ISITA2010, Taichung, Taiwan, October 17-20, 2010

Optimization of Memory Utilization for Partially Parallel QC-LDPC Decoder

Tsung-Che Wu†, Yao-Wen Hu† and Chang-Ming Lee‡

†Department of Communications Engineering
National Chung Cheng University, Chia-Yi, Taiwan
{ mulder1985, open.here}@yahoo.com.tw

‡Department of Communications Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering National Chung Cheng University, Chia-Yi, Taiwan cmlee@ccu.edu.tw

Abstract
Quasi-cyclic (QC) low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have advantages over other types of LDPC codes due to their cyclic shifting property. In this paper, a partially parallel QC-LDPC decoder with efficient memory design is proposed. To improve the memory utilization, the structures of efficient chunk and predictor are realized. The efficient chunk can store parts of check-to-variable messages. This design can effectively reduce the memory requirement. Furthermore, the predictor verifies variable-to-check messages and updates efficient chunks instantly. With less check-to-variable messages and variable-to-check messages stored in the memory, this decoding architecture only deposits few messages in several efficient chunks, such that the cost of memory is less. Eventually, the proposed approach dramatically reduces memory requirement about 65% compared to the traditional method while maintaining the same low-cost.
1. Introduction
Being first introduced by Gallager in 1962 [1] and rediscovered by Mackay recently, Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are a group of linear block codes specified by very sparse parity-check matrix H. Their performances are very close to Shannon limit and asymptotically superior to turbo codes [2]. LDPC codes usually can be applied to many high data rate applications, such as magnetic storages and wireless communications due to their excellent error correcting performance. However, the typical sparse, random, and large parity-check matrixes used to construct LDPC codes, impose great design challenges about the data routing and large amount of memory requirement on hardware implementations.
Quasi-Cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) codes [3], one of LDPC codes class, suit for the decoder implementation because of the regularity in the parity-check matrix. The QC-LDPC codes with code-length less than 10000 bits can achieve comparable performance to the randomly constructed ones while the their construction is well structured [4]. Besides, partially parallel QC-LDPC decoder has been studied widely to improve the throughput of decoding in recent years [5-7].
Basically, the message passing algorithm (MPA) [8] is adopted to decode the LDPC codes. Then, the variable-to-

check and check-to-variable messages are iteratively calculated and exchanged along the edges in the corresponding Tanner graph until stopping criteria are satisfied. The QC-LDPC decoder, consisting of the Check Node Function Unit (CNFU) and the Variable Node Function Unit (VNFU), stores all the check-to-variable and variable-to-check messages in separate memory block. However, this intuitive method is uneconomical for the hardware design. Accordingly, a QC-LDPC decoder with the efficient memory utilization has been proposed in [6]. With this optimization, all check-to-variable messages corresponding to one row in H matrix can be stored as a compressed form. Indeed, this efficient architecture realizes the column summation of check-to-variable messages in the VNFU. Thus, this strategy can save memory about 37%, compared to the traditional scheme. Chen and Hocevar [7] also introduced a kind of parallel decoder architecture. However, the irregular property of the parity check matrix is rarely discussed for the parallel requirement because that considerably adds to complexity in the MPA.
In this paper, we will store check-to-variable messages corresponding to one row in H matrix as a simplified memory form, names as efficient chunk, with a modified Min-sum algorithm (MSA) to achieve the memory efficiency. Furthermore, a proposed predictor will verify variable-to-check messages and update efficient chunks instantly. Without variable-to-check messages stored in the memory, the memory complexity can be reduced dramatically. The structure of this paper is as follows. Section II reviews the QC-LDPC codes construction and related decoding algorithms. The memory optimization policy and modified MSA are presented in Section III. Section IV shows the complexity analysis of the simplified memory structure. Finally, concluding remarks are revealed in Section V.
2. QC-LDPC codes
QC-LDPC codes can easily satisfy the requirement of parallelization for the decoder design with MPA. This strength appears with the block structure in the parity check matrix. In other words, the connections between variable nodes and check nodes are grouped with certain constraints. The cooperation between the code construction and MPA is essential to the effect of parallelization.

978–1–4244–6017–5/10/$26.00 c 2010 IEEE 496
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:15:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

A. Construction of parity check matrix
The construction of QC-LDPC codes would be focused on the corresponding parity check matrix H. To give a realistic cases, this parity check matrix H can consist of several cyclic shift matrices of identity matrices. For (j, k) QC-LDPC codes, the generation would be illustrated as follows.
1) Construct the all-one block matrix H' which size is j×k.
2) Determine offsets with (b(s-1)×a(t-1)) modulo L, where the pair (s, t) denotes the location of each sub-matrix with 1 ≤ s ≤ j, 1 ≤ t ≤ k , and a, b are multiplicative orders of k, j, respectively.
3) Replace each element in H' with cyclically shifting L×L identity matrix with a given offset, where L is a prime number and j, k are prime factors of L-1 and obtain the parity check matrix H.



(
i'Vj \i



(i'

j

))





(

(arg

min i' j

i'

j

))



arg

min i' j

i'

j



Thus, the MSA is able to simplify the log-domain MPA in (1)

as

L(rji

)




i'V j \i

i'

j



arg

min i' j

i'

j

.



MSA has lower complexity over log-domain MPA.

However, this method has worse performance about 0.5dB. A

modification in NMSA [9] has been proposed as the tradeoff of

complexity and performance. While maintaining the

approximate performance as MSA, the normalized MSA is

modified as following.

L(rji

)



k


i'V j \i

i'

j



min
i'V j \i

i'

j



where k is a normalization factor. Experience shows that this

modification with k = 0.75 approximates MPA.

B. Massage Passing Algorithm
In order to obtain near optimized (Shannon limit) result, the decoding scheme for LDPC codes is processed iteratively. In iteration, the update procedure evaluates the messages of variable-to-check and check-to-variable information alternately.

Note that the variable-to-check message qij(b) is passed from the ith variable node to the jth check node regarding the probability for the case that b is 0 or 1 and the check-tovariable message rji(b) to is passed from the jth check node to the ith variable node. The notations, Vj and Vj\i represent the sets of all variable nodes connected to the jth check node except for the ith variable node in the second set. Ci and Ci\j represent all check nodes connected to ith variable node except for the jth check node for the second set. The equations of updating check-to-variable messages and variable-to-check messages are reminded as following.

The log-likelihood ratios (LLR) of rji and qij are L(rji) and L(qij), respectively. The log-domain MPA updates check-tovariable and variable-to-check messages by (1) and (2)
respectively.

L(rji )   i' j (  (i' j )) 

i'V j \i

i'V j \i

L(qij )  L(ci )   L(rj'i )  j 'Ci\ j

where αij = sign[L(qij)], βij = |L(qij)|,

L(ci)

=

log(Pr(ci=0|yi)/Pr(ci=1|yi))

and

(x)  log((ex 1) /(ex 1)) . The LLR in each variable node is

updated with

L(Qi )  L(ci )   L(rji )  jCi
The function (x) is an involuntary function with the property
(x)  1(x) . Considering the updating procedure in the log-
domain MPA, the summation in the inner term of (1) can be eliminated and the measure formula can be approximated as the smallest βij with the above mentioned property. The derivation with the constraint i'Vj\i is as follows

3. Memory optimization for partially parallel QC-LDPC decoder
Instead of storing all the check-to-variable messages, a few of them are considered to be kept in the memory.. The MSA is modified in Sec. IIB to recover check-to-variable messages with the efficient memory. With variable-to-check messages, the predictor could be applied to update the messages for the next iteration, instead of storing the variable-to-check messages and updating the check-to-variable messages in the memory.
f1
+ Check node
1 2 34 5
Variable node
c1 c2 c3 c4 c5 0.5 0.4 -0.1 0.2 -0.3 Initial -0.1 -0.1 0.2 -0.1 -0.1 Updated
1
min1 min2 min1
Figure 1. The process of updating the check-to-variable messages in a check node.
A. Efficient Chunk for Check-to-variable Messages In the traditional MSA decoder, check-to-variable and
variable-to-check messages are separately stored in the memory. This intuitive behavior consumes memory. In order to achieve the memory efficiency, we investigate the process of updating the check-to-variable messages on the same check node in MSA. In Fig. 1, the number on the line from the variable node to the check node represents the index of the variable node with regarding for the message L(qij). There is a group of variable-to-check messages corresponding to the variable nodes, {ci, i = 1,...,5}, connected to the check node { fj, j = 1}. The initial values of LLR, 0.5, 0.4, -0.1, 0.2, and -0.3

497 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:15:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

correspond to the initial messages from these five variable nodes, respectively.

min1

min2

… sign bit iK j

iK j ⊕α

min1 index

Figure 2. Data structure of an efficient chunk.
In Fig. 1, two smallest magnitudes of variable-to-check messages, min1 and min2, will be chosen to update check-tovariable messages. All check-to-variable messages are updated with the min1 and the sign bit except the message with min1. This left message would be updated with min2 and the sign bit. Therefore, two methods of memory reduction from these observations are discussed. Firstly, all the check-to-variable messages which have been updated in a check node can be compacted and stored in an efficient chunk which includes the two smallest magnitude (min1 and min2), the smallest magnitude index (min1 index), and all the sign bits of variableto-check messages, as shown in Fig. 2. "0" in the sign bit indicates the positive sign of the magnitude, and "1" for the negative. In addition, an additional unit records the binary-sum "⊕" of the sign bits in the variable-to-check messages. Next,
each updated variable-to-check message can be used to update the efficient chunk in next iteration immediately in Fig. 3. Accordingly, the storing of all variable-to-check messages is unnecessary. We declare an efficient chunk as a simplified data structure for storing check-to-variable messages with respect to these two behaviors. Thus, the memory requirement is reduced dramatically. Besides, due to the regularity of edge number in QC-LDPC, the flexibility is not an issue to be considered with this efficient chunk.

f1
+ Check node
1 2 3 45
Variable node c1 c2 c3 c4 c5 0.5 0.4 -0.1 0.2 -0.3 Initial

0.1 0.2 001010 3

Figure 3. Illustration of the updating for the efficient chunk.

B. Modified Min-sum Algorithm
The check-to-variable messages could be updated with the selected messages in the efficient chunk by the following equations.

The variable-to-check messages and LLRs of variable nodes can be updated by the following equations:
L(Qi )  L(ci )   L(rji )  jCi L(qij )  L(Qi )  L(rji ) 

C. Proposed QC-LDPC Decoder
Fig. 4 represents the architecture of QC-LDPC decoder. In (J, K) regular QC-LDPC codes, there are J block rows. Due to the property of regular QC-LDPC codes, each block row occupies one memory bank and no access conflict among this rows. Efficient chunks with updated check-to-variable messages are located in memory1. Check-to-variable messages for the next iteration are updated by the predictor and stored in memory2 in the form of the efficient chunk. In an iteration, memory1 and memory2 will exchange, such that the next update process can access these memories in different function unit if the iteration is in progress. Intrinsic messages are stored in Intrinsic Message (IM). In the memory access process, the circular buffer can fulfill memory access in every memory bank, because QC-LDPC codes have the cyclic shifting feature. This regularity does not rely on lots of look-up tables.

IM memory

Parity equation

j1 memory bank j2 memory bank

cLh(ecci)k

r

L(rj1i )

r L(rj2i ) VNFU

check

sgn( L(Qi))

L(qij1 )

p

L(qij2 )

p

j1 memory bank j2 memory bank

jJ memory bank

r
L(rjJi )

p L(qijJ )

jJ memory bank

memory1

r Recover unit

memory2

p Predictor



Figure 4. Proposed architecture of the QC-LDPC decoder.

min1 index L(qij) index

Decision unit of min1 index

min1

min2
α ij
 kj
kVj

SM-2's
  i'j
i'V j i

Figure 5. Circuit design of the recover unit.

L(rji)

L(rji

)



((kkVVjj

 kj  kj

) )

 ij  ij

 

min2 min1

i  index of (min1) 
otherwise .

In the column operations, the QC-LDPC decoder will read data from J efficient chunks, corresponding to a column in memory1, and recover check-to-variable messages through the recover unit in Fig. 5. When the recover unit recovers checkto-variable messages L(rji), it must read the information in the

498 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:15:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

efficient chunk for the jth row, and verify whether it is min1 index or not. If min1 index is decided, multiplexer will output min2. Otherwise, multiplexer will output min1. The decision unit with a 2-to-1 multiplexer in Fig.5 is realized the comparison as follows.

min1' minij 1

min1  ij  otherwise

The operation XOR for the binary sum and the sign bit αij from the corresponding location of sign bit memory can reconstruct the sign bit. Besides, the two's-complement (SM-2's) converter

completes the original format of the check-to-variable message

L(rji). Next, the recover unit generates check-to-variable messages in the jth column, and VNFU updates the variable-to-

check messages. Such that recovered check-to-variable

messages will be ready for VNFUs which update variable-to-

check messages . The VNFU carrying out equations (8) and (9)

takes check-to-variable messages, and the intrinsic message

L(ci) in IM. The updated variable-to-check messages will not be stored directly in memory. Instead, they will be selected to

update the efficient chunks ( Rj1 ' ,…, RjJ ' ), in memory2 by the predictor immediately.

The predictor shown in Fig. 6 consists of two comparators
and two multiplexers as formulated in (11). The predictor can
update the efficient chunk in memory2. For example, when
VNFU updates the variable-to-check message L(qij), the predictor reads the efficient chunk Rj' in the jth row block. Then, the 2's-SM converter divides L(qij) into sign part αij and magnitude part βij. βij will be compared with the min1 and the min2 stored in Rj' for exactly updating the min1' and the min2'. The decision rules are expressed as

memory2. Until all the variable-to-check messages in the jth block row in H matrix are updated, the efficient chunks in memory 2 will be updated simultaneously.
When the whole columns are processed, all the efficient chunks in memory2 would be updated. Then, the connections of memory1 and memory2 will be switched in order to update messages in the next iteration. The hard decision of L(Qi) is made as the ith decoded bit if the iteration is terminated.
The partially parallel decoding procedure involves K components to decode QC-LDPC codes with K block columns. In column-major decoding process, a loop of iteration is completed after Lth process. All the efficient chunks in memory2 have already been updated. Fig. 7 is the procedure of processing for each block column. The column process and the memory update process are concerned in the procedure.

Memory update process Column process

Read efficient chunk
Recover check to variable messages
Calculate variable to check messages

Store updated efficient chunk in memory
Update efficient chunks

Terminate iteration No Yes
Parity equation check

 min 1 min 2' min 2

min1  ij (min1  ij ) & (min 2  ij )

(11)

 

ij

(min1  ij ) & (min 2  ij )

  kj
kVj
L(qij )
min1

 ij
2’s-S
M ij

min2

min1>βij min2>βij

  ' kj k Vj
 ij
min1'
min2'

L(qij )index

min1' index

Figure 6. Architecture of the predictor.

The binary sum bit of αij is updated with XOR. min1' index can be determined according to different situations: (i) if min1
> βij, min1' index is replaced with L(qij) index; (ii) if min1 < βij, min1' index does not change. Eventually, all the outputs of the predictor are stored in the efficient chunk of the jth block row in

Figure 7. The paradigm of column-major decoding procedure.
4. Analysis
In the simple case with the configuration (2, 3, 7) in the proposed scheme, storage requirements for the check-tovariable message memory module, the intrinsic memory module, and the decoded messages are 448, 126, and 42, respectively. Thus the total requirement is 616 bits as shown in Table I. In the traditional architecture, the memory requirements for the extrinsic module, intrinsic module, and the decoded messages are 504, 126, and 42, respectively. While the parallel architecture [6] is taken account, the memory requirement is increased as 840 bits; 420 bits for the R-memory module, 252 bits for the S-memory module, 126 bits for the Imemory module and 42 bits for the decoded messages. Table I shows the evaluation of memory quantity for the traditional decoder, the proposed decoder and the reference decoder [6] and proposed decoder. The total memory requirement includes memory of storing intrinsic messages, check-to-variable messages and variable-to-check messages. Note that the improvement is more obvious in the case of (4, 36, 128), i.e. the memory requirement is dramatically less than [6], about 56%. With this summary, the memory consumption is reduced by this novel parallel design.

499 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:15:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE I. MEMORY USAGE TABLE FOR (J, K, L) REGULAR QC-LDPC
CODES

Configurations (2, 3, 7) (3, 5, 31)
(4, 36, 128)

Traditional (bits) 672 6820
258048

[6] (bits) 840 6448
163840

Proposed (bits) 616 4774
91132

5. Conclusions
In our paper, a partially parallel QC-LDPC decoder is proposed. All check-to-variable messages in the same block row are compacted in the efficient chunk and memory efficiency is achieved. In column-major decoding process, our decoder exactly regains each check-to-variable message from the efficient chunk by the recover unit. When each variable-tocheck message is updated, the predictor updates the efficient chunk immediately instead of storing it. The experimental results show that only 35% of traditional storage requirement is required based on (4, 36, 128) QC-LDPC codes.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IRE Trans. Info. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21-28, 1962.
[2] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity approaching irregular low-density

parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619-637, 2001. [3] A. Sridharan, D. J. Costello Jr,D. Sridhara, T. Fuja, and R. M. Tanner, “Aconstruction for low-density parity check convolutional codes based on quasi-cyclic block codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, 2002, p. 481. [4] D. Sridhara, T. Fuja, and R. M. Tanner, “Low-density parity check codes from permutation matrices,” in Proc. Conf. Information Sciences and Systems, 2001. [5] Y. Chen; K.K. Parhi, “Overlapped message passing for quasi-cyclic low-density parity check codes,“ IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers. Volume 51, Issue 6, June 2004 pp. 1106 – 1113. [6] Z. Wang; Z. Cui, “A Memory Efficient Partially Parallel Decoder Architecture for QC-LDPC Codes,” Signals, Systems and Computers. Conference Record of the Thirty-Ninth Asilomar Conference. 2005 pp. 729 – 733. [7] Y. Chen; D. Hocevar, “A FPGA and ASIC implementation of rate 1/2, 8088-b irregular low density parity check decoder,” Global Telecommunications Conference. 2003 pp. 113 - 117. [8] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, pp. 406– 414, Mar. 2002. [9] Lu Xin, Liang Yongsheng and Xu Jun, “Efficient check node update implementation for normalized min-sum algorithm,” TENCON 2007 - 2007 IEEE Region 10 Conference, pp.1-4.

500 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:15:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

