2010 3rd International Congress on Image and Signal Processing (CISP2010)
A Novel Low Complexity LDPC Encoder Based On RU Algorithm With Dynamic Programming

Xiangran Sun
Information Engineering School Communication University of China
Beijing, China

Zhibin Zeng, Zhanxin Yang
Engineering Research Center of Digital Audio & Video, Ministry of Education
Communication University of China Beijing, China

Abstract—In this paper, we present a low-complexity highefficiency LDPC encoder, based on classic method of Richardson and Urbanke with a novel dynamic programming algorithm, which we propose to substitute greedy algorithm for approximate triangulation with sparse matrix of LDPC codes. For the LDPC code in CMMB, for example, the complexity of encoding is reduced effectively, and an implementation of LDPC encoder for two different code rate (1/2 and 3/4) on Altera Stratix II EP1S180F102014 can achieve encoding rate 34 Mbps and 69 Mbps.
Keywords-LDPC; encoder; dynamic programming; CMMB
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes were first presented by Gallager [1] in 1962. In 1996, D. MacKay and R.M. Neal [2] rediscovered their powerful performance as error correction coding. In the past few years, LDPC codes have received much attention due to their excellent performance and inherent parallelism in decoder. Presently LDPC codes have been widely used on magnetic record, wireless communication and other zones. For instance, LDPC codes were used as channel coding in DVB-S2, IEEE 802.11n/16e, DMB-TH, and DTTB, etc. In Chinese Mobile Multimedia Broadcasting standard (CMMB), LDPC code was also used as Forward Error Correction Code combined with RS code [3].
Although parity-check matrix H of LDPC codes is always very sparse, its corresponding generation matrix G is mostly dense, meaning quadratic complexity to code length with direct generation matrix encoding, which is nearly infeasible for hardware implementation. Few attempts have been made to implement the encoder directly through dense matrix operations, for it will result in complexity quadratic to code lengths. One of encoding methods with linear complexity was proposed by Richardson and Urbanke (named as RU algorithm or RU method) [4]. In [4], Richardson and Urbanke show that linear time encoding is achievable through careful linear manipulation of LDPC codes. They also present methods based on greedy algorithm to preprocess the parity-check matrix H and a set of matrix operations to perform the actual encoding. Another way is introduced by Neal [5], he used LU decomposition to free the encoding process of dense inverse operation, however, it is not easy to find a good sparse LU decomposition for arbitrary H matrices, and especially some

matrices can not be decomposed. Other various encoding methods include MacKay’s lower triangular method [6], Haley’s iterative encoding method [7], quasi-cyclic method [8] are all aiming at LDPC codes with specific constructions, not adapted for arbitrary LDPC codes.
In this paper, based on RU method, we present a general optimized algorithm named dynamic programming algorithm to reduce encoding complexity and improve encoding efficiency. We also implement a novel LDPC encoder based on our algorithm for CMMB as example. To reduce encoding complexity, we use dynamic programming algorithm instead of greedy algorithm to bring the given matrix into the approximate lower triangular (ALT) matrix. To improve encoding efficiency, we have designed the multi-staged pipeline architecture for the hardware encoder.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In section II, we proposed our LDPC encoder based on optimized RU method for CMMB. Next, we describe our novel dynamic programming algorithm to preprocess the given matrix in section III, and compare the different results corresponding to two algorithms. In section IV, we show our hardware encoder architecture. Last section presented remarks and conclusions.
II. LDPC ENCODER
A. General LDPC Encoder for CMMB
LDPC code in CMMB is a kind of High-Structured (HS) code, which is characterized by the parity-check matrix H which has the regular quasi-cyclic structure.
The principle of LDPC encoding with the matrix H is to
solve parity equations:

HcT = 0T

(1)

{ } Where

c=

c 0

,

c1,"

c 9215

is encoded codeword, which is

{ } consisted

of

information

bit

vector

s=

s 0

,

s 1

,"

sK

-1

and

{ } parity code vector p= p0, p1," p9215-K .

978-1-A4u2t4h4or-i6ze5d16lic-e3n/1se0d/$u2s6e.l0im0it©ed2t0o1: Y0oInEsEeiEUniv. Downloaded on Jun3e22548,2026 at 03:10:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

According to CMMB standard, information bits and parity bits are reordered by codeword bits mapping vector (named IDX table) in as follows:

cCOL_ORDER(i)

=

⎧ ⎨ ⎩

si

pi
+K -9216

0 ≤ i ≤ 9215 − K 9216 − K ≤ i ≤ 9215

(2)

Here c represents outputting encoded codeword, COL_ORDER(i) is codeword bits mapping vector, K is LDPC code information sequence length. K =4608 bits for
1/2 code rate, 6912 bits for 3/4 code rate.
Because the outputting encoded codeword is not systematic, it is not suitable for encoder implementation.
Suppose that csys is the systematic form of encoded code,
[ ] meaning csys = p s , TIDX is the permutation matrix
corresponding to codeword bits mapping vector, and the weight
of rows or the weight of columns are one, thus c=csysTIDX .

Substituting it into (1) we can get

( ) HTIDXT

cT sys

=

0T

.

(3)

We define HIDX to be the systematic form of parity-check
matrix H as HIDX =HTITDX . HIDX is divided into two parts, HP and HS , respectively corresponding to parity bits p and information bits s . Then (3) became

preprocessing in software since it needs to be performed only once for the given matrix. So it does not cost the encoding time and resource of the actual hardware encoder.
Let HTRI be the ALT matrix which comes from HP by
performing row and column permutations, given by following

HTRI =Ln...L2L1HPR1R2...Rm

(6)

= LNHPRM

Where LN =Ln...L2L1 denotes that the matrix HP is multiplied by n permutation matrices on its left which is equal to realign the rows. Similarly, RM =R1R2...Rm denotes that the matrix is multiplied by m permutation matrices on its right
which is equal to realign the columns.
Form (6) we have

HP

=

L-N1

H

TRI

R

-1 M

(7)

Substituting (7) into (4), therefore:

L-N1

HTRI

R

-1 M

pT

=-HS

s

T

.

(8)

If define

pT R

=R

-1 M

pT

(9)

HP pT +HSsT =0T .

(4)

HSL =LNHS

(10)

We get the general encoding method as follow:

Equation (8) is equal to:

pT =-H-P1HSsT .

(5)

HTRI

pT R

=

−

HSLs

T

.

(11)

H and HIDX both are very sparse, so HP separated from HIDX is still sparse. But H−P1 is a dense matrix. It shall
consume quite a number of storages and logical resources. In order to improve encoding efficiency, we use optimized RU method to implement LDPC encoder for CMMB.
B. LDPC Encoder Based on Optimized RU Method
In the classical RU encoding method, the preprocessing is
performed on the parity-check matrix H . However, in the
paper, we design optimized RU method for CMMB which only
processes the matrix HP corresponding to parity code and
brings it into an ALT form by performing row and column permutations in preprocessing. It can simplify the associated computational processes dramatically. We execute the

Figure 1. The matrix Hp in ALT form.
HTRI is in ALT form indicated in Figure 1, so we bring the
matrix in the form

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June32245,92026 at 03:10:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HTRI

=

⎡A ⎢⎣B

T⎤ C ⎥⎦

(12)

where A is (j - g) × g , B is g × g , C is g × (j - g) , and T is (j - g) × (j - g) , where g is the gap of the approximate
triangular matrix.
Further all the matrices are sparse. T is lower triangular
matrix with ones along the diagonal.
If define

( ) pT 2

=

−

T-1

HS1sT +Ap1T

.

(20)

Then

p 1

can be calculated by matrix-vector multiplication

and

p 2

by

forward-substitution.

Once

they

are

obtained,

we

[ ] can get

pT =RM

p 1

p 2

T

from

(9)

and

(13).

Finally,

the

outputting

encoded

codeword

c

is

determined

by

c sys

which

consisted of p and s .

p R

=[p1

p 2

]

(13)

and

HSL

=

⎡HS1 ⎤

⎢ ⎣

H S2

⎥ ⎦

(14)

where

p 1

has length

g , and

p 2

has length

( j - g),

HS1 has

(j - g) rows, HS2 has g rows.

Substituting (12), (13) and (14) into (11), multiplying

⎡ I 0⎤

⎢⎣-CT-1

I

⎥ ⎦

from

the

left

and

right of

(11),

we

get

[ ] ⎡ A T ⎤
⎣⎢-CT-1A+B 0⎥⎦

p 1

p 2

T

=

−

⎡

H S1

⎢⎣ -CT-1HS1 +HS2

⎤ ⎥ ⎦

sT

(15)

Equation (16) and (17) is naturally driven by (15) namely,

( ) ( ) −CT-1A+B

pT 1

=

CT-1HS1 − HS2

sT .

(16)

Ap1T +Tp2T = − HS1sT .

(17)

Let

F = −CT-1A + B

(18)

From (16) we can draw that

( ) pT 1

=

F−1

CT-1HS1 − HS2

sT .

(19)

Substitute (19) into (17), we get

Figure 2. LDPC encoding software and hardware framework.
The basic framework of our encoder is shown in Figure 2. Our approach for LDPC encoding consists of two steps: preprocessing and hardware encoding. First, the original parity-
check matrix H is preprocessed with the optimized RU
method to generate the matrices needed by the hardware encoder. This preprocessing step is implemented in software
and needs to be performed once for the given matrix H . The
encoder itself is implemented in hardware to encode the message blocks and output the encoded codeword.
III. APPROXIMATE LOWER TRIANGULATION VIA DYNAMIC PROGRAMMING ALGORITHM
The key of RU method is to produce an ALT matrix with as small a gap as possible. Richardson and Urbanke introduced greedy algorithm to perform row and column permutations with the given matrix. Greedy algorithms mostly (but not always) fail to find the globally optimal solution, because they usually do not operate exhaustively on all the data. They can make commitments to certain choices too early which prevent them from finding the best overall solution later. So we presents novel dynamic programming algorithm instead of greedy algorithm to implement triangulation. Dynamic programming is based on principle of optimality, it means that the next decision must be the optimal decision based on the current status, whatever the decision before was made. Moreover the sequence of optimal decision must include the optimal subsequence. Furthermore our algorithm is general algorithm for regular and irregular LDPC codes except for LDPC code in CMMB. Simulation results for CMMB show that the gap of ALT matrix can be reduced greatly by applying the new algorithm.
We are now ready to state dynamic programming solution:
1) Find the rows of degree one in the matrix HP . If no row is selected, remove the left most column of HP and repeat step 1 with the modified matrix HP .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June32246,02026 at 03:10:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 3. Overview of our hardware encoder architecture.

2) Take each "1" in the selected rows above as node. For

each node compute the sum of all rows of degree one in the

residual matrix by removing the row and column

corresponding to the node. Then we retain the nodes

corresponding to the maximum sum, record the path nodes one
by one, select the path nodes to form the set θ .
3) Remove the row and column of the matrix
corresponding to the path nodes in θ separately, the residual

matrix is HP ' . Different path nodes are corresponding to
different residual matrix. Take each "1" in the rows of degree

one in HP ' as node. Compute the sum of all rows of degree
one in the residual matrix by removing the row and column

corresponding to the node. If no row of degree one, go to step

4. Otherwise retain the nodes corresponding to the maximum
sum, add the nodes to the path nodes in θ , discard the halted

path nodes, and repeat step 3.
4) According to the path nodes in θ performing row and

co5lu)mnMpoedrmifyutaHtioPna, gbariinngbtyheremmaotvriixngHthPe

into ALT triangular

form. part.

The

residual matrix is empty, the algorithm terminates. Otherwise,

remove a column of Hp and go to step 2.

For 1/2 and 3/4 code rate, we triangulate the given matrices

according to classic greedy algorithm and our dynamic

programming algorithm. The gaps are listed in Table I.

TABLE I.

TABLE TYPE STYLES

From Table I we can see that the new algorithm offers smaller gaps than greedy algorithm, so encoding complexity is reduced.

IV. LDPC ENCODER DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION

A. LDPC Encoder Architecture

The hardware encoder is to compute the parity-check bits

consisted of two parts

p 1

and

p 2

,

according

to

equation

(19)

and (20). The main operations performed in the encoder are

matrix-vector multiplication (MVM), forward-substitution

(FS), vector addition (VA) and codeword generation (CWG).

Codeword generation implements the bit permutations

according to the standard. An overview of our hardware

encoder architecture is shown in Figure 3. The matrices

required by the operations is accomplished in the preprocessing

step and stored in the hardware. It is very considerate that the

operations are divided into four stages which run in parallel and

double buffering is used between the stages, in order to

minimize the overall latency, idle times and memory

requirement [9].

In stage 1, we simply write the message block into buffers.

In stage 2, we perform the operations of MVM, the results are

also buffered before they are fed to the next stage. In stage 3,

we

calculate

p 1

and

the

part of (20).

In

stage

4,

we

perform

forward-substitution and codeword generation.

rate

classic greedy

gap dynamic programming

B. Implementation Results

algorithm

algorithm

Our LDPC encoder is programmed in Verilog HDL and

1/2

302

188

implemented on Stratix II EP1S180F102014 device of Altera.

3/4

60

The design takes 4% of the logic resource and 60% of the

44

memory resource of the device.

Encoder maximum work frequency is 200 MHz, under this frequency, system pure encoding rate can achieve 34 Mbps

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June32246,12026 at 03:10:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(1/2 code rate) and 69 Mbps (3/4 code rate), which is sufficient for CMMB standard.
V. CONCLUSION
We have presented the software and hardware design of a LDPC encoder based on optimized RU method with dynamic programming algorithm, which has a low-complexity and highefficiency character. Whole design has been applied to the implementation of the LDPC encoder for CMMB. Ongoing and future work includes the optimization of software algorithm and the reduction of the hardware resource.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay, R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of lowdensity parity-check codes,” Electron. Lett, vol. 32, 1996, pp. 1645.

[3] Mobile Multimedia Broadcasting (P. R. China) Part 1: Framing Structure, Channel Coding and Modulation for Broadcasting Channel.
[4] T. Richardson, R. Urbanke. “Efficient encoding of low-density paritycheck codes. IEEE Trans,” on Inform. Theory, 2001, 47:638-656
[5] R. M. Neal, “Sparse matrix methods and probabilistic algorithm,” IMA Program On Codes, Systems, and Graphic Models, 1999.
[6] D. J. C. Mackay, S. T. Wilson, M. C. Davey, “Comparison of constructions of irregular Gallager codes,” IEEE Trans. on Communications, 1999, 47:1449-1454.
[7] D. Haley, A. Grant, J. Buetefer, “Iterative encoding of low-density parity-check codes,” in Australian Communication Theory Workshop, 2002, Feb.
[8] S. J. Johnson, S. R. Weller, “A family of irregular LDPC codes with low encoding complexity,” IEEE Comm. Lett., Vol. 7, Feb. 2003, 79--81.
[9] Dong-U Lee, Wayne Luk, Connie Wang, Christopher Jones, Michael Smith, John Villasenor, "A Flexible Hardware Encoder for Low-Density Parity-Check Codes," Proceedings of the 12th Annual IEEE Symposium on Field-Programmable Custom Computing Machines, p.101-111, April 20-23, 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June32246,22026 at 03:10:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

