IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2010

4905

Interior Point Decoding for Linear Vector Channels Based on Convex Optimization
Tadashi Wadayama, Member, IEEE

Abstract—In the present paper, a novel decoding algorithm for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes based on convex optimization is presented. The decoding algorithm, which is referred to hereinafter as interior point decoding, is designed for linear vector channels. The linear vector channels include several practically important channels, such as inter-symbol interference channels and partial response (PR) channels. It is shown that the maximum likelihood decoding (MLD) rule for a linear vector channel can be relaxed to a convex optimization problem, which is called a relaxed MLD problem. The proposed decoding algorithm is based on a numerical optimization technique known as the interior point method with barrier functions. Approximate variations of an interior point method based on the gradient descent and Newton methods are used to solve the relaxed MLD problem. Compared with a conventional joint message-passing decoder, from computer simulations, it is observed that the proposed decoding algorithm achieves better BER performance on PR channels with less decoding complexity in several cases. Furthermore, an extension of the proposed algorithm for high-order modulation formats, such as PAM and QAM, is presented.
Index Terms—Convex optimization, equalization, interior point algorithm, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, linear vector channels.

[37] first presented the unified factor graph approach to the

design of a decoding algorithm for channels with memory.

The unified factor graph includes two graphs as its subgraphs,

namely, the factor graph for an LDPC code (Tanner graph)

and the factor graph representing the target channel. A mes-

sage-passing decoding algorithm is naturally derived from

the unified graph. Considerable attention has been focused on

the application of this approach, for example, to burst-error

channels [14] and partial response channels [20].

The present study instead examines the possibility of an opti-

mization approach for solving the decoding problems of chan-

nels with memory. We can view a decoding problem as an op-

timization problem. Let us consider the following example to

make the succeeding discussion concrete. A codeword in a

binary code

( is the binary Galois field) is sent over

an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel after binary

(0, 1) to bipolar

conversion and a receiver obtains a

received word

(1)

I. INTRODUCTION
T HE development of decoding algorithms for binary linear codes has been a central research theme in coding theory. Recent research activities on message-passing decoding algorithms have made remarkable progress, and are bringing about a shift in the design principle of decoders from algebraic decoders to message-passing decoders. The sum-product algorithm for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [13] is a specific example. The combination of LDPC codes and the sum-product algorithm achieves a good tradeoff between the decoding performance and decoding complexity.
Message-passing decoding has been applied to memoryless channels as well as channels with memory. Worthen and Stark
Manuscript received March 06, 2008; revised December 01, 2009. Date of current version September 15, 2010. This work was supported in part by the Ministry of Education, Science, Sports, and Culture, Japan, through a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research on Priority Areas (Deepening and Expansion of Statistical Informatics) 180790091, and in part by a research grant from the Storage Research Consortium (SRC). The material in this paper was presented in part at the International Workshop on Statistical-Mechanical Informatics, Kyoto, Japan, September 2007, and in part at the International Symposium on Information Theory, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2008.
The author is with the Department of Computer Science, Nagoya Institute of Technology, Nagoya 466-8555, Japan (e-mail: wadayama@nitech.ac.jp).
Communicated by I. Sason, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2010.2060030

where represents a Gaussian noise vector and denotes the vector with all 1 elements.1
The maximum likelihood decoding (MLD) rule for this channel model is given by
(2)
where is the Euclidean norm. This rule can be regarded as a combinatorial optimization problem because the feasible set is a discrete set with a combinatorial and algebraic structure.
The relaxation technique is commonly used in the field of combinatorial optimization [24], [27] to solve difficult combinatorial optimization problems. The basic concept of relaxation is to relax the definition of the feasible set from a discrete set to a subset of an -dimensional real space . For example, for a combinatorial optimization problem written in the form of integer linear programming, elimination of the constraint that “a feasible point is integral” leads to a linear programming (LP) problem that can be efficiently solved by a simplex method or an interior point method [4], [19], [26], [39]. Although the solution of the relaxed problem may be different from the solution of the original problem, the approximate solution can be effectively used to find the optimal solution [24].
For example, in our context, a relaxation of the MLD rule (2) is interesting because it may lead to an efficient decoding
1In the present paper, the elements in , i.e., f0; 1g, can also be regarded as elements in , where represents the field of real numbers. Thus, the appropriate arithmetic (e.g., mod-2 sum or addition of real numbers) depends on the context.

0018-9448/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:12:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4906

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2010

algorithm approximating (2). We can relax the MLD rule of (2) to
(3)

TABLE I NOTATION USED IN THE PRESENT PAPER

where

is the convex hull2 of the codewords of . The

convex hull

is the smallest convex set containing all

of the codewords of . Note that, in this context, the codewords

of are assumed to be embedded in . The decoding problem

now becomes a quadratic programming problem [4], which is

a continuous optimization problem defined on . An efficient

numerical minimization algorithm can be expected to solve the

problem with feasible time complexity.

The research on LP decoding conducted by Feldman et al.

[10], [11] is the first application of the concept of relaxation to

decoding problems. Recently, a number of studies on LP de-

coding have been conducted [5], [7], [29]–[33], [38]. An im-

portant implication revealed by research on LP decoding is that

the MLD problem for a memoryless channel can be relaxed to

a linear optimization problem defined on . Once a decoding

problem has been relaxed to a continuous optimization problem,

we can then use an efficient numerical optimization technique

to solve the relaxed problem.

Thus far, most of the research activities on LP decoding have

focused on memoryless binary-input output-symmetric (BIOS)

channels. This is because the formulation of the LP decoding is

strongly dependent on the memoryless property and the BIOS

assumption. It is, therefore, challenging and meaningful to con-

sider relaxation techniques that are suitable for channels with

memory. For example, channels with inter-symbol interference

(ISI) and partial response (PR) channels are of practical im-

portance. The development of an efficient decoding algorithm

for such channels is an important problem in coding theory.

Recently, Taghavi and Siegel [28] presented a new relaxation

method for PR channels that relaxes the MLD problem for PR

channels to a linear programming problem. This work indicates

that the relaxation approach is effective not only for memory-

less channels, but also for channels with memory.

In the present paper, a novel decoding algorithm for LDPC

codes based on convex optimization is presented. The decoding

algorithm, called interior point decoding, is designed for linear

vector channels. The class of linear vector channels includes

several channels of practical importance, such as ISI channels,

PR channels, MIMO channels, and multiuser access channels.

It is shown that the MLD rule for a linear vector channel can be

relaxed to a convex optimization problem, which is referred to

as a relaxed MLD problem. Approximate variations of an inte-

rior point method [4] based on the gradient descent and Newton

methods are used to solve the relaxed MLD problem.

II. PRELIMINARIES

A. Basic Notation
The basic notation used throughout the present paper is shown in Table I.

B. Linear Vector Channels and MLD Rule

Suppose that is a binary

matrix

and

is the binary linear code defined based on

(4)

In the present paper, bold symbols, such as , denote column

vectors. The matrix is assumed to be a row-regular sparse

matrix having rows with row weight

.3

A linear vector channel, which is the main channel considered

in the present paper, is defined as follows.

Definition 1 (Linear Vector Channel): A sender chooses a

codeword

according to the message that he/she

wishes to send. The codeword is transmitted to the receiver and

then a receiver obtains a received vector

(5)

where is a nonsingular

real matrix (referred to as an

interference matrix) and is a real column vector of length

(referred to as an offset vector). Note that the elements of ,

are also considered to be elements of in (5). It is as-

sumed that both and are known by the receiver. The vector

denotes an additive noise vector. This channel model is called

a linear vector channel.

If the vector is an additive white Gaussian noise vector,

where the th element

is an i.i.d. Gaussian random

variable with mean 0 and variance , the channel is referred to

as a Gaussian linear vector channel. Note that the notation

denotes the set of consecutive integers from to .

In order to achieve the best decoding performance with re-

spect to the block error probability, we need to perform MLD

for this channel. Assume that the sender transmits a codeword

in

and that the receiver observes

as the received

word. The MLD rule for a linear vector channel is given by

In this section, we first introduce the definitions of the linear

(6)

vector channel and the MLD problem for the linear vector chan-

nels and then discuss the relaxed MLD problem.

The function

is a distance function defined on , which

2Since the convex hull of codewords is not easy to handle in general, we matches the probability density function corresponding to the

often need a further relaxation, such as the fundamental polytope discussed later

herein.

3This constraint on the row weight is required for Lemma 1.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:12:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WADAYAMA: INTERIOR POINT DECODING FOR LINEAR VECTOR CHANNELS

4907

noise components. In other words,

should be derived from

the likelihood function to be maximized in an MLD process.

For example, in the case of a Gaussian linear vector channel,

the noise vector is distributed according to an -dimensional

Gaussian distribution and its covariance matrix is diagonal (i.e.,

the i.i.d. case). In this case, we have the

and

(11)

are referred to as the parity constraints and the box constraints,

respectively. The fundamental polytope

is the polytope

defined by

(7)

satisfies both constraints of (10), (11)

where

represents the Euclidean norm defined by

.

Although the MLD rule of (6) gives us an optimal estimation

in terms of block error probability, its computational complexity

is exponential in the code length . This prevents the use of

MLD in practical applications, and, therefore, an approximation

of the MLD rule is required in order to reduce the computational

cost.

The interior set of points satisfying
and

, denoted by

, consists of the (12)
(13)

C. Relaxed MLD Rule

These constraints are also referred to as the parity constraints

and the box constraints, respectively. A point

is referred

Here, we introduce a relaxed MLD rule, which is an approx-

imation of the MLD rule of (6). This relaxed rule is the basis

of the interior point decoding to be presented later herein. The

basic concept of the relaxed rule is to relax the feasible set from

to a fundamental polytope4 [10], [11], [11] that is defined

based on the parity check matrix . The fundamental polytope

is a relaxed polytope of the convex hull of

. The set of ver-

tices of the fundamental polytope contains all of the codewords

of

.

This relaxation approach thus yields the possibility of using

a continuous minimization algorithm working on (e.g., the

gradient descent method or the Newton method) as a decoding

algorithm. In the following discussion, we assume that the dis-

tance function

is a convex, differentiable function with

to as an interior point.

As described earlier, the set of vertices of the fundamental

polytope contains all of the codewords of

. Such vertices

are referred to as codeword vertices. Note that, in general, the

set of vertices also contains noncodeword vectors, which are re-

ferred to as noncodeword vertices. These noncodeword vertices

become the main source of suboptimality in the decoding perfor-

mance of a decoding algorithm based on the fundamental poly-

tope, such as LP decoding. The fundamental polytope

is

a convex set defined by a set of

parity inequalities and

box inequalities.

We are now ready to discuss a relaxation of the MLD rule

for linear vector channels. The relaxed MLD rule based on the

fundamental polytope is given by

respect to .

(14)

The definition of the fundamental polytope is given as fol-

lows.5

where

is a received vector coming from a

Definition 2 (Fundamental Polytope and its Interior Set): Let linear vector channel. Note that, as shown in (14), the feasible

set has changed from

to

. Since the fundamental

(8) polytope

is convex and the objective function

is a convex function, the optimization problem of (14) can be

for

, where is the -element of . The set regarded as a convex optimization problem [4]. This observa-

is the set of all subsets of odd size in , namely tion motivates the use of numerical optimization techniques for

convex optimization, such as the interior point method [4], as a

(9) decoding algorithm.

Of course, the solution of the relaxed MLD problem may not

The constraints for

be the solution of the original MLD problem because the funda-

mental polytope has vertices that do not belong to

. More-

(10) over, the optimal point may not be a vertex of

if the ob-

jective function is not linear. However, this compromise on the

4The formulation of the fundamental polytope was first discovered by Koetter and Vontobel [17] in the context of the graph cover of Tanner graphs. Independently, the same formulation was obtained by Feldman et al. [10], [11] in the context of the LP formulation of maximum likelihood decoding of binary linear codes.
5Although the definition of the fundamental polytope given here may, at first glance, appear to be somewhat different from that given in [10], the two definitions are equivalent.

suboptimality of the relaxed MLD rule leads to a large reduction in the computational complexity of the decoding.
III. INTERIOR POINT DECODING BASED ON CONVEX OPTIMIZATION
Since the relaxed MLD problem can be seen as a convex optimization problem, it is reasonable to apply conventional opti-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:12:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4908

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2010

mization techniques to this problem. In this section, an interior point decoding algorithm for linear vector channels will be presented. The proposed decoding algorithm is based on the concept of the interior point method for convex optimization [4] and can be considered as a specialized optimization method for the relaxed MLD problem.

A. Barrier Function Method: A Brief Review

The interior point methods are optimization algorithms for

solving LP and convex optimization problems. Here, we explain

the simplest method, which is based on barrier functions.

Let

be a real-valued function to be minimized.

Assume that is a convex function and that the feasible set

is a convex subset of . A convex optimization problem is

a minimization problem

Fig. 1. Interior point method based on barrier functions (f (x): convex objective function, B(x): barrier function representing the constraints, t: scale parameter (t > 0), : multiplicative constant ( > 0)).

minimize subject to

(15) for simplicity, we assume a Gaussian linear vector channel.6 In

this case, the objective function to be minimized is

The key concept of the barrier function method is to convert

the original convex optimization problem of (15) into an uncon-

strained optimization problem using barrier functions.

Let

be a barrier function having the following proper-

(17)

ties: i)

takes a finite real value if

, where is the

interior set of the feasible set ; ii)

if

; and

iii)

is differentiable and convex. Combining the original

objective function with the barrier function , we have

a new convex objective function

, which

is referred to as a merit function. The parameter is referred to

as the scale parameter, which controls the relative softness of

the constraints represented by the barrier function.

The goal of the barrier function method is to solve the uncon-

strained problem

where and are the th elements of and , respectively. The

symbol denotes the -element of the interference matrix

.

In the present paper, we adopt

as the basis

of the barrier function, which is referred to as a log-barrier func-

tion. Although

holds when

, takes a finite

value if . Furthermore, is a convex function. Thus, the

function satisfies the requirements of the barrier functions,

as discussed above. Moreover, the derivative of , namely,

minimize

(16)

is simple enough for implementation in a de-

coding algorithm.

instead of the original problem of (15). It is observed that the The log-barrier function

including the parity

constraints in (15) are absorbed into the barrier function, and constraints and box constraints, which corresponds to the fun-

so the problem given in (16) is an unconstrained minimization damental polytope, is defined by

problem for a convex function . Therefore, in order to solve

this problem, we can exploit an efficient numerical optimization

algorithm such as the gradient descent method or the Newton

method. Of course, the unconstrained problem of (16) and the orig-

(18)

inal problem of (15) are not identical, and the optimal point

of problem of (15) will not, in general, coincide with the op-

timal point of (16). However, when

, it is expected that

because the effect of the barrier function becomes neg-

ligible in this limit. A common method for efficiently obtaining

a point close to is to perform a Newton iteration several

times while is gradually increased. The interior point method

based on barrier functions consists of the two nested loops, re-

The log-barrier function

inherits the properties of ,

and

is a convex, differentiable function. Furthermore, if

, then

holds; otherwise

.

For any

, the merit function

for the relaxed

MLD problem is given by

(19)

ferred to as inner and outer loops, respectively (see Fig. 1).

where is a positive real number. The first term of

is a

scaled version of the objective function. The second term is the B. Objective and Merit Functions for Interior Point Decoding log-barrier function corresponding to the fundamental polytope.

Here, we apply the interior point method based on log-barrier Since the sum of convex functions is also a convex function,

functions to the relaxed MLD problem of (14). In the following, 6The extension to a non-Gaussian case is straightforward.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:12:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WADAYAMA: INTERIOR POINT DECODING FOR LINEAR VECTOR CHANNELS

4909

is a convex function. Note that

value if

.

takes a finite

C. Partial Response Channels

In the field of magnetic recording, the PR channel model is

often used as a basis for system design. Interferences arising

from neighboring symbols are linearly superimposed on the cur-

rent symbol. These interferences increase the complexity of the

decoding or detection process.

Let

-real numbers

be the partial re-

sponse coefficients. The parameter is referred to as the degree

of the PR channel. The PR channel can be regarded as a dis-

crete-time finite impulse response (FIR) filtered channel with

additive white Gaussian noise (see Fig. 2).

A binary vector

is transmitted

over the channel defined by

Fig. 2. Block diagram of partial response channels (h : PR coefficients, n :
additive white Gaussian noise).

For PR channels, the objective function lowing form:

takes the fol-

(20)

(24)

where

is an i.i.d. Gaussian random variable with

mean 0 and variance . By convention, we assume that

(21)

The partial derivative of

with respect to a variable

is required in order to compute the approximate gradient

presented later herein. From the objective function of (24), we

immediately have

which simplifies the treatment of the boundary condition. This channel model is referred to as a PR channel. In the present paper, the signal-to-noise ratio of the PR channel is defined by
(25)

(22)

As shown in Fig. 2, the th received symbol consists of the

weighted sum of

and the

noise term. It is clear that the PR channel can be expressed in

the following linear vector channel form

, where

and are given by

The number of additions required to evaluate (25) is propor-

tional to . This means that evaluation of the gradient

has a time complexity of

if is constant.

The Hessian of the objective function, which is required for

the Newton method to be discussed later herein, can be ex-

pressed as

(26)

... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...

for

,

. The notation

indicator function such that

if

true; otherwise, it gives 0.

is the is

D. Overall Structure of Interior Point Decoding

The goal of the interior point decoding is to solve the relaxed

...

MLD problem using an interior point method based on log-barrier functions. The interior point decoding consists of two nested

(23) loops: an outer loop and an inner loop. The inner loop corre-

...

sponds to either an approximate gradient descent method or an approximate Newton method, both of which attempt to mini-

mize the merit function

. The main task of the outer loop

is the scaling of . Namely, the scale parameter is gradually in-

The PR channels can be regarded as linear vector channels with creased from a small initial value to a large value as the iteration

a sparse interference matrix . Thus, the PR channel is an ideal of the decoding process proceeds. The details of these subpro-

candidate for the interior point decoding.

cedures are discussed in the following subsections.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:12:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4910 Fig. 3. InteriorP oint(1) procedure.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2010

After the execution of the inner loop, built-in min-sum de-

coding7 is performed to obtain an estimate of the transmitted

word. This means that the proposed decoding algorithm can be

regarded as a hybrid decoding algorithm based on the interior

point method and the conventional normalized min-sum algo-

rithm.

In the interior point method, a search point must lie in the

feasible set

in all iterations of the procedure. The fol-

lowing lemma justifies the choice of

as the initial search point.

Lemma 1: If is a row-regular parity check matrix with

, then the initial search point

is

an interior point, i.e.,

.

Proof: It is evident that satisfies the box constraints.

Thus, we need only consider the parity constraints. For any

, we have

(27)

using the assumption

and row-regularity. This means

that also satisfies the parity constraints.

E. Built-in Min-Sum Decoding

Let

be the set of row indices such that

. The

procedure based

on the standard log-domain min-sum algorithm with a damping

factor (also known as the normalized min-sum algorithm [6]) is

presented in Fig. 4.

In the initialization part, the log likelihood ratios used in the

min-sum decoding are computed as (28). Since

holds for any

, we regard as the probability such

that the th transmitted symbol is 1. The constant that appears

in (29) is the damping factor

, which improves

the decoding performance of the min-sum decoding. Note that

parity check is performed at the end of the process.

In the case of Gaussian linear vector channels, the relaxed

MLD problem is a quadratic programming problem. Thus, the

solution is not assured to be one of the vertices of the funda-

mental polytope in general. This means that, in most cases, the

minimum point lies on a facet of the fundamental polytope. Note

that the optimal point always coincides with one of the vertices

Fig. 4. M inSum(1) procedure.

in LP decoding. This is the most crucial difference between the proposed algorithm and LP decoding with respect to the be-

The

procedure presented in Fig. 3 is the

main procedure of the interior point decoding. The positive in-

teger parameters

and specify the maximum number

havior of the decoder. The built-in min-sum decoding is used to compensate for this nonvertex solution in the quadratic programming problem.

of iterations performed in the outer and inner loops, respec- IV. INNER LOOP BASED ON THE GRADIENT DESCENT METHOD tively. The parameter is the initial scale parameter, which is

a positive real number.

A. Approximate Gradient Descent Method

The heart of the decoding algorithm is the

procedure. This procedure updates a search point using the

gradient descent method or the Newton method so as to min-

imize the merit function

for given . Since the search

point must always be contained in

, it is necessary to

check the feasibility of the search point in this process.

The purpose of the Fig. 5 is to find the minimum of

procedure shown in using a gradient

7In the first version of the manuscript arXiv:0705.3990v1, the sum-product algorithm was used for a build-in decoder. However, the normalized min-sum algorithms has been proven to be better in terms of performance/complexity tradeoff.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:12:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WADAYAMA: INTERIOR POINT DECODING FOR LINEAR VECTOR CHANNELS

4911

Fig. 5. InnerLoop(1; 1) procedure based on the gradient descent method.

. Note that the evaluation of the true gradient of the

barrier function

with a naive method requires a compu-

tation time of

.

B. Feasibility Check

The purpose of the

procedure is to decide the

feasibility of a given

. In the interior point method, a

search point must lie in the feasible set in all iterations. Thus,

the feasibility check is one of the key procedures of the inner

loop.

The

procedure returns 1 if

; oth-

erwise it returns 0. Of course, we could evaluate all of the in-

equalities of (12) and (13) to decide the feasibility of given .

However, such a brute-force approach takes

computa-

tion time to check the feasibility, because the number of parity

constraint inequalities of (12) is

. As shown in the fol-

lowing lemma and algorithm, a much shorter computation time

can be achieved.

Lemma 2 (Feasibility Check): The point

belongs to

if and only if

for any

and

for any

, where

is

defined by

(32)

Proof: If

for any

and

, then

for any

Fig. 6. IsF easible(1) procedure.

(33)

descent method. In order to make the interior point decoding

computationally tractable, some approximations are introduced.

It uses the approximate gradient (instead of the true gradient

) and an inexact line search scheme.

The parameter is a positive real number that represents the

initial value of the step size. Since the vector is an interior

point of the fundamental polytope, there exists

satisfying

. This means that the loop composed of Steps 3

holds for any

and

, because is the maximum

value of

. This implies that

is an interior point.

We then consider the opposite direction. Assume that

. From the definition of the fundamental polytope,

implies that satisfies both box and parity constraints.

This means that

and 4 must eventually stop. The

procedure in-

(34)

cludes a feasibility check. Thus, the updated point is guaranteed

to be located in the feasible set

.

The

procedure uses the approximate gra- holds for any

and

and

for any

dient and does not include an evaluation of the merit func-

. It is evident that

holds for any

. This

tion

. Moreover, only a feasibility check is carried out in completes the proof.

the procedure. Thus, we cannot expect the objective function to

be a nonincreasing function of the number of iterations in this

case. This implies that the search point may not converge to the

optimal point. However, this compromise provides a huge re-

duction in computational cost.

The evaluation of the merit function, which has a time com-

plexity of

, is avoided in this procedure.8 In contrast,

the execution of the feasibility check and the evaluation of

the approximate gradient require a computation time of only

Lemma 2 is useful for reducing the computation time required

to carry out the feasibility check, because the computation time

required to evaluate all

is proportional to .

In other words, can be computed without generating all of

the subsets of odd size in . We can use a concept similar

to maximum likelihood decoding for even weight codes.9 The

procedure shown in Fig. 6 includes such a con-

cept for the efficient computation of .

The symbol denotes addition over . Let us consider the

0 8In the present paper, we assume that m scales proportional to n, namely, states of the variables after execution of the above procedure.
m = (1 R)n, 0 < R < 1, where R is the design rate of the parity check

matrix.

9The Viterbi algorithm can also be used to evaluate  .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:12:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4912

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2010

Let

. Assuming that is odd, then

must be odd. The right-hand side of (36) can be rewritten as

For example, in the case of PR channels, we have the following first derivative of the merit function:

Thus, in this case,

holds. We then consider the case

in which is even. In such a case, one of the components in

should be flipped so as to make the weight of the

binary vector

odd. Let denote the index at which

the bit flip occurs, namely,

. The bit flipping

decreases the value of to

Since the purpose of the bit flipping is to find the optimal

subset of odd size, it is reasonable to determine the index l

according to the values of

. In other words,

gives the smallest decrement (i.e., the

largest value of ). Therefore,

also holds for this case.

The time complexity of

is

. Therefore,

the fast feasibility check method presented in this subsection

is much better than the brute-force approach that requires time

complexity

.

The partial derivative corresponding to the barrier function

of the parity constraints contains

terms. The compu-

tation time for evaluating

is therefore an exponential

function of the row weight . The computational cost of the

gradient becomes the primary obstacle to achieving a fast im-

plementation of the interior point decoding when a given parity

check matrix has a relatively large row weight. It is for this

reason that we use an approximate gradient instead of the true

gradient

.

The approximate gradient

is defined by

(44)

C. Approximate Gradient

for

and

. The subset is defined by

The gradient of by

, which is defined on

, is given

(40)
After some manipulation, we obtain the partial derivative of with respect to the variable

From the definition of , it is clear that

pressed as

, where

the vector obtained after the execution of

(45) can be ex-
is . This

means that the evaluation of

requires a

computation time that is proportional to , which is much

faster than the computation time required for the evaluation

of

. Following the execution of

, we can immediately evaluate the approximate

where

(41) gradient using . The approximate gradient is defined on

. This

implies that

holds for

any

. From this inequality and the definition of ,

(42)

for

,

. Note that the derivative of the objec-

tive function of (17) is given by

(43)

it is easy to show that

holds for any

and

. This inequality

indicates that the approximate gradient includes the largest (in

terms of absolute values) contribution for each

.

The

procedure presented in Fig. 7 ef-

ficiently evaluates the approximate gradient . The time com-

plexity of each step is as follows. If the interference matrix

contains only

nonzero elements (i.e., is a sparse ma-

trix), then the initialization process (Step 1) takes

time.

As discussed earlier, Step 2 requires

time. Finally, Step

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:12:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WADAYAMA: INTERIOR POINT DECODING FOR LINEAR VECTOR CHANNELS

4913

for

,

. As in the case of the gradient descent

method, a straightforward evaluation of

re-

quires

time. This is one of the reasons why we in-

troduce the approximate Hessian

at

defined by

Fig. 7. ApproxGradient(1; 1) procedure.

(49)

3 requires

time. In total, the evaluation of the approxi-

mate gradient takes

time.

V. INNER LOOP BASED ON THE NEWTON METHOD
The Newton method is a numerical minimization algorithm having faster convergence than the gradient descent method. The convergence speed of the Newton method is quadratic around the optimal point. Therefore, it is natural to consider the use of the Newton method as an optimization engine in the interior point decoding in order to achieve better decoding performance.
The Newton equation is a system of linear equations

where is the Hessian (

real matrix) at the current point

and is the gradient vector. The vector is referred to as

the Newton step, which is used for the search direction. Since

solving the Newton equation is the most time-consuming step

of the algorithm, it is important to make full use of the special

structures of the merit function

, e.g., sparseness of the

Hessian, in order to realize a feasible implementation.

for

,

. The subsets

are

defined by (45).

The approximate Hessian includes a contribution from the

(true) Hessian of the objective function

and a contribu-

tion from the approximate Hessian of the barrier function .

The approximate Hessian of

has only diagonal elements,

i.e., nondiagonal elements are discarded. Another approxima-

tion used here is that the double summation

in the left-hand side of (48) is replaced with a single summation

by using . This approximation has already been

used to derive the approximate gradient. Due to these approx-

imations, computation of requires only

time if the

interference matrix is sparse.

The

procedure is used to evaluate the

approximate Hessian according to (49). Thus, the details are

omitted.

For the PR channel case, the approximate Hessian

has the following form:

A. Inner Loop Based on the Newton Method
The inner loop procedure using the Newton method is shown in Fig. 8. Most of the processes are identical to those of the inner loop procedure based on the gradient descent method. The differences are in Steps 2 through 4, namely, evaluation of the approximate Hessian (Step 2), derivation of the Newton step (Step 3), and updating of the temporary search point (Step 4). The details of the new processes introduced here are described in subsequent subsections.

B. Approximate Hessian
The second derivative of the barrier function by

is given

(50)

C. Solving the Newton Equation

The most time consuming part of the Newton method is the

determination of the Newton step. In this step, the Newton equa-

tion

must be solved. Here, we discuss how to solve

the Newton equation efficiently in an inner-loop procedure.10

Cholesky Decomposition: If the approximate Hessian is a

positive definite symmetric matrix, then Cholesky decompo-

sition can be used to solve the Newton equation. For a given

positive definite matrix , Cholesky decomposition de-

composes as

, where is a lower triangular ma-

trix. A linear equation

can be solved efficiently using a

(48)

10Other implementations of the Newton method, e.g., quasi-Newton methods
O n and conjugate Newton methods, have not yet been thoroughly studied. Con-
structing the ( ) algorithm based on both methods appears not to be straightforward.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:12:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4914

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2010

Fig. 8. InnerLoop(1; 1) procedure based on the Newton method.

Fig. 10. Block diagram of joint message-passing decoding (joint MPD).
trix is not diagonally dominant. Under-relaxation (UR)11 of the Jacobi method yields convergent results for a wider class of linear equations, including those that cannot be treated by the original Jacobi method. The update rule for the UR Jacobi method is given by

(53) (54)

Fig. 9. Values of the objective function as a function of the number of iterations.

where is a real constant in the range

.

The Jacobi method with under-relaxation is appropriate for

application to solving the Newton equation. This method re-

quires

time if the coefficient matrix is sparse (the number

of nonzero elements in the matrix is ) and the number of

iterations is fixed. The Jacobi method is an algorithm of parallel

type and thus may be suitable for a hardware implementation

that can use its massive parallelism.

combination of Cholesky decomposition and backward/forward substitutions [25].
In the case of PR channels, the approximate Hessian becomes a symmetric positive definite matrix, and thus we can use Cholesky decomposition to solve the Newton equation. This approach may be suitable for software implementation of the interior point decoding because Cholesky decomposition is a serial-type algorithm.
The Jacobi Method: The Jacobi method is an iterative method

VI. BEHAVIOR OF INTERIOR POINT DECODING
In this section, the behavior of the interior point decoding is discussed based on the results of computer simulations. In the following simulations, a regular LDPC code with parameters
is assumed, where and denote the column and row weights, respectively. The code is from MacKay [23]. The channels used in the simulation are PR channels.

for solving a linear equation

[25]. This method is

especially suitable for the case in which the coefficient matrix

is sparse. The details of the Jacobi method are as follows.

The linear equation

can be rewritten in the following

form:

A. Objective Function Values as a Function of the Number of Iterations
Fig. 9 presents the average values of the objective function as a function of the number of iterations. The two curves
in Fig. 9 correspond to the results of the proposed scheme ob-

(51) tained using the gradient descent-inner loop and the Newton-

where , , and are lower triangular, upper triangular and diagonal matrices, respectively. Equation (51) can be transformed to

inner loop, respectively. The number of iterations is defined as the number of executions of the inner loop in the decoding process. These curves have been obtained by taking the average of 1000 trials (1000 codewords).

The parameters of the decoder are as follows:

(52)

. The channel is a

We can regard (52) as an update rule of and thereby obtain the

following recursive formula:

.

Starting from an appropriate initial value , we can evaluate

the above recursive formula iteratively. If certain conditions are

met, eventually converges to the solution of the linear equa-

channel (i.e.,

) with

.

The average objective function value decreases rapidly during

the first few iterations. The curve of the gradient descent

method shows the fastest decrement when the number of itera-

tions is small (e.g., 1 to 3). However, the Newton method (with

tion

. The Jacobi method fails to converge if the ma- 11UR is known as Successive Over Relaxation (SOR) when 1 < ! < 2.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:12:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WADAYAMA: INTERIOR POINT DECODING FOR LINEAR VECTOR CHANNELS

4915

Cholesky decomposition12) gives smaller objective function values after the fourth iteration. The results suggest that the proposed decoding algorithm using the Newton method may require fewer iterations than using the gradient descent method.

B. Bit Error Probability of the Interior Point Decoding

In this subsection, the bit error probability curves of the in-

terior point decoding obtained from computer simulations are

presented. The code used in the simulations is a regular LDPC

code with parameters

, and

[23].

In order to compare the proposed decoding algorithm to con-

ventional decoding algorithms, we also performed computer

simulations for joint message-passing decoding (abbreviated as joint MPD). A block diagram of the joint MPD is shown in

0 D h Fig. 11. BER curves of interior point decoding for a 1 ; h 0 1 = 1).

channel ( =

Fig. 10. The joint MPD consists of two parts: the BCJR (Bahl,

Cocke, Jelinek, and Raviv) algorithm [1] for a PR channel and

the normalized min-sum algorithm (damping factor: 0.7) for an

LDPC code.

The BCJR algorithm computes extrinsic information in a

standard manner and passes this information to the min-sum

algorithm. The min-sum algorithm uses the output from the

BCJR algorithm as a priori information. The extrinsic infor-

mation generated from the min-sum algorithm is then treated

as a priori information in the BCJR algorithm. The two parts

of this method are iteratively executed in turn. We assume that

the maximum number of iterations in the min-sum decoder is

ten and that the total number of iterations is limited to 20. For

each iteration, a parity check procedure is performed, and the

iteration stops when the parity check is passed.

Fig. 11 shows the bit error rate (BER) curves for a

channel

. In this figure, the decoding perfor-

0 D h Fig. 12. BER curves of interior point decoding for a 1 ; h 0 1 = 1).

channel ( =

mances of the interior point decoding using the gradient descent

and the Newton methods are compared. The notation “gradient

(20,5)” refers to gradient-descent-based interior point decoding

with

and

(Newton (5,5) is defined in a

similar manner.). The parameters

and

are used in these simulations.13 The maximum number of iter-

ations in the built-in min-sum decoder is

, and the

damping factor is 0.7. Comparing the results obtained by the

gradient descent method (5,5) and the Newton method (5,5) re-

veals that the Newton method (5,5) exhibits much smaller bit

error probabilities (approximately 2 dB gain at

)

than those of the gradient method (5,5). This difference could be

a consequence of the faster convergence of the Newton method.

Fig. 11 shows that a large improvement in BER can be ob-

tained by increasing from 5 to 20 in the case of the gra-

dient descent method. On the other hand, in the case of the

Newton method, a negligible improvement is achieved by in-

creasing from 5 to 20. These observations and other sim-

ulation results indicate that interior point decoding using the

Newton method requires at least five inner iterations in order

12Since there is no apparent difference in decoding performance between the Newton method with Cholesky decomposition and that with Jacobi method, we assume the Newton method with Cholesky decomposition throughout this section.

to closely approach the potential performance. In contrast, interior point decoding using the gradient descent method requires at least 20 iterations (however, more than 20 iterations provides only a marginal improvement).
Fig. 12 shows the BER curves obtained by the gradient method (20,5), the Newton method (5,5), and joint MPD. As in the case of Fig. 11, the channel is a 1-D channel. Fig. 12 shows that interior point decoding yields better decoding performance than joint MPD. The difference is approximately 1.5 dB (Newton vs. joint MPD) at a bit error probability of . This figure also shows that the Newton method yields smaller bit error probabilities than those obtained using the gradient descent method.
Fig. 13 shows the BER curves for a long-tail PR channel . Note that joint MPD cannot be applied to a PR channel with such a large number of states (i.e., PR channel with long-tail PR coefficients) because of the huge computational costs of BCJR computation. Thus, Fig. 13 does not include the BER curve for joint MPD. The PR coefficients of this long-tail PR channel are given by

13Thus far, it has been difficult to optimize these parameter in advance. These parameters were determined through preliminary experiments.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:12:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4916

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2010

Fig. 13. BER curves of interior point decoding for a long-tail PR channel ( =

16).

0 Fig. 15. BER curves of interior point decoding for another  = 3 channel
( = 3; h = h = h = 1; h = 1).

0 Fig. 14. BER curves of interior point decoding for the EPR4 channel (h =
h = 1; h = h = 1).

0 Fig. 16. Comparison of BER curves of MLD, interior point decoding, and joint
MPD (1 D channel, row-regular LDPC code: n = 24; m = 10; and w = 6).

The coefficients

are samples of a Gaussian

random variable with mean 0 and variance 1. We can see

that the interior point decoding certainly has the capability to

decode a given received vector observed from such a long-tail

PR channel. Compared with the gradient method (20,5), the

Newton method (5,5) achieves a gain of approximately 1.5 dB

at a bit error probability of .

Fig. 14 shows the BER curves for the case of the EPR4

channel

. In this

case, among the three decoding algorithms (gradient descent

Fig. 16 shows the BER curves of the MLD, the interior point

decoding (with the Newton method), and joint MPD, respec-

tively. The code used in the simulation is a short row-regular

LDPC code with parameters14

and

.

The channel is a

channel. Fig. 16 indicates that the MLD

outperforms, with a fairly large margin, both the interior point

decoding and the joint MPD. This performance gap can be con-

sidered as the tradeoff for making the decoding complexity com-

putationally tractable.

method (20,5), Newton method (5,5), and joint MPD), joint

MPD yields the best decoding performance. A large gap (1.8

VII. MULTISTAGE PROJECTION METHOD

dB at BER

) exists between the BER curves of joint

MPD and the Newton method (5,5).

Fig. 15 shows the BER curves for the case in which the PR

coefficients are given by

. This

In this section, we present a multistage projection method and its application to LDPC-coded modulation schemes with high-order modulation formats, such as PAM and QAM.

channel and the EPR4 channel have the same degree . The only difference is the sign of the PR coefficient . Fig. 15 shows that interior point decoding offers smaller bit error probabilities than joint MPD across the entire range of SNR.
The results suggest that the decoding performance of the in-

A. Applications to High-Order Modulation Format
In order to achieve high data rate wireless transmission, it is necessary to mitigate ISI due to multipath reception of transmitted signals. Although maximum likelihood sequence estima-

terior point decoding is highly dependent on the PR coefficients 14The Tanner graph of the code includes 13 variable nodes of degree 3, ten

of the channel.

variable nodes of degree 2, and one variable node of degree 1.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:12:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WADAYAMA: INTERIOR POINT DECODING FOR LINEAR VECTOR CHANNELS

4917

tion (MLSE) is optimal in the sense of error probability after detection, the computational complexity of MLSE is prohibitively high for cases in which the delay spread of the channel is large compared with the symbol duration.
Turbo equalization [8], [18] is a relatively new principle for joint equalization and decoding. A turbo equalizer includes two components, namely, a soft-output equalizer and a turbo-decoder for turbo codes or a sum-product decoder for LDPC codes. The components exchange soft information (extrinsic information) with each other. The reported performance of turbo equalization is impressive. In particular, turbo equalization based on linear MMSE [16] is versatile and practically feasible for many classes of channels, such as inter-symbol interference (ISI) channels, coded MIMO systems, and coded CDMA systems.
The interior point decoding presented in the previous sections is designed for the binary signal format. It cannot be applied to higher-order modulation formats, such as PAM and QAM, because the interference matrix cannot be a full-rank matrix in such cases. In the following, we discuss a modified interior point decoding algorithm incorporating the idea of multistage projection to handle higher-order modulation.
B. Multilevel Signal Codes and Complex Linear Vector Channels

Multilevel Signal Codes: Let

, where is a positive

integer. Assume that denotes a field such as or . Here,

we define

by

(57)

for

, where

similar manner,

is defined by

. In a

(58)

for

. The mappings

and

can be consid-

ered as the th row vector and the th column vector of a

matrix composed from

...

...

...

...

(59)

respectively.15

Let be a set of binary parity check matrices such that

where is an

binary parity

check matrix for

. The binary linear code

is defined by

In this subsection, we introduce multilevel signal codes and

complex linear vector channels. Our focus in this section is on

LDPC-coded modulation systems that use a high-order modula-

tion format, such as PAM and QAM, instead of binary signaling,

as assumed in the previous sections.

Signal Point Mapping: In order to use the concept of interior

point decoding, a mapping from a binary sequence to a signal

point in a signal constellation should be carefully designed.

Assume that

is given for

, where the param-

eter is a positive integer. A mapping

defined by

(60)

This definition means that the th row vector of (59) is a code-

word of

for all

if and only if

.

The parity check matrix is the parity check matrix of

obtained by rearranging the column vectors of . Namely,

is the binary

matrix

having the following form:

where

is the binary

matrix defined by

(55)

...

(61)

is referred to as a signal point mapping, where

.

If we change the domain of from to , then the

mapping can be seen as a continuous function of

, and

the mapping becomes a differentiable function. This is a desir-

able feature for the interior point decoding that requires the gra-

dient of the objective function.

The signal constellation is given by

. Assume that

. We consider the mapping defined by

The column vector

denotes the th

column vector of and the spaces in (61) are filled

with zeros.

We are now ready to define the multilevel signal codes that

have a close relationship to the multilevel codes defined by Imai

and Hirakawa [15]. Furthermore, the multilevel signal codes de-

fined below can be regarded as superimposed coding or super-

position coding [9], [22], [2].

The multilevel signal code

is defined by

where stellation

(56)

. In this case, we have . The signal con-
contains the following eight signal points:

(62) The multilevel structure of the multilevel signal codes will be effectively used in the proposed decoding algorithm, which is

.

15In this section, we assume that column and row indices start from 0.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:12:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4918

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2010

Fig. 17. Configuration of the multilevel signal codes.

defined later herein. The configuration of the multilevel signal

codes is illustrated in Fig. 17.

Complex Linear Vector Channels: In this section, we discuss

the following channel model, referred to as a complex linear

vector channel, which is a straightforward extension of the

linear vector channel discussed in the previous sections. The

details of this channel model are given as follows.

A sender transmits a codeword of the signal code

and a receiver obtains

such that

. The ma-

trix

is referred to as an interference ma-

trix. The entries of the additive noise

are assumed to be independent complex Gaussian random

variables with zero mean and variance . The signal-to-noise

ratio (SNR) of the complex linear vector channels is defined by

, where is the average energy (under the equiprobable

assumption) of the signal constellation used for modulation.

Fig. 18. Configuration of a projected search point. The point (x; x^; U ) is determined based on x; x^, and U .

processes (inner and outer loops) is approximately the same as

the original interior point decoding.

In the following, we discuss the details of the decoding

process.

Let

. The modified approximate gradient

vector is given by

, where

(64)

The function

is defined by

(65) C. Details of the Decoding Process

The multistage projection process is key in the decoding process. The projected point of a search point is obtained by fixing some variables to tentative decision bits. The fixed position indicator is a binary -tuple denoted by
that represents the indices of

Here, is forced to be 0 if

, which means that

(the th element of the search point) is no longer updated in the

inner loop process. On the other hand, the approximate partial

derivative of is approximated based on if

. Note

that we use instead of to evaluate the partial derivative of

the location at which the variables should be fixed. Let

be the search point that is updated in the inner loop process of

the interior point decoding, and let

be a tentative deci-

(66)

sion bit vector obtained after the min-sum decoding executed

in the outer loop process. The mapping

because

does not have a finite value.

In Fig. 19, the inner and outer loop processes of the interior

point decoding with multistage projection are summarized. The

yields -tuples of real numbers satisfying

appropriate selection of the update rule for the fixed position indicator (Step 2.4 of the outer loop) depends on the modulation

format and target channel. (63)

D. Behavior of the Proposed Algorithm: LDPC-coded 16QAM

for any

. Namely,

is the projected search System Over Complex ISI Channels

point obtained from the current search point by replacing some In this section, we investigate the behavior of the interior

locations in by a tentative decision bit vector according to point decoding with multistage projection for an LDPC-coded

the fixed position indicator. Thus, we refer to

as a 16QAM system over complex ISI (i.e., multipath fading) chan-

projected search point (see Fig. 18).

nels.

The flow of the decoding process is as follows. We use multi- Channel Model: In this section, we assume the signal point

level signal codes for data transmission. In the decoding process, mapping

defined by

we somehow decide the fixed position indicator based on the

reliability of the tentative decision bits vectors. The projected

search point

is then evaluated and used to calculate

a modified approximate gradient vector. The remainder of the

(67)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:12:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WADAYAMA: INTERIOR POINT DECODING FOR LINEAR VECTOR CHANNELS

4919

respectively. From the above form of the objective function, it is straight-
forward to derive the partial derivatives that are given by

Fig. 19. Inner and outer loops of the interior point decoding with multistage projection.
the image of which is the 16QAM constellation

Assume that a received signal sequence is represented by

(68)

for

. The symbol denotes an i.i.d. complex

normal Gaussian noise with mean zero and variance . The

symbols

denote the transmitted sequence

, where

.

The ISI coefficients

are assumed to be given

for the decoder. The parameter is called the degree of this ISI

channel. In order to simplify the boundary condition of (68),

we assume that

holds for

any transmitted sequence.

Objective Function: In this case, the objective func-

tion

to be minimized is given by

, which is the squared Euclidean

distance between a received sequence and a candidate sequence.

In the inner process, the partial derivatives of the objective

function are required. To derive the partial derivatives, the ob-

jective function must be rewritten such that the variables ex-

plicitly appear

(69) where the symbols and are given by

for

. These partial derivatives are used in the

inner loop process to compute the modified approximate gra-

dient vector.

Update Rule of the Fixed Positions Indicator: In the case of

an LDPC-coded 16QAM system, we use the following simple

update rule to determine the fixed positions indicator . Let

be the tentative decision bit obtained in the th outer iteration of

the interior point decoding.

At the beginning of the decoding process, is set to be

, i.e., no positions are fixed. After the second outer

iteration (i.e.,

),16 the update rule of is summarized as

follows:

• If

and

, set

.

• If

and

, set

.

• If

and

, set

.

The syndromes

are defined by

and

.

Simulation Results: Computer simulations were performed

in order to investigate the decoding performance of the inte-

rior point decoding with multistage projection. The two mul-

tilevel signal codes presented in Table II are assumed. The ma-

trix 204.102 is a 102 204 binary regular matrix with column

weight 3 and row weight 6. The matrix 504.252 is a 252 504

binary regular matrix with column weight 3 and row weight 6.

Both matrices are from MacKay [23].

Table III lists the nonzero ISI coefficients for the target ISI

channel of degree

that was used in the simulations. The

channel can be regarded as a multipath fading channel with four

(one direct and three indirect) paths. The ISI coefficients are as-

sumed to remain unchanged throughout the computer simula-

tions.

The results of the computer simulations are summarized in

Fig. 20, which shows the bit error probabilities after decoding.

For reference purposes, the BER curve of an LDPC-coded

16QAM system over the AWGN channel is also included

(labeled “NO-ISI”) in Fig. 20. For the no-ISI channel, the

multilevel signal code based on CODE1 was assumed and was

decoded by a BP-based algorithm [34].

and

16Without this condition, undetected errors often occur.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:12:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4920

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2010

C HTABLE II
PARAMETERS OF ( ) USED IN THE SIMULATIONS
TABLE III NON-ZERO ISI COEFFICIENTS OF THE TARGET COMPLEX ISI CHANNEL

Fig. 20. Decoding performance of the interior point decoding with multistage projection for the LDPC-coded 16QAM system over complex ISI channels.

The BER curve labeled as “With ISI (CODE1)” represents

the bit error probability of the multistage interior point decoding

applied to this ISI channel. The BER curve descends as SNR

increases, which means that the proposed decoding algorithm

actually works in the case of the LDPC-coded 16QAM system

over the complex ISI channel and gives an appropriate estima-

tion of transmitted words, even in the case of such a severe ISI

environment. Compared with the no-ISI channel, the BER curve

labeled “With ISI (CODE1)” shows some gains (e.g., approxi-

mately 2 dB at

) due to the ISI effect. Note that

our definition of SNR, i.e.,

, does not include the energy

from the ISI.

Fig. 20 also shows that the BER curve of CODE2 has a much

steeper slope compared to the BER curve of CODE1. This im-

plies that the use of longer codes can improve the decoding per-

formance of the proposed scheme. This property is a desirable

feature of a coded modulation system.

We have tested other ISI channels and modulation formats,

such as 4PAM and 16PAM. The results obtained through com-

puter simulations were positive as well. It is expected that the

combination of multilevel signal codes and interior point de-

coding with multistage projection has a wide range of applica-

tions to practically important channels that can be modeled by

complex linear vector channels.

VIII. CONCLUSION

The interior point decoding for linear vector channels was presented in this paper. The proposed algorithm is based on the formulation of the relaxed MLD problem, which is a convex optimization problem. An interior point method was applied to solve the relaxed MLD problem efficiently. An extension of

the proposed algorithm to high-order modulation was also dis-

cussed. Interior point decoding with multistage projection may

be applicable to various types of channels with memory, such as

coded QAM systems over complex ISI channels, lattice codes,

MIMO channels, and multiuser access channels.

The main contributions of the present paper are summarized

as follows: 1) a formulation of the relaxed MLD problem that

can be considered as a quadratic programming problem for

Gaussian linear vector channels; 2) efficient implementation

techniques for interior point decoding (fast feasibility check,

approximate gradient, and approximate Hessian) and the for-

mulation of the barrier function representing the fundamental

polytope; and 3) the results of computer experiments showing

the behaviors of the algorithms.

The formulation of the relaxed MLD enables us to apply

continuous optimization algorithms to decoding problems for

linear vector channels. Studies on the convex optimization ap-

proach to decoding problems for channels with memory have

begun only recently. Therefore, a number of problems, such as

finding a good relaxation (including a higher-order relaxation)

of

, geometrical studies on the fundamental polytope, and

how to avoid a fractional solution in a search process, remain

to be solved. An interdisciplinary research field located at the

intersection of the theory of convex optimization (interior point

methods, convex duality, the KKT condition, etc.), polyhedral

combinatorics (relaxation, geometrical properties of polytopes,

etc.), and coding theory appears promising and should be ex-

plored further.

The present paper discusses a scheme based on a rela-

tively simple interior point algorithm (i.e., the barrier function

method). More sophisticated convex optimization algorithms

with faster convergence [3], [4] can be considered in future.

For example, recently, Vontobel [32] and Taghavi et al. [31]

presented new implementations of interior point algorithms

for linear programming decoding. The algorithm of Taghavi et

al. [31] is based on the primal-dual interior point algorithm,

which appears promising in terms of convergence speed. The

efficient implementation techniques developed in the present

paper may be useful not only in the proposed algorithm but also

in forthcoming decoding algorithms based on various types of

interior point algorithm. A straightforward implementation of

the interior point method is not sufficient to achieve a practical

interior point decoder, i.e., we need to fully exploit the special

structures of LDPC codes. Note also that, with slight modifi-

cation, the proposed decoding algorithm can be used to realize

an efficient LP decoder based on the primal-path following

interior point method [36].

At the current stage of this research, we cannot simply

conclude that the convex optimization approach is superior to

either the message-passing approach or the turbo equalization

principle. For example, there are cases in which the perfor-

mance of joint MPD exceeds the proposed algorithm (e.g., the

EPR4 case). Furthermore, there exist other configurations of

joint MPD (for example, see [20]) that were not investigated

in the present study. Moreover, several theoretical aspects of

the interior point decoding have yet to be investigated. For ex-

ample, a clear discussion of the time-complexity of the interior

point decoding is currently lacking. However, the simulation

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:12:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WADAYAMA: INTERIOR POINT DECODING FOR LINEAR VECTOR CHANNELS

4921

results presented herein are encouraging and demonstrate the
potential of the convex optimization approach. Compared to a
conventional joint MPD, in many cases, the proposed decoding
algorithm for PR channels achieves better BER performance
with less decoding complexity. These positive results provide
motivation for further research on this topic. We hope that the
findings presented herein provide a solid basis for the develop-
ment of decoding algorithms based on continuous-optimization
algorithms.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author would like to thank the editor for providing de-
tailed comments on an earlier version of the manuscript. The au-
thor would also like to thank the anonymous reviewers of the In-
ternational Symposium on Information Theory 2008 and the re-
viewers of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY,
whose comments helped improve the quality of the manuscript.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[2] A. Bennantan, D. Burshtein, G. Caire, and S. Shamai, “Superposition coding for side-information channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 1872–1889, May 2006.
[3] D. P. Bertsekas, Nonlinear Programming, 2nd ed. Belmont, MA: Athena Scientific, 1999.
[4] S. Boyd and L. Vandenberghe, Convex Optimization. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2004.
[5] D. Burshtein, “Iterative approximate linear programming decoding of LDPC codes with linear complexity,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Toronto, Canada, Jul. 2008.
[6] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Density evolution for two improved BP-based decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 6, pp. 208–210, May 2002.
[7] A. G. Dimakis and M. J. Wainwright, “Guessing facets: Polytope structure and improved LP decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Seattle, WA, Jul. 2006.
[8] C. Douillard, M. Jezequel, C. Berrou, A. Picart, P. Didier, and A. Glavieux, “Iterative correction of intersymbol interference: Turbo equalization,” Eur. Trans. Telecomm., vol. 6, pp. 507–511, 1995.
[9] L. Duan, B. Rimoldi, and R. Urbanke, “Approaching the AWGN channel capacity without active shaping,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Ulm, Germany, Jun./Jul. 1997.
[10] J. Feldman, “Decoding Error-Correcting Codes via Linear Programming,” Ph.D, Mass. Inst. Technology, Cambridge, 2003.
[11] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. R. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 954–972, Mar. 2005.
[12] M. Fukushima, Hisenkei saitekika no Kiso (in Japanese, Basics on Non-linear Optimization). Tokyo, Japan: Asakura-shoten, 2004.
[13] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[14] J. Garcia-Frias and J. Villasenor, “Turbo decoding of Gilbert-Elliot channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 357–363, Mar. 2002.
[15] H. Imai and S. Hirakawa, “New multilevel coding method using error-correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-23, no. 3, pp. 371–377, May 1977.
[16] S. Jiang, L. Ping, H. Sun, and C. S. Leung, “Modifed LMMSE turbo equalization,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, pp. 174–176, Mar. 2004.
[17] R. Koetter and P. O. Vontobel, “Graph covers and iterative decoding of finite-length codes,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 2003.

[18] R. Koetter, A. C. Singer, and M. Tuchler, “Turbo equalization,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 67–80, Jan. 2004.
[19] M. Kojima, T. Tsuchiya, S. Mizuno, and H. Yabe, Naitenhou (in Japanese, Interior Point Method). Tokyo, Japan: Asakura-shoten, 2001.
[20] B. Kurkoski, P. Siegel, and J. Wolf, “Joint message-passing decoding of LDPC codes and partial-response channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 1410–1422, Jun. 2002.
[21] B. Kurkoski, P. Siegel, and J. Wolf, “Correction to joint message-passing decoding of LDPC codes and partial-response channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 8, p. 2076, Jun. 2003.
[22] X. Ma and L. Ping, “Coded modulation using superimposed binary codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 3331–3343, Dec. 2004.
[23] D. J. C. MacKay, Encyclopedia of Sparse Graph Codes [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html
[24] C. H. Papadimitriou and K. Steiglitz, Combinatorial Optimization: Algorithm and Complexity. New York: Dover, 1998.
[25] W. H. Press, B. P. Flannery, S. A. Teukolsky, and W. T. Vetterling, Numerical Recipes in C: The Art of Scientific Computing. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1992.
[26] C. Roos, T. Terlaky, and J. Vial, Interior Point Methods for Linear Optimization, 2nd ed. New York: Springer, 2006.
[27] A. Schrijver, Combinatorial Optimization: Polyhedra and Efficiency. New York: Springer, 2003.
[28] M. H. Taghavi and P. H. Siegel, “Equalization on graphs: Linear programming and message passing,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Nice, France, Jun. 2007.
[29] M. H. Taghavi and P. H. Siegel, “Adaptive linear programming decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Seattle, WA, Jul. 2006.
[30] M. H. Taghavi and P. H. Siegel, “Adaptive methods for linear programming decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 5396–5410, Dec. 2008.
[31] M. H. Taghavi, A. Shokrollahi, and P. H. Siegel, “Efficient implementation of linear programming decoding,” in Proc. 46th Annu. Allerton Conf., Sep. 2008.
[32] P. O. Vontobel, “Interior-Point Algorithms for Linear-Programming Decoding,” in Information Theory and Applications Workshop, 2008, pp. 433–437, DOI 10.1109/ITA.2008.4601085 .
[33] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Towards low-complexity linear-programming decoding,” in Proc. 4th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Munich, Germany, Apr. 2006.
[34] T. Wadayama, “A coded modulation scheme based on low density parity check codes,” IEICE Trans. Fund., vol. E84-A, no. 10, pp. 2523–2527, 2001.
[35] T. Wadayama, “Interior point decoding for linear vector channels based on convex optimization,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Toronto, ON, Canada, Jul. 2008.
[36] T. Wadayama, “An LP decoding algorithm based on primal path-following interior point method,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Seoul, Korea, Jun. 2009.
[37] A. P. Worthen and W. E. Stark, “Unified design of iterative receivers using factor graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 843–849, Feb. 2001.
[38] K. Yang, X. Wang, and J. Feldman, “A new linear programming approach to decoding linear block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 1061–1072, Mar. 2008.
[39] Y. Ye, Interior Point Algorithms, Theory and Analysis. New York: Wiley-Interscience, 1997.
Tadashi Wadayama (M’95) was born in Kyoto, Japan,on May 9, 1968. He received the B.E., the M.E., and D.E. degrees from Kyoto Institute of Technology in 1991, 1993 and 1997, respectively.
Since 1995, he has been with Okayama Prefectural University as a Research Associate. In 2004, he moved to Nagoya Institute of Technology as an Associate Professor. Since 2010, he has been a professor of Department of Computer Science, Nagoya Institute of Technology. His research interests are in coding theory, information theory, and digital communication/storage systems.
Dr. Wadayama is a member of IEICE and SITA.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:12:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

