IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 18, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2010

1447

An Area-Efficient and Low-Power Multirate Decoder for Quasi-Cyclic Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
Bo Xiang, Rui Shen, An Pan, Dan Bao, and Xiaoyang Zeng, Member, IEEE

Abstract—The quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check (QCLDPC) codes are widely applied in digital broadcast and communication systems. However, the decoders are still difficult to be put into practice due to their large area and high power, especially in the wireless mobile devices. This paper presents an improved all-purpose multirate iterative decoder architecture for QC-LDPC codes, which can largely reduce their area and power. The architecture implements the normalized min-sum algorithm, rearranges the original two-phase message-passing flow, and adopts an efficient quantization method for the second minimum absolute values, an optimized storing scheme for the position indexes and signs, and an elaborate clock gating technique for substantive memories and registers. It is also configurable for any regular and irregular QC-LDPC codes, and can be easily tuned up to different code rates and code word lengths. The chip is fabricated in an SMIC 0.18- m six-metal-layer standard CMOS technology. It attains a throughput of 104.5 Mb/s, and dissipates an average power of 486 mW at 125 MHz, and 15 decoding iterations. The core area is only 9.76 mm2. The chip has been applied into the China digital terrestrial/television multimedia broadcasting system.
Index Terms—Digital terrestrial/television multimedia broadcasting (DTMB) system, iterative decoder architecture, min-sum-with-normalization-factor algorithm, quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check (QC-LDPC) codes, VLSI implementation.
I. INTRODUCTION
F ORWARD error correction (FEC) codes have been playing an important role in the digital broadcast and communication systems. Among all kinds of FEC codes, the low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, which were first invented by Gallager [1], have become more and more popular nowadays, since it was proved by MacKay and Neal [2] that the performance of the LDPC codes was remarkable and even much closer to Shannon limit than that of other codes.
The LDPC codes, which are defined by a sparse parity-check matrix, are one kind of linear block codes, and can be efficiently presented by the bipartite Tanner graph [3]. There are two primary types of parity-check matrices: the pseudorandom matrix [1] and the quasi-cyclic matrix [4], [5]. The latter one,
Manuscript received September 20, 2008; revised January 31, 2009. First published September 01, 2009; current version published September 24, 2010. This work was supported by the Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality under Grant 77062001.
The authors are with the State Key Laboratory of Application-Specific IC and System, Department of Microelectronics, Fudan University, Shanghai 201203, China (e-mail: bxiang@fudan.edu.cn; rshen@fudan.edu.cn; 062052022@fudan.edu.cn; 062052032@fudan.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVLSI.2009.2025169

whose encoding complexity is directly proportional to the

code word length, is widely applied in the systems such as

DVB-S2, 802.11n, 802.16e, China digital terrestrial/television

multimedia broadcasting (DTMB) system, magnetic storage

and recording system, and maybe next generation wireless

mobile communication system.

A structured sparse parity-check matrix defines the

quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check (QC-LDPC) codes

. The matrix is composed of

square submatrices. Each submatrix is a

either all zero

or circulant permutated square matrix. The total number of

nonzero submatrices is . Therefore, the QC-LDPC codes can

be compactly identified by the base matrix, which only stores

the position indexes and offsets of all nonzero submatrices in

. The irregular multirate QC-LDPC codes are employed in

the DTMB system. The parameters

are (35,

59, 127, 275), (23, 59, 127, 296), and (11, 59, 127, 294) for

code rates 2/5, 3/5, and 4/5, respectively. The matrix and its

partial Tanner graph for code rate 2/5 is shown in Fig. 1, where

is the row weight and is the column weight.

It can perform very well with outstanding error-correcting

performance for LDPC decoders using iterative decoding algo-

rithms. The original two-phase message-passing (TPMP) algo-

rithm [1] has better performance with higher complexity. Con-

trarily, the min-sum algorithm [6] has lower complexity with

worse performance. For the tradeoff between performance and

complexity, some variations of min-sum algorithm come forth.

One is the min-sum-plus-correction-factor algorithm [7], and

the other is the min-sum-with-normalization-factor algorithm

[8], [9]. The former one, marked with min-sum , just saves the

memory bits for lookup tables. However, the latter one, marked

with min-sum , is much more realizable because it can largely

reduce the memory bits for extrinsic messages. In addition, the

turbo-decoding message-passing (TDMP) algorithm [10] has

been applied in LDPC decoders with faster convergence speed.

Based on the iterative decoding algorithms, many QC-LDPC

decoder architectures have been implemented for different

applications. In general, they would fall into: 1) the architec-

tures with better performance; 2) the architectures with higher

throughputs; 3) the architectures with smaller area; 4) the

architectures with lower power; and 5) the architectures with

more flexible configurability. The decoder architectures [10],

[11], adopting the TDMP algorithm, have faster convergence

speed and dispense with extra memories for intrinsic messages.

However, they still need good-sized memory bits and have

higher computing complexity. The decoder architectures [12],

[13], applied into the magnetic storage and recording systems,

can attain higher throughputs for both phases are interleaved

1063-8210/$26.00 © 2009 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:12:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1448

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 18, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2010

with each other. Nevertheless, they are not area efficient for longer code word lengths and lower code-rates. Additionally, they are suffering from a little more performance loss and lack of flexibility. The decoder architectures [14], [15], introducing the overlapped message-passing methods, can increase the throughputs to some extent. However, they rest heavily with the structures of matrix . The decoder architectures [16], [17], which are called vertical shuffle schedule (VSS), can speed up convergence and increase throughputs. Nevertheless, they need so many check-node updating units when the number of rows in gets larger that the area and power may not be acceptable for the mobile terminals. The traditional partially parallel decoder architectures [14], [15], [18]–[21] dispense with permutation network. However, they are not configurable and not area efficient for layout floor planning because of large numbers of memories.
In this paper, based on the min-sum- algorithm [8], following the idea of repartitioning both updating phases [22], a configurable area-efficient and low-power multirate decoder for QC-LDPC codes has been implemented. The decoder can be applied into set-top boxes and mobile terminals, which are critical for the area and power. The paper is organized as follows. Section I is introduction. Section II briefly reviews the logarithmic domain TPMP and min-sum- algorithms, and advances some modifications that aim at lowering the cost of VLSI implementation. It also gives the performance curves. Section III presents the proposed decoder architecture, and describes the techniques to decrease the area and power in detail. The implementation results are followed in Section IV. Finally, Section V concludes the paper.

Functions

and

in (1) denote the sign and ab-

solute value of x, respectively, and is given by

(2)

The variable node updating operation can be expressed as follows:
(3)

The variable nodes are decoded according to the following equations:

if

(4)

if

The iterative decoding process terminates when

or

.

B. Rearranged Min-Sum- Algorithm
The min-sum- algorithm proposed in [8] is simply derived from substituting (5) for (1). Here, is the normalization factor, which is related with channels and code rates. To obtain the best performance, the factor should vary from one iteration to another, and depends on the SNR values. However, to make the algorithm as simple as possible, the factor is constant for all iterations and all SNR values [9]

II. REARRANGED ALGORITHM AND QUANTIZATION
The Gallager’s TPMP algorithm [1] propagates the extrinsic messages between the check nodes and the variable nodes in multiple rounds of iterations. The a posteriori probabilities can converge to either 1 or 0 after some decoding iterations.

(5) After simplification by the min-sum- algorithm, the computation flow can be rearranged [22] as in (6) and (7). For each check node , the block of searcher searches the first and the second minimum absolute values through the extrinsic mes-

A. Logarithmic Domain TPMP Algorithm

sages from all variable nodes

to check node . Mean-

while, it stores the position index of the first minimum absolute

Let

be the extrinsic logarithm likelihood ratio (LLR)

from check node to variable node in the th iteration;

,

the extrinsic LLR from variable node to check node in the

th iteration; , the channel intrinsic LLR of variable node

value and the signs of all extrinsic messages. For variable node , the block of accumulator computes the sum of the channel in-
trinsic message and the extrinsic messages from all check nodes to variable node

;

, the posterior LLR of variable node after the th

stmin ndmin pos sgn

iteration; node ;

, the set of check nodes connected with check , the set of check nodes connected with check

(6)

node excluding variable node ; , the set of check nodes

(7)

connected with variable node ; and

, the set of variable

nodes connected with variable node excluding check node .

The iteration index is an integer from 1 to , where

Both variables,

in (6) and

is the maximum iteration number.

ered from the following equation:

in (7), are recov-

The check node updating operation can be expressed as follows:

stmin ndmin pos sgn (8)

The rearranged min-sum- algorithm imparts three key ad-

vantages for VLSI implementation as follows.

1) It can reduce the number of memory bits and the number

(1)

of memory accesses per iteration in a great measure.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:12:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIANG et al.: AREA-EFFICIENT AND LOW-POWER MULTIRATE DECODER

1449

M; N; b; t M N b t Fig. 1. Irregular QC-LDPC code (

) and its partial Tanner graph in the DTMB system, where = 35, = 59, = 127, and = 275 for code

rate 2/5.

2) It is much more flexible to design configurable partially C. Quantization and Performance Curves

parallel decoder architectures. 3) The check node updating phase and the variable node up-
dating phase can share the same processor if both of them work in turn. For 1), only the first and the second minimum absolute values are saved in the check node updating phase, and only the sum of each column is saved in the variable node updating phase. In addition, extra memories are required to store the signs of

Based on the Monte Carlo simulation and the field-programmable gate array (FPGA)-based field testing, the normalization factor in the DTMB system equals 0.625, 0.5625, and 0.625 for code rates 2/5, 3/5, and 4/5, respectively. Thereby, the complicated multiplication operation can be realized by the simple shift-and-add operation.
The decoder uses 6-bit integer and 2-bit fraction to quantize the LLRs. An 8-bit quantization gets much better error-cor-

all the extrinsic messages and the position indexes of the first recting performance than 7-, 6-, and 5-bit quantizations. Fig. 2

minimum absolute values in each row. Compared with the tradi- shows the bit error ratio (BER) curves on the additive white

tional decoder architectures [14], [15], [18]–[21], the proposed decoder architecture can cut down the number of memory bits by about 59.5%, and the number of memory accesses per iteration by about 68% consequently.
For 2), a novel configurable partially parallel multirate decoder architecture, which is different from the architectures [13], [22], [23], is presented for any regular and irregular QC-LDPC codes. In the proposed architecture, the rearranged two phases work yet in turn, but each row or column is updated serially. To increase the decoder’s throughputs, adjacent rows or columns are concurrently updated. Section IV will discuss the proposed decoder architecture in detail.
For 3), (6) and (7) indicate that the rearranged TPMP process features fine granularity. Subtraction and comparison are the basic arithmetic logical units (ALUs) in the check node updating phase, and addition is the basic ALU in the variable node updating phase. As a result, the hardware calculating resources can be approximately reduced by 40% when two equations are realized by the same processor. With the technique of time-division multiplexing, both phases cannot be processed concurrently. Nevertheless, the decoder’s area can be reduced

Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel for different code rates when

adopting 8-, 7-, 6-, and 5-bit quantizations. In Fig. 2, the left,

middle, and right clusters of BER curves are for code rates 2/5,

3/5, and 4/5, respectively.

For high code rate 4/5, the performance curves of different

quantizations are nearly the same with one another. They make

a much more striking difference when the code rate gets lower.

Especially, for code rates 3/5 and 2/5, the performance curves of

5-bit quantization do not drop like the waterfall. They give rise

to high error floor [24] when the BER is less than . Taking

much more complicated channels into account, the decoder uses

8-bit quantization with 2-bit fraction to meet the high perfor-

mance requirements of high-definition TV (HDTV) systems.

The second minimum absolute values feature the following

two statements: 1) they are used only once

in each row

in the check node updating phase and 2) simulation results in-

dicate that the mean of differences between the second and the

first minimum absolute values is very small. In order to save

memory bits, the decoder stores only the first minimum abso-

lute values quantized by 7-bit unsigned digit and the differences

quantized by 4-bit unsigned digit. Consequently, the decoder

can save memory resources of

bits,

further, and the throughputs can be doubled with the twofold which are about 5.64% of the total memory bits used in the pro-

work frequency.

posed decoder architecture.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:12:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1450

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 18, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2010

Fig. 2. BER curves of min-sum- algorithm employing different quantization schemes on the AWGN channel. The left, middle, and right parts are for code rates
2/5, 3/5, and 4/5, respectively, the normalization factor equals 0.625, 0.5625, and 0.625 correspondingly, and the maximum iteration number equals 15.

Fig. 3. BER curves of different algorithms on the AWGN channel. The left, middle, and right parts are for code rates 2/5, 3/5, and 4/5, respectively, the normalization factor equals 0.625, 0.5625, and 0.625 correspondingly, and the maximum iteration number equals 15.

If the differences overflow, they would be truncated to the to say, the performance loss becomes smaller when the code rate

maximum value of 4-bit binary sequence

. In this case, CR becomes higher. Fig. 3 shows the performance loss for dif-

the 4-bit representation with overflow protection will slow the ferent code rates. Compared with the 7-bit quantization method

convergence speed down and result in a little performance loss. for all the second minimum absolute values (marked with 8-bit

Actually, the performance loss heavily depends on the code rate min-sum- 1), the 4-bit quantization method for all the differ-

CR . For all the QC-LDPC codes

, the row ences (marked with 8-bit min-sum- 2) degrades the error-cor-

weight becomes larger when the code rate CR becomes recting performance only by about 0.15 dB at code rate 2/5 and

higher. The expression

, which denotes the total proba- about 0.08 dB at code rate 4/5.

bility of utilizing the second minimum absolute values for all As shown in Fig. 3, the performance of min-sum- algorithm

the extrinsic messages, becomes smaller consequently. That is is nearly the same with that of min-sum- algorithm. However,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:12:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIANG et al.: AREA-EFFICIENT AND LOW-POWER MULTIRATE DECODER

1451

M; N; b; t Fig. 4. Time schedule of the proposed decoder architecture for QC-LDPC codes (

b W m ; ; M W n ; ; N (c) time schedule of the CWSR. Here, = 10,

= 5 for = 1 . . . , and

): (a) overall time schedule, (b) time schedule of the RWSR, and = 5 for = 1 . . . .

both of them are about 0.8 dB better than the simplest min-sum scanning rounds can be scheduled in two ways. First, both of

algorithm.

them are processed concurrently. Second, both are processed se-

rially. The proposed iterative decoder architecture employs the

III. PROPOSED ITERATIVE DECODER ARCHITECTURE
For the tradeoff between throughputs and area, the partially parallel decoder architectures are often taken into consideration. Parallel degree (PD) is a key parameter to illuminate the decoder architectures. In the traditional partially parallel architectures in [14], [15], and [18]–[21] for QC-LDPC codes
, PD is either the number of block rows or the number of block columns . In other words, rows from different block rows are updated simultaneously in the check node updating phase, and columns from different block columns are updated simultaneously in the variable node updating phase. All rows or columns of each block are updated serially in clock cycles. In this case, the number of memories is directly proportional to the number of nonzero submatrices in . These architectures feature such coarse granularity that both phases cannot share the same processor when they work

second way to optimize the area and power, and doubles the

throughputs with the twofold work frequency.

The timing schedule is demonstrated in Fig. 4, where

for

denotes the row weight of the th block row

and for

denotes the column weight of the th

block column. The CWSR operation follows the RWSR opera-

tion. The RWSR operation scans serially for the nonzero sub-

matrices in the row-wise order, and the th block row is updated

serially in clock cycles. The CWSR operation scans se-

rially for the nonzero submatrices in the column-wise order, and

the th block column is updated serially in clock cycles.

That is to say, each of the nonzero submatrices in is processed

within one clock cycle. The parameter , which is given by (9),

denotes the number of clock cycles taken to finish an RWSR op-

eration or a CWSR operation. As a result, it takes

clock

cycles to finish a whole decoding iteration

in turn. Thereby, the cost of VLSI implementations is still very

high. To reduce the area and power further, we proposed a novel

(9)

configurable partially parallel multi-rate decoder architecture

for any regular and irregular QC-LDPC codes

.

The input and output interfaces heavily depend on the

A. Timing Schedule

The propagated extrinsic messages between check nodes and

variable nodes are recovered from (8). Therefore, the decoder

can be realized much more efficiently by changing the value

of PD to

. Different from the architectures in [14],

[15], and [18]–[21], rows or columns of each block are up-

dated concurrently, and the whole updating process is accom-

plished serially by scanning matrix in the row-wise order

and column-wise order alternately. A whole decoding iteration

systems, and maybe vary from one to another. In the DTMB

system, the inputs are

-bit LLRs per clock cycle,

and the outputs are

information bits per clock cycle.

As a result, it needs

CR clock cycles for the

input and output interfaces. Here, is the code word length,

CR is the code rate, is the work frequency, and

is

the maximum iteration number. Based on the assumed input

and output interfaces, the decoder’s throughputs can be

approximately written as follows:

is composed of a row-wise scanning round (RWSR) operation

(10)

and a column-wise scanning round (CWSR) operation. The two

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:12:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1452

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 18, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2010

M; N; b; t Fig. 5. Proposed TPMP decoder architecture for multirate QC-LDPC codes (

).

TABLE I

M; N; b; t THROUGHPUTS OF THE PROPOSED DECODER ARCHITECTURE FOR

DIFFERENT QC-LDPC CODES (

)

memories with depth 12 and width 127, stores the position indexes of the first minimum absolute values of all check nodes. F_RAM_bank, which is made up of a two-port sign memory

with depth 296 and width 127, and a single-port flag memory

with depth 35 and width 127, stores the signs of all extrinsic

messages. Moreover, Hbase_ROM_bank, which is made up of

two single-port memories with depth 865 and width 6, stores

the position indexes (row and column indexes) and the offsets

of nonzero submatrices in . When the matrix is changed,

only the Hbase_ROM_bank needs to be reconfigured.

Ignoring the clock cycles for interfaces, and fixing the work

frequency and the maximum iteration number, the throughputs

are directly proportional to the ratio . Table I presents the

throughputs of the proposed decoder architecture for different

QC-LDPC codes

according to (10). The pro-

posed decoder architecture can be easily tuned up to satisfy the

throughput requirements of different systems by changing the

work frequency and the maximum iteration number.

The recovers realize the function in (8). In the previous check node updating phase, all the updated extrinsic messages are decomposed into minimum values, signs, and position indexes, which are stored into the M_RAM_bank, F_RAM_bank, and P_RAM_bank, respectively. All the extrinsic messages required in the next check node updating phase and variable node updating phase are again recovered from the components read from the corresponding memory banks.
The permutation network, which is realized by the barrel

B. Proposed Iterative Decoder Architecture

shifter, shifts the sequence of 127 messages cyclically by an offset. The RWSR operation and the CWSR operation are

The proposed iterative decoder architecture, which is shown processed serially, so the decoder can do with only one permu-

in Fig. 5, is composed of five parts: 1) central controller; 2) tation network.

memories; 3) recovers; 4) permutation network (barrel shifter); Due to the serial computation and fine granularity of both

and 5) searchers, accumulators, and parity checks (S-A-Ps). scanning rounds, only one processor can deal with both of them.

There are five banks of memories. I_RAM_bank, which is A total of 127 processors work in parallel and realize the func-

made up of 16 single-port memories with depth 59 and width tions of S-A-Ps that are shown in Fig. 5.

64, stores the intrinsic messages received from transferring Table II evaluates the hardware cost of different partially par-

channel. S_RAM_bank, which is made up of 16 single-port allel QC-LDPC decoder architectures applied into the DTMB

memories with depth 59 and width 64, stores the sums of system. Compared with the traditional partially parallel archi-

all variable nodes. M_RAM_bank, which is made up of 16 tectures in [20] and [21], the architecture in [22] can only reduce

single-port memories with depth 35 and width 88, stores the memory bits by about 25.5%. However, the proposed decoder

first minimum absolute values and the differences of all check architecture can largely reduce memory bits by about 59.5%.

nodes. P_RAM_bank, which is made up of nine single-port In addition, the number of memories is reduced from 355 to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:12:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIANG et al.: AREA-EFFICIENT AND LOW-POWER MULTIRATE DECODER

1453

M; N; b; t TABLE II
COMPARISON WITH DIFFERENT PARTIALLY PARALLEL ARCHITECTURES FOR QC-LDPC CODES (

) IN THE DTMB SYSTEM

Fig. 6. Rearranged message-passing architectures: (a) RWSR architecture and (b) CWSR architecture.

61 by about 83%. It is very helpful to do back-end floor plan- In the RWSR operation, 127 8-bit sums are first read from the

ning. Compared with the complicated check node function units S_RAM_bank, and then, get permutated through the 127-way

and variable node function units in architectures [20]–[22], the two-stage pipeline permutation network. Meanwhile, 127 8-bit

proposed architecture only needs 127 two-input S-A-Ps in both individual extrinsic messages are recovered from the minimum

phases. Therefore, the proposed architecture is much more ef- values, signs, and position indexes of the previous round, which

ficient for area and power, has the best configurability, and fits are read from the M_RAM_bank, the F_RAM_bank, and the

well in irregular multirate QC-LDPC codes.

P_RAM_bank, respectively. A total of 127 8-bit updated prior

C. RWSR and CWSR

messages, which are obtained from subtracting the individual extrinsic messages from the permutated sums, are decomposed

The RWSR and the CWSR work by turns to update the ex- into the absolute values and signs. The absolute values are

trinsic messages between check nodes and variable nodes. The normalized by the factor , and then, are used for updating

architectures are shown in Fig. 6(a) and (b), respectively.

the first and the second minimum absolute values, and the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:12:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1454

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 18, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2010

position indexes by comparing with the temporary values in

registers. The signs [most significant bits (MSBs)] are for parity

check and sign updating. The intermediate updated minimum

values, signs, and position indexes are temporarily latched

in registers. After

for

clock cycles, the

final updated minimum values, signs, and position indexes of

the th block row are written back into the M_RAM_bank,

the F_RAM_bank, and the P_RAM_bank, respectively. The

decoder continues scanning the next block row after then.

Similarly, in the CWSR operation, 127 8-bit extrinsic mes-

sages are first recovered from the minimum values, signs, and

position indexes, which are read from the M_RAM_bank, the

F_RAM_bank, and the P_RAM_bank, respectively, and then,

get through the 127-way two-stage pipeline permutation net-

work. At last, the permutated extrinsic messages accumulate

one by one with 127 8-bit intrinsic messages read from the

I_RAM_bank. The intermediate updated sums are temporarily

latched in registers. After for

clock cycles,

the final updated sums of the th block column are written back

into the S_RAM_bank. The decoder continues scanning the next

block column after then.

The decoder does parity check row by row in the RWSR op-

eration, which is shown in Fig. 6.

sign bits (MSBs) per-

taining to the same row feed into the logical exclusive OR gate

bit by bit. After clock cycles, all the output flag bits from

different rows are carried into the logical OR gate. The whole

parity-check flag bit is obtained as the RWSR operation is done.

If the flag bit equals 0, the decoder converges at the right code

word, and then, quits the decoding process. Meanwhile, the de-

coder outputs the information bits of the code word and discards

the parity-check bits. All the blocks stand by until the arrival of

the next data frame. Oppositely, if the flag bit equals 1, the de-

coder continues the next decoding iteration.

The decoder employs 4-bit unsigned digit to quantize the dif-

ference between the second minimum absolute value and the

first minimum absolute value. The differences are calculated

with overflow protection before they are written back into the

M_RAM_bank. The second minimum absolute values are re-

covered again by adding the differences to the first minimum

absolute values.

As shown in Fig. 6, the RWSR architecture is made up of four

memory banks, 127 recovers, a 127-way two-stage pipeline

permutation network, 127 accumulators, 127 searchers, and

127 parity checks, and the CWSR architecture is made up of

five memory banks, 127 recovers, a 127-way two-stage pipeline

permutation network, and 127 accumulators. Introducing the

technique of time-division multiplexing, 127 processors op-

erate both of them, and the hardware utility rate is improved

further. Fig. 7 shows the iterative decoding mechanism for the

proposed decoder. In the operation of RWSR, all the switches

(SWs shown in Fig. 7) are connected with node 1. Contrarily,

in the operation of CWSR, all the switches are connected with

node 2, and the parity check blocks and the searcher blocks are

switched off. The recover blocks, the permutation network, and

the accumulator blocks are active for both scanning rounds.

As shown in Fig. 8, both scanning rounds adopt five-stage

pipeline including reading from and writing into memories. The

first stage is reading necessary messages from all the memory

Fig. 7. Time-division multiplexing technique. Node 1 corresponds to the RWSR, node 2 corresponds to the CWSR, and SW denotes the switch.

Fig. 8. Five-stage pipeline of data processing.

banks. The second, third, and fourth stages correspond to the

register sets , , and , respectively, in Fig. 6. For the

RWSR operation, the second stage operates the first stage of

permutation network and recovers, the third stage operates the

second stage of permutation network, parity checks, and accu-

mulators, and the fourth stage operates searchers. For the CWSR

operation, the second stage operates recovers, the third stage

operates the first stage of permutation network, and the fourth

stage operates the second stage of permutation network and ac-

cumulators. The fifth stage

is feeding the intermediate

data back or writing the final data back. During the process

of scanning one block row in , the temporary data are fed

back into the next logical calculation. The final updated data

are written back into the corresponding memory banks as soon

as it is accomplished.

D. Position Index and Sign Storing Optimization

All the QC-LDPC codes

in DTMB, 802.11n,

and 802.16e feature the following two statements.

1) The row weight is often much smaller than the number

of block columns for irregular QC-LDPC matrix

.

2) The total number of nonzero submatrices in matrix is

almost same for different code rates

.

For 1), the position indexes of the minimum absolute value

in each row can be stored with

-bit digit, which is

much more efficient than the traditional storing scheme with

-bit digit. Therefore, the total number of memory bits

for position indexes

is calculated as in (11). Table III

lists the

for different code rates in the DTMB system by

different storing schemes. Compared with the traditional storing

scheme, the proposed can reduce the memory bits by 50% at

most

(11)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:12:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIANG et al.: AREA-EFFICIENT AND LOW-POWER MULTIRATE DECODER
TABLE III MEMORY BITS NEEDED FOR POSITION INDEXES BY DIFFERENT SCHEMES

1455

For 2), suppose that the parameter is constant, then the pa-

rameter would be inversely proportional to the parameter

. In other words, the decoder can maintain some kind of

balance for

, no matter which code rate it is. However,

if all position indexes are stored in one memory, the memory

depth must be the maximum value of , and the memory width

must be the maximum value of

. For the DTMB

system, this storing scheme would need

bits and waste almost

. To

enhance the utilization rate of memory, a novel storing scheme

is presented for the multirate decoder architectures, which is

shown in Fig. 9. All bits of a position index are separately stored

in several memories with the same address tag. Thereby, one

single-port memory with 22 225 bits is replaced by nine single-

port memories with

. For each

of them, the depth is 12 and the width is 127. The overhead of

the proposed is just

. As shown in

Fig. 9, the nine memories are grouped into three sets, two sets,

and one set for code rates 2/5, 3/5, and 4/5, respectively. For

code rate 3/5, the ninth memory is no use. For code rate 4/5,

the sixth, seventh, eighth, and ninth memories are no use. The

central controller just selects the memory set by code rate and

block row index

Fig. 9. Position index storing optimization for multirate QC-LDPC codes.

for begin
end

message MSB

clock clock clock clock clock clock clock clock for

cycle cycle cycle cycle cycle cycle cycle cycle

W (12)

Fig. 10. Sign storing optimization: (a) traditional scheme and (b) proposed scheme. Here, equals 8.

The signs of the extrinsic messages are updated according to

(12) in the proposed decoder architecture. The traditional way of sign storing in Fig. 10(a) is to send the final updated signs into the sign memory. For the parameters and vary from one

TABLE IV DIFFERENT SIGN STORING SCHEMES FOR MULTIRATE
QC-LDPC CODES IN THE DTMB SYSTEM

code rate to another, this storing scheme needs large numbers of

memory bits and registers, which is shown in Table IV, where

TP denotes the two port and SP denotes the single port.

An optimized storing scheme, which is much more befitting

for the proposed multirate decoder architecture, is presented in

Fig. 10(b). In the proposed architecture, the message updating

of each block row is processed by serial scanning in clock stores the intermediate signs and instead of the valid signs

cycles. However, all the valid signs are just known after

. Although it requires additional

bits for

clock cycles. To avoid the usage of many registers, the decoder , the proposed scheme can deal with multirate architectures

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:12:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1456

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 18, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2010

Fig. 11. Power distribution of different architectures: (a) traditional partially parallel architectures [21] and (b) proposed architecture.

Fig. 12. Dynamic power controlling technique of clock gating.

Fig. 13. Die photograph of the FEC decoder in the DTMB system.

very well, and in total, it can save memory bits by about 34% and registers by about 96%, which are shown in Table IV.

E. Power Analysis and Clock Gating

A traditional partially parallel decoder architecture [21] for

the DTMB system is implemented in the SMIC

m prior

to the proposed one. This decoder architecture works at 60

MHz and 1.3 V, and attains a throughput of 108.2 Mb/s at 15

decoding iterations. To analyze the power distribution of the

different architectures more accurately, the postlayout netlists

with the parasitic annotation are used by the synopsys electronic

design automation (EDA) tool, the Prime Power. Fig. 11(a)

shows the power distribution of the traditional partially parallel

architecture [21]. It has revealed that about 74% of the total

chip power is consumed by continuous memory accesses and

flip-flop overturns. Therefore, decreasing the memory size and

register number is the most efficient way to lower the decoder’s

power dissipation. The power distribution of the proposed

partially parallel architecture is shown in Fig. 11(b). For much

less number of memories and much less memory accesses per

iteration, the proportion of power dissipation for all memory

blocks is reduced from 53% to

. However,

the proposed architecture also uses large numbers of registers

to latch temporary results, and the proportion for this part goes

up from 21% to

.

When the estimated code word satisfies the parity-check

matrix , the decoder terminates the iterative decoding process,

and gates off all the clocks of memory banks and ALUs. They would be again activated by the central controller as soon as the next data frame arrives.
For the multirate decoder architecture, the hardware utility rate must be less than 1, and some parts of the decoder may not operate in the course of iterative decoding. Thereby, the clock gating is introduced for the proposed architecture to lower the power dissipation of unnecessary memory accesses and register overturns. For the serial updating, and the asymmetry of RWSR operation and CWSR operation, not all the memories and registers are always in active state. The clocks of the memories and registers in the idle state would be gated off.
About 39% of the total power is consumed by the large numbers of registers in the proposed decoder. Fig. 12 shows an example of clock gating to control power dissipation of some registers dynamically. The maximum column weight in is 16. In the variable node updating phase, it employs 12-bit quantization with 4-bit extension for the sum of each column to guarantee high-precision requirements of the proposed decoder. Therefore, it needs 12 registers for 12-bit sum. However, the weights are only 3 for most columns, which is much smaller than 16. The unnecessary registers are gated off dynamically in the serial accumulation process. In the check node updating phase, it only uses eight registers for 8-bit extrinsic message, and the other four registers are gated off all along.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:12:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIANG et al.: AREA-EFFICIENT AND LOW-POWER MULTIRATE DECODER

1457

Fig. 14. Power dissipation versus average iteration number for different code rates.

Fig. 11(b) shows that the clock gating can save 5% of the total power dissipation for memory accesses (the upper part excluded from pie diagram), and 6% for register overturns (the lower part excluded from pie diagram).

TABLE V COMPARISON OF IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS BETWEEN PROPOSED ARCHITECTURE AND PREVIOUS ARCHITECTURE [21] IN THE DTMB SYSTEM

IV. IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS

The decoder is fabricated in the SMIC - m six-metal-

layer standard CMOS technology. Fig. 13 shows the die pho-

tograph of the FEC decoder in the DTMB system, including

the proposed QC-LDPC decoder, deinterleaver, demapper,

Bose–Chaudhuri–Hocquenghem (BCH) decoder, and syn-

chronized parallel interface (SPI). Due to the large numbers

of memory accesses in both phases, all memories are placed

around the chip to balance the power distribution.

Fig. 14 presents power dissipation of the proposed de-

coder versus average iteration number. Due to more memory

accesses to the M_RAM_bank, the P_RAM_bank, and the

F_RAM_bank for lower code rates, the power dissipation is

a little more than that for higher code rates. When it works at

high SNR, the power dissipation is less than 100 mW.

Table V lists VLSI implementation results of the proposed de-

coder and the previous decoder with traditional partially parallel

architecture [21] for QC-LDPC codes in the DTMB system. The

chip in this study can run at a peak frequency of 250 MHz with a

throughput of about 209 Mb/s at 15 iterations. The memory bits of the proposed decoder are about 236 000 bits at 8-bit quantization. In the DTMB system, the decoder operates at 125 MHz, and dissipates an average power of 486 mW at 15 iterations. There are about 580 000 logic equivalent gates, which occupy

The memory access efficiency (MAE) in Table V, which is defined in (13), is the average number of memory accesses per variable node per iteration, where is the total number of memory accesses per iteration and is the code word length

an area of about mm . The work frequency and the max-

imum iteration number can be adjusted to satisfy the throughput

MAE

(13)

requirements of different systems.

The area of the two-port memory is about 1.5 times larger Compared with the architecture in [21], the memory bits are

than the single port with the same memory size. Table V in- reduced by 40%. The MAE decreases from 188.6 bits to 60 bits

dicates that most of them in the proposed architecture are the by about 68%. Total number of logic equivalent gates is only

single port. The size ratio between the single-port memories and about 580 000 reduced by about three fourths. Additionally the

the two-port memories is 5.28/1, which is much greater than architecture has much better flexibility for different code rates

1/5.14 for the traditional architecture [21]. That is to say, the area and code word lengths, lower routing complexity, smaller area,

of the memories becomes smaller as the ratio becomes larger. and lower power consumption.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:12:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1458

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 18, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2010
TABLE VI COMPARISON WITH LDPC DECODERS IN OTHER SYSTEMS

Table VI lists comparison results among different LDPC

decoders of different systems. Compared with the other four

LDPC codes, the codes in the DTMB system are much more

complex. First, the code word lengths are much longer. Second,

the number of ‘‘1’’ in is 296 127 at most, which is about

4.4 times of the number in [25] and [26], and about six times of

the number in [11].

Here, two normalized parameters to compare different LDPC

decoders are given. The first parameter is the memory usage effi-

ciency (MUE), which is defined in (14), where denotes the

total number of memory bits and

denotes the number of

quantization bits

reference values of PEs for different LDPC decoders. Since the

technologies are not uniform, it is meaningless to compare them

with one another directly.

The total power consumption of the circuits is the sum of

the dynamic power and the static power , as shown in

(16). The static power, which is always much smaller than the

dynamic power, can be ignored. The dynamic power is made

up of the switch power and the short-circuit power .

The variables and denote the total load capacitance and

the total equivalent short-circuit capacitance in the circuits. The

variable is the work voltage and the variable

is the

frequency of switching activities from 0 to 1 for logic gates.

MUE

(14)

In (14), the denominator is the total number of memory bits

in traditional partially parallel architectures using the original

logarithmic domain TPMP algorithm. When all the memory

resources are normalized to this level, the proposed decoder’s

MUE is only 0.65, which is much smaller than the numbers in

[11], [25], and [26]. Furthermore, the majority of memories are

the single port. The size ratio between the single-port memories

and the two-port memories is 5.28/1 in this paper. However, it

is about 1/3.17 in [26] and 1/1.06 in [11]. In other words, the

chip area occupied by the memory bits is decreased furthest for

the proposed decoder architecture. The memory usage is much

more efficient than the other three decoders.

The second parameter is the power efficiency (PE), which

is defined in (15). is the total power dissipation, is the

throughputs, and

is the maximum iteration number

PE

(15)

(16)

According to the constant scaling rule, the work voltage ,

the capacitances and , and the circuit delay are scaled

down as in (17) in the successive process generation. Here,

is the constant scaling factor whose typical value is

. As

shown in (17), the decrease of circuit delay would result in

increase of the maximum work frequency . Here, we do

not consider the relationship between the circuit delay and the

maximum work frequency, and suppose that all the throughputs

in decoders [11], [25]–[27] could be attained with the same work

frequencies in the - m technology. Once the frequency of

switching activities

for all logical gates is constant, the

total power consumption is scaled down by the cubic factor

, as shown in (18)

The proposed decoder consumes an average power of 310

pJ per variable node per iteration at 1.8 V. Table VI lists the

(17)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:12:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIANG et al.: AREA-EFFICIENT AND LOW-POWER MULTIRATE DECODER

1459

(18)

Therefore, all the PEs can be estimated in the - m technology based on the constant scaling rule. For example, if both of the work voltage and the total capacitance are scaled up from
- m technology to - m technology by the factor , then the total power consumption is scaled up approximately by the factor . The reference values of PEs in the - m technology for different LDPC decoders are listed in Table VI.
If considering the density of ‘‘1’’ and the average column weight in , the normalized power efficiency (NPE) is defined by (19). The symbol denotes the estimated power consumption in the - m technology. Actually, NPE is the average power consumption per ‘‘1’’ in per iteration. The decoder in this paper has the smallest NPE than the other three partially parallel decoders [11], [25], [26]

m

(19)

V. CONCLUSION
A configurable, area-efficient, and low-power decoder for 7493-bit irregular multirate QC-LDPC codes has been presented in this paper. It dissipates an average power of 486 mW, and attains a throughput of 104.5 Mb/s when operated at 125 MHz and 1.8 V.
Based on the features of the second minimum absolute values, the decoder adopts 4-bit unsigned digit to quantize the difference between the second minimum absolute value and the first minimum absolute value, which leads to 5.64% decrease of the memory bits.
The decoder absorbs fully the advantage of fine granularity of the proposed architecture, and performs both the RWSR operation and the CWSR operation with the same hardware processor. Additionally, much more efficient position index and sign storing schemes are introduced in the decoder.
To reduce the total power dissipation further, the technique of clock gating is adopted in the decoder, which can reduce the power dissipation of memories and registers by about 11%. Especially, in the phase of CWSR, the technique of dynamic power controlling is very flexible and efficient to reduce the registers’ power consumption.
The decoder is configurable and can be easily tuned up to different code rates and code word lengths. It can also have applications in other high-speed communication systems very flexibly by changing the work frequency and the maximum iteration number.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.

[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645–1646, 1996.
[3] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[4] W. W. Peterson and E. J. Weldon, Error-Correcting Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1972.
[5] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1983.
[6] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elect. Eng., Univ. Linkoping, Linkoping, Sweden, 1996.
[7] X.-Y Hu, E. Eleftherious, D.-M Arnold, and A. Dholakia, “Efficient implementation of the sum-product algorithm for decoding LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, Nov. 2001, vol. 2, pp. 1036–1036E.
[8] J. Chen and M. C. Fossorier, “Decoding low-density parity-check codes with normalized APP-based algorithm,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, Nov. 2001, vol. 2, pp. 1026–1030.
[9] J. Chen, “Reduced complexity decoding algorithms for low-density parity-check codes and turbo codes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elect. Eng., Univ. Hawaii, Honolulu, 2003.
[10] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “Turbo decoder architectures for low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, Nov. 2002, pp. 1383–1388.
[11] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “A 640-Mb/s 2048-bit programmable LDPC decoder chip,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 634–698, Mar. 2006.
[12] E. Yeo, P. Pakzad, B. Nikoli, and V. Anantharam, “High throughput low-density parity-check decoder architectures,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, Nov. 2001, vol. 5, pp. 3019–3024.
[13] H. Zhong, W. Xu, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “Area-efficient min-sum decoder design for high-rate quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes in magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 43, no. 12, pp. 4117–4122, Dec. 2007.
[14] Y. Chen and K. K. Parhi, “Overlapped message passing for quasi-cyclic low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst., vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 1106–1113, Jun. 2004.
[15] N. Chen, Y. Dai, and Z. Yan, “Partly parallel overlapped sum-product decoder architectures for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” in Proc IEEE SIPS, Oct. 2006, pp. 220–225.
[16] J. Zhang and M. Fossorier, “Shuffled iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 209–213, Feb. 2005.
[17] F. Guilloud, “Generic architectures for LDPC codes decoding,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elect. Eng. Telecomm., Telecom Paris, Paris, France, 2004.
[18] Mansour and M. M.Shanbhag, “N. R. low-power VLSI decoder architectures for LDPC codes,” in Proc. ISLPED, 2002, pp. 284–289.
[19] T. Zhang and K. K. Parhi, “A 54 Mbps (3, 6)-regular FPGA LDPC decoder,” in Proc IEEE SIPS, Oct. 2002, pp. 127–132.
[20] M. Karkooti and J. R. Cavallaro, “Semi-parallel reconfigurable architectures for real-time LDPC decoding,” in Proc. Int. Conf. ITCC, 2004, vol. 1, pp. 579–585.
[21] C. Yun, Z. Xiao-yang, L. Yi-Fan, X. Bo, and D. Yun-Song, “VLSI design of an irregular LDPC decoder in DTMB,” J. Commun., vol. 28, no. 8, pp. 61–66, Aug. 2007.
[22] Z. Wang and Z. Cui, “A memory efficient partially parallel decoder architecture for QC-LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 483–488, Apr. 2007.
[23] Y. Chen and D. Hocevar, “A FPGA and ASIC implementation of rate 1/2, 8088-b irregular low density parity check decoder,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, Dec. 2003, vol. 1, pp. 113–117.
[24] D. MacKay and M. Postol, “Weaknesses of margulis and ramanujan-margulis low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Notes Theor. Comput. Sci., vol. 74, pp. 97–104, 2003.
[25] C.-H. Liu, S.-W. Yen, C.-L. Chen, H.-C. Chang, C.-Y. Lee, Y.-S. Hsu, and S.-J. Jou, “An LDPC decoder chip based on self-routing network for IEEE 802.16e applications,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 684–694, Mar. 2008.
[26] X.-Y. Shih, C.-Z. Zhan, C.-H. Lin, and A.-Y. Andy Wu, “An 8:29 mm 52 mW multi-mode LDPC decoder design for mobile wiMAX system in 0.13 CMOS process,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 672–683, Mar. 2008.
[27] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “A690-mW1-Gb/s1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:12:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1460

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 18, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2010

Bo Xiang received the B.S. degree in microelectronics from Sichuan University, Chengdu, China, in 2005. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in microelectronics in the State Key Laboratory of Application-Specific IC (ASIC) and System, Department of Microelectronics, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
His research interests include wireless communication systems and their VLSI architecture design, in particular, the channel coding and decoding algorithms, and their VLSI implementations.

Dan Bao received the B.S. degree in electronics from Beijing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Beijing, China, in 2005. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in microelectronics in the State Key Laboratory of Application-Specific IC (ASIC) and System, Department of Microelectronics, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
His research interests include ASIC designs, and interactions between algorithms and VLSI architectures in broadband wireless transmission systems.

Rui Shen received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from Tongji University, Shanghai, China, in 2006. She is currently working toward the M.S. degree in microelectronics in the State Key Laboratory of Application-Specific IC (ASIC) and System, Department of Microelectronics, Fudan University, Shanghai.
Her research interests include wireless communication systems and their VLSI architecture design.
An Pan received the B.S. degree from East China Normal University, Shanghai, China, in 2006. He is currently working toward the Masters’ degree in microelectronics in the State Key Laboratory of Application-Specific IC (ASIC) and System, Department of Microelectronics, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
His research interests include digital signal processing, orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing systems, and wireless transmission communications, in particular, the channel estimation and equalization for the high-definition TV systems.

Xiaoyang Zeng (M’06) received the B.S. degree from Xiangtan University, Xiangtan, China, in 1992, and the Ph.D. degree from Changchun Institute of Optics and Fine Mechanics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, in 2001.
Since 2007, he has been a Full Professor and the Director of the State Key Laboratory of ApplicationSpecific IC (ASIC) and System, Fudan University, Shanghai, China, where he was a Postdoctoral Researcher from 2001 to 2003, and later an Associate Professor in the Department of Microelectronics. His research interests include information security chip design, VLSI signal processing, and communication systems. Prof. Zeng is the Steering Committee Member of the Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference, and the TPC member of the IEEE Asian Solid-State Circuits Conference and the International Conference on ASIC (ASICON).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:12:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

