A BER PERFORMANCE-AWARE EARLY TERMINATION SCHEME FOR LAYERED LDPC DECODER

Xiongxin ZHAO, Zhixiang CHEN, Xiao PENG, Dajiang ZHOU, Satoshi GOTO

Graduate School of IPS, Waseda University City of Kitakyushu, Fukuoka, Japan zxx@moegi.waseda.jp

ABSTRACT
This paper presents a novel early termination scheme for layered LDPC decoder. By solving the bit error rate (BER) performance degradation which will occur when other early termination schemes are applied in layered LDPC decoder, the proposed method achieves very fast termination speed without BER performance loss. It is the best solution for BER performance-aware layered LDPC decoders, such as satellite video broadcasting applications.
Index Terms— low-density parity-check, layered message passing algorithm, early termination scheme
1. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) code [1], recently as an error correcting code, is receiving much attention in both academic and industrial areas because of its excellent BER performance and parallelization with relatively low implementation complexity for decoders.
With the invention of LDPC codes, Gallager proposed an iterative decoding algorithm, named as two phase message passing algorithm (TPMP), which includes checknode updating and variable-node updating. In addition, Mansour introduced the concept of turbo decoding message passing (TDMP), which is also called layered message passing algorithm, for his proposed architecture-aware LDPC codes, which is able to reduce the iteration time up to 50% without performance degradation when compared to the original TPMP algorithm [2]. It has already been proven theoretically by Sharon in [3] that the convergence speed of layered message passing algorithm is two times faster compared to TPMP algorithm.
While full-parallel LDPC decoder designs suffer from complicated interconnection network and are not suitable for multi-rate implementation which is a rather important factor for modern wireless communication systems. To balance the implementation complexity and for multi-rate implementation flexibility, a structured quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) code was proposed in [4] and has already been

adopted in many communication standards not limited to IEEE 802.16e (WiMAX), IEEE 802.11n (WLAN) and DVB-S2 standards. The parity-check matrix (PCM) is composed of either an identity matrix with different cyclic shifts or all-zero matrix. The expansion factor, defined as the size of each sub-matrix differs from standards. The structured QC-LDPC codes make it effectively suitable for partial-parallel decoder implementation with the layered algorithm. Recently, a multi-rate LDPC decoder architecture based on QC-LDPC codes with layered algorithm is proposed in [5]. With the faster convergence speed of layered algorithm, partial-parallel decoding flexibility of QC-LDPC code structure and capability to support multirate implementation, many works are implemented based on the similar decoder architecture.
Besides the decoding schedules, early termination (ET) scheme is another hot topic in LDPC decoding field since it can tremendously increase the decoding throughput or reduce the power consumption. Many works have been done for both traditional TPMP decoder architecture and layered decoder architecture. Early termination in layered decoder architecture is different to that in TPMP one since the bitLLRs (Log likelihood ratio) are updated more than once in a single iteration of layered decoding process which are only updated once in TPMP. For ET schemes in layered decoding schedule, previous works have been done in [6] [7]. They can terminate the decoding rapidly without disturbing the pipelined schedule. However, both of them bring some BER performance degradations, which worsen the decoding performance and cannot be applied in BER performanceaware applications, such as DVB-S2 standard.
In this paper we propose a BER performance-aware ET scheme for layered LDPC decoder. By using the proposed ET, the best BER performance and fast termination are achieved with acceptable hardware overhead. Furthermore, as a hardware module, the proposed ET scheme is not limited to any standards or check-node message updating functions.
The organization of this paper is as follows. Section 2 briefly introduces the layered LDPC decoder architecture based on QC-LDPC codes and the BER performance loss

978-1-4244-8933-6/10/$26.00 ©2010 IEEE

416

SiPS 2010

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:14:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

problem occurred in previous ET schemes. Section 3 introduces our proposed last-iteration satisfaction check based early termination (LSC-ET) scheme and its hardware overhead in details. Comparisons of simulation results are presented in Section4 while section 5 concludes the paper.
2. LAYERED DECODER ARCHITECTURE AND EARLY TERMINATION PROBLEM
2.1. Layered decoder architecture for QC-LDPC codes
Figure 1 shows the block diagram of decoder architecture for QC-LDPC codes based on the layered partial-parallel decoding algorithm [5]. In this architecture, APP (A posterior possibility) memory and check memory store bitLLR messages and check-node messages, respectively. The PCM rom stores all PCM information including the seed matrix and shift values. Permuter is a flexible permutation network which can cyclically permute the fetched APP messages and sent them to proper PEs. Each PE which is a processing element works on bit-node and check-node message updating.

APP Memory Permuter

PCM rom

PE Array Check Memory

Addr Gen
Controller

Figure 1. Block diagram of layered decoder architecture
PE array, which is composed of a number of P (P is the expansion factor of QC matrix) PEs, deal with P check nodes in parallel way while for each check node the PEs are pipelined. In each clock cycle, one block of APP messages and check messages are fetched from the memories based on the addresses generated by the controller respectively, and then pass through the permuter to proper PEs for updating. In the PEs, for each check node the differences between APP and check messages are temporarily stored in a FIFO and written back to memories after the message updating.
This architecture can support multi-rate implementation because the interconnection network is constructed with seed matrix and shifted values and they are not fixed. The differences between standards make the memory size and PE amount be different. Also the architecture of PE varies from different check-node message updating functions. However, the pipelined data updating architectures are almost the same.

2.2. ET problem in layered decoder architecture
As mentioned in section 1, due to the difference between TPMP and layered message passing schedule, traditional early termination schemes, which verify the satisfaction of all the check equations, are not precise enough for the layered decoder architecture since the hard-decisions of variable nodes are always changed with decoding in different layers.
Recently, there are two research works focused on early termination for layered decoder architecture. Both of them can be implemented with acceptable hardware overhead and do not disturb the pipelined data updating. One is the popularly used hard-decision aided (HDA) scheme which stores the hard-decision values and compares the decoded codeword in two successive iterations [6]. If the decoded codeword of these two iterations are the same, the decoding will be terminated. Otherwise, the decoding process will be terminated when a predefined maximum iteration time (Max_IT) is reached. This scheme does not verify the check equations so that it cannot guarantee the BER performance. Sometimes an additional constraint is added to increase the reliability, in which all the absolute values of bit-LLR are larger than a predefined threshold. The threshold value for HDA varies from different channel conditions thus it needs to be determined through simulations for better BER performance. Another one, we named it as current-iteration satisfaction check based early termination (CSC-ET), which examines the check equations layer by layer with the decoding [7]. When all the check equations are satisfied sequentially in a single iteration, the decoding process will be terminated immediately or after additional iterations for better BER performance.
Since the updating of each APP message is more than once in a single iteration, such kind of serial satisfaction of check equations in a single iteration utilizes temporary harddecisions of bit-LLR. It is not equal to the correctly decoding criterion, which all the check equations are satisfied at the same time. Figure 2 shows an example, in which the CSC-ET constraint is met but it is not correctly decoded.

layer 0

i

.

.

.

layer

1

j

Vk
1
. . .
01

0 1 Check(i)=0
. . .
Check(j)=0

Figure 2. CSC-ET constraint problem

417
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:14:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Layers i and j are two check nodes in PCM. Positions with numbers mean that there are connections between variable nodes and check nodes. Variable node Vk connects to both of them. When the decoder processes on layer i and layer j respectively, the check equations i and j are satisfied, but the hard-decision Vk is updated from ‘1’ to ‘0’. Thus when the check equation j is processed, the already satisfied check equation i becomes unsatisfied. Through simulations we find that the above phenomenon does happen in the codewords terminated by CSC-ET and it just worsens the BER performance.
In one word, both HDA-ET and CSC-ET schemes cannot guarantee the BER performance. The BER performance loss of them is shown in section 4.

This method can make sure that all the hard-decisions of variable nodes are only updated once and they are the newest values. The LSC-ET scheme is described as follows:
a) Enlarge one bit (hard-decision bit) for all APP messages and initialize them as zero;
b) When decoding to each layer, only for marked variable nodes the hard-decision bits are updated with updated APP messages;
c) Without in the first iteration, do parity-checks with the hard-decision bits in all layers;
d) When all of check equations are satisfied in a whole iteration, stop the decoding process.

3. PROPOSED EARLY TERMINATION SCHEME
By investigating the unsatisfied-constraint problem of CSCET, for layered decoder architecture we propose the lastiteration satisfaction check based early termination (LSCET) scheme. Unlike the previous schemes, the proposed one can terminate the decoding process without any BER performance loss. Moreover, compared with mentioned two ET schemes, the proposed one achieves good average iteration times (AIT) which greatly influences the decoding throughput since in the typical layered decoding architecture throughput is directly proportional to 1/AIT.
The main idea of the proposed LSC-ET scheme is that the decoder executes the satisfaction check during (i+1)th iteration with hard-decision values made by ith iteration. The decoding process is terminated only if all of the check equations in a single iteration are satisfied. Otherwise it will be terminated after predefined Max_IT. As the CSC-ET scheme, we verify the check equations layer by layer. The only difference is that we utilize hard-decisions generated by last iteration which CSC-ET uses the ones from current iteration.
Since all of APP messages are updated more than once in a single iteration, we should memorize the last-updated hard-decisions in a single iteration. A simple example shown in Figure 3 explains how our method memorizes the lastupdated values. Considering each row as a layer in the PCM, layers 0 to 5 are decoded sequentially. The ‘1’s marked with bold red are last-updated positions for each variable node.
layer 0 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0
layer 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0
layer 2 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 0
layer 3 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1
layer 4 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 1
layer 5 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0
Figure 3. Last-updated information in PCM

For the satisfaction check in (i+1)th iteration, the lastupdated hard-decisions obtained from ith iteration should be passed to the correct PEs, so they are combined with APP messages together. In real implementation, we enlarge the data widths of both APP memory and permuter by one bit to achieve this function. Compared to additional parity-check function logics, the increased hard-decision bits for APP messages occupy the most part of hardware overhead of LSC-ET scheme. For DVB-S2 standard, the total memory overhead is no larger than 3% (8 bit quantization for APP messages) and it is the same as HDA-ET, while hardware overhead of CSC-ET scheme can be ignored compared with our proposed one.
4. SIMULATION RESULTS AND COMPARISONS
Under the condition of BPSK modulation, AWGN channel and 8-6 bit fixed point quantization, the BER and 1/AIT simulations for CSC-ET, HDA and LSC-ET scheme have been done. Normalized Min-Sum layered algorithm with factor 0.75 is used to perform iterative decoding. A kind of long LDPC code: (64800 bits code length, 1/2 code rate) specified by DVB-S2 and a kind of short LDPC code: (2304 bits code length, 1/2 code rate) specified by WiMAX are used throughout the simulations.
The results of BER performance of both codes are shown in Figure 4 and Figure 5. CSC-ET_n means currentiteration satisfaction check based early termination scheme such that after satisfaction of the ET criterion the decoder will process extra n iterations. Also HDA schemes with two different thresholds are simulated. It is clear that from the BER to SNR curves our proposed LSC-ET scheme has the best BER performance almost the same as the ideal one.
Another simulation is for the termination speed. We draw 1/AIT to SNR curves in Figure 6 and Figure 7 where the results of our proposed scheme are unified to one for comparison. From the figures we can see that among all the ET schemes our proposed one achieves very good termination speed, especially in DVB-S2 simulations.

418
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:14:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 4. BER performance comparison (64800, 1/2) Figure 5. BER performance comparison (2304, 1/2) Figure 6. AIT performance comparison (64800, 1/2)

5. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a BER performance-aware early termination scheme for layered LDPC decoder is proposed. Comparisons of simulation results demonstrate that based on the same conditions our proposed LSC-ET scheme achieves the best BER performance among all of the ET schemes with very good termination speed and acceptable hardware overhead. Moreover, since the proposed LSC-ET scheme does not cause extra error floor, it is the best solution for applications which require strict BER performance and early termination for low power consumption or high throughput.
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to acknowledge the contributions of the students, faculty, and sponsors of Goto’s Lab, Graduate school of IPS, Waseda University. This work was supported by Global COE project, MEXT and CREST project, JST.
7. REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes, Cambridge, MA: MITPress, 1963.
[2] M.-M. Mansour and N.-R. Shanbhag, “High-throughput LDPC decoders,” in IEEE Trans. VLSI System, vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 976996, Dec. 2003.
[3] E. Sharon, S. Litsyn and J. Goldberger, “An Efficient MessagePassing Scheduling for LDPC Decoding,” in Proc. 23rd IEEE Convention in Tel-Aviv, pp. 223-226, Sep. 2004.
[4] R.M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T.E. Fuja, and D.J. Costello Jr., “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” in IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966-2984, 2004.
[5] Y. Sun, M. Karkooti, and J. R. Cavallaro, “VLSI decoder architecture for high throughput, variable block-size and multi-rate LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE ISCAS, pp. 2104-2107, May 2007.
[6] R.-Y. Shao, S. Lin, and M.P.C. Fossorier, “Two simple stopping criteria for turbo decoding,” in IEEE Trans. on Commu., Vol. 47, pp. 1117-1120, Aug. 1999.
[7] Y. Ueng, Y. Wang, “Modified Layered Message Passing Decoding with Dynamic Scheduling and Early Termination for QC-LDPC Codes,” in Proc. IEEE ISCAS 2009, May 2009.

Figure 7. AIT performance comparison (2304, 1/2)
419
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:14:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

