An Improved HARQ Scheme Based on Irregular LDPC Coding

Long Guo, Youyun Xu, Wenfeng Ma, Junquan Hu
Institute of Communications Engineering PLA University of Science and Technology
Nanjing 210007, China tx2zguolong@163.com, yyxu@vip.sina.com

Abstract— The hybrid auto repeat request (HARQ) is an efficient retransmission technique which can guarantee highly reliable communication over noisy channels, and nowadays it has been widely adopted in packet-based data communication systems. In this paper, we propose an improved Type- Ċ Hybrid-ARQ scheme that can degrade the average number of the iteration and improve the performance. In this scheme, the source transmits the whole codeword to the destination, and only the parity bits are retransmitted, if the decoder fails. Irregular LDPC codes, which have different degrees, are utilized in the proposed HARQ scheme. Before the retransmission, the parity bits have been treated as a set of bits specified by the node’s degrees. The nodes with same degree are classified into one subset. When the retransmissions are needed, only the parity bits are retransmitted, and the subset which has the larger degree is transmitted firstly, then the smaller subset is transmitted. The simulation results demonstrate that the proposed HARQ scheme can outperform the Type-ĊHARQ scheme.
Keywords-LDPC codes; Hybrid ARQ; Degree Distribution
I. INTRODUCTION
Reliable communication is essential in applications of wireless packet-oriented data network. LDPC codes [1], as a powerful FEC (Forward Error Correction) technique to achieve reliable communication, are widely used in some practical system (e.g. DVB-S2). It can achieve near Shannon limit performance and be decoded easily compared to Turbo codes. The ARQ (Automatic Repeat reQuest) scheme plays a major roll in order to achieve reliable communication in wireless link also. In order to guarantee the reliability of communication, the receiver detects errors in a received packet. If there are errors in the packet, the receiver asks the sender to retransmit the packet. So, a class of special schemes, that are called hybrid auto repeat request (HARQ)[2], combine the powerful channel coding such as Turbo codes and LDPC codes with the retransmission protocols to enhance the reliability of wireless communication.
Hybrid ARQ technique combines ARQ with FEC such as LDPC codes to achieve higher throughput with lower delay. There are two types of HARQ schemes as the Type-ĉHARQ and the Type-Ċ HARQ. In the Type-ĉ HARQ, the source retransmits the same packet as the previous one, but the packet of previous transmission with error is not used. But there are some schemes using the previous packet. Chase combining

(CC) [3][4] is the simplest combining scheme for the type-ĉ HARQ. When the packet is retransmitted to the receiver, it is added to the previous received packet symbol by symbol and the decoder is performed using the combined values. On the other hand, in the Type-ĊHARQ scheme, e.g. incremental redundancy (IR) [4][5] when there are errors, the source retransmits only the additional parity bits whose length can be smaller than the length of message and the receiver combines them together to obtain new codes of lower coding rate.
There are many studies of HARQ about wireless communication systems. In [6], the author proposes a new efficient HARQ system using MLS/MSD with reduced constellation size. It has high bandwidth efficiency and a low complexity, and the simulation result shows that the number of retransmissions and the throughput is higher than those of the BICM. [7] shows a new criterion for reordering schemes of LDPC coded OFDM subframes in the type -ĉHARQ system. The subframe reordering scheme for achieving equal combined power allocation gives better BER performance than the conventional chase combining scheme without increasing the complexity of decoding.
In this paper, we propose an improved Type- Ċ HARQ scheme. In the scheme, the source transmits the all bits of the packet firstly, then retransmits the parity parts from the bits which have large degree to the bits which have small degree, that is the difference from the Type-ĊHARQ scheme, in order to degrade the average number of the iterations and retransmissions and improve the performance. Irregular LDPC codes, which are utilized to our improved scheme, are suitable for the scheme because of the different degree distributions. The parity parts of the LDPC block have been treated as a set of bits specified by the node’s degrees. The nodes with the same degrees are classified into one subset which will be retransmitted when needed. In the scheme, we can get better performance and degrade the average number of iterations and retransmissions.
To make our statement more clearly, the rest of paper is organized as follows. In sectionĊ, we give a brief introduction of LDPC codes. The proposed HARQ scheme is described and analyzed in section ċ. In section Č, some numerical results for analysis and comparisons are present, and the performance of the proposed HARQ scheme is shown. section čconcludes this paper.

978-1-4244-7555-1/10/$26.00 ©2010 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:18:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

II. BRIEF INTRODUTION OF LDPC CODES

Low density parity check (LDPC) is first proposed by R. G.

Gallager in 1960’s [1]. It is a kind of linear codes. It is so

named because it is specified by a parity-check matrix with

very low density that means the number of the “1” is very

sparse and most elements are “0” in the matrix. LDPC codes

can be defined by an mhn parity check matrix H , where m is

the number of parity-check equations, and n is the block length,

and the generator matrix G which satisfies the expression:

GH T = 0

(1)

The parity-check matrix H can be graphically represented by a bipartite graph depicted, and in the bipartite graph there are two sets of nodes: the variable nodes, corresponds to elements of the codeword, and the check nodes, corresponds to the set of parity-check constraints which define the code. Regular LDPC codes are those for which all nodes of the same type have the same degree, and the irregular LDPC codes have different degrees. For example, the matrix H and the bipartite graph of a (3,6) -regular LDPC codes are shown in Fig.1 and Fig.2. In the paper, we will use irregular LDPC codes.

§1 1 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 1 0·

¨1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1¸

H

=

¨ ¨

0 1

0 0

0 0

0 1

0 0

1 0

1 0

1 1

0 1

1 1

1 0

1¸ 1¸

¨ ©¨

0 0

1 0

0 1

1 0

1 1

0 1

1 0

1 0

1 1

0 1

0 1

0 0

¸ ¸¹

Figure 1. Example of the parity check matrix of (3,6)-regular LDPC codes

λi ( ρi ) is the fraction of edges belonging to variable (check)

nodes with i edges (or a degree of i), and dv ( dc ) is the
maximum variable (check) node degree. Thus, we can have many different parity-check matrices which comply with a degree distribution pair, and either a parity-check matrix or a bipartite graph is a realization of a degree distribution pair. The rate of LDPC codes specified by a degree distribution pair
(λ ( x), ρ ( x)) is computed as ([9])

dc

³ ¦ 1 ρ (x)dx

ρj / j

r(λ, ρ) = 1− 0

= 1− j=2

³ 1 λ ( x)dx 0

dv
¦λj / j

j=2

(4)

III. THE IMPROVED HARQ SCHEME
The structure of the Type-ĊHARQ [10] is shown in Fig 3. In the Type- Ċ HARQ scheme, the source sends only the message parts of the codeword and a small amount of parity information firstly, and the receiver decodes only by the log likelihood ratios (LLRs)of message parts. When the receiver decodes successfully, the source sends the next codeword. If the decoder fails, the retransmissions are needed and the transmitter sends additional parity bits and the receiver combines them together to obtain new LLRs to decode. The parity bits can be transmitted once or many times.

Figure 3. The structure of the Type-ĊHARQ

Figure 2. Example of bi-partite graph of LDPC codes

While a parity-check matrix and a bipartite graph specify an instance of an LDPC code, an ensemble of LDPC codes can be described with a degree distribution pair
(λ ( x), ρ ( x)) [8].

¦ λ ( x ) =

λ x d v

i −1

i=2 i

(2)

¦ ρ ( x) =

ρ x dc

i −1

i=2 i

(3)

(2)(3) are the polynomial whose coefficients are nonnegative

real numbers, the sum of the coefficients is equal to 1,

Figure 4. the structure of the proposed HARQ system
In the paper, we propose a new retransmission scheme that is based on the Type-II HARQ. The structure of the retransmission scheme is shown in Fig 4. In this scheme, it is the whole codeword that the source transmits to the destination, but it is the message part and a small amount of parity information that the source transmits in the Type-II HARQ. After getting the codes, the receiver begins to decode. If the decoder can get the right codeword, the source transmits the next codeword. When the decoder fails to get the right codeword, the retransmission mechanism will be needed and only the parity bits will be retransmitted. Before the retransmission, the parity parts of the LDPC block has been

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:18:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

treated as a set of bits specified by the node’s degrees. The nodes with same degree are classified into one subset, the structure is shown in Fig 5.

Figure 5. the subsets of the different degrees

Irregular LDPC codes, which have different degrees, are utilized to our improved scheme. We can use the degree distribution (Ȝ,ȡ) to indicate the fraction of edges with different degrees, which is an important parameter for the performance. Because the bits with larger degrees have more contribution to the performance, these bits (with large degrees) are prior to be retransmitted.

When the retransmission is recalled, the source transmits the subsets with the order from the subset which has large degree to the one which has low degree. As shown in Fig 4, the parity 1 part with larger degree is transmitted firstly, and if the decoder fails, the second retransmission with the parity 2 part which has smaller degree will be needed.

It is shown in Fig 4 that the receiver calculates the log likelihood ratio (LLR) of the received codeword and decodes the codeword. If the codeword is successfully decoded (i.e., parity check matrix H constraint is satisfied), the source transmits the next LDPC codeword. If there are unrecoverable errors, the source retransmits only the parity 1 of the LDPC code which has larger degree, and the destination computes the LLR of the parity 1 of the retransmission and updates the LLR of the parity 1 by the average of the second transmission and the previous LLR which is transmitted firstly. The order of updating the LLR by the average value of the transmissions is to get the value which is more close to the codeword.

LLRp1 = (LLRp1re + LLRp1pre ) / 2

(5)

LLR = (LLRm , LLRp1, LLRp2 )

(6)

LLRp1re denotes the LLR of the second transmission;

LLRp1pre denotes the previous LLR.

Then the receiver begins to decode the codeword with the updated LLR. If the decoder is successful, the source will begin to transmit the next codeword. If the decoder fails, the source retransmits only the parity 2 of the LDPC code, and the destination computes and updates the LLR of the parity bits as do the parity 1.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
This section evaluates the improved Type- Ċ HARQ scheme by computer simulation. We built a simple simulation platform to compare the improved scheme with the Type-Ċ HARQ scheme. The simulation parameters are listed in table ĉ.
In this simulation platform, the LDPC degree distribution is Ȝ(x) = 0.25105x+0.30938x2+0.00104x3+0.43853x9, ȡ(x) =

0.63676x6 +0.36324x7. In order to simplify the retransmission system, the parity bits of the packet whose degree is 10 are classified into the parity 1, and the rest of parity bits are classified into the parity 2. In our scheme, we set the maximum of retransmission as 2. That means when the decoder still fails after the retransmission of the parity 1and the parity 2, the scheme stops and begins to deal the next packet. The number of maximum iteration is 50.

TABLE I. Channel coding
Modulation

SIMULATION PARAMETERS
Irregular LDPC 990*3960 BPSK

LDPC degree distribution

Ȝ(x)=0.25105x+0.30938x2+0.00104x3+ 0.43853x9
ȡ(x)=0.63676x6+0.36324x7

Channel model

AWGN

A. BER Performance Comparison
Fig 6 shows BER comparison between the improved scheme and the Type-ĊHARQ scheme . In the new scheme, the all bits are transmitted and the bits with large degrees are prior to be retransmitted to enhance the performance. By comparing two schemes, we can observe that the BER performance of the improved scheme is better than that of the Type-ĊHARQ scheme. By the Type-ĊHARQ scheme, When SNR is higher than 3.0 dB, the value of the BER is 0. But by the improved scheme, When SNR is higher than 2.4 dB, the value of the BER is 0. From the Fig 6, we can see that there is a 0.5 dB gap between two schemes.

Figure 6. BER comparison between the improved scheme and the Type-Ċ HARQ scheme
B. Average Number of Transmissions We investigate the average number of transmissions in the
Type- Ċ HARQ scheme and the improved Type- Ċ HARQ scheme. In Fig 7, the average number of transmissions is compared. If the two schemes get the same performance, the average number of transmissions of the improved scheme is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:18:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

smaller than that of the Type-ĊHARQ scheme. When SNR is lower than 2.8 dB, the number of transmissions decreases along with the increasing of SNR. When the SNR is higher than 2.8 dB, the number of transmissions tends to 1. That means When the SNR is higher than 2.8 dB, the receiver can decode successfully without retransmission. C. Average Number of Iterations
In Fig 8, the average number of iterations is compared. From the figure, we can see that the average number of iterations of the Type- Ċ HARQ scheme is very large, that means the Type- Ċ HARQ scheme will cost more time to decode. But the average number of iterations of the improved scheme degrades observably, and the number is smaller. When SNR is lower than 2.8 dB, the average number of iterations decreases like-linearly along with the increasing of SNR. When the SNR is higher than 2.8 dB, the average number of iterations tends to a limit. By this improved scheme, the decoder can degrade the time of decoding and get the right codeword quickly.
Figure 7. The average number of transmissions

Figure 8. The average number of iterations
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have proposed an improved Type- Ċ HARQ scheme. In the scheme, we transmit all bits of the packet firstly, and when the decoder fails, the parity bits with large degrees are prior to be transmitted. By the computer simulation results, it has shown that the performance of the improved scheme is higher and the average number of retransmissions and the average number of iterations of the improved scheme is smaller than that of the Type-ĊHARQ scheme. From the simulation results, we can observe that when the SNR is higher than 2.8 dB, the average number tends to a limit. That means the scheme works without retransmission.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check codes, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,1963.
[2] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Error Control Coding. Prentice Hall, second ed., 2004.
[3] D. Chase, “Code combing: A maximum-likelihood decoding approach for combing an arbitrary number of nosiy packets,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 385-393, May 1985.
[4] P. Fenger, S. Parkvall, E. Dahlman, “Performance comparison of HARQ with Chase combining and incremental redundancy for HSDPA”, IEEE VTC 2001 Fall. Volume 3, Page: 1829-1833, Oct. 2001.
[5] Jung-Fu Cheng, “On the coding gain of incremental redundancy over chase combining”, IEEE GLOBECOM ’03. Vo. 1, page: 107-112, Dec. 2003.
[6] Takashi Tamagawa, Hideki Ochiai, “An Efficient Hybrid ARQ System Using Multilevel Coded Modulation with Reduced Consetellation Size”, IEEE GLOBECOM 2008. Page: 1-5, Dec. 2008.
[7] Min-Ho Jang, Beomkyu Shin, Sang-Hyo Kim, Dong-Joon Shin, “A New Criterion for Retransmission in Type I H-ARQ Schemes of LDPC Coded OFDM Systems” , IEEE VTC 2009-Fall pp. 1-4, 70th,2009.
[8] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, D. Spielman, and V. Stemann,̌Practical loss-resilient codes,̍ in Proc. 29th Annu. ACM Symp. Theory of Computing, 1997, pp. 150̄159.
[9] T. J. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, ̌ Design ofcapacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes, ̍ IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619̄637, Feb. 2001.
[10] Takayuki Hashimoto, Tetsuya Wakiyama, Koji Ishibashi, Tadahiro Wada, “A Proposal of New Hybrid ARQ Scheme suitable for Multi-hop Transmissions using LDPC Codes”, IEEE GLOBECOM 2009. Page: 16, 2009.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:18:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

