5274

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2010

Iterative Decoding Threshold Analysis
for LDPC Convolutional Codes
Michael Lentmaier, Member, IEEE, Arvind Sridharan, Member, IEEE, Daniel J. Costello, Jr., Life Fellow, IEEE, and Kamil Sh. Zigangirov, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—An iterative decoding threshold analysis for terminated regular LDPC convolutional (LDPCC) codes is presented. Using density evolution techniques, the convergence behavior of an iterative belief propagation decoder is analyzed for the binary erasure channel and the AWGN channel with binary inputs. It is shown that for a terminated LDPCC code ensemble, the thresholds are better than for corresponding regular and irregular LDPC block codes.
Index Terms—Belief propagation, density evolution, iterative decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, LDPC convolutional codes, message passing, threshold analysis.
I. INTRODUCTION
I N classical coding theory, the efficiency of block and convolutional coding schemes is characterized by two criteria: decoding complexity and decoding reliability. The decoding complexity is usually measured by the number of operations per symbol or per frame. The decoding reliability of block codes is typically measured by the bit error probability or the block error probability. In convolutional coding, when the length of the sequences becomes much larger than the constraint length, the burst or first event error probability is considered instead of the block error probability. Since an analysis of particular codes is often difficult, the asymptotic performance of code ensembles, when block or constraint length tend to infinity, is frequently considered.
Manuscript received November 29, 2007; revised December 15, 2009. Date of current version September 15, 2010. This work was supported in part by the NSF Grants CCR-02-05310 and CCF-0514801 and by NASA Grants NNG05GH73G and NNX07AK53G. The material in this paper was presented in part at the 2004 Allerton Conference Monticello, IL, 2004 and the 2005 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Adelaide, Australia, 2005.
M. Lentmaier was with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556 USA. He is now with Vodafone Chair Mobile Communications Systems, Dresden University of Technology (TU Dresden), D-01062 Dresden, Germany (e-mail: Michael.Lentmaier@ifn.et.tu-dresden.de).
A. Sridharan was with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556 USA. He is now with Seagate Technologies, Longmont, CO 80503 USA (e-mail: arvind.sridharan@seagate.com).
D. J. Costello, Jr. is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556 USA (e-mail: Daniel.J.Costello.2@nd. edu).
K. Sh. Zigangirov is with the University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556 USA. He is also with Lund University, Lund, Sweden, and the Institute for Problems of Information Transmission, Moscow, Russia (e-mail: Kamil.Zigangirov@eit.lth.se).
Communicated by T. J. Richardson, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques. Color versions of one or more figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2010.2059490

For maximum likelihood (ML) decoding, the decoding com-

plexity is an exponential function of block or constraint length.

At the same time, for most codes the bit or block/burst error

probabilities decrease exponentially with block or constraint

length if the code rate is less than the channel capacity. As a

consequence, both decoding complexity and reliability are char-

acterized by exponential functions of block or constraint length.

By definition, we call convergence to zero of the block/burst

error probability, when block or constraint length tends to in-

finity, the reliable communication condition.

The reliability of codes of a fixed rate is characterized by the

Shannon limit, the boundary value of the channel parameter for

which the channel capacity exceeds the code rate. For the ad-

ditive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, it is the smallest

signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), for the binary symmetric channel

(BSC) or the binary erasure channel (BEC), the largest crossover

or erasure probability, respectively, for which reliable commu-

nication is possible.

Modern coding theory deals mostly with low-density parity-

check (LDPC) codes and iterative decoding methods. The de-

coding complexity of these codes is usually characterized by the

number of operations per bit and per iteration. In most cases this

number is a constant, i.e., it does not depend on the block or con-

straint length. At the same time, for LDPC codes with symbol

node degrees larger than two, the bit error probability decreases

at least doubly exponentially with the number of iterations [3]

as the block or constraint length goes to infinity, given that the

SNR is larger than some constant (for the AWGN channel) or

the crossover/erasure probability is smaller than some constant

(for the BSC/BEC). This makes iterative decoding of codes with

large block or constraint lengths feasible.

We call the boundary value of the channel parameter for

which reliable communication is possible with iterative de-

coding the iterative decoding limit. In some sense, the iterative

decoding limit is the counterpart of the Shannon limit, but it

is associated with particular ensembles of codes and particular

iterative decoding methods.

While an exact calculation of the iterative decoding limit is

difficult, it is possible to find bounds. The Shannon limit is

an obvious lower bound on the iterative limit for the AWGN

channel and an upper bound for the BSC or BEC. Bounds in

the other direction are commonly called convergence thresh-

olds. These thresholds are often assumed to coincide with the

actual iterative decoding limit, although this is difficult to prove.

In this paper, we study the iterative decoding thresholds of

terminated

regular LDPC convolutional codes (LDPCC

codes), with

. LDPCC codes, the convolutional counter-

0018-9448/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:09:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LENTMAIER et al.: LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

5275

part of Gallager’s LDPC block codes [4], have been described1 in [6]–[9]. Both LDPC block and LDPC convolutional codes are defined by sparse parity-check matrices and can be decoded iteratively using message passing algorithms with complexity per bit per iteration independent of the block or constraint length. An example of a message passing decoding algorithm for LDPC codes is belief propagation, which will be considered throughout this paper. The ensemble of LDPCC codes we analyze is defined by parity-check matrices composed of permutation matrices and is described in Section II. This ensemble was previously used to lower bound the free distance of LDPCC codes [10]. The block counterparts of these codes were introduced in the Appendix of Gallager’s book [4] and also studied in [11] and [12]. In particular, [12] proved the existence of codes in this ensemble with a minimum distance satisfying Gallager’s lower bound [4].
The calculation of convergence thresholds for LDPC codes is based on estimating the bit error probability when the block or constraint length and the number of iterations go to infinity. The bit error probability, in turn, can be found by calculating the probability density function of the decision statistics used in the message passing algorithm in different iterations. A commonly used recursive numerical algorithm for the calculation of this density function is known as density evolution [13]. Since numerical methods alone are not sufficient to prove convergence of the error probability to zero, density evolution can be combined with analytical methods, e.g., bounding the evolution of the Bhattacharyya parameter [3], [14]–[18]. Several papers have been devoted to analyzing convergence thresholds for regular and irregular LDPC block codes (e.g., [19] and [20]), with the result that thresholds of irregular codes are generally better than those of regular codes.
The application of density evolution requires that all messages exchanged during the iterations are independent, i.e., that the decoder operates in cycle-free regions of the graph. In Section III it is shown that the standard parallel updating schedule can be used for the threshold analysis of terminated LDPCC codes, provided that the constraint length can be chosen sufficiently large. In the BEC case, density evolution reduces to observing a single parameter, the erasure probability, and can be described by simple recursive equations. Unfortunately, for the AWGN channel, performing density evolution for the standard parallel updating schedule becomes increasingly difficult in the case of large frame lengths.
In Section IV, a sliding window updating schedule for threshold analysis is described. This approach can be used to calculate thresholds even when the termination length of the convolutional codes is large. Furthermore, we conjecture that this approach can also be applied to analyze the thresholds of unterminated LDPCC codes.
A numerical analysis of the calculated thresholds, with results for the BEC and the AWGN channel, is given in Section V, and we see that the thresholds of some regular LDPCC codes closely approach the ML decoding thresholds of the corresponding reg-
1Some suggestions for the construction and decoding of LDPCC codes were earlier given in a patent application by Tanner [5].

ular LDPC block codes [21], [22], which in turn approach the Shannon limit exponentially with increasing symbol node degrees. Further, it is surprising to note that increasing the density of the parity-check matrices leads to improved belief propagation thresholds, unlike the behavior of regular LDPC block codes. Simulation results for the BEC confirm the calculated thresholds.

II. LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODE ENSEMBLE

A rate

time-varying binary convolutional code can

be defined as the set of sequences

(1)

satisfying is given by
...

, where the infinite syndrome former matrix ...

...

...

...

...

(2)

and each

is a

binary matrix. If defines

a rate

convolutional code, the matrix

must have

full rank for all time instants . In this case, by suitable row per-

mutations, we can ensure that the last

rows are linearly

independent. Then the first symbols at each time instant are

information symbols and the last

symbols are the cor-

responding parity symbols. The largest such that

is a nonzero matrix for some is called the syndrome former

memory [23]. LDPCC codes have sparse syndrome former

matrices. A

regular LDPCC code is defined by a syn-

drome former that contains exactly ones in each row and

ones in each column.

We now describe the ensemble of LDPCC codes introduced

in [10]. Although the ensemble can be defined more generally,

in this paper we focus on the case

. We construct

LDPCC codes defined by syndrome formers with syndrome

former memory

. For

, the

submatrices of the syndrome former are equal to

(3)

where the matrices

are

permuta-

tion matrices. All other entries of the syndrome former are zero

matrices. Equivalently, each

, is a

binary matrix. In the case

, we have

and

. By construction it follows that each row of the

syndrome former has ones and each column has ones.

Suppose the permutation matrices

, are chosen independently and all

values are equally likely. Then the corresponding ensemble of

syndrome formers defines an ensemble

of

regular time-varying LDPC convolutional codes. Fig. 1

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:09:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5276

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2010

M t J Fig. 1. Tanner graph connections of the 2 symbol nodes at time for = 3. Symbol nodes and constraint nodes are shown as black and white circles,
respectively.

shows the syndrome former matrix of a (3, 6) regular LDPC

convolutional code in

.

Since

consists of two nonoverlapping permutation ma-

trices, it has full rank. Hence, defines a rate

code.

Further, the constraint imposed by the syndrome former, i.e.

(4)

where

, can be used to im-

plement systematic encoding [6], [9]. The overall con-

straint length of the codes in

is defined as

. Thus, the overall constraint

length of codes in the ensemble

is .

The syndrome formers of codes in the ensemble

have memory

independent of ,

while and depend on . This is different from the LDPC

convolutional codes considered in [6]–[8], where the codes

have varying syndrome former memories , while and

are fixed. However, by a permutation of rows, the syndrome

former of each code in the ensemble can be converted into the

syndrome former of a conventional rate

LDPCC code

with

, and

[10]. This code differs

from the original one only in the order of the symbols, i.e., it is

an equivalent code.

The Tanner graph for a code in

can be ob-

tained from its syndrome former matrix. The graph consists of

symbol nodes and constraint nodes, each symbol node corre-

sponding to a particular row and each constraint node to a partic-

ular column of the syndrome former matrix. There is an edge be-

tween a symbol node and a constraint node if the corresponding

symbol takes part in the respective parity-check equation. For

the Tanner graph of a convolutional code we can associate a no-

tion of time. At each time instant , the submatrices

of

the syndrome former [see (2)] lead to

constraint

nodes in the Tanner graph. Similarly, for each time instant ,

there are

symbol nodes in the Tanner graph. Observe

; ; M Fig. 2. Syndrome former matrix for a (3, 6) regular LDPCC code in
C (3 6 ).

that

is non-zero only for

, and hence

nodes in the Tanner graph can be connected at most time

units away. For

, Fig. 2 illustrates how the information

symbols

and the parity symbols

at time are connected through different permutation matrices to parity-check equations at time
, and . For practical applications, a convolutional encoder starts to operate from a known state (usually the all-zero state) and after the block of data symbols to be transmitted has been encoded, the encoder is terminated back to the all-zero state using tail bits. Trellis based decoding algorithms for convolutional codes can exploit this known starting and ending state of the encoder to simplify decoding. As we shall see, a message passing decoder can also exploit the fact that the encoder starts and ends in the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:09:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LENTMAIER et al.: LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

5277

M = 1 (3; 6; 1) Fig. 3. Tanner graph for the case

of (a) the unique LDPCC code C

and (b) the corresponding terminated code.

all-zero state. For LDPCC codes in the ensemble

, along with all connected edges. As a result, while all symbol

the syndrome former matrix can be used to determine the tail nodes have fixed degree

, the constraint nodes at times

bits needed for termination. A termination procedure is pre-

and

will have a

sented in the Appendix, together with a sketch of the proof of reduced degree. In particular, in Fig. 3, the constraint nodes at

the following theorem (a complete proof can be found in [24]).

and

have degree two and the constraint nodes

Theorem 1: Almost all codes in

can be termi-

nated with a tail of length

blocks, i.e.,

bits.

Termination of LDPCC codes is not only a practical method

of transmitting finite blocks of data symbols but also a con-

venient instrument for theoretical performance assessment. By

terminating LDPCC codes we reduce the investigation of their

thresholds to the estimation of thresholds of LDPC block codes

at

and

have degree four. At all other time

instants the constraint nodes have their full degree of

.

It follows that, even though the convolutional code is regular,

knowing the bits at time instants

and

leads to a

slight irregularity in the Tanner graph of the convolutional code.

As a consequence, the constraint nodes of lower degree provide

better protection for the symbols at the beginning and end of a

block.

and we can apply analysis methods developed for the latter. In this paper we consider transmitting blocks of

III. ITERATIVE DECODING ANALYSIS

code bits using a code from

. We assume that the

encoder starts at time

in the zero state, encodes infor- A. Decoding Trees

mation bits into code symbols at times

,

and then brings the encoder back to the zero state by adding a

corresponding tail at times

. It follows that

the resulting terminated code has rate

While the implementation of a message passing decoder can be described by a Tanner graph, for the analysis of iterative decoding of a particular code symbol
, it is more

convenient to consider a tree-shaped graph (or a computation (5) tree [26]) for symbol , showing how different code sym-

where we assume, motivated by Theorem 1, that the chosen

codes satisfy

. Note that the rate loss is negli-

gible for

.

Fig. 3 shows the Tanner graph of an LDPCC code in the en-

semble

and of the corresponding terminated code.

The depicted graphs correspond to the simplest case,

.

They can be interpreted as protographs [25] for the ensembles

with larger , whose Tanner graphs can be obtained from the

graphs in Fig. 3 by a copy-and-permute procedure. In the ter-

minated graph, two symbol nodes (black) are followed by one

constraint node (white) at each time instant

. As

for regular LDPC block codes, all symbol nodes and constraint

nodes in the infinite Tanner graph of the original convolutional

code have fixed degree and

, respectively (compare

Fig. 2). In the case of termination, however, all symbol nodes at

bols contribute to the decoding of this symbol as the iterations

proceed.

Such a tree-shaped graph for an arbitrary code symbol of

an LDPC code can be obtained directly from the Tanner graph.

In this case symbol is called the clan head. Each node at the

th level,

, of the tree represents one of the code

symbols and each node at the

th level,

,

represents one of the parity-check equations. We call the set of

code symbols corresponding to nodes at all the even levels of

the tree a clan. Symbol located at the th level of the tree

is designated as

. The clan head is located at level

zero (the root of the tree) and is designated as

. The set of

code symbols at the th level, where is a nonnegative integer,

is called the th generation of the clan. The code symbols in

the clan, excluding

, are called descendants of the clan

times and

are known to be zero. But known symbols head

. The configuration of the tree, as we will see later,

do not affect their associated parity-check equations and, con- depends on the time instant corresponding to the position of

sequently, their nodes can be removed from the Tanner graph the clan head

in the Tanner graph.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:09:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5278

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2010

= 1 = 2 = 3 = 3 Fig. 4. The first levels of the computation trees for t ; t ; t with J .

The edges leaving the root node, together with the nodes at the

first level of the tree, correspond to the parity-check equations

that include the clan head. The nodes at this first level are called

families of the clan head. Each of these nodes, in turn, is con-

nected by edges to nodes at the second level. For LDPCC codes

in the ensemble

, the number of these edges/nodes

can be

, or

, depending on the time instant of

the constraint node. These second level nodes correspond to the

code symbols that are included in the same parity-check equa-

tions as the clan head. The second level symbols are called direct

descendants or children of the clan head. Hence, the clan head

has families and in each family there can be

, or

Note that the girth of the Tanner graph of an -nondegen-

erate code satisfies either

or

, i.e.,

. The parameter was introduced by Gal-

lager [4]. For message passing decoders with standard parallel

updating schedule this value defines the maximal number of de-

coding iterations that can be performed before the independence

of the decision statistics becomes invalid. The following the-

orem affirms the existence of a code in

with

proportional to

.

Theorem 2: There exists a code in

for which

the number of independent decoding iterations satisfies

children. For the trees of the clan heads

at time instants

, the nodes at levels zero, one, and two are

(6)

illustrated in Fig. 4 for the case

. Note that for terminated

LDPCC codes, the tree of the clan head

is analogous where the constant does not depend on .

to that of

, and the tree of

is analogous

to that of

.

Each of the direct descendants of the clan head has

families, i.e.,

edges leave each second level node leading

to nodes in the third level of the tree. These third level

nodes correspond to the

other parity-check equations that

include a direct descendant of the clan head. Each of the third

level families can include a maximum of

children, i.e.,

the edges leaving each third level node lead to at most

nodes at the fourth level, and so on. This expansion of levels can

be continued indefinitely, and eventually different nodes in the

graph will represent the same code symbols, i.e., there is a cycle

in the graph.

Using this tree representation, we will be able to analyze the

iterative decoding behavior of LDPCC codes.

Definition 1: The

-clan is called -nondegenerate if

all nodes of the clan up to the th generation correspond to

different code symbols, but in the set of nodes of the clan up to

the

th generation there is at least one pair of nodes that

corresponds to the same symbol.

Definition 2: A code is called -nondegenerate if the clans

of all code symbols are -nondegenerate, where

, and

there exists at least one -nondegenerate clan.

Theorem 2 is the convolutional code counterpart of Gallager’s theorem [4] which states existence of an LDPC block code with proportional to the logarithm of the block length, and an analog of Theorem 2 for conventional LDPCC codes was proved in [15]. Theorem 2 can be proved either analogously to [15] or using a random ensemble approach [3]. Note that termination of an LDPCC code can only increase , since termination only reduces the degrees of some symbol nodes.
B. Binary Erasure Channel
In our threshold analysis of LDPCC codes, we will follow the principles developed in [3] for analyzing the error probability of iteratively decodable block codes. Since terminated LDPCC codes are, in fact, a special case of LDPC block codes, we can directly use the methods described in that paper.
Consider first the binary erasure channel, as shown in Fig. 5. The probability of an erasure is and with probability the transmitted symbol is received correctly. In each iteration, a message passing decoder exchanges messages between the symbol nodes and the constraint nodes. A symbol node can be recovered correctly if its channel value or at least one message from the constraint nodes to which it connects is not an erasure.
Thus convergence of message passing decoding on the erasure channel can be analyzed by tracking the erasure probability

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:09:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LENTMAIER et al.: LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

5279

Fig. 5. Binary erasure channel.

for

, where

denotes the probability

that the message sent in the previous, i.e., the

th, itera-

tion from a symbol node at time instant to a constraint node

at time instant

corresponds to an erasure. For

,

these probabilities are initialized as

for all and .

For terminated convolutional codes, we also have the boundary

conditions

if

or

. This condition takes into

account the lower constraint node degrees at the beginning and

the end of the Tanner graph.

The message computed at a symbol node update for a con-

straint node [see Fig. 6(b)] is an erasure if all incoming messages

from the neighboring constraint nodes and from the channel are

erasures. Thus we have

= 3 Fig. 6. Illustration of (a) a constraint node update and (b) a symbol node update
for the case J .

(8)

of the messages. This is straightforward as long as the mes-

sages exchanged during the iterations are independent. Theorem

2 guarantees the existence of a code in

such that

the number of independent iterations is lower-bounded by the

right-hand side (RHS) of (6).

Consider the th iteration of the decoding procedure, where

. Each symbol node is characterized by the time

instant , i.e., the position in the Tanner graph, and by the level

of the symbol in the computation tree. Analogously, a constraint

node is characterized by the time instant and by the level .

The operations of the message passing decoder can be divided

into two stages, as illustrated in Fig. 6. In both stages, nodes

receive messages from adjacent connected nodes and combine

them using a computation rule to form new messages, which are

then sent back to the same nodes. The stage where messages re-

For regular LDPC block codes, the distribution of the mes-

sages exchanged in the th iteration is the same for all nodes

regardless of their position within the Tanner graph. Likewise,

for the random irregular code ensembles considered in [19],

the message distributions are averaged over all codes, and only

a single density has to be considered for all constraint and

symbol nodes. In the LDPCC code case, while nodes at the

same time instant behave identically, the messages from nodes

at different time instants can behave differently and must be

tracked separately.

Thus the density evolution procedure in this case involves

calculating the erasure probabilities

in the th iteration,

, for all time instants . It follows from [3] that, if

, it is sufficient to observe density evolution up to iteration

, when the maximum of

over all and becomes less

ceived from symbol nodes are combined at a constraint node, than the breakout value

we call a constraint node update. The other stage, where mes-

sages received from constraint nodes are combined at a symbol

node, is called a symbol node update. With the standard parallel updating schedule, first all constraint nodes and then all symbol nodes are updated at each decoding iteration. In this case Theorem 2 guarantees that the number of independent iterations can be made arbitrarily large if goes to infinity. Note that the nodes involved in an update can belong to different time instants. For an iteration we study the probability distribution

Then, if the number of independent iterations tends to infinity, the probability that one or more symbols in a block are erased goes to zero at least doubly exponentially with the number of iterations. This defines a strategy for threshold calculation: we perform density evolution up to iteration , at which point all
have crossed the breakout value.

of messages sent by symbol nodes to constraint nodes and the

probability distribution of messages sent by constraint nodes to

symbol nodes. These probabilities depend on the time instants

of the nodes that send and receive the messages, but not on the

position of those nodes within a time instant of the Tanner

graph.

The message computed at a constraint node update to send

to a connected symbol node (see Fig. 6(a)) is an erasure if at

least one of the other

neighboring symbol nodes has been

erased. It follows that the probability

that the message

from a constraint node at time instant

to a symbol node

at time instant

, is an erasure is equal to

C. Binary-Input Output-Symmetric Memoryless Channels

The threshold analysis for LDPC block codes on an AWGN

channel with binary inputs in [3] required observing not only the

evolution of the probability density function (pdf) but also the

Bhattacharyya parameter. (Note that, for the BEC, the erasure

probability

is itself the Bhattacharyya parameter.) If

, then, as in the BEC case, the observations can be stopped if

the Bhattacharyya parameter became less than some breakout

value. In this case, the decoding error probability goes to zero

at least doubly exponentially with the number of iterations as

and the number of iterations tend to infinity.

In the case of density evolution for terminated LDPCC codes,

the pdfs of the log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) for nodes at dif-

ferent time instants are, generally speaking, different. Thus we

must observe the pdfs and the Bhattacharyya parameter sepa-

(7) rately for each time instant, and the observations can be stopped

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:09:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5280

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2010

only when the maximal Bhattacharyya parameter over all time instants becomes less than the breakout value.
In each decoding iteration, messages are exchanged between the symbol nodes and the constraint nodes. At a constraint node update, extrinsic LLRs are computed by decoding the associated single parity-check component code. The message received by the th symbol node from its th neighboring constraint node,
, in the th iteration can be written as

neighboring constraint nodes associated with the

th time

instant, conditioned on

and

, respectively.

(Note that the pdf of the messages sent by the symbol to

one of its neighboring constraint nodes at time instant

depends only on the symbol, its position (time instant) in the

Tanner graph, and the time instant increment , i.e., they do not

depend on and .) It follows from symmetry arguments that

we also have

. The Bhattacharyya

parameter to

of these messages

is equal

(9)

where

is the message that the th constraint node has re-

ceived from its th neighboring symbol node in the

th

(11)

iteration. At a symbol node update, the incoming extrinsic LLRs

are combined with the intrinsic channel LLR LLRs

to give the Note that the Bhattacharyya parameter is an upper bound on the bit error probability and hence can serve to estimate its value.

(10) The Bhattacharyya parameter of the intrinsic channel LLRs

is equal to

, where

is the SNR per bit

[3]. The following theorem connects the Bhattacharyya param-

which form the messages to be sent by the th symbol node to eters corresponding to the LLRs of two consecutive decoding the neighboring th constraint nodes in the th iteration. Initially, iterations.

before the first decoding iteration, the LLRs are set to

Theorem 3: The Bhattacharyya parameter

, defined by

for the symbols at time instant

. For

and (11) for

and

, satisfies

, the code symbols are defined to be zero, which implies

that the LLR messages sent by these nodes are

for

all iterations. This boundary condition automatically takes into

account the lower constraint node degrees at the beginning and

end of the Tanner graph.

The standard parallel updating schedule assumes that, at each

(12)

decoding iteration, first all constraint nodes and then all symbol

nodes are updated according to (9) and (10), respectively. The where

and

.

messages computed in this way are true LLRs as long as they are produced from independent observations. Theorem 2 guarantees that the number of independent iterations can be made arbitrarily large if goes to infinity.
Given that all messages are formed from independent observations, it is possible to calculate the evolution of their exact

The proof of Theorem 3 is analogous to the proof of [3,

Lemma 1]. Inequality (12) also follows from [18, Lemma 4.1

and (4.6)].

Now define

as the largest value of

over all edges

in the graph, i.e.

pdfs during the iterations [20]. Since, in general, density evolu-

tion must be performed numerically, we follow the approach in

(13)

[3] and estimate the asymptotic convergence rate by observing

not only the pdfs of the LLRs but also their Bhattacharyya Then it follows from (12) that

parameter.

Consider again the flow of messages shown in Fig. 6. In

(14)

Fig. 6(a), the messages

in (9) come from nodes, gener-

ally speaking, belonging to different time instants. The same

holds for the messages

that are combined in (10) [see

Fig. 6(b)]. Then, as in the BEC case, the messages from nodes

at different time instants must be tracked separately. To take

Suppose now that, after some iteration

, all Bhat-

tacharyya parameters

are smaller than the breakout

value

this into account, at each time instant different pdfs must be

(15)

computed for both and

.

Consider now the th decoding iteration, where

. Then, as shown in [3], if the number of independent iterations

Let

and

be the pdfs of the messages goes to infinity, the bit error probability of all symbols con-

sent from the symbol node

, asso- verges to zero at least doubly exponentially with the number of

ciated with the th time instant in the Tanner graph, to one of its iterations.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:09:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LENTMAIER et al.: LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

5281

Instead of observing the evolution of the Bhattacharyya pa-

rameter

, we can also observe the evolution of the proba-

bility of hard decision error

defined2 as

(16)

The integrals are the probabilities of error of the hard decisions made with respect to a symbol, given that the symbol is 1 and 0, respectively, after iterations. Then it follows from (11) that

= 3 = 20 Fig. 7. Decoding windows from symbol node perspective at different rounds k

for W

and L

.

nodes are updated in each iteration. This is convenient for anal-

ysis, since then the computation trees of all symbols have a very

regular structure. An alternative schedule, where the constraint

nodes are activated one by one and a symbol node is activated

whenever a message is demanded by a neighboring constraint

(17) node, was considered in [27]. It has been observed from computer simulations that such an on-demand symbol node updating

were we have used Cauchy’s inequality. From (17), it follows schedule can reduce the required number of decoding iterations

that it is sufficient to observe the evolution of

[27], [9].

In this section we analyze the following message passing (18) schedule for decoding terminated LDPCC codes. Consider the

until it became less than

Tanner graph of a terminated LDPCC code, where symbol nodes

are labeled by time instants

(see Fig. 3). For sim-

(19)

plicity, we assume that is even. Suppose that two decoders operate in turn on different regions of the graph defined by two

This means that we can perform density evolution until the hard

decision error probabilities

reach a sufficiently low level

defined by (19).

To determine the convergence thresholds of terminated codes

from the ensemble

it is possible, in principle, to

use the standard parallel updating schedule. In this case we must

evaluate numerically, iteration by iteration, the different pdfs

for all time instants

,

and for all

. Note that, in addition to the node

degrees and , the termination length is another param-

eter that influences the result. While increasing reduces the

rate loss of the terminated code, the computational burden of

performing density evolution becomes increasingly difficult for

larger . Both the number of different pdfs to be tracked and the

number of iterations needed for the effect of the strong nodes at

the ends of the graph to propagate to the time instants in the

center increase with . Also, for the AWGN channel, the com-

plexity of density evolution is much greater than for the BEC,

where a simple one-dimensional recursion formula can be used.

In the next section we therefore consider a sliding window up-

dating schedule that reduces the number of operations required

for the threshold computation.

windows of size not exceeding

. In the -th de-

coding round,

, the first decoder operates on

symbol nodes within the window

and the second decoder on symbol nodes within the window

, as illustrated

in Fig. 7.

Within their windows, the decoders perform iterations

during round according to the following updating schedule.

Symbol node updates are performed time instant by time

instant, from left to right for the first decoder and from right to

left for the second decoder. Before each symbol node update,

all its neighboring constraint nodes are updated, i.e., we employ

the on-demand constraint node updating schedule. Compared

to the parallel schedule, the contribution of individual nodes to

the exchanged messages flows faster through the graph.

The window defines the time instants of the symbol nodes

that are updated in a decoding round . The activated check

nodes and also the symbol nodes of their incoming messages

may hence lie outside the window. As a consequence, the two

decoders exchange messages when the windows approach the

center of the graph, although the windows never overlap.

We now apply density evolution analysis to this schedule,

considering first the BEC. Assume that is large enough so

IV. SLIDING WINDOW DECODING

In the standard parallel updating schedule, considered in the previous section, first all constraint nodes and then all symbol

2Strictly speaking, P

is the probability of hard decision error made on

the basis of a message (10) sent by a symbol node to one of its neighboring

constraint nodes, i.e., it does not include information sent by this constraint node
to the symbol node, but P can be easily calculated in the process of density

evolution.

that the decoders operate in cycle-free regions of the graph, i.e.,

each symbol contributes to a message at most once. The number

of iterations in the th round, , is chosen such that all erasure

probabilities

, defined by (8) become less

than some sufficiently small value , where

(we call this the breakout value condition). Then the window

is shifted by increasing the starting time instant by one and

the procedure is repeated for round . Analogously, in the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:09:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5282

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2010

th round, the nodes in the second window are updated until

the probabilities

, reach

the value . Then the window is shifted to the position cor-

responding to the

th round. From the symmetry of the

Tanner graph, it follows that the computations of the two de-

coders are identical, and it is sufficient to perform the calcula-

tions for the first decoder3 for

.

For the AWGN channel, density evolution can be performed

analogously. In round the pdfs

are evaluated numerically, iteration by iteration, for all time in-

stants in the window. In parallel, the hard decision error prob-

abilities

, defined by (16) are cal-

culated for the window’s leftmost time instant

. When

at some iteration the probability

reaches some

sufficiently small value

(the breakout value

condition), the window is shifted by increasing the starting time

instant by one and the procedure is repeated for round .

In Section III it was shown that fulfilling the breakout value

condition for all symbol nodes implies that the bit error proba-

bility converges to zero with an increasing number of iterations.

However, this result was derived for a decoder based on the stan-

dard parallel updating schedule and the number of independent

iterations guaranteed by Theorem 2 relies on this assumption. In

general, the node activation order used in decoding determines

the particular shape of the computation trees for the different

code symbols. Since, for any finite number of node activations,

the depths of the computation trees will be finite as well, it fol-

lows that these trees can be covered by trees corresponding to a

parallel updating schedule with a sufficient number of iterations.

Consequently, any node updating schedule can be interpreted as

a parallel schedule, where certain node activations are omitted.

But, under the independence assumption, such an omission of

additional side information can never improve the performance

of decoding, which results in the following proposition. (A sim-

ilar result has also been obtained in [28].)

Proposition 1: Consider density evolution with an arbitrary

node activation order. Assume that after a specific number of

node activations the Bhattacharyya parameters of all symbol

node messages are below some value and the breakout value

condition is satisfied, i.e.,

. Then the value can also

be reached for a standard parallel updating schedule after a suf-

ficiently large number of iterations.

To demonstrate the threshold computation procedure with the

window updating schedule, consider an AWGN channel with

an SNR of

dB for the case

,

and

. By definition, iterations are performed

within the window in each decoding round . It follows

that the total number of iterations for each node at time

, is equal to

which can be written recursively as (20)

In this example, the values are shown in Fig. 8(a) for the

time instants within the operation region of the first decoder.

The number of iterations at each decoding round is chosen

such that the breakout value condition is satisfied for . The

chosen channel SNR corresponds to the estimated threshold,

which explains the large number of required iterations. In the

first round,

, but only

iterations are required

for the second round, and a similar value is observed for the

following rounds

. As a consequence of (20),

the number increases until a maximum value is reached

at

. Then it remains constant until the effect of

the second decoder reduces the number of iterations at times

close to the center of the Tanner graph.

The bit error probability

at time , as a function of the

number of iterations

, is shown in Fig. 8(b) for

different . Observe from the figure that the curves for time

instants

and

are almost indistinguishable. This

is actually the case for all time instants for which stays

constant. This behavior indicates that the calculations tend to

repeat themselves at different window positions. From this we

may conclude that the effect of the strong nodes at the ends of

the Tanner graph carries through to the center, independent of

the termination length .

These observations suggest that detecting convergence at

time

is sufficient to determine the overall convergence

threshold, which is confirmed for the BEC by the following

theorem.

Theorem 4: Consider density evolution for the BEC with era-

sure probability and the window updating schedule for an ar-

bitrary termination length . Let the message probabilities at

times

and

be initialized by

.

If, under these conditions, the value is reached at time

after some number of iterations in round

, so that

the window can be shifted one step further, then, for the actual

initial probabilities, the value can be reached at all times

.

Proof: We prove the theorem by induction. Assume that at the beginning of decoding round the message probabilities from symbol nodes to constraint nodes satisfy

(21)

and that after further iterations the message probabilities be-

came smaller than or equal to at time

and smaller than

or equal to at times

within the window. After shifting

the window, the same condition must then be fulfilled for round

after

iterations.4 This follows since the mes-

sage probabilities within the window before round

are all

3Although the first decoder receives messages from the second one, the pdfs of these messages are, by symmetry, equivalent to some of those from decoder one, which are available from earlier computations and need not be evaluated separately.

B " 4Actually, the message probabilities are then smaller than or . But they B " could be set equal to and by introducing some artificial additional era-
sures. The conventional decoder can never perform worse than such a modified
decoder.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:09:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LENTMAIER et al.: LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

5283

= 3 = 100 = 20 = 0 55 Fig. 8. (a) Total number of iterations I for nodes at time t. (b) Evolution of the bit error probability P

J ;L

, and W

. The results correspond to an AWGN channel with E =N

: dB.

= 1 . . . at time t with iterations i ; ; I for

smaller than or equal to those in (21). If the messages probabil- to obtain lower bounds on the density evolution threshold, as

ities at times

are initialized by before the first round, stated in the following corollary.

then it follows by induction that can be reached at all other

times up to the center of the Tanner graph. The fact that the sym-

bols at times

are known due to termination, so that the

actual initial probabilities are equal to 0 (which is smaller than

), can only improve the performance, which finally proves

the statement of the theorem.

Corollary 5: Consider standard belief propagation decoding

of codes obtained from the ensemble

by termina-

tion. Any channel value that satisfies the condition of Theorem

4 for some given values

, and

represents

a lower bound on the density evolution threshold that can be

achieved as

for any fixed termination length

.

Theorem 4 allows us to determine valid channel values for We conjecture that the statements of Theorem 4 and Corol-

which a decoder with the window updating schedule, under the lary 5 are true for other binary-input memoryless channels as

assumption that all exchanged messages are statistically inde- well. Although this is technically difficult to prove, all our cal-

pendent, can reach a given value

at all time instants culations for the AWGN channel (see, e.g., Fig. 8) support this

for arbitrarily large termination lengths . If a conjecture.

channel value is identified as valid for a specific termination In the following section, numerical calculations of thresholds

length and window size

, it follows that it is valid for the BEC and the AWGN channel are given.

for all termination lengths

and even for non-terminated

LDPCC codes. According to Proposition 1, if the breakout value

V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

can be achieved under the window updating schedule, then it can be achieved under the parallel updating schedule as well, provided that the number of iterations is chosen sufficiently large. But, for the parallel updating schedule, Theorem 2 ensures that, for an arbitrary number of independent decoding iterations, we can find a suitable code if is chosen sufficiently large. It

Let us first consider the BEC, for which a simple evaluation

of density evolution according to (7) and (8) is possible.

In Table I we present the thresholds for terminated (3,6)

LDPCC codes of frame length with

information

symbols, where

. Assuming equality, the code

rate is

. The first column shows , the

then follows from (14) that the bit error probability of all sym- second column shows the resulting rate

of the terminated

bols in the terminated code converges to zero at least doubly convolutional code, and the third column gives the threshold

exponentially with the number of iterations under the standard

. For

, the threshold is quite high, in fact larger

parallel updating schedule. As a result, Theorem 4 can be used than the Shannon limit for rate

codes. However, in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:09:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5284

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2010

TABLE I
BEC THRESHOLDS FOR THE ENSEMBLE C (3; 6; M ). CORRESPONDING
IRREGULAR BLOCK CODE THRESHOLDS ARE SHOWN FOR COMPARISON

TABLE III
BEC THRESHOLD CALCULATION WITH WINDOW UPDATING SCHEDULE FOR
THE ENSEMBLE C (3; 6; M ) WITH L = 100: THE INFLUENCE OF W ON
THE REQUIRED NUMBER OF ITERATIONS. ON DEMAND UPDATING SCHEDULE
WITHOUT WINDOW IS SHOWN FOR COMPARISON

TABLE II
BEC THRESHOLD CALCULATION WITH PARALLEL UPDATING
SCHEDULE FOR THE ENSEMBLE C (3; 6; M ): THE INFLUENCE
OF L ON THE REQUIRED NUMBER OF ITERATIONS

TABLE IV
BEC THRESHOLDS OF TERMINATED LDPCC CODES FOR THE
ENSEMBLES C (M; 2M; J ) WITH DIFFERENT J

window will not further improve the bit error probability perfor-

this case there is a significant rate loss and the rate

of the mance. As shown in the table, convergence at the threshold

terminated code is only 0.350. For larger and correspondingly can be guaranteed for any

. However, for

, the

larger rates, the threshold remains constant at a value of 0.488. rate of convergence is slower and the value increases.

From Theorem 4, we conclude that the threshold stays at this A measure of complexity for the threshold calculation in den-

value for going to infinity and, consequently, that the rate of sity evolution is the average number of iterations over all time in-

the terminated code can be made arbitrarily close to 0.5 without stants. For larger windows this value increases, since the nodes

affecting the threshold.

at a given time instant are activated during a larger number of

The fourth column of Table I shows the thresholds

decoding rounds. In Table III, the required number of iterations

for random irregular LDPC block codes having the same degree for the on demand updating schedule without a window is also

distributions as the terminated convolutional codes (see [19] or shown for comparison, and from Tables II and III we see that the

[20] for a definition of degree distributions). Note that the de- number of iterations can be reduced from 40899 to 26697 without

gree distribution of the irregular codes depends on and that they a window. For a window of size

, this number can be fur-

have the same rate as the terminated convolutional codes. We ob- ther reduced to 9987 if the symbol nodes at all time instants are

serve that the thresholds of the terminated convolutional codes checked. According to Proposition 1, the threshold is the same

are better than those of the corresponding irregular LDPC block for all these approaches. Finally, using Theorem 4, only 688 it-

codes. With increasing , the degree distribution of the termi- erations are required. This example illustrates the large computa-

nated convolutional codes tends to that of a (3,6) regular LDPC tional savings obtained from the sliding window approach, which

block code. Therefore it is not surprising that the thresholds of the is especially useful for the AWGN channel, where the numerical

corresponding irregular LDPC block codes tend to the threshold representation of the message distributions and hence the com-

of a (3, 6) regular LDPC block code, which is equal to

putations within density evolution are more involved.

. However, the thresholds of the terminated LDPC convo- In Table IV, thresholds for the BEC are presented for different

lutional codes remain unchanged as increases. The improve- . In each case is chosen so that there is a rate loss of 2%. The

ment in threshold can be attributed to the structure imposed on first column in Table IV shows the values and of the under-

the Tanner graph by the convolutional nature of the code.

lying convolutional code, the second column the rate

of

Table II shows how influences the required number of iter- the terminated code, the third column the threshold , and

ations with the parallel updating schedule. The second column the fourth column the threshold for randomly chosen reg-

gives the number of iterations required for the erasure proba- ular LDPC block codes with the same and . We again ob-

bility of all messages to satisfy the breakout condition for the serve that the thresholds of the terminated convolutional codes

value

. The third column gives the number of iter- are much better than for the corresponding block codes. This is

ations for the case when the breakout condition is checked for reasonable, since the constraint nodes at either end of the Tanner

symbol nodes at time

only. The results in Table II re- graph in the terminated convolutional codes have lower degrees

flect the fact that, for larger , the messages from the stronger than in the block codes. i.e., the terminated convolutional codes

nodes at the ends of the Tanner graph need more time to affect have a structured irregularity.

the symbols in the center.

Interestingly, the terminated convolutional codes with higher

Corresponding values for the sliding window approach are have better thresholds than those with lower . This behavior

shown in Table III for

and different window sizes . is different from that of randomly constructed

regular

In this example, the number of iterations in the first decoding LDPC block codes, where, for a fixed rate, increasing typi-

round stays constant for

, indicating that a larger cally results in worse thresholds, since it is necessary to increase

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:09:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LENTMAIER et al.: LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

5285

TABLE V
THRESHOLDS FOR THE ENSEMBLES C (J; 2J; M ) WITH DIFFERENT
J FOR AWGN CHANNEL WITH BINARY INPUT

were derived in [21], [22], follow from a lower bound on the conditional entropy of the transmitted codeword given the received sequence at the channel output. These information

theoretic bounds are given in terms of the degree distribution

of the parity-check nodes of an arbitrary code representation

and stay valid for any sequence of codes whose block error

probability vanishes. Surprisingly, the values in Table VI show

TABLE VI
BP THRESHOLDS FOR TERMINATED CODES FROM THE ENSEMBLES
C (M; 2M; J ) IN COMPARISON WITH UPPER BOUND ON THE ML
THRESHOLDS OF THE CORRESPONDING REGULAR BLOCK CODES

that terminated LDPCC codes almost achieve the bounds on the ML thresholds even under the suboptimal and practical iterative belief propagation decoding algorithm. The results also demonstrate the tightness of the information theoretic

bounds, which are easy to compute and can be useful as a

starting point in searching for the iterative decoding thresholds,

which is computationally intensive due to the large number of

iterations required to obtain low bit error probabilities at rates

close to capacity.

accordingly5. For randomly constructed regular LDPC block Finally, simulation results of some randomly chosen termi-

codes, the loss due to the higher constraint node degrees out- nated LDPCC codes with

and

weighs the gain resulting from the higher symbol node degrees,

are given in Fig. 9 and compared to the corre-

adversely affecting performance. However, in the LDPCC code sponding regular LDPC block codes. The choice of leads to

case, the codes with higher still have strong constraint nodes an equal rate

for both LDPCC codes6. The curves

with low degrees at either end of the Tanner graph. Thus the in Fig. 9 are obtained with randomly selected permutation ma-

symbols at the ends are better protected for codes with larger trices of size

under standard belief propagation de-

symbol degrees, and this results in better thresholds.

coding with the parallel updating schedule. In order to demon-

Oswald and Shokrollahi have constructed LDPC block code strate that low error rates close to the calculated thresholds are

ensembles from sequences of right regular degree distributions achievable, a maximum number of 5000 iterations was allowed

(with fixed constraint node degrees) for which the convergence in the simulations to allow a progression of reliable messages

thresholds of the bit erasure probability approach the Shannon through all time instants

. Note that, although the

limit as the maximum symbol node degree tends to infinity overall block length

increases with , for a fixed

[29]. According to Table IV, with increasing the convergence the performance improves with decreasing at the expense of a

thresholds of rate

terminated LDPCC codes also tend higher rate loss, as indicated in Table I. On the other hand, after

toward the Shannon limit for rate

codes. However, in some sufficiently large , convergence to a steady behavior is

this case, the degree distributions are not right regular but left expected (also seen in Table I), since the potential strength of

regular, i.e., all symbol nodes have the same degree.

a convolutional code in

is determined by its con-

We now present the thresholds of terminated LDPCC codes straint length

, which is independent of the

for a binary input AWGN channel, computed by discretized den- termination length . While the number of required decoding

sity evolution [30]. In Table V, the thresholds

, cal- iterations under the parallel updating schedule increases signif-

culated using the conventional parallel updating schedule de- icantly with (see also Table II), the analysis in Section IV

scribed in Section III, are presented for different . The values suggests that a sliding window decoder can provide a good per-

of were chosen such that there is a rate loss of 2%, i.e., formance complexity tradeoff with an iteration number per de, and the same values can be obtained using the sliding coded symbol that is independent of the termination length .

window updating schedule described in Section IV. Also shown We see this as a promising direction for further research.

in the table are the threshold values

, calculated for

the case

, i.e.,

, using the sliding window up-

dating schedule, under the assumption that Theorem 4 can be

generalized to the AWGN channel. Finally, the RHS of the table

shows the thresholds

of regular LDPC block codes

with the same .

The results of Table V for the AWGN channel are similar to

the results of Table IV for the BEC. In particular, we observe

that the thresholds of regular LDPCC codes are much better than

those of the corresponding regular LDPC block codes and that

the thresholds improve with increasing .

In Table VI the thresholds of terminated LDPCC codes are

compared to upper bounds on the ML decoding thresholds of

regular LDPC block codes. The given upper bounds, which

VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have analyzed the iterative decoding thresholds of a special class of terminated rate regular LDPCC codes for the BEC and the AWGN channel. We show that these thresholds not only are better than the belief propagation decoding thresholds of corresponding regular LDPC block codes, but that they are even very close to the ML decoding thresholds of the latter. To calculate the thresholds for a particular termination length, we made use of the density evolution technique that is commonly used to calculate the thresholds of LDPC block codes, noting that the particular Tanner graph structure of the terminated LDPCC codes must be taken into account. To calculate the thresholds for large

5Recall that symbol nodes with higher degrees are stronger than those with lower degrees, but higher degree constraint nodes are weaker than lower degree constraint nodes.

termination lengths, we proposed a sliding window updating
0 6Both selected codes can be terminated within  = m = J 1 time instants.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:09:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5286

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2010

Fig. 9. Simulation results for the BEC of terminated LDPCC codes from the ensembles C(6000; 12000; 3) and C(6000; 12000; 5) (solid lines) for L = 100
and L = 200, respectively. Regular LDPC block codes composed of permutation matrices of the same size M = 6000 are shown for comparison (dashed lines). The vertical dashed-dotted lines show the convergence thresholds for the different ensembles.

schedule. Using this approach, we proved for the BEC that the

calculated thresholds are valid for arbitrarily large termination

lengths, and we conjecture that this is also true for the AWGN

channel and for unterminated LDPCC codes. Although we con-

sidered only rate

codes, we can expect similar be-

havior for other rates. It is especially interesting that the thresh-

olds of regular LDPCC codes, in contrast to the thresholds of

regular LDPC block codes, improve with increasing density of

the parity-check matrices.

APPENDIX

Sketch of the proof of the Theorem 1.

Let the vector

,

for

, with

denote the systemati-

cally encoded codeword corresponding to an information block

of length starting at . For each time instant

, the vector consists of an information block of length

and the corresponding length parity block . For a code

in

, we define the partial syndrome vector [9]

associated with at time as

, where

The syndrome former trellis can be defined using the partial syn-

drome vectors as states. Equations (22) and (23) define the tran-

sitions, i.e., the next state and branch labels, of this trellis. The

initial syndrome former state is the zero vector, i.e., we start

from the all-zero state.

To terminate the code to a total length

,

where

, we seek a length

tail vector

, for

, such that the final syndrome

former state

is the zero vector, i.e., we terminate back to

the all-zero state. This is equivalent to solving the system of

linear equations

(24)

where the

matrix

is given by

(25), shown at the bottom of the next page.

To continue, we need the following property of the partial

syndrome vector for codes in

.

Lemma 1 ([24]): For any code in

, the

(22) components weight.

of a partial syndrome vector have even

and, by definition,

for all

Theorem 1 is proved if we show that, for

and

, and each

is an for almost all codes in

, (24) has a solution for any

-dimensional vector. Encoding can be carried out by valid partial syndrome vector , i.e., a vector with components

solving

of even weight. In other words, we show that any sequence

can be terminated with a tail of

bits.

For simplicity, we consider below the ensemble

. In

(23) this case

and the tail bits are determined by

solving to determine the parity-block for each . Thus knowledge

of the partial syndrome vector at time

and the in-

formation block makes the future independent of the past.

(26)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:09:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LENTMAIER et al.: LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

5287

For any two permutation matrices mutation matrix such that

, there exists a per-

(28)

H Fig. 10. The matrix

.

where the

matrix

is given by (27) at

the bottom of the page, and the submatrices

are com-

posed of two

permutation matrices. Fig. 10 shows

the permutation matrices that comprise

. The ex-

istence or lack of solutions of (26) depends on the rank of

. We now proceed to show that

has

almost full rank.

For convenience, let denote the matrix

. With

viewed as a 6 5 block matrix, let

, denote the

matrix in the th row and th column

of . Note that the matrices

are either permutation ma-

trices or the all-zero matrix. Consider the ensemble consisting

of matrices of the form with probability distribution inherited

from the ensemble

, so that each of the permutation

submatrices comprising is chosen independently and all

values are equally likely. We now perform row operations on

to reduce it to diagonal form, using the following property of

permutation matrices:

This follows from the facts that a permutation matrix is invert-

ible and that the product of any two permutation matrices is an-

other permutation matrix. In fact,

.

The row operations on are carried out by viewing it as a

6 5 matrix with

matrices as entries. We next consider

a four step procedure of matrix transformation. Note that oper-

ations in the procedure do not change the rank of the matrix on

which we operate.

Step 1: Let

be such that

. Mul-

tiply each of the matrices

, in

the first row by

and add the products to the

matrices

, in the second row.

Then the matrix

in the first column of the

second row, i.e., in position (2, 1), of the resulting

matrix is the all-zero matrix. The two non-zero en-

tries in the second row of the resulting matrix, i.e.,

the matrices in positions (2, 2) and (2, 3), are sums

of two permutation matrices. Further, each of these

matrices can be assumed to be chosen independently

and equally likely. We now repeat the same process

for the third and fourth and the fifth and sixth rows

of so that the matrices

and

in posi-

tions (4, 2) and (6, 3) of the resulting matrix are

the all-zero matrix.

Step 2: The matrix in position (2, 2) of is the sum of

two permutation matrices, say

and

. Let

and

be such that

and

. Multiply each of the ma-

trices

, by

and

add the products to the second row. Then the ma-

trix

in position (2, 2) of the resulting matrix

is the all-zero matrix, the matrix

in posi-

tion (2, 3) is the sum of four permutation matrices,

and the matrix

in position (2, 4) is the sum of

two permutation matrices. We then perform a sim-

ilar operation on the fourth and fifth rows so that the

matrix

in position (4, 3) of the resulting ma-

trix is the all-zero matrix.

Step 3: The matrix

in position (2, 3) of is

the sum of four permutation matrices, say

...

...

(25)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:09:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(27)

5288

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2010

. Once again we deter-

mine matrices

such that

tiplying the matrices

. Then mul, by

and adding the products to the second

row of makes the matrix

in position (2,

3) of the resulting matrix equal to the all-zero

matrix, and the matrices

and

in po-

sitions (2, 4) and (2, 5) are sums of six and four

permutation matrices, respectively.

Step 4: Now reorder the rows of . The first and sixth row

of matrices in the resulting matrix are left un-

changed. The second row is moved to the fourth row,

the third row to the second, the fourth to the fifth, and

the fifth to the third. Observe that the 3 3 subma-

trix in the upper left corner of comprised of the

matrices

has full

rank, i.e., .

We now state the following lemma, which is proved in [24].

Lemma 2: The probability that the 3 3 submatrix in the

lower right corner of has rank less than

tends to zero

as

.

From Lemma 2 and the definition of the matrix follows

another lemma.

Lemma 3: The probability that the rank of any matrix in

the ensemble is less than

tends to zero as

.

Proof: From the row operations described in the above four

step procedure, it follows that has rank

.

Lemma 2 implies that the probability that rank

tends to zero as

. This proves the lemma.

Using Lemma 3 we now prove the existence of solutions to (26).

Lemma 4: Equation (26) has a solution for almost all codes

in

.

Proof: Consider the matrix

. Since the sum of

columns of two permutation matrices is the zero vector, it fol-

lows that the sum of the first, third, and fourth blocks of columns

of

is the zero vector. Similarly, the sum of the

second, third, and fifth blocks of columns is the zero vector.

This implies that there are at least two dependent columns in

, or equivalently two dependent equations in (26).

From Lemma 3 it follows that, for almost all codes, these are

the only two dependent equations in (26). Further, Lemma 1

implies that both components of the partial syndrome state

have even weight, i.e., the sum of its components is zero. It

is easy to check that the components of the -dimensional

vector

corresponding to the columns of

that sum to zero (i.e., the columns corresponding

to the blocks of permutation matrices that sum to zero) also sum

to zero, i.e., the two dependent equations are consistent. Hence,

it follows that (26) has a solution.

Theorem 1 now follows from Lemma 4.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Dr. I. Sason for pointing out
and providing his bounds on the ML decoding thresholds. Fur-
thermore, they are grateful for the use of the high performance
computing facilities of the ZIH at TU Dresden.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Sridharan, M. Lentmaier, D. J. Costello, Jr., and K. S. Zigangirov, “Convergence analysis of a class of LDPC convolutional codes for the erasure channel,” in Proc. 42nd Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Computing, Monticello, IL, 2004, pp. 953–962.
[2] M. Lentmaier, A. Sridharan, K. S. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Terminated LDPC convolutional codes with thresholds close to capacity,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Adelaide, Australia, Sep. 2005, pp. 1372–1376.
[3] M. Lentmaier, D. V. Truhachev, K. S. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “An analysis of the block error probability performance of iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-51, no. 11, pp. 3834–3855, Nov. 2005.
[4] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press, 1963.
[5] R. M. Tanner, “Error-correcting coding system,” 4 295 218, Oct. 13, 1981.
[6] A. J. Feltström and K. S. Zigangirov, “Periodic time-varying convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-45, no. 5, pp. 2181–2190, Sept. 1999.
[7] K. Engdahl and K. S. Zigangirov, “On the theory of low density convolutional codes I,” Problems of Inf. Transmiss. (Problemy Peredachi Informatsii), vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 295–310, Oct.–Dec. 1999.
[8] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984, Dec. 2004.
[9] A. E. Pusane, A. J. Feltström, A. Sridharan, M. Lentmaier, K. S. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Implementation aspects of LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 1060–1069, Jul. 2008.
[10] A. Sridharan, D. V. Truhachev, M. Lentmaier, D. J. Costello, Jr., and K. Sh. Zigangirov, “Distance bounds for an ensemble of LDPC convolutional codes,” , vol. 53, no. 12, pp. 4537–4555, Dec. 2007.
[11] D. J. C. MacKay and M. C. Davey, “Evaluation of Gallager codes for short block length and high rate applications,” in Codes, Syst. Graphical Models, ser. IMA Volumes in Mathematics and its Applications, B. Marcus and J. Rosenthal, Eds. New York: Springer-Verlag, 2001, vol. 123, ch. 5, pp. 113–130.
[12] A. Sridharan, M. Lentmaier, D. V. Truhachev, D. J. Costello, Jr., and K. S. Zigangirov, “On the minimum distance of low-density parity-check codes with parity check matrices constructed from permutation matrices,” Problems of Inf. Transmiss. (Problemy Peredachi Informatsii), vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 33–44, Jan.–Mar. 2005.
[13] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[14] M. Lentmaier, D. V. Truhachev, and K. S. Zigangirov, “Analysis of the asymptotic iterative decoding performance of turbo codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Wash., DC, Jul. 2001, p. 190.
[15] M. Lentmaier, D. V. Truhachev, and K. S. Zigangirov, “On the theory of low density convolutional codes II,” Problems of Inf. Transmiss. (Problemy Peredachi Informatsii), vol. 37, pp. 15–35, Oct.–Dec. 2001.
[16] K. S. Zigangirov, M. Lentmaier, and D. V. Truhachev, “Two approaches to the analysis of low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, July 2002, p. 29.
[17] A. Khandekar and R. J. McEliece, “A lower bound on the iterative decoding threshold of irregular LDPC code ensembles,” in Proc. CISS 2002, Princeton, NJ, Mar. 2002.
[18] A. Khandekar, “Graph-based codes and iterative decoding,” Ph.D. dissertation, Calif. Inst. Technol. , Pasadena, 2002.
[19] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, D. Spielman, and V. Stemann, “Practical erasure resilient codes,” in Proc. 29th Ann. ACM Symp. Theory of Computing, 1997, pp. 150–159, STOC.
[20] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[21] G. Wiechman and I. Sason, “Parity-check density versus performance of binary linear block codes: New bounds and applications,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 550–579, Feb. 2007.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:09:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LENTMAIER et al.: LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

5289

[22] I. Sason, “On universal properties of capacity-approaching LDPC code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 2956–2990, Jul. 2009.
[23] R. Johannesson and K. S. Zigangirov, Fundamentals of Convolutional Coding. Piscataway, NJ: IEEE, 1999.
[24] A. Sridharan, “Design and Analysis of LDPC Convolutional Codes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, Feb. 2005.
[25] J. Thorpe}, Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from protographs IPN Progress Rep. 42-154, Aug. 2003, JPL.
[26] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Linköping Univ., Linköping, Sweden, 1996.
[27] A. E. Pusane, M. Lentmaier, K. S. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Reduced complexity decoding strategies for LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Chicago, IL, Jul. 2004, p. 490.
[28] A. W. Eckford, “Low-density Parity-check codes for Gilbert-Elliot and Markov-Modulated channels,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. Toronto, Toronto, Canada, 2004.
[29] P. Oswald and A. Shokrollahi, “Capacity-achieving sequences for the erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-48, no. 12, pp. 3017–3028, Dec. 2002.
[30] S.-Y. Chung, J. Forney, G. D. T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 db of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
Michael Lentmaier (S’98–M’03) received the Dipl.-Ing. degree in electrical engineering from University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany, in 1998, and the Ph.D. degree in telecommunication theory from Lund University, Lund, Sweden, in 2003.
He then worked as a Postdoctoral Research Associate with the University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, and with the University of Ulm. From 2005 to 2007, he was with the Institute of Communications and Navigation of the German Aerospace Center (DLR), Oberpfaffenhofen, working on high-resolution channel estimation techniques for multipath mitigation in satellite navigation receivers. Since January 2008, he has been a Senior Researcher and Lecturer with the Vodafone Chair Mobile Communications Systems, Dresden University of Technology (TU Dresden). His research interests include design and analysis of coding systems, graph-based iterative algorithms, and Bayesian methods applied to decoding, detection, and estimation.
Arvind Sridharan (S’01–M’06) was born in Madras, India. He received the B.Tech. degree in electrical engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, in 1999, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, in 2001 and 2005, respectively.
Since February 2005, he has been with the coding and signal processing group, Seagate Technology, Longmont, CO. His research interests include the design and analysis of coding systems for recording, iterative decoding and detection algorithms, and information theory.

Daniel J. Costello, Jr. (S’62–M’69–SM’78–F’86–LF’08) was born in Seattle, WA, on August 9, 1942. He received the B.S.E.E. degree from Seattle University, Seattle, WA, in 1964, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, in 1966 and 1969, respectively.
He joined the faculty of the Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, in 1969 as an Assistant Professor of Electrical Engineering. He was promoted to Associate Professor in 1973, and to Full Professor in 1980. In 1985, he became Professor of Electrical Engineering with the University of Notre Dame, and from 1989 to 1998 served as Chair of the Department of Electrical Engineering. His research interests are in the area of digital communications, with special emphasis on error control coding and coded modulation. He has numerous technical publications in his field, and in 1983, he coauthored a textbook entitled Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications Prentice–Hall, 2004).
Dr. Costello was selected in 1991 as one of 100 Seattle University alumni to receive the Centennial Alumni Award in recognition of alumni who have displayed outstanding service to others, exceptional leadership, or uncommon achievement. In 1999, he received a Humboldt Research Prize from the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation in Germany. In 2000, he was named the Leonard Bettex Professor of Electrical Engineering at Notre Dame. Since 1983, he has been a member of the Information Theory Society Board of Governors, and in 1986 he served as President of the BOG. He has also served as Associate Editor for Communication Theory for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, and Co-Chair of the IEEE International Symposia on Information Theory in Kobe, Japan (1988), Ulm, Germany (1997), and Chicago, IL (2004). In 2000, the IEEE Information Theory Society selected him as a recipient of a Third-Millennium Medal. He was a corecipient of the 2009 IEEE Donald G. Fink Prize Paper Award, which recognizes an outstanding survey, review, or tutorial paper in any IEEE publication issued during the previous calendar year.
Kamil Sh. Zigangirov (M’95–SM’99–F’01) was born in the USSR in 1938. He received the M.S. degree in 1962 from the Moscow Institute for Physics and Technology, Moscow, USSR, and the Ph.D. degree in 1966 from the Institute of Radio Engineering and Electronics of the USSR Academy of Sciences, Moscow.
From 1965 to 1991, he held various research positions with the Institute for Problems of Information Transmission of the USSR Academy of Sciences, first as a Junior Scientist, and later as a Main Scientist. During this period, he visited several universities in the United States, Sweden, Italy, and Switzerland as a Guest Researcher. He organized several symposia on information theory in the USSR In 1994, he received the Chair of Telecommunication Theory at Lund University, Lund, Sweden. From 2003 to 2009, he was a Visiting Professor with the University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, the Dresden Technical University, Dresden, Germany, and with the University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. His scientific interests include information theory, coding theory, detection theory, and mathematical statistics. In addition to papers in these areas, he published a book on sequential decoding of convolutional codes (in Russian) in 1974. With R. Johannesson, he coauthored the textbook Fundamentals of Convolutional Coding (Piscataway, NJ: IEEE, 1999). He also published the book, Theory of CDMA Communication (Piscataway, NJ: IEEE, 2004).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:09:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

