2018 IEEE 10th International Symposium on Turbo Codes & Iterative Information Processing

A Discrete Information Bottleneck Receiver with Iterative Decision Feedback Channel Estimation
Jan Lewandowsky, Maximilian Stark, Gerhard Bauch Hamburg University of Technology Institute of Communications 21073 Hamburg, Germany
Email: {jan.lewandowsky,maximilian.stark,bauch}@tuhh.de

Abstract—The application of the Information Bottleneck method allows for an innovative approach to quantized, but information-optimum signal processing. This method originates from machine learning, but also offers an unconventional and efficient design approach for communication receivers. In the resulting receivers all signal processing degenerates to simple lookup operations in tables. These lookup tables are designed to maximize the relevant information. This paper presents a novel iterative Information Bottleneck receiver for block fading channels which uses iterative decision feedback for informationoptimum channel estimation. Detection, channel decoding and channel estimation only use lookup tables constructed with the Information Bottleneck method. We compare the proposed receiver to conventional iterative receivers. Our findings show that the proposed Information Bottleneck receiver offers performance extremely close to that of a conventional double precision receiver. Moreover, it outperforms a fixed point receiver, even with entirely mismatched lookup tables.
I. INTRODUCTION
In modern digital communication receivers the received signal is sampled, quantized and processed for detection and channel decoding. Higher precision of the analog-to-digital converter (ADC) in this context typically yields better performance, but is also more costly in terms of complexity and energy consumption. Figure 1 illustrates the conventional quantization process. First, threshold decisions are performed on the continuous input signal to categorize it into quantization regions. The input signal is then approximated using representation values which lie in the center of a quantization region in the shown example. These representation values are used in the applied algorithms, for example, to calculate loglikelihood ratios (LLRs) for soft channel decoding. However, from an information theoretical perspective, it is not necessary to assign representation values from the domain of the input signal to the quantization regions. In contrast, processing the bit sequence from ADC which reflects the threshold decision of the ADC as an unsigned integer is sufficient to capture all information present in the quantized signal. The reason is that Shannon’s mutual information is independent of the particular elements in the event spaces of the involved variables, but only depends on their joint probability distributions. Since processing of unsigned integers in hardware is very efficient, several authors recently considered a novel informationoptimum method for the design of receiver algorithms for detection and channel decoding which exclusively process

received signal (I or Q)

2 1 0 −1 −2
0

≡ quantization threshold

quantized signal

(representation values)

1

2

3

4

output (binary), repr. value 111, +1.75 110, +1.25 101, +0.75 100, +0.25 011, −0.25 010, −0.75 001, −1.25
000, −1.75
5

time / sampling time

Fig. 1. Illustration of receiver side 3 bit ADC. The ADC delivers a threshold decision represented as quantization index. A representation value is assigned to each quantization region of the ADC.

compact quantization indices in the entire signal processing chain [1]–[5]. The considered algorithms are designed using the Information Bottleneck principle of maximizing relevant information which originates from machine learning [6]. The Information Bottleneck method allows to construct compression mappings for an observation which maximize the mutual information shared between a compressed output variable and a relevant variable of interest. These mappings can be used generically to implement signal processing tasks such as channel decoding, channel estimation and detection [4], [5]. This concept is fundamentally different to conventional signal processing approaches, as it does not focus on processing the received signal with a small quantization error, but on its inherent relevant information. Earlier works using this principle describe decoders for low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes [1]–[4] and simple detection schemes [5]. A very interesting fact about these systems is that they offer performance extremely close to double precision systems although they only process unsigned integers represented by a few bits and the only required signal processing steps are lookup operations. Moreover, [3] illustrates that the considered design principle can yield significant throughput and efficiency gains in practical LDPC decoder implementations.
In this paper, we present a novel iterative Information Bottleneck receiver which uses a decision feedback loop to support its channel estimation. We show that the proposed receiver which consists completely of small and static lookup tables approaches the performance of a conventional double

978-1-5386-7048-4/18/$31.00 ©2018 IEEE 1 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:17:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2018 IEEE 10th International Symposium on Turbo Codes & Iterative Information Processing

precision reference receiver. Moreover, it outperforms a fixed point precision reference system. In the following section we introduce the channel model and preliminaries. Section III opposes the considered conventional receivers and the proposed Information Bottleneck receiver. Afterwards in Section IV, their bit error rate performance is compared. Finally, our conclusions are presented in Section V. We use the following notation: Random variable X has realization x, distribution p(x) and conditional distribution p(x|y). More specific notations are introduced on appearance.

II. CHANNEL MODEL AND PRELIMINARIES

A. Transmitter and Channel Model

We consider data transmission over a frequency flat block

fading channel. The transmitter applies binary phase shift

keying (BPSK) modulation with symbol duration Ts and

delivers symbols sk ∈ {−1, +1} in the symbol clock. On

the channel, the transmitted signal is weighted with complex channel coefficient h˜ = h˜re + jh˜im which is drawn from a zero

mean circular complex uncorrelated Gaussian process with variance σh2. Finally, additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) n˜k disturbs the resulting signal. The continuous received signal

r˜k at time kTs is

r˜k = h˜sk + n˜k.

(1)

The AWGN n˜k has variance σn2 which splits up into σn2 /2 in real and imaginary part, respectively. Please note that we use a tilde (e.g., h˜, n˜k) to mark all continuous random variables.
The considered transmitter applies a (dv, dc)-regular LDPC code, where dv and dc are the variable and the check node degrees. Hence, the transmitted symbols sk are BPSK modulated codeword bits. P additional pilot symbols spk are inserted periodically into a codeword block with a distance of M
codeword symbols. The received samples corresponding to the pilot symbols are denoted z˜k = z˜kre + jz˜kim. The inserted pilot symbols are used for channel estimation at the receiver side. Channel coefficient h˜ is constant for a block of P + M
symbols. After this time period, a new channel coefficient is
drawn which weights the following P + M symbols.

B. Information-Optimum Lookup Tables vs. Conventional Signal Processing
The Information Bottleneck method introduced in [6] provides mutual information maximizing clustering algorithms that map an observation Y onto a compact representation T . The compression Y −→ T is described by conditional distribution p(t|y) designed such that the mutual information I(T ; X) is maximized under a constraint for the cardinality of T . In this paper we only consider deterministic mappings Y −→ T which allow to implement this mapping in a lookup table t = f (y). The event space of T in general can be chosen arbitrarily. For the considered applications, it is practical to choose an index set of unsigned integers, such that t ∈ {0, 1, . . . , Q − 1}. Cardinality Q mainly determines the compression level of the compression mapping. To obtain the desired mapping t = f (y), the joint distribution p(x, y) and

the desired output cardinality Q have to be fed to an Information Bottleneck algorithm. We use the KL-means Information Bottleneck algorithm described in [7] because this algorithm is very fast. The KL-means algorithm delivers the desired compression mapping t = f (y) and also distributions p(x|t) and p(t). We explain the principle of information-optimum lookup table design for signal processing and its difference to conventional signal processing referring to channel estimation in the following. The principle is generic and will later also be applied to all other signal processing steps.
First, consider a conventional receiver chain with very high precision ADC. The receiver uses the P training symbols spk inserted into the encoded block at the transmitter to calculate a minimum mean squared error channel estimate as

h˜ˆ

=

P

1 + σn2 /σh2

P −1
z˜kskp .
k=0

(2)

If the ADC resolution is very high, z˜k = z˜kre + jz˜kim in (2) can be replaced by a quantized representation value from the
ADC, as it has been explained in Section I.
Now consider, in contrast, a receiver with very coarse q
bit ADC in the inphase and the quadrature path respectively.
Other than in the conventional scheme, the quantized signal
is not mapped onto representation values, but onto unsigned integers zkre and zkim, each from the set {0, 1, . . . , 2q − 1} and reflecting the threshold decision of the ADC in the inphase and
the quadrature path, respectively (cf. Figure 1). Essentially, information on the channel coefficient h˜ has to be extracted from the P available pairs of integers (zkre, zkim). In the remainder of the paper, we will often neglect signal processing of zkim, as it is equivalent to the one of zkre. We now consider the quantized real part hre of channel coefficient h˜ = h˜re + jh˜im. Integer hre is the index of the ADC’s quantization region the continuous h˜re falls into. From an information theoretical
perspective, the task of a channel estimator is to map unsigned integers z0re, z1re, . . . , zPre−1 onto a hˆre, such that the mutual information I(Hˆ re; Hre) is maximized. This task can be solved
with the Information Bottleneck method. The Information Bot-
tleneck method delivers a lookup table implementing operation hˆre = f (z0re, z1re, . . . , zPre−1) and also a belief p(hre|hˆre) on the relevant variable hre for a given hˆre. Please note that hˆre does not approximate hre by any means, as one might expect from the usual notion of channel estimation. Compressed hˆre
is just an integer sharing a desired huge amount of mutual information with hre. Realizations hre and hˆre are solely linked by p(hre|hˆre). A major challenge of implementing mapping (z0re, z1re, . . . , zPre−1) −→ hˆre in a lookup table is now that each zkre from the ADC can take 2q different values and therefore there exist 2q·P distinct combinations (z0re, z1re, . . . , zPre−1). This number can be extremely large. For example, with q = 5 bit quantization and P = 6 pilot symbols it is larger than 109. Implementing the required mapping in a lookup table has exponential complexity in q · P and is only possible for
small numbers of this product. Fortunately, this problem can be
solved by application of the factor graph principle of opening

2 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:17:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2018 IEEE 10th International Symposium on Turbo Codes & Iterative Information Processing

z0re

z0re

z1re

hre hˆre ≡ z1re

z2re closed node

z2re

opened node

hre

hˆ 0re

hre hˆre

Fig. 2. Exemplary Information Bottleneck Graph for channel estimation with P = 3. A closed node p(hˆre|z0re, z1re, z2re) is shown on the left and an opened node is shown on the right.

nodes. The principle is illustrated in Figure 2 for P = 3.

The into

overall lookup operation two serial lookups hˆr0e =

hˆre = f0(z0re,

f z1re

()z, 0rhˆe,rez1r=e,

zf2re1)(hˆi0rse,

split z2re).

Both lookup tables process only two inputs. Each of these

two input lookup tables is designed with the Information

Bottleneck method. Figure 2 uses the Information Bottleneck

Graph notation which we have introduced in [5]. On the left

hand side, the figure illustrates that realizations (z0re, z1re, z2re) are the input of the shown lookup table. Its output hˆre is

connected to the shortest side of the trapezoid. The relevant

variable hre labels the block to illustrate that the block is designed such that its output hˆre is highly informative about

the quantized channel coefficient hre. On the right hand side,

the opened node structure only using two input lookup tables

is shown. In general, for P inputs, the shown lookup table

structure lowers the number of lookup table entries from 2q·P

to (P − 1)22q and thus from exponential to linear complexity

in P . For the considered example with q = 5 and P = 6, this yields a reduction from more than 109 to 5120 table entries

which can be stored easily. The input distributions required

to design the two input lookup tables can be calculated using

a method of stochastic integration for multivariate Gaussian

variables described in [8]. For the two input lookup table with

inputs z0re and z1re in Figure 2, it is exemplarily given by

p(hre, z0re, z1re|sp0, sp1) =
+∞ +∞ +∞
p(z˜0re|h˜re, s0p )p(z˜1re|h˜re, s1p )p(h˜re)·

−∞ −∞ −∞
p(hre|h˜re)p(z0re|z˜0re)p(z1re|z˜1re) d h˜re d z˜0re d z˜1re. (3)

The output cardinality of the applied Information Bottleneck algorithms used to generate the lookup tables for channel estimation determines how many bits are required to store hˆre. Please note that the choice is a design choice which offers a huge flexibility in the system design. We denote the chosen output cardinality of the discrete channel estimator Qce.
An apparent disadvantage of the lookup tables is that they are designed using joint distributions like (3) which depend on the channel noise variance. However, later we will see that mismatched lookup tables offer surprisingly good performance. As a consequence, all required tables can be generated offline and stored with a reasonable amount of memory.

III. ITERATIVE RECEIVER STRUCTURES
In this section we oppose a conventional iterative receiver with soft demodulation, belief propagation LDPC decoding

samples z˜k for channel est.

decisions sˆl

MMSE channel estimation
hˆ˜

NFB most reliable
decision feedback loop, iFB iterations

received

soft demodulator

LLRs

belief propagation
decoder

decision

samples r˜k (representation

imax decoder bits

values)

iterations

ints zrke, zikm for channel est.

channel estimation lookup table
ints hˆre, hˆim
detection received lookup table ints rkre, rkim from ADC

decisions sˆl

NFB most reliable
decision feedback loop, iFB iterations

Information

ints tdket

Bottleneck decoder [4]

decision

imax decoder bits

iterations

Fig. 3. Receiver layout of the applied conventional iterative receiver (top) and the proposed Information Bottleneck receiver (bottom). In both receivers decoded bits are fed back to the channel estimator to improve the quality of the initial channel estimation.

and iterative decision feedback channel estimation and an Information Bottleneck receiver. The bit error rate performance of the presented receivers will be compared in Section IV. Block diagrams of the considered receivers are shown in Figure 3.

A. Conventional System Layout
The top of Figure 3 illustrates the considered conventional receiver. Its working principle is similar to the receiver in [9] for turbo coded transmission over a fading channel. For each received block of length P + M , the samples corresponding to the P inserted pilot symbols are fed to an MMSE channel estimator which evaluates (2). The obtained channel estimate hˆ˜ is provided to a soft demodulator which calculates channel LLRs for the codeword bits in the LDPC codeword. Once all LLRs are calculated, an iterative belief propagation decoder is applied for decoding the LDPC code. The decoder performs a parity-check in each iteration and stops once all paritychecks are satisfied or after a maximum of imax decoding iterations between variable and check nodes. The decoder outputs LLRs for all codeword bits. It is well known that the absolute value of an LLR represents the reliability of the corresponding bit decision. A bit decision for the NFB most reliable output LLRs in each block of length M is performed. The corresponding BPSK symbols sˆl are used to virtually increase the number of available pilot symbols by feeding them back to the channel estimator. The channel estimator now calculates an improved channel estimate with an increased number of P + NFB reference symbols which is provided to the soft demodulator. Using virtual pilot symbols for channel

3 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:17:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2018 IEEE 10th International Symposium on Turbo Codes & Iterative Information Processing

channel est.

hˆ re

ADC

rkre

channel est. hˆim

sk

trke

sk tkdet

LDPC decoder

ADC

sk

tikm

rkim

detection lookup table

Fig. 4. Detection lookup table in the Information Bottleneck receiver. The opened node structure processes integers from ADC and from channel estimation and delivers output integers.

z¯3re

z¯2re

z¯1re

hˆ re

hre

hre

hˆr2e 1h2r3e 4567hˆ81re9101h1r1e2131hˆ40r1e 5161h7re1 z¯0re

hre

hre

hre

(NFB − 1) lookup tables

feedback channel estimator lookup table hˆ FreB
to detection lookup table
Fig. 5. Illustration of feedback channel estimator in the Information Bottleneck receiver for NFB = 4. Its output hˆFreB is used as input of a detection lookup table.

estimation is well known and even more sophisticated soft decision feedback schemes exist (see, e.g., [9], [10]). However, in this first work on an Information Bottleneck receiver with decision feedback, we stick with hard decision feedback. The described estimation, detection and decoding loop is repeated iFB times. Afterwards the final decision bits are provided.
Clearly, the performance of the described receiver depends on the precision of the ADC and also on the precision of the arithmetical units applied in the signal processing blocks. We will consider two distinct implementations of the conventional receiver. In the first considered architecture all signal processing blocks use floating point arithmetic with double precision and no quantization beyond the limits of double precision. This system serves as a performance bound of the considered receiver structure, but has high implementation complexity. We will refer to this receiver as the conv. rec. double. The second variant uses fixed point number representation and arithmetic in all blocks. We use the fixed point notation as in [11]. A signed Qa.b fixed point number uses a + b bits in the hardware in total. The range of a signed Qa.b fixed point number reaches from −2a−1 to +2a−1 − 2−b with a uniform precision of 2−b. We will refer to a fixed point receiver with Qa.b number representation as the conv. rec. Qa.b.
B. Information Bottleneck System Layout
The proposed Information Bottleneck receiver is shown at the bottom of Figure 3. The major difference to the conventional receiver above is that instead of processing representation values in arithmetical operations, only unsigned integers and Information Bottleneck lookup tables are used. The applied q bit ADC delivers unsigned integers from {0, 1, . . . , 2q − 1}. The ADC delivers P pairs of unsigned integers (zkre, zkim) to channel estimation lookup tables like the one shown in Figure 2. The channel estimation delivers an unsigned integer hˆre for the real part and an unsigned integer hˆim for the imaginary part. Once hˆre and hˆim are determined, a detection lookup table combines hˆre, hˆim and received integers rkre, rkim in the opened node structure which is shown in Figure 4. This lookup table aims to extract the relevant information on the transmitted symbol sk and is also designed using the Information Bottleneck method. The output cardinality of the Information Bottleneck algorithms for design of the detection lookup table is denoted Qdet. The output of

the detection lookup table tkdet ∈ {0, 1, . . . , Qdet − 1} is fed to an Information Bottleneck LDPC decoder presented in [4]. The output of this decoder is from the set {0, 1, . . . , Qdec − 1}
for each code bit. Similarly as for LLRs, the smallest output
integer 0 corresponds to the most reliable decision for code bit 1 and the largest output integer Qdec − 1 corresponds to
the most reliable decision for code bit 0. Therefore, just as
in the conventional receiver, it is simple to identify the NFB
most reliable bit decisions from the output integers of the
decoder. These bit decisions are used for an enhanced channel estimation as follows. Let us define zlre, l ∈ {0, 1, . . . , NFB−1} to be the NFB received integers rkre from ADC corresponding to the most reliable bit decisions in the feedback path. The
BPSK symbol of the respective bit decision is denoted sˆl. We determine a z¯lre from each zlre and the respective symbol decision sˆl according to the rule

z¯lre =

zlre 2q − zlre − 1

sˆl = +1 sˆl = −1.

(4)

This transformation simply mirrors ADC output zlre, if sˆl = −1. The transformed ADC outputs z¯lre are then used in a feedback channel estimator lookup table shown in Figure 5

for an exemplary number of NFB = 4 feedback decisions. In the upper path of the opened node structure, the z¯lre are
processed. In each two input lookup table information on hre is

preserved with the Information Bottleneck method. Finally, the

output of the feedback path is combined in another two input lookup table with the original discrete channel estimate hˆre

from the known pilot symbols. The feedback channel estimator

finally outputs hˆrFeB which and is highly informative

is an about

integer from {0, hre. Integer hˆFreB

1, . . . , Qce−1} is used as input

of a detection lookup table like the one shown in Figure 4.

As for the conventional receiver, the decision feedback loop

is repeated iFB times.

IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

In this section we compare the performance of the conventional receivers and the Information Bottleneck receiver using bit error rate simulations. We have used the common parameters consolidated in Table I in all simulations. The proposed Information Bottleneck receiver used the output cardinalities listed in Table II. The maximum output cardinality is 256. Therefore, only integers with a maximum length of 8 bit have

4 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:17:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2018 IEEE 10th International Symposium on Turbo Codes & Iterative Information Processing

TABLE I SIMULATION PARAMETERS

parameter
P +M P M NFB imax (dv, dc) Nv

description
fading block length (in symbol durations) number of pilot symbols per fading block number of codeword symbols per fading block number of feedback decisions per fading block maximum number of LDPC decoder iterations LDPC code node degrees LDPC code codeword length

value
35 3 32 20 25 (3, 6) 8000

TABLE II LOOKUP TABLES IN THE INFORMATION BOTTLENECK RECEIVER

component
channel estim. detection LDPC decoder ADC

cardinality
Qce = 256 Qdet = 32 Qdec = 32 2q = 32

bit width
8 bit 5 bit 5 bit 5 bit

table entries table size
157 696 0.158 MB 18 432 0.012 MB 179 200 0.112 MB 31 decision thresholds

to be stored. Most lookup tables even need fewer bits per entry. We generated all lookup tables for Eb/N0 = 5.65 dB and used them mismatched for all Eb/N0. The memory occupied by the lookup tables is also listed in Table II. It is smaller than 0.3 megabyte (MB) in total. Therefore, it is no practical challenge to store the lookup tables. Figure 6 shows the bit error rates over Eb/N0 obtained with iFB = 0 (that is, no iteration in the decision feedback loop) and iFB = 5 for the conv. rec. double using black curves and the proposed Information Bottleneck receiver using red curves. The benefit of the decision feedback loop is clearly observable, as it brings the performance of both receivers much closer to the performance of the conv. rec. double with perfect channel state information (CSI) which shall serve as an ultimate reference in Figure 6. The curves referring to the proposed Information Bottleneck receiver and the conv. rec. double with iFB = 5 are hard to distinguish because both receivers offer almost identical performance. Also for iFB = 0 the loss of the proposed receiver over Eb/N0 with respect to the conv. rec. double is around only 0.2 dB in the waterfall region. Figure 6 also includes results for the

100

bit error rate

10−1

10−2 10−3 10−4 10−5 10−6

conv. rec. double × with iFB = 0 + with iFB = 5 ∗ perfect CSI
proposed with iFB = 0 with iFB = 5
conv. rec. Q5.3 ◦ with iFB = 0
with iFB = 5

012345678

Eb/N0 in dB
Fig. 6. Bit error rates of the conventional receivers and the proposed Information Bottleneck receiver. The Information Bottleneck receiver comes close to the double precision receiver even with mismatched tables and outperforms a fixed point receiver with 8 bit signal processing.

fixed point precision reference system conv. rec. Q5.3 plotted in blue. In order to not disadvantage the fixed point receiver, we have also tried all other Qa.b fixed point architectures with a + b = 8, but included only the curves for conv. rec. Q5.3. These showed the best performance among all 8 bit fixed point receivers with iFB = 5. The conv. rec. Q5.3 is outperformed by the proposed Information Bottleneck receiver.
V. CONCLUSION
We applied the Information Bottleneck method to develop a receiver for fading channels which employs iterative decision feedback for channel estimation. Its design is fundamentally different to conventional signal processing approaches as it is not based on representation values of a quantized signal, but on information-optimum integer based lookup tables. The presented receiver which processes only 5 and 8 bit integers performs extremely close to a conventional double (64 bit) precision receiver. Moreover, it outperforms an 8 bit fixed point receiver. Both even holds for entirely mismatched lookup tables. The only required arithmetical operations in the proposed receiver are address calculations in lookup tables. Interestingly, with the proposed Information Bottleneck design of the lookup tables, this suffices to compete with a conventional double precision receiver.
REFERENCES
[1] F. J. C. Romero and B. M. Kurkoski, “LDPC decoding mappings that maximize mutual information,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 2391–2401, Sep. 2016.
[2] M. Meidlinger and G. Matz, “On irregular LDPC codes with quantized message passing,” in IEEE 18th International Workshop on Signal Processing Advances in Communications (SPAWC), Sapporo, Japan, Jul. 2017, pp. 1–5.
[3] R. Ghanaatian, A. Balatsoukas-Stimming, T. C. Mu¨ller, M. Meidlinger, G. Matz, A. Teman, and A. Burg, “A 588-gb/s LDPC decoder based on finite-alphabet message passing,” IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 329–340, Feb. 2018.
[4] J. Lewandowsky and G. Bauch, “Information-optimum LDPC decoders based on the information bottleneck method,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 4054–4071, Jan. 2018.
[5] J. Lewandowsky, M. Stark, and G. Bauch, “Information bottleneck graphs for receiver design,” in IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, 2016. (ISIT), Barcelona, Spain, Jul. 2016, pp. 2888– 2892.
[6] N. Tishby, F. C. Pereira, and W. Bialek, “The information bottleneck method,” in Proceedings 37th Allerton Conference on Communication and Computation, Monticello, VA, USA, 1999, pp. 368–377.
[7] J. A. Zhang and B. M. Kurkoski, “Low-complexity quantization of discrete memoryless channels,” in International Symposium on Information Theory and Its Applications (ISITA), Monterey, CA, USA, Nov. 2016, pp. 448–452.
[8] A. Genz, “Numerical computation of multivariate normal probabilities,” Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 141–149, 1992.
[9] M. C. Valenti and B. D. Woerner, “Iterative channel estimation and decoding of pilot symbol assisted turbo codes over flat-fading channels,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 19, no. 9, pp. 1697–1705, Sep. 2001.
[10] S. Park, B. Shim, and J. W. Choi, “Iterative channel estimation using virtual pilot signals for MIMO-OFDM systems,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 63, no. 12, pp. 3032–3045, Jun. 2015.
[11] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, M. Mainwright, V. Anantharam, and B. Nikoli, “Quantization effects in low-density parity-check decoders,” in IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), Glasgow, UK, Jun. 2007, pp. 6231–6237.

5 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:17:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

