2018 IEEE 10th International Symposium on Turbo Codes & Iterative Information Processing

Fast convergence stochastic LDPC decoder based on edge memory structure
Guiwu Yang∗, Kai Kang, Jianhao Hu∗, Qiu Huang, Yujing Lin National key Lab. Of Communications
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, UESTC Chengdu, China
Email: guiwuyang uestc@163.com and jhhu@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract—In recent years, the LDPC decoder based on stochastic calculation has been becoming a hot topic, and the rerandomization structure based on edge memory for the stochastic LDPC decoder shows great advantages over performance and complexity compared with the traditional decoders. However, latching issue is also the main challenge for the stochastic LDPC decoders with edge memory structure, similar to stochastic LDPC decoders with other structures. Frequent latching state results in a low information updating efficiency, which reduces decoding performance and convergence speed. In order to speed up the information updating efficiency of the stochastic decoder, in this paper, we propose a dual memory parallel update structure for edge memory. Based on the proposed structure, the efficiency of information convergence is greatly accelerated with acceptable hardware cost. And the decoding performance and latency are also improved.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low density parity check (LDPC) code whose performance can approach the Shannon limit is a kind of progressive linear block code. It was proposed by Gallager in 1960s [1]. However, due to the lack of computation ability, storage ability and highly effective decoding algorithm, the development of LDPC was restricted. And for a long time, LDPC was neglected. Until 1981, Tanner proposed the graph theory representation method of LDPC, which is well known as Tanner Graph. It intuitively represented the features of LDPC, which led LDPC attract the attention of scholars. In 1995, MacKay and Neal proposed a new LDPC decoding algorithm [2] whose performance is excellent and easy to realize. Thus, the research of high performance LDPC coding and decoding schemes become a hot topic in research and industry areas. At present, LDPC has been chosen as the coding scheme for 5G enhanced Mobile Broad-Band (eMBB) scenario [3].
The common LDPC decoding algorithms include soft decision methods, such as Belief Propagation (BP) [4] and MinSum [5], and hard decision methods, such as Bit Flipping (BF), as well as some hybrid methods. These conventional algorithms inherently have heavy complexity in hardware implementation for fully parallel decoding architectures. Thus, researchers proposed the decoding schemes based on stochastic computation to reduce the implementation complexity of LDPC decoder and improve the efficiency of decoding [6], [7], [8], through new digital representation and computation schemes in probability domain. A hardware structure of full

parallel stochastic LDPC decoder based on Tanner graph iteration is designed in [6], and a re-random module based on Edge Memories (EM) structure is proposed to solve the latching problem in stochastic iterative decoding [7], which can significantly improve the decoding performance. However, the information converge speed is slow for EM structure. Thus, the iteration number of EM based on stochastic LDPC decoder is much larger than that of conventional decoder schemes. For the ultra-high throughput applications, information updating efficiency for the stochastic decoder must be improved. In this paper, a stochastic LDPC decoder based on dual updating EM structure is proposed. We use dual updating EM to speed the effective information updating. The more effective iterative processing can be achieved with proposed structure, compared with [7]. Thus, the iteration number of dual updating EM structure can be reduced with better decoding performance. We adopt the LDPC codes of IEEE802.11aj [9], [10] protocol as case study. According to the simulation results, we find that the LDPC decoder with dual updating EM structure can effectively reduce the iteration times and improve the decoding performance.
The paper is organized as follows. The structure with variable nodes and check nodes of LDPC decoder and the reason of latching problem are introduced in section II. Section III give the dual updating EM structure. In section IV the efficiency of proposed structure is analyzed from iteration time and decoding performance. We make a conclusion in section V.
II. VARIABLE NODE AND CHECK NODE OF STOCHASTIC LDPC DECODER
Benefit from stochastic stream representation method, stochastic computation can achieve the high-speed and high fault tolerance calculations with simple logic gates. In recent years, it has been applied in various communication modules, especially in the channel decoding, which can reduce the complexity in hardware implementation and improve implementation efficiency. The algorithms and implementation structures of stochastic LDPC decoder and traditional LDPC decoder are very similar. And the only difference is that the main calculation unit adopt stochastic computation method in stochastic LDPC decoder rather than twos complement computation method. Stochastic LDPC decoder also adopts full

978-1-5386-7048-4/18/$31.00 ©2018 IEEE 1 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:15:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2018 IEEE 10th International Symposium on Turbo Codes & Iterative Information Processing

Fig. 1. J-K Triggers implement variable node operations.

Fig. 4. 2-degrees variable node structure based on EM module.

Fig. 2. XOR gate implement check node operations.

parallel decoding structure in order to achieve high throughput. According to the Tanner Graph, the BP decoding algorithm
of LDPC is realized by updating the messages which pass between the variable nodes (VN) and the check nodes (CN). In the early stochastic LDPC decoder, the operation of VN can be implemented by J-K flip-flop (FF), and the multiplication and addition operations of CN can be implemented by XOR gate. The stochastic implementation structures of 2-degrees VNs and CNs are shown as Fig.1 and Fig.2 [11], respectively.
The stochastic LDPC decoder mentioned above is prone to latching problem, which seriously affects decoding performance. For example, if the two inputs of Fig.1 are different, the J-K FF will enter hold state and the output will be kept as last period. If the J-K FF stay in the error state for a long peroid, the decoder performance will be degraded greatly [7]. In order to get high performance and fast converge speed, the stochastic decoder should have a scheme to let VN get out from hold state when latching occurs. That is, the decoder can perform an effective information updating for the VN even when this VN fall into hold state. For latching problem, Tehrani proposed adding re-randomization unit to the VN structure [7], just shown as Fig.3.
The re-randomization units commonly used include edge memories (EM), internal memories (IM) and their hybrid structure. When it adopts EM structure, the structure of 2degrees VN is shown as Fig.4.
In Fig.4, Si represents the stochastic bit of channel information, ini (i = 1, 2) represents the stochastic bit delivered from CNs, outi (i = 1, 2) represents the outputs of corresponding edges of VNs. When the input stochastic bit Si is the same as ini, the enable signal U is valid, and the structure updates the

Fig. 5. M-bits edge memory structure.
re-randomization unit, meanwhile, outi outputs the updating bit; otherwise, EM remains unchanged and randomly chooses a bit from the EM as the output bit. The EM has a various implementation forms, and a simple one is the implementation based on M-bits shift register [7], as shown in Fig.5.
Before decoding, EM needs to be initialized, which contributes to accelerating the decoding speed and getting the right code words fast. When the enable signal U is valid, the shift register abandons the first input bit and updates the contents of the EM with the updated bits in a non-latch state. Thus, the register keeps the correct values of non-latch state most recently, which ensures the accuracy of decoding. If the enabled signal U is invalid, the address will be a random number, and the output will be randomly selected from the correct updated bits. The random selection feature introduced in EM can effectively prevent the latch of VNs in the decoding iteration cycle.
The structure of IM whose length is shorter than EM is similar to EM, and its hardware implementation is simpler [7]. In order to further reduce the probability of latch state, IM and EM cascade can be used to construct higher-degrees VNs [7]. As shown in Fig.6.
In Fig.6, each sub-node connects to an IM, and multilevel IM outputs are adopted to reduce the occurrence of latch state. When the sub-nodes in each level are at a non-latch state, the content of IM is updated with updated bits; otherwise, the pseudo-random address R (t) is used to select a bit from IM as output, and the specific process is similar to EM.

Fig. 3. Variable node structure with re-randomization units.

III. DUAL UPDATING EM STRUCTURE
The study of stochastic LDPC decoder with EM rerandomization module shows that the random selection feature introduced by EM cannot eliminate the latching problem in the iterative decoding loop. We also find the efficiency of EM updating is important for the decoding performance and converging speed of the EM based stochastic decoder. In

2 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:15:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2018 IEEE 10th International Symposium on Turbo Codes & Iterative Information Processing

Fig. 6. Subnode cascade representation of the higher-degrees VN.

Fig. 8. The structure of variable node with dual updating EM structure.
10-1 EM-single EM-dual
10-2

Fig. 7. The structure of variable node and check node dual updating EM structure.
order to further enhance the performance of stochastic decoder, we propose an EM re-randomization module structure whose variable nodes and check nodes are dually updated, as shown in Fig.7.
In Fig.7, ch in1 and ch in2 represent the dual different input stochastic sequences for the channel informations, CN out1 and CN out2 are the dual output stochastic sequences after processing by CNs. V N in1 and V N in2 are dual stochastic sequences which are passed from CNs to VNs. V N out1 and V N out2 are dual stochastic sequences which are used for information processing of CNs. r1 (t) and r2 (t) are dual updating sequences which are used for EM updating in the non-latching state. U 1 and U 2 are two enable signals for updating. From the proposed update structure, the VNs and CNs, the EM module are the same as the single update EM structure. The differences are dual stochastic sequences processing for channel information and EM is updated by two independent signals concurrently. The two signals are completely independent except for sharing EM. Thus, the EM updating efficient is improved. So the decoder convergence can be speeded up. Taking the 2-degrees VN as an example, the structure of the dual updating EM module is shown as Fig.8.
Fig.8 shows the update process of dual updating EM module: input1 and input2 are stochastic bit streams of the dual independent processing respectively, EM updating rules are the same as the single EM. When both inputs are the same stochastic bits, the EM is updated by two updating bits and outputs their own updating bit. When one input is the same and the other is different, EM is only updated by updating bit and both outputs is the same updating bit. When both inputs are different, EM performs bucket shift operation and randomly

BE R

10-3

10-4

10-4 2.7 2.8 2.9 3 3.1 3.2 3.3

10-51

1.5

2 Eb/N0 2.5

3

3.5

Fig. 9. Comparison of decoding performance of stochastic LDPC decoder.

adopts stochastic bits from EM as output. Similarly, at the processing end of CNs, the two signals execute XOR operation independently, and obtain their own stochastic output bit, and then deliver them to the respective VNs for processing through the interwoven network of connection between VNs and CNs.
IV. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
The latching problem directly affect the decoding performance and the number of iterative decoding cycles. Therefore, this paper analyzes and compares the efficiency of the proposed dual updating structure from the aspects of decoding performance and the number of decoding iterations.
The LDPC scheme in 802.11aj is used in the simulation. The code rate and code length of used LDPC code is 5/8 and 672 bits, respectively. The communication model uses BPSK modulation over the AWGN channel. Under the same number of simulation data, the decoding performance comparison of the stochastic LDPC decoding based on the single updating EM structure and the dual updating EM structure is shown in Fig.9 .
As can be seen from Fig.9, the dual updating EM structure has a performance improvement about 0.37dB at BER = 2 × 10−4 compared to the single updating EM structure. However, in the case of low signal-to-noise ratio, the information updating accuracy is reduced due to the influence of noise,

3 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:15:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2018 IEEE 10th International Symposium on Turbo Codes & Iterative Information Processing

Fig. 10. The decoding cycle distribution of stochastic LDPC decoder.

TABLE I ASIC IMPLEMENTATION AND COMPARISON FOR DECODERS (ONLY
INCLUDING THE VNS AND THE PNS MODULE)

EM structure single updating dual updating

Technology 65nm 65nm

Core Area 0.78mm2 0.99mm2

Gate Count 314K 404K

and the updating error of the dual updating EM information is aggravated, so that the performance of the dual updating EM method is worse. Under the condition of Eb/N0=3.2dB, the decoding cycle distribution of stochastic LDPC based on the single updating and the dual updating EM structure is shown in Fig.10.
As can be seen from Fig.10, the decoding cycle of the dual updating EM structure is mainly concentrated between 100 and 200, while the decoding cycle of the single update EM structure is mainly concentrated between 150 and 400. The results show that the stochastic LDPC decoder with dual updating EM architecture has a significant reduction in the number of decoding cycles compared with the traditional single updating decoder. That is, the dual updating EM structure can effectively reduce the latched state, ease the latch problem, with the advantages of the decoding convergence.
From the performance of decoding and the number of iterative decoding cycles, we can see that the dual updating EM structure proposed in this paper can effectively improve the performance of the stochastic LDPC decoding algorithm and speed up the convergence of decoding compared with the traditional single updating EM structure.
We design and synthesize the decoder using the Synopsys Design Compiler with a SMIC 65 nm CMOS technology. The post-layout results are obtained by IC compiler are shown in table I. From table I, we find that complexity of dual EM increase 28.7% compared with that of single EM. Consider that dual updating structure can greatly reduce the number of iterations compared to single updating structure. Thus, dual updating structure has a great advantage in achieving hardware efficiency.

V. CONCLUSION
LDPC decoder based on stochastic calculation shows great advantages over traditional decoder in performance and complexity, but there are still many latching problems in traditional stochastic LDPC decoder using single updating EM structure. In order to speed up the efficiency of information update, further reduce the latching state. We propose a dual updating EM structure. The simulation and implementation results show that the proposed dual updating EM LDPC decoder can effectively speed up the efficiency of information updating compared with the traditional single updating EM decoder, and at the same time obtain better performance gain and reduce the number of iterative decoding cycles with acceptable complexity incensement.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager,Low-density parity-check codes, IRE Trans. on Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21-28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay, S. T. Wilson and M. C. Davey, ”Comparison of constructions of irregular Gallager codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 10, pp. 1449-1454, Oct 1999.
[3] H. Gamage, N. Rajatheva and M. Latva-aho, ”Channel coding for enhanced mobile broadband communication in 5G systems,” in Proc EuCNC, Oulu, 2017, pp. 1-6.
[4] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2008.
[5] F. Angarita, J. Valls, V. Almenar and V. Torres, ”Reduced-Complexity Min-Sum Algorithm for Decoding LDPC Codes With Low Error-Floor,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I: Reg. Papers, vol. 61, no. 7, pp. 2150-2158, July 2014.
[6] S. Sharifi Tehrani, W. J. Gross and S. Mannor, ”Stochastic decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett, vol. 10, no. 10, pp. 716-718, Oct. 2006.
[7] S. Sharifi Tehrani, S. Mannor and W. J. Gross, ”Fully Parallel Stochastic LDPC Decoders,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 56, no. 11, pp. 56925703, Nov. 2008.
[8] S. Sharifi Tehrani, A. Naderi, G. A. Kamendje, S. Hemati, S. Mannor and W. J. Gross, ”Majority-Based Tracking Forecast Memories for Stochastic LDPC Decoding,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process, vol. 58, no. 9, pp. 48834896, Sept. 2010.
[9] W. Haiming, H. Wei, C. Jixin, S. Bo and P. Xiaoming, ”IEEE 802.11aj (45GHz): A new very high throughput millimeter-wave WLAN system,” China Communications, vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 51-62, June 2014.
[10] Y. Zhang, Z. Xue and W. Hong, ”Planar Substrate-Integrated Endfire Antenna With Wide Beamwidth for Q-Band Applications,” IEEE Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett, vol. 16, pp. 1990-1993, 2017.
[11] V. C. Gaudet and A. C. Rapley, ”Iterative decoding using stochastic computation,” Electronics Letters, vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 299-301, 6 Feb 2003.

4 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:15:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

