2018 11th International Symposium on Computational Intelligence and Design

An Improved Belief Propagation Iterative Algorithm Based on Dynamic Scheduling

Hang Yin1, Yuhuan Wang1, Qiuyuan Huang1, Yaobin Lu2, Zhanxin Yang1
1. Engineering Center of Digital Audio and Video, Communication University of China, Beijing, China 2. Nanjing Research Institute of Electronics Technology, Nanjing, China
yinhang@cuc.edu.cn, wangyuhuan@cuc.edu.cn, hqy1015@cuc.edu.cn, lyb0316@126.com, yangzx@cuc.edu.cn

Abstract—In this paper, on the basis of analysing existing schedule message passing mechanism of Belief Propagation (BP) iterative algorithm, we propose a Belief Propagation iterative algorithm based on Dynamic Schedule Row Message Passing (DS-RMP). This algorithm optimizes the update mode of the check node message in the iteration, reduce the imbalance of check nodes’ confidence degree in the original algorithm, and promote the efficiency of message passing .. The simulation results indicate that, compared with the existing Belief Propagation algorithm, the Belief Propagation iterative algorithm not only reduces the average number of iterations, but also improves the bit error rate performance effectively.
Keywords—Low Density Parity Check Code (LDPC), schedule message passing, BP-Based iterative decoding
I. INTRODUCTION
Low Density Parity Check Code (LDPC) is a type of code which has a strong error-correcting capacity. In 1962, Low Density Parity Check Code was discovered by Gallager for the first time, and then proposed Belief Propagation (BP) algorithm [1]. However, due to the limited level of hardware, it was not valued until MacKay and Neal rediscovered LDPC code and proved that it has the performance approaching the Shannon limit in the 1990s [2].
BP algorithm has excellent performance and is widely used because of outstanding performance and lower complexity. It is a message iteration algorithm [3]. The order of message updating between variable nodes and check nodes is called scheduling in decoding [4]. Classical BP iterative algorithm uses the scheduling mode called Standard Message Passing (SMP) [5]. Every variable node and check node can be handled at the same time in LDPC decoding, so we can use parallel structure to produce the decoder of high-speed LDPC code. The main weakness of Standard Message Passing BP algorithm is the relatively slow speed of convergence. It needs 25 to 30 iterations to achieve good performance. P.Radosavljevic et al. proposed Row Message Passing (RMP) mechanism in 2005. At the same time, some other algorithm were proposed to adopt the similar row message passing mechanism, such as Layered BP algorithm [6] and Shuffled BP algorithm [7]. Actually, RMP scheduling is a turboscheduling, and it serializes the parallel scheduling of message passing in the original BP algorithm, processes and passes the message in ascending order of the check nodes. In each iteration, subsequent updated nodes can take advantages of the message of previous updated nodes. Compared with the decoding algorithm based on Standard Message Passing, this new algorithm improves the message’s convergence,

promotes the decoding performance effectively, and reduces the number of iterations by about 50%. Based on RMP scheduling, Jingru. Dong et al. proposed an improved IRMP scheduling in 2016, which reduced the number of decoding iterations and improved the decoding performance based on improving the operation complexity of single iteration [8].
However, the decoding algorithm based on RMP is a kind of static scheduling, it is always arranged in ascending order of the check nodes throughout the decoding process. The sequence of the check nodes updating affects the confidence of the check nodes directly. The check node updated later correspond to the higher confidence, and the static scheduling results in the accumulation of imbalance of confidence degree about check nodes, which reduces the decoding performance. To solve the above-mentioned imbalance of check nodes and further improve the efficiency of message passing, a BP iterative decoding algorithm based on dynamic scheduling was proposed. On the basis of analysis of existing schedule message passing mechanism, this paper proposes a BP iterative decoding algorithm based on Dynamic Schedule RMP (DS-RMP). The simulation results indicate that compared with the existing Belief Propagation algorithm, this algorithm reduces the average number of iterations and improves the decoding performance effectively under the same computing complexity.
II. LDPC ITERATIVE DECODING BASED ON BP ALGORITHM
BP decoding algorithm is a kind of iterative message passing algorithm. In each iteration, each check node receives messages from all variable nodes that connected with the check node, and return them to the connected variable nodes after processing. Then all the variable nodes carry out the same process. Finally, the variable node collects all available messages for judgment.
A. The LLR BP Algorithm
The modulation mode is controlled by BPSK modulation, the transmission channel employs AWGN channel. The parity check matrix corresponding to LDPC code is HM*N, where M is the number of row and N is the number of columns. ݉ሺ݉ ൌ ͳǡʹǡ͵Ǥ Ǥ Ǥ ‫ܯ‬ሻ is the check node and ݊ሺ݊ ൌ ͳǡʹǡ͵Ǥ Ǥ ܰሻ is the variable node. The probability information of check node m to variable node n is represented as‫ݎ‬௠௡ሺܾሻሺܾ ൌ Ͳǡͳሻ. The probability information of variable node n to check node m is expressed as‫ݍ‬௡௠ሺܾሻሺܾ ൌ Ͳǡͳሻ. The set of all variable nodes that connected with check node m isܰሺ݉ሻ. The set of all check nodes that connected with variable node n is‫ܯ‬ሺ݊ሻ.

2473-3547/18/$31.00 ©2018 IEEE

291

DOI 10.1109/ISCID.2018.10168

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:17:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Due to the AWGN transmission channel, noise variable is a

Gaussian random variable with statistical independence and

identically distribution, and ߪଶ is the variance of noise

variable.‫ܮ‬ሺ‫ݎ‬௠௡ሻis the log likelihood ratio

log of

likelihood ratio ‫ݍ‬௡௠ . ܿ ൌ ሺܿଵǡ

oܿfଶ‫ݎ‬ǡ௠ܿ௡ଷǤ;‫ܮ‬Ǥ Ǥሺܿ‫ݍ‬ே௡ሻ௠iሻsis

the the

encoding codeword; and‫ ݕ‬ൌ ሺ‫ݕ‬ଵǡ ‫ݕ‬ଶǡ ‫ݕ‬ଷǤ Ǥ Ǥ ‫ݕ‬ேሻis the received

codeword. ̰ܿ ൌ ሺܿଵ̰ǡ ܿଶ̰ǡ ܿଷ̰Ǥ Ǥ Ǥ ܿே̰ ሻ is the decoded codeword.

The decoding steps of standard log-likelihood ratio BP

algorithm are as follow:

1) Initialization.

In the iterative process, the channel passes information to

variable nodes, it is defined as (1):

‫ܮ‬ሺ଴ሻሺ‫ݍ‬௡௠ሻ

ൌ

݈݊

௉௥ሼ௖೙ୀ଴ȁ௬೙ሽ ௉௥ሼ௖೙ୀଵȁ௬೙ሽ

ൌ

ଶఙ௬మ೙

(1)

2) Iterative update process.

a. Check nodes update. The information updating of check nodes is the process of information integration. The information is calculated as: ‫ܮ‬ሺ௟ሻሺ‫ݎ‬௠௡ሻ ൌ ʹ ‫ି ݊ܽݐ‬ଵሺ ς௡ǡ‫א‬ேሺ௠ሻ̳௡ ‫ ݊ܽݐ‬൬ଶଵ ‫ܮ‬ሺ௟ିଵሻሺ‫ݍ‬௡ǡ௠ሻ൰ሻ (2)

b. Variable nodes update. The update value of variable nodes received form check nodes is counted as follow: ‫ܮ‬ሺ௟ሻሺ‫ݍ‬௡௠ሻ ൌ ‫ܮ‬ሺܲ௜ሻ ൅ σ௠ǡ‫א‬ெሺ௡ሻ̳௠ ‫ܮ‬ሺ௟ሻሺ‫ݎ‬௠ǡ௡ሻ (3)

c. Decoding decision. The decision value of variable nodes is computed as:

‫ܮ‬ሺ௟ሻሺ‫ݍ‬௡ሻ ൌ ‫ܮ‬ሺܲ௡ሻ ൅ σ௠ǡ‫א‬ெሺ௡ሻ ‫ܮ‬ሺ௟ሻሺ‫ݎ‬௠ǡ௡ሻ

(4)

If ‫ܮ‬ሺ௟ሻሺ‫ݍ‬௡ሻ ൐ Ͳ, ܿ௡̰ ൌ Ͳ; else, ܿ௡̰ ൌ ͳǤ 3) Stop decoding.
Stop decoding if‫ ்̰ܿܪ‬ൌ Ͳor the maximum number of iterations is reached; otherwise, keep iterating.

B. BP Decoding Algorithm Based on RMP Scheduling
At each iteration of the standard BP algorithm, all the check-to-variable messages and variable-to-check messages are processed and transmitted simultaneously, and variablenode messages from previous iteration are used in updating check-node messages. This message scheduling scheme is called SMP scheduling. The major drawback of the LDPC codes versus the turbo-codes is their comparative low convergence speed: 25-30 iterations vs 8-10 iterations for turbo codes [6].
At each iteration of the RMP scheduling algorithm, checknode messages updated during the current decoding iteration are immediately utilized within the same iteration for computation of new variable-node messages. Therefore, the result of one RMP scheduling iteration is equivalent to that of multiple SMP scheduling iterations. They keep the same computational complexity, but the former’s iteration number needed is reduced by 50% and its convergence speed is accelerated.
Take ሺܰǡ ‫ܭ‬ሻ LDPC codes as an example, in the RMP scheduling algorithm, messages are processed and transmitted in the order of check nodes݉ଵǡ ݉ଶǡ ݉ଷǤ Ǥ Ǥ ݉ெǡ ‫ ܯ‬ൌ ܰ െ ‫ܭ‬. Each iteration process consists of two loops, the outer loop calculates each check node, and the inner loop updates the

variable node connected with the check node in turn. Detailed BP decoding procedure based on RMP scheduling is as follows:

1) Initialization. In the iterative process, the channel passes information to
variable nodes, it is defined as (1).

2) Iterative update process.
The message is updated in the order of the check node݉ଵǡ ݉ଶǡ ݉ଷǤ Ǥ Ǥ ݉ெ, and the loops of each check node are composed of inner loop and outer loop.

a. Outer loop. The information updating of check nodes is the process of information integration. The information is calculated as:

‫ܮ‬ሺ௟ሻሺ‫ݎ‬௠೔௡ሻ ൌ ʹ ‫ି ݊ܽݐ‬ଵ ൭ς  ௡ǡ‫א‬ேሺ௠೔ሻ̳௡ ‫݊ܽݐ‬
௡ǡ‫א‬ேሺ௠ೕሻǡெஹ௝வ௜

൬ ൰ ௅ሺ೗షభሻሺ௤೙ǡ೘೔ሻ
ଶ

ൈ

ς  ௡ǡ‫א‬ேሺ௠೔ሻ̳௡ ‫݊ܽݐ‬
௡ǡ‫א‬ேሺ௠ೕሻǡଵஸ௝ழ௜

൬௅ሺ೗ሻሺ௤ଶ೙ǡ೘೔ሻ൰൱

(5)

b. Inner loop. The updated value of variable nodes received form check nodes is counted as follow (3).

c. Decoding decision. The decision value of variable nodes is computed as (4).

3) Stop decoding. Stop decoding if‫ ்̰ܿܪ‬ൌ Ͳor the maximum number of

iterations is reached; otherwise, keep iterating.

In one iteration of the RMP scheduling algorithm, latter

updated check nodes have higher confidence degree. When

updating the check node ݉ெmessage, messages of variable

nodes that connected with the check nodes

݉ଵǡ ݉ଶǡ ݉ଷǤ Ǥ Ǥ ݉ெିଵ have already been updated. Therefore,

we can update message of check node ݉ெ using the value

of ‫ܮ‬ሺ௟ሻ൫‫ݍ‬௡௠೔൯᩸ሺ݅ ൌ ͳǡʹǡ͵Ǥ Ǥ Ǥ ‫ܯ‬ሻ obtained at iteration l, and the confidence degree of check

the node

current ݉ெis the

highest. The confidence degree of check nodes

݉ଵǡ ݉ଶǡ ݉ଷǤ Ǥ ݉ெ increases successively.

III. IMPROVED DS-RMP BP DECODING ALGORITHM BASED ON DYNAMIC SCHEDULING
A Dynamic scheduling BP iterative decoding algorithm based on the LLR of initial decoding vector is presented in this paper. In this DS-RMP (Dynamic Schedule Row Message Passing) BP decoding algorithm, the check node message scheduling is dynamically optimized based on the loglikelihood ratio of the initial message of the input decoding vector in each iteration.
RMP scheduling is a kind of static scheduling. It only uses the connections between the check matrix nodes, and in each iteration, message updates are carried out in ascending order of check nodes, therefore, the confidence degrees between former and latter check nodes are imbalanced in RMP. To solve this problem, a new updating order is given in DS-RMP scheduling algorithm. Considering the imbalances of check nodes’ confidence degrees caused by ascending update message in each iteration, the initial LLR value of the input decoding vector is used while using the connected relation

292 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:17:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

between the nodes of the check matrix. For each input

decoding vector, dynamic optimization scheduling determines

the updating order of the check nodes by using the sum of LLR

values of the variable nodes corresponding to the check nodes.

First, the sum of LLR values of all variable nodes

corresponding to each check node is calculated according to

the check matrix. Then this sum of LLR values is formed into

a weight vector in ascending order. Select the check node

corresponding to the element with the maximum sum of LLR

value in the weight vector as the first updated node, and the

check node corresponding to the element with the sub-

maximum sum of LLR value in the weight vector as the

second updated node. And so on for each element in the

vector, the updating order of the check nodes can be obtained.

the check node message scheduling based on the log-

likelihood ratio of the initial message of the input decoding

vector in each iteration is Dynamic scheduling BP iterative

decoding algorithm. The parameters used in this section are

explained as follow.

The parity check matrix corresponding to LDPC code is

HMXN, where M is the number of rows and N is the number of columns.݆௜is the check node and n is the variable node. The

set of all check nodes that connected with variable node n is‫ܯ‬ሺ݊ሻ, and the set of all variable nodes that connected with check node݆௜isܰሺ݆௜ሻ. The log-likelihood ratio of probability information about check node݆௜to variable node n in iteration

l is represented as ‫ܮ‬ሺ௟ሻ൫‫ݎ‬௝೔௡൯ . The log-likelihood ratio of

probability information about variable node n to check

node ݆௜ in iteration l is expressed as ‫ܮ‬ሺ௟ሻ൫‫ݍ‬௡௝೔൯ . ܿ ൌ

ሺܿଵǡ ܿଶǡ ‫ܿ ڮ‬ேሻ

ሺሺܿ‫רݕ‬ଵଵǡǡܿ‫ݕר‬ଶଶǡ Ǥǡ

Ǥ‫ݕ‬Ǥ ଷܿ‫ר‬௡ǡ ‫ڮ‬ሻ

‫ݕ‬ே is

is ሻ is the

the encoding codeword, ‫ݕ‬ ‫ר‬
the received codeword, and ‫ܥ‬ decoded codeword. The algorithm

ൌ ൌ is

implemented as follows:

1) Input Check matrix H; Decoding vector ‫ ݕ‬ൌ ሺ‫ݕ‬ଵǡ ‫ݕ‬ଶǡ ‫ݕ‬ଷǤ Ǥ ‫ݕ‬௡ሻ ;
Maximum number of iterations L.

2) Initialization The check nodes and variable nodes which satisfy
‫ܪ‬ሺ݉ǡ ݊ሻ ൌ ͳin the check matrix are computed iteratively. The number of iterations is L=1. In the iterative process, the channel passes information to variable nodes, it is defined as

equation (6)

‫ܮ‬ሺ଴ሻሺ‫ݍ‬௡௠ሻ

ൌ

‫ܮ‬ሺܲ௡ሻ

ൌ

݈݊

௉௥ሼ᩸௖೙ୀଵ᩸ȁ᩸௬೙᩸ሽ ௉௥ሼ᩸௖೙ୀ଴᩸ȁ᩸௬೙᩸ሽ

ൌ

ଶ௬೙ ఙమ

(6)

Where ݊ ൌ ͳǡʹǡ͵Ǥ Ǥ Ǥ ܰ, ݉ ൌ ͳǡʹǡ͵Ǥ Ǥ Ǥ ‫ܯ‬.

3) Dynamic scheduling The sum of the probabilistic likelihood ratio of the initial
messages of all the variable nodes connected with each check node is calculated in firstly, and the updating order of the check nodes is determined according to the ascending order of the sum of the probabilistic likelihood ratio of the corresponding initial messages. The updating order set of the check nodes is ߆ ൌ ሼ݆ଵǡ ݆ଶǡ ݆ଷǤ Ǥ ݆ெሽ , ݆௜ሺ݅ ൌ ͳǡʹǤ Ǥ Ǥ ‫ܯ‬ሻ represents the ith updated check node, and ݆௜ ‫א‬ ሼͳǡʹǡ͵Ǥ Ǥ Ǥ ‫ܯ‬ሽ.
4) Iterative update process.

a. Check nodes update The update order of check node is the set߆ ൌ ሼ݆ଵǡ ݆ଶǡ ݆ଷǤ Ǥ ݆ெሽ, and the information updating of check nodes is the process of information integration. The information is calculated as: ‫ܮ‬ሺ௟ሻ൫‫ݎ‬௝೔௡൯ ൌ

ʹ ‫ି ݊ܽݐ‬ଵ ቌς ௡ǡ‫א‬ேሺ௝೔ሻ̳௡

‫݊ܽݐ‬

ሺ

௅ሺ೗షభሻሺ௤೙ǡೕ೔ ଶ

ሻ
ሻ

ൈ

௡ǡ‫א‬ேሺ௝೗ሻǡ᩸ெஹ௟வ௜

ς ௡ǡ‫א‬ேሺ௝೔ሻ̳௡

‫݊ܽݐ‬

ሺ

௅ሺ೗ሻሺ௤೙ǡೕ೔ ଶ

ሻ
ሻቍ

௡ǡ‫א‬ேሺ௝೗ሻǡ᩸ଵஸ௟ழ௜

(7)

b. Variable nodes update. For ݊ ‫ܰ א‬ሺ݆௜ሻand݊ ‫ א‬ሼͳǡʹǡ͵Ǥ Ǥ Ǥ ܰሽ , the update value of variable nodes received form check nodes is counted as follow:

‫ܮ‬ሺ௟ሻሺ᩸‫ݍ‬௡௝೔ ሻ ൌ ‫ܮ‬ሺܲ௡ሻ ൅ σ௝ೖ‫א‬ெሺ௡ሻ̳௝೔ ‫ܮ‬ሺ௟ሻቀ᩸‫ݎ‬௝ೖ௡᩸ቁ (8)
᩸᩸᩸᩸ሺ᩸௞ஷ௜᩸ሻ

5) Decoding decision.

The decision value of variable nodes is computed as:

‫ܮ‬ሺ௟ሻሺ᩸‫ݍ‬௡ሻ ൌ ‫ܮ‬ሺܲ௡ሻ ൅ σ௝ೖ‫א‬ெሺ௡ሻ ‫ܮ‬ቀ᩸‫ݎ‬௝ೖ௡᩸ቁ

(9)

If ‫ܮ‬ሺ௟ሻሺ‫ݍ‬௡ሻ ൐ Ͳ, ܿ௡̰ ൌ Ͳ; else, ܿ௡̰ ൌ ͳǤ

6) Stop decoding Stop decoding if‫ ்̰ܿܪ‬ൌ Ͳor the maximum number of

iterations is reached; otherwise, keep iterating.

IV. SIMULATION AND DECODING COMPLEXITY ANALYSIS
Based on the analysis about decoding complexity, the BP iterative decoding algorithm based on dynamic scheduling is proposed in this paper. This proposed algorithm uses the sort order of dynamic dispatching weight, so it just needs‫ܯ‬ሺ݀௩ െ ͳሻ ൅ ‫݃݋݈ ܯ‬ଶ ‫ ܯ‬times extra add operations, where M represents the number of check nodes in the check matrix, dv represents the degree of variable nodes in the check matrix, and the remaining computational amounts are consistent with those of the decoding algorithm based on RMP scheduling.

Generate Random Sequence

LDPC Encoder

BPSK Mod.

AWGN
+

Compute BER/BLER

LDPC Decoder
˄BP-RMP vs.DS-RMP˅

BPSK DeMod.

Fig.1 Simulation block diagram of LDPC BP decoder

Analysing from performance simulations, we adopt
quasi-cyclic LDPC codes in which (N, K)˙(2304,1152) [9]. The maximum row weight and maximum column weight of the check matrix of LDPC code are 7 and 6 respectively. Suppose the channel is AWGN and the modulation is BPSK, the compared decoding algorithm is BP-RMP and DS-RMP scheduling algorithm proposed in this paper.

293 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:17:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig.2 BER and BLER when the max number of iterations is 5
Fig.3 BER and BLER when the max number of iterations is 10
Fig.4 LDPC decoding average number of iterations when the maximum number of iterations is 5 and 10
Figs. 2 and Figs. 3 depicts that, the decoding algorithm based on DS-RMP scheduling has a lower block error rate under different times of decoding. Especially, when the number of iterations is limited, the advantages are even more obvious. Compared with the algorithm based on RMP scheduling, the bit error rate of the algorithm mentioned in this paper is improved by more than 0.2dB. Figs.4 illustrates that, the algorithm based on DS-RMP scheduling requires the least average number of iterations under different times of decoding iterations. Compared with the BP algorithm based on RMP, the average number of iterations was reduced by about 10%. Based on the analysis above, in the case of a small increase in algorithm complexity, the improved BP decoding algorithm based on DS-RMP scheduling not only reduces the average number of iterations required for decoding, but also improves the performance of bit error rate effectively.
V. CONCLUSION This paper studies the SMP, RMP and other message scheduling mechanisms in LDPC decoding algorithm in

detail, and proposes an improved DS-RMP scheduling. The algorithm optimizes the message scheduling of the check nodes in each iteration dynamically, improves the message updating mode of check nodes in each iteration, reduces the imbalance of confidence degree of check nodes in the original algorithm, and promotes the message passing efficiency. Simulation results and theoretical analysis show that, compared with the BP decoding algorithm based on RMP scheduling, the bit error rate performance of the algorithm mentioned in this paper can be improved by about 0.2dB, the average number of iterations is reduced by about 10% while the decoding complexity is not much improved. As can be seen from the above results, the improved BP decoding algorithm based on DS-RMP scheduling reduces the number of decoding iterations, at the same time, the bit error rate performance is improved to some extent, with excellent performance.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported by a grant from National Key Technology R&D Program of China under contract No. 2015BAK05B01. The authors would like to thank the reviewers and the associate editor for their assistance with improving this paper by their valuable feedback on our manuscript.
REFERENCES
[1] Gallager R.G㸪Low-density parity-check codes. IRE Transactions on Information Theory, 1962, 8 (1):21-28㸬
[2] MacKay D. J. C, Neal R M. Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes[J]㸬Electronics Letters 1996㸪32( 18) : 1645-1646㸬
[3] Chen J, Fossorier M.P.C. Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes .IEEE Transactions on Communications , 2002 , 50 ( 5 ) : 406- 414
[4] S. Y. Chung, T. J. Richardson and R. Urbanke. Analysis of Sumproduct decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation [J]. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 2001, 47(2): 657-670.
[5] P.Radosavljevic㸪A.Baynast㸪et al. Optimized Message Passing Schedule for LDPC Decoding. IEEE Signals 㸪 Systems and Computers㸪2005:591-595
[6] D.E.Hocevar. A Reduced Complexity Decoder Architecture via Layered Decoding of LDPC Codes. IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems. SIPS㸸 Design and Implementation㸪 Texas㸪 2004:107-112.
[7] J. Zhang and M. P. C. Fossorier. Shuffled Belief Propagation Decoding [A]. Proceedings of 36th Annual Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems and Computers [C].2002: 8-15.
[8] J. Dong, “An improved message passing schedule of BP-based decoding algorithm for LDPC codes,” CPSCom 2016, p480-484, May 1, 2017.
[9] IEEE. IEEE P802116e/D12 draft IEEE standard for local and metropolitan area networks, part 16: air interface for fixed and mobile broadband wireless access systems[S].[S.l.]: IEEE, 2005.

294 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:17:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

