816

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 64, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2018

Progressive Matrix Growth Algorithm for Constructing Rate-Compatible Length-Scalable
Raptor-Like Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes
Yushu Zhang , Kewu Peng , Senior Member, IEEE, Zhangmei Chen , and Jian Song, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—With the worldwide deployment and rapid development of digital television terrestrial broadcasting (DTTB) systems, the demands of diversified multimedia services from the fixed/mobile receptions increase significantly. To satisfy the various requirements of quality of service, the forward error correction codes with multiple code rates and lengths become a trend for DTTB standards. In this paper, rate-compatible length-scalable raptor-like quasi-cyclic low density parity check (RL-QC-LDPC) codes are proposed for future DTTB systems, where a wide range of code rates and information/parity block lengths can be obtained with low implementation complexity. A low-complexity construction method, called progressive matrix growth (PMG), is also proposed for such kind of RL-QC-LDPC codes. Unlike conventional construction methods, PMG performs 2-D progressive extension of both information variable nodes and check nodes with limited computational complexity and memory resources. Based on the performance prediction provided by the tool of multi-edge type density evolution, several code families are constructed with PMG as examples, and careful discussions on design parameters are given. The numerical results show that the average gaps of SNR threshold to Shannon limit of binary-input additive white Gaussian noise channel are only 0.41∼0.44 dB for the code families with information-bit puncturing.
Index Terms—Rate-compatible, length-scalable, raptor-like quasi-cyclic low-density parity check (RL-QC-LDPC) code, progressive matrix growth.
I. INTRODUCTION
W ITH the worldwide deployment and rapid development of digital television terrestrial broadcasting (DTTB)
Manuscript received August 3, 2017; revised October 27, 2017; accepted October 31, 2017. Date of publication January 23, 2018; date of current version December 7, 2018. This work was supported in part by the Science, Technology and Innovation Commission of Shenzhen Municipality under Grant JCYJ20160331171115521, and in part by the National Project of New-Generation Broadband Wireless/Mobile Communication Networks under Grant 2016ZX03001019-002. (Corresponding author: Kewu Peng.)
Y. Zhang and Z. Chen are with the Electronic Engineering Department and the Research Institute of Information Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China, and also with the Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: zhang-ys15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; chenzm16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn).
K. Peng and J. Song are with the Electronic Engineering Department and the Research Institute of Information Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China, also with the Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China, and also with the Shenzhen City Key Laboratory of Digital TV System, Shenzhen 518057, China (e-mail: pengkewu@tsinghua.edu.cn; jsong@tsinghua.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBC.2017.2781137

systems, the demands of multimedia services for mobile and pedestrian reception increase significantly, as well as the terrestrial high-definition television (HDTV) and ultra HDTV services for fixed receivers. To support multiple services with differentiated quality of service (QoS) requirements, physical layer pipes (PLPs) technology has been adopted in DVB-T2 [1] and the latest ATSC 3.0 [2], [3], where multiple services with different levels of protection are delivered in different PLPs. A maximum of 64 PLPs can be supported simultaneously in ATSC 3.0, and a single service can employ four PLPs for delivering separate components, e.g., video, audio, etc [2].
To achieve multiple levels of protection in different PLPs, forward error correction (FEC) codes supporting multiple code rates and lengths are essential. In DVB-T2 [1], 7 and 6 code rates are supported for block lengths of 16200 and 64800, respectively. In DVB-NGH [4], 9 code rates are supported for block length of 16200. And for both DVB-T2 and DVB-NGH, quasi-cyclic low density parity check (QC-LDPC) codes [5] are chosen as FEC coding schemes. As a class of structured LDPC codes, QC-LDPC codes are particularly suitable for high-throughput applications since the encoders/decoders can be implemented with low hardware complexity and high memory efficiency.
Recently, with new advances in FEC coding, LDPC codes with code rates of {i/15}, i = 2, 3, . . . , 13, have been adopted as FEC schemes for ATSC 3.0, which provides better code-rate granularity and flexibility than those in previous DTTB standards. As one of the key innovative technologies, two different code structures, conventional QC-LDPC codes and raptor-like (RL-) QC-LDPC codes [6], are also employed in ATSC 3.0, mainly for the cases of high code rates and low code rates, respectively.
To meet the ever-increasing requirements of differentiated QoS, FEC codes supporting a wider range of code rates are demanded for more flexible transmission schemes in future DTTB systems. However, for conventional QC-LDPC codes with parity check matrices (PCMs) individually designed for each code rate, the hardware implementation complexity may become prohibitive to support such a large number of code rates. To solve the problem, it is worthwhile considering QCLDPC codes with excellent rate-compatibility, which indicates that a large number of code rates can be supported with a set of nested PCMs and only a common pair of encoder and decoder is required.

0018-9316 c 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:08:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: PMG ALGORITHM FOR CONSTRUCTING RATE-COMPATIBLE LENGTH-SCALABLE RL-QC-LDPC CODES

817

Although the PCMs in ATSC 3.0 are individually designed for each code rate and each block length, the raptor-like structure of the adopted RL-QC-LDPC codes is inherently suitable to provide rate-compatibility [7], [8], and the quasicyclic structure can support scalable block lengths with one or multiple sets of lifting factors [9], [10]. Besides, due to the incremental redundancy of RL-QC-LDPC codes, the received signal of each codeword can be partially demodulated and decoded by receivers according to their own channel conditions, which is promising to provide power-saving and low-latency solutions for green DTTB systems [11].
As a result, rate-compatible RL-QC-LDPC codes have attracted significant interest from both academic and industrial communities. In [7] and [8], a low-rate RL-QC-LDPC code is designed and then punctured to obtain the higher code rates. And in [12] and [13], the highest-rate PCM is designed first and then extended to construct the lower-rate PCMs. Moreover, rate-compatible RL-QC-LDPC codes have been also adopted for data channel to support enhanced mobile broadband (eMBB) applications in 5th generation (5G) mobile networks recently [14]–[16].
In this paper, the construction of RL-QC-LDPC codes with rate-compatibility as well as length-scalability is considered. Instead of a fixed information or parity block length as those in previous works, both the information and parity block length can vary within a wide range in this paper, which can provide more choices of FEC codes with fine granularity of code rates and lengths. Meanwhile, only a simple set of lifting factors are required for the lifting process of RL-QC-LDPC codes, and the complexity of code design, code description and hardware implementation can be significantly reduced.
With conventional construction methods, like information-variable-node extension [17] and check-node extension [12], [13], the complexity of code design becomes prohibitive for the proposed rate-compatible length-scalable RL-QC-LDPC codes due to the wide range of information/parity block lengths. To the best of our knowledge, low-complexity construction method of such kind of flexible RL-QC-LDPC codes has never been disclosed. Therefore, we focus on the construction of such kind of codes with capacity-approaching capability, and the contributions of this paper can be listed as follows.
Firstly, rate-compatible length-scalable RL-QC-LDPC codes are proposed to support the diversified multimedia services from mobile/fixed receptions for future DTTB systems. With the proposed codes, a wide range of code rates and information/parity block lengths with even one-bit granularity can be supported with the help of only a simple set of lifting factors.
Secondly, a low-complexity method, called progressive matrix growth (PMG), is proposed for the construction of the proposed rate-compatible length-scalable RL-QC-LDPC codes. PMG focuses on 2-dimensional (2D) progressive extension of information variable nodes and check nodes. According to the performance prediction by the tool of multi-edge type density evolution (MET-DE), progressive growth of base matrices can be facilitated with limited computational complexity and memory resources.

Fig. 1. The base matrix B of an RL-QC-LDPC code ensemble.
Thirdly, with the proposed method PMG, several families of rate-compatible length-scalable RL-QC-LDPC codes with excellent granularity of code rates and information/parity block lengths are designed in this paper. During the construction process, the computational complexity and the required memory resources are analyzed and shown to be under control of the predefined parameters. Furthermore, careful discussions on the design parameters are given to provide insights on the code design for future DTTB systems.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the code structure of the proposed rate-compatible length-scalable RL-QC-LDPC codes. In Section III, the method of PMG is described. Then several design examples are given in Section IV, where the design parameters and the complexity of PMG are also discussed. Finally, the conclusions are drawn in Section V.
II. RATE-COMPATIBLE RAPTOR-LIKE QC-LDPC CODE
A. The Structure of RL-QC-LDPC Code and the Lifting Process
An LDPC code can be represented by its m × n PCM, which is a low density matrix with a small number of nonzero entries. Correspondingly, the parity block length is m, the code block length is n, the information block length is k = n − m and the code rate is (n − m)/n. The PCM can also be represented in the form of bipartite graph. Each column and each row of the PCM correspond to a variable node and a check node in bipartite graph, respectively. And the non-zero entries in PCM represent the edges in bipartite graph connecting the corresponding variable nodes and check nodes. In this paper, the variable nodes associated with the information bits and the parity bits are called information variable nodes and parity variable nodes, respectively.
For an RL-QC-LDPC code, the PCM consists of small square zero matrices and circulant permutation matrices of size L × L. A circulant permutation matrix can be obtained by cyclically shifting the rows of an identity matrix. Note, more generally, the circulant permutation matrices in the PCM of RL-QC-LDPC codes can also be replaced by a matrix superposed by several circulant permutation matrices. Due to the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:08:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

818

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 64, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2018

Fig. 2. The nested base matrices of a rate-compatible length-scalable RL-QC-LDPC code family. For simplicity of illustration, Kmax and Mmax are set as Kmin + 8 and Mmin + 10, respectively, in this example.

quasi-cyclic structure, the PCM can be constructed from a base matrix B of size M × N, where the base parity block length M = m/L, the base block length N = n/L and the base information block length K = N − M = k/L. The base matrix is usually designed first, and then lifted, with the so-called lifting factor L, to obtain the final PCM. In the lifting process, each zero entry b in B is replaced by an L × L zero matrix, and each non-zero entry b in B is replaced by an L × L circulant permutation matrix if b = 1, or a matrix superposed by b circulant permutation matrices if b > 1.
Unlike conventional QC-LDPC codes, the base matrix of an RL-QC-LDPC code ensemble has raptor-like structure, which is inherently suitable for rate-compatibility due to the incremental redundancy [7], [11]. As shown in Fig. 1, the base matrix of an RL-QC-LDPC code ensemble consists of five submatrices. Z is a G × (M − G) zero matrix, I is an (M − G) × (M − G) identity matrix, and the sizes of A, C and D are G × K, G × G and (M − G) × (K + G), respectively. The entries in A, C and D are non-negative integers, and each entry will be replaced by an L × L matrix in the lifting process as mentioned above. In this paper, C can be assumed to be dual-diagonal.
Note that the base matrix B also corresponds to a bipartite graph, called base graph, where each non-zero entry b in B represents a single edge if b = 1, or b parallel edges if b > 1. In Fig. 1, the first K columns and the last M columns of B are referred to as base information columns and base parity columns, respectively, corresponding to the base information variable nodes and base parity variable nodes in base graph. And the rows in B correspond to the base check nodes in base graph.
B. RL-QC-LDPC Codes With Rate-Compatibility and Length-Scalability
For conventional QC-LDPC codes with multiple code rates and block lengths, where each base matrix is individually

designed, the description and implementation complexity are prohibitive in practice. As a result, rate-compatible lengthscalable RL-QC-LDPC codes are proposed to support the diversified services for future DTTB systems. The approaches to obtain a wide range of code rates and block lengths with excellent granularity will be introduced in this subsection, and the low-complexity construction method, PMG, proposed for this kind of codes will be detailed in Section III.
A family of rate-compatible length-scalable RL-QC-LDPC codes can be represented by a set of nested PCMs, which are constructed from a set of nested base matrices. In Fig. 2, the nested base matrices of a rate-compatible length-scalable RL-QC-LDPC code family with excellent granularity are illustrated. In the base matrix set, the smallest one of size Mmin × (Kmin + Mmin), as indicated by the red dashed box 1 , is defined as the core base matrix. As we can see, the core base matrix is embedded in every larger base matrix. The maximum base information block length and base parity block length are denoted by Kmax and Mmax, respectively, and the largest base matrix of size Mmax × (Kmax + Mmax) is indicated with the orange dashed box 4 in Fig. 2. Totally, there are (Mmax − Mmin + 1)(Kmax − Kmin + 1) nested base matrices, and any base matrix of size M × (K + M), denoted by B(K,M), can be obtained from the largest base matrix B(Kmax,Mmax) if Kmin ≤ K ≤ Kmax and Mmin ≤ M ≤ Mmax. For example, the base matrices B(Kmin+1,Mmin+4) and B(Kmin+5,Mmin+1) are illustrated with the blue dashed box 2 and green dashed box 3, respectively, in Fig. 2.
Note that the raptor-like structure has been maintained for all nested base matrices. In other words, for any B(K,M), the upper-right submatrix of size G × (M − G) is a zero matrix and the lower-right submatrix of size (M − G)×(M − G) is an identity matrix. Besides, in order to design a core base matrix of a small enough size, the minimum base parity block length Mmin can be set equal to G, which means the core base matrix only consists of the submatrices A and C in Fig. 2.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:08:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: PMG ALGORITHM FOR CONSTRUCTING RATE-COMPATIBLE LENGTH-SCALABLE RL-QC-LDPC CODES

819

To improve threshold performance, information-bit puncturing [18] is considered in this paper. We assume the last PL information bits are punctured for any code generated from the nested base matrices, where P represents the number of base information columns associated with the punctured information bits. Then, with a set of nested base matrices as described in this subsection, any code rate K/(K +M−P) can be directly obtained, and the code rate range is from Kmin/(Kmin +Mmax − P) to Kmax/(Kmax +Mmin −P). Meanwhile, with a set of lifting factors {L}, a wide range of information block lengths, from KminLmin to KmaxLmax, as well as code block lengths, from (Kmin + Mmin − P)Lmin to (Kmax + Mmax − P)Lmax, can also be directly supported. Since the base information and parity block lengths K and M span a wide range, only a simple set {L} of limited lifting factors is needed to cover the intended range of information/parity block lengths.
Furthermore, shortening of information bits and puncturing of parity bits can be employed to help achieve one-bit granularity of both information block length and code block length. For example, we consider generating a code of length n and information block length k , both of which are assumed to be within the supported ranges. With these assumptions, the base matrix of size M × (K + M) and the lifting factor L are chosen such that k ≤ KL and n − k + PL ≤ ML. After lifting, a PCM of size ML × (K + M)L is constructed. If k = KL and n −k +PL = ML, the code can be generated directly with the PCM. Otherwise, the code will be shortened, i.e., additional KL − k zero bits will be padded with the k information bits if k < KL, and ML − (n − k + PL) parity bits will be punctured to match the required block length if n − k + PL < ML. In this way, any code with code block length and information block length within the supported ranges can be generated, and the granularity of one-bit is achieved for the code/information block length.
III. PROGRESSIVE MATRIX GROWTH
A. Reviews of Conventional Information-Variable-Node Extension and Check-Node Extension
To construct rate-compatible length-scalable LDPC codes, there are mainly two kinds of methods. The methods can be applied to the construction of PCMs directly or employed in the construction of base matrices in a similar way. For simplicity, the conventional methods are reviewed in terms of the construction of PCMs in this subsection.
One method is based on progressive puncturing, where the lowest-rate PCM is designed at first, and the PCMs of higher rates can be obtained by puncturing the lowest-rate PCM [7], [19]–[21]. However, when the number of punctured bits is large, the performance degradation of high-rate codes becomes significant [7], [22], [23].
The other method is based on progressive extension, where the PCM of the smallest size is designed first, and larger PCMs are obtained by extending the smallest PCM later [11], [13], [24]. Conventional approaches of progressive extension include information-variable-node extension [17] and check-node extension [12], [13].

Fig. 3. Conventional extension methods: (a) information-variable-node extension and (b) check-node extension.
In information-variable-node extension, the number of check nodes is fixed. As shown in Fig. 3(a), the lowest-rate PCM of size m×(k+m) is designed first. An extended PCM of higher rate can be obtained by adding one or more information variable nodes in bipartite graph, or equivalently, adding one or more information columns in the PCM. At the same time, the edges connecting the added information variable nodes and the existing check nodes need to be designed. In this way, with more and more information variable nodes added, the PCM is progressively extended.
As for check-node extension, the number of information variable nodes is fixed. One or more check nodes are added and the edges connected to them are designed. As shown in Fig. 3(b), with one check node added, a row and a parity column, of the same color, are added to the PCM, and the entries of the extended part need to be designed accordingly. For raptor-like codes, as illustrated in Fig. 1, the structure of the added part is constrained, and only the entries in the submatrix D need to be designed.
B. The Proposed PMG Algorithm
For the rate-compatible length-scalable RL-QC-LDPC codes described in Section II-B, each base parity block length M is associated with a large number of base information block lengths, from Kmin to Kmax. As a result, with conventional check-node extension, a large number of base matrices with the same M and different Ks need to be jointly optimized when a check node is extended, and the computational complexity increases exponentially with the number of supported Ks. There will be a similar problem if conventional

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:08:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

820

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 64, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2018

information-variable-node extension is directly employed, and the computational complexity will increase exponentially with the number of supported Ms.
In this subsection, the proposed method PMG, which can construct rate-compatible length-scalable RL-QC-LDPC codes with near-capacity performance and low description/implementation complexity, is described. Since the performance of QC-LDPC code ensembles is mainly determined by the underlying base matrices, we mainly focus on the progressive growth of base matrices for the RL-QC-LDPC code families with PMG.
The basic idea of PMG is to minimize the cost according to a cost function for each nested code rate, or equivalently, for each nested base information and parity block length pair (K, M). In the progressive growth procedure of the base matrices, 2D progressive extension of information variable nodes and check nodes is performed. As a key feature of PMG, the computational complexity and the required memory resources of 2D progressive extension can be controlled by the predefined parameters, and the computational complexity is linear with the number of (K, M) pairs. In the following two parts, the preliminaries are introduced first, and then the proposed PMG algorithm is described.
1) Preliminaries: In this paper, the cost function is based on the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) threshold predicted by METDE [25], which is a powerful tool to analyze the threshold performance of a QC-LDPC code ensemble sharing the same base matrix. In MET-DE, all probability density functions of messages propagated through different types of edges are traced. Compared with conventional density evolution with single-edge type assumption, MET-DE can take the raptor-like code structure into consideration and predict the asymptotic performance of RL-QC-LDPC code ensemble more accurately.
As mentioned above, PL information bits, associated with P base information columns, are assumed to be punctured in this paper. Given a base matrix B(K,M), the gap of the predicted SNR threshold from the corresponding theoretical Shannon limit is given as

D B(K,M), P = SShan(K, M, P) − SDE B(K,M), P , (1)

where SDE(B(K,M), P) is the threshold predicted by MET-DE for base matrix with parameters (K, M), and SShan(K, M, P) denotes the Shannon limit for code rate K/(K + M − P).

Besides, let Kmax, Kmin, Mmax and Mmin represent the maxi-

mum and minimum base information and parity block lengths,

respectively. Then the set Plen of required base information

and parity block length pairs (K, M) can be given as

⎧

⎫

⎨

K, M ∈ N,

⎬

Plen

= ⎩(K, M)

Kmin ≤ K ≤ Kmax, Mmin ≤ M ≤ Mmax

⎭

(2)

where N denotes the set of non-negative integers. Since the nested base matrices are extended progressively for each pair of (K, M), we define an indicator function I(K, M), which returns one if the base matrix B(K,M) is constructed or under construction and zero otherwise.
During the procedure of PMG, each candidate set of nested base matrices is denoted by {Bj(K,M)}, where j is the index

of the candidate, (K, M) ∈ Plen and |{B(jK,M)}| = |Plen|. And |Plen| denotes the cardinality of the set Plen. Due to the nested structure, the set {B(jK,M)} can also be represented by the largest base matrix B(jKmax,Mmax), which is initialized to a zero matrix, and the entries in B(jKmax,Mmax) are progressively designed as the base matrices are progressively extended. In the proposed PMG, the candidate sets {B(jK,M)} are stored in the form of B(jKmax,Mmax). Note that only submatrices B(jK,M) with I(K, M) = 1 are meaningful.
For a set of nested base matrices {Bj(K,M)}, the cost function is defined as

λK,MD Bj(K,M), P I(K, M)

Djc = (K,M)∈Plen

λK,MI(K, M)

,

(3)

(K,M)∈Plen

where λK,M denotes the weight of the threshold gap for the base matrix Bj(K,M). Furthermore, each non-zero entry in these base matrices belongs to {1, . . . , bmax}, and represents a single edge or multiple parallel edges in base graphs as described

in Section II-A. Let J denote the number of the candidate sets B(jK,M) that have been stored in memory, Jmax denote the predefined maximum value of J, and {D(B(jK,M), P)} denote the set of threshold gaps of base matrices in {B(jK,M)}. For simplicity, {D(B(jK,M), P)} is referred to as the threshold-gap set of {B(jK,M)} in the following discussions. The elements in {D(Bj(K,M), P)} with I(K, M) = 0 are initialized to zeros, and the elements with I(K, M) = 1 are calculated according to (1). With {D(B(jK,M), P)}, Djc in (3) can be obtained directly.
2) Description of PMG Algorithm: With the cost func-

tion defined in (3), the progressive extension in PMG can be

summarized as the following four steps, and the main contri-

bution is the 2D progressive extension in Step 4. Moreover,

the mechanism of controlling the computational complexity

and required memory resources for 2D progressive extension

with the predefined parameters, uref,u, uref,l and Jmax will be detailed in Step 4.
Initialization: I(K, M) is initialized to zero for every (K, M) ∈ Plen, J is initialized to 0 and Jmax is predefined; The entries are initialized to zeros for any candidate set {Bj(K,M)}, stored in the form of B(jKmax,Mmax).
Step 1: Design the core base matrix B(Kmin,Mmin) in a conventional way. Since the size Mmin × (Kmin + Mmin) is usually set to be very small, all possible core base matrices could
be enumerated. Update I(Kmin, Mmin) = 1, select the J1 best candidate sets {Bj(K,M)} with the smallest costs Dcj , store them and the J1 corresponding threshold-gap sets {D(Bj(K,M), P)} in memory, and update J = J1.
Step 2: Perform information-variable-node extension based

on the J1 core base matrices designed in Step 1. With the base parity block length fixed as Mmin, the base information block length is progressively extended, from Kmin + 1 to Kmax, as shown in Fig. 4. Thanks to the small value of Mmin assumed in this paper, conventional information-variable-node

extension methods can be utilized in this step. After the base information block length is extended to Kmax, I(K, Mmin) are

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:08:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: PMG ALGORITHM FOR CONSTRUCTING RATE-COMPATIBLE LENGTH-SCALABLE RL-QC-LDPC CODES

821

Fig. 4. Progressive extension of base matrix in PMG.
updated to 1 for Kmin + 1 ≤ K ≤ Kmax, J2 best candidate sets {B(jK,M)} with the smallest costs Dcj are selected and stored, and the corresponding sets {D(B(jK,M), P)} are also stored. Update J = J2.
Step 3: Perform check-node extension based on the J1 core base matrices designed in Step 1. Similar to Step 2, conventional check-node extension can be employed in Step 3 due to the small value of Kmin. With the base information block length fixed as Kmin, the base parity block length is progressively extended from Mmin + 1 to Mmax as shown in Fig. 4. After the core base matrices are extended to the size Mmax × (Kmin + Mmax), I(Kmin, M) are updated to 1 for Mmin +1 ≤ M ≤ Mmax, and the J3 best candidate sets {Bj(K,M)} with the smallest cost are selected. Then the J2 candidate sets selected in Step 2 and the J3 candidate sets selected in Step 3 are combined to obtain J2J3 new candidate sets, each of which consists of 1 + (Kmax − Kmin) + (Mmax − Mmin) designed base matrices and (Kmax − Kmin)×(Mmax − Mmin) base matrices to be designed. Finally, store the J2J3 new candidate sets and the corresponding J2J3 threshold-gap sets in memory, and update J = J2J3.
Step 4: Perform 2D progressive extension on the candidate sets of nested base matrices stored in Step 3. As shown in Fig. 4, for each candidate set, only the entries in the lowerleft (Kmax − Kmin) × (Mmax − Mmin) submatrix of Bj(Kmax,Mmax) need to be determined after Step 2 and Step 3. In 2D progressive extension, the base matrices are extended entry by entry, which means only one entry is added next to the determined part in Bj(Kmax,Mmax) to obtain a larger base matrix. Unlike conventional information-variable-node or check-node extension, the extension along both vertical and horizontal dimensions are allowed.
The key idea of 2D progressive extension is to find the target entry, which requires the least MET-DE operations to obtain the threshold-gap sets for all newly generated candidate sets {Bj(K,M)} if added, for each extension round. Two parameters uref,u and uref,l, uref,u > uref,l, are predefined for Step 4 to control the number of required MET-DE operations. And the

parameter Jmax is utilized to limit the number of candidate sets and threshold-gap sets that can be stored in memory.
The basic procedures of 2D progressive extension in Step 4
are summarized in Algorithm 1. To illustrate 2D progressive
extension more clearly, an example of an extension round in
Step 4 is also given in the following. We assume there are J candidate sets {Bj(K,M)} and J corresponding threshold-gap sets {D(Bj(K,M), P)} stored in memory before this extension round.
Firstly, all potential entries that can be added in this
extension round are enumerated. Since only one entry is
added for each extension round, the potential entry should be located at the lower-left corner point of submatrix B(jK,M) with I(K, M) = 0, I(K − 1, M) = 1, and I(K, M − 1) = 1, i.e., the submatrices Bj(K−1,M) and Bj(K,M−1) have already been constructed. And extending the corner point of submatrix Bj(K,M) means the construction of a base matrix for the new pair (K, M). Obviously, only the pair (Kmin + 1, Mmin + 1) can be constructed for the first extension round in Step 4.
Secondly, calculate the required number of MET-DE oper-
ations for extending each potential entry, and select the entry
with the least MET-DE operations. With a new entry added for (K, M), (bmax + 1)J new candidate sets are generated for the J original candidate sets in memory. To obtain the (bmax + 1)J corresponding new threshold-gap sets, only the threshold gap of the base matrix Bj(K,M) needs to be calculated for each new threshold-gap set, while the other elements can be obtained
directly from the original threshold-gap set. Though there are J candidate sets, unique base matrices B(jK,M), excluding the lower-left corner point to be extended, are usually limited.
Thus, the number of threshold gaps needed to be calculated,
i.e., the number of MET-DE operations, is also limited, and
usually much smaller than J. We count the number of unique Bj(K,M) for each potential entry of (K, M), and choose the entry (K0, M0) with the least unique base matrices Bj(K0,M0).
Thirdly, add the selected entry of (K0, M0) to each one of the J original candidate sets, calculate bmax + 1 threshold gaps for each one of the u0 unique base matrices B(jK0,M0), and generate J0 = (bmax + 1)J new candidate sets and the corresponding threshold-gap sets.
Finally, update I(K0, M0) = 1, dynamically adjust the maximum number Jmax,0 of candidate sets that can be stored in this extension round, and store the newly generated candidate sets and threshold-gap sets accordingly. If (bmax +1)J ≤ Jmax,0, all (bmax + 1)J candidate sets will be stored, otherwise, only the Jmax,0 candidate sets with the lowest costs (i.e., better average SNR threshold performance) are selected and stored.
Since one of the key ideas of PMG is to control computational complexity, two parameters uref,u and uref,l, uref,u > uref,l, are utilized to dynamically adjust the number (bmax + 1)u0 of MET-DE operations for each extension round. Since u0 is related to the number of the original candidate sets stored in memory, Jmax,0 will be dynamically adjusted if u0 < u ref,l or u0 > uref,u. And consequently, the number (bmax + 1)u0 of MET-DE operations for next extension round can be controlled. Besides, in every extension round, the num-
ber of the candidate sets that can be stored is also constrained

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:08:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

822

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 64, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2018

Algorithm 1 2D Progressive Extension

Inputs: Kmax, Kmin, Mmax and Mmin; J candidate sets of nested base matrices and their threshold-gap sets stored in memory; Indicator function I(K, M) for all required (K, M); The alphabet set {0, 1, ..., bmax}; The maximum number Jmax of stored candidate sets; The predefined values uth,l and uth,u to control the number of threshold-gap calculations for each extension round, uth,l < uth,u.
Output: The final set of nested base matrices {B(j,Kfi,nM)}. 1: Initialize Jmax,0 = Jmax. 2: while true do 3: if I(K, M) = 1 for all (K, M) then

4: Calculate the costs of the J stored candidate sets.

5:

return the set {B(j,Kfi,nM)} with the lowest cost.

6: end if

7: Generate two empty lists Ppoten and Upoten. 8: for m = Mmin + 1, Lp = 0; m ≤ Mmax; m + + do

9:

for k = Kmax; k > Kmin; k − − do

10:

if I(k, m) = 0 and I(k − 1, m) = 1 and I(k, m −

1) = 1 then

11:

Ppoten[Lp] = (k, m).

12:

Calculate the number u of unique base matrices

among all B(jk,m), j = 1, ..., J.

13:

Upoten[Lp] = u.

14:

Lp = Lp + 1.

15:

Break.

16:

end if

17:

end for

18: end for

19: Get the minimum element u0 from Upoten and the

corresponding pair (K0, M0) from Ppoten.

20: Extend the J original candidate sets for (K0, M0), and

generate J0 = (bmax + 1)J new candidate sets.

21: Calculate the threshold gaps of the u0 unique base

matrices, and generate J0 new threshold-gap sets.

22: if u0 > uth,u then

23:

Jmax,0 = min(Jmax,0/(bmax + 1), Jmax).

24: else if u0 < uth,l then

25:

Jmax,0 = min(Jmax,0(bmax + 1), Jmax).

26: end if

27: if J0 > Jmax,0 then

28:

Calculate the costs of J0 new candidate sets, and

delete J0 − Jmax,0 of them with the highest costs,

as well as the corresponding threshold-gap sets.

29:

Update J0 = Jmax,0.

30: end if

31: Store the J0 new candidate sets and threshold-gap sets to replace the original ones in memory.

32: Update J = J0, I(K0, M0) = 1. 33: end while

by a predefined value, Jmax, which ensures limited memory requirement for the proposed PMG algorithm. Furthermore, computational complexity and memory usage of PMG will be analyzed together with design examples in Section IV.

TABLE I THE AVERAGE SNR THRESHOLD GAP TO SHANNON LIMIT OVER
BI-AWGN CHANNEL FOR THE DESIGNED CODE FAMILIES
By performing the above procedure of 2D progressive extension iteratively, the base matrices can be extended with limited computational complexity and memory resources. Meanwhile, rate-compatible length-scalable RL-QC-LDPC codes with capacity-approaching performance at each nested code rate can be constructed. To illustrate the progressive extension process of Step 4, an example of the extension order of entries in Step 4 is also shown in Fig. 4, where the indexes in the lowerleft (Kmax − Kmin) × (Mmax − Mmin) submatrix represent the extension order of the corresponding entries.
IV. DESIGN EXAMPLES AND DISCUSSIONS With the proposed PMG, several families of rate-compatible length-scalable RL-QC-LDPC codes, supporting a wide range of code rates and information/parity block lengths, are designed as examples in this section. Based on these code families, design parameters are carefully discussed to provide insights on the code design for future DTTB systems. Note that, to facilitate hardware implementation and code design, compact base matrices are adopted for rate-compatible lengthscalable RL-QC-LDPC codes. Furthermore, the computational complexity and the required memory resources are analyzed and shown to be under control of the predefined parameters. In order to verify the performance of the designed code families with finite length, several rate-compatible length-scalable RL-QC-LDPC codes are constructed from a set of designed base matrices, and then bit error rate (BER) and block error rate (BLER) simulations of the constructed codes are carried out. The design examples are given in the following subsections as four representative cases, and the complexity analysis is carried out afterwards. More specifically, without information-bit puncturing or parallel edges in base graph, a code family is designed in Case 1 as the baseline for the following discussions. Then in Case 2 and Case 3, the effects of information-bit puncturing and parallel edges are analyzed, respectively. In Case 4, the characteristic of quasi-row orthogonality (QRO) is applied to RL-QC-LDPC code families, and, moreover, an RL-QC-LDPC code family with QRO, as well as a much wider range of code rates and block lengths, is designed

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:08:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: PMG ALGORITHM FOR CONSTRUCTING RATE-COMPATIBLE LENGTH-SCALABLE RL-QC-LDPC CODES

823

for practical applications. Then the computational complexity
and the memory usage are analyzed during the construction
process of the base matrices for a code family. Finally, sev-
eral finite-length LDPC codes are constructed from a set of
base matrices, and the performance is verified via BER/BLER
simulations.
Binary-input additive white Gaussian noise (BI-AWGN)
channel is considered in this section. The SNR thresholds
of code ensembles are obtained with the tool of MET-DE at BER = 2 × 10−9, and the number of iterations in MET-DE is set to 60. To facilitate comparisons in the following discussion,
the average SNR threshold gaps of the designed code families are summarized in Table I. For PMG, the weights λK,M in (3) for different pairs (K, M) are set equal in this section, and the maximum number of candidate sets of nested base matrices that can be stored in memory is limited to Jmax = 16384. For Case 1, 2 and 4, the two parameters uref,u and uref,l are set to 30 and 10, respectively. For Case 3, uref,u = 20 and uref,l = 10 are assumed. Since the last Mmax − G columns of the largest base matrix B(Kmax,Mmax) are a concatenation of a zero matrix and an identity matrix, only the first Kmax + G columns are shown for each designed code family for simplicity.

A. Case 1: Baseline
In this case, a rate-compatible length-scalable RL-QCLDPC code family is designed with Kmin, Kmax, Mmin, Mmax and G set to 3, 12, 3, 24 and 3, respectively. Information-bit puncturing is not employed, and there are no parallel edges in base graph, i.e., P = 0 and bmax = 1 for PMG. Therefore, the performance of the code family designed Case 1 can serve as the baseline for the following discussions on design parameters.
The nested base matrices of the designed code family are shown in Fig. 5(a), where the right 24 × 21 submatrix of the largest base matrix is omitted for simplicity as mentioned above. As we can see, the structure of the code family is rather compact, and the size of the core base matrix is only 3 × 6. Meanwhile, the code rates span a wide range, from 1/9 to 4/5, and there are totally 220 base matrices with different base information/parity block lengths embedded in the largest base matrix.
To evaluate the threshold performance of the designed code family at each nested code rate, the gaps of SNR threshold from Shannon limit, referred to as threshold gaps for simplicity, are calculated according to (1) over BI-AWGN channel. The threshold gaps for each base information block length K is shown in Fig. 5(b). The maximum and minimum threshold gaps are 0.929 dB and 0.400 dB, respectively, and the average threshold gap of all 220 base matrices is 0.502 dB. The threshold performance can be further improved in the following cases.
Generally, the threshold gap for each K becomes smaller as the code rate decreases. This is because in the progressive extension process, a lower code rate for a certain K corresponds to a larger M, which implies more degree of freedom in code design. For smaller Ks, the threshold gaps are also

Fig. 5. (a) The nested base matrices of the rate-compatible length-scalable RL-QC-LDPC code family in Case 1. (b) The gap of SNR threshold from Shannon limit vs. code rate of the code family in Case 1 for each K.
Fig. 6. A family of rate-compatible QC-LDPC codes in CCSDS experimental standard [26], where information-bit puncturing and information-variablenode extension are adopted.
relatively worse than those of larger Ks, because the minimum value of K is set as 3 for compact base matrices and the degree of freedom is very limited.
B. Case 2: Information-Bit Puncturing Inspired by the rate-compatible QC-LDPC codes designed
for deep-space applications in CCSDS experimental standard [26], information-bit puncturing is considered in this case to improve threshold performance. Firstly, the nested base matrices of a code family from CCSDS experimental standard

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:08:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

824

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 64, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2018

Fig. 7. The nested base matrices of the rate-compatible length-scalable RLQC-LDPC code families (a) with P = 1 in Case 2a and (b) with P = 2 in Case 2b.

are shown in Fig. 6, where information-variable-node extension is adopted to provide multiple base information block lengths as K = 2, 4, 6 and 8. The information bits associated with the shaded column of the base matrix in Fig. 6 are assumed to be punctured, and thus the achieved code rates are 1/2, 2/3, 3/4 and 4/5. As stated in [17] and [26], the decoding thresholds are improved and more freedom can be provided in code design with information-bit puncturing, especially for high-rate codes.
Secondly, rate-compatible length-scalable RL-QC-LDPC code families with information-bit puncturing are designed via PMG. To compare with the baseline in Case 1, Kmin, Kmax and G are also set as 3, 12 and 3. In Case 2a, P = 1 base information column is assumed to be punctured, and Mmin and Mmax are set as 4 and 25, respectively, to provide equivalent supported code rates as in Case 1. And in Case 2b, P = 2, Mmin = 5 and Mmax = 26 are assumed for the same reason.
The nested base matrices of code families in Case 2a and 2b are shown in Fig. 7(a) and Fig. 7(b), respectively. It can be observed from the designed results of PMG that the weight of the punctured base column is much heavier than that of any other base column for both cases. As shown in Fig. 6, this feature is also present in the nested base matrices from CCSDS experimental standard.
Then the threshold gaps of the code families in Case 2a and 2b are calculated and illustrated in Fig. 8. Compared with the threshold gaps in Fig. 5(b), the threshold performance of Case 2a with P = 1 is better with a maximum value of 0.624 dB and a minimum value of 0.357 dB. The average threshold gap of Case 2a is 0.448 dB, which is 0.054 dB better than that of Case 1. For Case 2b with P = 2, the threshold gaps vary from 0.302 dB to 0.536 dB, and the average threshold gap is 0.411 dB, which is 0.091 dB better than that of Case 1. The analysis results show that the threshold performance of rate-compatible length-scalable RL-QC-LDPC code families can be improved by information-bit puncturing, which is recommended for future RL-QC-LDPC code design.

Fig. 8. The gap of SNR threshold from Shannon limit vs. code rate for (a) code family in Case 2a and (b) code family in Case 2b.

C. Case 3: Parallel Edges in Base Graph

In Case 1 and 2, the entries of base graph are chosen from

{0, 1}, which means no more than one edge is connected

between a certain pair of variable node and check node in

base graph. To introduce additional freedom in code design,

parallel edges in base graph are considered in this case.

With bmax > 1, the entries of base matrices are chosen from a larger set 0, 1, . . . , bmax, and base matrices with better performance could be obtained intuitively. In fact, a base

graph with parallel edges is equivalent to a larger-size base

graph without parallel edges, because the base matrix with

bmax > 1 could be lifted to separate the parallel edges in the first step, and then lifted to construct the final PCM in

the second step [17], [26]. This indicates that a more com-

pact structure can be achieved if there are parallel edges in

base graph. However, with a larger bmax, the computational complexity of code design also increases exponentially.

For simplicity, bmax = 2 is assumed for Case 3. In PMG,

the parameters uref,u and uref,l for adjusting the number u0 of

unique base matrices B(jK0,M0) are tively. This is because the number

set as 20 and 10, respec(bmax + 1)u0 of MET-DE

operations is also proportional to bmax + 1, and a uref,u smaller

than that in other cases is chosen to control the complex-

ity of code construction in Case 3. Besides, information-bit

puncturing, P = 1, is also employed.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:08:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: PMG ALGORITHM FOR CONSTRUCTING RATE-COMPATIBLE LENGTH-SCALABLE RL-QC-LDPC CODES

825

Fig. 9. (a) The nested base matrices of the rate-compatible length-scalable RL-QC-LDPC code family with bmax = 2 in Case 3. (b) The gap of SNR threshold from Shannon limit vs. code rate of code family in Case 3.

Fig. 10. (a) The nested base matrices of the rate-compatible length-scalable RL-QC-LDPC code family with QRO in Case 4a. (b) The gap of SNR threshold from Shannon limit vs. code rate of code family in Case 4a.

With parallel edges in base graph, a more compact code family is designed and shown in Fig. 9(a). Kmin = 2 and Mmin = 2 can be achieved, which are even smaller than those in Case 1 and 2. The threshold gaps are depicted in Fig. 9(b), and the average threshold gap is 0.402 dB. Compared with Case 2a, where P = 1 is also assumed, the average threshold gap is improved by 0.046 dB with bmax = 2. As we can see, parallel edges in base graph can facilitate more compact base matrices and improve the threshold performance, meanwhile, the computational complexity in code design and implementation complexity also increase. A good tradeoff needs to be made according to different requirements of practical DTTB systems.
D. Case 4: Quasi-Row Orthogonality (QRO)
Inherent orthogonality of rows in PCMs contributes to rowparallel decoding of LDPC codes, which is proven to provide extremely high throughput [27]. In row-parallel decoding,

multiple check nodes corresponding to orthogonal/quasiorthogonal rows can be decoded in one parallel group. Thus the hardware can be efficiently utilized and the implementations complexity of decoders is reduced.
For RL-QC-LDPC codes with information-bit puncturing, the weight of the punctured column is usually designed to be heavy for good performance. As a result, the relaxed version, QRO, is considered for the rate-compatible length-scalable RL-QC-LDPC code families in this case. For base matrices with r-QRO, every r adjacent rows between the Mminth and the Mmaxth row are orthogonal to each other except for the punctured base columns. This implies the partition of parallel groups can be flexible for row-parallel decoding.
In Case 4a, the performance degradation caused by QRO is analyzed. A code family with Kmin, Kmax, Mmin, Mmax and G set as 3, 12, 5, 26 and 3, respectively, is designed with PMG. Since P = 2 is assumed, the supported code rates and information block lengths are equivalent to those of Case 1, 2a and 2b. Since the base matrix is compact, r = 3 is assumed for QRO. The nested base matrices are shown in Fig. 10(a),

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:08:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

826

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 64, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2018

where every 3 adjacent rows between the 5th and the 26th row are orthogonal to each other except for the two punctured base columns. The threshold gaps of the designed code family in Case 4a are shown in Fig. 10(b). The average threshold gap is 0.444 dB, which is still 0.058 dB better than that of Case 1. Due to the characteristic of QRO, the average threshold gap is slightly, i.e., 0.033 dB, worse than that of Case 2b, where P = 2 and no QRO are assumed.
Furthermore, considering various QoS requirements of practical systems, an RL-QC-LDPC code family with 4-QRO, as well as a much wider range of code rates and block lengths, is designed in Case 4b and shown in Fig. 11(a). The base information block length K varies from 3 to 24, the base parity block length M varies from 3 to 50, and P = 2 is assumed to improve threshold performance. A wide range of code rates from 1/17 to 24/25 can be supported, and totally 48 × 22 = 1056 base matrices with different base information/parity block lengths are constructed.
The threshold gaps are calculated for Case 4b, and only threshold gaps associated with 8 of the 22 Ks are shown in Fig. 11(b) for simplicity of illustration. Compared with Case 4a, the average threshold gap of 0.429 dB is a little better due to the larger size of base matrices and additional freedom in code design. The small average threshold gap indicates that the characteristic of QRO and a wide range of code rates and information/parity block lengths can be supported simultaneously with near capacity performance via PMG.

E. Complexity Analysis of PMG Algorithm

In this subsection, the computational complexity and

memory usage are analyzed based on the construction process

of Case 3. Firstly, the computational complexity is consid-

ered. For the proposed PMG, the computational complexity

is mainly determined by the MET-DE operations for each

base information/parity block length pair (K, M). Since MET-

DE operations of most (K, M) pairs are performed in Step

4 of PMG, we focus on the analysis of required MET-DE

operations for each extension round in Step 4.

As described in Section III-B Step 4, if there are u0 unique

base matrices (bmax + 1)u0

B(j K0 ,M0 ) MET-DE

for the entry chosen to operations are required

be extended, for updating

the threshold-gap sets. The values of u0 for totally (Kmax −

Kmin)(Mmax − Mmin) = 230 extension rounds in Step 4 of

Case 3 are shown in Fig. 12, in the form of the ratio u0/uref,u.

The parameter uref,u is utilized to control the number u0. In each extension round, if u0 > uref,u, the maximum number

Jmax,0 of the newly generated candidate sets that can be stored

will be reduced, because u0 is closely relevant to the stored

candidate sets. As depicted in Fig. 12, the maximum ratio

of u0/uref,u is 1.4, and most of the ratios are less than 1,

which indicates u0 and the number of MET-DE operations in

all 230 extension rounds in Step 4 are under control. Besides,

u0 should not be too small in order to ensure enough base-

matrix candidates for next extension round. Thus Jmax,0 is also

adjusted based on the relationship between u0 and uref,l in Step

4. As shown in Fig. 12, the minimum value of the ratio is also

controlled. With u ref,u and uref,l, the total number of MET-DE

Fig. 11. (a) The nested base matrices of the rate-compatible length-scalable RL-QC-LDPC code family with QRO in Case 4b. (b) The gap of SNR threshold from Shannon limit vs. code rate of code family in Case 4b.
operations is linear with the number of (K, M) pairs to be extended.
As for memory usage, the maximum number of stored candidate sets is strictly constrained by the parameter Jmax = 16384 in the whole construction process. The number J of candidate sets stored in each extension rounds of Step 4 is also shown in Fig. 12, in the form of J/Jmax. As we can see, all ratios J/Jmax ≤ 1, which means the PMG can be performed

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:08:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: PMG ALGORITHM FOR CONSTRUCTING RATE-COMPATIBLE LENGTH-SCALABLE RL-QC-LDPC CODES

827

Fig. 12. The number of MET-DE operations and the number of stored
candidate sets, shown in the form of u0/uref,u and J/Jmax, respectively, for each extension round in Step 4 of PMG.

Fig. 13. Comparisons of SNR threshold gaps of base matrices from DVB-S2, ATSC 3.0, [13] and Case 4b.

with limited memory resources. Moreover, the fluctuation of the ratio J/Jmax corresponds to the process of controlling u0. When u0 for an extension round is too large, the number J of candidate sets to be stored in this round is reduced accordingly, and when u0 is too small, more candidate sets are stored in this round to ensure a larger u0 for next extension round.
F. Code Construction and Performance Comparisons
In this subsection, several rate-compatible length-scalable RL-QC-LDPC codes with finite code block lengths are constructed from the designed code family in Case 4b. Two base information block lengths, K = 8 and K = 16, are taken as one example, and the corresponding threshold gaps of the base matrices are shown in Fig. 13. For the purpose of fair comparisons, the LDPC codes designed for long block length n = 64800 from ATSC 3.0 and DVB-S2 are selected, and two kinds of rate-compatible RL-QC-LDPC codes from [13], designed for short and long block lengths in [13, Secs. IV-A and IV-B], respectively, are also analyzed. Note that the base information block lengths of base matrices for short- and long-block-length codes from [13] are both K = 8, and parallel edges of bmax = 3 are employed in base matrices design. Under the same assumptions of MET-DE as described previously in Section IV, the SNR threshold gaps of base matrices from DVB-S2, ATSC 3.0 and [13] are obtained and depicted in Fig. 13.
Firstly, the comparison between the threshold gaps of base matrices in Case 4b and [13] is considered. As shown in Fig. 13, the threshold gaps of base matrices with K = 8 and K = 16 in Case 4b are very close, and generally lie between the threshold gaps of the base matrices for short- and long-block-length codes from [13]. Though the base matrices from [13] for long block length have better SNR threshold performance than the designed base matrices in Case 4b, wider range and better granularity of code rates are achieved by Case 4b, and the base matrices of K = 8 and K = 16 are nested with the feature of QRO and no parallel edges, which means less computational complexity in code design and less implementation complexity. Moreover, the nested base

matrices of K = 8 and K = 16 in Case 4b can be lifted with one or multiple sets of lifting factors. In this way, codes with long and short block lengths can be constructed from the same set of nested base matrices.
Then the comparison of base matrices in DVB-S2, ATSC 3.0 and Case 4b is carried out. As we can see, base matrices in Case 4b have better threshold performance than those in DVB-S2. And compared with the base matrices in ATSC 3.0, the base matrices in Case 4b suffer from small performance degradation due to the nested structure. However, simple implementation at the encoder/decoder, more flexible information/code block lengths and better granularity of the code rate can be achieved via one code family in Case 4b.
In order to verify the finite-length performance of the designed code families, several rate-compatible length-scalable RL-QC-LDPC codes are constructed from the base matrices in Case 4b, with M = 6, 10, 18, 26, 34 for both K = 8 and K = 16, as an example. Two different lifting factors, L = 128 and 1024, are utilized in the lifting processes of base matrices with K = 8 and K = 16, respectively, to provide shortand long-block-length codes. For K = 8, the code rates are 2/3, 1/2, 1/3, 1/4 and 1/5 with information block length of k = 1024. And for K = 16, the code rates are 4/5, 2/3, 1/2, 2/5 and 1/3 with k = 16384.
For the short- and long-block-length codes constructed from Case 4b, the BLER and BER simulations are carried out, respectively. In both BLER and BER simulations, the number of iterations in LDPC decoder is set as 60 with flooding scheduling. As shown in Fig. 14(a), for short-block-length codes in Case 4b with rates of 2/3, 1/2, 1/3, 1/4 and 1/5, the gaps between SNR thresholds at BLER = 10−3 and the thresholds predicted by MET-DE in Fig. 13 are respectively 0.91, 0.91, 0.87, 0.88 and 0.87 dB, which are mainly caused by the finite block lengths. The BLER simulation results of several short-block-length codes in [13] with the same rates are also provided for comparison.
For the long-block-length codes constructed from Case 4b, the BER simulation results are illustrated in Fig. 14(b), where the BER simulation results of several long-block-length LDPC codes in DVB-S2, ATSC 3.0 and [13] with the same rates are also shown. The code block lengths of the selected codes in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:08:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

828

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 64, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2018

of MET-DE, 2D progressive extension of information variable nodes and check nodes is performed with limited computational complexity and memory resources in PMG.
Several rate-compatible length-scalable RL-QC-LDPC code families with compact base matrices are designed as examples, and discussions on design parameters are carried out to provide insights on the code design for future DTTB systems. Firstly, information-bit puncturing is incorporated and shown capable of improving the threshold performance of code families efficiently. Secondly, parallel edges in base graph are employed to further improve threshold performance, but the complexity of code design and implementation also increases. Thirdly, QRO is adopted in code structure to facilitate flexible and high-throughput implementation. Finally, a rate-compatible length-scalable RL-QC-LDPC code family with QRO and an even wider range of information/parity block lengths is designed, and for the 1056 designed base matrices with different base information/parity block lengths, the average gap of SNR threshold to Shannon limit of BI-AWGN channel is only 0.429 dB.
Furthermore, since RL-QC-LDPC codes have been recently selected as the coding scheme of the data channel for eMBB applications in 3GPP New Radio study item, the proposed method PMG and design principles can also be applied to the code design for 5G.

Fig. 14. (a) The BLER simulation results of the raptor-like LDPC codes in [13], with K = 8 and k = 1032, and the constructed short-block-length codes in Case 4b, with K = 8 and k = 1024. (b) The BER simulation results of the LDPC codes in DVB-S2 and ATSC 3.0 with n = 64800, the long-blocklength codes in [13] with k = 16384 and the constructed long-block-length codes in Case 4b with k = 16384.
DVB-S2 are n = 64800, and the information block lengths of the selected codes in [13] are k = 16384. The gaps of the SNR thresholds obtained in BER simulations, at BER = 10−5, and MET-DE are 0.17, 0.27, 0.25, 0.15 and 0.17 dB for the long-block-length codes in Case 4b with rates of 4/5, 2/3, 1/2, 2/5 and 1/3, respectively. Note that for code rates 4/5 and 2/3, the SNR threshold differences between DVB-S2 and Case 4b are mainly caused by the shorter information block length, k = 16384, of Case 4b. Taking into consideration of the finite block length [28], the BER simulation results of the designed rate-compatible length-scalable RL-QC-LDPC codes, as well as the codes in DVB-S2, ATSC 3.0 and [13], are consistent with the thresholds predicted by MET-DE.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, rate-compatible length-scalable RL-QC-LDPC codes, supporting a wide range of code rates and information/parity block lengths, are proposed to meet the diversified QoS requirements of future multimedia services. A lowcomplexity construction method, PMG, is also proposed for this kind of codes. According to the performance prediction

REFERENCES
[1] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Frame Structure Channel Coding and Modulation for a Second Generation Digital Terrestrial Television Broadcasting System (DVB-T2), ETSI Standard EN 302 755, Apr. 2012.
[2] L. Fay, L. Michael, D. Gómez-Barquero, N. Ammar, and M. W. Caldwell, “An overview of the ATSC 3.0 physical layer specification,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 159–171, Mar. 2016.
[3] H. Jeong et al., “Flexible and robust transmission for physical layer signaling of ATSC 3.0,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 204–215, Mar. 2016.
[4] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Next Generation Broadcasting System to Handheld, Physical Layer Specification (DVB-NGH), ETSI Standard EN 303 105, Jun. 2013.
[5] M. P. Fossorier, “Quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.
[6] K.-J. Kim et al., “Low-density parity-check codes for ATSC 3.0,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 189–196, Mar. 2016.
[7] S. I. Park, Y. Wu, H. M. Kim, N. Hur, and J. Kim, “Raptor-like rate compatible LDPC codes and their puncturing performance for the cloud transmission system,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 239–245, Jun. 2014.
[8] S. I. Park et al., “Two dimensional code based on low density parity check and Reed–Solomon codes for the terrestrial cloud transmission system,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 75–83, Mar. 2015.
[9] S. Myung, K. Yang, and Y. Kim, “Lifting methods for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 489–491, Jun. 2006.
[10] M. Beermann, F. Wickert, and P. Vary, “Highly flexible design of multirate multi-length quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” in Proc. 8th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process. (ISTC), 2014, pp. 37–41.
[11] T. Van Nguyen and A. Nosratinia, “Rate-compatible short-length protograph LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 948–951, May 2013.
[12] T.-Y. Chen, D. Divsalar, J. Wang, and R. D. Wesel, “Protograph-based raptor-like LDPC codes for rate compatibility with short blocklengths,” in Proc. IEEE Glob. Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), 2011, pp. 1–6.
[13] T.-Y. Chen, K. Vakilinia, D. Divsalar, and R. D. Wesel, “Protographbased raptor-like LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 63, no. 5, pp. 1522–1532, May 2015.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:08:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: PMG ALGORITHM FOR CONSTRUCTING RATE-COMPATIBLE LENGTH-SCALABLE RL-QC-LDPC CODES

829

[14] 3GPP Specification Draft V0.1.0, document 3GPP TSG RAN WG1 87, 3GPP, Sophia Antipolis, France, 2016.
[15] R1-166388, LDPC Rate Compatible Design, 3GPP document TSG RAN WG1 86, Qualcomm, Gothenburg, Sweden, Aug. 2016.
[16] R1-1703697, Compact QC-LDPC Design, 3GPP document TSG RAN WG1 88, Mediatek Inc., Spokane, WA, USA, Apr. 2017.
[17] K. Andrews, S. Dolinar, D. Divsalar, and J. Thorpe, “Design of lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes for deep-space applications,” NASA, Jet Propulsion Lab., Pasadena, CA, USA, IPN Program Rep. 42-159, 2004.
[18] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, C. R. Jones, and K. Andrews, “Capacityapproaching protograph codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 876–888, Aug. 2009.
[19] J. Ha, J. Kim, and S. W. McLaughlin, “Rate-compatible puncturing of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 2824–2836, Nov. 2004.
[20] J. Kim, A. Ramamoorthy, and S. W. McLaughlin, “The design of efficiently-encodable rate-compatible LDPC codes—[Transactions papers],” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 365–375, Feb. 2009.
[21] B. N. Vellambi and F. Fekri, “Finite-length rate-compatible LDPC codes: A novel puncturing scheme—[Transactions letters],” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 297–301, Feb. 2009.
[22] J. Li and K. R. Narayanan, “Rate-compatible low density parity check codes for capacity-approaching ARQ schemes in packet data communications,” in Proc. Commun. Internet Inf. Technol., 2002, pp. 201–206.
[23] M. Yazdani and A. H. Banihashemi, “On construction of rate-compatible low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., vol. 1. Paris, France, 2004, pp. 430–434.
[24] T. Van Nguyen, A. Nosratinia, and D. Divsalar, “The design of ratecompatible protograph LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 10, pp. 2841–2850, Oct. 2012.
[25] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Multi-edge type LDPC codes,” in Proc. Workshop Honoring Prof. Bob McEliece 60th Birthday, Pasadena, CA, USA, 2002, pp. 24–25.
[26] CCSDS, “Low density parity check codes for use in near-earth and deep space applications,” document 131.1-O-2, CCSDS, Washington, DC, USA, Sep. 2007.
[27] S.-W. Yen et al., “A 5.79-Gb/s energy-efficient multirate LDPC codec chip for IEEE 802.15.3c applications,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 47, no. 9, pp. 2246–2257, Sep. 2012.
[28] J.-H. Park, “Analysis on nonuniform channels and LDPC codes in the finite block length regime,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elect. Eng., Korea Adv. Inst. Sci. Technol., Daejeon, South Korea, 2012.
Yushu Zhang received the B.Eng. degree in electronic engineering from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 2015, where she is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree. Her research area is wireless/mobile communication networks, and her current research interests include channel coding, coded modulation, nonorthogonal multiple access, and nonorthogonal multiple access-based random access.

Kewu Peng was born in Hefei, China. He received the B.Eng. degree in electronics engineering from the Hefei University of Technology, in 1993, the M.E. degree in electronics engineering from Tsinghua University, in 1996, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA, in 2003. He was a Researcher and a Lecturer with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, from 1996 to 1999. Since 2005, he has been a Research Staff with the Digital Television Research Center, Tsinghua University, where he has been an Assistant Researcher since 2006, and an Associate Professor from 2009. He has published over 90 journal and conference papers and holds over 60 China patents. His research interests include mobile/wireless communications, digital terrestrial/television broadcasting, and image/video transmission.
Zhangmei Chen received the B.Eng. degree in electronic engineering from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 2016, where she is currently pursuing the M.E. degree. Her current research interests include wireless communication, channel coding, and coded modulation.
Jian Song (M’06–SM’10–F’16) received the B.Eng. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 1990 and 1995, respectively. He was with the Chinese University of Hong Kong, in 1996, and the University of Waterloo, Canada, in 1997. He has been with Hughes Network Systems, USA, for seven years before joining the Faculty Team, Tsinghua University, in 2005, as a Professor, where he is currently the Director of Tsinghua’s DTV Technology Research and Development Center. He has been working in quite different areas of fiber-optic, satellite, wireless, powerline, and visible light communications. His current research interest is in the area of digital TV broadcasting. Dr. Song has published over 200 peer-reviewed journal and conference papers. He holds two U.S. and over 40 Chinese patents. He is a fellow of IET.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:08:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

