1
978-1-5386-7048-4/18/$31.00 ©2018 IEEE
2018 IEEE 10th International Symposium on Turbo Codes & Iterative Information Processing 
Decoding LDPC Codes on Binary Erasure Channels
using Deep Recurrent Neural-Logic Layers
Ali Payani
School of Electrical and
Computer Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, Georgia 30332–0250
Email:payani@ece.gatech.edu
Faramarz Fekri
School of Electrical and
Computer Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, Georgia 30332–0250
Email:fekri@ece.gatech.edu
Abstract—Iterative algorithms based on belief propagation can
perform very close to optimal ML decoding for long LDPC codes.
However, for short LDPC codes over Binary Erasure Channels
(BEC) their performance drops significantly. In this paper, we
introduce an iterative LDPC decoder over BEC by using our
novel deep recurrent neural logic networks that learns Boolean
logic algebra. It turned out that the neural logic network is
capable of learning discrete algorithmic tasks and suitable for
decoding LDPC codes. We show that the proposed decoding
method can outperform the belief propagation algorithm for
short LDPC code while using significantly fewer number of
iterations. We further demonstrate that the proposed model is
able to generalize very well. In other words, the model that was
trained for specific settings such as channel erasure, parity check
matrix, and code length, when tested under various other settings,
still performed almost as if it was trained for those new settings.
I. INTRODUCTION
Coding for binary Erasure Channels (BEC) is widely studied
by the research community. It is known that Maximum
Likelihood (ML) decoding over a BEC channel can be reduced
to solving a set of linear equations; which can be implemented
with the complexity O(ν3) for ν erased bits in a general
case. However, in most practical applications this approach is
infeasible even for moderate length codes. As a result, some
forms of iterative algorithms (based on a message passing
algorithm) are often used to obtain a sub-optimal solution for
decoding Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes. These
iterative algorithms can perform very close to the optimal ML
decoding bounds for sufficiently long LDPC codes. However,
for short length codes, they do not perform as well. In [1]
and [2], authors introduced augmented steps to the Belief
Propagation (BP) algorithm to increase its performance when
the standard BP decoding fails due to stopping sets. However,
such approaches further increase the complexity of the LDPC
decoding. Moreover, in real-time applications, it is desirable to
decode the messages in batches to increase the speed. As such,
Deep Neural Networks (DNN), if successful in learning how
to decode, with their suitable structures for batch processing
in parallel can prove to be a viable alternative.
Over the last few years, DNNs have been successfully used
in many applications. In particular, deep models based on
Convolution Neural Networks (CNNs) and Recurrent Neural
Networks (RNNs) have improved the state of the art in various
topics such as natural language processing [3], image and
video processing [4], and Speech recognition [5], just to
name a few. In decoding, we have virtually unlimited training
examples. Since learning a decoder is basically a supervised
learning task, the application of DNN in designing an efficient
decoder may seem trivial at first. However, there exist several
challenges. Even though we have as many training examples
as we need, there are 2m different possible codewords for a
message of length m; which is prohibitive even for a rather
short message (e.g., ∼100 bits). Thus, the deep network
should be able to learn the decoding algorithm instead of
learning just the non-linear approximation as in Multi-Layer
Perceptron (MLP) layers. In most deep algorithm learning tasks,
autoregressive models such as Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNNs) are deployed which allow for recursion through
intermediate results, and consequently learning some kinds
of algorithms to solve the problem in an iterative fashion. For
example in [6], the authors successfully employed RNNs to
design a very efficient decoder for convolutional and turbo
codes over additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels
and in [7] the authors proposed a framework for soft decoding
of linear codes of arbitrary length. However, as we have shown
in [8], typical neural network layers often fail to learn the exact
logical flow in discrete (Binary) arithmetic. This is specially
true for decoding LDPC codes over BEC. In [8], we proposed
a new architecture that is designed specifically for learning
logical flows in discrete algorithmic tasks. We have shown
that the proposed logical representation layers are able to
learn the underlying logical flows that exist in many discrete
algorithmic protocols. In this paper, we present a recurrent
model based on the logical representation layers, referred as a
recurrent neural logic network, for decoding LDPC over BEC.
In Section II, we present the outline of deep recurrent network
for decoding. Then, in Section III, we introduce the neural
logical representation layers and show how they can be fit into
the decoding problem. Training the model and experimental
results are then presented follow by the conclusion at the end.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:15:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2
2018 IEEE 10th International Symposium on Turbo Codes & Iterative Information Processing 
II. RECURRENT NEURAL DECODER
In most practical LDPC decoders, a variant of the iterative
algorithm is often used. These iterative algorithms are mainly
based on the Message Passing (MP) algorithm. In MP, a unique
message from each variable node is sent to every connected
check node in the forward path. Likewise in the backward
path, every check node computes a proper response message
which is sent back to each variable node it is connected to, and
hence the name message passing. Under certain simplifying
independence assumptions, one can view the messages in the
MP algorithm as the belief (i.e., estimated probabilities) of the
model regarding the values of each particular variable node in
the graph.
Our objective is to employ deep neural networks to learn an
iterative (recurrent) algorithm by exploiting the structure of the
parity check matrix. While by iterating between variable nodes
and check nodes, the model learns some forms of the message
passing scheme, we make no probabilistic assumptions and
we let the network learn an efficient iterative algorithm. This
allows (at least in theory) for learning a more complicated
model with possible performance improvements over the belief
propagation scheme.
Let H ∈{0, 1}r×n be the parity check matrix for a length
n regular LDPC code with parameters (dv, dc), i.e., H has dv
and dc non-zero elements in each column and row, respectively.
We assign vector Vi ∈Rdimv, i ∈{1, . . . , n} to each variable
node and similarly vector Cj ∈Rdimc, j ∈{1, . . . , r} to each
check node. Corresponding to the ith variable node at the
time stamp t where t ∈{1, . . . , tmax}, we define two sets
of functions F (t)
i
: Rdc×dimv →Rdimc (from the variable
node to the check node) and G (t)
i
: Rdv×dimc →Rdimv (from
the check node to the variable node). Here, dimv and dimc
denote the dimensions of the representation used in variable
nodes and check nodes, respectively. In soft decoding using
belief propagation, the erasure bits are usually represented by
a real valued scalar (0.5). However, we choose the one-hot
representations of depth 3 for each variable node, which is
more suitable for our model. In our representation, the three bit
positions in the one-hot vector are correspond to values of ’0’,
’1’, and ’e’ (erasure), respectively. For example, if the bit value
is ’0’, the vector is [1, 0, 0]. The dimension dimc of check-node
vectors is a design parameter of the model which controls the
amount of information that can be sent from each check node
to variable nodes. We formulate the recursive formula for each
variable node vi at time stamp t + 1 as:
v(t+1)
i
= G (t)
i

V ec( C(t+1)
i
)

, where
(1)
C(t+1)
i
= {C(t+1)
j
|H(j, i) = 1, j ∈{1, . . . , r} }
(2)
also,
C(t+1)
j
= F (t)
i

V ec( V(t)
i,j )

, where
(3)
V(t)
i,j = {V (t)
i′ |H(j, i′) = 1, i′ ∈{1, . . . , n} }
(4)
where V ec(S) generate a vector by concatenates all the vectors
in set S. Further, we can exclude the intrinsic information (the
information that each node already possesses about itself) as
in the BP algorithm, i.e.
V(t)
i,j = {V (t)
i′ |H(j, i′) = 1, i′ ∈{1, . . . , n}, i′ ̸= i }
(5)
However, our experiments later showed that although using
extrinsic information slightly increases the speed of the conver-
gence, it has no significant effect on the network performance
and the model can learn the desired algorithm regardless.
III. NEURAL LOGIC LAYERS FOR DECODING OVER BEC
The learning of the model involves adjusting the trainable
weights of the set of forward and backward functions, i.e,
F (t)
i (·)’s and G (t)
i (·)’s. While these two sets of functions can
be designed in general using a typical MLP architecture, we
encountered an slow convergence and in some cases poor
generalization performance for decoding over BEC. Albeit
the impressive performance of the typical MLP layers in
many applications, these architectures suffer from a basic
limitation that is inherent in any general purpose design of
neural networks. While using sufficient number of weights and
(hidden) layers, we could in theory approximate any function
by using MLP, in practice this is not always possible. As
we have shown in [8], this is specially evident in learning
many algorithmic tasks where we are dealing with discrete
input/output and the network is to learn some logical flow
of the information. To address this, in [8], we introduced a
new set of neural layers which are designed specifically for
representing binary logic algebra. In this new paradigm, we
use Boolean algebra instead of typical non-linear weighted
summations used in a regular MLP design
¯x
=
1 −x
,
¯y = 1 −y
(6a)
x

y
=
xy
(6b)
x

y
=
¯x

¯y
=
1 −(1 −x)(1 −y)
(6c)
x ⊗y
=
(x

¯y)

(¯x

y)
=
x + y −2xy (6d)
In order to learn any one of the possible Boolean functions
that can be defined over the set of n binary elements of input
vector x ∈{0, 1}n, we use the membership weights defined
in the range of [0, 1] and we encourage these weights to
approach either 0 (no membership) or 1 (full membership)
using a sigmoid function with a constant multiplier, i.e.
σ(cx) where c > 1. By using these basic elements, we can
define the logical conjunction function formed from a (trainable)
subset of elements from the vector xn as
yconj =
n

i=1

1 −σ(cwi) (1 −xi)

.
(7)
Likewise, we define the disjunction function with the help of
the De Morgan Law as
ydisj = 1 −
n

i=1
(1 −σ(cwi) xi).
(8)
Any arbitrary complex Boolean function can be expressed
as both a standard Disjunctive Normal Form (DNF) and a
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:15:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
3
2018 IEEE 10th International Symposium on Turbo Codes & Iterative Information Processing 
Conjunctive Normal Form (CNF). In the DNF form, the
Boolean function is expressed by the disjunction of the sub-
expressions which are consisted of only conjunctions. This is
correspond to applying a disjunctive layer on the output of a
conjunction layer in our logical representation layers. Likewise,
the CNF form is correspond to applying a conjunction layer
on the output of a disjunctive layer. As such, we may combine
our proposed conjunctive and disjunctive layers to form two
new multilayer structures denoted as CNF and DNF layers.
To further increase the representational power of our logical
layers, we designed the XOR logical layers by application of
carefully designed mask vectors {M (1), . . . , M (k)} of length
n, where k = [ n
2 ], such that
M (i)
j
=

−1
if j > k −i + 1  j < 2k −i + 2
1
else
(9)
and
yXOR =
k

t=1
σ(c (
 xn × (Mk
t ⊙W)T  −.5)).
(10)
Here, W is the membership weight vector of length n and
c ≫1 is a constant. The complete proof of the above formula
is give in [8]. The proposed XOR functions are created by
applying k masks. However, when the dimension of the input
vector is large, this can lead to slow convergence. Alternatively,
we use simpler mechanism that consists of only one mask,
but we let the network learn its weights instead of the using
fixed masks defined in (9) . Further details can be found in
[8]. We call these simplified functions SXOR functions. Using
these basic elements of the logical representation, we design
the functions F (t)
i (·)’s and G (t)
i (·)’s as it is depicted in Fig.
1.
IV. TRAINING
For training, we define the loss function at time t as the
average softmax cross-entropy between the estimated values
of the variable nodes and the correct codeword vector, both
represented as one-hot vectors of length n and depth 3, i.e.
L(t) = −1
n
n

i=1
3

b=1
xib log(v′(t)
ib )
(11)
v′
i = softmax(vi)
(12)
We may consider these options for designing the forward and
backward function sets (i.e. (4) and (2)):
• Option 1: Use the same two functions F(·) and G (·) for
all the time stamps and variable nodes, i.e. sharing the
weights across both dimensions.
• Option 2: Share functions across the time dimension but
use different functions F i(·)’s and G i(·) for each variable
node.
• Option 3: Do not share at all, i.e., choose different
functions F (t)
i (·)’s and G (t)
i (·)’s for different time stamps
and different variable nodes.
𝑉𝑉𝑗𝑗𝑗
SXOR
𝐶𝐶𝑗𝑗
SXOR
𝑉𝑉𝑗𝑗2
𝑉𝑉𝑗𝑗𝑑𝑑𝑐𝑐
AND
(a) Function F(.) from a variable node to a check node
𝐶𝐶𝑖𝑖𝑖
SXOR
𝐶𝐶𝑖𝑖2
𝐶𝐶𝑖𝑖𝑑𝑑𝑣𝑣
AND
AND
CNF
𝑉𝑉𝑖𝑖
(b) Function G (.) from a check node to a variable node
Fig. 1.
Logical functions used in forward/backward operations
Although Option 1 may seem to be the most rigid and inflexible
of all, our experimental results surprisingly show that its
convergence speed is the fastest among the other options. While
it requires a significantly fewer number of trainable parameters,
it offers the best overall performance specially for the case
of regular LDPC codes. For irregular LDPC codes, Option 2
provides more flexibility over the first option and performs
better. Sharing weights across the time dimension facilitates
learning a repetitive algorithmic task. In particular, instead of
training the model using a large number of iterations (time
stamps), we can train using only a few iterations and let the
model learn a recursive algorithm. Consequently, both Options
1 and 2 provide good generalizations. Moreover, it allows to
limit the number of iterations (to increase the training speed
and reduce complexity) in the training phase while running
the model for many more iterations in the test time to obtain
much improved results. On the other hand, although Option
3 performs well when tested for the exact number of training
iterations, its accuracy cannot be improved by iterating beyond
the number of training iterations because the weights are not
shared across time. As such, Option 3 performs relatively poor.
When the number of iterations in the training phase is small
(i.e. tmax < 3), we can train the model by minimizing L(tmax).
However, when the number of iterations is large, this approach
usually leads to no convergence or very slow convergence
specially at the beginning of the training. To cope with this
problem, in the beginning of training, we must include the loss
functions from all the time stamps but then gradually remove
the effect of the earlier time stamps in the loss function. That
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:15:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
4
2018 IEEE 10th International Symposium on Turbo Codes & Iterative Information Processing 
is
L =
tmax

t=1
α(tmax−t)L(t)
(13)
where the value of α is reduced from 1 to 0 gradually as we
progress in the training.
Further, training the model with different functions F (t)
i (·)s
and G (t)
i (·), as in Options 2 and 3, can be extremely slow in the
beginning. This phenomena can be explained by observing that
the network has to adjust too many parameters and randomly
initialized weights can create too many local minimums at
the early stages of the training. To alleviate this, we can use
an approach similar to the weight push mechanism in [9].
Let W (t)
i
be the set of weight matrices for all the functions
F (t)
i (·)s and G (t)
i (·). We can introduce a push term to the loss
function that is proportional to the average variance of the set
of weights across the index set (i, (t)), i.e.,
Ltotal = L + β var{W (t)
i
}
(14)
This would encourage uniformity of the weights at the
beginning of training. We then gradually decrease the parameter
β during the training.
V. EXPERIMENTS
A. Convergence Speed
We use Gallager algorithm[10] for creating random parity
check matrices used in our experiments. In order to avoid
over-fitting, instead of repeating the training samples, for each
training batch we create a new set of randomly generated
codewords in which each bit is erased independently with the
probability ϵ. In all the experiments we use batch size of 100
codewords and we train the model using ADAM [11] optimizer
with the learning rate of 0.003. The dimensions of SXOR and
AND (conjunction) layers in designing F ()’s and F ()’s are
set to 100 and we use dimc = 30. As shown in Fig. 2, the
Fig. 2.
Convergence speed of the LDPC decoder models
model in Option 1 has the fastest conversion speed. It reaches
the optimal performance in approximately 500 epochs whereas
Option 2 reaches this level after 3000 epochs if we do not
incorporate the push mechanism.
B. Performance
Fig. 3 depicts the decoding performance in terms of the
average number of decoding errors per bit (BER) and also the
average number of block (frame) errors (FER) for a half-rate
regular (3, 6) LDPC code of length 48, and compare it to the
results of the belief propagation (BP) algorithm. Here, we train
(a) Bit Error
(b) Block Error
Fig. 3.
Performance comparison between the neural logic decoder and BP
the model (by sharing all functions according to Option 1) using
only 3 iterations (i.e. tmax = 4). After the training finished
(model converged), we test the model using 10 iterations for
the total of 100k randomly selected testing codewords. For the
BP algorithm, we evaluate the performance using 50 iterations.
As it is apparent from Fig. 3, our proposed model outperforms
the BP algorithm for the (3,6) regular LDPC code. While the
results are shown for a typical randomly generated code, we
obtained the same level of performance improvements for all
the test cases. As we increased the code length from 48 to
values above 132, we noticed that while our model achieves its
optimal results using significantly fewer iterations than BP, the
performance gap between the two methods reduces for higher
lengths.
C. Generalizations
In most of approaches based on deep neural networks,
while the models are usually able to outperform the classical
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:15:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
5
2018 IEEE 10th International Symposium on Turbo Codes & Iterative Information Processing 
approaches, the generalization is limited and the models must
be re-trained for each particular different settings. In contrast,
our proposed decoder model using a recurrent neural logic
layer scheme is able to generalize very well under various
settings and situations for which it has not been trained. To
demonstrate this, we randomly generate three half-rate codes
with parity check matrices H1 and H2 of code length 48 and
H3 of code length 132. We trained the model using only H1
for erasure probability ϵ = 0.2. Then, we tested the model
generalization. Specifically, our model can generalize well for
3 variations:
1) Erasure Probability: We trained the model using only one
specific erasure probability and evaluate its performance
under different erasure probability settings. As it is
apparent from the first row of Table I, the decoder
performance when tested for ϵ = .3 does not depend on
whether the model has been trained on ϵ = .3 or ϵ = .2..
It is worth noting that while the performance of the model
is not dependent on the specific value of the erasure
probability that we used in training, the convergence
speed depends on it. Through our experiments, we
noticed that an erasure value of around 0.2 offers the
best convergence speed for the half-rate regular codes
that we used.
2) Parity Check Matrix: More importantly, our model is
not dependent on the specific code that is used in the
training as long as we are using codes with similar
(dv, dc) parameters. As it is depicted by the second row
of Table I, the model that has been trained for H1 still
provides very good performance when it is used for
evaluating the code associated with H2.
3) Code Length: This means that we can train the model
using a smaller code size and the model can generalize
well under larger code lengths if other parameters of
the code remains the same. Since the dimension of the
learnable functions only depends on the weight degrees
(i.e., (dv, dc)) of the LDPC code, the same model can be
used in different code lengths. In particular, as the third
row of Table I shows the performance of the model
trained on a (48, 24) LDPC code when tested on a
(132, 66) code is only slightly less than the optimal
performance for a model that is trained specifically for
the latter code. We have to note that although the model
generalizes very well, one have the option of fine tuning
the model for the specific set of new parameters. For
example, one may train the model using a shorter code
size (to increase the training speed) and then use the
weights of the trained model as the initial values for the
new model for longer codes. This option would make
the training of a larger model more efficient since it only
needs a few epochs to fine tune and reach the optimal
results.
VI. CONCLUSION
We proposed a novel paradigm for decoding LDPC codes
over binary erasure channels by using recurrent neural logic
TABLE I
EVALUATING THE GENERALIZATION PERFORMANCE OF THE MODEL
Train Setting
Test Setting
Test Generalization
Performance (BER)
Test Optimal
Performance (BER)
H1, ϵ = .2
H1, ϵ = .3
0.01480
0.01476
H1, ϵ = .2
H2, ϵ = .3
0.00891
0.00832
H1, ϵ = .2
H3, ϵ = .3
0.0014
0.0013
layers. We demonstrated that the proposed method outperforms
the bit error rate performance of the belief propagation
algorithm for short length LDPC codes while having the same
performance for longer codes but requiring fewer iterations.
We also demonstrated the generalization properties of the
proposed method in terms of various parameters such as erasure
probability, the parity check matrix, and code lengths.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is partially funded by NSF CCSS program under
award No. 1609823.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Pishro-Nik and F. Fekri, “On decoding of low-density parity-check
codes over the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Transactions on Information
Theory, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 439–454, 2004.
[2] B. N. Vellambi and F. Fekri, “Results on the improved decoding algorithm
for low-density parity-check codes over the binary erasure channel,” IEEE
transactions on information theory, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 1510–1520, 2007.
[3] R. Collobert and J. Weston, “A unified architecture for natural language
processing: Deep neural networks with multitask learning,” in Proceed-
ings of the 25th international conference on Machine learning.
ACM,
2008, pp. 160–167.
[4] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagenet classification
with deep convolutional neural networks,” in Advances in neural
information processing systems, 2012, pp. 1097–1105.
[5] G. E. Dahl, D. Yu, L. Deng, and A. Acero, “Context-dependent pre-
trained deep neural networks for large-vocabulary speech recognition,”
IEEE Transactions on audio, speech, and language processing, vol. 20,
no. 1, pp. 30–42, 2012.
[6] H. Kim, Y. Jiang, R. Rana, S. Kannan, S. Oh, and P. Viswanath, “Commu-
nication algorithms via deep learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.09317,
2018.
[7] E. Nachmani, Y. Be’ery, and D. Burshtein, “Learning to decode linear
codes using deep learning,” in Communication, Control, and Computing
(Allerton), 2016 54th Annual Allerton Conference on.
IEEE, 2016, pp.
341–346.
[8] A. Payani and F. Faramarz, “Learning algorithms via neural logic
networks,” in submitted to Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence (AAAI-19), 2019.
[9] Ł. Kaiser and I. Sutskever, “Neural gpus learn algorithms,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1511.08228, 2015.
[10] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Transactions on
information theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[11] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:15:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
