IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, VOL. 67, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2018

1663

Access Characteristic Guided Read and Write Regulation on Flash Based Storage Systems

Qiao Li , Liang Shi , Congming Gao, Yejia Di , and Chun Jason Xue

Abstract—NAND flash memory is now used in various storage systems, such as embedded systems, personal computers, and web servers. The developments in bit density and technology scaling have reduced its price, but worsen the reliability, leading to shortened lifetime and degraded access performance. This paper proposes to exploit access characteristics of workloads to improve flash performance and lifetime. The basic idea is to regulate the read and write operations based on the identified access characteristics. First, an access cost model is presented, which indicates a tradeoff between read and write time cost on NAND flash memory. Based on the access characteristics of workloads, read-only pages will be written with high cost so that they can be read with low cost, and write-only pages will be written with low cost. Second, the tradeoff between read cost and flash wearing is exploited for lifetime improvement. The write requests on write-only data are processed with reduced wearing by regulating the programm threshold voltage. Finally, as these approaches apply different write operations on write-only data for performance and lifetime improvement respectively, a combined approach is proposed to satisfy both goals. Simulation results show that the proposed approaches can improve performance and lifetime significantly with negligible overhead.

Index Terms—Access characteristics, LDPC, access cost regulation, threshold voltage regulation, NAND flash memory
Ç

1 INTRODUCTION
NAND flash-based storage has been widely deployed as it outperforms most magnetic-based storage in several aspects, such as light weight, high performance, and small form factors [2], [3]. However, with the development of bit density and technology scaling, less charges can be stored in flash cells to represent data, which degrades the reliability [4], [5], [6]. There are two consequences for this trend. First, the lifetime of flash memory will be shortened as the supported program/erase (P/E) cycles will be reduced. Second, to provide stronger error correction capability from error correction codes (ECC), low-density parity-check codes (LDPC), are applied on NAND flash memory. LDPC needs long access latency to decode data with high raw bit error rates (RBER), which deteriorates flash access performance [7]. In this paper, we propose techniques to improve access performance and lifetime of NAND flash memory based storage systems.
There is a tradeoff between read cost and write cost. The incremental-step pulse programming (ISPP) [8], [9] scheme is applied for write operations in flash memory. ISPP is designed to iteratively increase the program voltage and use a small verifying voltage to reliably program flash cells to
 Q. Li and C. J. Xue are with the Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong. E-mail: qiaoli045@gmail.com, jasonxue@cityu.edu.hk.
 L. Shi, C. Gao, and Y. Di are with the College of Computer Science, Chongqing University, Chongqing 400044, China. E-mail: {shi.liang.hk, albertgaocm, yejia.di.cqu}@gmail.com.
Manuscript received 16 Aug. 2017; revised 21 Mar. 2018; accepted 24 Apr. 2018. Date of publication 22 May 2018; date of current version 7 Nov. 2018. (Corresponding author: Liang Shi.) Recommended for acceptance by F. Douglis. For information on obtaining reprints of this article, please send e-mail to: reprints@ieee.org, and reference the Digital Object Identifier below. Digital Object Identifier no. 10.1109/TC.2018.2839671

their specified voltages. In each iteration, the program voltage is increased by a predefined program step size. Increasing the program step size reduces the number of iterations and thus reduces write cost, but increases the RBER of the programmed data pages. On the other hand, read cost highly depends on the RBER of data pages and the deployed error correcting code (ECC). For a specific ECC, the higher the RBER is, the higher the read cost will be [7], [10], [11]. Many previous works have proposed to regulate the read and write access costs to exploit the tradeoff. Based on the characteristic that a high-cost write reduces the cost of the following reads to the same page [7], [10], several optimization approaches have been proposed. For example, Li et al. [12] proposed to apply low-cost writes when there are several queued requests, and high-cost writes otherwise. Wu et al. [13] proposed to apply high-cost writes for future low-cost reads on the data when, according to their estimation, the next access operation will not be delayed due to the increased cost. However, none of these works exploits the access characteristics of workloads, which show great potential for performance improvement through cost regulation.
There is a tradeoff between flash wearing and access cost. Flash wearing is proportional to the threshold voltages which define the voltage states of flash cells [14], [15], [16], [17]. Note that the threshold voltages for the above tradeoff between read and write costs are constant and thus the flash wearing is constant. The lower the threshold voltages are, the less the wearing incurred by each P/E cycling is, as well as the less the noise margins between the states of a flash cell are. The reduced noise margins in turn result in high RBER. Previous work [16] has proposed to slow down the program speeds to compensate the increased RBER from the reduced threshold voltages. Shi et al. [15] proposed to reduce the threshold voltages by exploiting the specific retention time

0018-9340 ß 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See ht_tp://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:14:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1664

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, VOL. 67, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2018

bits per cell, the data are represented by 2n different voltage

levels. Fig. 1a illustrates an example for flash memory with

2 bits per cell, which is realized with 4 voltage states. To

write data to flash memory, program operation is per-

formed to inject certain amount of charges into the floating

gate. To read data from flash memory, read operation is per-

formed to sense the voltage state of flash cells. The distribu-

tion of each voltage state and noise margins between

neighboring voltage states directly impact the reliability of

data stored in flash memory. The increasing demands on

Fig. 1. Illustration of flash reads with low and high RBER.

large storage capacity have promoted the flash memory to develop in bit densities from 1 bit per cell to the latest 6 bits

requirement of the data to be programmed. In this work, an per cell [11] and technology scales from 65 nm to the latest

access characteristic guided lifetime improvement approach 10 nm technology [18]. This is achieved at the sacrifice of

will be presented.

reduced charges stored in flash cells, which narrows the

This work is the first in exploiting the access characteristics noise margins. As a result, the reliability is degraded, which

of workloads for performance and lifetime improvement. causes both lifetime and performance degradation. First,

First, three page access characteristics are defined in this the degraded reliability shortens lifetime of flash memory.

work. If almost all the accesses to a data page are read (write) Second, to deal with the reliability issue, error correction

requests, the page is characterized as read-only (write-only). If codes (ECC) with strong error correction capability, such as

the accesses to a data page are interleaved with reads and low-density parity-check codes (LDPC), are applied to

writes, the page is characterized as interleaved-access. The pro- NAND flash memory [7], [19]. However, LDPC needs long

posed approach is based on the observation that most read access latency to decode data, especially for data with high

requests from the host are performed on read-only data pages and RBER, which further deteriorates flash performance. In the

most write requests are performed on write-only data pages. The following two sections, detailed descriptions on flash per-

main idea is to guide regulation of read and write operations formance and lifetime are presented.

by utilizing the observed access characteristics as follows. First, to improve access performance, the read and write costs 2.2 Read and Write in Flash Memory

are regulated. For the read requests accessing read-only data, Flash write operation is the process to inject charges to float-

low-cost reads are preferred. For the write requests accessing ing gates to increase the threshold voltage of each cell to

write-only data, low-cost writes are preferred. Second, to one of 2n non-overlapping voltage levels that are apart from

improve flash lifetime, write requests are performed differ- each other with certain noise margin. Incremental-step

ently to regulate the threshold voltage. For the write requests pulse programming scheme (ISPP) is used for reliably pro-

accessing write-only data, writes with reduced threshold gramming a flash page, using an iterative program-verify

voltage, thus reduced wearing, are preferred. Third, to com- algorithm. The iterative algorithm has two stages in each

bine the performance and lifetime improvement, we propose iteration step: it first programs a flash cell with an incremen-

to switch the write mode of write requests on write-only data tal program voltage, and then verifies the voltage of the cell.

based on the system status. The proposed approach chooses If the voltage is lower than the predefined threshold, the

LPDC as the default ECC, which is the best candidate for cur- process continues. In each iteration, the program voltage

rent flash memory storage systems [7], [10]. The main contri- increases by a step size, DVpp. The step size DVpp determines

butions of this work are as follows:

the write cost. To reach the same threshold voltage level, a

 We present the access characteristics of flash memory, which are the basis of the following two approaches;
 We propose an approach to improve access performance by regulating the cost of writes and reads;
 We propose an approach to improve flash lifetime by regulating the write voltage;
 We present an efficient implementation of the proposed approaches with negligible overhead.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the background and related work. Section 3 presents the motivation of this work. Section 4 presents the proposed approaches. Experiments and analysis are presented in Section 5. Section 6 concludes this work.

larger step size indicates a smaller number of iterations, hence a lower write cost. However, programming with a larger step size will narrow the noise margin between two adjacent voltage states and result in higher raw bit error rates (RBER) in the programmed pages [9], [20], [21].
Flash read operation is the process to correctly recognize the voltage levels of each cell in a flash page. Errors occur when the threshold voltage of a cell shifts to another voltage level. LDPC decoding scheme is based on the probability information of the read data. The error correction capability of LDPC depends on the accuracy of the input information. For the data with a high RBER, the adjacent voltage states have small noise margin or have been overlapped, as shown in Fig. 1b. In this case, LDPC requires fine-grained memory-cell sensing to gain the probability information in each region, which is realized by

2 BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK

comparing a series of N reference voltages. The number of reference voltage N determines the read cost. A larger N required

2.1 Basics of Flash Memory

by the data with a higher RBER indicates a longer on-chip

NAND flash memory stores data by trapping charges in the memory sensing latency and longer memory-to-controller

floating gate of memory cells. For the flash memory with n data transfer latency, hence a higher read cost.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:14:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI ET AL.: ACCESS CHARACTERISTIC GUIDED READ AND WRITE REGULATION ON FLASH BASED STORAGE SYSTEMS

1665

Based on above descriptions, there is a strong relationship between read cost and write cost on flash memory. Programming with a large step size during the ISPP process will reduce the write cost but increase the RBER of the data, and further increase the read cost, and vice versa. This relationship is valid under the constraint of the same maximum retention time. It is because that the RBER of flash data will increase with the growing of retention time [20], [21]. In this work, we focus on read and write cost interaction by tuning the program step size, where the tuning is constrained by the maximum required retention time [22].
2.3 Flash Lifetime
Due to the out-of-place update characteristic, a flash block has to be erased before new data can be programmed. This process including one program operation on each page and one erase operation on the block is called a P/E cycle. During program operations, charges are injected into the floating gate of flash cells, by applying a high program voltage. During erase operations, charges are evicted from the floating gate by applying a high erase voltage. The charges travel through the oxide layer of flash cells during a P/E cycle, which will damage the oxide layer. The flash wearing is accumulated with the increasing of P/E cycles, which weakens the ability to store data. Therefore, the lifetime of flash memory can be represented by the maximal number of P/E cycles to the flash memory.
The damages caused by program and erase voltages are highly related with charges trapped in the tunneling oxide layer, which prevent the flash cell from being discharged to the erase state. To reduce the damages from the trapped charges, a common approach is to reduce the maximum threshold voltages of flash cells [14], [16]. With less charges, the program and erase voltages are reduced, causing reduced wearing to flash cells. However, reduced threshold voltages will result in narrow noise margin between adjacent voltage states of flash cells. This situation introduces increased RBER of stored data, which requires read operations performed with increased read latency. As a result, there exists a tradeoff between the flash wearing and read performance.

Several strategies have been recently proposed to regulate read and write costs by exploiting the reliability characteristics to improve flash memory performance. The RBER of flash data are affected by several factors, mainly including P/E cycling, retention time, and the program step size in ISPP. There are several works proposed based on the relationship between RBER and retention time. The longer the retention time is, the higher the RBER is. Pan et al. [20] and Liu et al. [21] proposed to reduce write costs by relaxing the retention time requirement of programmed pages. To periodically refresh flash data, the data suffers less errors during retention time. Therefore, the data can tolerate more errors from programming with a larger step size in ISPP. Other strategies are proposed based on the tradeoff between read and write costs. Wu et al. [13] proposed to apply a high-cost write to reduce the cost of read requests performed on the same page. The high-cost write is performed on the premise that upcoming requests will not be delayed by the increased cost. The method can effectively improve read performance, but impact write performance meanwhile. Li et al. [12] proposed to apply low-cost writes when there are queued requests to reduce the queueing delay, and apply high-cost writes otherwise, allowing low-cost reads of the page. It is motivated by the observation that the conflict latency is the dominate part in access latency and has a significant influence on access latency.
However, these works are mostly based on the physical characteristics of flash memory. None of them exploited the access characteristics of a specific data page for cost regulation. Several types of workload access characteristics have been studied in previous works, including hot and cold accesses [25], inter-reference gaps [26], and temporal and spacial locality [27], [28], [29]. These access characteristics have been employed to guide the design of buffer caches [26], [27], [28], and flash translation layers (FTL) [25], [29]. However, these characteristics focus on access frequency, which cannot be exploited for read and write cost regulation because the cost regulation hints the cost relationship for a specific data page. This work proposes to regulate read and write costs based on the access characteristics of workloads.

2.4 Related Work
This section presents the related works from two aspects: access performance and lifetime.

2.4.2 Lifetime Improvement
As the endurance of recent high-density NAND flash memory is continuously decreasing, many works proposed approaches to improve the lifetime of flash-based storage

2.4.1 Access Performance Improvement

systems. Other than wear leveling techniques [30], [31], several system-level techniques which exploited the physical

The performance of ECC have been widely studied. As the characteristics of NAND flash memory have been proposed.

promising ECC in recent years, LDPC has drawn a lot of Since flash blocks are worn out if the data have more errors

attention. There are many prior works focusing on optimiz- than ECC’s correction capability, many works focused on

ing LDPC decoding strategy. Zhang et al. [23] proposed to reducing different types of errors. Pan et al. [20] proposed

optimize the decoding strategy for flash memory, and thus to reduce the errors from retention time by refreshing data

improve flash performance. Dong et al. [10] and Li et al. [24] at the late age of flash memory. Cai et al. [32] proposed to

proposed to optimize the soft-decision memory sensing by recharge flash cells after charge leakage with the increasing

exploiting the distribution characteristic of threshold voltage of retention time. Lee et al. [33] proposed to improve life-

on multiple-level cell (MLC) flash memory. Zhao et al. [7] time by intentionally throttling write performance.

further proposed an approach to progressively increase the There are several works focused on the tradeoff of flash

memory sensing precision level-by-level and retry LDPC wearing and RBER of data through regulating the threshold

decoding accordingly. All these works have improved the voltage [14], [15], [16], [17]. Flash cells with reduced thresh-

efficiency and performance of LDPC decoding, which pro- old voltage endure less wearing, but suffer more errors

motes the adoption in flash memory.

from the reduced noise margin between two adjacent

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:14:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1666

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, VOL. 67, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2018

3.1 Read and Write Cost Model
This section presents the read and write time cost model, the specific relationship between read cost and write cost. The model has been validated by simulation in previous studies [7], [12], [13], [37]. It consists of a write cost model and a read cost model. First, the write cost is inversely proportional to the program step size of ISPP [8], [20], [21]. Thus, the write cost model is as follows:

1

WCðDVppÞ ¼ g Â DVpp

(1)

where RBERðDVppÞ < CBERLDPCðNÞ;

WCðDVppÞ denotes the write cost when the program step size is DVpp, and g is a constant. A coarser step size results

in a lower write cost, but a higher RBER. In addition, the

reduction of the write cost is limited by the condition that

the resulting RBER should be within the error correction

Fig. 2. The voltage state distribution with different read and write costs.

capability of the deployed LDPC code, CBERLDPCðNÞ, with N reference voltages.

voltage states. To guarantee the same reliability, Jeong et al. The read cost is composed of the time to sense the page,

[14], [16] proposed to sacrifice write performance, as fine- which is proportional to the number of reference voltages,

grained programming operations cause reduced errors. N, and the time to transfer the data from the page to the

Based on the observation that the updating time intervals of controller, which is proportional to the size of the trans-

most data are much shorter than the promised retention ferred information [7], [10], [11]. Thus, the read cost model

time, Shi et al. [15] proposed to relax the retention time is as follows:

requirements for some data, which avoided the degradation

of write performance in lifetime improvement. Peleato et al. [17] proposed to optimize the target level placement by achieving the trade-off between flash lifetime and error

RCðNÞ ¼ a Â N þ b Â dlog ðN þ 1Þe (2)
where RBERðDVppÞ < CBERLDPCðNÞ;

rates. Different from these works, this paper exploits the where RCðNÞ denotes the read cost with N reference vol-

access characteristics of flash memory to achieve tradeoff tages in the deployed LDPC code, and a and b are two con-

between read cost and flash wearing.

stants. With a larger N, longer on-chip memory sensing

time and longer flash-to-controller data transfer time are

2.4.3 Performance and Lifetime Improvement

required, which lead to increased read cost.

This section presents the related work on both performance and lifetime improvement [34], [35], [36]. When NAND flash memory is used as second level cache, traditional cache mechanisms need modifications considering the characteristics of flash. Cache replacement policies often maximize the hit ratio to achieve a better performance, during which a great number of small random writes are introduced and this impacts the lifetime of flash memory. Several works have been proposed to design flash friendly cache management schemes. Tang et al. [34] proposed RIPQ framework which efficiently approximated a priority queue on flash for performance improvement, and aggregated small random writes by lazily moving updated contents to reduce erase operations. Cheng et al. [35] proposed to exploit the tradeoff between the hit ratio and endurance, to improve endurance while maintaining hit ratio. Li et al. [36] introduced a container-based flash cache to manage compound blocks. The focus is also the tradeoff between the performance and lifespan. All of these works are cache management policies and implemented in the host, which are orthogonal to this work.

Fig. 2 shows the different voltage state distributions for different read and write costs. Fig. 2b is the normal case with medium step size DVpp, where read and write operations are performed with medium cost, denoted as medium-cost write/medium-cost read (MCW/MCR). Fig. 2a shows the voltage distribution with reduced DVpp and therefore reduced RBER, where writes are performed with high cost and reads are performed with low cost, denoted as high-cost write/low-cost read (HCW/LCR). Fig. 2c shows the voltage distribution with increased DVpp and therefore increased RBER, where writes are performed with low cost and reads are performed with high cost, denoted as low-cost write/ high-cost read (LCW/HCR). The maximum of threshold voltage stays the same for the three cases, and regulation of threshold voltage will be discussed in the following section. Based on this model, experiments are conducted to evaluate the performance difference between the three cases. The detailed settings are presented in Section 5.1.
Fig. 3 presents the comparison of access latency for 10 representative traces of the enterprise servers from Microsoft Research (MSR) Cambridge [38] and 4 traces we col-

3 MOTIVATION

lected on flash memory systems, which will be introduced in Section 5.1. Compared to the default MCW/MCR,

This section presents the motivation of this work by analyz- HCW/LCR improves read performance by 54 percent, and

ing two models on flash memory: read and write cost LCW/HCR improves write performance by 26 percent on

model, and flash wearing model.

average. The significant performance improvement comes

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:14:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI ET AL.: ACCESS CHARACTERISTIC GUIDED READ AND WRITE REGULATION ON FLASH BASED STORAGE SYSTEMS

1667

Fig. 3. I/O latency comparison for read and write requests with different access costs.

from the reduction in access costs. Comparing LCW/HCR and HCW/LCR, the differences in their read and write latencies are 114 and 61 percent, respectively. The performance gap indicates that the read and write cost regulation should be applied carefully. While LCW/HCR is able to improve the overall performance, it introduces the worst read performance, as shown Fig. 3b. However, read operations are always in the critical path, which motivates this paper to regulate read and write costs carefully.

3.2 Access Cost and Flash Wearing Model
The wearing to NAND flash depends on the program and erase voltages applied. Based on previous work [15], [16], the wearing to a flash cell is proportional to its threshold voltage. Wearing for a flash page or block depends on the flash cell with the largest wearing. We use the maximum of threshold voltage (denoted as Vp) of flash cells to calculate the effective wearing we. The relationship is we ¼  Â Vp, where  is a constant, which depends on the physical characteristics of NAND flash cells. The effective wearing can be reduced when the maximum threshold voltage Vp is reduced. The reduction of Vp can be achieved by reducing the program step size DVpp, which affects the write cost, or by reducing the noise margin of adjacent voltage states, which affects the read cost. In this work, we exploit the relationship between flash wearing and read cost, while maintaining the write cost as constant. Thus, the effective wearing to flash memory can be modeled as follows.

we ¼  Â Vp

where

Vp DVpp

¼

C

(3)

RBERðVp; DVppÞ < CBERLDPCðNÞ;

The effective wearing is reduced as the reduction of Vp, on the condition that the write cost stays constant (C) and the resulting RBER (RBERðVp; DVppÞ) is within the error correction

capability of the deployed LDPC code, CBERLDPCðNÞ, with N reference voltages. With the reduction of Vp, the noise margin between two adjacent voltage states will be reduced, leading to increased RBER of data. Therefore, the high-cost read needs to be performed to read the data.
Fig. 4 shows the comparison of voltage state distributions based on the wearing model. Fig. 4a is the normal case with normal step size DVpp and regular wearing, which is the default setting for flash memory, denoted as regular wearing/medium-cost read. Fig. 4b shows the voltage distribution with reduced threshold voltage and reduced flash wearing but increased read cost. The step size DVpp is reduced as well, but the write cost stays the same, denoted as reduced wearing/high-cost read. Based on the model, experiments are conducted to evaluate the read performance and effective wearing difference between the two cases. The detailed settings can be found in Section 5.1.
Fig. 5 presents the comparison of read latency. Compared to the regular wearing, the read latency of reduced wearing is increased by 52 percent on average, where the effective wearing is reduced to 80 percent of the regular wearing. The performance degradation of reduced wearing shows that the threshold voltage reduction approach for flash wearing reduction should be applied carefully. This work will exploit the access characteristics on flash memory to regulate the threshold voltage for lifetime improvement.
4 READ AND WRITE REGULATION FOR PERFORMANCE AND LIFETIME IMPROVEMENT
As presented above, the cost model and wearing model indicate that the read and write operations can be regulated. However, simply regulating the read and write operations is not able to achieve performance and lifetime improvement. In this section, we propose to exploit the access characteristics of workloads for the operation regulation. In the

Fig. 4. The voltage state distribution for different read cost and flash Fig. 5. The read access latency comparison for different flash wearing

wearing.

schemes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:14:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1668

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, VOL. 67, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2018

Fig. 6. Distribution of read and write requests on three access characteristics.

following, the access characteristics of workloads are first studied. Then, based on the observations from the workload analysis, we proposed several approaches for performance and lifetime improvement.
4.1 Access Characteristics This section first presents the study on the access characteristics of several workloads. Then, we present a highaccuracy access characteristic identification scheme.
4.1.1 Access Characteristics of Workloads
Several workloads are studied in respect of read and write requests. Fig. 6 presents the statistical results for the workloads analyzed in our study. We collected access characteristics for all data pages at the host system and distinguished among three types of data accesses:
1) Read-only: If almost all the accesses ( > 95 percent) to a data page are read requests, we characterize this page as read-only. This is typical when accessing media files or other read-only files;
2) Write-only: If almost all the accesses ( > 95 percent) to a data page are write requests, we characterize this page as write-only. This is typical in log files and periodical data flushes from the memory system to storage for consistency maintenance;
3) Interleaved-access: If the accesses to a data page are interleaved with read and write requests, we characterize this page as interleaved-access.
Fig. 6 shows the request distributions for these logical data pages with different access characteristics. The read requests will either access read-only pages or interleavedaccess pages, and Fig. 6a shows the distribution of read requests accessing these two type of pages. Similarly, the write requests will either access write-only pages or interleaved-access pages, and Fig. 6b shows the distribution of write requests. For each trace, the sum of the read from Fig. 6a and the write requests from 6b is near 100 percent

(more than 99 percent). Three observations can be made from Fig. 6:
 Observation 1 – Most read requests access read-only pages, more than 87 percent on average;
 Observation 2 – Most write requests access writeonly pages, more than 92 percent on average;
 Observation 3 – Only a small part of all requests access interleaved-access pages.
These observations will guide the design of the performance and lifetime improvement approaches in this paper. In the following, a simple, yet accurate access characteristic identification method is presented.
4.1.2 Access Characteristic Identification
We identify the access characteristic of a data page based on its most recent requests and the upcoming request which are recorded using a history window. If the most recent requests and the upcoming request are all read requests/ write requests, this page is characterized as read-only/ write-only. Otherwise, this page is characterized as interleaved-access. Essentially, the identification method looks for consecutive reads or writes to characterize the page.
Fig. 7 shows an example of the identification method. The first line shows the access lists. Case 1 has read requests only, case 2 has write requests only, and case 3 has interleaved read and write requests. The length of the history window is set to 2 in the examples. Thus it includes the upcoming request (indicated by the arrow above the window) and the most recent request to this page. The arrows below the access lists represent the identified access type of the page. The identification is updated upon the arrival of each access to the page. If the access characteristic of the page is indeed read-only or write-only, the identification is accurate and stable, as shown in Figs. 7a and 7b. However, if the access characteristic of the page is interleaved, such as in Fig. 7c, the identification is unstable and may change from time to time.

Fig. 7. Example on the access characteristic identification and cost regulation: access characteristic, " – read-only, # – write-only, and l – interleaved-
access; access cost, L – low-cost, M – medium-cost, H – high-cost, and MR – medium-cost with reduced wearing. Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:14:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI ET AL.: ACCESS CHARACTERISTIC GUIDED READ AND WRITE REGULATION ON FLASH BASED STORAGE SYSTEMS

1669

Fig. 8. The outline of the proposed approach.
This simple identification method works well, because, as observed above, most requests will access either readonly pages or write-only pages. The accuracy of the identification method will be further evaluated in Section 5, where we analyze the effects of the history window size.
4.2 Read and Write Regulation This section exploits the access characteristics studied above for performance and lifetime improvement. Fig. 8 shows the outline of the proposed approach. First, the approach for performance improvement by exploiting the tradeoff between read cost and write cost is presented. Second, the approach for lifetime improvement by exploiting the tradeoff between read cost and effective wearing is presented. Finally, we combine these two approaches for both performance and lifetime improvement.
4.2.1 Read and Write Cost Regulation for Performance Improvement

The read performance improvement mainly comes from low-cost read for read-only pages, which mostly benefits from the high-cost write operation initially. For example, a media file is typical read-only data and will be read repeatedly after being written. The re-write operation will occur only on the situation a read-only page is updated, which seldom happens. Therefore, the re-write ratio of the proposed method should be very low, which will be further evaluated in the experiments.
Write Cost Regulation. The cost of a write will be regulated by adjusting the program step size in ISPP when it is issued. As shown in Fig. 7, there are two cases for write cost regulation. Upon arrival of a write request, the page is characterized and the cost of the write request is regulated as follows:
 A write-only page will be written with a low-cost write to improve write performance which will rarely influence read performance;
 An interleaved-access page, as in Fig. 7c, will be written with a medium-cost write to balance read and write performance.
When a page is written for the first time, there is no history for access characteristic identification. In this case, a high-cost write is performed, which can benefit the following read requests especially when the page is a read-only page. However, if it is a write-only page, the write performance will be impacted only for this first time.
In this paper, we only regulate the access cost of readonly and write-only pages, while the interleaved-access pages are not regulated. It comes from the consideration for balance of read and write costs. The observation made in Section 4.1.1 shows that only a small part of requests access interleaved-access pages. Thus, the read and write performance will be rarely influenced by the write cost regulation or read cost regulation, which guarantees the performance improvement of the proposed approach.

Based on the read and write cost model, the basic idea for performance improvement is to apply low-cost writes for write-only pages, and low-cost reads for read-only pages to improve access performance. This section does not consider the lifetime impact, and thus the maximum threshold voltage is constant. In the following, regulation for read and write cost is presented.
Read Cost Regulation. The read cost is determined by the cost of the last write operation performed on the data page. A low-cost read can only be processed if the page was written by a high-cost write. Thus, to ensure a low-cost read for read-only pages, a high-cost re-write operation will be done during idle time, if the page was not written with high cost previously. As shown in Fig. 7, there are three cases of read cost regulation. Upon arrival of a read request, the page is characterized, and its cost is regulated as follows:

4.2.2 Threshold Voltage Regulation for Lifetime
Improvement
In this section, the access characteristics are exploited to reduce flash wearing for lifetime improvement. Two write types are used in the lifetime improvement scheme: regular write with normal threshold voltage distribution and reduced wearing write with reduced threshold voltage. Note that the write costs for the two write types are the same based on the wearing model in Section 3.2. Data with regular write has much smaller RBER than the data with reduced wearing write. In this case, the data with reduced wearing write will have a high read cost based on the cost model presented in Section 3.1.
As read operations will not cause wearing to flash cells and the voltage of write operations determines flash wearing, we change the threshold voltage during the issuing of

 For a read-only page with a low-cost read, it is the the upcoming write request after the identification of access

expected case and nothing should be done;

characteristics. We define two write types: regular write

 For a read-only page with a high-cost read, a high- with normal threshold voltage distribution and low-wearing

cost re-write operation is inserted to the re-write write with reduced threshold voltage distribution. Note that

queue and performed during idle time to reduce the the write cost remains the same (medium-cost write) for

cost of upcoming reads (denoted with H in Fig. 7c); these two types. Data being written by regular write type

 For an interleaved-access page, the read cost is not will be read with medium cost, while data written by low-

regulated.

wearing write type has higher RBER, which needs higher

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:14:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1670

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, VOL. 67, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2018

Fig. 11. An example on the FTL mapping entry.

First, upon arrival of a write request on write-only data, the write request is processed as follows:

 If there is no write request in the request queue,

medium-cost write with reduced wearing is applied

Fig. 9. Write cost regulation and write voltage regulation for performance and lifetime improvement.

for wearing reduction. In this case, the lifetime will be improved without causing additional queueing time;

cost to read. Upon arrival of a write request, the page is characterized and the the write operation is regulated as follows:

 If there are requests appending in the queue, lowcost write with regular wearing is applied for write performance improvement. In this case, the queue-

 For an interleaved-access page, regular write type is

ing time for appending write requests will be

applied;

relieved, which leads to better performance.

 For a write-only page, write operation with reduced

Note that if a read request accesses the write-only data,

wearing is applied to reduce the maximum thresh- high-cost read is required. Based on the observation pre-

old voltage.

sented in Section 4.1.1, this case rarely happens.

Based on the access characteristic that most write Fig. 9 presents the write cost and write voltage regulation

requests access write-only data pages, effective wearing to for a write request. Medium-cost with regular wearing is

NAND flash will be significantly reduced.

applied for the write requests of interleaved-access data. The

Fig. 7 shows an example on the lifetime improvement cost and write voltage of write requests on write-only data are

process. At the bottom of the figure, if the data is identified selected. The benefits of this approach will vary for different

as write-only data, it is programmed with a reduced wear- applications or different periods. It satisfies the more urgent

ing write operation (MR). Otherwise, it is programmed by requirement of flash memory, i.e., performance or lifetime.

regular write operation. If the data written with reduced

wearing write operation is read, a high-cost read is required (H). However, considering the access characteristics presented above, we believe that this case rarely happens.

4.3 Implementation and Overheads
Fig. 10 shows the implementation of the proposed approach in the flash memory controller. Three components are

4.2.3 Performance and Lifetime Improvement
The above two approaches benefit access performance and lifetime of NAND flash memory respectively. A write request on write-only data will be processed either by low-cost write with regular wearing for write performance improvement or medium-cost write with reduced wearing for lifetime improvement. However, the demands for optimizing both aspects cannot be satisfied. This section presents an approach to improve both performance and lifetime. The basic idea is to selectively apply these two types of writes for the write requests on write-only data based on the system status. If the system is busy, a low-cost write is a better choice. Otherwise, a medium-cost write with reduced wearing is selected. In the following, we discuss the details for the above idea.

added: Access Characteristic Identification, Access Regulator and Re-Write Queue. In addition, each mapping entry in the FTL is extended with two fields, as shown in Fig. 11. The first is the access history, and the second is a 1-bit highcost write tag. When the high-cost write tag is set for a readonly page, this indicates that the page is written with highcost, which can be accessed with low-cost read and doesn’t need to be re-written.
When an I/O request is issued, the page is characterized. First, for a read request accessing read-only data, high-cost write tag is checked. If it is unset, the logical address of the data page is added to the re-write queue. During idle time, re-write operations are triggered to program the data in the queue with a high cost, which guarantees low-cost reads on these read-only pages. After re-write operation, the high-

cost write tag is set. The re-write overhead is evaluated in the

experiments. Second, for a write request accessing write-

only data, low-cost write with regular wearing will be per-

formed when there are requests waiting in the queue, and

medium-cost write with reduced wearing will be performed

when there are no queueing requests. Third, for the read and

write requests accessing interleaved-access data, medium-

cost operations with regular wearing will be performed.

This implementation incurs three types of overheads:

storage, hardware and firmware overhead. The storage over-

head includes, for each page, a number of bits for access his-

Fig. 10. The implementation of the proposed approach.

tory and one bit for the high-cost write. Assuming access

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:14:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI ET AL.: ACCESS CHARACTERISTIC GUIDED READ AND WRITE REGULATION ON FLASH BASED STORAGE SYSTEMS

1671

TABLE 1 The Access Cost and Effective Wearing Configurations

Read Cost (ms)

Low Medium High

70

170

310

High 310

Write Cost (ms)

High Medium Medium Low

800

600

600

450

Effective Wearing Regular Regular Reduced Regular

1

1

0.8

1

Fig. 12. History window size impact on identification accuracy.
history is set to one bit, which records only the most recent

request to the page, the storage overhead is 16 Mb for a One of the most important parameters is the size of his-

64 GB flash memory with 4 KB pages. The hardware over- tory window in the access characteristic identification

head comes from the multiple voltage thresholds needed to method. It affects the storage overhead as well as the identi-

support the reads and writes with different costs. Since the fication accuracy. Fig. 12 shows the identification accuracy

flash controller already supports multiple levels of read for three window sizes. The result shows that the identifica-

latency for different errors, the only change is using more tion approach can achieve great accuracy and a larger win-

than one programming step size DVpp, which has been stud- dow results in a higher accuracy. However, the increase in

ied and verified in previous work [9], [20], [21], [39], [40]. To accuracy decreases as the size increases. In the figure, the

support the function, the device needs to provide multiple increase from the first column to the second column is sig-

program voltages, each of which corresponds to one pro- nificant. While the increase of accuracy from the second col-

gramming step size DVpp. This overhead is negligible accord- umn to the third column is reduced. In the following

ing to previous studies [9], [20], [21], [39], [40]. The firmware experiments, the size of history window is set as 2, contain-

overhead includes the processes involved in access charac- ing the most recent request and the upcoming request (the

terization, read and write regulation and re-write queue. The second column in Fig. 12) for identification to trade-off the

overhead of these simple processes is negligible. The pro- storage overhead and identification accuracy.

posed approach does not introduce reliability issues thanks to the constraints in the read and write cost model and the 5.2 Experimental Results

constraints in wearing model. In addition, the energy con- In this section, the results of five schemes are compared:

sumption of the additional components is negligible.

Traditional, Li et al. [12], R+W, R+L and R+W+L. Traditional

scheme is the traditional approach without cost regulation

5 EVALUATION
This section first presents the experimental setup. Then, experiment results are presented, followed by the analysis of the performance and lifetime improvement.

and all requests are performed with medium cost and regular wearing. Li et al. applied low-cost reads or writes when there is queueing delay, where the flash wearing is constant as regular. The other three schemes are proposed in this work. Read and write performance improvement (R+W) represents

the approach in Section 4.2.1, where read and write costs are

5.1 Experimental Setup

regulated with constant flash wearing. Read performance

To verify the effectiveness of the proposed technique, we and lifetime improvement (R+L) represents the approach in

have implemented the proposed scheme on a trace-driven Section 4.2.2, where the read requests of read-only data are

simulator SSDSim [41] and conducted comprehensive accessed with low cost and write requests of write-only data

experiments. Ten workloads from MSR [38] and four work- are processed with medium-cost and regular-wearing write.

loads collected on flash memory based systems are used for Read, write performance and lifetime improvement (R+W

evaluation. Two of the four workloads are collected on Win- +L) represents the approach in Section 4.2.3, where the read

dows system with NTFS file system and the other two are requests of read-only data are accessed with low cost and

collected on Linux system with EXT4 file system. MUS_W write requests of write-only data are processed by one of the

and MV_W are collected on Windows when playing online two write types. We first discuss the performance improve-

music and offline movie respectively. MUS_L and MV_L are ment of the proposed approaches, with analysis of the over-

collected on Linux when playing online music and offline head of re-write operations. Second, the flash wearing is

movie respectively. From our studies, we found that all evaluated. Finally, the sensitivity study is presented.

workloads have similar access characteristics. The SSD in the simulation has eight channels, with four chips per channel 5.2.1 Performance Improvement

and four planes per chip. Each chip has 2048 blocks and each Figs. 13a and 13b present the normalized read and write

block has 64 4 KB pages. Default page mapping based FTL, latency. As shown in Fig. 13a, read performance is improved

greedy garbage collection, and wear leveling are imple- in all three proposed schemes, about 48 percent over Li et al.

mented in the simulator, representing state-of-the-art storage on average. This indicates that the read performance is hardly

systems [42]. For fair comparison, we use the parameters for impacted by the processing of write requests of write-only

the cost regulator from previous work [12], [14], [20]. Table 1 data. As shown in Fig. 13b, the proposed schemes achieve

shows the access costs and corresponding effective wearing. better performance over Li et al. R+W achieves the best

The cost of the erase operation is constant.

write performance, 20 percent on average, R+L has no write

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:14:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1672

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, VOL. 67, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2018

Fig. 13. Normalized read and write latency compared with traditional case and Li et al. [12].

Fig. 14. Distributions of different cost operations. For each trace, the five bars from the left to the right represent Traditional, Li et al., R+W, R+L and R+W+L respectively.

performance benefit since the write requests are explored to improve lifetime, and R+W+L achieves a tradeoff between the two schemes. In conclusion, the proposed schemes can improve access performance significantly over the state-of-the-art work.
To understand the performance variations, Fig. 14 shows the distributions of operations of different costs, including low-cost, medium-cost and high-cost reads and writes, and medium-cost write with regular wearing and reduced wearing. The operations in the figure refer to the read and write access on the data pages. In the traditional case, all reads and writes are performed with medium cost and regular wearing, while Li et al. applied low-cost reads or writes when there is queueing delay, which are also performed with regular wearing. In the proposed schemes, the access costs are regulated based on the access characteristics identified and write types are decided based on the system status. If there is no history for the accessed page, a high-cost write is used for write requests and a low-cost read is used for read requests. The distribution in the figure matches the

read and write performance in Fig. 13. More low-cost reads and writes means better read and write performance. Comparing to Li et al.’s work, the proposed schemes issue considerably more low-cost reads and writes, thus improve read and write performance significantly.
Fig. 15 presents the overall performance. Compared to Li et al., the proposed approach achieves the best overall performance improvement. Among three approaches proposed in this work, R+W has the best performance, 15 percent over Li’s work on average, and R+L has the worst. This is because R+W is used to improve read and write performance while R+L is applied to improve read performance and flash lifetime.
Re-Write Overhead. Fig. 16 shows the ratio of re-write operations of Li et al.’s work and the proposed approaches, which equals to the number of host I/O divided by the number of re-write operations. Since the re-write ration of the three schemes proposed in this work have the same policy for read requests, where the re-write operations are introduced, only R+W+L is compared in the figure. From the results, the proposed approach introduces negligible re-write operations,

Fig. 16. Re-write ratio comparison of the state-of-the-art work and this

Fig. 15. Overall performance comparison.

work.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:14:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI ET AL.: ACCESS CHARACTERISTIC GUIDED READ AND WRITE REGULATION ON FLASH BASED STORAGE SYSTEMS

1673

Fig. 17. Comparison of effective wearing for NAND flash memory.

no more than 1 percent, while the state-of-the-art work is

much higher. The result benefits from the strategy to apply

high-cost write for the data pages that are first written to

flash, which ensures most of the read-only pages will be read

with low cost. The other reason for the low re-write ratio is

that the requests for interleaved-access pages only constitute

a small portion of total requests. Most read operations occur

on read-only pages. The percentage of re-write operations

presents the measures to avoid bad read performance on

read-only pages. However, the re-write operations will influence the processing of host requests, especially write requests. In summary, more re-write operations will benefit

Fig. 18. Write performance and lifetime improvement (WPLI) comparison.

read performance within a specific range, but too many will lifetime improvement. A larger WPLI means a greater

worsen the write performance.

improvement based on a specific w.

Fig. 18 shows the comparison of WPLI when w equals to

5.2.2 Lifetime Improvement

0.2 and 0.8. Two conclusions can be made from the results.

Fig. 17 shows the comparison of the effective wearing for NAND flash memory. The traditional approach, Li et al., and R+W have no wearing reductions. R+L can achieve near 20 percent lifetime improvement since all the write requests of write-only data are processed with reduced wearing. The wearing reduction of R+W+L corresponds to the write performance improvement in Fig. 13b. For some traces, like SRC1_2, the write performance improvement is

First, R+L achieves the highest WPLI among all the approaches when w is 0.2, and R+W achieves the highest WPLI when w is 0.8. This is consistent with the approaches since they are designed for lifetime improvement and write performance improvement respectively. Second, WPLI has a higher average when w is 0.8, which indicates that the write performance improvement is more significant than lifetime improvement with the proposed approach.

significant, and the wearing reduction is small. This is because these traces are intensive and most of the time there are requests waiting in the queue. On the other hand, for some traces, such as USR_0 and RSRCH_2, the write performance improvement is small, and the wearing reduction is significant, near 20 percent. This is because more write requests are performed with reduced-wearing writes for lifetime improvement.

5.3 Sensitivity Study
5.3.1 History Window Size
This section evaluates the sensitiveness of the proposed approaches by varying the size of history window, from 1 to 3. Size equaling to 1 means that the history window only contains the upcoming request, 2 means that the history window contains the upcoming request and one most recent accessing request, and 3 means that the history win-

5.2.3 Performance and Lifetime Improvement
In this section, a new metric WPLI is introduced to combine write performance improvement and lifetime improvement into a single number for comparison purpose.

dow contains the upcoming request and two most recent accessing requests. Read and write performance together with effective wearing is evaluated.
Fig. 19 shows the normalized read and write latency and Fig. 20 shows the normalized effective flash wearing. Two

WPLI ¼ w Ã ðWPT À WPP Þ=WPT þ ð1 À wÞ Ã ðEWT À EWP Þ=EWT ;

observations can be made from the results. First, the read (4) performance increases with the size of history window.
This is because smaller window size will lead to more rewrite operations, which can affect the foreground access

where WPT and WPP are the write latency of the traditional performance, especially when the size equals to 1. In addi-

approach and the proposed approach respectively, and tion, too many data waiting for idle time to be re-written

EWT and EWP are the effective wearing of the traditional can delay the re-write of real read-only data, thus affecting

approach and the proposed approach respectively. w the read performance. Second, the size of history window

(0 < w < 1) is a weight to specify the relative importance has little influence on the write performance and lifetime

between the write performance improvement and the improvement.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:14:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1674

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, VOL. 67, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2018

Fig. 19. Sensitivity study of history window size on performance.

Fig. 21. Sensitivity study of degree of parallelism on performance.

Fig. 20. Sensitivity study of history window size on lifetime.

Fig. 22. Sensitivity study of degree of parallelism on lifetime.

5.3.2 Degree of Parallelism
This section evaluates the proposed approaches by varying the degree of parallelism, from 8 channels to 4 channels, where each channel has 4 chips. Fig. 21 shows the normalized read and write latency and Fig. 22 shows and the effective flash wearing, respectively. In both figures, the results are normalized to the results of the traditional approach with 8 channels. Two observations can be made from the results. First, when the degree of parallelism is reduced, the performance becomes worse, but the improvement from the proposed approach increases. Second, the lifetime improvement is smaller with the reduction of parallelism. The reason is that with the reduction of the degree of parallelism, there will be more requests waiting to be issued, which leads to the result that more write requests on write-only data will be issued with low-cost writes with normal wearing.

are exploited for performance and lifetime improvement. For performance improvement, the tradeoff between read and write time costs is combined with the access characteristics, where read requests of read-only data are processed with lowcost read and write requests of write-only data are processed with low-cost write. For lifetime improvement, the tradeoff between the read cost and effective wearing is combined with the access characteristics, where the write requests of writeonly data are performed with reduced wearing. To achieve both performance and lifetime improvement, a strategy is proposed to switch the write mode based on the system status. Simulation results show that the proposed approaches are effective in reducing I/O latency and reducing effective wearing on flash memory.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

6 CONCLUSIONS

This work is supported by the NSFC (61772092 and 61572411). The first author, Qiao Li, of the paper finished

This paper conducted a study on the access characteristics of part of the work during her master period at Chongqing Uni-

flash memory, which reveals that most read (write) requests versity. She is now a first year PhD candidate at City Univer-

access read-only (write-only) data. These access characteristics sity of Hong Kong. An earlier version of this work has been

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:14:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI ET AL.: ACCESS CHARACTERISTIC GUIDED READ AND WRITE REGULATION ON FLASH BASED STORAGE SYSTEMS

1675

accepted in the Proceedings of the 14th File and Storage
Technologies (FAST16) [1]. The conference paper covers
only the access performance improvement, whereas the new
manuscript presents the lifetime improvement approach.
REFERENCES
[1] Q. Li, L. Shi, C. J. Xue, K. Wu, C. Ji, Q. Zhuge, and E. H.-M. Sha, “Access characteristic guided read and write cost regulation for performance improvement on flash memory,” in Proc. 14th Usenix Conf. File Storage Technol., 2016, pp. 125–132.
[2] C. Lee, D. Sim, J. Hwang, and S. Cho, “F2FS: A new file system for flash storage,” in Proc. USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol., 2015, pp. 273–286.
[3] N. Agrawal, V. Prabhakaran, T. Wobber, J. D. Davis, M. S. Manasse, and R. Panigrahy, “Design tradeoffs for SSD performance,” in Proc. USENIX Annu. Tech. Conf., 2008, pp. 226–229.
[4] Y. Cai, S. Ghose, Y. Luo, K. Mai, O. Mutlu, and E. F. Haratsch, “Vulnerabilities in mlc nand flash memory programming: Experimental analysis, exploits, and mitigation techniques,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. High Perform. Comput. Archit., 2017, pp. 49–60.
[5] L. M. Grupp, J. D. Davis, and S. Swanson, “The bleak future of nand flash memory,” in Proc. 10th USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol., 2012, pp. 2–2.
[6] X. Jimenez, D. Novo, and P. Ienne, “Phoenix: Reviving MLC blocks as SLC to extend NAND flash devices lifetime,” in Proc. Conf. Des., Autom. Test Eur., 2013, pp. 226–229.
[7] K. Zhao, W. Zhao, H. Sun, T. Zhang, X. Zhang, and N. Zheng, “LDPC-in-SSD: Making advanced error correction codes work effectively in solid state drives,” in Proc. USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol., 2013, pp. 244–256.
[8] K.-D. Suh, B.-H. Suh, Y.-H. Lim, J.-K. Kim, Y.-J. Choi, Y.-N. Koh, S.-S. Lee, S.-C. Kwon, B.-S. Choi, J.-S. Yum, J.-H. Choi, J.-R. Kim, and H.-K. Lim, “A 3.3 V 32 Mb NAND flash memory with incremental step pulse programming scheme,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 30, no. 11, pp. 1149–1156, Nov. 1995.
[9] Y. Pan, G. Dong, and T. Zhang, “Exploiting memory device wearout dynamics to improve NAND flash memory system performance,” in Proc. USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol., 2011, pp. 1–14.
[10] G. Dong, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “Enabling NAND flash memory use soft-decision error correction codes at minimal read latency overhead,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I: Reg. Papers, vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 2412–2421, Sep. 2013.
[11] K.-C. Ho, P.-C. Fang, H.-P. Li, C.-Y. Wang, and H.-C. Chang, “A 45 nm 6b/cell charge-trapping flash memory using LDPC-based ECC and drift-immune soft-sensing engine,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers, 2013, pp. 222–223.
[12] Q. Li, L. Shi, C. Gao, K. Wu, C. J. Xue, Q. Zhuge, and E. H.-M. Sha, “Maximizing IO performance via conflict reduction for flash memory storage systems,” in Proc. Des., Autom. Test Eur. Conf. Exhib., 2015, pp. 904–907.
[13] G. Wu, X. He, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “Exploiting workload dynamics to improve SSD read latency via differentiated error correction codes,” ACM Trans. Des. Autom. Electron. Syst., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 55:1–55:22, 2013.
[14] J. Jeong, S. S. Hahn, S. Lee, and J. Kim, “Improving NAND endurance by dynamic program and erase scaling,” in Proc. 5th USENIX Conf. Hot Topics Storage File Syst., 2013, pp. 1–4.
[15] L. Shi, K. Wu, M. Zhao, C. J. Xue, and H. Edwin, “Retention trimming for wear reduction of flash memory storage systems,” in Proc. 51st ACM/EDAC/IEEE Des. Autom. Conf., 2014, pp. 1–6.
[16] J. Jeong, S. S. Hahn, S. Lee, and J. Kim, “Lifetime improvement of NAND flash-based storage systems using dynamic program and erase scaling,” in Proc. 12th USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol., 2014, pp. 61–74.
[17] B. Peleato and R. Agarwal, “Maximizing mlc nand lifetime and reliability in the presence of write noise,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 2012, pp. 3752–3756.
[18] S. E. C. Ltd., “High-Performance 128-gigabit 3-bit Multi-level-cell NAND Flash Memory,” 2013. [Online]. Available: https:// memorylink.samsung.com/.../detail.do?newsId=12761
[19] Y. Du, D. Zou, Q. Li, L. Shi, H. Jin, and C. J. Xue, “LALDPC: Latency-aware LDPC for read performance improvement of solid state drives,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Massive Storage Syst. Technol., 2017, pp. 1–11.

[20] Y. Pan, G. Dong, Q. Wu, and T. Zhang, “Quasi-nonvolatile SSD: Trading flash memory nonvolatility to improve storage system performance for enterprise applications,” in Proc. High Perform. Comput. Archit., 2012, pp. 1–10.
[21] R.-S. Liu, C.-L. Yang, and W. Wu, “Optimizing NAND flash-based SSDs via retention relaxation,” in Proc. USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol., 2012, pp. 1–11.
[22] H. Park, J. Kim, J. Choi, D. Lee, and S. H. Noh, “Incremental redundancy to reduce data retention errors in flash-based SSDs,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mass Storage Syst. Technol., 2015, pp. 1–13.
[23] M. Zhang, F. Wu, X. He, P. Huang, S. Wang, and C. Xie, “Real: A retention error aware LDPC decoding scheme to improve nand flash read performance,” in Proc. 32nd Symp. Mass Storage Syst. Technol., 2016, pp. 1–13.
[24] Q. Li, L. Shi, C. J. Xue, Q. Zhuge, and E. H.-M. Sha, “Improving ldpc performance via asymmetric sensing level placement on flash memory,” in Proc. 22nd Asia South Pacific Des. Autom. Conf., 2017, pp. 560–565.
[25] D. Park and D. H. Du, “Hot data identification for flash-based storage systems using multiple bloom filters,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Mass Storage Syst. Technol., 2011, pp. 1–11.
[26] G. Wu, B. Eckart, and X. He, “BPAC: An adaptive write buffer management scheme for flash-based Solid State Drives,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Mass Storage Syst. Technol., 2010, pp. 1–6.
[27] L. Shi, J. Li, C. J. Xue, C. Yang, and X. Zhou, “ExLRU: A unified write buffer cache management for flash memory,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Embedded Softw., 2011, pp. 339–348.
[28] H. Kim and S. Ahn, “BPLRU: A buffer management scheme for improving random writes in flash storage,” in Proc. USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol., 2008, pp. 1–14.
[29] S. Lee, D. Shin, Y.-J. Kim, andJ. Kim,“LAST: locality-aware sector translation for NAND flash memory-based storage systems,” ACM SIGOPS Operating Syst. Rev., vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 36–42, 2008.
[30] Y. Pan, G. Dong, and T. Zhang, “Error rate-based wear-leveling for nand flash memory at highly scaled technology nodes,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. Syst., vol. 21, no. 7, pp. 1350–1354, Jul. 2013.
[31] Y.-J. Woo and J.-S. Kim, “Diversifying wear index for mlc nand flash memory to extend the lifetime of SSDs,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Embedded Softw., 2013, pp. 1–10.
[32] Y. Cai, G. Yalcin, O. Mutlu, E. F. Haratsch, A. Cristal, O. S. Unsal, and K. Mai, “Flash correct-and-refresh: Retention-aware error management for increased flash memory lifetime,” in Proc. IEEE 30th Int. Conf. Comput. Des., 2012, pp. 94–101.
[33] S. Lee, T. Kim, K. Kim, and J. Kim, “Lifetime management of flashbased SSDs using recovery-aware dynamic throttling,” in Proc. 10th USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol., 2012, Art. no. 26.
[34] L. Tang, Q. Huang, W. Lloyd, S. Kumar, and K. Li, “RIPQ: Advanced photo caching on flash for facebook,” in Proc. 13th USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol., 2015, pp. 373–386.
[35] Y. Cheng, F. Douglis, P. Shilane, G. Wallace, P. Desnoyers, and K. Li, “Erasing belady’s limitations: In search of flash cache offline optimality,” in Proc. USENIX Annu. Tech. Conf., 2016, pp. 379–392.
[36] C. Li, P. Shilane, F. Douglis, and G. Wallace, “Pannier: Design and analysis of a container-based flash cache for compound objects,” ACM Trans. Storage, vol. 13, no. 3, 2017, Art. no. 24.
[37] K. Zhao, K. S. Venkataraman, X. Zhang, J. Li, N. Zheng, and T. Zhang, “Over-clocked SSD: Safely running beyond flash memory chip I/O clock specs,” in Proc. High Perform. Comput. Archit., 2014, pp. 536–545.
[38] D. Narayanan, E. Thereska, A. Donnelly, S. Elnikety, and A. Rowstron, “Migrating server storage to SSDs: Analysis of tradeoffs,” in Proc. ACM Eur. Conf. Comput. Syst., 2009, pp. 145– 158.
[39] S. Lee and J. Kim, “Effective lifetime-aware dynamic throttling for NAND flash-based SSDs,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 65, no. 4, pp. 1075–1089, Apr. 2016.
[40] J. Jeong, Y. Song, S. S. Hahn, S. Lee, and J. Kim, “Dynamic erase voltage and time scaling for extending lifetime of NAND flash-based SSDs,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 66, no. 4, pp. 616–630, Apr. 2017.
[41] Y. Hu, H. Jiang, D. Feng, L. Tian, H. Luo, and C. Ren, “Exploring and exploiting the multilevel parallelism inside SSDs for improved performance and endurance,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 62, no. 6, pp. 1141–1155, Jun. 2013.
[42] Y. Hu, H. Jiang, D. Feng, L. Tian, H. Luo, and S. Zhang, “Performance impact and interplay of SSD parallelism through advanced commands, allocation strategy and data granularity,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Supercomputing, 2011, pp. 96–107.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:14:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1676

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, VOL. 67, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2018

Qiao Li received the BS and MS degrees from the College of Computer Science, Chongqing University in China, in 2014 and 2017, respectively. She is working toward the PhD degree in Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong. Her research interests include NAND flash memory, embedded systems and computer architecture.

Yejia Di received BS degree from the College of Computer Science, Chongqing University, in China in 2014. She is working toward the PhD degree in the College of Computer Science, Chongqing University. Her research interests include embedded and real-time systems, flash memory and system optimizations.

Liang Shi received the BS degrees in computer science from Xi’an University of Post & Telecommunication, Xi’an, Shanxi, China, in July, 2008, and the PhD degree from University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China, in June, 2013. He is now an associate professor with the College of Computer Science, Chongqing University. His research interests include flash memory, embedded systems, and emerging non-volatile memory technologies.
Congming Gao received the BS degree from the College of Computer Science, Chongqing University, Chongqing, China, in 2014. He is working toward the PhD degree in the College of Computer Science, Chongqing University. His research interests include embedded and real-time systems, nonvolatile memory, and architecture optimizations.

Chun Jason Xue received the BS degree in computer science and engineering from the University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX, in 1997, and the MS and PhD degrees in computer science from the University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, TX, in 2002 and 2007, respectively. He is currently an associate professor with the Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong. His current research interests include memory and parallelism optimization for embedded systems, software/hardware co-design, realtime systems, and computer security.
" For more information on this or any other computing topic, please visit our Digital Library at www.computer.org/publications/dlib.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:14:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

