Information-Optimum LDPC Decoders with Message Alignment for Irregular Codes
Maximilian Stark, Jan Lewandowsky, Gerhard Bauch Hamburg University of Technology Institute of Communications 21073 Hamburg, Germany
Email: {maximilian.stark,jan.lewandowsky,bauch}@tuhh.de

Abstract—In practical implementations, message passing decoding of LDPC codes has to be implemented with finite precision, i.e., the messages are quantized with a small number of bits. This results in a significant performance degradation with respect to decoding with high-precision messages. Recently, we have proposed so-called information bottleneck decoders to design finite-precision decoders with error-correction performance close to high-precision belief-propagation decoding. Earlier works solely focus on the design of information bottleneck decoders for regular LDPC codes or specifically optimized irregular LDPC codes. In this paper, we extend the concept of information bottleneck decoders to irregular LDPC with arbitrary degree distribution. We show that this extension is not straightforward and requires an additional information-optimum step. Therefore, we devise a novel intermediate construction step which we call message alignment. Exemplary numerical simulations using an irregular LDPC code taken from the IEEE 802.11 standard show that incorporating message alignment in the construction yields a 4-bit information bottleneck decoder which performs only 0.15 dB worse than a double-precision belief propagation decoder and outperforms a min-sum decoder.
I. INTRODUCTION
In modern wireless communication systems, advanced forward error correction is inevitable. Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are very powerful error-correcting codes [1]. LDPC codes fully unfold their capacity-approaching errorcorrection capabilities under message passing decoding only if precise and computationally complex belief propagation decoding is performed. Mainly, two factors induce this high complexity. On the one hand, the exchanged messages have to be represented precisely in order to reliably exchange soft information and thus ensure optimum performance. On the other hand, elaborate arithmetic operations which combine incoming beliefs, e.g., at a check node, form a major performance bottleneck. Especially in mobile applications, where power and delay limitations at the mobile terminals are strict, the computational burden of high-precision message passing decoding is too high. Instead, practical hardware implementations use finite-precision message passing algorithms where the messages are quantized and the node operations are simplified by smart approximations. However, the errorrate performance of such finite-precision decoders deteriorates significantly with decreasing precision [2].
Recently, a fundamentally different approach was proposed, the so-called information bottleneck or discrete decoder [3]–

[6]. This decoder leverages ideas from information theory and machine learning and differs from conventional finite-precision decoders mainly in the following two points. First, instead of executing the conventional arithmetic exactly or approximated in the nodes with discrete values, the node operations are replaced by relevant-information-maximizing look-up tables which map discrete input messages onto discrete output messages. The required message mappings are designed using a relevant-information-preserving clustering technique, e.g, the information bottleneck method as shown in [3], [4] or using greedy algorithms [6]. This leads to the second characteristic of information bottleneck decoders. The relevant-informationmaximizing look-up tables let become LLR messages obsolete. Instead, integer-valued pointers to look-up table entries, sometimes called cluster indices, are exchanged, which do not represent LLRs. In our previous works, we have shown that already 4 bits are sufficient to represent the exchanged messages [3], [4], [7]: Our proposed 4-bit information bottleneck decoder for regular LDPC codes approaches the performance of double precision belief-propagation decoding up to 0.1 dB over Eb/N0 with a vastly reduced implementation complexity.
Existing work is mainly limited to regular LDPC codes. A first step towards information bottleneck decoders for irregular LDPC codes was described in [2] where the authors advocate that existing LDPC codes are often ill-suited for discrete decoding and thus proposed a joint optimization of the node-degree distribution and the look-up tables. That is, they proposed to adapt the code to the specific shortcomings of the available information bottleneck decoding method instead of fundamentally changing the decoder design.
Contrastingly, in this paper, we propose a generalized design approach suitable for arbitrary irregular LDPC codes as defined in many standards like IEEE 802.11 or DVB-S2 without any modification of the LDPC code itself. In detail, the paper contains the following main contributions:
• We extend the discrete density evolution scheme from [6] to be applicable to arbitrary irregular LDPC codes.
• We describe in detail why an application of existing information bottleneck decoders to irregular LDPC codes suffers from severe performance degradation.
• We derive the underlying information-theoretic problem formulation and devise an optimization technique which we call message alignment as novel step in the design of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Un9iv7.8D-1o-w5n3l8o6a-d4e7d27o-n1J/1u8n/e$2341,.20002©6 2a0t 1182:I1E1E:4E5 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the message mappings. • We construct a 4-bit information bottleneck decoder for
irregular LDPC codes where all conventional arithmetic in the nodes is replaced by simple look-up tables and only 4-bit integer-valued messages are passed. • Our proposed decoder, constructed for an irregular LDPC code from the IEEE 802.11 standard achieves error-rates superior to min-sum decoding and only 0.15 dB away from double-precision belief propagation decoding.
The paper is organized as follows. The information bottleneck method and LDPC codes are briefly reviewed in Section II. In Section III, we propose message alignment resulting in a general information bottleneck decoder design approach for arbitrary irregular LDPC codes. In Section IV, numerical simulations comparing the performance of our proposed decoder with several reference systems are provided. Section V concludes the paper.

II. PREREQUISITES
This section briefly reviews LDPC codes and the information bottleneck method. Throughout the paper, we use the following notation: the elements y ∈ Y from the event space of a discrete random variable Y occur with probability Pr(Y = y) and p(y) defines the corresponding probability distribution. The cardinality or alphabet size of a random variable is denoted by |Y|. The joint distribution of X and Y is denoted p(x, y).

A. LDPC Codes

An LDPC code is defined by a sparse Nc × Nv parity check matrix H. To analyze the structure of H, an LDPC code can be visualized using a Tanner graph. A Tanner graph is a bipartite graph consisting of one set for the Nv variable nodes and the other set for the Nc check nodes which is schematically illustrated in Figure 1. The connections between the two sets are characterized in a probabilistic manner by the edge-degree distributions for the variable nodes and the check nodes [8]:

λmax
λ(z) = λdzd−1
d=2

ρmax
ρ(z) = ρdzd−1, (1)
d=2

where λd denotes the fraction of edges connected to variable nodes with degree d and ρd denotes the fraction of edges connected to check nodes with degree d. If all variable nodes
have the same degree dv and all check nodes have the same degree dc the LDPC code is called regular and otherwise it is called irregular.

B. The Information Bottleneck Method
The information bottleneck method is a generic unsupervised clustering framework from the field of machine learning [9], [10]. It attempts to design a compression mapping p(t|y) which maps an observation Y onto a compact compression variable T . Typically, |Y| |T |. The key idea is to design p(t|y) such that the maximum possible amount of mutual information I(T ; X) ≤ I(X; Y ) is preserved under a constraint for the cardinality |T |. The random variable X is termed the

...

...

y1 y2

t ydc−1

...

b1

. . . b2 . . .

bdc−1 . . . x . . .

Fig. 1: Illustration of a Tanner graph and message passing.
relevant random variable. Several information bottleneck algorithms exist, intended to find an locally-optimum compression mapping p(t|y) [10]. All information bottleneck algorithms input a joint distribution p(x, y) and yield the compression mapping p(t|y) and a joint distribution p(x, t) = p(x|t)p(t). Typically, in the context of signal processing, one assumes a deterministic input-output mapping, e.g., at a quantizer. Hence, it is often sufficient to consider only deterministic mappings p(t|y), i.e., p(t|y) ∈ {0, 1} ∀(t, y). Such mappings can be interpreted as look-up tables mapping y onto t. More details related to the information bottleneck method can be found in [9], [10]. Throughout the paper we use the terms mapping and clustering synonymously. Please note that when performing a mapping p(t|y) any physical meaning contained in Y is lost, i.e., the compression variable T on its own has no distinct meaning and the event space T can be chosen arbitrarily. Hence, a coupling between the relevant variable X and T is needed given by p(x|t). We sometimes refer to this distribution as meaning of a cluster index t with respect to x.

III. INFORMATION BOTTLENECK DECODERS FOR IRREGULAR LDPC CODES USING MESSAGE ALIGNMENT
This section contains our main contributions. After a brief review of information bottleneck decoder design for regular LDPC codes, we generalize this concept to arbitrary irregular LDPC codes. First, we derive the relevant-informationpreserving message mappings, which replace the conventional arithmetic operations. Afterwards, we present two perspectives, a graphical and an information-theoretical one, to motivate the need for an additional step in the decoder design. As a result, we propose a technique which we call message alignment.

A. Information Bottleneck Decoders for Regular LDPC Codes
As mentioned in the introduction, the need for quasicontinuous LLRs and complex node operations makes belief propagation decoding computationally intensive. Information bottleneck decoders were shown to overcome this impairment, i.e., they pair low implementation complexity and near-optimal performance [3], [5], [6]. The fundamental idea of these decoders is to propagate compressed but highly informative integer-valued messages along the edges of a Tanner graph. In a second step, node operations optimized for discrete input alphabets are designed. These operations are look-up operations mapping a set of incoming, discrete messages onto a discrete outgoing message and thereby neglecting the original arithmetic operations. The vital task of this mapping is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:11:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

to ensure that all relevant information gained by the processing of the incoming messages is contained in the compactly represented output. A suitable information-theoretic framework for such problems is the information bottleneck method [9].
The information bottleneck method constructs relevantinformation-maximizing clusterings given a joint probability distribution of the observed random variable Y and relevant random variable X. In the context of LDPC decoder design, the observed random variables are the M incoming discrete messages y = [y1, . . . , yM ]T and the relevant random variable X depends on the node type. For a variable node, X represents the underlying code bit of a particular node, whereas, if the mapping is designed for a check node, X represents the (mod 2)-sum of the connected, possibly different code bits b1, . . . , bM (cf. Figure 1). The joint distribution p(x, y) serving as input for the information bottleneck algorithms is determined using discrete density evolution [6]. Although classical density evolution was originally intended to find the decoding thresholds of an LDPC code ensemble, previous works have shown that the joint distributions exchanged in discrete density evolution equal exactly the necessary input distributions for the information bottleneck method [3]–[6]. The term discrete in discrete density evolution implies that instead of processing continuous joint distributions, also the event space of the observed random variable Y , i.e., Y = {0, 1, . . . , |Y| − 1} is discrete meaning that the realizations y are from a finite alphabet with cardinality |Y|. Hence, given an observation vector y, |Y|M possible input combinations exist. To prevent an exponential growth in the number of input combinations while passing p(x, y) over the Tanner graph during discrete density evolution, p(x, y) is squeezed through a compact information bottleneck. I.e., a relevantinformation preserving clustering p(t|y) is introduced such that the outgoing message t ∈ T = {0, 1, . . . , |T | − 1} is from a finite alphabet with cardinality |T | |Y|M . Once the mappings are found, the actual decoding simplifies to simple look-ups in offline generated tables, which map the sequence of incoming integers y onto an outgoing integervalued message t. For a mathematical analysis and a detailed description of information bottleneck decoders for regular codes we refer the reader to [3]–[6].
B. Relevant-Information-Preserving Clusterings for Arbitrary Irregular LDPC Codes
In contrast to regular LDPC codes, irregular LDPC codes are characterized by nodes with varying degrees, i.e., the number of incoming messages differs. Thus, the input joint distribution pd(x, y) for the information bottleneck depends on the node degree d. Consequently, it is not sufficient to design message mappings only for each node type but for each node type considering the individual node degrees. For ease of notation, we introduce subscripts for the distributions indicating the node degree, i.e., pd(t|y) is the relevant-informationpreserving clustering at a node with degree d found given the input joint distribution pd(x, y). In density evolution a code ensemble is considered, i.e., instead of a particular irregular

LDPC code with a certain parity check matrix, the connectivity between variable and check nodes is only known on average defined by the degree distribution. To construct the required input joint distributions pd(x, y), discrete density evolution from [6] needs to be extended to consider the degree distribution of the code ensemble. In continuous density evolution, to incorporate the degree distribution one has to average over all possible degrees resulting in an average distribution pd¯(x, y), i.e.,

λmax

pd¯(x, y) = λdpd(x, y)

(2)

d=2

where λd is from the edge-degree distribution [8]. In case of discrete density evolution, a relevant-information-
preserving clustering is crucial to inhibit the exponential
growth of the possible input combinations. Thus, pd¯(x, t) instead of pd¯(x, y) has to be tracked in discrete density evolution. We define the average distribution pd¯(x, t) as

λmax

λmax

pd¯(x, t) = λdpd(x, t) = λd

pd(t|y)pd(x, y)

d=2

d=2

y∈Ydvec

(3)

where Ydvec denotes the set of all possible combinations of y for a node with degree d.

Please note that assuming a trivial, straightforward gen-

eralization of information bottleneck decoders to irregular

LDPC codes, one would stop at this point. In this case, look-

ups in node-degree-specific tables pd(t|y) would replace the node operations and only integer values cluster indices are

exchanged. However, in the next subsections we demonstrate

that such a design approach is adversely and an additional step

is integral.

C. Message Alignment - A Graphical Perspective

In this subsection, some consequences of definition (3) will

be sketched resulting in what we call the message alignment

problem. Please recall that LLRs are not needed in the entire

information bottleneck decoder during decoding, because only

cluster indices t are exchanged. However, analyzing LLRs

interpretation of a particular cluster index t in density evo-

lution, allows to graphically illustrate the limiting factor of

the considered decoding method for irregular codes. Figure

2a visualizes the meanings of certain cluster indices t with

respect to x before and after averaging over the degree

distribution

according

to

(3).

Here,

L2(x|t)

=

log

p2 (X =0|t) p2 (X =1|t)

and

L4(x|t)

=

log

p4 (X =0|t) p4 (X =1|t)

denote

the

conveyed

meanings

of a certain cluster t with respect to x of variable nodes

with degree two and four before, i.e., without averaging

according to (3). Both compression variables have the same

event space T . However, the meaning conveyed by a certain

cluster with respect to X differs. Vividly, this means that the

red cross and blue dot for the same index t in Figure 2a

do not superimpose. For instance, if t = 13 and d = 2,

L2(x|t) = 2.88 and if d = 4, L4(x|t) = 4.02 (cf. arrows in Figure 2a). After application of (3) the averaged meaning,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:11:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Ld(x|t)

5 L2(x|t) L4(x|t) Ld¯(x|t)
0
−5

Going back to Figure 2a we note by comparing the blue and red makers, that providing the node degree d together with the respective cluster index t is required to recover the proper belief on the relevant bit X. Therefore, from an information theoretic point of view I(X; T, D) upperbounds the information on X of a node receiving an incoming discrete message t. Rewriting I(X; T, D) using the chain rule of mutual information yields

I(X; T, D) = I(X; D|T ) + I(X; T ),

(4)

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 t
(a)
5 L4(x|z) Ld¯(x|z) L2(x|z)
0

Ld(x|z)

−5

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 z
(b)

Fig. 2: Averaged and originally cluster meaning of variable nodes with degree two and four (a) without and (b) with message alignment.

i.e., 2a)

Ld¯(x|t) = log lies somewhere

ppindd¯¯((XXbe==t01w||tte))en(caf.ndbladcokestrniaenitghleers

in Figure match the

originally intended belief of the variable node with degree

two nor to the one with degree four. Nevertheless, a closer

look at Figure 2a leads to another interesting observation.

Although the meanings corresponding to the same indices, can

differ significantly, i.e., L2(x|T = t) = L4(x|T = t), quite

similar meanings are expressed by different cluster indices,

i.e. L2(x|T = t2) ≈ L4(x|T4 = t4) for some t2 = t4. The

explanation of this phenomenon is as follows. The clusterings

pd(t|y) are determined independently. Although by construction the realizations of the compression variables td ∈ Td coin-

cide, the realization have no natural or physical interpretations

which enable a meaningful order or relation, e.g., between

t2 ∈ T2 and t4 ∈ T4. In other words, the messages are not aligned with respect to there belief on x. We advocate that

this misalignment inhibits a straightforward application of (3).

At this point, we defer further evidence to Section IV where

it is shown that information bottleneck decoders, which are

generalized to arbitrary irregular LDPC codes using (3) alone,

exhibit notable performance degradation.

D. Message Alignment - An Information-Theoretic Perspective
In this subsection, we derive an information-theoretic formulation of the message alignment problem.

where I(X; T ) is the information about X obtained by receiving T alone and I(X; D|T ) is the additional information gained by providing also the node degree if the cluster index is already known. In turn, if I(X; D|T ) ≈ 0, from an information-theoretic point of view conveying the delivering node degree d in addition to the cluster index yields no information gain about X. Exchanging node degree and cluster index and therefore designing different message mappings for all possible combinations of delivering and receiving node degrees would dramatically increase the space and computational complexity of the decoder design. Thus, we propose a novel message mapping construction which minimizes I(X; D|T ) such that exchanging the node degree in addition to the cluster index yields no information gain. Expanding I(X; T, D) for a variable node yields

λmax

I(X; D|T ) =

λdpd(t)DKL{pd(x|t)||pd¯(x|t)} (5)

t∈T d=2

= Et,d [DKL{pd(x|t)||pd¯(x|t)}] ,

(6)

where DKL{.||.} denotes the Kullback-Leibler divergence. The result from (6) has a direct, intuitive link to Figure
2a. If the blue and red markers would nearly superimpose
for a particular cluster, the change in meaning introduced
by averaging would be negligible. Similarly, in this case the Kullback-Leibler divergence between pd(x|t) and pd¯(x|t) would be small as well. If this holds on average for all clusters and node degrees, I(X; D|T ) ≈ 0. Motivated by the observation that similar meanings are expressed by different cluster indices, i.e. L2(x|T = t2) ≈ L4(x|T4 = t4) for some t2 = t4, paired with (6) we define message alignment as reordering strategy to obtain

min
pd (z |t)

Ez,d

[DK

L

{pd

(x|z

)||pd¯(x|z

)}]

,

∀d.

(7)

where pd(z|t) is a mapping describing the found ordering and Z is the aligned random variable. I.e., message alignment assigns those Ld(x|t)’s to a new similar cluster index z which represent approximately the same meaning with respect to X. Figure 2b depicts the aligned meanings after application of the message alignment algorithm presented in the next subsection. Obviously, the algorithm identifies and assigns those different cluster indices from different nodes degrees to a new index z which have a similar meaning, i.e., the markers superimpose. As a consequence, I(X; D|Z) ≈ 0 and now z instead of t is exchanged over the edges of the Tanner graph.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:11:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

pd(x|t) o
pd¯(x|z)

pd (x|t) o
pd(z|t)

...

o

pd (z|t)

...

Fig. 3: Flow graph of iterative message alignment.

to information bottleneck decoders designed without mes-
sage alignment. The look-up tables used while decoding are pd(z|y) = t∈T pd(z|t)pd(t|y). We advocate that message alignment does not affect the implementation complexity of an information bottleneck decoder, if |Z| = |T |. In this case, the look-up tables pd(z|y) have the same size as pd(t|y) and z instead of t is exchanged over the edges of the Tanner graph.

E. Message Alignment - Algorithm

To the best of our knowledge, due to the structure of (7) and the restriction to deterministic mappings pd(z|t), deriving an optimal implicit solution for (7) is not possible. In literature,
iterative algorithms were proposed to minimize problems
involving the Kullback-Leibler divergence [11]. Thus, we
propose an iterative algorithm as depicted in Figure 3.
First, only the independently generated mappings for each
node degree and the corresponding degree-specific cluster meanings pd(x|t) exist. The black squares in Figure 3 depict the actual message alignment steps. According to (7), in each step, a particular pd(x|t) is aligned with respect to the beliefs of the average distribution pd¯(x|z) (cf. Figure 3). To find a reordering pd(z|t) minimizing (7), a search over all candidates t for the best new cluster index z is performed, i.e.,

z

=

arg

min
z∗

DKL

{pd

(x|T

=

t)||pd¯(x|Z

=

z∗)} ,

∀t,

(8)

which yields pd(z|t). Afterwards, using the determined pd(z|t), pd(x|z) is computed. Then, pd¯(x, z) is updated, considering only the normalized weights of the already aligned

nodes similar to (3). As visualized in Figure 3 this averaged
distribution pd¯(x|z) is forwarded and serves as new input in the next alignment step, together with pd (x|t), i.e., the not aligned cluster meanings of a different node with degree d .
Again the search according to (8) is performed. Once pd (z|t) is found, the averaged meaning is updated and forwarded.

This processes, as shown in Figure 3, is performed for all

node degrees and repeated iteratively. To start the algorithm,
pd¯(x|z) is initialized with an arbitrary mapping pd (x|t). Once stable solutions for all message alignment mappings
pd(z|t) are determined, the final average joint distribution pd¯(x, z)

λmax

pd¯(x, z) = λd

pd(z|t)pd(t|y)pd(x, y) (9)

d=2 y∈Ydvec

is computed. This distribution is passed in discrete density
evolution and leveraged to design the relevant-information-
preserving mappings.
Figure 2b visualizes the LLRs L2(x|z) and L4(x|z), i.e., L2(x|t) and L4(x|t) after applying the deterministic mapping p2(z|t) and p4(z|t) which where found using the algorithm described above. The LLRs are now aligned, i.e., L2(x|z) ≈ L4(x|z). As a consequence, the average LLR Ld¯(x|z) is quite similar to L2(x|z) and L4(x|z), i.e., the original beliefs can propagate through the Tanner graph without significant

distortion. In the next section, it is investigated how this re-

duced distortion improves the decoding performance compared

IV. INVESTIGATION AND RESULTS
In this section, we apply message alignment during the construction of discrete decoders for irregular LDPC codes. The investigated irregular code is selected from the IEEE 802.11 standard [12]. We provide numerical simulations for our proposed information bottleneck decoder and several reference systems assuming transmission over an AWGN channel with 16-QAM modulation.

A. Bit Error Rate (BER) Performance
The considered, standardized code has a length of N = 1296 bits, code rate R = 0.5 and the degree distributions [12]:

ρ(z) = 0.814z6 + 0.186z7

(10)

λ(z) = 0.256z1 + 0.314z2 + 0.047z3 + 0.383z10. (11)

For performance evaluation, BER curves for three conventional decoders and two information bottleneck decoders are shown in Figure 4. All compared systems perform i = 50 decoding iterations. The properties of the decoders used are summarized in Table I.
The first reference decoder (cf. blue curve in Figure 4) is a belief propagation decoder which receives quasi-continuous LLRs from the channel and performs box-plus operations at the check nodes and summations at the variable node.
In a second step, we include a 4-bit channel output quantizer as described in [13] in our simulation. The belief propagation decoder receives only 16 distinct LLRs from the quantizer. However, the internal processing remains unchanged. We denote this approach belief propagation decoding with quantized channel output (cf. green curve in Figure 4).
The third considered decoding approach is min-sum decoding (cf. red curve in Figure 4). The min-sum decoder, as the belief propagation decoder, receives channel LLRs which are not quantized and need to be represented precisely, e.g., using double-precision floating points. These LLRs are exchanged while message passing decoding. However, the box-plus operation at the check node is approximated in minsum decoding and thus much simpler compared to box-plus.
The aim of information bottleneck decoders is to combine both domains, i.e., simple node operations and compressed messages such that only a small number of bits has to be exchanged. We restrict the cardinality of the compression variable T and thus also |Z| to |T | = |Z| = 16, which equals the number of clusters used by proposed information bottleneck decoders for regular LDPC codes [3], [13]. Hence, all messages can be represented as 4-bit integers.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:11:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE I: Properties of the compared decoding algorithms.

Decoder

Node Operations (Check Node) Messages (Internal) Messages (Channel)

belief propagation

arithmetic (Box-Plus)

64 bit

64 bit

belief propagation, quantized channel output

arithmetic (Box-Plus)

64 bit

4 bit

min-sum

approx. arithmetic (Min-Sum)

64 bit

64 bit

information bottleneck decoder [3]

Look-Up Table

4 bit

4 bit

proposed information bottleneck decoder

Look-Up Table

4 bit

4 bit

Message Alignment no
yes

100

10−1 10−2 10−3

min-sum double LLRs
belief propagation, quantized channel output

0.15 dB

BER

10−4

o - information bottleneck, proposed, 4 bit integers

x - information bottleneck,

10−5

no message alignment

belief propagation

10−6 0

double LLRs

1

2

3

4

5

Eb/N0 in dB Fig. 4: BER performance of our proposed decoder and reference systems with properties summarized in Table I.

The magenta curve in Figure 4 corresponds to our proposed information bottleneck decoder which uses message alignment during the construction. When constructed without message alignment, the information bottleneck decoder (cf. light blue curve) diverges already at a BER of 10−4. In contrast, the results obtained with our proposed information bottleneck decoder are quite remarkable compared to the performance of a belief propagation decoder working with double-precision data types. Although only 16 different integers were processed by the information bottleneck decoder, the performance degradation in terms of bit error rate is only 0.15 dB for a BER of 10−3 down to 10−6. The operations performed during discrete decoding are only simple look-ups in the offline-generated look-up tables, whereas the belief propagation reference simulation processed double precision channel output values and also performed double precision box-plus operations.
The performance degradation is even smaller if the belief propagation decoder with quantized channel LLRs is considered which suffers from the same information loss introduced by the channel quantizer as the discrete decoder. Finally, although the min-sum decoder exchanges double precision LLRs, the performance is significantly worse compared to our proposed discrete decoder. As a consequence, the performance gain achieved by applying message alignment allows constructing information bottleneck decoders for irregular LDPC codes which pair low complexity, simple node operations and close to optimum performance.

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we generalized the construction of information bottleneck decoder to be also applicable for arbitrary irregular

LDPC codes. For this purpose, we first extended discrete
density evolution for irregular codes and revealed that due to
the discrete, finite alphabets of the compression variables, a
straightforward application of existing methods is not possible
without an additional information-optimal step. We derived
the underlying information-theoretic optimization problem and
devised a solution, which we vividly call message alignment.
By adding this extra step, we were able to build a 4-bit infor-
mation bottleneck decoder in which all arithmetic operations
have been replaced by look-up tables mapping incoming 4-
bit messages onto outgoing 4-bit messages. Our presented
decoder is characterized by a vastly lower implementation
and computational complexity than conventional decoders,
but at the same time achieves a comparable (0.15 dB gap
to double-precision belief propagation) or even much better
performance compared to min-sum decoders. We believe that
the demonstrated applicability now also for practically relevant
irregular LDPC codes, increases the relevance of information
bottleneck decoders as promising candidates for practically
important finite-precision LDPC decoding.
REFERENCES
[1] S.-Y. Chung et al., “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 db of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, 2001.
[2] M. Meidlinger and G. Matz, “On irregular LDPC codes with quantized message passing decoding,” in Proc. IEEE 18th International Workshop on Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications (SPAWC’17), Piscataway, NJ, 2017, pp. 1–5.
[3] J. Lewandowsky and G. Bauch, “Information-optimum LDPC decoders based on the information bottleneck method,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 4054–4071, 2018.
[4] J. Lewandowsky, M. Stark, and G. Bauch, “Optimum message mapping LDPC decoders derived from the sum-product algorithm,” in Proc. ICC’16, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 2016, pp. 1–6.
[5] F. J. C. Romero and B. M. Kurkoski, “LDPC decoding mappings that maximize mutual information,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 2391–2401, Sep. 2016.
[6] B. M. Kurkoski, K. Yamaguchi, and K. Kobayashi, “Noise thresholds for discrete LDPC decoding mappings,” in Proc. GLOBECOM’08, New Orleans, LO, USA, 2008, pp. 1–5.
[7] G. Bauch et al., “Information-optimum discrete signal processing for detection and decoding,” in Proc. VTC-Spring’18, Porto, Portugal, 2018.
[8] W. Ryan and S. Lin, Channel codes: classical and modern. Cambridge University Press, 2009.
[9] N. Tishby, F. C. Pereira, and W. Bialek, “The information bottleneck method,” in Proc. 37th Allerton Conference on Communication and Computation, 1999.
[10] N. Slonim, “The information bottleneck: Theory and applications,” Ph.D. dissertation, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, 2002.
[11] T. Minka et al., “Divergence measures and message passing,” Technical report, Microsoft Research, Tech. Rep., 2005.
[12] Wireless LAN Medium Access Control MAC and Physical Layer PHY specifications, IEEE Std. 802.11, 2012.
[13] J. Lewandowsky, M. Stark, and G. Bauch, “Message alignment for discrete LDPC decoders with quadrature amplitude modulation,” in Proc. ISIT’17, Aachen, Germany, 2017, pp. 2925–2929.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:11:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

