2644

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 71, NO. 5, MAY 2024

A Low Valid Throughput Loss LDPC Codec Architecture With Variable Code Rate
Jiaming Liu , Zhijian Hao , Lingxiu Zhao, Jiazheng Lian , Jun Tao , Senior Member, IEEE, Yibo Fan , Member, IEEE, and Quanyuan Feng , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Shortening is a rate-compatible technology that can improve LDPC error correction performance by modifying the code rate. However, as the code rate decreases, the throughput of valid data drops rapidly. Reducing the attenuation of valid throughput at low code rates is challenging. For this reason, this brief proposes two contributions. First, a Block Tag-based encoding method is presented with a non-fixed code length, which reduces the latency caused by fixed-length communications. Second, a novel Time Division Multiplexing (TDM) architecture is developed to improve valid throughput, reducing resource utilization compared to conventional multiplexers. Based on the above contributions, the codec is implemented on FPGA and the results show that the valid throughput loss is low in changing from high to low code rates.

Index Terms—LDPC codec, throughput loss, time division Fig. 1. The transmission method with shortening technology. multiplexing, non-fixed code length, FPGA.

invalid information increases the latency of receiving and

decoding. In the proposed method, invalid padding bits are

I. INTRODUCTION

removed, as shown in Fig. 1(b). The remaining bandwidth

R ATE-COMPATIBLE technology, a method for tuning LDPC error correction performance, is widely used in Internet of Things (IoT) applications [1]. Particularly, IoT edge platform requires dynamically adjusting the code rate to accommodate time-varying channels during mobility. LDPC base code is modified by puncturing, extending, or shortening to generate multi-rate LDPC codes with different performances [2]. In recent years, rate-compatible LDPC codecs have been widely proposed. Multi-rate codecs [3], [4] have been optimized through logic-sharing [5], algorithm improvements [6], and the construction of LDPC codes [7], among others.
However, in resource-constrained IoT devices, reducing the code rate by shortening can lead to a pronounced decline in throughput. Shortening introduces invalid padding bits that occupy part of the bandwidth in the fixed-length transmission of the rate-compatible codec, as shown in Fig. 1(a). Adding

is used to transmit multiple encoded frames in the proposed non-fixed-length codec, improving the valid throughput and reducing the valid throughput loss.
In this brief, two methods are proposed to address the reduction of valid bandwidth and the multiple decoding latencies. First, a shortening technology with Block Tag can identify information block and parity check block to achieve multi-group transmission with non-fixed code length, which removes invalid padding bits to reduce throughput loss for block-based QC-LDPC code. Second, a miniaturized TDM decoder architecture with a shorter iteration calculation chain is presented to enhance valid throughput and reduce valid throughput loss in multi-group transmission.
The remainder of this brief is organized as follows: valid throughput loss is described in Section II, and the nonfixed-length transmission method and the TDM decoder optimization scheme are proposed in Section III. The low valid throughput loss LDPC codec architecture is implemented and

Manuscript received 21 February 2023; revised 9 July 2023, 28 August 2023, and 14 October 2023; accepted 13 December 2023. Date of publication 19 December 2023; date of current version 22 May 2024. This work was supported in part by the Important Project of the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62090012. This brief was recommended by Associate Editor J. Lin. (Corresponding author: Quanyuan Feng.)
Jiaming Liu, Zhijian Hao, Jiazheng Lian, Jun Tao, and Yibo Fan are with the State Key Laboratory of Integrated Chips and Systems, Fudan University, Shanghai 201203, China (e-mail: liujm22@m.fudan.edu.cn; taojun@fudan.edu.cn; fanyibo@fudan.edu.cn).
Lingxiu Zhao and Quanyuan Feng are with the Institute of Microelectronics, Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu 611756, China (e-mail: fengquanyuan@swjtu.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at https://doi.org/10.1109/TCSII.2023.3344221.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSII.2023.3344221

verified in Section IV; finally, Section V concludes this brief.

II. VALID THROUGHPUT LOSS FOR LDPC CODEC

The throughput is fixed for the circuit of conventional LDPC codecs, but the invalid padding bits of shortening reduce the amount of valid information in a single transmission. The evaluation of LDPC codecs with variable code rates cannot rely on throughput alone. The system must be evaluated by valid throughput, i.e., the throughput of valid information.
The throughput TP is defined as:

TP

=

I Tcodec

× fclock,

(1)

1549-7747 c 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:32:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: LOW VALID THROUGHPUT LOSS LDPC CODEC ARCHITECTURE WITH VARIABLE CODE RATE

2645

TABLE I THE ENCODED VECTOR TRANSMITTED AT AVAILABLE CODE RATES

Fig. 2. The parity check matrix H of C2 code and the submatrix B of the generator matrix G. In the proposed method, matrix H is divided into 16 blocks, and matrix B is divided into 14 blocks.

where I denotes the number of information bits, Tcodec means the latency of the codec, and fclock shows the system’s clock frequency. As can be further known, the valid throughput TPv is shown as:

TPv

=

Ivalid Tcodec

× fclock

=

I − Ipad Tcodec

× fclock,

(2)

where Ipad represents the number of invalid information bits. Valid throughput (TPv) can quantify the performance of codec in transmitting valid information (Ivalid).
For multi-rate LDPC codecs, the valid throughput (TPv) drops from high to low code rate (r). Therefore, the valid
throughput loss (TPLoss) is proposed to measure the throughput attenuation when transforming the code rate, shown as:

TPLoss

=

TPvmax − TPvmin , TPvmax × (rmax − rmin)

(3)

where TPvmax denotes the maximum valid throughput at the maximum available code rate (rmax), TPvmin represents the minimum valid throughput at the minimum available code rate (rmin). TPLoss means the attenuation ratio of valid throughput at normalized code rates, which is utilized to quantify valid throughput attenuation as the code rate varies. Generally, a lower valid throughput loss indicates a more stable throughput in rate-compatible system.

III. PROPOSED METHOD
A. Non-Fixed-Length Transmission Based on Block Tag
The conventional codecs only support fixed-length transmission, which means that a large number of invalid padding bits (Ipad) are filled in a single transmission when shortening. For this reason, a Block Tag-based transmission method is proposed to remove the invalid padding bits and reduce circuit complexity, wherein the block serves as the smallest unit.
The Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS) Near-Earth standard LDPC code (C2 code) is used as an example. The code rate of C2 basic LDPC code (H) is 7/8, as shown in Fig. 2. The parity check matrix (H) is composed of 2 × 16 sparse submatrices (Ai,j) of dimension 511×511. The calculation of encoding is expressed as [s, p] = s × G, s means the information vector (7154 bits), and p denotes the parity vector (1022 bits), i.e., the encoded data has a total of 8176 bits. The matrix G is defined as the generator matrix satisfying G·HT = 0, which is composed of an identity matrix E and a matrix B. The dimension of the matrix E is 7154 × 7154, and the matrix B is composed of 14 × 2 cyclic sub-matrices.
In the proposed method, the parity check matrix H is divided into 16 blocks according to the size of the submatrix, and the matrix G is divided into 14 blocks, as shown in Fig. 2. When shortening, one or more blocks with the same serial

Fig. 3.

The

encoded

data

frame

with

code

rate

z×β z+2

,

z

is

the

number

of

Blocks(I).

number in matrix H and G are used as invalid padding blocks,

i.e., the smallest unit of shortening is a block. There are a total

of 14 available code rates. The dense location of the invalid

padding bits retains the properties of the cyclic submatrices

when removing invalid blocks. In the proposed method, the

vectors of invalid blocks are not transmitted, and the length

of encoded frame transmitted at available code rates is shown

in Table I. Block(I) represents the information vector and

Block(p) indicates the parity check vector. Under the encoded

vector with the same length (16 blocks), the valid information

of the proposed non-fixed length method Ivalid(Non-fixed) is more than that of the fixed length method Ivalid(fixed) at a low

code rate. Increasing the valid information can significantly

improve the valid throughput.

Block Tag is introduced as the block identification (1 bit)

to obtain frame length. The tag of the Block(I) (Tg0) is used

as the start bit of the block to indicate that the block is an

information vector, and the tag of the Block(p) (Tg1) signifies

that the block is a parity vector. Since the parity blocks are

two Blocks(p) at any code rate, the number of Tg0 (Mtg0) is counted by decoder until two consecutive Tg1s are detected, then the number of blocks in a single frame is Mtg0 + 2.
However, the channel’s noise may impact the accuracy of

Block Tag. Therefore, it is necessary to introduce forward

error correction (FEC) techniques in Block Tag to improve the

accuracy of Block Tag. In the brief, N-modular redundancy is

employed as error correction for Block Tag, i.e., the encoder

sends Ntag identical Block Tags, and the decoder uses the most

frequent value as the true Block Tag. Hence, the encoded data

frame

with

code

rate

z×β z+2

is

shown

in

Fig.

3.

In principle, the error correction performance of Block Tag

is much more excellent than that of the data. As shown in

Fig. 4, the experimental results show that the number of Tag

errors decreases as the length of Block Tag increases. When

EbNo > −4.5dB, no error occurs with Block Tag (33 bits)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:32:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2646

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 71, NO. 5, MAY 2024

Fig. 6. The calculation chain of BF algorithm.

Fig. 4. The number of incorrect Block Tags under AWGN channel.

Fig. 7. The calculation chain of the proposed single-bit decoding algorithm.

As the BF algorithm is a single-bit decoding algorithm,
only one bit (Xf ) is flipped in a single iteration. Although the variable nodes X(t) of the t-th iteration differs from the variable nodes X(t−1) of the (t−1)-th iteration only by 1 bit, the

reliability still needs to be recalculated, and the unreasonable

Fig. 5. The decoders with variable methods.
from the Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) channel. Thus, a suitable length of Block Tag (Ntag) can ensure the accuracy of Block Tag.

calculation increases the delays in decoding.
In this brief, a proposed single-bit decoding algorithm is developed based on a shorter iteration chain. The vector V(t)
is defined as the value of the T-th iterative multiplication as:

Vi(t) =

Xj(t).

(5)

j∈N(i)

B. A Miniaturized TDM Decoder Scheme
Fixed-length decoders face challenges in parallel processing within multiplexers (Fig. 5(b)). The main reason is the long receiving latency of invalid padding bits, which leads to extended intervals between two frames in multiplexers and results in low improvement of multiplexers compared to a single decoder (Fig. 5(a)). However, in the proposed nonfixed-length method (Fig. 5(c)), the multiplexer computes multiple frames with no intervals in parallel, improving the

Since only 1 bit differs between Xj(t) and Xj(t−1), then only the number of M(j) bits differ between V(t) and V(t−1), so Eq. (4) can be updated to:

Vi(t)

=

−Vi(t−1)⎛i

∈

M(f (t−1)) ⎞

,

(6a)

f (t) = arg min⎝

Vi(t)⎠(t > 1).

(6b)

f

i∈M(f )

throughput in a single transmission. When the code rate is

lower, the number of parallelisms is higher, which reduces

valid throughput loss. The resource utilization of conventional

multiplexers is exceptionally high. In the brief, a miniaturized

TDM decoder is presented to reduce decoding latency and

resource utilization, using the Bit Flipping (BF) algorithm as

an example.

A number of symbols are defined in this section. The

dimension of the parity check matrix H is m × n. Let N(i) and

M(j) be N(i) = {j|hi,j = 1, j ∈ [1, n]} and M(j) = {i|hi,j = 1, i ∈ [1, m]}. hi,j is the element in the i-th row and j-th column

in the matrix H.

Assuming that the bipolar code (+1, −1) of the data

with noise obtained at the decoder is X, the least credible

variable node is flipped in each iteration of BF algorithm.

According to:

⎛

⎞

f (t) = arg min⎝

Xj(t)⎠,

(4)

f

i∈M(f ) j∈N(i)

Obviously, the calculation of the flipping is simpler than the multiplication, the flipping of V and X can be calculated in parallel. The calculation chain of the proposed single-bit decoding algorithm is shown in Fig. 7, and the single iteration chain contains accumulation, argmin, and flipping in 3 levels.
The conventional multiplexer (3-lane) is shown in Fig. 8. The check node unit (CNU) is used to calculate the multiplication (V(t)), and the variable node unit (VNU) is used to calculate the accumulation, argmin and flipping. The multiplexer distributes data via arbiters with the same number of CNU groups as VNU groups.
The proposed algorithm has a shorter iteration delay and less resource utilization in the multiplexer. As the multiplication is not in the iteration chain, the role of the CNU is only to calculate V(1) according to Eq. (5) and not to participate in subsequent iterations. A single-CNU multi-VNU TDM decoder is proposed, as shown in Fig. 9, which has a lower resource utilization than the conventional multiplexer.

f (t) denotes the serial number of the least credible variable

IV. IMPLEMENTATION RESULT

node in the t-th iteration. The calculation chain of BF algo- A. Encoder Architecture

rithm is illustrated in Fig. 6. The single iteration chain contains A variable code rate LDPC encoder architecture based

multiplication, accumulation, argmin, and flipping in 4 levels. on C2 code is proposed, as shown in Fig. 10, which uses

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:32:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: LOW VALID THROUGHPUT LOSS LDPC CODEC ARCHITECTURE WITH VARIABLE CODE RATE
TABLE II HARDWARE IMPLEMENTATION OF ENCODER

2647

Fig. 8. The conventional multiplexer for BF algorithm.

Fig. 12. The proposed LDPC decoder architecture.

Fig. 9. The proposed TDM decoder for the proposed algorithm.

Fig. 13. The sequence diagram of proposed TDM decoder, pd ≥ 6.

Fig. 10. The proposed LDPC encoder architecture.

Fig. 14. The valid throughput of codec architectures at various code rates.

Fig. 11. The single-frame sequence diagram of proposed LDPC encoder.
inter-block serial intra-block parallel computation until the last block. The shift network can generate the non-first row vector of the quasi-cyclic matrix, reducing memory capacity. The accumulation delay between blocks is related to the code rate. The Tag Generator and Tag Error Correction Coding (ECC) produces Block Tag (Ntag = 33). Fig. 11 illustrates the singleframe sequence diagram. The parity vector is generated after block accumulation, and the Tags cost 2 cycles. The total encoding latency is 34β/(β − r) cycles.
Several LDPC encoders [8], [9] based on C2 code are shown in Table II, the above encoders with low resources do not change the code rate. Some multi-rate encoders with 4 rates [10], [11] have been proposed with a TPLoss of 2.00 and 1.62, according to Eq. (3). The miniaturized encoder with

the proposed non-fixed method can transform 14 code rates through pre-coded data with a TPLoss of 1.71. Fig. 14(a) demonstrates that the proposed encoder has a high valid throughput at low code rates, with the lowest TPLoss (1.22) compared to other encoders.
B. Decoder Architecture
A variable code rate LDPC TDM decoder architecture is presented, as shown in Fig. 12. Block Tag is detected to obtain the code length and removed by Tag Check & Removal module. The proposed TDM architecture has only one CNU group, the number of VNU groups and RAMs depends on the number of concurrency pd. Each VNU group includes a set of registers for storing the vector V(t−1) of the last iteration, V(t−1) and matrix H can obtain the vector V(t) of the current iteration according to Eq. (6a). As shown in Fig. 13, in the worst case, each VNU group completes the decoding of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:32:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2648

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 71, NO. 5, MAY 2024
TABLE III HARDWARE IMPLEMENTATION OF DECODER

non-fixed length encoding method exploits the advantages of the multiplexers. Moreover, the proposed TDM architecture has a lower resource utilization than the proposed multiplexer, which is suitable for IoT mobile edge platform.

Fig. 15. Performance comparison of the proposed codec and BF algorithm, maximum iteration number is 50.
current frame before the arrival of the next frame when pd = 6. The total latency is independent of the delay of a single VNU group when pd ≥ 6. In this brief, the pd is 6.
The entire codec is tested in the AWGN channel to verify the error correction performance, as shown in Fig. 15. Binary Phase Shift Keying (BPSK) is the modulation method. When the code rate decreases, the bit error rate (BER) gradually decreases, and the codec has excellent error correction performance. When Eb/No > 3dB, no errors were observed for each simulation case when the code rate is 0.313.
In Table III, the hardware resources of the single-rate BFbased decoder [13] are similar to those of the proposed multi-rate decoder. The TPLoss of the decoder [14] is 1.71 when used the proposed non-fixed method. The decoder in [15] has 4 code rates with a TPLoss of 1.98.
Ablation experiments demonstrate the advantages of the proposed architecture. The TPLoss of decoder (Fig. 8) with the proposed non-fixed-length method is lower than that of the conventional decoder (Fig. 5(a)) with fixed code length. The proposed TDM decoder (Fig. 9) reduces 22.9% of the LUTs and 34.2% of the Flip-Flops compared to the proposed decoder (Fig. 8). Fig. 14(b) exhibits that the proposed TDM decoder has a high valid throughput at low code rates, with the lowest TPLoss (1.22) compared to other decoders.
V. CONCLUSION
The proposed low valid throughput loss codec architecture is developed for multi-rate scenarios, with higher throughput at low code rates than conventional codecs. The

REFERENCES
[1] T. V. Nguyen, A. Nosratinia, and D. Divsalar, “The design of ratecompatible protograph LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 10, pp. 2841–2850, Oct. 2012.
[2] X. Liu, X. Wu, and C. Zhao, “Shortening for irregular QC-LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 13, no. 8, pp. 612–614, Aug. 2009.
[3] J. Xie, S. Li, Y. Chen, Q. Zhang, and X. Zeng, “High throughput multicode LDPC encoder for CCSDS standard,” in Proc. IEEE 13th Int. Conf. ASIC (ASICON), 2019, pp. 1–4.
[4] A. Verma and R. Shrestha, “Hardware-efficient and high-throughput LLRC segregation based binary QC-LDPC decoding algorithm and architecture,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 68, no. 8, pp. 2835–2839, Aug. 2021.
[5] A. Mahdi, N. Kanistras, and V. Paliouras, “A Multirate fully parallel LDPC encoder for the IEEE 802.11n/ac/ax QC-LDPC codes based on reduced complexity XOR trees,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 51–64, Jan. 2021.
[6] Y. Sun, M. Karkooti, and J. R. Cavallaro, “VLSI decoder architecture for high throughput, variable block-size and multi-rate LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), 2007, pp. 2104–2107.
[7] K. Zhang, X. Huang, and Z. Wang, “A high-throughput LDPC decoder architecture with rate compatibility,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 839–847, Apr. 2011.
[8] D. Theodoropoulos, N. Kranitis, A. Tsigkanos, and A. Paschalis, “Efficient architectures for multigigabit CCSDS LDPC encoders,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 1118–1127, May 2020.
[9] Small World Communications. “LCE01C CCSDS (8160, 7136) LDPC encoder, 1st ed.” sworld.com. Accessed: Mar. 28, 2013. [Online]. Available: http://www.sworld.com.au/products/lce01c.html
[10] H. Yasotharan et al., “A flexible hardware encoder for systematic lowdensity parity-check codes,” in Proc. 52nd IEEE Int. Midwest Symp. Circuits Syst., 2009, pp. 54–57.
[11] C. P. Fewer, M. F. Flanagan, and A. D. Fagan, “A versatile variable rate LDPC codec architecture,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I Reg. Papers, vol. 54, no. 10, pp. 2240–2251, Oct. 2007.
[12] J. Liu and Q. Feng, “A Miniaturized LDPC encoder: Two-layer architecture for CCSDS near-earth standard,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 68, no. 7, pp. 2384–2388, Jul. 2021.
[13] F. Ghaffari and B. Vasic, “Probabilistic gradient descent bit-flipping decoders for flash memory channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), 2018, pp. 1–5.
[14] X. Chen, J. Kang, S. Lin, and V. Akella, “Memory system optimization for FPGA-based implementation of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes decoders,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 98–111, Jan. 2011.
[15] S. Kumawat, R. Shrestha, N. Daga, and R. Paily, “High-throughput LDPC-decoder architecture using efficient comparison techniques & dynamic multi-frame processing schedule,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 62, no. 5, pp. 1421–1430, May 2015.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:32:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

