984

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 28, NO. 5, MAY 2024

List-Based Residual Belief-Propagation Decoding of LDPC Codes
Ziqin Yan , Wu Guan , Member, IEEE, and Liping Liang

Abstract— This letter presents an enhanced list-based residual belief propagation (L-RBP) method for decoding low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. L-RBP reduces computational complexity by scheduling a concise list of residuals. Moreover, the list is partially renewed to deter a small cluster of residuals from monopolizing renewal opportunities. Simultaneously, we also incorporate a decay mechanism to constrain the residuals retained within the list, further mitigating the greediness of the algorithm. The numerical results indicate that the L-RBP has an attractive convergence speed, error rate performance, and complexity of long-length and low-rate codes in the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel.
Index Terms— LDPC codes, residual belief propagation (RBP), residual list, residual decaying, greediness.
I. INTRODUCTION
THE belief propagation (BP) decoding algorithm is the most popular decision decoding algorithm at present, and it approaches the performance of maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding [1]. It can be divided into static and dynamic schedules according to the node information update strategy. The traditional low-density parity-check (LDPC) decoding is based on static scheduling, and all nodes are updated in a fixed order during the process of belief message passing [2]. Consequently, it takes several iterations to converge, which results in slow decoding. Contrastingly, the informed dynamic schedule (IDS) [3] distinguishes itself as a leading example of dynamic schedules, demonstrating superior performance.
As common types of IDS strategies, residual belief propagation (RBP) [4], node-wise RBP (NW-RBP) [5], silent-variablenode-free RBP (SVNF-RBP) [6], and residual-decaying-based RBP (RD-RBP) [7] are conspicuous. As the original algorithm among them, RBP uses residual as a metric to prioritize the propagation of check-to-variable (C2V) messages that contribute most to the decoding process, thereby accelerating the convergence speed. However, the comparison of all residuals increases to O(E), where E denotes the total edge count in the Tanner graph. This is hard to utilize [8]. Meanwhile, RBP breeds the greedy group and the silence of variable nodes. This results in specific subsets of edges in the Tanner graph undergoing substantial updates, and some variable nodes may never have the opportunity to update when residuals

change little after several iterations. Hence, the remaining four algorithms are dedicated in different ways to achieve low computational complexity, rapid convergence speed, and excellent error rate performance. They enable the communication system to achieve higher-quality communication while consuming fewer hardware resources [9], [10].
Greediness is essential to the design of an effective IDS strategy [11]. The inherent greediness of the algorithm holds a dual role. On the one hand, it enables those messages that contribute most to the decoding process to propagate preferentially. On the other hand, it could compromise the full utilization of the intrinsic information from specific variable nodes [7]. In this letter, we mainly commence improvements from this point. In other words, when the algorithm becomes excessively greedy, we restrain it. Under normal circumstances, we ensure the preferential propagation of information that contributes substantially.
The main contribution of this letter is proposing a new method called list-based RBP (L-RBP), which effectively controls greediness and ensures information reliability. Firstly, L-RBP selectively retains the C2V residual of specific edges in a small residual list during each message update. Secondly, a residual-decaying mechanism described in [7] is used to optimize the value of residuals in the residuals list. The kernel of it lies in implementing a degree of decay to the retained residual values, which is based on the number of C2V updates for edges. The simulations and analysis show that compared with LLR-BP, RBP, NW-RBP, SVNF-RBP, and RD-RBP, our L-RBP has significant advantages in decoding performance and computational complexity for long-length codes and lowrate codes.

II. RBP DECODING FOR LDPC CODES
A. Message Exchanging
RBP has the same method of exchanging messages between two nodes as BP. For any interconnected variable node vj and check node ci on the Tanner graph, the generation functions of the messages passed between them are defined as

Cvj = log

p(yj|vj = 0) p(yj|vj = 1)

(1)

Manuscript received 7 December 2023; revised 16 January 2024 and 26 February 2024; accepted 20 March 2024. Date of publication 25 March 2024; date of current version 10 May 2024. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 62271069). The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was M.-R. Sadeghi. (Corresponding author: Wu Guan.)
The authors are with the School of Integrated Circuits, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100088, China (e-mail: yzqqqaqq@bupt.edu.cn; guanwu@bupt.edu.cn; liangliping@bupt.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2024.3381220

where yj is the received signal of the j-th variable node and vj denotes the j-th decoding bit. Cvj is the initialized loglikelihood ratio (LLR) information of a variable node vj.After initialization, the all variable-to-check (V2C) messages Lvj→ci from vj to ci are updated using (2).

Lvj →ci =

mca→vj + Cvj

(2)

ca∈N (vj )\ci

1558-2558 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:31:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YAN et al.: LIST-BASED RESIDUAL BELIEF-PROPAGATION DECODING OF LDPC CODES

985

where N (vj)\ci denotes the check nodes that are connected to vj except ci. Then the all C2V messages mci→vj from ci to vj are updated using (3).





mci→vj = 2 tanh−1 

tanh

mvb →ci 

(3)

2

vb∈N (ci)\vj

where N (ci)\vj denotes the variable nodes that are connected to ci except vj.
This reveals that the message updates in BP follow a predetermined sequence in which nodes will not be discriminated against [12]. However, the information generated by some nodes in the iteration process may become stable in several iterations. In contrast, the other part of the information may need more iterations to stabilize.

B. Residual Scheduling

IDS dynamically adjusts the order in which messages are updated. RBP considers the C2V residual to determine the order of message updates. The absolute value difference of a C2V message during one update is called C2V residual and is defined as

rci→vj = |mpcir→e vj − mocild→vj |

(4)

where mpcir→e vj is the pre-computation of the next updated C2V message [7].

RBP uses (4) to select the edge ci → vj with the maximum residual before each update for C2V. After each C2V update,

V2C update is performed on every ca → vj edge, where ca ∈ N (vj)\ci. And during each V2C update, the C2V residual calculation is performed on every ca → vb edge, where vb ∈ N (ca)\vj.
The intuitive reason for the RBP process is that the C2V

residual will approach zero as the BP loops converge. There-

fore, prioritizing updating the ample residual information in

the unconverted part of the graph will speed up the pro-

cess [4]. However, RBP is a greedy algorithm with silent

variable nodes. Therefore, NW-RBP selects multiple edges for

information updating [5]. Then, SVNF-RBP goes beyond NW-

RBP, giving each variable node the same opportunity to choose

a connected edge with the largest residual [6]. In RD-RBP, the

values of C2V residuals are decayed according to (5) [7].

rci→vj = βnci→vj × |mpcir→e vj − mocild→vj |

(5)

where β denotes the decaying factor, nci→vj denotes the number of C2V messages updating from ci to vj in one iteration. We define one iteration as the count of C2V message updates equals E.

III. LIST-BASED RBP DECODING
A. L-RBP Basics
To constrain the greediness of RBP, we propose the L-RBP algorithm. It reduces the number of edges involved in the residual comparison by a small residual list composed of two parts: the newly computed residuals after the current V2C messages updating and the residuals retained from previous updating. Simultaneously, we control the residual values of the

Fig. 1. The structure diagram of the L-RBP decoding algorithm.
repeating edges in the two parts using the decay mechanism described in [7]. The rationale is as follows.
Firstly, each residual comparison necessitates a global edge in RBP and NW-RBP. However, the residuals of some edges will become stable after a certain number of updates, so it is a waste of resources to let them participate in the comparison and may introduce unreliable information. We utilize a residual list comprising two smaller lists to simplify the process. They store the residual values computed after the current and previous message updates, respectively. This filtered out some residuals that have become stable and accelerated the transmission of newly updated reliable messages to a certain extent. Secondly, when the algorithm displays excessive greediness, edges with the highest residuals tend to occur and be selected within a fixed group. But the total number of C2V updates is set to E. This implies that other edges are deprived of the opportunity for C2V updating. Therefore, we appropriately decay the residuals of these repeatedly updated edges. Meanwhile, we only retain some edges with larger values in two smaller lists. As a result, other edges are likely to update while prioritizing the C2V, which contributes significantly to decoding. In general, we summarize the decoding process of L-RBP into two steps:
1) Search for the maximum residual in the residual list for scheduling decoding.
2) Update the residual list.
The specific process structure of these two steps is shown in Fig. 1. In this letter, the L0 and L1 represent the two lists constituting the final residual list L for comparison. Moreover, we employ LR and LN to define the lists that partially renew L0 and L1, respectively. It should be noted that LR is the L removed from the edge that has been C2V updated. Then, we use Size(G) to represent the size of the corresponding G list, such as Size(L1) denoting the size of L1 list. From the above description, the proposed L-RBP can be succinctly depicted using the pseudocode shown in Algorithm 1. Moreover, n is the resetter described in [7] that prevents sure edges from being decayed unduly. Finally, the stopping criterion in step 31 is either the fulfillment of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:31:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

986

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 28, NO. 5, MAY 2024

all parity-check constraints or the reaching of a predefined maximum number of iterations.

Algorithm 1 L-RBP Decoding

1: Initialize all mc→v = 0

2: Initialize all Lvj→ci = Cvj

3: Initialize the values of Size(L), Size(L1) and E

4: Set all nci→vj = 0, e = 0

5: Randomly select an edge ci → vj

6: Generate and propagate mci→vj

7: Update the counter nci→vj = nci→vj + 1, e = e + 1

8: for every ca ∈ N (vj)\ci do

9: Generate and propagate Lvj→ca

10: for every vb ∈ N (ca)\vj do

11:

Compute rca→vb using Eq.(4)

12: end for

13: end for

14: Preserve the edges in L of which residuals were updated

during steps 8∼13 and residual values rank top Size(L)

15: Select the maximal residual edge ci′ → vj′ in L

16: Generate and propagate mci′ →vj′ and delete the edge ci′ → vj′ in L to be the LR

17: Update the counter nci→vj = nci→vj + 1, e = e + 1

18: for every ca′ ∈ N (vj′ )\ca′ do

19: Generate and propagate Lvj′ →ca′ 20: for every vb′ ∈ N (ca′ )\vj′ do

21:

Compute rca′ →vb′ using Eq.(4)

22: end for

23: end for

24: Preserve the edges in LN of which residuals were updated during steps 18∼23

25: Find duplicate edges in LR and LN and use Eq.(5) to decay the residual of the repeated edges in LN while removes the corresponding repeated edges in LR
26: Merge the edges whose residual values rank top Size(L1) in LN with the edges whose residual values rank top Size(L0) among the previous remaining LR to be the new L

27: if e equal E then

28:

Reset all nci→vj = 0, e = 0

29: end if

30: While not iteration stopping rule do

31: Position=15;

32: end While

B. Optimization of List Parameters
Here lies the challenge of choosing an appropriate size for the residual lists and the value of β. For β, we follow the selection strategy presented in [7], which sets β = 0.9. Before discussing the size of the lists, we first clarify the cycles in LDPC codes.
In the Tanner graph of an LDPC code, if a path exists that originates from a node and returns to the same node after traversing several routes, it is referred to as a cycle. The number of edges in the path determines the cycle length. Cycles have a significant impact on the greediness of algorithms. If a cycle has large residual values for its edge, it may

Fig. 2. BER performance of L-RBP in a wide range of the Size(L) with 50 iterations maximum of stopping criterion, where the (576,288) IEEE802.16e LDPC code is considered.
Fig. 3. Convergence performance of RBP and L-RBP in a small range of the Size(L) with different iterations of stopping criterion at an SNR of 2 dB, where the (576,288) IEEE802.16e LDPC code is considered.
lead to the messages propagating repeatedly within this cycle. The absence of new information will prevent the edge within the cycle from converging to a stable residual value for an extended period and consume most of the updating resources. Furthermore, short cycles can quickly trigger multiple loops of information, while large residual values can lead to substantial changes in this information. This could potentially exacerbate the issue of algorithm non-convergence. Therefore, we set the Size(L1) to be one less than the length of the smallest cycle in the codes. It alleviates the impact of short cycles on the decoding performance while ensuring the propagation of newly updated reliable information as much as possible.
The Size(L0) can be calculated by Size(L) − Size(L1). Furthermore, the lower bound of Size(L) is Size(L1) + 1, and the upper bound is E. The lower bound aims to prevent the complete replacement of all the residuals in the L by L1, alleviating the greediness of L-RBP. Then, we will find an appropriate Size(L) by a tradeoff between error rate and convergence rate performance as [9]. Intuitively, the probability of falling into the trap of greedy sets tends to increase when the Size(L) is overly large. Conversely, when the Size(L) is tiny, it impedes the prioritized information propagation that significantly contributes to decoding.
Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 show the error rate performance of the LRBP for different Size(L), where legend E/x denotes the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:31:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YAN et al.: LIST-BASED RESIDUAL BELIEF-PROPAGATION DECODING OF LDPC CODES

987

Fig. 4. BER performance of RD-RBP and L-RBP with 10 iterations maximum of stopping criterion, where the (576,288), (576,144), (1152,576), (2016,1008) IEEE802.16e LDPC codes are considered.

Fig. 5. BER and FER performance of LLR-BP, RBP, NW-RBP, SVNF-RBP, RD-RBP and L-RBP with 10 iterations maximum of stopping criterion, where the (2016,1008) Regular LDPC code is considered.

Size(L) is 1/x times E. In Fig. 2, we rely roughly on a bit-error-rate (BER) and frame-error-rate (FER) to determine the Size(L) in our limited range. It visually shows that the error rate performs best when the Size(L) is near E/128, while it deteriorates for overly large or small Size(L). Then Fig. 3 shows the convergence performance curves of the L-RBP under different numbers of iterations with the Size(L) on a finer scale than Fig. 2. To more intuitively reflect the low bit error rate and faster convergence speed of L-RBP, we introduce the RBP algorithm as a reference. We discovered that the comprehensive performance of L-RBP is satisfactory and better than RBP when the Size(L) ranges from 150 to 100. This demonstrates that the L-RBP with an appropriate Size(L) can constrain the greediness without excessively impeding the prioritized information propagation, which substantially contributes to decoding. Interestingly, the performance of L-RBP is getting less sensitive to the variation of Size(L) when the number of iterations is over 40. For the remainder of this letter, the Size(L) is selected as E/128 for L-RBP unless otherwise specified.
IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION AND COMPLEXITY ANALYSIS
A. Performance Evaluation
We performed simulations for different LDPC codes with parameters (N ,M ) over the AWGN channel with the BPSK modulation, where N is the code length and M denotes the number of parity check bits. Codes (576,288), (576,144), (1152,576), (2016,1008) (constructed based on the IEEE802.16e standard [13]) and regular LDPC codes with parameters (2016,1008) (structured with the progressive edge growth (PEG) algorithm [14]) were used.
Fig. 4 shows the BER performance of the L-RBP and RD-RBP algorithms under different irregular LDPC codes. Although the superiority of RD-RBP has been demonstrated in [7], Fig. 4 indicates that the BER performance of the L-RBP outperforms RD-RBP with various code rates and lengths. When the irregular (2016,1008) code is used, and the BER approaches 10−5, L-RBP can obtain a coding gain of approximately 0.13 dB over RD-RBP. Besides, the analysis of

Fig. 6. Convergence performance of LLR-BP, RBP, NW-RBP, SVNF-RBP, RD-RBP, and L-RBP with different iterations of stopping criterion at an SNR of 2 dB, where the (576,288) IEEE802.16e LDPC code is considered.
Fig. 2 informs that the performance of L-RBP first improves and then deteriorates as the Size(L) increases. Thus, when the increasing code length in Fig. 4 continuously brings appropriate E for Size(L), we observe the advantage of L-RBP over RD-RBP is more pronounced as code length increases. Fig. 5 shows the BER and FER performance of the different decoding algorithms. It shows the L-RBP outperforms the other algorithms in BER and FER. When the BER approaches 10−4, the L-RBP algorithm can obtain a coding gain of approximately 0.25 dB over RBP and 0.2dB over NW-RBP, 0.15 dB over SVNF-RBP and 0.12dB over RD-RBP for the regular code (2016,1008). Notably, L-RBP outperforms LLR-BP due to its effective residual decay and selection mechanism while bringing higher computational complexity in one iteration. Moreover, the performance benefits become more prominent as the SNR increases in Fig. 4 and Fig. 5. These results show that L-RBP may effectively operate with different structured LDPC codes, lurking broad applicability to a certain extent.
Fig. 6 shows the performance of the BER versus the number of iterations. We find that the L-RBP converges faster than SVNF-RBP in the early iterations, and it later reaches a lower BER than RD-RBP under the same number of iterations. According to [7], SVNF-RBP shows faster convergence initially, but RD-RBP performs better as the number

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:31:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

988

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 28, NO. 5, MAY 2024

TABLE I
COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITIES OF DIFFERENT DECODING ALGORITHMS

dv ≈ 3, the comparison operation of L-RBP is around half of NW-RBP and one-eleventh of RBP and RD-RBP. This is beneficial for practical applications of long-length codes.

of iterations increases. This implies that L-RBP outperforms both algorithms. Meanwhile, L-RBP outperforms LLR-BP, RBP, and NW-RBP in BER performance and convergence speed, regardless of the number of iterations. It achieves a much lower BER than three after the first few iterations. To achieve these results, Residual decay and residual list scheduling mechanisms were combined in L-RBP. Residual list scheduling prioritizes the propagation of information that accelerates convergence in initial iterations, while residual decay reduces greediness to reduce BER as iterations increase.
B. Complexity Analysis
In this subsection, we evaluate the decoding complexity for the proposed L-RBP algorithms according to the number of computations required in each step during one iteration. It includes the number of V2C and C2V updates, the number of operations required for residual computation, and the number of operations required for comparison. Let dc and dv denote the average degrees of check and variable nodes respectively. Thus, E = dc ×M = dv ×N . The computational complexities of different RBP decoding algorithms are shown in TABLE I. Some data in it are from [12]. The C2V updates for all algorithms are not listed in TABLE I as their complexity is E.
Precomputation is the complexity of residual calculation after each C2V update. Comparison operation is the complexity of finding the edge with maximum residual. For L-RBP, its comparison operation involves finding repetition to eliminate and decay the corresponding residual value. It is accomplished by individually comparing each corresponding edge in the LN with those in the LR. CO analysis is the comparison operation with dc ≈ 6 and dv ≈ 3, which assists complexity analysis.
Residual calculations are not necessary during initialization for L-RBP. Thus, the initial residual computation of L-RBP is less complex than other algorithms. Secondly, dc, dv and L are much smaller than M and E. Moreover, the longer the code length and the lower the code rate are, the dc, dv for them can be relatively smaller than that of the high-rate codes and short-length codes. This important feature may cause highrate and short-length codes to lose a little of the complexity advantage, but it greatly improves the decoding complexity of low-rate and long-length codes compared to the RBP, NWRBP, and RD-RBP algorithms. For instance, while employing the (2016,1008) IEEE802.16e LDPC code with dc ≈ 6 and

V. CONCLUSION
In this letter, we propose an innovative IDS algorithm, L-RBP. L-RBP schedules a small residual list and partially renews it from two parts. Meanwhile, L-RBP adopts a decaying mechanism to manipulate the C2V message residuals in the residuals list. These strategies enable L-RBP to prioritize information propagation with more significant contributions over the BP algorithm, more effectively constraining the greediness compared to RBP and its improved algorithms. Our simulation results and analyses show that the L-RBP can achieve good error rate performance, fast convergence speed, and low computational complexity. In particular, L-RBP is more advantageous for long-length and low-rate codes, which is profitable for the practical application of long-length codes.
REFERENCES
[1] R. J. McEliece, D. J. C. MacKay, and J.-F. Cheng, “Turbo decoding as an instance of Pearl’s ‘belief propagation’ algorithm,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 140–152, Feb. 1998.
[2] W. Guan and L. Liang, “Check-belief propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 71, no. 12, pp. 6849–6858, Dec. 2023.
[3] A. I. V. Casado, M. Griot, and R. D. Wesel, “Informed dynamic scheduling for belief-propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Glasgow, U.K., Jun. 2007, pp. 932–937.
[4] G. Elidan, I. McGraw, and D. Koller, “Residual belief propagation: Informed scheduling for asynchronous message passing,” in Proc. 22nd Conf. Uncertainty Artif. Intell., Cambridge, MA, USA, Jul. 2006.
[5] A. I. V. Casado, M. Griot, and R. D. Wesel, “LDPC decoders with informed dynamic scheduling,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 12, pp. 3470–3479, Dec. 2010.
[6] H.-C. Lee, Y.-L. Ueng, S.-M. Yeh, and W.-Y. Weng, “Two informed dynamic scheduling strategies for iterative LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 886–896, Mar. 2013.
[7] H. Zhang and S. Chen, “Residual-decaying-based informed dynamic scheduling for belief-propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 23656–23666, 2019.
[8] B. Wang, Y. Zhu, and J. Kang, “Two effective scheduling schemes for layered belief propagation of 5G LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 1683–1686, Aug. 2020.
[9] X. Liu, L. Zi, D. Yang, and Z. Wang, “Improved decoding algorithms of LDPC codes based on reliability metrics of variable nodes,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 35769–35778, 2019.
[10] H.-C. Lee, Y.-H. Su, and Y.-L. Ueng, “A rate-compatible low-density parity-check convolutional coding scheme using informed dynamic scheduling,” in Proc. IEEE 85th Veh. Technol. Conf. (VTC Spring), Sydney, NSW, Australia, Jun. 2017, pp. 1–5.
[11] C. Adnan Aslam, Y. L. Guan, K. Cai, and G. Han, “Lowcomplexity belief-propagation decoding via dynamic silent-variablenode-free scheduling,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 28–31, Jan. 2017.
[12] R. Sun, X. Hou, J. Sun, H. Guan, and Z. Zhao, “Reliability-based-layered belief propagation for iterative decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Vail, CO, USA, Jun. 2018, pp. 1156–1160.
[13] IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks Part16: Air Interface for Broadband Wireless Access Systems, IEEE Std 802.16, May 2005.
[14] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D.-M. Arnold, “Progressive edge-growth tanner graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., Nov. 2001, pp. 995–1001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:31:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

