JTu2A.82

CLEO 2024 © Optica Publishing Group 2024

FPGA Verification of Generalized LDPC Convolutional Codes with Hamming Code
Yinlong Shi, Kai Tao, Zitao Wei, Jian Wang
ZTE Corporation, Shenzhen, China
Abstract: Employing FPGA emulations, we investigate the performance of the hybrid check generalized LDPC convolutional code, and reveal that a small proportion of generalized check nodes can not effectively decrease the error floor down to 10-15. ©2024TheAuthor(s)
1. Introduction
Generalized low-density parity-check convolutional codes (GLDPC CCs) are a class of LDPC codes, in which generalized constraint (GC) nodes replacing standard single parity check constraint (SPC) nodes result in better error floor performance, due to improved minimum distance and trapping set properties [1], meanwhile the convolutional structure brings about better waterfall performance [2,3], in comparison to conventional LDPC block codes. By replacing a few SPC nodes with GC nodes, the hybrid check generalized LDPC code can achieve better performance and lower error floor with less code rate reduction, which makes GLDPC-CCs a very promising solution for optical communication [4,5].
In this paper, we construct a 29%-overhead GLDPC-CC with a Hamming(15, 11) code as local code, and analyze the real-time performance of the GLDPC-CC with early exit function on a large FPGA platform. For an output BER of 10-11, the GLDPC-CC requires the input BER to be 4.18e-2, which indicates that it has no obvious advantage over LDPC-CC in [3]. In addition, we investigate the impact of different check positions on the performance and power consumption when exiting early, and the Lapr performs better.
2. Encoder and Decoder of the GLDPC-CCs
The parity-check matrix of a periodically time-varying GLDPC-CC can be obtained from the parity-check matrix of a Hamming code and a LDPC block code. Firstly, the parity check matrix of LDPC convolutional code is obtained via a matrix-based unwrapping procedure [3]. Then, replace “1” with columns in the parity matrix of Hamming code, and “0” with an all-zero column vector in the first row of every d rows. We construct 29%-overhead GLDPC-CCs from a regular (3, 15)QC-LDPC block code and a Hamming(15, 11) code, then the first row of every 24 rows is GC node. There are 5z variable nodes , z/24 GC nodes , and 23z/24 SPC nodes at each time in Tanner graph. For SPC nodes, the encoding process is carried out by multiplying input data with the circulant permutation matrices, which can be implemented with shift registers. For GC nodes, the encoding process is carried out by multiplying the input data with the expansion matrix, which can be implemented by first using shift registers and then multiplying with the Hamming parity check matrix.

Fig. 1. ENACSU architecture

Fig. 2. The flowchart of hard decision check

The layered decoding algorithm is used in the decoding implementation [3], but different check nodes adopt

different update algorithms [4]. SPC nodes adopt the revised min-sum algorithm, and GC nodes use the BCJR

algorithm. In order to reduce the computational power consumption of single decoding process, the joint path and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:33:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JTu2A.82

CLEO 2024 © Optica Publishing Group 2024

state pruning (JPSP) update rule is adopted [6]. The JPSP is the same as BCJR, which is divided into four steps, namely initialization, forward recursion, backward recursion and external information updating. The difference is that the basic computing unit of JPSP is an add-compare-select unit with an enable signal (ENACSU), which is shown in Fig. 1. Meanwhile, in order to reduce the power consumption of the overall GLDPC decoder, a hard decision check mechanism shown in Fig. 2 is added. The hard decision check result affects the overall early exit judgment. If the same code block is successfully checked for three consecutive hard decisions, the code block can not be decoded in the next iteration. There are two cases for the position of the hard decision check. One is that the LLR before the decoding starts meets the Hamming or parity check, named Lapp. The other is that the LLR after subtracting the C2V infomation satisfies the check, named Lapr. The two different hard decision positions not only affect the decoding performance, but also affect the power reduction effect.
3. Performance Investigation with the FPGA Platform
The GLDPC-CC performances with FPGA emulation platform are plotted in Fig. 3(a). The error floor of LDPC-CC is down to 10-13, but the error floor of GLDPC-CC appears at 10-12. For an output BER of 10-11, the GLDPC-CC and LDPC-CC require the input BER to be 4.18e-2 and 3.99e-2, respectively. The NCG of both is basically the same. The yellow and green curves in Fig. 3(a) represent the impact of early exit on decoding performance. The error floor of the green curve is 10-7, and the yellow curve is 10-11. From the emulation results, the yellow curve has less performance loss than green, and the post-BER is only one order of magnitude worse than the case without early exit in error floor region. According to FPGA platform statistics result in Fig. 3(b), the average number of iterations of the Lapr is 33.98, while that of the Lapp is 31.73. When power consumption and performance requirements are considered comprehensively, the hard decision check after subtraction is optimal.

Fig. 3. (a)Performance of GLDPC-CCs and (b)Statistics of the number of iterations
4. Conclusions Empolying FPGA implementation, we investigate the performance of the hybrid check GLDPC-CC. According to the FPGA emulation, the GLDPC-CC has no obvious advantages over LDPC-CC in terms of performance, delay and power consumption, and it can not effectively decrease the error floor down to 10-15. In addition, the hard decision check after subtraction is optimal in terms of performance and power. 5. References
[1] M. Lentmaier, et al., "On generalized low-density parity-check codes based on Hamming component codes," IEEE Comm. Letters, vol. 3, no. 8, pp. 248-250, Aug. 1999. [2] D. G. M. Mitchell, et al., "Spatially Coupled Generalized LDPC Codes: Asymptotic Analysis and Finite Length Scaling," IEEE Trans. on Info. Theory, vol. 67, no. 6, pp. 3708-3723, June 2021. [3] Y. Cai, et al., "FPGA assisted design of concatenated LDPC convolutional and BCH codes for optical fiber communications," 45th European Conference on Optical Communication (ECOC 2019), Dublin, Ireland, 2019, pp. 1-4. [4] Z. Ding, et al., "An FPGA design of generalized low-density parity-check codes for rate-adaptive optical transport networks." Optical Metro Networks and Short-Haul Systems VIII. Vol. 9773. SPIE, pp. 145-150, 2016. [5] Djordjevic I.B., et al., "Multiple component codes based generalized LDPC codes for high-speed optical transport." Optics express 22.14 (2014): 16694-16705. [6] S. G. Rad, et al., "A New MAP-based Algorithm to Reduce the Complexity of Turbo Decoder," The 9th International Conference on Advanced Communication Technology, Gangwon, Korea (South), 2007, pp. 1058-1061.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:33:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

