2188

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 4, APRIL 2011

Graph-Based Decoding in the Presence of ISI
Mohammad H. Taghavi, Member, IEEE, and Paul H. Siegel, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—We propose a new graph representation for ISI channels that can be used for combined equalization and decoding by linear programming (LP) or iterative message-passing (IMP) decoding algorithms. We derive this graph representation by linearizing the ML detection metric, which transforms the equalization problem into a classical decoding problem. We observe that the performance of LP and IMP decoding on this model are very similar in the uncoded case, while IMP decoding significantly outperforms LP decoding when low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are used. In particular, in the absence of coding, for certain classes of channels, both LP and IMP algorithms always find the exact ML solution using the proposed graph representation, without complexity that is exponential in the size of the channel memory. This applies even to certain two-dimensional ISI channels. However, for some other channel impulse responses, both decoders have nondiminishing probability of failure as SNR increases. We provide analytical explanations for many of these observations. In addition, we study the error events of LP decoding in the uncoded case, and derive a measure that can be used to classify ISI channels in terms of the performance of the proposed detection scheme.
Index Terms—Combined equalization and decoding, graphbased decoding, intersymbol interference (ISI) channels, iterative message passing, linear programming, maximum-likelihood detection.
I. INTRODUCTION
I NTERSYMBOL INTERFERENCE (ISI) is a characteristic of many data communications and storage channels. Systems operating on these channels often employ error-correcting codes in conjunction with some form of ISI reduction technique, which, in magnetic recording systems, is often a trellis-based sequence detector. It is known that some gain will be obtained if the equalization and decoding blocks are combined at the receiver by exchanging soft information between them. A possible approach to achieving this gain is to use soft-output equalization methods such as the BCJR algorithm [1] or the soft-output Viterbi algorithm (SOVA) [2] along with iterative decoders. For
Manuscript received June 14, 2007; revised March 08, 2009; accepted January 27, 2010. Date of current version March 16, 2011. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grant CCF-0829865. The material in this paper was presented in part at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), Nice, France, June 2007.
M. H. Taghavi was with the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, and the Center for Magnetic Recording Research, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093 USA. He is now with Qualcomm, Inc., San Diego, CA 92121 USA (e-mail: mtaghavi@ieee.org).
P. H. Siegel is with the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, and the Center for Magnetic Recording Research, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093 USA (e-mail: psiegel@ucsd.edu).
Communicated by T. J. Richardson, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2011.2110070

a survey of performance results with this approach see [3]. However, both BCJR and SOVA suffer from complexity that is exponential in the length of the channel memory.
Kurkoski et al. [4] proposed two graph representations of the ISI channel that can be combined with the Tanner graph of the LDPC code for message-passing decoding. Their bit-based representation of the channel contains many 4-cycles, which results in a significant performance degradation compared to maximum-likelihood (ML) detection in the uncoded case. On the other hand, iterative message passing (IMP) on their state-based representation, where messages contain state rather than bit information, has a performance and overall complexity similar to BCJR, while benefiting from a parallel structure and reduced delay. Among other works, Singla et al. [5] applied message passing on a bit-based graph representation of a two-dimensional ISI channel combined with an LDPC Tanner graph. However, similar to the case of one-dimensional ISI, the abundance of short cycles prevents the algorithm from achieving performance that is close to optimal.
Linear programming (LP) has been recently applied by Feldman et al. [6] to the problem of ML decoding of LDPC codes in memoryless channels, as an alternative to IMP techniques. The idea behind LP decoding is to relax the ML decoding problem, which can be written as an optimization with linear objective function, but nonlinear constraints, into a linear optimization problem. LP decoding performs closely to IMP algorithms such as the sum-product algorithm (SPA) and the min-sum algorithm (MSA), and it is much easier to analyze for deterministic finite-length codes. This approach, however, cannot be directly applied when the channel has ISI, since the objective function of the ML decoding problem will become a quadratic and, generally, nonconvex function.
In this work we study the problem of ML detection in the presence of ISI, with the goal of deriving a graph representation for the channel that allows detection with a complexity that is polynomial in the channel memory size, and that also can be combined with the Tanner graph of an LDPC code for combined decoding. Motivated by LP decoding in the memoryless channel, our approach is based on linearizing the quadratic objective function of the ML detection problem. Using this technique, we convert the detection problem into an equivalent binary decoding problem in a memoryless channel, which can be represented by a factor graph and used for IMP detection, or, after relaxing the binary constraints, LP detection, similar to the way IMP decoding and LP decoding are applied on memoryless channels. Furthermore, decoding an underlying LDPC code can be incorporated into this problem simply by adding the check nodes of the LDPC code to the graph representation. Our simulations indicate that the performance of IMP and LP detection using the proposed graphical model are very similar in the uncoded case. Hence, in our analysis, we focus primarily on LP

0018-9448/$26.00 © 2011 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:18:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TAGHAVI AND SIEGEL: GRAPH-BASED DECODING

2189

Fig. 1. Binary-input ISI channel.

detection, since it is generally more amenable to deterministic performance analysis.
By a geometric analysis we show that, in the absence of coding, if the impulse response of the ISI channel satisfies certain conditions, LP detection on the proposed graph is guaranteed to produce the ML solution at all SNR values. This means that there are ISI channels, which we call proper channels, for which uncoded ML detection can be achieved with a complexity polynomial in the channel memory size. This result becomes more significant in the context of two-dimensional ISI channels, for which the general ML detection problem has been shown to be NP-complete [7].
On the other end of the spectrum, we observe that, for some channels, which we call improper, both IMP and LP decoders results in a nonintegral solution with a probability bounded away from zero at all SNR, even in the absence of noise. Moreover, there are some intermediate channels, which we designate as asymptotically proper, for which the performance asymptotically converges to that of ML detection at high SNR. In order to explain this behavior, we analyze the error events of LP detection, and derive a closed-form parameter that can be used to classify different ISI channel impulse responses in terms of the performance of the proposed graph-based detection scheme. In particular, using this measure, we prove sufficient conditions for a channel to be improper.
When LDPC decoding is incorporated in the detector, IMP detection often significantly outperforms LP detection. With LP detection, proper and asymptotically proper channels achieve very good performance; for some other channels, the word error rate (WER) cannot go below a certain value. On the other hand, IMP detection often produces reasonable results, even on some improper channels.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we describe the channel, and introduce the graph-based formulation of ML detection. The performance analysis and simulation results of uncoded graph-based detection are presented in Section III. In Section IV, we study the combination of graphbased detection and LDPC decoding, and Section V concludes the paper.

The partial-response channel transfer polynomial is , where is the channel memory size. Thus, the
output sequence of the PR channel in Fig. 1 before adding the white Gaussian noise can be written as
(2)

B. Maximum-Likelihood (ML) Detection

Given the vector of received samples

,

the ML detector solves the optimization problem

(3)

where

is the codebook and

denotes the

-norm. By expanding the square of the objective function,

the problem becomes equivalent to minimizing

(4)
where, for simplicity, we have dropped the limits of the summations. Equivalently, we can write the problem in a general matrix form

where in this problem

, and

defined as the

Toeplitz matrix

(5) , with

II. GRAPH-BASED DETECTION A. Channel Model

... . . .

We consider a partial-response (PR) channel with bipolar (BPSK) inputs, as described in Fig. 1, and use the following notation for the transmitted symbols.

(6)

...

...

...

Notation 1: The bipolar version of a binary symbol,

, is denoted by

, and is given by

Here we have assumed that zeros are padded at the beginning

and the end of the transmitted sequence, so that the trellis di-

(1) agram corresponding to the ISI channel starts and ends at the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:18:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2190

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 4, APRIL 2011

zero state. If the signals are uncoded, i.e.,

, and

and are chosen arbitrarily, (5) will represent the general form

of an integer quadratic programming (IQP) problem, which is,

in general, NP-hard. In the specific case of a PR channel, where

we have the Toeplitz structure of (6), the problem can be solved

by the Viterbi algorithm with a complexity linear in , but ex-

ponential in . However, this model can also be used to describe

other problems such as detection in MIMO or two-dimensional

ISI channels. Also, when the source symbols belong to a nonbi-

nary alphabet with a regular lattice structure such as the QAM

and PAM alphabets, the problem can be reduced to the binary

problem of (5) by introducing some new variables.

Fig. 2. PR channel and LDPC code represented by a Tanner graph.

C. Detection on a Graph

plus a constant, given that

is a constant. With some

simplifications, the IQP in (5) can be rewritten as

A common approach for solving the IQP problem is to first

convert it to an integer LP (ILP) problem by introducing a new variable for each quadratic term, and then to relax the integrality

Minimize

condition; e.g., see [8]. While this relaxed problem does not necessarily have an integer solution, it can be used along with

Subject to

branch-and-cut techniques to solve integer problems of reason-

able size. A more recent method is based on dualizing the IQP

(9)

problem twice to obtain a convex relaxation in the form of a

semidefinite program (SDP) [9], [10].

where, in the equalization problem

In this work, we use a method similar to [8] to derive an

ILP form of the ML detection problem. In [8], the original IQP

problem is given in terms of 0-1 variables, and each of a number

(10)

of 0-1 auxiliary variables is defined as the product of two orig-

inal 0-1 variables. To apply this method, here we can first convert the bipolar (i.e., ) IQP problem in (5) into an equivalent 0-1 problem, and then define the auxiliary variables as in [8] to linearize the objective function. As an alternative, we can also define the auxiliary variables in the domain as the pairwise products of original variables. If we then convert the linearized problem from the domain to the 0-1 domain, the binary versions of the auxiliary variables will each become the modulo-2 sum of two binary variables, rather than the product. In this work, we use the latter approach, since modulo-2 additive constraints are similar to parity-check constraints; thus, LP and message-passing decoders designed for decoding binary linear codes can be applied without any modification. However, in the Appendix we show that the LP relaxations resulting from these two approaches are equivalent.
To linearize (4), we define

In this optimization problem, we call the information bits,

and

the state bits. It can be seen from (10) that is

independent of , except for indices near the two ends of the

block; i.e.,

and

. In practice, this

“edge effect” can be neglected due to the zero padding at the

transmitter. For clarity, we sometimes drop the first subscript in

when the analysis is specific to the PR detection problem.

The combined equalization and decoding problem (9) has the

form of a single decoding problem, which can be represented by

a low-density Tanner graph. It is worth emphasizing that there

is no approximation in this derivation, and hence this decoding

problem is equivalent to ML detection. Fig. 2 shows an example

of the combination of a PR channel of memory size 2 with an

LDPC code. We call the upper and lower layers of this Tanner

graph the code layer and the PR layer (or the PR graph), respec-

tively. The PR layer of the graph consists of check nodes

of degree 3, each connected to two information bit nodes

, and one distinct state bit node, . Also, the PR layer

can contain cycles of length 6 and higher. If a coefficient, ,

(7) is zero, its corresponding state bit node, , and the check node it is connected to can be eliminated from the graph, as they have

no effect on the detection process.

In the binary domain, this will be equivalent to

It follows from (10) that the coefficients of the state bits in

the objective function,

, are only a function of the PR

channel impulse response, while the coefficients of the informa-

(8)

tion bits are the results of matched filtering the noisy received signal by the channel impulse response, and therefore depen-

dent on the noise realization. Once the variable coefficients in

where stands for modulo-2 addition. Hence, the right-hand the objective function are determined, IMP or LP decoding can

side (RHS) of (4) is a linear combination of

and

, be directly applied to decode on this Tanner graph. We call this

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:18:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TAGHAVI AND SIEGEL: GRAPH-BASED DECODING

2191

method graph-based detection or, more specifically, IMP detec- information bit nodes and and state bit node , the

tion and LP detection, when IMP and LP decoding, respectively, constraints (11) can be summarized as

are used.

For graph-based detection by means of LP decoding, we use

the relaxation introduced in [6], where the binary parity-check

constraint corresponding to each check node is relaxed as follows. Let be the index set of neighbors of check node , i.e.,

(12)

the variable nodes it is directly connected to in the Tanner graph. Then, we include the following constraints:

which can be represented more simply as

(13)

(11)

In addition, the integrality constraints

are relaxed to

box constraints

. This relaxation has the ML certifi-

cate property; i.e., if the solution of the relaxed LP is integral,

it will also be the solution of (9).

For graph-based detection using IMP decoding, note

that the ML detection problem (9) is equivalent to ML de-

coding of a linear code on a memoryless channel, where

the variables

are the bit variables, coefficients

are their log-likelihood ratio (LLR) values—al-

beit up to a scalar multiplicative factor—and the constraints of

the problem are the parity-check constraints defining the linear

code. Hence, IMP decoding algorithms commonly used for

linear codes can be directly applied to this equivalent decoding

problem. In particular, the Min-Sum Algorithm (MSA) can

be used to solve this problem with no modification to the

coefficients

, since MSA is not sensitive to a

uniform scaling of the LLR values. On the other hand, to apply

the Sum-Product Algorithm (SPA), proper scaling should be

applied to the coefficients to derive suitable values to serve as

equivalent LLRs of the bit variables.

In the following section, we use the MSA directly, treating the

coefficients in (9) as the equivalent LLR values. In Section IV,

we describe a reasonable scaling of these coefficients that can

be used for IMP detection with the SPA.

Since there is exactly one such pair of upper and lower bounds for each state bit , its value in the solution vector will be equal to either the lower or upper bound, depending on the sign of its coefficient in the linear objective function . Hence, the cost of in the objective function can be written as
(14)
where the first term in the second line is constant and does not affect the solution. Consequently, by substituting (14) in the objective function, the LP problem will be projected into the original -dimensional space, giving the equivalent minimization problem
Minimize

Subject to

(15)

which has a convex and piecewise-linear objective function. Each absolute value term in this expression corresponds to a check node in the PR layer of the Tanner graph representation of the problem.

III. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS OF UNCODED DETECTION

A. Proper Channels: Guaranteed ML Performance

In this section, we study the performance of graph-based de- We now discuss a class of channels, which we call proper

tection using LP relaxation in the absence of coding, i.e., solving channels, for which the proposed LP relaxation of uncoded

(5) with

. It is known that if the off-diagonal ele- graph-based detection always gives the ML solution. We also

ments of are all nonpositive; i.e.,

, the provide a criterion for recognizing a proper channel.

0-1 problem is solvable in polynomial time by reducing it to the MIN-CUT problem; e.g., see [11]. As an example, Sankaran and Ephremides [12] argued using this fact that when the spreading sequences in a synchronous CDMA system have nonpositive cross-correlations, optimal multiuser detection can be done in polynomial time. Here, we derive a condition, slightly weaker than the nonnegativity of the , that is necessary and sufficient

Definition 1: An LP relaxation of an optimization problem1 is called exact if whenever the original optimization problem has a unique solution, the relaxed problem has the same unique solution, and vice versa.
Thus, a proper channel is one whose LP relaxation (15) is exact.

for the LP relaxation to have an integer solution for any value of in (9). The derivation also sheds some light on the question of how the algorithm behaves in cases where this condition is not satisfied. For a check node in the Tanner graph connecting

1With some abuse of terminology, here what we refer to as an optimization problem is in fact a class of optimization problems all having the same set of constraints, but different objective functions. An example is the class of decoding problems corresponding to a given code representation and channel model, but different transmitted codewords and/or noise realizations.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:18:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2192

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 4, APRIL 2011

Definition 2: We call a check node in the PR layer of the Tanner graph representation of the graph-based detection problem a positive (respectively, negative) check node if the state bit node connected to this check node has a positive (respectively, negative) coefficient.
We now present a property of the PR Tanner graph that, as we will demonstrate, can be used to identify a proper channel.

Cycle Condition (CC): Every cycle in the channel graph contains an even number of negative check nodes.
The following theorem shows that satisfaction of the CC is a necessary and sufficient condition for a channel to be proper.

Fig. 3. The dependence graph of the system of linear equations with one cluster of cycles. Solid lines represent positive edges and dashed lines represent negative edges.

Theorem 1: Consider a PR channel with ML detection

problem defined by (9), where

. If the associated

channel graph satisfies the CC, then the channel is proper.

Conversely, if the CC is not satisfied, there are instances of the

corresponding LP relaxation that do not have an integer vector

solution, implying that the channel is not proper.

Proof: If a bounded LP has a unique solution, it is always

at one of the vertices of the feasible region. Hence, the pro-

posed LP relaxation of problem (9) is exact if and only if all the

vertices of its feasible region—i.e., all its potential unique so-

lutions—are integer-valued. We first prove sufficiency: the CC

guarantees that all the vertices of the feasible region of the LP

relaxation are integral. We then prove necessity: if the CC is not

satisfied, then some of the coordinates in the LP solution have

fractional values.

1) Sufficiency: The objective function in (15) is a piecewise

linear function

. We call a breakpoint of if the

derivative of

with respect to changes at

, for

any nonzero vector

.

Now, consider (15) without the box constraints. The unique

optimum point of the objective function has to occur ei-

ther at infinity or at a breakpoint of . Since the nonlinearity in

the function comes from the terms involving the absolute value

function, each breakpoint is determined by making of these

absolute value terms active, i.e., setting their arguments equal

to zero. These terms should have the property that the linear

system of equations obtained by setting their arguments to zero

has a unique solution.

When the feasible region is restricted to the unit cube

,

the optimum can also occur at the boundaries of this region.

Without loss of generality, we can assume that the optimum

point lies on hyperplanes corresponding to the box constraints

in (15), where

. This will make exactly vari-

ables,

, equal to either 0 or 1, for some index set

with

. In addition, at least

other

equations are needed to determine the remaining fractional

variables. Each of these equations will be the result of making

some number of absolute value terms active, each having the

form

or

, depending on whether

or

, respectively. When an absolute value

term in (15) is active, either both or neither of its variables can

be integer-valued. Since the former case does not provide an

equation in terms of the fractional variables, we can assume that

all of these active absolute value terms involve only fractional

variables.

We now examine the question of when such equations can

have a unique and nonintegral solution. To determine the an-

swer, we represent the system of equations by a dependence

graph. The vertices correspond to the unknowns, i.e., the

fractional variable nodes. Between vertices and , there

is an edge if a check node connects them in the PR Tanner

graph. We refer to the edge as a positive edge if is a positive

check node (i.e.,

) and a negative edge if is a neg-

ative check node (i.e.,

). An example of a dependence

graph is shown in Fig. 3, where a a solid line denotes a posi-

tive edge and a dotted line denotes a negative edge. Note that

the corresponding Tanner graph satisfies the CC. If two vertices

are connected in the dependence graph by a positive edge, the

corresponding variables will have the same value in the solution

of the system of equations. Hence, we can collapse the positive

edge and merge these two vertices into a single vertex, and the

value that this combined vertex takes will be shared by the two

original vertices. If we perform this collapsing for every posi-

tive edge, we will be left with a reduced dependence graph that

has only negative edges.

We claim that, if the PR Tanner graph satisfies the CC, the

reduced dependence graph will not contain any cycles of odd

length. To see this, consider a cycle in the original dependence

graph, passing through a negative edge , which connects

vertex on its “left side” to vertex

on its “right side.”

The CC ensures that any path other than from vertex to

vertex passes through an odd number of negative edges.

This property will be inherited by the reduced graph, since only

positive edges collapse and no new path will be created between

and . This proves the claim.

Now consider a cycle of length in the reduced dependence

graph. The system of linear equations corresponding to the

edges in this cycle, possibly after some row and column per-

mutations in the coefficient matrix, will have the form

...

...

...

...

(16)

where the coefficient matrix contains exactly two ones in each row. Since is even, the coefficient matrix is rank deficient, and we can remove any one of its rows without losing any useful

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:18:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TAGHAVI AND SIEGEL: GRAPH-BASED DECODING

2193

equation. Hence, we can break any cycle of the reduced depen-

dence graph by removing an edge from it without changing the

space of system solutions. By repeating this for every cycle, we

will be left with an equivalent dependence graph which is a tree.

Since trees have fewer edges than vertices, the system of equa-

tions for determining the unknown variables will be underdeter-

mined, and none of the nodes in the dependence graph will have

a unique solution. Consequently, the only case where we have

a unique solution for any of the variables will be

, which

means that all of the variables are integral. This proves the

sufficiency of the CC.

2) Necessity: We now prove the necessity of the CC by

means of a counterexample. Consider a case where the realiza-

tion of the noise sequence is such that the received sequence

is zero. This will make , the coefficients of the linear

term in (15), equal to zero. Hence we are left with the posi-

tive-weighted sum of a number of absolute value terms, each of

them being greater than or equal to zero. The objective function

will become zero if and only if all these terms are zero, which

is satisfied if

. We need to show that if the CC

is not satisfied, equating all of the absolute value terms to zero

will determine a unique, fractional value for at least one of the

elements of , thereby implying that the relaxation is not exact.

Consider the dependence graph of this system of equations,

and for simplicity assume that all of the positive edges have been

collapsed in order to obtain a reduced dependence graph with

negative edges only, following the procedure described in the

proof of sufficiency. Note that, in contrast to what was assumed

in the sufficiency proof, here there is at lease one cycle of odd

length. For any such cycle, the corresponding coefficient ma-

trix in (16) has full rank, and therefore the unique solution to

this system is

. This means that no inte-

gral vector can make the objective function in (15) zero, and

therefore no integral vector can be a solution to the problem.

This completes the proof of the necessity of the CC for the LP

relaxation to be exact, and for the channel to be proper.

Corollary 1: The unique solutions of the LP relaxation of

the uncoded graph-based detection problem are in the space

.

Proof: The values of the fractional elements of are the

unique solutions of a system of linear equations, each of the

form

or

. The vector

satisfies

all these equations, and, hence, it must be the unique solution.

B. Implications of the CC

Proof: Let be the number of nonzero elements of

. Then, it is easy to see that the

PR Tanner graph will have edges and

vertices (i.e.,

variable or check nodes). But the graph can be acyclic only if

, which means that

.

Example 1: It is easy to see that the memory-1 PR channel

with

satisfies the AC.

The state-variable coefficients are given by

. Lemma 1 is of course satisfied. On the other hand, these

coefficients are not necessarily nonnegative. Therefore the NC

may not hold. The memory-2 channel

also satisfies the AC, as well as Lemma 1. However, the state-

variable coefficients satisfy

and

. Therefore this

channel satisfies the NC, as well.

In a one-dimensional ISI channel, where the state coefficients

are given by (10), the NC implies that the autocorrelation func-

tion of the discrete-time impulse response of the channel should

be nonpositive everywhere except at time zero. As the memory

size of the channel increases, this condition becomes more re-

strictive, so that a long and randomly-chosen impulse response

is not very likely to satisfy the NC. However, in some applica-

tions, such as magnetic recording, the impulse response of the

channel is first equalized to an optimized, constrained-length

target response in order to simplify the subsequent sequence de-

tection algorithm, which is often a trellis-based, Viterbi-like al-

gorithm with complexity exponential in the target length. A pos-

sible alternative, based upon the linear relaxation of graph-based

detection, might be to optimize the target channel subject to the

NC. This should make it possible to achieve performance com-

parable to that of the trellis-based detector, without incurring the

exponential complexity penalty.

This alternative approach can be applied to two-dimensional

(2-D) ISI channels, for which there is no tractable extension of

the Viterbi algorithm [7]. In a 2-D channel, the received signal

at coordinate

in terms of the transmitted symbol se-

quence

has the form

(17)

Hence, following the same procedure that resulted in (10), one can obatain the coefficients of the state variables in the 2-D channel. In particular, the state variable defined as
will have the coefficient

In the uncoded PR detection problem, validity of either of the

following conditions is sufficient for the CC to be satisfied and

therefore, by Theorem 1, for the channel to be proper.

1) Acyclicity Condition (AC): The PR Tanner graph is

acyclic.

2) Nonnegativity Condition (NC): All state variables have

nonnegative coefficients; i.e.,

.

The following lemma shows that the Acyclicity Condition

also has implications for the coefficients of state variables.

Lemma 1: If the PR channel satisfies the Acyclicity Condition, the number of nonzero state-variable coefficients
must be less than .

(18)

For simplicity, we have dropped the index in (18) because

is independent of and , except near the boundaries of the

transmitted array, where appropriate truncation may be used.

Theorem 1 guarantees that ML detection can be achieved by LP

detection if the NC is satisfied, i.e.,

for any

.

An example of a 2-D channel satisfying the NC is given by the

impulse response matrix

(19)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:18:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2194

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 4, APRIL 2011

C. Error Event Characterization: Asymptotically Proper and Improper Channels

In the preceding subsection, we showed that if the CC is not

satisfied, there are noise configurations that result in the failure

of LP detection to find the ML sequence. We now present a prob-

abilistic analysis of the performance of LP detection for general,

uncoded ISI channels and determine conditions under which

such failure occurs. Specifically, we develop a notion of “dis-

tance” for detector error events that is helpful in understanding

the behavior of channels that are not proper. We focus here on

stationary 1-D PR channels, so we can assume that

is

independent of , as discussed in Section II.C. However, we note

that, with some modifications, a similar analysis can be applied

to 2-D ISI channels.

We begin the error event analysis with a useful definition.

Definition 3: Given the solution, , of LP detection on a PR,

the fractional set,

, is the set

of indices of the information bit nodes in the Tanner graph of

the PR channel that have fractional values in the solution, .

Our analysis is based upon the following assumption, which

is supported by extensive computer simulation at high SNR.

Assumption: If the ML solution, which we denote by , is correct, then the integer-valued elements of the LP detection solution, , are also correct.
We know from Corollary 1 that the fractional elements in the LP solution, , are all equal to . Therefore, the assumption implies that we have

(20)

Since minimizes the objective function

of (15), we

can associate with it a nonnegative penalty defined by

(21)

Expanding using the expression in (15), we can write this

inequality in terms of

, and . To help simplify the

resulting expression, we make use of the following lemma.

Lemma 2: Let and be binary variables and and be their bipolar versions, respectively. Define

where

is defined to be zero if

. Since

we assumed that is equal to the transmitted sequence, we can

expand as

where the fact that

(24)
. By substituting (24) into (23), and using , we obtain

(25)
In this equation, and are obtained, respectively, from and by keeping only the elements with indices in
is a submatrix of (defined in Section II-B) consisting of the elements of with column and row indices in and its diagonal elements made equal to zero, and
(26)
Equations (21) and (25) lead to the following theorem, describing a condition for LP detector failure (in the assumed scenario where the ML sequence equals the transmitted sequence and agrees with on integer-valued elements).
Theorem 2: Uncoded LP detection fails to find the transmitted (and ML) sequence if there is an index set
for which

(22)

(27)

Then, the following equations hold:

1)

2)

,

3)

.

Proof: The equations can be verified by using (1), and

testing all possible values for and .

By using Lemma 2, and cancelling the common terms in

and , we can write

as

If the transmitted sequence, , is given, we can estimate the probability that the failure condition given by Theorem 2 is satisfied, and determine the dominant error event causing such a failure. In order to do that, for any given , we define a “distance” for the corresponding error event as
(28)
The corresponding noise variance is given by

(23)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:18:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(29)

TAGHAVI AND SIEGEL: GRAPH-BASED DECODING

2195

where is the variance of each noise sample . The probability that the error event corresponding to occurs will then be equal to

(30)

where

is the Gaussian -function. In order to find the

dominant error event over all transmitted sequences, for every

choice of the index set , we should find the vector

that maximizes the probability in (30). However,

this will require an exhaustive search over all . As an alterna-

tive, we can upper bound this probability by finding the smallest

distance

and the largest standard deviation

, and computing

. Fortu-

nately, each of these two optimization problems can be solved

by dynamic programming (in particular, the Viterbi algorithm)

using a trellis of at most states.

Referring to (28), we note that the minimum distance can

be negative. In that case, the probability that the corresponding

sequence exists in the transmitted block is independent of

the SNR. This means that the probability of failure

will be greater than for any SNR value. Therefore, there will

be a nondiminishing probability of failure as the SNR goes to

infinity. This reasoning leads to the following corollary.

Corollary 2: If for an ISI channel, there is a index set

and a vector

for which , as

defined in (28), is negative, LP detection on this channel will

have a nondiminishing word error rate (WER) as SNR grows.

We call a channel for which LP detection has nondiminishing probability of error as the SNR increases an improper channel. Thus, the corollary provides a condition that implies the channel is improper.
For some ISI channels, for sufficiently large SNR, the probability of failure becomes dominated by the probability that the ML sequence is different from the one that was transmitted. For such a channel, the WER of graph-based detection is asymptotically equal to that of ML detection as the SNR increases, so we call it asymptotically proper.

Remark 1: The error events considered in the analysis do not represent all possible modes of detector failure. Rather, our analysis is intended to provide an estimate of the gap between the performance of LP and ML detection methods by estimating the probability that graph-based detection fails to find the ML solution when the ML detector is successful. Moreover, as mentioned before, we only studied the events where a sequence satisfying (20) has a lower cost than the transmitted sequence. Therefore, even if (27) does not hold for any , it is theoretically possible that LP decoding for graph-based detection has a fractional solution. However, a substantial body of empirical evidence suggests that this is not very likely.

D. The Fully Fractional Solution

one. However, studying this event provides us with another, sim-

pler sufficient condition for the failure of LP detection, further

clarifying the distinction between the different classes of ISI

channels.

The distance, , corresponding to this event is obtained by

putting

in (28). If the block length is much

larger than the channel memory length , we can neglect the

“edge effects” caused by the indices that are within a distance

of one of the two ends of the sequence. We will then have

(31)
where is the autocorrelation of corresponding to a shift equal to . On the other hand, for the noise variance, , corresponding to this event we see from (29) that

(32)

Note that and have a similar dependence on the transmitted sequence.
A possible approach for finding the likelihood of occurrence of an all- error event is to maximize over all possible transmitted sequences. However, with a long, randomly chosen transmitted sequence, the probability that this ratio will be close to its worst case value may become very low. On the other hand, as we now show, as grows with remaining fixed, the dependence of both and on the transmitted sequence becomes negligible compared to the constant terms in their respective definitions.

Lemma 3: Let

be a sequence of i.i.d. random

variables, each equally likely to be or , and let

. Then, for fixed , as

almost surely

(33)

Proof: For each

is the sum of terms

of the form

. Clearly, each of these terms is equally likely

to be or . Furthermore, it can be shown that these terms

are mutually independent2. Hence, using the strong law of large

numbers, we have

Of particular interest among the possible error events is the

one where the all- sequence has a lower cost than the cor-

rect solution; i.e.,

in (27). For a given trans-

(34)

mitted sequence , this event is not necessarily the most likely 2For a proof of this statement, refer to Proposition 1.1 of [13].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:18:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2196
where we have used the fact that Consequently

, since

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 4, APRIL 2011
.

(35)

since the sum is a linear combination of a finite number of variables, each going to zero almost surely.
Using Lemma 3 in (31) and (32), with large, we can write

(36)

(37)

where we have used the fact that

. Since

the probability of the all- error event is equal to

, these

results motivate us to define the following parameter to charac-

terize the limiting probability as

.

Fig. 4. BER for CH1-CH3. SNR is defined as the ratio of the transmitted signal power to the received noise variance.

Definition 4: The LP distance, , of a partial-response Hence channel is given by

(41) (38)

The LP distance is a dimensionless parameter that can take values between and 1. The following theorem gives a new sufficient condition for a channel to be improper, expressed in terms of the distance .

Since the NC is satisfied,

. Therefore, we have

Theorem 3: The WER of uncoded graph-based detection by

LP decoding over an ISI channel with the transmitted sequence

generated as a random sequence of i.i.d. Bernouli binary

symbols goes to 1 as the block length goes to infinity for any

SNR. That is, the channel is improper if the LP distance of

the channel is nonpositive.

Proof: As mentioned above, the probability of the all-

event is equal to

. From (36) and (37), we have, for large

(39)

If

, the RHS will approach as increases, hence,

will go to 1.

The theorem shows that can provide evidence that a channel is improper. It is, therefore, natural to ask how it behaves for proper channels; i.e., channels satisfying the CC in Theorem 1. The following lemma provides an answer.

Lemma 4: For proper channels that satisfy the NC,

.

Proof: For any ISI channel, we can write

(40)

(42)

E. Simulation Results

We have simulated graph-based detection on the PR Tanner

graph using LP decoding and the min-sum algorithm (MSA) for

three PR channels of memory size 3:

1) CH1:

(with

,

satisfies CC; proper);

2) CH2:

(with

);

3) CH3:

(EPR4 channel with

; improper).

Bit error rates (BER) obtained on these uncoded channels using

LP and MSA are shown in Fig. 4. Since CH1 satisfies the CC,

LP will achieve ML performance on this channel. For CH2, the

BER curve can be compared to that of the ML detector, which is

also shown. Except at very low SNR where there is a small dif-

ference, the performance of LP and ML are nearly equal, which

means that CH2 is an asymptotically proper channel. For both

CH1 and CH2, the MSA detector converges in at most three it-

erations and has a BER very close to that of LP detection. In

contrast, CH3 (i.e., the EPR4 channel) is an improper channel,

and we observe that the BERs of the LP and MSA detectors are

almost constant. It is interesting to note that Kurkoski et al. also

observed a similar constant error-floor behavior in their mes-

sage-passing detection of the uncoded EPR4 channel [4]. The

floor was eliminated by the introduction of a suitably chosen

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:18:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TAGHAVI AND SIEGEL: GRAPH-BASED DECODING

2197

Fig. 5. Upper and middle plots: Performance of graph-based LP detection versus  for random ISI channels of memory 4, with SNR = 11 dB. Lower plot: His-
togram of  values for the same set of channels.

precoder. In an LDPC-coded system, on the other hand, their Finally, to give a sense of the probability density function of

simulation results showed no evidence of a minimum BER. In

corresponding to this random construction of ISI channels,

the next section, we will similarly observe that, in the presence we show in the lower plot of Fig. 5 a histogram of the values

of coding, the error floor observed in Fig. 4 does not appear for of the 200 ISI channels whose performance was simulated.

message-passing algorithms on the proposed graph representa-

tion of the EPR4 channel. We also studied the relationship between the ISI channel pa-
rameter and the performance of graph-based detection. We randomly generated 200 ISI channels with memory 4, choosing the taps of the impulse response to be i.i.d. samples from a zero-mean, unity-variance Gaussian distribution. The total energy of the impulse response was also normalized to one, i.e.,
. For each channel, we then simulated the uncoded

IV. COMBINED EQUALIZATION AND LDPC DECODING
One of the main advantages of the graph-based detection proposed in Section II is that it lends itself to the combining of the channel equalization with the decoding of an underlying error-correcting code. In this section, we study this joint detection scheme using both linear progamming and iterative, message-passing algorithms.

LP detector at an SNR of 11 dB with randomly chosen channel

input sequences of length 100. In the upper and middle plots of

Fig. 5, respectively, we show the WER of LP detection as well

as the ratio of that WER to the WER of ML detection as a func-

tion of for all 200 of the ISI channels.

The results in Fig. 5 demonstrate a strong correlation between

the performance of the LP detection algorithm and the value of

. In particular, almost every channel with

has a

WER close to 1, while for almost every channel with

,

the WER of LP detection is very close to that of ML detec-

tion. Simulation results for the MSA detector showed a similar

behavior, except for some channels with

,

for which MSA performance was significantly better than that

of the LP detector. This suggests that, for MSA, the transition

from “improper” to “proper” error-rate characteristics begins at

A. Coded LP Detection
Joint LP equalization and decoding is represented by a linear relaxation of the IQP problem in (9), incorporating the constraints that apply to the uncoded graph-based detection, as well as the linear inequalities corresponding to the relaxation of parity-check constraints of the code. The latter constraints cut from the feasible polytope some of the fractional vertices that can cause the uncoded LP detector to fail, but they also add new fractional vertices to the polytope.
Unfortunately, except for certain structured codes, no general systematic method has been reported in the literature for computing the performance of LP decoding of explicitly given codes even on a memoryless channel. Performance analysis becomes even harder in the case of LP detection on ISI channels. Hence, we have not been able to fully generalize to the coded case the

smaller values of than for LP.

conditions derived for the uncoded LP detection in the previous

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:18:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2198

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 4, APRIL 2011

section. However, we can generalize Theorem 3, which formulated in terms of a condition that implies the channel is improper, with nondecreasing WER asymptotically in the block length.

Corollary 3: Consider a linear code with no “trivial” (i.e.,

degree-1) parity checks, used on a channel satisfying

.

Then, coded LP detection on this system has a nondiminishing

WER for large block lengths.

Proof: We have shown in Section III-C that if this condi-

tion is satisfied, the all- vector will with high probability have

a lower cost than the transmitted vector.3 It is now enough to

show that the all- vector will not be cut from the polytope

by any error-correcting code. To see this, consider a relaxed

parity-check inequality of the form

Fig. 6. Selective message passing at the information bit nodes. (a) Calculating a message outgoing to the code layer. (b) Calculating a message outgoing to the PR layer.

coefficients become the true LLR values of the received sam-

ples. Consequently, we have used for SPA detection the equivis odd (43) alent LLRs obtained by this normalization.

where

. To prove that this constraint is satisfied by the

all- vector, we consider two cases:

, and

.

If

, the first sum in (43) will be equal to , and the

second sum will be greater than or equal to , since

has

at least one element. Hence, the left-hand side (LHS) of (43) will

be less than or equal to

. Also, if

, the first

sum will be equal to

, while the second sum is

nonnegative. Therefore, the LHS of the inequality will be less

than or equal to its RHS. Consequently, in both cases (43) will

be satisfied.

Decoding with MSA (respectively, SPA) on the Tanner graph defining the code represents an approximation of ML decoding (respectively, a posteriori probability decoding). The approximation becomes exact if the messages incoming to any node are statistically independent. This happens if the Tanner graph is cycle-free and the channel observations (i.e., the a priori LLRs) are independent. In the graph-based detection that we propose, neither of these two conditions is satisfied. In particular, the PR layer of the graph may contain many cycles of length 6, while the channel observations result from matched filtering of the received signal and, therefore, contain colored noise.

B. Coded Message-Passing Detection

Similar to LP detection, graph-based IMP detection can

be extended to coded systems by adding the parity-check

constraints of the code to the PR Tanner graph, as shown in

Fig. 2, and treating it as a single Tanner graph defining a linear

code. Despite many similarities, LP and IMP decoding schemes

behave differently when used for joint detection and decoding.

For example, there is no immediately evident analog to Corol-

lary 3 for IMP detection. On the contrary, we have observed in

simulation studies that there are improper channels for which

coded IMP detection does not exhibit the poor performance

seen in the uncoded setting.

In this paper, we used both the min-sum algorithm (MSA)

and the sum-product algorithm (SPA) for the implementation of

coded IMP detection. As in the uncoded case, we use as the ob-

jective coefficients of MSA the same coefficients as those used

for LP detection, i.e., and

, since MSA is invariant

under coefficient scaling. For SPA, note that each contains a

Gaussian noise term with variance proportional to . Hence,

one can argue that a suitable normalization of the objective co-

efficients to estimate the “equivalent LLRs” is achieved by mul-

tiplying all the objective coefficients by . An advantage of

this normalization is that, in the absence of ISI, the normalized

1) Selective Message-Passing Algorithm: In order to mitigate the positive feedback resulting from the cycles of the PR layer, we propose an alternative IMP approach, which we call selective message passing (SMP), for coded detection. In SMP, we use a modified combining rule for messages at the information bit nodes, illustrated in Fig. 6. The outgoing message from an information bit node along an edge in the code layer is computed from the channel observation and the messages coming into the bit node along all edges, excluding edge . On the other hand, the outgoing message along an edge in the PR layer is computed from the channel observation and incoming messages along the edges in the code layer only. Since there are no 4-cycles in the PR layer of the graph, this modification prevents any “closed-loop” circulation of messages within the PR layer. In other words, message passing inside the PR layer becomes effectively loop-free. However, there still remain cycles in the code layer, as well as cycles that have edges in both the code and PR layers. Simulation studies, discussed in more detail in Section IV-C, showed that SMP improved coded IMP detection on some channels that would otherwise perform poorly, such as the EPR4 channel.
2) Performance Analysis: Density evolution provides a powerful tool for analyzing the average performance of message-passing decoding of LDPC code ensembles on mem-

3The derivation of the limit of  was based on the assumption that the transmitted sequence is an i.i.d. sequence, so that (33) holds. While the transmitted sequence is no longer i.i.d. in the presence of coding, we implicitly assume that (33) still holds. This is a sufficiently accurate assumption for all codes of practical interest. In particular, (33) can be proved for a random ensemble of LDPC codes.

oryless channels in the limit as the code length goes to infinity. The calculation of the ensemble average performance inherently assumes that the messages entering each node of the Tanner graph are statistically independent, an assumption that becomes accurate as the code length goes to infinity and the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:18:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TAGHAVI AND SIEGEL: GRAPH-BASED DECODING

2199

E =N Fig. 7. BER versus

for coded LP detection and coded MSA detection in four channels.

topology of the Tanner graph of the code approaches that of a Another challenge in applying density evolution to the anal-

cycle-free graph.

ysis of detectors for channels with memory is that, unlike the

Given the success of density evolution in predicting the wa- case of memoryless channels, the performance of the detector

terfall behavior of IMP decoding of LDPC codes, it is natural depends on the transmitted codeword. Hence, the simplifying

to try to extend this approach to the message-passing decoding assumption that the all-zeros codeword is transmitted cannot

of coded ISI channels. Unfortunately, we face some challenges be used, and one needs to instead assume that a random (but

in applying density evolution to the proposed message-passing valid) codeword is transmitted. In [15], Kavcˇic´ and Mitzen-

detector in the presence of ISI. A key requirement in the ap- macher proposed a method to tackle this problem based on mes-

plication of density evolution is that the incoming messages at sage flow neighborhoods in the channel factor graph. A similar

each node be statistically independent, or at least have a con- technique may be applicable to the performance analysis of the

trolled statistical dependence which enables us to estimate the SMP detector.

statistics of the outgoing messages. As is done in the setting of In summary, with careful consideration of the structure of the

memoryless channels, we can consider the limiting case of an in- PR layer, and the assumption of a random tree-like structure in

finite-length, random LDPC code with corresponding cycle-free the code layer, it should be possible to use suitably modified

graph structure in the code layer of the Tanner graph. In the density evolution techniques to analyze the performance of the

PR layer, however, there will generally be many cycles, with proposed SMP detection technique. We leave the pursuit of this

cycle length as short as 6, irrespective of the code length, as idea to future research.

well as an overall lack of randomness in the graph interconnec-

tions. These properties notwithstanding, use of the SMP algorithm presented above may allow a meaningful application of density evolution. Specifically, a message passed from an information bit node to a check node in the PR layer of the Tanner graph is only derived from the channel observations, , and a number of statistically independent messages coming from the code layer, as illustrated in Fig. 6. Furthermore, since each check node in the PR layer is connected to only two information bit nodes and one state bit node with a fixed and deterministic message, one can approximate the statistics of the messages going from these check nodes to the information bit nodes. In particular, the known pattern of statistical dependence between channel observations, , makes it possible to approximate the dependence among the messages coming into an information bit

C. Simulation Results

In this subsection, we present simulation results for coded de-

tection in the presence of ISI using the schemes proposed above.

In all cases, we have used a rate- , length-200, (3,4)-regular

LDPC code. The following PR channels were considered:

1) Memoryless Channel:

;

2) PR4 Channel:

(

; proper),

3) EPR4 Channel:

(

,

improper);

4) Modified EPR4:

(

,

asymptotically proper).

In Fig. 7, the BER of coded LP and MSA detection on these

channels has been plotted as a function of

. For all but the

node from nearby check nodes in the PR layer and, hence, to es- memoryless channel, coded MSA detection outperforms coded

timate the statistics of messages entering the code layer of the LP detection. In particular, for the EPR4 channel, coded LP de-

Tanner graph.

tection has a BER of about for all SNR values, as predicted

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:18:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2200

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 4, APRIL 2011

E =N Fig. 8. BER versus

for various coded detection schemes in the EPR4 channel.

by Corollary 3, while coded MSA detection has a monotonically

APPENDIX

decreasing BER.

EQUIVALENCE OF THE LP RELAXATION OF BINARY AND

For the EPR4 channel, the BER for LP, MSA, selective MSA,

BIPOLAR FORMS OF THE IQP PROBLEM

SPA, and selective SPA are compared in Fig. 8. SPA shows a gain of about 2 dB over MSA. (Although not shown in the figure, the gap between MSA and SPA for the other three PR channels was between 0.3 and 0.7 dB.) Selective message passing provides an additional gain of approximately 0.5 dB for MSA, but appears to offer little benefit when applied to SPA.

In this Appendix we show that if we first rewrite the objective function of the IQP problem (5) in terms of 0-1 variables, and then relax the resulting problem in to an LP, as done in [8], the resulting problem will be equivalent to the LP detection proposed in II.C. Clearly, since the parity-check constraints of an underlying code only involve the information variables, their re-

laxation will not be affected by the way the auxiliary variable

V. CONCLUSION

nodes are defined. Hence, for simplicity of the expressions, here we only consider an uncoded scenario.

In this paper, we introduced a new graph representation of ML detection in ISI channels, which can be used for combined equalization and decoding using LP relaxation or iterative message-passing methods. By a geometric study of the problem, we derived a necessary and sufficient condition for the equalization

We prove the claim by showing that the relaxation of 0-1

form of the IQP problem results in an equivalent minimization

problem identical to (15). We first start by rewriting the objec-

tive function of the IQP problem in (5) as a function of the 0-1

vector . Replacing by

, the objective function becomes

problem to give the ML solution for all transmitted sequences

and all noise configurations under LP relaxation. Moreover, for

certain other channels violating this condition, the performance

of LP is very close to that of ML at high SNR. For a third class

of channels, graph-based has a probability of failure bounded

away from zero at all SNR, even in the absence of noise. In a

step toward the analysis of the performance in the general case,

we derived a distance for ISI channels, which can be used as

(44)

a tool to estimate the asymptotic behavior of the proposed de-

tection method. Simulation results show that message-passing techniques have a similar performance to that of LP detection After removing the constant terms and factors and using (10), for most channels. In addition, we studied graph-based joint we obtain the equivalent objective function

detection and decoding of channels with LDPC-coded inputs.

Simulation results indicate that, in contrast to the uncoded case,

message-passing detection significantly outperforms LP detec-

(45)

tion for some channels.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:18:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TAGHAVI AND SIEGEL: GRAPH-BASED DECODING

2201

where we have defined the auxiliary variables

as

in (15). This proves that the information bits have equal optimal values in the two LP relaxations obtained from the 0-1 and bipolar forms of the IQP problem.

(46)
As the next step, we need to relax the constraints above into linear constraints. Similar to [8], as well as the relaxation of Feldman et al. [6], we use linear constraints that define the convex hull of all binary 3-tuples, that satisfy (46). This results in the four linear inequalities, which can be summarized as
(47)
or equivalently

(48)

Following a line of reasoning similar to that in Section III,

we know that the value of at the solution of the relaxed LP

problem will be equivalent to either the upper or lower bound

given by (47), depending on the sign of its coefficient

in

the objective function. Hence, similar to (14), the cost of in

the optimum objective function will be

(49) Substituting the expression above in (45), and neglecting the constant terms, yields the equivalent optimization problem
Minimize

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the associate editor and the anonymous reviewers for their helpful suggestions.
REFERENCES
[1] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-20, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[2] J. Hagenauer and P. Hoecher, “A Viterbi algorithm with soft-decision outputs and its applications,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, Dallas, TX, Nov. 1989, vol. 3, pp. 1680–1686.
[3] W. Ryan, S. McLaughlin, K. Anim-Appiah, and M. Yang, “Turbo, LDPC, and RLL codes in magnetic recording,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. on Turbo Codes and Rel. Topics, Sept. 2000.
[4] B. M. Kurkoski, P. H. Siegel, and J. K. Wolf, “Joint message-passing decoding of LDPC codes and partial-response channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1410–1422, Jun. 2002.
[5] N. Singla, J. A. O’Sullivan, R. Indeck, and Y. Wu, “Iterative decoding and equalization for 2-D recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 2328–2330, Sep. 2002.
[6] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 954–972, Mar. 2005.
[7] E. Ordentlich and R. M. Roth, “On the Computational Complexity of 2D Maximum-Likelihood Sequence Detection,” HP Labs Tech. Rep. HPL-2006-69, Apr. 2006.
[8] L. J. Watters, “Reduction of integer polynomial programming problems to zero-one linear programming problems,” Operat. Res., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 1171–1174, Nov.–Dec. 1967.
[9] C. Lemaréchal and F. Oustry, Semidefinite Relaxations and Lagrangian Duality With Application to Combinatorial Optimization Rapp. Rech. no. 3710, Jun. 1999, INRIA.
[10] M. X. Goemans and D. P. Williamson, “Improved approximation algorithms for maximum cut and satisfiability problems using semidefinite programming,” J. ACM, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1115–1145, Nov. 1995.
[11] J. M. W. Rhys, “A selection problem of shared fixed costs and network flows,” Manage. Sci., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 200–207, Nov. 1970.
[12] C. Sankaran and A. Ephremides, “Solving a class of optimum multiuser detection problems with polynomial complexity,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 44, no. 5, pp. 1958–1961, Sept. 1998.
[13] I. D. Mercer, “Autocorrelations of random binary sequences,” Combinator., Probabil., Comput., vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 663–671, Sep. 2006.
[14] M. H. Taghavi and P. H. Siegel, “Adaptive methods for linear programming decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 5396–5410, Dec. 2008.
[15] A. Kavcˇic´, X. Ma, and M. Mitzenmacher, “Binary intersymbol interference channels: Gallager codes, density evolution, and code performance bounds,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 7, pp. 1636–1652, Jul. 2003.

Subject to

(50)

Since the second and third sums in the objective function cancel each other, the equivalent problem becomes identical to that

Mohammad H. Taghavi (M’09) received the B.Sc. degree from the Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran, in 2003 and the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, in 2005 and 2008, respectively, all in electrical engineering.
Since 2008, he has been a Senior Engineer with Qualcomm, Inc., San Diego, CA, where he conducts research and development on wireless cellular and local area networks and contributes to the IEEE 802.11 standards. His research interests include error-correcting codes, wireless communications, information theory, and optimization theory.
Dr. Taghavi was a recipient of the Gold Medal of the Iranian National Physics Olympiad and the Gold Medal of the 30th International Physics Olympiad, Padova, Italy, 1999.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:18:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2202

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 4, APRIL 2011

Paul H. Siegel (M’82–SM’90–F’97) received the S.B. and Ph.D. degrees in mathematics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, in 1975 and 1979, respectively.
He held a Chaim Weizmann Postdoctoral Fellowship at the Courant Institute, New York University. He was with the IBM Research Division in San Jose, CA, from 1980 to 1995. He joined the faculty at the University of California, San Diego, in July 1995, where he is currently a Professor of electrical and computer engineering in the Jacobs School of Engineering. He is affiliated with the California Institute of Telecommunications and Information Technology, the Center for Wireless Communications, and the Center for Magnetic Recording Research, where he holds an endowed chair and serves as Director. His primary research interests lie in the areas of information theory and communications, particularly coding and modulation techniques, with applications to digital data storage and transmission.
Prof. Siegel was a member of the Board of Governors of the IEEE Information Theory Society from 1991 to 1996 and was re-elected for a 3-year term in 2009. He served as Co-Guest Editor of the May 1991 Special Issue on “Coding for Storage Devices” of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY. He served the same TRANSACTIONS as Associate Editor for Coding Techniques from 1992 to 1995, and as Editor-in-Chief from July 2001 to July 2004. He was also Co-Guest Editor of the May/September 2001 two-part issue on “The Turbo Principle: From Theory to Practice” of the IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS. He was co-recipient, with R. Karabed, of the 1992 IEEE Information Theory Society Paper Award and shared the 1993 IEEE Communications Society Leonard G. Abraham Prize Paper Award with B. Marcus and J. K. Wolf. With J. B. Soriaga and H. D. Pfister, he received the 2007 Best Paper Award in Signal Processing and Coding for Data Storage from the Data Storage Technical Committee of the IEEE Communications Society. He holds several patents in the area of coding and detection and was named a Master Inventor at IBM Research in 1994. He is a member of Phi Beta Kappa and the National Academy of Engineering.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:18:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

