IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 4, APRIL 2011

2213

Lowering the Error Floor of LDPC Codes Using Cyclic Liftings
Reza Asvadi, Amir H. Banihashemi, and Mahmoud Ahmadian-Attari

Abstract—Cyclic liftings are proposed to lower the error floor of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. The liftings are designed to eliminate dominant trapping sets of the base code by removing the short cycles which are part of the trapping sets. We derive a necessary and sufficient condition for the cyclic permutations assigned to the edges of a cycle  of length `() in the base graph such that the inverse image of  in the lifted graph consists of only cycles of length strictly larger than `(). The proposed method is universal in the sense that it can be applied to any LDPC code over any channel and for any iterative decoding algorithm. It also preserves important properties of the base code such as degree distributions, and in some cases, the code rate. The constructed codes are quasi-cyclic and thus attractive from a practical point of view. The proposed method is applied to both structured and random codes over the binary symmetric channel (BSC). The error floor improves consistently by increasing the lifting degree, and the results show significant improvements in the error floor compared to the base code, a random code of the same degree distribution and block length, and a random lifting of the same degree. Similar improvements are also observed when the codes designed for the BSC are applied to the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel.
Index Terms—Cyclic lifting, error floor, graph lifting, graph covering, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, trapping sets.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK (LDPC) codes [9] have emerged as one of the top contenders for capacity approaching error correction over many important channels. They not only perform superbly but also lend themselves well to highly efficient parallel decoding algorithms. A well-known construction of LDPC codes is based on protographs, also referred to as base graphs or projected graphs [24], [6], [18]. In such constructions, one starts with a bipartite base graph . This graph is then copied times and for each edge of ,
Manuscript received February 16, 2010; revised November 06, 2010; accepted November 19, 2010. Date of current version March 16, 2011. The material in this paper was presented at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Austin, TX, June 13–18, 2010. This work was supported in part by the Education and Research Institute for ICT (ERICT) under Grant number 19333/500.
R. Asvadi and M. Ahmadian-Attari are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, K. N. Toosi University of Technology, Tehran, Iran (e-mail: asvadi@ee.kntu.ac.ir; mahmoud@eetd.kntu.ac.ir).
A. H. Banihashemi is with the Broadband Communications and Wireless Systems (BCWS) Center, Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada (e-mail: ahashemi@ sce.carleton.ca).
Communicated by P. O. Vontobel, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques. Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2011.2110150

a permutation is applied to the copies of to interconnect the copies of . The resulting graph, called an -cover or an -lifting of , is then used as the Tanner graph [22] of the LDPC code. If the permutations are cyclic, the resulting LDPC code is quasi-cyclic (QC). QC LDPC codes are attractive due to their simple implementation and analysis [18].
At very large block lengths, the performance of LDPC codes can be well estimated using asymptotic techniques such as density evolution [17]. At finite lengths, however, our understanding of the dynamics of iterative decoding algorithms is limited. In particular, iteratively decoded finite-length codes often demonstrate an abrupt change in their error rate curves, referred to as error floor, in the high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) region. The analysis of the error floor and techniques to improve the error floor performance of LDPC codes are still very active areas of research. For the binary erasure channel (BEC), the error floor is well understood and is known to be caused by graphical structures called stopping sets [5]. Richardson related the error rate performance of LDPC codes on the binary symmetric channel (BSC) and the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel to more general graphical structures, called trapping sets, and devised a technique to estimate the error floor [16]. Other estimation techniques based on finding the dominant trapping sets were also proposed for the BSC in [3], and for the AWGN channel in [4], [21]. In [30]–[33], Xiao and Banihashemi took a different approach, and instead of focusing on trapping sets which are the eventual result of the decoder failure, focussed on the input error patterns that cause the decoder to fail. A simple technique for estimating the frame error rate (FER) and the bit error rate (BER) of finite-length LDPC codes over the BSC was developed in [30] and [31]. The complexity of this algorithm was then reduced in [33], and the estimation technique was extended to the AWGN channel with quantized output in [32]. More recent work on the estimation of the error floor of LDPC codes is presented in [2], [7], to which the reader is also referred for a more comprehensive list of references.
There is extensive literature on reducing the error floor of finite-length LDPC codes over different channels and for different iterative decoding algorithms. One category of such literature, focusses on modification of iterative decoding algorithms, see, e.g., [11], while another category is concerned with the code construction. In the second category, some researchers use indirect measures such as girth [14], [23], or approximate cycle extrinsic message degree (ACE) [25], [26], [29] while others work with direct measures of error floor performance such as the distribution of stopping sets or trapping sets [27], [12], [13]. In [27], edge swapping is proposed as a technique to increase the stopping distance of an LDPC code, and thus to improve

0018-9448/$26.00 © 2011 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2214

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 4, APRIL 2011

its error floor performance over the BEC. Random cyclic liftings are also studied in [27] and shown to improve the average performance of the ensemble in the error floor region compared to the base code. Ivkovic et al. [12] apply the same technique of edge swapping between two copies of a base LDPC code to eliminate the dominant trapping sets of the base code over the BSC.
In the approach proposed here, we also focus on dominant trapping sets which are the main contributors to the error floor. We start from a code whose error floor is to be improved, as the base code. We then construct a new code by cyclically lifting the base code. The lifting is designed carefully to eliminate the dominant trapping sets of the base graph. This is achieved by removing the short cycles which form the dominant trapping sets. Our work has similarities to [12] and [27]. The similarity with both [12] and [27] is that we also use graph covers or liftings to improve the error floor performance of a base code. It however differs from [12] in that we restrict ourselves to cyclic liftings, that are advantageous in practice.1 Moreover, to eliminate the dominant trapping sets, we use a different approach than the one in [12]. More specifically, our approach is based on the elimination of the short cycles involved in the trapping sets. To do so, we derive a necessary and sufficient condition for the problematic cycles of the base code such that they are mapped to strictly larger cycles in the lifted code. The difference with [27] is that while [27] is focused on the ensemble performance of random liftings, our work is concerned with the intentional design of a particular cyclic lifting.
Given a base code and its dominant trapping sets over a certain channel and under a specific iterative decoding algorithm, the proposed construction can lower the error floor by increasing the block length while preserving the important properties of the base code such as degree distributions. The code rate is also preserved or is decreased slightly depending on the rank deficiency of the parity-check matrix of the base code. Moreover, the cyclic nature of the lifting allows for a more compact representation of the code compared to a random code, thereby making it attractive from a practical point of view. We apply the proposed construction to the Tanner code [23] and two randomly constructed codes, one regular and the other irregular, to improve the error floor performance of Gallager A/B algorithms over the BSC.2 Simulation results show a consistent improvement in the error floor performance by increasing the degree of liftings. The constructed codes are far superior to similar random codes or codes constructed by random liftings in the error floor region. We also examine the performance of the codes constructed for BSC/Gallager B algorithm, over the AWGN channel with belief propagation and min-sum decoding and observe similar improvements in the error floor performance.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II introduces definitions, notations and background material used throughout the paper. In Section III, the proposed construction
1Cyclic liftings can be defined more compactly compared to random codes or codes constructed by random liftings. This in turn allows for a simpler implementation of the encoder and the decoder. One should however note that the lifting degrees used in this work are rather small compared to typical degrees used for the common construction of quasi-cyclic codes.
2The choice of BSC/Gallager algorithms is for simplicity, and the proposed construction is applicable to any channel/decoding algorithm combination as long as the dominant trapping sets are known.

is explained and discussed. Numerical results are presented in Section IV, and finally Section V concludes the paper.

II. PRELIMINARIES: LDPC CODES, TANNER GRAPHS, GRAPH LIFTINGS, AND TRAPPING SETS

A. LDPC Codes and Tanner Graphs

Consider a binary LDPC code represented by a Tanner

graph

, where

and

are the sets of variable nodes and check nodes, re-

spectively, and is the set of edges. Corresponding to , we

have an

parity-check matrix

of , where

if and only if (iff) the node

is connected to

the node

in ; or equivalently, iff

. If all

the nodes in the set have the same degree , and all the nodes

in the set have the same degree , the corresponding LDPC

code is called

-regular. Otherwise, it is called irregular.

A subgraph of is a path of length if it consists of a se-

quence of

nodes

and distinct edges

. We say two nodes are connected

if there is a path between them. A path is a cycle if

, and all the other nodes are distinct. The length of the

shortest cycle(s) in the graph is called girth. In bipartite graphs,

including Tanner graphs, all cycles have even lengths. So, the

girth is an even number.

B. Graph Liftings

Consider the symmetric group of all possible permuta-

tions over the set of integer numbers

,

with the group operation defined as composition. Let de-

note the cyclic subgroup of consisting of the circulant

permutations defined by

. The

permutation corresponds to cyclic shifts to the right. Cor-

responding to , we define the permutation matrix whose

rows are obtained by cyclically shifting all the rows of the iden-

tity matrix by to the left. Clearly,

. There is a

natural isomorphism between (a) , (b) the group of integers

modulo

, under addition, and (c) the group of circulant

permutation matrices under multiplication. This isomorphism

is defined by the correspondence between and . In the

following, we refer to as the shift of the permutation .

Consider the following construction of a graph

from a graph

: We first make copies of such that

for each node

, we have copies

in . For each edge

, we apply a permutation

to the copies of in such that an edge

belongs to iff

. The set of these edges is denoted

by . The graph is called an -cover or an -lifting of ,

and is referred to as the base graph, protograph or projected

graph corresponding to . We also call the application of a per-

mutation to the copies of , edge swapping, highlighting

the fact that the permutation swaps edges among the copies

of the base graph.

In this paper, is a Tanner graph, and we define the edge

permutations from the variable side to the check side, i.e., the

set of edges in corresponding to an edge

are defined by

. Equivalently, can be

described by

, where

is the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ASVADI et al.: LOWERING THE ERROR FLOOR OF LDPC CODES

2215

inverse of in . Our focus in this paper is on cyclic liftings

of , where the edge permutations are selected from , or

equivalently . Thus the nomenclature cyclic edge swapping.

In this case, if is a permutation from variable nodes to check

nodes,

, will be the corresponding

permutation from check nodes to variable nodes. (Note that

is the additive inverse of in .) It is important to distinguish

between the two cases when we compose permutations on a

directed path.

To the lifted graph , we associate an LDPC code , referred

to as the lifted code, such that the

parity-check matrix

of is equal to the biadjacency matrix of . More specifi-

cally, consists of a total of submatrices

, with each submatrix of dimension

,

arranged in rows and columns. The submatrix

in

row and column is the circulant permutation matrix corre-

sponding to the edge

when

; otherwise,

is

the all-zero matrix. Let the

matrix

be defined

by

if

, and

, oth-

erwise. Matrix , called the matrix of edge permutation shifts,

fully describes and thus the cyclically lifted code .

C. Trapping Sets and Error Floor
The culprits in the error floor region of iterative decoding algorithms are referred to as trapping sets. An trapping set is defined as a set of variable nodes which have check nodes of odd degree in their induced subgraph. Among trapping sets, the most harmful ones are called dominant. Trapping sets depend not only on the Tanner graph of the code but also on the channel and the iterative decoding algorithm. In general, finding all the trapping sets is a hard problem, and one often needs to resort to efficient search techniques to obtain the dominant trapping sets [16], [4], [33], [28]. Trapping sets for Gallager A/B algorithms over the BSC are examined for a number of LDPC codes in [3], [33]. In this work, we assume that the dominant trapping sets are known and available for the code defined by the protograph.
In the context of symmetric decoders over the BSC, the error floor of FER can be estimated by [31]

(1)

where is the channel crossover probability, and and are

the size and the number of the smallest error patterns that the

decoder fails to correct. From (1), it is clear that the dominant

trapping sets over the BSC are those caused by the minimum

number of errors at the input to the decoder. (In [3] and [12], pa-

rameter in (1) is called the minimum critical number. Param-

eter is also equal to the smallest size of instantons [2].) In the

double-logarithmic plane, one can see from (1) that

decreases linearly with

and the slope of the line is deter-

mined by .

of reducing the error floor. (This is equivalent to the design of

noninfinity edge permutation shifts of the matrix .) For ex-

ample, (1) indicates that for improving the error floor on the

BSC, one needs to increase and decrease corresponding

to the dominant trapping sets. In particular, while increasing

for dominant trapping sets increases the slope of

vs.

at low channel crossover probabilities , reducing

amounts to a downward shift of the curve. So, the general idea

is to primarily increase by eliminating the trapping sets with

the smallest critical number, and the secondary goal is then to

decrease .

It is well known that dominant trapping sets are composed

of short cycles [3], [33]. To eliminate the trapping sets, we thus

aim at eliminating their constituent cycles in the lifted graph. In

the following, we examine the inverse image of a (base) cycle

in the cyclically lifted graph.

A. Cyclic Liftings of Cycles

Lemma 1: Consider a cyclic -lifting of a Tanner graph .

Consider a path of length in , which starts from a variable

node and ends at a variable node with the sequence of edges

. Corresponding to the edges, we have the sequence

of permutation shifts

. Then the permutation shift that

maps , the inverse image of in , to , the inverse image of

in , through the path is , where

(2)

Proof: The proof is straightforward (see, e.g., [8] and [10]).

The value of given in (2) is called the permutation shift of

the path from to . Clearly, the permutation shift of the path

from to is equal to

. If

and all

the other nodes are distinct, then the path will become a cycle

and depending on the direction of the cycle, its permutation shift

will be equal to or .

Theorem 1: Consider a cyclic -lifting of a Tanner graph

. Suppose that is a cycle of length in . The inverse image

of in is then the union of cycles, each of length ,

where is the order of the permutation shifts of .

Proof: We first note that the two permutation shifts of

corresponding to the two directions of are the inverse of each

other in , and thus have the same order. The proof then fol-

lows from [10, Th. 2.4.3], by noticing that the permutation

corresponding to is cyclic and thus its cycle structure has only

one nonzero element, i.e., all the cycles of have the same

length

. It is then easy to see that , where

is the order of in (which is the same as the order of the

permutation shifts of in ), and that the number of cycles of

length in the cycle structure of is equal to .

III. DESIGN OF CYCLIC LIFTINGS TO ELIMINATE TRAPPING SETS

In what follows, we refer to the value in Theorem 1 as the order of cycle , and use the notation to denote it.

In this work, our focus is on the design of cyclic liftings of a Corollary 1: Consider the cyclic -lifting of a Tanner given Tanner graph to eliminate its dominant trapping sets with graph . Suppose that is a cycle of length in . The inrespect to a given channel/decoding algorithm with the purpose verse image of in is the union of non-overlapping cycles,
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2216

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 4, APRIL 2011

Fig.
pin=g

1so.edt.d(a)de(g5=r,ee3)cvhTaerrcaiakpbpnilneogdneos.edte;(b)

(4=,

2)evtreanppdineggreseet

ch(ce)ck(4n, o4d)e

trapand

each strictly longer than iff

; or equivalently, iff the

permutation shift of , given in (2), is nonzero.

B. Deterministic Edge Swapping (DES) Algorithm

Example 2: Going back to Fig. 1, for the

trapping set,

it would be enough to just pick one of the edges of the cycle of

length 8 to eliminate this cycle in the lifted graph. For the (5,

3) and (4, 2) trapping sets, however, at least two edges should

be selected for the elimination of all the cycles. A proper choice

would be to select one edge from the diagonal and the other edge

from one of the sides.

The next step is the assignment of permutation shifts to the

selected edges such that

for every cycle

. In

general, we would like to have larger orders for the cycles. This

in turn would result in larger cycles in the lifted graph. To limit

the complexity, however, we approach this problem in a greedy

fashion and with the main goal of just eliminating all the cycles

in , i.e., for each selected edge , we choose the permutation

shift such that all the cycles

have orders larger than one.

This can be performed by sequentially testing the values in the

set

.3 As soon as such an index is found, we assign it to

and move to the next selected edge and repeat the same process.

We call the proposed algorithm deterministic edge swap-

ping (DES) to distinguish it from “random edge swapping.”

The pseudocode of the algorithm is given as Algorithm 1. At

the output of Algorithm 1, we have the sets SwappedSet and

IndexSet, which contain the edges of the Tanner graph that

should be swapped, and their corresponding permutation shifts,

respectively.

Algorithm 1: Deterministic Edge Swapping (DES) Algorithm

Suppose that is the set of all dominant trapping sets, and

that

is the set of all cycles that appear in some trapping set

from . We also use the notations and for a trapping set

and its constituent cycles, respectively. We thus have

. For an edge , we use

to denote the

set of cycles in the trapping set that include . In the previous

subsection, we proved that a cycle in the base Tanner graph

is mapped to the union of larger cycles in the cyclically lifted

graph iff

. To eliminate the dominant trapping sets,

we are thus interested in assigning the edge permutation shifts

to the edges of

such that

for every cycle

. To achieve this, we order the trapping sets in accordance

with the increasing order of their critical number. We still denote

this ordered set by with a slight abuse of notation. Note that

may now include trapping sets with critical numbers larger than

the minimum one. We then go through every trapping set in

, identify all the cycles involved in , and collect all the found

cycles in the set . Note that

is also partially ordered

based on the corresponding ordering of the trapping sets in .

Example 1: Three typical trapping sets for Gallager A/B al-

gorithms are shown in Fig. 1 from [3]. The (4, 4) and (5, 3)

trapping sets include one and three cycles of length 8, respec-

tively, while the (4, 2) trapping set has 2 cycles of length 6 and

one cycle of length 8.

The next step is to choose proper edges of each trapping set

to be swapped, i.e., to choose the edges to which nonzero per-

mutation shifts are assigned. In general, the policy is to select

the minimum number of edges that can result in

for

every cycle in the trapping set under consideration.

1) Initialization: Create the ordered sets and .

Select .

.

2) Select the next trapping set

.

3)

.

4)

.

5) If

, go to Step 8.

6) Select the edges from

that should be

swapped, and assign their permutation shifts from

such that

for every cycle in .

7)

, and

. Go to Step 12.

8)

. If

, Stop.

9) Select an edge from

and assign a

permutation shift

to it such that for

all cycles

, we have

. If this is not feasible, go to Step 11.

10)

, and

. If

, go

to Step 8. Otherwise, go to Step 12.

11)

, If

, go to Step 9. Else, stop.

12) If all the trapping sets in are processed, stop.

Otherwise, go to Step 2.

3More complex search algorithms with the goal of increasing the order of cycles may be devised. In this work however, no attempt has been made in this direction.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ASVADI et al.: LOWERING THE ERROR FLOOR OF LDPC CODES

2217

Fig. 2. Comparison of the FER performance of the Tanner code and its liftings over the BSC (Example 3).

In Algorithm 1, the search for edges to be swapped and the

permutation shift assignment to these edges are performed in

two phases. The first phase is in Steps 4–6, where any edge from

previously processed trapping sets is removed from the set of

candidates for swapping. If the first phase fails, in that no edge

exists as a candidate for swapping

, then

the algorithm switches to the second phase in Steps 8–9, where

only previously swapped edges are removed from the candidate

set for swapping.

The process of permutation shift assignment in Algorithm 1

involves the satisfaction of inequalities

for certain cycles,

where is given in (2). In general, this is easier to achieve if

the variables involved in (2) are selected from a larger alphabet

space. In fact, by increasing , one can eliminate more trap-

ping sets and achieve a better performance in the error floor

region.

of that is obtained from , introduced in Section II-B, by suitable row and column permutations, as follows:

...

...

...

. . . ...

...

Clearly, and describe equivalent codes. In (3), all the submatrices , and are given by

(3) , have size

(4)

C. Minimum Distance and Rate of Cyclic Liftings

where is the permutation shift corresponding to . The parity-check matrix is block circulant with the property that

Consider an LDPC code with an

parity-check matrix

(5)

. To prove our results on the minimum distance and the rate of

a cyclic -lifting of , we consider the parity-check matrix The next lemma follows immediately.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2218

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 4, APRIL 2011

Fig. 3. Comparison of the FER performance of the Tanner (305, 124) and (755, 334) codes and the DES 2- and 5-liftings of the Tanner (155, 64) code over the BSC (Example 4).

Lemma 2: If the parity-check matrix of a code has the block

circulant structure of (3), and if for any , the submatrices

and have non-overlapping nonzero entries, then is a

cyclic -lifting of a code with the parity-check matrix given by

(5). In this case, the entries of the matrix of edge permutation

shifts are equal to

, if the th entry of is

nonzero for a submatrix ; otherwise,

.

We also need the following lemma.

structure of (3) with replaced by

, can be partitioned

into submatrices of size

as follows:

...

...

. . . ... ...

(6)

Lemma 3: Any cyclic lifting of with degree

(

and are positive integers) can be expressed as a cyclic

-lifting of a cyclic -lifting of .

Proof: Suppose that is an

parity-check matrix

of . The parity-check matrix of , which has the general

where [see (7) at the bottom of the page]. (Note that has

size

and that all indices of should be interpreted as

modulo

.) From (6), is block circulant, and from (4)

and (7), we can see that the nonzero entries of and for

, are non-overlapping. This, based on Lemma 2, means

...

...

...

...

(7)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ASVADI et al.: LOWERING THE ERROR FLOOR OF LDPC CODES

2219

Fig. 4. Comparison of the FER performance of the regular (504, 252) code and its liftings over the BSC (Example 5).

that is the parity-check matrix of a cyclic code which has the following matrix:

-lifting of a From the last expression, it is easy to see that parity-check is in fact a cyclic -lifting of .
The following results are from [12].

, and thus

By substituting (7) in (8), one can see that

Theorem 2: If code , with the parity-check matrix , has (8) rate and minimum distance , then the rate and the

minimum distance of a 2-lifting of satisfy

and

, respectively.

...

...

. . . ... ...

Corollary 2: If the matrix has full rank, then

.

Combining Lemma 3 and Theorem 2, in the following, we

have the main result of this section which generalizes Theorem

2.

(9) Theorem 3: If code , with the parity-check matrix , has rate and minimum distance , then the rate and the

where

, for

. minimum distance

of a cyclic -lifting of satisfy

Clearly, the nonzero entries of and for

, are

nonoverlapping. The block circulant structure of in (9) thus

implies that is a cyclic -lifting of a code which has the

, and

, for

.

Proof: Based on Lemma 3, can be obtained by times

following parity-check matrix:

2-lifting of (note that by definition, any 2-lifting is cyclic). Se-

quential application of the bounds in Theorem 2, times, proves

the result. (10)
The following corollary is a consequence of Corollary 2.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2220

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 4, APRIL 2011
TABLE I DOMINANT TRAPPING SETS OF THE IRREGULAR (200, 100) CODE, ITS RANDOM 13-LIFTING, AND THE DES 13-LIFTING (EXAMPLE 6)

Corollary 3: If matrix has full rank, then

, for

.

It is easy to find counter-examples to demonstrate that the

upper bound

of Theorem 3, and the result of Corollary

3 do not always hold for values of that are not integer powers

of two.

It is worth noting that cyclic covers and their minimum dis-

tance properties have also been studied in [19] and [20]. In

particular, upper bounds on the minimum distance of proto-

graph-based QC LDPC codes have been derived in [20]. For the

cases considered in this paper, however, where the base graph is

rather large and where the cover degree is relatively small, the

bounds of [20] are not expected to pose strong limitations.

IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS
In this section, we apply the DES algorithm of Section III-B to three LDPC codes to eliminate their dominant trapping sets over the BSC. The codes are: the (155, 64) Tanner code [23], a (504, 252) randomly constructed regular (3, 6) code [15], and an optimized (200, 100) randomly constructed irregular code.

Example 3: For the (155, 64) Tanner code under the Gallager

B algorithm, the most dominant trapping set is the (5, 3) trap-

ping set, shown in Fig. 1(a), with critical number 3. We apply

the DES algorithm to this code to design cyclic -liftings for

, and 5. The FER curves of the designed codes are

presented in Fig. 2 along with the FER of the base code.

A careful inspection of Fig. 2 shows that using a 2-lifting, the

slope of the curve changes from 3 to 4, an indication that all (5,

3) trapping sets are eliminated. In this case, (4, 4) trapping sets

play the dominant role. Further increase of to 3 and then to

4, only causes a downward shift of the curve (with no change of

slope), an indication that the minimal critical number remains

at 4 for the two lifted codes and increasing the degree of lifting

just reduces the number of (4, 4) trapping sets. Increasing to

5 however, eliminates all the (4, 4) trapping sets and the slope

of the FER curve further increases to 5. The dominant trapping

sets for the 5-lifting are (5, 5) trapping sets.

It is important to note that for

, the performance of

the designed code is practically identical to that of the code de-

signed in Example 3 of [12] based on a 2-cover of the Tanner

code. There are however no results reported in [12] for covers of larger degree.
For comparison, we have also included in Fig. 2 the FER of a random 5-lifting of the Tanner code, as well as the FER of a random regular code of the same block length and the same degree distributions as the designed 5-lifting.4 As can be seen, the error floor performance of both codes is significantly worse than that of the designed 5-lifting. In particular, the FER slope of the two codes are 4 and 3, respectively, versus 5 for the designed lifting.
The code rates of the designed -liftings are: 0.4065, 0.4043, 0.4032, and 0.4026, for from 2 to 5, respectively. The small decrease in the code rate by increasing the degree of lifting is a consequence of the fact that the original parity-check matrix of the Tanner code is not full rank. The rate of the Tanner code itself is 0.4129.
It is also worth noting that while the girth of the -liftings, , remains the same as that of the Tanner code, i.e.,
, for the 5-lifting, the girth is increased to 10.
Example 4: In this example, we compare the performance of the Tanner codes with block lengths 305 and 755 [23] with the designed 2- and 5-liftings of the previous example, respectively. It is important to note that all codes have the same degree distributions. The Tanner (305, 124) code has a rate 0.4066 which is almost identical to the rate of the designed 2-lifting. The block lengths of the two codes are also very close to one another. The Tanner (755, 334) code has a rate 0.4424, which is about 10% higher than the rate of the designed 5-lifting. The block lengths are only slightly different. The FER curves for the four codes are given in Fig. 3. It can be seen that both Tanner codes have the same error floor performance which is practically identical to the error floor performance of the designed 5-lifting. The error floor performance of the designed 2-lifting, however is inferior due to the poor error floor of the base Tanner code and the limited improvement that was attainable by a lifting of degree only 2. The waterfall performance of the two Tanner codes is very close to that of the corresponding designed codes.
4All the random constructions reported in this paper are obtained in one trial, i.e., no attempt is made to find the best code by searching among a number of randomly constructed codes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ASVADI et al.: LOWERING THE ERROR FLOOR OF LDPC CODES

2221

Fig. 5. FER curves of the irregular (200, 100) code, its DES cyclic 13-lifting, a random 13-lifting and a random irregular (2600, 1300) code with the same degree distribution over the BSC (Example 6).

Example 5: In this example, we consider a regular (504, 252) In this example, the parity-check matrix of the base code is

code from [15] decoded by the Gallager B algorithm. The domi- full-rank, and all the liftings have the same rate of 0.5 as the base

nant trapping sets in this case have critical number 3 and include code.

(3, 3), (4, 2), and (5, 3) trapping sets among others. The DES Noteworthy is that while the 2-lifting has the same girth of

algorithm is used to design cyclic -liftings of this code for

as the base code, the girth for -liftings,

to 6. The FER results of the liftings and the base code increased respectively to 8, 8, 8, and 10.

to 6, is

are reported in Fig. 4. Again, the performance of the 2-lifting

is similar to that of the code designed in [12]. All (3, 3) trap-

ping sets are eliminated in the 2-lifting, but the survival of other

trapping sets with critical number 3 keeps the minimal critical

number at 3, and thus no change of FER slope compared to the

base code is attained. Increasing to 3, however, eliminates all

the trapping sets with critical number 3 and changes the slope of

the FER to 4. The dominant trapping sets in this case are (4, 4)

sets. Further increase of to 4 and 5 only reduces the number

of (4, 4) trapping sets and thus results in a downward shift of the

FER curve. For

, the algorithm can eliminate all the (4,

4) trapping sets, and thus increases the slope of the FER curve

to 5. The dominant trapping sets in this case are (5, 5) sets.

For comparison, in Fig. 4, we have also shown the perfor-

mance of a random 6-lifting of the (504, 252) code, and a

Example 6: In this example, we consider a randomly con-

structed rate-1/2 irregular (200, 100) code as the base code. The

degree distributions for this code, optimized for the Gallager A

algorithm over the BSC [1], are

and

. The code has

. This code

has a wide variety of dominant trapping sets under the Gallager

A algorithm, all with critical number 3. These sets, along with

their multiplicities, are listed in Table I.

We apply the DES algorithm to this code to design a cyclic

13-lifting of length 2600, rate 0.5 and

. The FER curves

of the lifted code and the base code are presented in Fig. 5.

As can be seen, the lifted code has a much better error floor

performance compared to the base code. In fact, the minimum

critical number for the lifted code is 5 versus 3 for the base code.

For comparison, a rate-1/2 code of block length 2600 with the

random code of the same block length and the same degree same degree distribution and

is randomly constructed.

distributions. As can be seen, the two random codes perform The performance of this code is also given in Fig. 5. So is the

practically the same and their performance in the error floor performance of a random 13-lifting of the base code. Clearly the

region is far poorer than that of the designed 6-lifting. In performance of the designed code is significantly better in the

particular, the slope of the FER curve for both codes is only 3 error floor region compared to both random codes. In particular,

versus 5 for the designed code.

the slope of the FER curve for the random codes is the same as

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2222

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 4, APRIL 2011

Fig. 6. FER performance of the Tanner code, its DES cyclic 5-lifting, a random 5-lifting and a random (775, 310) code with the same degree distribution over the BIAWGN channel (Example 7).

the base code (3) and much less than that of the lifted code (5). in that it can be applied to any decoding algorithm over any

The list of the dominant trapping sets for both the random and channel, as long as the dominant trapping sets are known and

the designed 13-liftings are also given in Table I. As expected, available. In addition, the liftings have the same degree distribu-

the designed lifting has a much better trapping set profile.

tions as the base code and are attractive from a practical point of

Example 7: In this example, we demonstrate that cyclically lifted codes designed for the Gallager B algorithm in Examples 3 and 5 also perform very well on the binary-input AWGN channel under belief propagation (BP) (sum-product) and min-sum (MS) decoding algorithms. The FER results for the 5-lifting of the Tanner code and the 6-lifting of the MacKay code are reported in Figs. 6 and 7, respectively. In each figure, the performance of the corresponding base code, a similar random lifting, and a similar random code (same block length and degree distributions) are also presented. One can see that at high SNR values, the designed codes perform far superior to the corresponding base codes and random codes. In particular,

view due to their cyclic structure. For base codes with full-rank parity-check matrices, the liftings also have the same rate as the base code and the performance improvement is achieved at the expense of larger block length. Compared to random codes or random liftings with the same block length and degree distributions, the designed codes perform significantly better in the error floor region.
While the cyclic liftings in this work are designed for the Gallager A/B algorithms over the BSC, they also perform very well over the BIAWGN channel. In particular, the designed codes substantially outperformed similar random codes in the high SNR region.

they show no sign of error floor for FER values down to about , and their FER decreases at a faster rate compared to the
base codes and random codes.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the Associate Editor and the anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments that improved

V. CONCLUSION

the presentation of the paper. In particular, the current approach for the proof of Theorem 3 was suggested by the Associate Ed-

In this paper, cyclic liftings are proposed to improve the error itor to replace a longer proof. The authors also wish to thank

floor performance of LDPC codes. The liftings are designed to C. Kelley for her help in pointing out some relevant literature.

eliminate the dominant trapping sets of the code by eliminating The first and the third authors would like to thank H. Haghighi

their constituent short cycles. The design approach is universal from the Mathematics Department of K. N. Toosi University of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ASVADI et al.: LOWERING THE ERROR FLOOR OF LDPC CODES

2223

Fig. 7. FER performance of the regular (504, 252) code, its DES cyclic 6-lifting, a random 6-lifting, and a random (3024, 1512) code with the same degree distribution over the BIAWGN channel (Example 7).

Technology for helpful discussions on the material presented in
Section III-A of the paper.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Bazzi, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Exact threshold and optimal codes for the binary-symmetric channel and Gallager’s decoding algorithm A,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 9, pp. 2010–2021, Sep. 2004.
[2] S. K. Chilappagari, M. Chertkov, M. G. Stepanov, and B. Vasic, “Instanton-based techniques for analyzing and reduction of error floors of LDPC codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 855–865, Aug. 2009.
[3] S. K. Chilappagari, S. Sankaranarayanan, and B. Vasic, “Error floors of LDPC codes on the binary symmetric channel,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC 2006), Istanbul, Turkey, Jun. 2006, pp. 1089–1094.
[4] C. A. Cole, S. G. Wilson, E. K. Hall, and T. R. Giallorenzi, “A general method for finding low error rates of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, 2006.
[5] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. E. Telatar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[6] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, C. R. Jones, and K. Andrews, “Capacity-approaching protograph codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 876–888, Aug. 2009.
[7] L. Dolecek, P. Lee, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, B. Nikolic, and M. Wainwright, “Predicting error floors of structured LDPC codes: Deterministic bounds and estimates,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 908–917, Aug. 2009.
[8] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.

[9] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[10] J. L. Gross and T. W. Tucker, Topological Graph Theory. New York: Wiley, 1987.
[11] Y. Han and W. E. Ryan, “Low-floor decoders for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1663–1673, Jun. 2009.
[12] M. Ivkovic, S. K. Chilappagari, and B. Vasic, “Eliminating trapping sets in low-density parity-check codes by using Tanner graph covers,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 3763–3768, Aug. 2008.
[13] X. Jiao, J. Mu, J. Song, and L. Zhou, “Eliminating small stopping sets in irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Comm. Lett., vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 435–437, June 2009.
[14] Y. Mao and A. H. Banihashemi, “A heuristic search for good lowdensity parity-check codes at short block lengths,” in Proc. IEEE ICC 2001, Helsinki, Finland, Jun. 11–14, 2001.
[15] D. J. C. Mackay, Encyclopedia of Sparse Graph Codes [Online]. Available: http://www.interference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html
[16] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Ann. Allerton Conf. Commun., Contr. Comput., Monticello, IL, Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[17] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[18] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2008.
[19] R. Smarandache, A. E. Pusane, P. O. Vontobel, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Pseudocodeword performance analysis for LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 2577–2598, Jun. 2009.
[20] R. Smarandache and P. O. Vontobel, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes: Influence of proto- and Tanner-graph structure on minimum Hamming distance upper bounds,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory Jan. 2009 [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/0901.4129

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2224

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 4, APRIL 2011

[21] M. Stepanov and M. Chertkov, “Instanton analysis of low-density parity-check codes in the error floor regime,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Seattle, WA, Jul. 2006, pp. 9–14.
[22] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 27, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[23] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, and T. Fuja, “A class of group-structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. ISCTA 2001, Ambleside, U.K., 2001.
[24] J. Thorpe, “LDPC codes constructed from protographs,” IPN Progr. Rep., pp. 42–154, Aug. 2003, JPL.
[25] T. Tian, C. R. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPC code construction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1242–1247, Aug. 2004.
[26] D. Vukobratovic and V. Senk, “Evaluation and design of irregular LDPC codes using ACE spectrum,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 2272–2278, Aug. 2009.
[27] C.-C. Wang, “Code annealing and suppressing effect of the cyclically lifted LDPC code ensembles,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop 2006, Chengdu, China, Oct. 2006, pp. 86–90.
[28] C.-C. Wang, S. R. Kulkarni, and H. V. Poor, “Finding all small errorprone substructures in LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 1976–1999, May 2009.
[29] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Improved progressive-edge–growth wth (PEG) construction of irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 715–717, Dec. 2004.
[30] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Hard-decision performance of LDPC codes on binary symmetric channels with small crossover probabilities,” in Proc. 23rd Biennial Symp. Commun., Kingston, Ontario, Canada, May 29–Jun. 1 2006, Queen’s Univ..
[31] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Estimation of bit and frame error rates of finite-length low-density parity-check codes on binary symmetric channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no. 12, pp. 2234––2239, , Dec. 2007.
[32] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Error rate estimation of finite-length low-density parity-check codes decoded by soft-decision iterative algorithms,” in Proc. 2008 IEEE ISIT, Jul. 2008, pp. 439–443.
[33] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Error rate estimation of low-density parity-check codes on binary symmetric channels using cycle enumeration,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1550–1555, Jun. 2009.
Reza Asvadi received the B.Sc. degree (with highest honers) in electrical engineering from K. N. Toosi University of Technology, Tehran, Iran, in 2001, and the M.Sc. degree in communications engineering from Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, in 2003.
He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in communications. His research interests include coding and information theory, advanced mathematics of communications, and signal processing for wireless communications.

Amir H. Banihashemi received the B.A.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from the Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan, Iran, in 1988, and the M.A.Sc. degree in communications engineering from the University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran, in 1991, with the highest academic rank in both classes. He received the Ph.D. degree in 1997 from the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada.
From 1991 to 1994, he was with the Electrical Engineering Research Center and the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Isfahan University of Technology. During 1994–1997, he was with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Waterloo, where he held two Ontario Graduate Scholarships for international students. In 1997, he joined the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, where he was a Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) Postdoctoral Fellow. He joined the Faculty of Engineering, Carleton University, in 1998, where he is currently a Professor with the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering. His research interests include coding and information theory, digital and wireless communications, theory and implementation of communications algorithms, network coding and compressive sensing and sampling. He has published more than 130 papers in refereed journals and conferences.
Dr. Banihashemi served as an Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS from 2003 to 2009. He was a member of the Board of Directors for the Canadian Society of Information Theory between 1999 to 2009. He is the Director of the Broadband Communications and Wireless Systems (BCWS) Centre, Carleton University. He has been involved in many international conferences as chair, member of technical program committee and member of organizing committee. These include Co-Chair for Communication Theory Symposium of Globecom’07, TPC Co-Chair of Information Theory Workshop (ITW) 2007, Member of Organizing Committee for International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT) 2008, and Co-Chair of Canadian Workshop on Information Theory (CWIT) 2009. He is a recipient of Carleton’s Research Achievement Award in 2006, and was awarded one of NSERC’s 100 2008 Discovery Accelerator Supplements (DAS).
Mahmoud Ahmadian-Attari was born in Tehran, Iran, on April 15, 1953. He received the M.Sc. degree from the University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran, and Ph.D. degree from the University of Manchester, U.K., in 1975 and 1996, respectively, both in electrical engineering.
Since 1979, he has been with K. N. Toosi University of Technology, Tehran, as a faculty member. He has taught several courses on electronics, communication theory, digital communications, data communications, channel coding, coded modulation schemes at K. N. Toosi University of Technology. He founded the Cryptography and Coding Lab (CCL), K. N. Toosi University, in 2003, and is currently an Associate Professor of electrical engineering and supervising research activities in the related fields in this Lab. His research interests include secure communication, multifunctional coding, design and development of error control codes, MIMO channels, and network security.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

