2011 Third International Conference on Communications and Mobile Computing
A High-efficiency LDPC Encoder with Optimized Backtracking Algorithm

Zhibin Zeng
Engineering Research Center of Digital Audio & Video, Ministry of Education Communication University of China Beijing, China zhbzeng@cuc.edu.cn

Abstract— A new LDPC encoder is presented for CMMB in this paper. The encoder uses based on RU method embodies high-efficiency by using the optimized backtracking algorithm. Simulation shows that this method decreases the complexity of encoding and calculation significantly. Implementation of the LDPC encoder for CMMB achieves more efficient encoding rate.
Keywords- LDPC; encoder; CMMB; RU decomposition; backtracking algorithm
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes were originally invented and investigated by Gallager [1]. The crucial innovation was Gallager’s introduction of iterative decoding algorithms (or message-passing decoders) which he showed to be capable of achieving a significant fraction of channel capacity at low complexity. LDPC code has been used as channel coding in CMMB [2] because of its lower decoding complexity. But its’ disadvantage is higher encoding complexity.
The characteristic parity-check matrix of LDPC code is sparse, while its generation matrix is mostly dense, which means that the quadratic complexity to code length with direct generation matrix encoding is infeasible for hardware implementation. Although some methods implement the encoder directly through dense matrix operations, they will result in complexity quadratic to code lengths. One of encoding methods with linear complexity was proposed by Neal [3], which used LU decomposition to free the encoding process of dense inverse operation. It is not easy, however, to find a proper sparse LU decomposition for arbitrary H matrices. Another method introduced by Richardson and Urbanke [4] (named as RU algorithm) preprocesses the parity-check matrix H and a series of related matrix operations based on greedy algorithm before encoding, which shows that the linear time encoding is achievable through careful linear manipulation.
In this paper, based on RU decomposition with paritycheck matrix, we propose an optimized backtracking algorithm instead of greedy algorithm to bring the given matrix into the approximate lower triangular matrix(ALT) to reduce encoding complexity and improve encoding efficiency. And the multi-staged pipeline architecture is also designed for the hardware implementation for CMMB encoder.

II. LDPC ENCODER A. General LDPC Encoder for CMMB

LDPC code in CMMB is a kind of High-Structured (HS) code, which is characterized by the parity-check matrix H with the regular quasi-cyclic structure.

The principle of LDPC encoding with the matrix H is to

solve parity equations:

HcT = 0T

(1)

{ } Where

c=

c 0

,

c1,"

c 9215

is encoded codeword, which is

{ } consisted of information bit vector s=

s 0

,

s1,"

sK

-1

and

{ } parity code vector p= p0, p1," p9215-K .

For CMMB standard, information bits and parity bits are reordered by codeword bits mapping vector (named IDX table) as follows:

cCOL_ORDER(i)

=

⎧ ⎨ ⎩

si

pi
+K -9216

0 ≤ i ≤ 9215 − K 9216 − K ≤ i ≤ 9215

(2)

Here c represents outputting encoded codeword,

COL_ORDER(i) is codeword bits mapping vector, K is

LDPC code information sequence length. For 1/2 code rate, K equals 4608, and for 3/4 code rate, K is 6912.

Since the outputting encoded codeword is not systematic,

it

is

difficult

for

encoder

implementation,.

Suppose

that

c sys

presents the systematic form of encoded code, meaning
[ ] csys = p s , TIDX is the permutation matrix

corresponding to codeword bits mapping vector, and the

weight of rows or the weight of columns are 1, thus
c=csysTIDX .

Substituting it into (1) we can get

( ) HTIDXT

cT sys

=

0T

(3)

Define HIDX to be the systematic form of parity-check

matrix H as HIDX =HTITDX . HIDX is divided into two

parts, HP and HS corresponding to parity bits p and information bits s respectively. Then (3) becomes

HP pT +HSsT =0T

(4)

978-0-7695-4357-4/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE

341

DOI 10.1109/CMC.2011.81

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:15:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

The general encoding method is as follows:

pT =-H-P1HSsT

(5)

Both H and HIDX are very sparse, so HP separated

from HIDX is still sparse. Being a dense matrix, however,

H

−1 P

will

consume

quite

a

number

of

storages

and

logical

resources. In order to improve encoding efficiency, LU decomposition with optimized dynamic programming

algorithm is used to implement LDPC encoder for CMMB.

B. LDPC Encoder Based on LU Decomposition

The encoding method based on LU decomposition has linear complexity. Neal used LU decomposition to free whole encoding process from dense inverse operation; however, it is not easy to find a good sparse LU decomposition for arbitrary matrices. In the classic LU decomposition method, the preprocessing which is
performed on the parity-check matrix HP cannot achieve a
good sparse lower-triangular matrix L and upper-triangular matrix U .

We design optimized LU decomposition method for
CMMB which processes the matrix HP corresponding to
parity code by Gaussian elimination and bring it into sparse lower-triangular and upper-triangular matrix as possible by performing row and column permutations during the operation of Gaussian elimination. It can improve sparsity of the matrices dramatically. The preprocessing is executed in software since it needs to be performed only once for a given matrix and costs no encoding time and resource of the actual hardware encoder.

In general the Classic LU decomposition on the matrix
HP is based on Gaussian elimination as follows:

⎡1

h 12

h 13

"

h1N ⎤

⎢ ⎢

h 21

h 22

h 23

"

h 2

N

⎥ ⎥

HP

=

⎢ ⎢ ⎢

h31 "

h32 "

h33 "

" "

h3N "

⎥ ⎥ ⎥

⎢⎣hN1 hN 2 hN 3 " hNN ⎥⎦

⎡1

h 12

⎯L⎯C (⎯1) ×→

⎢ ⎢ ⎢

0 0

⎢⎢"

1
h1 32
"

h 13

"

h1N ⎤

h1 23

"

h21N

⎥ ⎥

h1 33
"

" "

h31N "

⎥ ⎥ ⎥

⎢⎣ 0 h1N 2 h1N 3 " h1NN ⎥⎦

⎡1

h 12

h 13

"

h1N ⎤

⎯L⎯C(⎯N )×⎯→

⎢ ⎢ ⎢

0 0

⎢⎢"

1 0 "

h1 23 1
"

" " "

h1 2

N

⎥ ⎥

h32N "

⎥ ⎥ ⎥

(6)

⎢⎣ 0 0 0 " 1 ⎦⎥

Where h is the element of the matrix HP , h ∈ (0,1) .

From the procedure we can get

LC(N )...LC(2)LC(1)HP = UC

(7)

Where LC(i) denotes partial lower-triangular matrix, and

UC denotes upper-triangular matrix.

For the matrix is binary, we have

L −1 C(i)

=

LC(i)

(8)

So equation (7) is equal to:

HP = LC(1)LC(2)...LC(N )UC = LCUC

(9)

Where LC = LC(1)LC(2)...LC(N ) is lower-triangular matrix.

Generally, LC and UC are not good sparse matrices. In
order to achieve as sparse as possible matrices, an optimized algorithm is used to perform row and column permutations during the operation of Gaussian elimination. The optimized LU decomposition is as follow:
L(N )R(N )...L(2)R(2)L(1)R(1)HPC(1)C(2)...C(N ) = U (10)

Where L(i) denotes partial lower-triangular matrix and U
denotes upper-triangular matrix in optimized algorithm

instead of classic algorithm. Where R(i) denotes that the
matrix is multiplied by a permutation matrix on its left which

is equal to realign the row. Similarly, C(i) denotes that the
matrix is multiplied by a permutation matrix on its right which is equal to realign the column.
Similarly, defined C = C(1)C(2)...C(N ) we get

HPC = R(1)L(1)R(2)L(2)...R(N )L(N )U = LU

(11)

Where L = R(1)L(1)R(2)L(2)...R(N )L(N ) is lower-

triangular matrix. We can find the appropriate value of R(i)

and C(i) to improve the sparsity of L and U using

optimized algorithm which is described in next section.

Substitute (11) into (4), we obtain

LUC−1 pT = −HSsT

(12)

Define

pT C

=C−1

pT

,

equation

(12)

is

equal

to

LUpCT = −HSsT

(13)

342 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:15:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Let −HSsT = xT , LyT = xT , UpCT = yT , then parity-check bits pT can be calculated as following steps:

1) Compute sparse matrix HS multiplies information bit

vector sT : xT = −HSsT 

(14)

2) Solve equation LyT = xT with forward substitution;

3) Solve equation UpCT = yT with backward

substitution;

4) So pT can be calculated: pT = CpCT 

Finally, the outputting encoded codeword

determined by

c sys

which consisted of

p

and

s.

(15)
c is

The basic framework of our encoder is shown in Figure

1. Our approach for LDPC encoding consists of two steps:

preprocessing and hardware encoding. First, the original

parity-check matrix H is preprocessed with the optimized

LU decomposition method to generate the matrices needed

by the hardware encoder. This preprocessing step is

implemented in software and needs to be performed once for

the given matrix H . The encoder itself is implemented in

hardware to encode the message blocks and output the

encoded codeword.

Figure 1 LDPC encoding software and hardware framework
III. APPROXIMATE LOWER TRIANGULATION VIA OPTIMIZED BACKTRACKING ALGORITHM
The aim of RU method is to produce an ALT matrix with as small a gap as possible. Richardson and Urbanke introduced greedy algorithm to perform row and column permutations with the given matrix. Greedy algorithms mostly (but not always) fail to find the globally optimal solution for they usually do not traverse all the data. Greedy algorithms make commitments to certain choices too early to find the best overall solution. So we presents novel optimized backtracking algorithm instead of greedy algorithm to implement triangulation. Furthermore, our algorithm is general algorithm for regular and irregular LDPC codes except for LDPC code in CMMB. Simulation results for CMMB show that the gap of ALT matrix can be reduced considerably by applying the new algorithm.
Optimized backtracking algorithm runs as follows:
1) Find the rows of degree one in HP then select the rows to form the set θ . If θ is empty, remove the left most

column of HP and repeat step 1 with the modified matrix
HP .
2) Take each “1” in θ as node. For each node compute
the degree sum of all rows and columns in the residual matrix by removing the row and column corresponding to
the node from θ .Then we take the nodes corresponding to
minimum sum of both row and column as existence-nodes, others as death-nodes. Select one of existence-nodes as start node which is also expansion-node, then remove the row and column corresponding to start node. The residual matrix is
HP ' . In the optimized algorithm, Computing the degree
sum of all rows and columns is replaced with only computing the degree sum of all rows. It can improve operation efficiency and decrease calculation time.
According to the above principle, choose new nodes of
next stage in HP ' , then take one of new existence-nodes as
expansion-node. If it is available that the current expansionnode can move to a new node, the new node will become existence-node and new expansion-node, and the old expansion-node is existence-node as before. If not, the current expansion-node will become death-node, then record the rank of the residual matrix.
When the current residual matrix is resumed to the postremoved form and backtracking is performed on other existence-node, the existence-node becomes a new expansion-node. As all existence-nodes have been backtracked, the search process is finished. After all the ranks recorded above are compared, we get the solution corresponding to the minimum rank and note all the path nodes of the solution. As the constraint condition is the minimum degree sum, the number of existence-nodes is small every time. Thus backtracking time is tolerable.
3) According to the above path nodes performing row and column permutation, bring the matrix into ALT form.

4) Modify HP again by removing the triangular part.
The residual matrix is empty, the algorithm terminates.
Otherwise, remove a column of HP and go to step 2.
For 1/2 and 3/4 code rate, we triangulate the given matrices according to classic greedy algorithm and our backtracking algorithm. The gaps are listed in Table I. From Table I we can see that the new algorithm offers smaller gaps than greedy algorithm, so encoding complexity is simplified.

TABLE I.

TABLE TYPE STYLES

RATE
1/2 3/4

GAP

Classic Greedy Algorithm

Optimized Backtracking Algorithm

302

171

60

38

343 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:15:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 2 The hardware architecture of encoder implementation

IV. LDPC ENCODER IMPLEMENTATION
A. LDPC Encoder Architecture
Hardware Implementation of the encoder is designed to compute the parity-check bits according to equation (15). The main operations performed in the encoder are matrixvector multiplication (MVM), forward-substitution (FS), back-substitution (BS) and codeword generation (CWG). CWG is responsible for the bit permutations according to the standard. The overview of the hardware encoder architecture is shown in Figure 2. Four stages run in parallel and double buffering is used between the stages, in order to minimize the overall latency, idle times and memory requirement[5]. During stage 1, the message block is read into buffers. Then stage 2 performs the operations according to equation (14). And stage 3 operates forward-substitution and backsubstitution. In the last stage the codeword be generated with permutation table.
B. Implementation Results
The Verilog HDL implementation of the LDPC encoder on Altera Stratix II EP1S180F102014 takes about 4% of the logic resource and 62% of the memory resource. Under the encoder maximum work frequency 200 MHz, system pure encoding rate achieves 36.18Mbps (1/2 code rate) and 72.39 Mbps (3/4 code rate), which satisfies the requirement of CMMB.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a high-efficiency LDPC encoder for CMMB based on RU decomposition with optimized backtracking algorithm is proposed. Results from simulation and implementation show that this method can decrease encoding complexity and improve encoding rate effectively.

REFERENCES
[1] Yue bangguo, “Talking about bedpan’s flushing filth function and saving water,” Chinaware, 2001(5).(in Chinese)
[2] Wu ziniu, The basic elements of computing hydromechanics. Beijing: the Science Press. 2001. 1-8. (in Chinese)
[3] Hong fangwen, “Kinetic object round free surface flowing field value simulation and experimentation research,” Doctor Degree thesis. Wuxi, Jiangsu, China: Chinese watercraft science research center. 2001.4. (in Chinese)
[4] C.W. Hirt, B.D. Nichols. Volume of fluid (VOF) method for the dynamics of free boundaries. Journal of Computational Physics, 1981, 39:201-225.
[5] Dong-U Lee, Wayne Luk, Connie Wang, Christophoer Jones, Michael Smith, John Villasenor, “A Flexible Hardware Encoder for Low-Density Parity-Check Codes” Proceeding of the 12th Annual IEEE Symposium on Field-Programmable Custom Computing Machines, p.101-111, April 20-23, 2004

344 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:15:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

