2010 International Conference on Electronics and Information Engineering (ICEIE 2010)

A fixed Bits LDPC Decoder

Fen Xu , Liang Zhou, Hong Wen
National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Communication University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
Chengdu, China E-mail:x_f605@163.com, lzhou@uestc.edu.cn,
sunlike@uestc.edu.cn,
Abstract—With iterative decoding, most LDPC codes have a weakness known as error floor. In this work, we propose a fixed bits LDPC decoding scheme to improve the ability of LDPC transmission. The method is universal as it can be applied to any code/channel model/decoding algorithm and it improves performance greatly, without losing the code regularity, without changing the decoding algorithm. Simulation results show that the error floor performance also can be significantly improved with this decoding scheme.
Keywords-LDPC, error floor, min-sum decoding algorithm, fixed bits.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) code was invented by Gallager nearly 40 years ago. It has received a lot of attention lately due to its excellent error-correcting ability and implementation friendly decoding algorithms [1]. With coding gain approaching Shannon limit and lower hardware complexity than Turbo codes, LDPC codes have been widely considered as error-correcting codes for next generation communication systems.
The performance of LDPC under iterative decoding depends on the choice of the parity-check matrix of the code. More precisely, the error rate of a code is influenced by a class of combinatorial entities determined by the choice of the parity-check matrix. LDPC codes perform very well under iterative decoding such as the sum-product algorithm (SPA) or min-sum algorithm (MSA). However, with iterative decoding, most LDPC codes have a weakness known as error floor. In the past, to lower the error floor, a great deal of research effort has been expended in finding its causes and constructing codes to avoid error floor inducing structures in the code’s Tanner graph. In many applications, the error floor is required to be lower than a particular level so as not to adversely affect the performance of the system. In some communication and data storage systems, this requirement is as low as 10−12 to 10−15.
The error floor problem for iterative decoding on the binary erasure channel (BEC) is now well understood. It is arguably the most important problem in the theory of lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes and iterative decoding algorithms. Roughly, error floor is an abrupt change in the frame error rate (FER) performance of an iterative decoder in the high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) region. In the case of the

Chen Huang, Qian Zhao
National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Communication University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
Chengdu, China E-mail: huc1985@163.com, iceluckyboy@yahoo.com.cn
additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, MacKay and Postol pointed out a weakness in the construction of the Margulis code which led to high error floors. Richardson presented a method to estimate error floors of LDPC codes and presented results on the AWGN channel [2]. A significant part of the research on error floor analysis has also focused on methods for lowering the error floor. The two distinct approaches taken to tackle this problem are (1) modifying the decoding algorithm and (2) constructing codes avoiding certain topological structures.
Since the reason to cause error floor generally have complicated combinatorial properties, it is very difficult to cope with them directly only in code construction or decoding algorithm. Instead, some decoder-based strategies have been proposed to lower the error floor due to trapping sets. However, with these methods, a prior knowledge of the dominant trapping sets in a particular code is required at the decoder, which is often difficult to obtain [3]. In this work, we propose a fixed bits decoding which combined with encoding to improve the error floor performance. It contains two stages—encoding stage and decoding stage. In the encoding stage, some code bits which are chosen randomly will be fixed. In the decoding stage, the fixed bits decoding will be used. Simulation results show that this decoder can improve the error floor performance significantly. But one thing to note here: this method only applies to the systematic LDPC code.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The LDPC code’s background is briefly reviewed in Section II. Section III describes the proposed method. Section IV contains the main simulation results and concluding remarks are given in Section V.
II. BACKGROUND
A. Code Definition
The LDPC codes can be described by a M × N sparse parity check matrix H, in which most of the elements are 0’s and only a few are 1’s. M denotes the number of parity check equations, which is the number of check nodes. N is the block length, which is the number of variable nodes. Complying with the parity-check rule of linear block codes, all code words are orthogonal to the row space of H. Assuming that H is full rank, the length of message word is K = N − M bits, and the code rate

978-1-4244-7681-7/$26.00 C 2010 IEEE

V2-428

Volume 2

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:51:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2010 International Conference on Electronics and Information Engineering (ICEIE 2010)

is R = K / N = 1− M / N .An LDPC code can be represented with a Tanner Graph, which serves as a signal-flow model of sum-product algorithm (SPA) decoding.

The parity check matrix of an (N, K) QC-LDPC [4] is an

MC × NC

array

of

sub-matrices

with MC = M / b and NC = N / b ; the sub-matrix is either a

circulation or a zero matrix with uniform size. In a

circulation, each row is the one-place cyclic right-shift of the

row above it, and the first row is the cyclic right-shift of the

last row. In most usual cases, the circulation is a shifted

identity matrix; namely, there is only one 1-entry either in a

row or in a column.

B. Regular Quasi-cyclic LDPC Codes
Cyclic code is an important sub-category of linear block code, which has a variety of simple and practical decoding algorithms with lower decoding complexity and more efficiency due to its inherent structure of algebra. The disadvantage of general LDPC codes is that a significant amount of memory is needed to store their parity-check matrices. Quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) codes may be a good candidate to solve the memory problem, since their parity-check matrices consist of circulant permutation matrices or the zero matrix.
The array LDPC parity-check matrix is specified by three parameters: a prime number p and two integers k (checknode degree) and j (variable-node degree) such that j, k ≤ p [5]. This is given by

⎡I I

⎢ ⎢

I

α

H = ⎢I α2

⎢⎢... ...

⎣⎢ I α j−1

(1)

I α2 α4 ... a( j−1)2

... I ⎤

...

α k−1

⎥ ⎥

... α ⎥ 2(k−1)

...

...

⎥ ⎥

... α ⎦⎥ ( j−1)(k−1)

where I is a p × p identity matrix, and α is a p × p
permutation matrix representing a single left cyclic shift (or equivalently down cyclic shift) of I. The exponent of α in H is called the shift coefficient and denotes multiple cyclic shifts, with the number of shifts given by the value of the exponent.

C. An Introduction to LDPC Encoding
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have been adopted by high-speed communication systems due to their near Shannon limit error-correcting capability. In order to achieve the desired bit error rate (BER), longer LDPC codes with higher code rate are preferred in practice. As in the case of block codes, we define a generator matrix (G) and a parity check matrix (H). In order to achieve a systematic LDPC code G must be in the following form

G = [Ik P]

(2)

Where Ik is an identity matrix and P defines the parity bits.
In some cases, a code may be specified by only the H matrix and it becomes necessary to solve for the G matrix. The H matrix is often in an arbitrary format, it must be converted into echelon canonical form shown here

H = ⎡⎣-PT In−k ⎦⎤

(3)

Where In−k is an identity matrix and defines the parity bits[6].

Typically, encoding consists of using the G matrix to compute the parity bits and decoding consists of using the H matrix and soft-decision decoding. This conversion can be accomplished with the assistance of a computer program. Afterwards, the G matrix can be observed by inspection.

III. MODIFIED DECODING ALGORITHM
The proposed decoding method contains two stages— encoding stage and decoding stage. In the encoding stage, some code bits which are chosen randomly will be fixed. In the decoding stage, the fixed bits decoding will be used. Although LDPC codes can be decoded very well with a class of SPA including nonlinear computations, the modified MSA such as normalized or offset MSA have been preferred due to their simplified hardware implementations and acceptable performance. Specifically, the normalized MSA has been implemented for several practical applications due to its better performance and low complexity. And our modified decoding algorithm will take normalized MSA for example.

A. Encoding Process

In the encoding stage, the main task is identifying the

fixed bits position. As we know, in the systematic LDPC

codes, the value of the transmission codeword is the same

with the value of the H matrix’s message word. So we can

fix some codeword bits in the encoder’s codeword. Think of

the binary LDPC code, H = [hi, j ]M ×N is the check matrix of

the LDPC code, C = {c1, c2 ,..., cN } is the encoder’s

codeword,

and

fixed

bits

set

is

S = {ci1 , ci2 ,..., cij ,...citp }, 0 ≤ ij ≤ N (S is chosen randomly),

order cij = 0 or cij = 1 , then the encoding method is

C = {c1, c2 ,..., ci1 , ci1+1,..., cij , cij +1,..., citp ,..., cN }
(4)

That is to say, we don’t translate the messages of variable
nodes and check nodes in the positions of cij ∈ S , only
translate the fixed number “0” or “1”. After this step, both the encoder and decoder know the value of the fixed bits. And the decoder can use the value of the fixed bits, which can improve the accuracy of decoding, to decode.

V2-429

Volume 2

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:51:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2010 International Conference on Electronics and Information Engineering (ICEIE 2010)

B. Modified Normalized Min-Sum Algorithm

After the encoding, as normalized MSA for example, the

following paragraphs describe the modified decoding

algorithm—modified normalized MSA. If the encoder

outputs “0” and “1” sequence codeword is C, after the BPSK

modulation, C is mapped into {+1,-1} signal
sequence X = {x1, x2 ,", xN } transmitted through the

AWGN channel, and the receiver vector
is r = {r1, r2,", rN } ， r = X + v . v is a noise vector whose

average value is zero, and unilateral noise power spectral

density

is

N0

=

2σ

2 n

,

let

R

represent

the

code

rate,

then

the

unit

signal

to

noise

ratio

is

Eb

/

N0

=

x02

/

(2Rσ

2 n

)

.

In the modified normalized MSA, similar to normalized MSA, the extrinsic messages are passed between check and variable nodes in the form of log-likelihood ratios (LLRs). Let M ( j) = {i : hi, j = 1} represent the set where variable

node x j participate the check set, M ( j) \ i represent the

subset where M ( j) uncontained the element i. similarly,

N (i) = { j : hi, j = 1} represent the set where check node

zi constraint the code set, N (i) \ j represent the subset

where

N (i)

uncontained the element j. Let

v(t ) i, j

represent the

LLR value for bit j, sent from variable node to check node in the tth iteration, and similarly u(t) represent the LLR value
i, j
for bit j, sent from check node to variable node in the tth

iteration. Let vsure represent the maximum posteriori LLR of the fixed bit in set S. Suppose the decoder received the initial
value information Lj = y j , 0 ≤ j ≤ N −1 . γ1 is a

multiplication factor. The new decoding algorithm consists of the following steps:

1) Initialize the iteration counter, t , to 0 and let Imax=Max be the maximum number of iterations allowed.

2)

Initialize

v(0) i, j

to

the

maximum

posteriori

LLR

vsure for c j ∈ S ,

and

v(0) i, j

to

the

posteriori

LLR

Lj

for others, 0 ≤ j ≤ N −1 , i ∈ M ( j) .

3) Update the check nodes, i.e., for 0 ≤ i ≤ M −1 ,
j ∈ N (i) , calculate

γ ∏ u(t+1) = i, j

1

.[

k∈N

(i

)

\

j

sgn(v

(t )
i ,k

)].

min
k∈N (i)\

j

v(t) i ,k

(7)

4) Update the variable nodes, i.e., for 0 ≤ j ≤ N −1 , i ∈ M ( j) , if c j ∈ S , let

v = v (t +1)

i, j

sure

(8)

And others, let

∑ v(t+1) = v(0) +

u(t)

i, j

j

k,j

k∈M ( j )\i

5) Apply a hard decision, i.e.,
x = (xˆ1, xˆ2 ,..., xˆN ) . If c j ∈ S ,let

(9) compute

z _ hd j = vsure

(10)

And others, let

∑ z _ hd j = Lj +

u(t) k,j

k∈M ( j )

(11)

Then calculate the element xˆ j

⎧⎪ ⎨ ⎩⎪

xˆ xˆ

j j

= 0, = 1,

z _ hd j > 0 z _ hd j ≤ 0

(12)

6) If xH T = 0 or t> Imax stop decoding and output x as the decoder output. Otherwise set t=t+1 and go to step 3.
The advantages of the method are a) it is universal as it can be applied to any code/channel model/decoding algorithm and b) it improves performance without losing the code regularity, without changing the decoding algorithm. The method can be slightly modified to construct convolutional LDPC codes as well. And the disadvantage of the method is that it only applies to the systematic code, not to non- systematic code.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In all our simulation, BPSK signaling over AWGN channel is assumed. As described in last section, we use the modified MSA to simulate. The simulation results and some remarks are given in the following two examples.
Example 1: A rate-0.875, Euclidean geometry (EG) algorithm constructed, (8176, 7156) QC-LDPC code is used as the original code. Its parity check matrix is a 1022× 8176 matrix, which has column weight 4 and row weight 32. We choose four groups bits randomly as set S, respectively, and each group has 160 bits. Therefore we get 4 new codewords. In the simulation, we used normalized MSA, with 4 quantization bits for the decoder input value and 8 quantization bits for the intermediate variable value, set
γ1 = 0.65 and Imax=20, to simulate the original codeword.
And we used modified normalized MSA, with 4 quantization bits for the decoder input value and 8 quantization bits for
the intermediate variable value, set γ1 = 0.65 and Imax=20,
to simulate the 4 new codes. The performances of the 4 new codes, the average performance of the 4 new codes and the performances of the original code are shown in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2. The average performance is to take the average of the performances of the 4 new codes.

V2-430

Volume 2

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:51:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2010 International Conference on Electronics and Information Engineering (ICEIE 2010)
intermediate variable value, set γ1 = 0.735 and Imax=20, to
simulate the 4 new codes. The performances of the 4 new codes, the average performances of the 4 new codes and

Fig. 1. Performance of the (8176, 7156) LDPC code

Fig. 3. Performance of the (5100, 4337) LDPC code

Fig. 2. Average performance of the (8176, 7156) LDPC code
From Fig. 1 and Fig. 2, it can be seen that the error floor of modified normalized MSA is significantly lower than that of the MSA. More importantly, because the number of elements in set S—p is far less than the quantity of the code bits N, both the original code and the new code have the same spending.
Example 2: A rate-0.85, Euclidean geometry (EG) algorithm constructed, (5100, 4337) QC-LDPC code is used as the original code. Its parity check matrix is a 765× 5100 matrix, which has column weight 3 and row weight 20. Similarly, We choose four groups bits randomly as set S, respectively, and each group has 80 bits. Therefore we get 4 new codewords. In the simulation, we used MSA, with 4 quantization bits for the decoder input value and 8 quantization bits for the intermediate variable value, set
γ1 = 0.65 and Imax=20, to simulate the original codeword.
And we used modified MSA, with 4 quantization bits for the decoder input value and 8 quantization bits for the

Fig. 4. Average performance of the (5100,4337) LDPC code
the performances of the original code are shown in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4.
Similar to example 1, from Fig. 3 and Fig. 4, it can be seen that the error floor of modified normalized MSA is lower than that of the MSA too. And because we know the LLRs values of the fixed bits before iteration decoding, the total decoding iteration is reduced.
V. CONCLUTIONS
In this paper, we propose a simple fixed bits decoding to lower the error floors of LDPC codes under iterative decoding, and have obtained some good results. This work shows that the LDPC code, combining with code design methods and decoding strategies, has great potential in addressing the error floor problem. In our future research, we will try to further improve the performance and reduce the

V2-431

Volume 2

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:51:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2010 International Conference on Electronics and Information Engineering (ICEIE 2010)

complexity of this decoding method and examine its effectiveness with a wider range of codes.
REFERENCES
[1] Mong-Kai Ku, Huan-Sheng Li, Yi-Hsing Chien, “Code design and decoder implementation of low density parity check code,” IEEE 07803-9329-5/05, 2005.
[2] Milo˘s Ivkovic´, Shashi Kiran Chilappagari and Bane Vasic´, “Eliminating Trapping Sets in Low-Density Parity-Check Codes by Using Tanner Graph Covers,” IEEE transactions on information theory, vol.54, no.8, August 2008.
[3] Jingyu Kang, Li Zhang, Zhi Ding and Shu Lin, “A Two-Stage Iterative Decoding of LDPC Codes for Lowering Error Floors,” IEEE “Globlecom”,2008.

[4] Nan Jiang, Kewu Peng, Jian Song, Chanyong Pan, and Zhixing Yang, “High-Throughput QC-LDPC Decoders,” IEEE transactions on broadcasting, vol.55, no.2, June 2009.
[5] Kiran K. Gunnam, Gwan S. Choi, Weihuang Wang, Euncheol Kim, and Mark B. Yeary', “Decoding of Quasi-cyclic LDPC Codes Using an On-the-Fly Computation,” Texas A&M University.
[6] Aaron E. Cohen, Keshab K. Parhi. “A Low-Complexity Hybrid LDPC Code Encoder for IEEE 802.3an (10GBase-T) Ethernet,” IEEE transactions on signal processing, vol. 57, no. 10, October 2009
[7] Stefan Laendner, Thorsten Hehn, Olgica Milenkovic, Johannes B. Huber, “The Trapping Redundancy of Linear Block Codes,” IEEE transactions on information theory, vol.55, no.1, January 2009.
[8] Ivan B. Djordjevic and Bane Vasic, “Iteratively Decodable Codes from Orthogonal Arrays for Optical Communication Systems,” IEEE communications letters, vol. 9, no. 10, October 2005..

V2-432

Volume 2

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:51:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

