2010 Fifth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

Bootstrapped Iterative Decoding Algorithms for Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) Codes

Albashir Adel Mohamed, Maha Mohamed Elsabrouty
Electronics and Communication Engineering Arab Academy for Science and Technology (AAST),
2033 Al Horriyah, Heliopolis, Cairo, Egypt albashir.mohamed@staff.aast.edu maha2000_eg@yahoo.com

Salwa Hussien El-Ramly
Electronics and Communication Engineering Ain Shams University, Faculty of Engineering,
11566 Abbassia, Cairo, Egypt sramlye@netscape.net

Abstract—Reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping algorithm is one of the best hard decision decoding algorithms in performance. Recently several modifications are done to this technique either to improve performance or to lower the complexity. The implementation efficient reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping is developed targeting decreasing processing time of the decoding process. In this paper we are targeting improving performance of recent developed algorithm named low complex implementation efficient reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping by adding a bootstrap step to the decoding technique which leads to increase in reliability of received bits then number of decoded bits will be increased leading to improve in performance. Also a modification done to bootstrap step for further increase the performance.
Keywords- Bit-flipping algorithm; low density parity check (LDPC) codes; Modified weighted bit-flipping; reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low density parity check (LDPC) coding is a prominent channel coding technique that has excellent performance approaching Shannon limit. It was proposed by Gallager in 1963 [1]. It has received increased attention and became a strong competitor to turbo codes as many digital communication systems adopted it as error control coding technique such as DVD-S2 [11].
LDPC codes can be decoded using various types of decoding techniques. There are three categories of decoding techniques for LDPC codes which are hard decision, soft decision and hybrid decision decoding techniques. The focus of this paper is on hard decision decoding techniques. Another naming of the hard-decision decoding is the bit-flipping family which was first presented in [1]. Modifications to the basic bit-flipping begin by the Weighted Bit-Flipping algorithm (WBF) [2], which targeted to increase the performance of the basic bit-flipping algorithm, through a measure of the reliability of received symbols in their decoding algorithm.
Another modification was done for further improvement in the performance which is the Modified Weighted Bit-Flipping algorithm (MWBF) [3], which includes a weighting factor α in the weighted check sum equation of the Weighted Bit-Flipping algorithm (WBF) to include the intrinsic message for each bit in this equation, the value of α is determined by simulation for

every SNR and column weight of each matrix. To solve the problem of predetermining α for each SNR and column weight of each matrix, reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping algorithm (RRWBF) was proposed in [4] to solve this problem and also to increase the performance. The main drawback in RRWBF is the long processing time, so implementation efficient reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping algorithm (IERRWBF) was proposed in [5] to solve this problem as optimization was applied to the technique and a reduction in the processing time was accomplished. Another modification done to IERRWBF to reduce the complexity without affecting the performance which led to the Low Complex IERRWBF proposed in [6]. The low complex algorithm LCIERRWBF is based on observing the check node step, and for certain number of repeated syndrome words the decoding is ended declaring failed decoding rather than wasting more computational power if decoding is continued.
In this paper, a modification is done on LCIERRWBF using a bootstrap step following to the work done in [7] targeting increasing the performance of LCIERRWBF to be one of the best hard decision decoding techniques. Also a modification done to the bootstrap step for further increase the performance of Bootstrapped Low Complex implementation efficient reliability ratio based weighted bitflipping algorithm (BLCIERRWBF).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II presents the background of bit-flipping algorithms especially the LCIERRWBF. Section III, presents the modifications done to the LCIERRWBF. Section IV presents the results obtained compared to the original work in [6]. Section V illustrates conclusion and future work.
II. A BRIEF REVIEW ON BIT-FLIPPING ALGORITHMS
The bit-flipping algorithm began by the work of Gallager in his PhD [1], which contains the basic bit-flipping algorithm. A lot of modifications done to the basic bit-flipping algorithm were targeting lowering complexity or enhancing performance. Most of the recent algorithms will be illustrated in details in the following sections starting with the implementation efficient reliability ratio based weighed bitflipping algorithm. Table 1, summarizes the basic variables used in the bit-flipping algorithms.

978-0-7695-4145-7/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE

335

DOI 10.1109/ICSNC.2010.59

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:52:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE I.

SYMBOLS USED IN ALGORITHMS

Symbol

Definition

Hmn
rn Zm
N (m)
M (n)

mth row, nth column of parity-check matrix H
nth bit received from the channel
Hard decision of rm The set of variable nodes that participate in mth check node
The set of check nodes in which nth variable node participates

A. Implementation Efficient Reliability Ratio Based Weighted Bit-Flipping
Reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping algorithm is an efficient hard decision decoding algorithm but it has a main drawback which is the long decoding time taken by the algorithm. Implementation efficient reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping was proposed in [5] to solve this problem by optimizing the algorithm to reduce the decoding time to be suitable for simulation and hardware implementation especially when the maximum number of iterations assigned for the algorithm is small.

The algorithm is divided into four steps: initialization step, variable node step, decision step and check node step. The operation done in each step is shown as follows:

Initialization step:

Tm = ∑ | rn | .

(1)

n∈N ( m )

Variable node step:

E ∑ T n

=

1 rn

(2sm − 1)
m∈M ( n )

m.

(2)

Decision step: Flip the bit zn for n = arg maxn En.

Check node step:

N

∑ H sm = z m mn .

(3)

n =1

B. Low Complex Implementation Efficient Reliability Ratio based Weighted Bit-Flipping Algorithm
One of the obvious drawbacks of the iterative decoders is that the algorithm spends a larger percentage of time at the variable node step and the check node step, where the author in [5] tries to solve this problem for reliability ratio based bitflipping algorithm but he failed in solving it as stated in [5]. As the maximum number of iteration assigned for the decoding algorithm increased, the more processing time is spent on the iteration part resulting in less contribution in performance and delay increases due to the oscillation phenomena that will be discussed in the following paragraphs. There has been some proposal for better performance with

reducing number of iterations required as in [13], the authors not only discover the phenomenon of oscillation in the decoding process and exploit it to improve the performance quite a bit.
In case of channels with low Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) having AWGN, the hard-decision based bit-flipping algorithms sometimes fails to decode the received codeword correctly, as the decoding in such a case causes the syndrome vector to be a non-zero vector, which leads to failed decoding of the received codeword. Even with large iteration number assigned for the algorithm (500 iterations and more), there will be no significant improvement in the error performance. It has been observed that in such low SNR the syndrome vector will continue to be a non-zero vector and the decoding will keep flipping endlessly consuming computational power with no improvement throughput. So a lot of processing power will be wasted without any further contribution and delay will be increased due to using high max number of iterations. The low complex implementation efficient reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping decoding algorithm proposed in [6] is based on the original scheme described in [5]. The initialization, decision and variable node steps are the same as the original algorithm. However, the modification is in the check node step. Such a modification has a great effect on significant reduction of the decoding time.
The check node step used in all bit-flipping algorithms is a mere syndrome check condition that checks if the decoded codeword is a valid codeword or not. If the syndrome vector is all-zero vector, then the decoded codeword is a valid codeword and if the syndrome vector is not all-zero vector, then the decoded codeword is not decoded correctly and the algorithm continues till the syndrome becomes all-zero vector or the maximum number of iterations is achieved without fulfilling the syndrome condition. As explained, such a condition is rendered in case of low SNR. However, what is required in such cases is to try decreasing the number of iterations required at each SNR for decoding any received codeword to a limited number of iterations as extending the algorithm to more number of iterations will not achieve any observable or enhanced performance. This is done by adding an extra conditional step to examine such situations and control the iteration loop by deciding whether to continue decoding or exit the iteration loop and stop the algorithm to have a final decoded codeword. So a mechanism of the added condition will be started by obtaining syndrome vector at the end of each iteration and be stored in 3-entry register. The register is chosen to be of minimum size equal to 3 precisely because we need at least 2 iterations to get the same decoded codeword and the same syndrome vector, starting from initial vector, if the same bit in the decoded codeword is being flipped two times to return to the initial state, so the 3 entries correspond to the initial syndrome (initial vector) in the register, the syndrome vector after first iteration and the syndrome vector after second iteration. So, size 3 is the minimum size of register that could be used for storing syndrome vector for comparing between the first and the third (last one) where each new entry is stored at the top of the register and the remaining entries are shifted down to remove the last entry. So when the point of oscillation is reached which means that no contribution to performance will occur

336 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:52:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

while continuing to the maximum number of iterations, so decoding failure is declared and decoding is halted, this added condition significantly reduces the complexity without any effect on performance compared to IEERRWBF algorithm.
III. THE PROPOSED ALGORITHMS In the following sections we are going to present the proposed algorithms in detail.
A. Bootstrapped Low Complex Implementation Efficient Reliabilty Ratio Based Weighted Bit-Flipping Low complex implementation efficient reliability ratio
based weighted bit-flipping is the last modification done to reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping targeting lowering complexity. Our goal is to increase the performance of low complex implementation efficient reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping which will be in this case a very efficient hard decision decoding technique.
The idea of the algorithm comes from the work done in [7]. In [7] a modification to the weighted bit-flipping algorithm is done by adding a bootstrap step to the decoding algorithm which leads to significant contribution in performance. The insertion of bootstrap step increases the received code words reliability which leads to improve the performance of weighted bit-flipping by decoding more code words than the algorithm can do without it. Bootstrap step is a combination between horizontal step and vertical step of min-sum algorithm which is a soft decision algorithm with superior performance over any hard decision algorithm. As a result for insertion of bootstrap step as it being part of soft decision decoding technique, it massively increased the performance of weighted bit-flipping algorithm. Bootstrap step will firstly be discussed for further explanation of the idea of using bootstrap step to improve the performance of the weighted bit flipping.
We define the received value yn and its corresponding bit
Figure 1. Bootstrap decoding procedure over tanner graph.
node unreliable if | yn | < α and reliable otherwise. Where α is
the predetermined threshold for identifying unreliable bit nodes and reliable ones, as unreliable ones will be improved using eq. (4). A check node is counted as reliable if all connected bit nodes to it are reliable except for one bit node. If more than one bit node connected to the check node is unreliable this check node counted as unreliable check node.
We start decoding by replacing each unreliable reliability value by improved one calculated using eq. (4). Where

improved values of reliability are calculated by passing messages from reliable bit nodes through reliable check nodes.

∑ ∏ y'n =

yn

+

sgn(
m∈M r ( n ) n '∈N ( m )\n

y

n

'

)

n

min
'∈N ( m )\

n

y'n

.

(4)

As shown in eq. (4) Mr(n) represents the set of the reliable check nodes connected to the unreliable bit node n. If there is no reliable check node connected to an unreliable bit node, that node keeps the original received value yn. The algorithm then proceeds with the conventional algorithm using the improved value y’n which will be weighted bit-flipping in case of [7] or our target algorithm presented in [6].
The embedding of bootstrap step in the weighted bitflipping decoding algorithm leads to significant increase in reliability of received codeword that will lead to increase in performance. Our idea is to do the same for low complex implementation efficient reliability ratio based weighted bitflipping algorithm by impeding the bootstrap step in it to increase the reliability of received code words which will improve performance, resulting a very good hard decision decoding technique that have two main properties; low complexity and high performance, then new algorithm is created which is called bootstrapped low complex implementation efficient reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping (BLCIERRWBF) due to insertion of bootstrap step.
After processing on the bootstrap step the LCIEERRWBF algorithm begins decoding the improved received codeword as mentioned in the last section.

B. Modified Bootstrapped Low Complex Implementation Efficient Reliabilty Ratio Based Weighted Bit-Flipping
The modified bootstrapped low complex implementation efficient reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping (MBLCIERRWBF) performs the same procedure used in the bootstrapped low complex implementation efficient reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping (BLCIERRWBF) except for the bootstrap step which will be modified to accomplish higher performance. After studying and observing the bootstrap step in bootstrapped weighted bit-flipping it was found that it combines horizontal step with vertical step of min-sum algorithm in one equation to be processed individually on the unreliable bits predetermined using certain threshold (α) [7]. Then an idea comes from this observation by editing the bootstrap step using more complex algorithm but with higher performance. The chosen algorithm for this mission is LLR-BP where min-sum is derived from.
The same procedure will be maintained except for the equation which will define the bootstrap step. Log likelihood ratios belief propagation algorithm (LLR-BP) is chosen to create the new bootstrap step as it is the algorithm where minsum is extracted from [12], by approximating the equation of the horizontal step. The approximation is done to the tanh ( ) function due to its odd property by replacing it by Signum function. The new bootstrap step will combine between the horizontal step and vertical step of LLR-BP algorithm as shown in eq. (5).

337 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:52:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

∑ ∏ y'n

=

yn

+

2 tanh
m∈M r ( n )

−1

⎡ ⎢

tanh(

⎣ n '∈N ( m )\ n

yn 2

'

⎤ )⎥. ⎦

(5)

The new bootstrap step is better in performance than the old one due to using the Log likelihood ratios belief propagation algorithm instead of min-sum algorithm which is superior with respect to performance while its complexity is higher than that of min-sum algorithm. So better performance is accomplished but complexity is increased due to higher complexity of Log likelihood ratios belief propagation algorithm than that of minsum algorithm. The MBLCIERRWBF algorithm will perform exactly as BLCIERRWBF algorithm except of using the new bootstrap step.

from 1 dB to 6 dB. The contribution in the performance increases as the maximum number of iterations increases or as the code length increases. The value of α for all codes is computed using simulation by observing bit error rate versus α to get the lowest bit error rate.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
The simulations are performed using (n,k,v) regular LDPC codes where n stands for the codeword length, k is the message length, and v is the number of ‘1’s per column in the parity check matrix H. Progressive edge growth (PEG) and regular LDPC codes based on MacKay work in [14] were used as the construction methods for generating the parity check matrix H of these regular LDPC codes. The regular LDPC codes used in the simulation were PEG (504,252,3), (504,252,3) and (204,102,3) by decoding each LDPC code using WBF, LLR-BP, IERRWBF algorithm presented in [5], LCIERRWBF algorithm presented in [6] and the proposed algorithms in this paper. All codes used are of rate ½. The coded data are then modulated using a BPSK modulation scheme and sent over a channel having AWGN to simulate the effect of real wireless channel. The simulations were run on MATLAB.
The figures show the observable contribution in error performance. Figure 2 and Figure 3 show the performance of decoding PEG (504,252,3) and regular (504,252,3) LDPC codes with 25 maximum iterations using WBF, LCIERRWBF and BLCIERRWBF. Also 15 maximum iterations assigned for BLCIERRWBF for further proof of superiority of the new algorithm. Only 25 maximum iterations are assigned for LLRBP. It is clear that the performances of the LLR-BP and the BLCIERRWBF have the best performance. The performance of LCIERRWBF decoding is lower than that of its modified version but the difference is also very small then begins to be observable as Eb /No value increases.
Figure 4 shows the performance of (204,102,3) regular LDPC code when decoded with LCIERRWBF and BLCIERRWBF for 5 maximum iterations. It is clear that the performance of BLCIERRWBF is better than that of the LCIERRWBF at the same number of iterations. With increasing number of iterations for BLCIERRWBF decoding to 25 iterations, the difference in performances between the LCIERRWBF and BLCIERRWBF is significantly increased. This shows that the BLCIERRWBF decoding is better than that of the LCIERRWBF decoding in terms of performance.
Figure 5 and Figure 6 show the performance of decoding PEG (504,252,3) and (204,102,3) regular LDPC codes for 25 and 5 maximum iterations for the WBF, LCIERRWBF, BLCIERRWBF and its modified version obtained for values

Figure 2. BER for (504,252,3) PEG-LDPC code decoded by WBF, LCIERRWBF, BLCIERRWBF, and LLR-BP.
Figure 3. BER for (504,252,3) regular LDPC code decoded by WBF, LCIERRWBF, BLCIERRWBF, and LLR-BP.

338 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:52:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 4. BER for (204,102,3) regular LDPC code decoded by LCIERRWBF, BLCIERRWBF and LLR-BP.

sum based bootstrap step by LLR-BP based bootstrap step which leads to better performance. The new algorithms are named bootstrapped low complex implementation efficient reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping (BLCIERRWBF) algorithm and modified bootstrapped low complex implementation efficient reliability ratio based weighted bitflipping (MBLCIERRWBF) algorithm.
As for future work, while the new algorithms have very good performance and very low complexity it needs more adjustments, where the value of α is obtained through simulation for each column weight and SNR, so before proceeding in decoding, α must be computed first. Then the new algorithms need a new mechanism instead of α to define the unreliable bits and the reliable ones to solve the problem of pre-computing of α before proceeding in decoding the received codeword. Also the complexity of the algorithms needs to be minimized, as the complexity of the algorithms is increased due to the insertion of bootstrap step which leads to more processing time as received codeword reliability increased. Then more adjustments to the algorithm are needed to minimize complexity.

Figure 5. BER for (504,252,3) PEG-LDPC code decoded by WBF, LCIERRWBF, BLCIERRWBF, MBLCIERRWBF and LLR-BP.
Figure 6. BER for (204,102,3) regular LDPC code decoded by LCIERRWBF, BLCIERRWBF, MBLCIERRWBF and LLR-BP.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK In this paper, new algorithms are created by modifying low complex implementation efficient reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping (LCIERRWBF) by adding bootstrap step which leads to very good performance and very low complexity, also modifying BLCIERRWBF by replacing min-

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-Density Parity-Check Codes”. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low density parity check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and more”, IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, issue 7, pp. 2711-2736, Aug. 2002.
[3] J. Z. Fossorier, "A modified weighted bit-flipping decoding of lowdensity parity-check codes", IEEE Communication. Letters, vol. 8, issue 3, pp. 165–167, Mar. 2004.
[4] F., Guo, and L., Hanzo, "Reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping decoding for low-density parity-check codes", Electronics Letters, vol. 40, issue 21, pp. 1356–1358, Oct. 2004.
[5] C.-H. Lee and W. Wolf, “Implementation-efficient reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping decoding for LDPC codes”, Electronics Letters, vol. 41, issue 13, pp. 755-757, July 2005.
[6] H. R. Zeidan and M. M. Elsabrouty, “Low Complexity Iterative Decoding Algorithm for Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes”, Wireless Days. WD '08. 1st IFIP, PP 1 – 5, Apr. 2009.
[7] A. Nouh and A. H. Banihashemi. "Bootstrap decoding of low-density parity-check codes", Communications Letters, IEEE, vol. 6, issue 9, pp. 391-393, Nov. 2002.
[8] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, issue 7, pp. 2711–2736, Aug. 2002.
[9] D.J.MacKay Encyclopedia of Sparse Graph Codes. [Online]. Available:http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.htm.
[10] Y. Inaba and T. Ohtsuki, “Performance of Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) Bootstrap Decoding Algorithm on a Fast Fading Channel”, Vehicular Technology Conference, 2004. VTC 2004-Spring. 2004 IEEE 59th , vol. 1, PP. 333-337, Feb. 2005.
[11] “Digital video broadcasting (DVB); User guidelines for the second generation system for broadcasting, interactive services, news gathering and other broad-band satellite applications (DVB-S2),” European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI), TR 102 376.
[12] J. Z. Fossorier and M. Zhang, “Improved Min-Sum Decoding of LDPC Codes Using 2-Dimensional Normalization”, Global Telecommunications Conference, 2005. GLOBECOM '05. IEEE , vol. 3, 6 pp., Jan. 2006.
[13] M. Shan, C.M. Zhao, and M. Jiang,” Improved weighted bit-flipping algorithm for decoding LDPC codes”, Communications, IEE Proceedings, vol. 152, issue 6, pp. 919-922, Dec. 2005.
[14] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electronics Lett., vol.32, issue 6, pp. 457- 458, Aug. 2002.

339 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:52:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

