EFFICIENT ENCODING OF CYCLE CODES: A GRAPHICAL APPROACH
Jin Lu and Jose‘ M. E Moura and Haotian Zlzaiig
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering Camegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213
{Jinlu, moura}@ece.cmu.edu

ABSTRACT
The paper presents a lowcomplexity encoding algorithm for cycle codes-low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes with column weight j = 2. For a cycle code of block length n, the encoding complexity of the algorithm we present is O ( n )whereas the conventional encoding method has complexity O ( n 2 ) .We achieve the linear-complexity encoder through graph analysis. First, w e introduce particular Tanner graphs named pseudo-trees and prove that any pseudotree can he encoded in linear time. Second, we show that any cycle code can he represented by the union of pseudotrees. We show that combining these two ideas, cycle codes are linear-time encodahle.
1. INTRODUCTION
LDPC codes [ I ] are excellent error-correcting codes with performance close to the Shannon Capacity [Z]. LDPC codes of column weight j = 2 are known as cycle codes [3]. Though distance properties of cycle codes are not as good as LDPC codes of column weight j 2 3 [I],reference [ 5 ] shows tliat cycle codes have low decodirrg complexity and, when concatenated with Reed-Solomon codes, show better error-correcting performance than other LDPC codes. In addition, reference 171 shows that cycle codes with large girth have good error-correcting performance. Hence, cycle codes are promising in the data storage areas and other applications.
The high encoding complexity prevents the application of cycle codes. The convcntional way to encode cycle codes is to multiply the data words B with a matrix called generator matrix G , Le., code words Z = G S. Though the parity-check matrix H for cycle codes is sparse, the associated generator matrix G is no longer sparse. Assume the block length of a cycle code is n , the encoding coniplexity is O ( n 2 )w, hich is significant. It is known that by matrix manipulation, the coefficient of the quadratic term in the encoding complexity can he made small 141. In this paper, we
This work was supported by the Data Slorage Systems Center at Carnegie Mellon University.

prove that cycle codes can be actually encoded in exactly linear time.
2. “LABEL-AND-DECIDE”ENCODING ALGORITHM
LDPC codes can he described by a bipartite graph called Tanner graph [6],in which each hit becomes a hit node and each parity-check equation becomes a check node. If a bit is constrained by a parity-check equation, there is an edge connecting the associated hit node and check node.
Initially Tanner graphs were developed to explain the decoding process for LDPC codes; in fact, they can he used for the encoding of LDPC codes as well. Let H be an ni x n parity-check matrix for an LDPC code C. To encode C, we need to identify the hits that contain user data, namely, irlforiiiatiorr bits, from all the n bits contained in the code word of C . The bits other than the information hits in the code word are called redundant hits or parif)‘bits. Given the values of all the information bits, the encoding process is to compute the values of all the parity hits. We identify information hits and parity hits through a labeling process on the Tanner graph. When a hit node is labeled as an information bit, we simply assign its numerical value to it; when a hit node is labeled to he a parity bit, we simultaneously compute its value. This encoding approach is named Lobel-aiddecide.
Example. Assume that the parity-check matrix H for
an (8,3) linear code is given by -
[ 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0
H= 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 10000111
Its associated Tanner graph is cycle-free, as shown in Figure I .
In Figure 1, initially, all the hit nodes are unlaheled. First, we randomly pick a hit node, say, z5,to he an information bit. According to the parity-chcck equation c?, we know that the value of the hit X I depends only on the value
of the hit z6such that z1 = zj.Therefore, z1 should he labeled as a parity hit if we label the bit zjas an information

0-7803-8104-1/03/$17.00 02003 IEEE

69

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:42:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

*4

‘6

Fig. 1. The Tanner graph for H
bit. After the values of the bits x j and x1 are already fixed, we can not yet determine the value of the bit xz. Therefore, T? ought to be laheled as a11 infoimation bit. Similarly, the bit x3 is labeled as an information bit. Next, we label the bit
.qas a parity bit and compute its value as 21 = 51ex?e x 3
according to the pal-ity-check equation cl. In a like manner,
the bits x7 and xi are labeled as information bits and the bit
z g is labeled as a parity hit such that z g = x i @ z7 @ zg. By the above labeling process, we decide the systematic
component of the codeword ( x lz2 .x3 x~ x j xg x7 2 8 ) to
be S = (I:? x3 x j xi sa)and the parity component to be
p = ( X I x4 2 6 ) .

Fig. 2. Labeling bit nodes on the Tanner graph in Fig. I
The above example is for a cycle-free Tanner graph. In the next section, we will apply it to cycle codes through graph analysis.

3. LINEAR COMPLEXITY ENCODER FOR CYCLE CODES
We achieve linear-complexity encoding for cycle codes as follows: In the first step, we propose particular Tanner graphs named pseudo-trees and prove that any pseudo-tree can be encoded in linear time. Second, we prove that any cycle code can be represented by the union of pseudo-trees. We then show that combining these two ideas, cycle codes can be encoded in linear-time.
We will say that a Tanner graph that satisfies conditions (i) through (iii) is a pseudo-tree.
(i) It is composed of 2P+1tiers where P is a positive integer. We number these tiers from 1 to 2P+1,starting
+ from the top tier to the bottom tier. The (2i- l Y h tier
(i = 1,... ,P 1)contains only bit nodes while the (Z1)lh tier (1 = 1,.. . ,P) contains only check nodes.
(ii) Each bit node in the first tier has degree one. Each of them is connected to one and only one check node in the second tier.
(iii) For each check node C, in the (21)Ih tier where I can take any value from I to P, there is only one bit node I. in the (21 - l ) I h tier that connects to C, and there
are no other bit nodes in the upper tiers that connect
to C,. We call x,, the pareid of C, and call C, the
clrild of x o .
Figure 3 on the left shows a pseudo-tree TI with seven tiers.
Lemma 1 Any LDPC code represeiired b ) a pseudo-tree is linear riiiie encodable.
+ Proof: Let a pseudo-tree contain 2P 1 tiers, n bit nodes,
and m check nodes. Condition (iii) guarantees that each check node has one and only one parent in the immediate upper tier, so there are m parents for the check nodes. We
label these m parents as parity bits and the other n -m bit
nodes as information bits. The inputs of the encoder provide the values for all the
information bits. The task of the encoder is to compute the values for all the parity bits. Let z, he an arbitrary parity bit
and C, be the child of x. The tier that contains x, is the
(22 - 1)”tier. The value of za is determined by the parity-
check equation represented by C,. According to condition (iii), all the bit nodes contained by C,, except for x a are
in tiers below the (2i - l)Ihtier. Therefore, lhe value of
x. depends only on the values of the bit nodes below the (2i- 1)”tier. We compute values of the parity bits tier by tier, starting from the (ZP- l ) I h tier. This encoding process is repeated until the values of all the parity bits in the 1’‘tier
are known.
Let kl, 1 = 1 , 2 ,.L . ,m, denote the number of bits con-
tained in the lIh parity-check equation. When the I” paritycheck equation is used to determine the value of a parity bit,

70
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:42:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

( k [ - 2) XOR operations are needed. Therefore, overall
C;"=l(-k2[) XOR operations are required to obtain the
values for all the m parity bits. Hence, the encoding pro-
cess above is accomplished in linear time. This completes
the proof.

Reudetree T,

Redo-me T,

Bitnodehllabeled aeanmfurndmrbd

ihecknade
Fig. 3. The associated pseudo-trees of the Tanner graph shown in Fig. 4

Tanner graph for C . G can be decomposed into q disjoint subgraphs: G I , . . G , . Each subgraph G i , i = 1 , . .. ,q,
~
is a connected graph in the sense that every two vertices in Gi are connected to each other by at least one path. Now we restrict our attention to G , .Let G , contain ni hit nodes and mi check nodes. Each of the nihit nodes in Gi is of degree 2 since each column of H contains exactly two 1's. Each of the m icheck nodes represents a row of H. The sum of all
the mi rows in the binary field is a vector of all 0's because
each of the ni bits appears exactly twice in the summation. Therefore, at least one of the m irows is linearly dependent. We can remove the linearly dependent row, without changing the underlying code structure of C. Say, we remove the
lIh row of H. Correspondingly, the associated check node
C, and all the edges that are incident on Cl are removed from G i while the remaining Tanner graph still represents
the code C . Let xi,xi,... ,xibe the k bit nodes that con-
nect to C,in G i . After removing C, from Gi, each xf,
s = 1 , 2 , .. . ,k , connects to only one check node in the sub-
,si graph G i . We place xi.xi;.. . in the first tier and put
the check nodes that connect to x:,xi,...,xk in the second
tier. Edges connect bit nodes in the first tier and their associated check nodes in the second tier. The b i t nodes other
xi than xi,xb... . that connect to the check nodes in the
second tier are put in the third tier. In a like manner, ex-
cept for the check nodes in the second tier, the check nodes that connect to the bit nodes in the third tier are placed in the fourth tier. Successive tiers are constructed in ,similar manner. As Gi is a connected graph, the construction goes on until all the iii bit nodes and all the micheck nodes but the removed check node Ci in G ihave been included in the constructed multi-layer structure.

B Checknode 0 Bilnode
Fig. 4. Tanner graph for a cycle code
Lemma 2 relates general Tanner graphs for cycle codes lo pseudo-trees. Lemma 2 Any cycle code can be represented as :he rriiion of pseudo-trees. Proof:Let C represent an LDPC code of column weight 2. H denotes the parity-check matrix for C and G denotes the

......

/%'
./ 1

Tis 5

1,I

Fig. 5. A multi-layer structure but not a pseudo-tree ( C7 has two parents: zg and 5 1 3 )
Up to now, the multi-tier structure Constructed confoims

71
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:42:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

fI

Tier 1

Fig. 6. The pseudo-tree that evolves from the multi-layer sti-ucture shown in Fig. 5

to the conditions (i) and (ii), however, condition (iii) may

not be satisfied. For example, in Figure 5 , the check node

C7 in the 4‘” tier is connected to two bit nodes sg and xI3

in the 31d tier, which violates condition (iii). To satisfy con-

dition (iii), we further adjust the positions of the bit nodes.

If a check node in the (%)Ih tier is connected to d bit nodes

in the upper tiers. We wndomly pick one bit node from the

d bit nodes and leave its position unchanged. Next, we drag
the other d - 1 bit nodes from their initial positions to the
+ (2i l ) I h tier. To illustrate, let us focus on Figure 5 again.

We drag the bit node x13from the 3d tier to the 5Ihtier. The

newly formed graph is shown in Figure 6, which follows the

conditions (i). (ii), and (iii). Hence, a pseudo-tree is formed

in Figure 6. By tuning the positions of the bit nodes in this

way, we can transform the multi-tier graph constructed into
a pseudo-tree. Therefore, each Gi, i = 1 ; . . . q, corre~

sponds to an equivalent pseudo-tree. Since the code C is
represented by the union of G I ,..., up to G,, C can also

be represented by the union of q pseudo-trees. This com-

pletes the proof.

We now show that the encoding complexity of a cycle

code is O ( n ) . If the Tanner graph for the cycle code C is represented as q .pseudo-trees: T I , .. . ,T,, C contains n

bits and T i , i = 1:2 , . . . ,q. contains n, bit nodes. Then
n = E:=,ni.Lemma 1 guarantees that the encoding com-

plexity for Ti is O ( n i ) .Therefore, the complexity to en-

E:=, code Cis

O(ni)= O(Ey,l ni) = O(n),i.e., linear

complexity.

O(n) Encoding Algorithm

We illustrate by an example the O ( n )encoding algo-

rithm. Figure 3 shows two pseudo-trees T1and Tzfor the

Tanner graph in Figure 4. According to T1,the bit nodes

511, 2 6 ; sg.- T I , . Z Z . . Z ~ , and x4 are labeled as parity bits;

According to Tz, the bit nodes xZ4,xIgrx17, and 223 are labeled as parity bits; The other bit nodes are labeled as information bits. Then we encode as follows:

a. Compute xll by the equation xi1 = 214 @ 515 @ 5 1 6
(The symbol fB denotes addition in the binary field);

b. Compute 5 6 and Xg such that 2 6 = Z~IJ@ 515 @ 2 1 1 and 2 9 = 2 1 2 @ 2 1 6 @ 2 1 3 ;

c. Compute X I ,XZ, 23, and x,: x1 = xl0 @ x5 @ x7, 22 = 2 5 fB 2 6 @ x12, x3 = x7 @ xl, @ 2 8 , and
x4 = 2 8 @ x g @ 213;

d. Compute 224: 2 2 4 = x z z fBXI*@ 1 2 5 ;

e. Compute q g . 2 1 7 . andzz3: 219 = 2 2 1 @ 2 1 8 @ x 2 6 %
2 1 7 = 2 2 2 @ 224 fB zZ012 2 3 = Z Z O fB X26 @ z25.

We summarize our results in the main theorem:

Theorem 1 Any cycle code can be ericoded in linear riine.

Proof: By Lemma 2, any cycle code can be represented by

the union of several pseudo-trees. Let C be a cycle code and

C = TI U . . . U T, where Ti, i = 1:. . . .q. is a pseudo-

tree. Further, let Ti contain mi check nodes and the average

number of bits contained in the mi parity-check equations
F. be According to Lemma 1, the computational complex-

ity to encode Ti is mi(G- 2). Therefore. the complexity

E:=, to encode all the q pseudo-trees is

mt(k,- 2 ) . For

an ( n :2: k ) regular LDPC code. the encoding complexity is

($ - q)(k - 2 ) zz 2n. Therefore, any cycle code can be

encoded in linear time. This completes the proof.

It is of interest to relate Theorem 1 to the parity-check

matrix of the code. This is done in the following corollary:

Corollary 1 T/iepari@-clieckmnrrix H of a cycle code can
De rraiisformed iriro an equivalent upper-rriangidar matrix Huppersimply by pernirrriiig the mws arid colunins of H.

Fig. 7. The parity-check matrix for a (200,2,8) LDPC code
For example, by permutation of rows and columns, we transform the parity-check matrix shown in Figure 7 to an upper-triangular matrix shown in Figure 8. Corollary 1 implies that any cycle code can be viewed as a causalsystem.

12
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:42:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 8. An equivalent upper-triangular matrix for the LDPC code in Figure 7
4. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose an efficient encoding algorithm named “label-and-decide” for cycle codes. By introducing a hierarchical Tanner graph called pseudo-trees and an algorithm to transform Tanner graphs of cycle codes into union of pseudo-trees, we achieve linear encoding. This is quite desirable in many applications.
5. REFERENCES
[I] R. G .Gallager, Lolo-Densir).Parin Check Codes, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1963.
[2] D. J. C. Mackay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trarrsartions. 011 111fornratiori Theon., vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399-431, Mar. 1999.
[33 N. Wiberg. Codes and Decodirig 011 Ceriernl Graphs. PhD thesis, Dept. of Electrical Engineering, Linkoping, Sweden, 1996. Linkoping studies in Science and Technology. Dissertation No. 440.
[4] T.Richardson and R.Urbanke; “Efficient encoding of
low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. 011 Information Tlieor?, vol. 47, no. 2, Feb. 2001, pp. 638656.
[5] H. Song and J. Liu and B. V. K. Vijaya Kumar, “Low
complexity LDPC codes for partial response channels,” IEEE Globecorn 2002, vol. 2, pp. 1294-1299, Nov. 2002, Taipei, Taiwan, R.0.C
[6] R. Michael Tanner, “A recursive approach to low coniplexity codes,” IEEE Trans. on Irlforinarion Theor)., vol. IT-27, no. 5, Sep. 1981, pp. 533-547.
[7] Jose M. E Moura, J. Lu and H. Zhang, “Structured Low-Denstiy Parity-Check Codes: Methods to design regular LDPC codes with large girth,” to be published, IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 2 I , no. 1, January 2004.
73
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:42:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

