IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 51, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2003

1413

Transactions Letters________________________________________________________________

Resolvable 2-Designs for Regular Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
Sarah J. Johnson, Student Member, IEEE, and Steven R. Weller, Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper extends the class of low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes that can be algebraically constructed. We present regular LDPC codes based on resolvable Steiner 2-designs which have Tanner graphs free of four-cycles. The resulting codes are (3 )-regular or (4 )-regular for any value of and for a flexible choice of code lengths.
Index Terms—Combinatorial designs, iterative decoding, lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes were first presented by Gallager [13] in 1962 and created much interest when rediscovered and shown to perform remarkably close to the Shannon limit [6], [25]. Gallager proposed a decoding algorithm which utilizes the sparsity of the parity-check matrix to decode iteratively with complexity linear in the code length. It has since been realized that this algorithm is a special case of the sum-product decoding algorithm which is also used by turbo codes [20], [27].
It is known that the sum-product decoding algorithm converges to the optimal solution provided that the Tanner graph of the code satisfies a structural constraint, namely, that it is free of cycles [11], [27]. The existence of cycles in the Tanner graph prevents an exact error-probability analysis of iterative decoding procedures, and the shorter the cycles in the graph, the sooner the analysis breaks down [32]. Various improvements have been made to Gallager’s original random construction method to avoid cycles and obtain the desired column and row weights [17], [23], [25], [31], [32]. As well, algebraic constructions of LDPC matrices have been proposed to provide regular codes with Tanner graphs free of four-cycles [10], [12], [18], [19], [21], [22], [24], [34], [36], [38].
In the special case of the binary-erasure channel, code performance with sum-product decoding can be determined explicitly, and is based solely on the stopping set distribution of the codes [9]. A stopping set is a set of codeword bit positions with the
Paper approved by M. Fossorier, the Editor for Coding and Communication Theory of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received December 21, 2001; revised June 12, 2002 and March 22, 2003. This work was supported in part by a CSIRO Telecommunications and Industrial Physics postgraduate scholarship, and in part by Bell Laboratories Australia, Lucent Technologies, with the Australian Research Council under Linkage Project Grant LP0211210. This paper was presented in part at the IEEE Global Communications Conference (Globecom), San Antonio, TX, November 2001.
The authors are with the School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Newcastle, Callaghan, NSW 2308, Australia (e-mail: sarah@ee.newcastle.edu.au; steve@ee.newcastle.edu.au).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2003.816946

property that every parity-check equation, including a bit in the

stopping set, is connected to at least two such bits. Recently, it

was shown in [29] that if cycles of size four are avoided in the

codes, then the size of the smallest stopping set is at least ,

where is the column weight of .

The random constructions for LDPC codes produce parity-

check matrices with small column weights, allow flexible

choice of code parameters, and can be adapted to remove

small cycles from the Tanner graph of the code. However,

the resulting codes are irregular and the removal of all small

cycles is difficult for higher rate codes. The algebraically

constructed codes, on the other hand, offer guaranteed code

properties including regularity, minimum distance, girth, and

rate, although choice of code parameters is limited in existing

constructions. Ideally, we seek codes with the flexible choice

of code parameters of the random constructions, but with the

benefits of algebraic construction.

A key idea in this paper is that resolvable 2-designs provide

an algebraic construction method for a large class of regular

LDPC codes with Tanner graphs free of four-cycles. The link

between combinatorial designs and codes is not a new one (see,

e.g., [2] and [26]) and many well-known codes are associated

with designs, however, the methods for relating a design to a

code are varied. The blocks of an orthogonal array, for example,

can be used as the codewords of a nonbinary maximum distance

separable code [26, p. 329], while the rows of the incidence

matrix of a design can be used as the codewords of a nonlinear

binary code [26, p. 63]. More recently, erasure-resilient codes

for disk arrays have been constructed using the incidence matrix

of a design as a portion of the parity-check matrix of the code

[5].

Codes designed for majority logic decoding [37] using the in-

cidence matrix of certain finite geometry designs as the parity-

check matrix have recently shown excellent performances with

sum-product decoding [22]. Like the codes for majority logic

decoding, the codes for sum-product decoding are designed via

their parity-check matrix, and the properties required for both

are similar. The design of codes for majority logic decoding fo-

cused on the designs which give a larger column weight in

because the minimum distance of the codes was a priority and

increased column weight gives better minimum distance proper-

ties in the resulting code. However, when sum-product decoding

is considered, the low density of the parity-check matrix is an

important property of the codes and the designs we consider

have an advantage in this area.

The codes presented in this work are

-regular (or

-regular); that is, all column weights of are equal to

0090-6778/03$17.00 © 2003 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:49:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1414

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 51, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2003

three (or four), and all row weights are . An advantage of these codes is that the number of nonzero entries in the parity-check matrix increases only linearly with the code length. Further, the length of the code can be chosen independently of the rate, and existence is proved for an infinite class of code lengths for each allowable code rate.
As our construction is based on combinatorial design theory, we present in Section II some background material on designs before describing the construction of resolvable designs. Section III describes the LDPC codes from resolvable designs and outlines their properties. The performance of the codes when sum-product decoding is used is given in Section IV, and Section V concludes the paper.

II. RESOLVABLE 2-DESIGNS

A combinatorial design is an arrangement of a set of points

into subsets, called blocks. A design is regular if the number of

points in each block, and the number of blocks which contain

each point, designated and , respectively, are the same for

every point and block in the design. The number of blocks that

two points and appear in together is denoted . A regular

design is called a design if every points of the design are in a

constant number of blocks together. 2-designs are also called

balanced incomplete block designs (BIBDs), and are denoted as

2-

, or simply 2-

designs.

Every design can be described by a incidence matrix

where each row in represents a block of the design and

each column a point

if otherwise.

(1)

For a regular design, the number of ones in is

.

The incidence matrix of a combinatorial design is a binary

matrix which can be used as the parity-check matrix of a bi-

nary LDPC code, with the proportion of nonzero entries in

given by . The parameters of an error-correcting code are de-

noted

, where is the code length, the code dimen-

sion, and the minimum distance of the code. When consid-

ering designs for LDPC codes, choosing a 2-design with

,

called a Steiner 2-design, is beneficial as it guarantees the ab-

sence of four-cycles in the Tanner graph of the resulting code.

One class of Steiner 2-designs that have been proposed

for generating LDPC codes are Steiner triple systems (STS),

or

designs [24]. These designs exist for all

with

blocks. For STS designs

, and so the transpose of the STS incidence matrix is

used as the parity-check matrix of an STS-LDPC code; this

convention is retained in the remainder of the letter. The codes

produced from STS designs are regular with parity checks,

code bits, column weight of equal to three, and row

weight of equal to

. The dimension of the code is

where

is the rank of over GF(2),

also called the 2-rank of . Since the dimension of the code

is at least

, and since the code length

increases with the square of the number of parity checks, the

codes quickly become high rate. It would be useful to have

codes with the properties of STS codes but with a wider range

of available rates for each codeword length.

A simplistic approach to obtaining a lower rate code is to

choose a design with greater than the required code length

and remove some columns of . For each pair of points ,

in the omitted column, the corresponding is zero, and thus,

the matrix so formed no longer represents the incidence matrix

of a 2-design. Importantly, the incidence between the points and

remaining blocks is retained and four-cycles will still be avoided

in the Tanner graph of the resulting code. Randomly removing

columns from , however, results in a parity-check matrix

with variable row weights, and can lead to rows with all entries

zero. Ideally, we would like to be able to remove a group of

columns of in such a way that we reduce by one the weight

of every row in the matrix. For this, we need the design described

by to be resolvable. A design is resolvable if the blocks of the

design can be arranged into groups, called resolution classes,

such that the blocks of each resolution class are disjoint,

and each class contains every point precisely once. STS designs

which are resolvable are called Kirkman triple systems (KTS).

Unlike the STS designs which exist for all

,

KTS designs on points, denoted KTS , exist for all

[7, p. 89, Th. 6.7].

A. Resolvable Designs From Difference Systems

To generate the resolvable designs the concept of mixed dif-

ference systems is required. We first present background mate-

rial on difference sets, systems, and mixed systems before pre-

senting in Constructions 1 and 2 the KTS designs. Our treatment

of difference systems follows Anderson [1], while the material

on KTS designs is essentially Ray–Chaudri and Wilson’s orig-

inal presentation [30], using the terminology of Anderson [1].

Consider an arbitrary Abelian group of order . A

difference set is a subset of ,

, such that

each nonzero element

occurs exactly times in the set

of differences

[4, p. 330]. The translates

of are the sets

, for all elements

. The translates of a difference set in an Abelian group

are the blocks of a symmetric Steiner 2-design with point set

the elements of the group [1, p. 51]. The projective geometry

designs used in [37] can be constructed from difference sets in

this way. For example, the subset {1,2,4} of is a difference

set with differences

and the translates of {1,2,4} give the blocks of the projective

geometry (7,7,3,3,1) design [1].

Definition 1: For an Abelian group of order ,

the

element subsets

of

form a

difference system if the differences

give each nonzero

element of exactly times. The translates of the sets of

a

difference system in make up the blocks of

a

design with points the elements of [1,

Th. 2.2.2]. For example, the subsets {1,2,5} and {1,3,9} of

form a difference system, and the translates of these

sets are the blocks of a (13,26,6,3,1) design with point set

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:49:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 51, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2003

1415

An extension to the method of difference systems allows sev-

eral copies of each element of an Abelian group to be used. For

, an Abelian group of order , let

. Then con-

sists of elements, copies of each element of . An element

represents the th copy of the element in .

Definition 2: For

, the subsets

form a mixed difference system if there exists an integer

such that for every

, every element

occurs times as the difference

, where

and ,

.

The translates of the set are the sets

for all

. The translates of the sets of a mixed

difference system form the blocks of a

de-

sign with point set the elements of [1, Th. 2.4.1]. KTS de-

signs can be constructed in this way, and we now present con-

structions for the mixed difference systems required for the KTS

designs with

and

, a prime power.

Construction 1: [1, Th. 2.2.4] Let

be a prime

power, an integer and take , a primitive element of

,

so that

,

, and

. The point set

is

and the mixed difference system consists

of the sets

Construction 2: [1, Th. 9.1.5] Let

power, an integer and take

a primitive element of

, so that

and choose an integer , so that

be a prime

. Choose ,

and

,

. Then the sets

form a mixed difference system in . The sets of the mixed

difference system partition the

elements of and make

up the first resolution class. Each translate of the sets give a

further resolution class, and we have a KTS

design.

Note that when forming the translates

.

For example, take

and

,,

and

. Choose

and

and the required mixed

difference system is

(3)

These sets make up the six blocks of the first resolution class of the KTS(15), and each successive resolution class is obtained by forming translates of these sets. The first translate is

for

(mod 3), where

. The sets

, , and of the mixed difference system make up the

blocks of one resolution class of a design, and each translate of

these sets gives a further resolution class. Next, each set

with its translates gives a resolution class; so we obtain a total

of

resolution classes and we have a KTS .

For example, take

,

,

, and

. Choose

and the mixed difference system is

(2)
The sets , , and make up the blocks of the first resolution class of the design and the six translates of these sets make up the blocks of the next six resolution classes. The blocks in the second resolution class (the translate of , , and with ) are

If we take the ordering of the points to be

, the first 20 columns of for this

KTS (15,35,3,7,1) design are shown in Fig. 1. The entire

incidence matrix of the KTS design provides the parity-check

matrix for a [35,21,4] LDPC code, while if just the first four

resolution classes (shown in Fig. 1) are used for , the code

has parameters [20,6,6].

Alternative constructions for STS designs exist which, while

not producing resolvable designs, do produce designs which are

3-resolvable. That is, the blocks of the STS design on points

can be grouped into classes of blocks with each point incident

in exactly three of the blocks in the class. These 3-resolvable

STS designs are cyclic, that is, whenever

is a triple of

the design, so is

. The cyclic STS designs

exist for all 1, 3 (mod 6) except

, with blocks the

translates of a difference system in [1, Sec. 8.3]. Cyclic STS

designs were used in [34] and [35] to produce LDPC codes for

magnetic recording channels. The codes presented in [34] and

[35] cannot be derived from KTS designs (see, e.g., [7, p. 89,

Th. 6.7]).

Next, the translates of each block in make up a resolution class; for the first block, , this class is
Altogether, there are ten resolution classes, each with seven blocks, to give the KTS (21,70,3,10,1) design. Each block defines a row of a binary incidence matrix, as in (1), the transpose of which is a parity-check matrix for a [70,49,4] LDPC code.

III. LDPC CODES FROM RESOLVABLE STEINER 2-DESIGNS

KTS-LDPC codes can be constructed for any number of

parity checks

(mod 6). The number of resolution

classes

determines the row weight

of , which is , the code length

, and the

rate,

. Conversely, for a given code rate

, for any integer, KTS-LDPC codes exist for

any block length

. The number

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:49:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1416

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 51, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2003

Fig. 1. First four resolution classes of a KTS(15) design.

of nonzero entries in the parity-check matrix of a KTS code

is and so increases only linearly with . This will result

in a decoding complexity advantage over those algebraically

constructed codes which have code length as a function of

column weight. For example, the LDPC codes from projective

geometry designs have

, column weight ,

and

nonzero entries in .

For any given set of code parameters, there will be multiple

choices of resolution classes. At present, the best method seems

to be to choose a combination of resolution classes which gives

good minimum distance results using Tanner’s parity-check

bound [33].

A. Rank
If the 2-rank of the parity-check matrix of a code is known, we can determine the rate of the code exactly
. For the STS designs, full-rank incidence matrices are guaranteed for all choices of 1, 9 (mod 12), while for 3, 7 (mod 12) the 2-rank of depends on the structure of the design (and hence, its construction) and is bounded as [2]

(4)

As the KTS designs are a special case of STS designs, the re-

sults above hold for them also. For the KTS designs presented in

this letter, we observe that Construction 1 produces designs with

full-rank incidence matrices, while Construction 2 produces de-

signs with one linearly dependent row in their incidence matrix,

corresponding to the point at which will remain linearly de-

pendent in the KTS codes regardless of the selection of resolu-

tion classes. For all

corresponding to prime , full rank

(Construction 1) and rank

(Construction 2) codes have

easily been constructed for any number of resolution classes

greater than three. In fact, the majority of the possible selec-

tions of resolution classes produce codes of the maximum rank,

but we leave as an open problem formally determining existence

results.

B. Cycles
As no two points in a Steiner 2-design can be incident in more than one block together, four-cycles are avoided in the Tanner graph of all LDPC codes obtained in this way. However, the requirement that every pair of points occur in exactly one block together guarantees the existence of six-cycles in the Tanner graph of the code. The exact number of six-cycles in the Tanner graph

of a code from a Steiner 2-design on points with points in each block can be counted

(5)

The number of six-cycles in the codes taking a subset of the blocks of a Steiner 2-design will, of course, be upper bounded by (5), as removing columns from a matrix cannot add cycles.

C. Minimum Distance

The minimum distance of a code is equal to the minimum

nonzero number of columns in the parity-check matrix for

which a nontrivial linear combination sums to zero [39, p. 84].

The properties of Steiner 2-designs ensure that all columns in

the parity-check matrix have weight , and that no two columns

share more than one point. Therefore, at least

columns

are needed to sum to zero and

for the codes

presented in this letter.

For KTS designs to obtain codes with minimum distance of

at least six, we need to establish the existence of KTS designs

that lack collections of four blocks employing just six points, as

this configuration of blocks will lead to a minimum distance of

four. The particular configuration consisting of just four blocks

and six points, with each block containing three points, and each

point incident with precisely two blocks is called a Pasch con-

figuration, or quadrilateral. The term anti-Pasch is used to de-

scribe a design that lacks a Pasch configuration. It has recently

been proven that anti-Pasch STS designs exist for all for which

STS designs exist [15]. Recent constructions have been found

for anti-Pasch KTS with

(mod 18) [5] and codes con-

structed from the resolution classes of these designs will have

. When using KTS designs which are not anti-Pasch,

an option is to discard those resolution classes that involve a

Pasch configuration when selecting resolution classes of the de-

sign to construct a KTS-LDPC code. For example, a rate-1/2

anti-Pasch LDPC code can be constructed from the KTS(21) in

(2), by selecting the first, second, third, fourth, eighth, and ninth

resolution classes.

The Pasch configuration is also the only possible configura-

tion of bits and checks which results in a stopping set of size

four in a KTS code. So by choosing an anti-Pasch KTS design,

the minimum stopping set size is increased to five. To further in-

crease this bound to six, mitre configurations [8] (which consist

of just five blocks and seven points, with each block containing

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:49:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 51, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2003

1417

three points, one point incident with three blocks and every other

point incident with precisely two blocks) need to be avoided. Al-

though some STS designs without both mitre and Pasch config-

urations, called five-sparse designs, have been found, a general

existence result is lacking [8].

Resolvable Steiner 2-designs exist for

, and these

designs produce codes with larger column weights, and hence,

larger minimum distances. However, as for randomly con-

structed codes, simulation results suggest that, in general, when

the column weights of these codes are increased from three, a

performance degradation results. In [10], it was shown that at

very high rates array codes with column weight four performed

well with sum-product decoding. In the following section, we

will show that this is also true of resolvable Steiner 2-designs

with

. These resolvable

designs can be

constructed in a similar manner to KTS designs and exist for all

(mod 12) [1], [16]. The codes from these designs have

minimum distance and avoid stopping sets of size smaller

than five.

Fig. 2. Bit-error rate (BER) versus E =N for rate 1/2 LDPC codes, maximum iterations = 500.

D. Implementation

One benefit of a deterministic construction is that the storage

requirements necessary to completely describe the code are

reduced. For the codes from KTS and resolvable

designs, only the sets of the difference system are required; the

translates can be constructed online, whereas for a random code,

the entire parity-check matrix must be stored. For a code from

Construction 1, this requires storage of

sets of size

three, while codes from Construction 2 require storage of

sets of size three. The codes from resolvable

designs

require sets of size four to be stored. If storage is a significant

issue, it is possible to specify only the required value of and the

primitive element and the entire code can be constructed online

with some expenditure in terms of computational complexity.

Alternatively, where hardwiring of the Tanner graph is em-

ployed [3], the regularity of the codes from KTS and resolvable

designs translate directly into regularity in the very

large scale integration (VLSI) layout. Further, if cyclically re-

solvable cyclic KTS designs [14] are employed, encoding can

be achieved in linear time with shift register circuits in much

the same way as for quasi-cyclic codes.

The resolution classes of the codes from resolvable Steiner

2-designs also offer a significant degree of flexibility when it

comes to selecting code lengths and rates online. Once the sets

of the difference family are stored, longer higher rate codes

can be achieved simply by adding another translate to the code

which adds to the number of message bits without changing the

number of parity bits. The only information that needs to be

communicated to completely specify the code in use is the res-

olution classes employed.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS USING ITERATIVE DECODING
We employed sum-product decoding, also known as belief propagation decoding, as presented in [23]. In the simulation results that follow, codes from KTS and resolvable designs are compared with randomly constructed codes and Euclidean geometry (EG) codes. The EG codes used are those from [21]. The random LDPC codes were constructed using the

Fig. 3. BER versus E =N for LDPC codes, maximum iterations = 50.
method from [25] and [28], and we have chosen parity-check matrices which lead to codes with Tanner graphs free of four-cycles. For all the codes presented in this section, the dimension of the code has been calculated exactly.
Fig. 2 shows the performance of rate-1/2 KTS, EG, and randomly generated LDPC codes. The KTS codes are from KTS(57) and KTS(255) designs. The performance of the KTS codes is similar to the performance of the randomly generated codes which have the same rate, codeword length, and an equal number of nonzero entries in . All three length codes have similar block lengths and rates, however, they are not equally sparse. The EG code is (6,8)-regular while the KTS code is (3,6)-regular. While all codes have the same number of columns in their parity-check matrix, the EG code has more rows, some of which are linearly dependent. Consequently, the EG code has twice as many nonzero entries in its parity-check matrix, resulting in a significant increase in computational complexity for the same number of decoding iterations.
Fig. 3 shows the performance of rate-2/3 LDPC codes and two rate-0.86 LDPC codes. The KTS codes are from KTS(87),

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:49:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1418

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 51, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2003

Fig. 4. BER versus E =N for LDPC codes, maximum iterations = 50.
KTS(147), and KTS(171) designs. All three length 513 codes have parity-check matrices with column weight three and so require equal computational complexity for decoding, as do both length 1029 codes. The KTS codes perform as well as randomly constructed codes.
Fig. 4 shows the performance of high-rate length 2000 codes. The column weight four code from the resolvable 2-(160,4,1) design significantly outperforms both the column weight three and column weight four random LDPC codes. In neither case were we able to construct random codes at this high rate which were completely free of four-cycles.
V. CONCLUSION
We have presented a construction method for LDPC codes based on the resolution classes of resolvable Steiner 2-designs. The method produces very sparse parity-check matrices having constant column and row weight, girth equal to six and with a flexible choice of code parameters. We have shown by considered application of design theory that it is not necessary for LDPC codes to be constructed randomly to achieve good decoding performances at moderate lengths and for a wide range of code parameters.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank the reviewers and editor whose constructive comments and suggestions greatly improved this letter, and Prof. R. M. Neal for his online repository of LDPCrelated software.
REFERENCES
[1] I. Anderson, “Combinatorial designs: construction methods,” in Mathematics and Its Applications. Chichester, U. K.: Ellis Horwood, 1990.
[2] E. F. Assmus, Jr. and J. D. Key, “Designs and their codes,” in Cambridge Tracts in Mathematics. Cambridge, U. K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1993, vol. 103.
[3] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.

[4] P. J. Cameron and J. H. van Lint, “Graphs, codes and designs,” in London Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series. Cambridge, U. K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1980, vol. 43.
[5] Y. M. Chee, C. J. Colbourn, and A. C. H. Ling, “Asymptotically optimal erasure-resilient codes for large disk arrays,” Discrete Appl. Math., vol. 102, no. 1–2, pp. 3–36, May 2000.
[6] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, Jr., and T. J. Richardson, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 45, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[7] C. J. Colbourn and J. Dinitz, Eds., The CRC Handbook of Combinatorial Designs. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1996.
[8] C. J. Colbourn, E. Mendelsohn, A. Rosa, and J. Siran, “Anti-mitre Steiner triple systems,” Graphs Combin., vol. 10, pp. 215–224, 1994.
[9] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. E. Telatar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 48, pp. 1570–1579, June 2002.
[10] E. Eleftheriou and S. Ölçer, “Low-density parity-check codes for digital subscriber lines,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications (ICC 2002), vol. 3, 2002, pp. 1752–1757.
[11] T. Etzion, A. Trachtenberg, and A. Vardy, “Which codes have cycle-free Tanner graphs?,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 5, pp. 2173–2181, Sept. 1999.
[12] J. L. Fan, “Array codes as low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, Brest, France, Sept. 4–7, 2000, pp. 543–546.
[13] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[14] M. Genma, M. Mishima, and M. Jimbo, “Cyclic resolvability of cyclic Steiner 2-designs,” J. Combin. Des., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 177–187, May 1997.
[15] M. J. Grannell, T. S. Griggs, and C. A. Whitehead, “The resolution of the anti-Pasch conjecture,” J. Combin. Des., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 300–309, July 2000.
[16] H. Hanani, D. K. Ray-Chaudri, and R. M. Wilson, “On resolvable designs,” Discrete Math., vol. 3, pp. 343–357, 1972.
[17] D. Hösli, E. Svensson, and D. Arnold, “High-rate low-density parity-check codes: construction and application,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, Brest, France, Sept. 4–7, 2000, pp. 447–450.
[18] S. J. Johnson and S. R. Weller, “Codes for iterative decoding from partial geometries,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, June 30–July 5, 2002, p. 310.
[19] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: a rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[20] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[21] S. Lin, H. Tang, Y. Kou, J. Xu, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Codes on finite geometries,” in Proc. IEEE Information Theory Workshop, Cairns, Australia, Sept. 2001, pp. 14–16.
[22] R. Lucas, M. P. C. Fossorier, Y. Kou, and S. Lin, “Iterative decoding of one-step majority logic decodable codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 48, pp. 931–937, June 2000.
[23] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[24] D. J. C. MacKay and M. C. Davey, “Evaluation of Gallager codes for short block length and high rate applications,” in Codes, Systems and Graphical Models; Volume 123 of IMA Volumes in Mathematics and Its Applications, B. Marcus and J. Rosenthal, Eds. New York: SpringerVerlag, 2000, vol. 123, pp. 113–130.
[25] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near-Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645–1646, Mar. 1996.
[26] F. J. MacWilliams and N. J. A. Sloane, The Theory of Error-Correcting Codes. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North-Holland, 1977.
[27] R. J. McEliece, D. J. C. MacKay, and J.-F. Cheng, “Turbo decoding as an instance of Pearl’s “belief propagation” algorithm,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 140–152, Feb. 1998.
[28] , R. M. Neal. [Online]. Available: www.cs.toronto.edu/radford/homepage.html
[29] A. Orlitsky, R. L. Urbanke, K. Viswanathan, and J. Zhang, “Stopping sets and the girth of Tanner graphs,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, June 30–July 5, 2002, p. 2.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:49:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 51, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2003

1419

[30] D. K. Ray-Chaudhuri and R. M. Wilson, “Solution of Kirkmans schoolgirl problem,” in Proc. Symp. Mathematics, vol. 19, 1971, pp. 187–203.
[31] M. Sipser and D. A. Spielman, “Expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 1710–1722, Nov. 1996.
[32] V. Sorokine, F. R. Kschischang, and S. Pasupathy, “Gallager codes for CDMA applications—part I: Generalizations, constructions, and performance bounds,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 48, pp. 1660–1668, Oct. 2000.
[33] R. M. Tanner, “Minimum-distance bounds by graph analysis,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 808–821, Feb. 2001.
[34] B. Vasic, “Structured iteratively decodable codes based on Steiner systems and their application in magnetic recording,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom Conf., San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001, pp. 2954–2960.

[35] B. Vasic, E. M. Kurtas, and A. V. Kuznetsov, “Kirkman systems and their application in perpendicular magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 38, pp. 1705–1710, July 2002.
[36] P. O. Vontobel and R. M. Tanner, “Construction of codes based on finite generalized quadrangles for iterative decoding,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Information Theory, Washington, DC, June 24–29, 2001, p. 223.
[37] E. J. Weldon, “Difference-set cyclic codes,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 7, pp. 1045–1055, Sept. 1966.
[38] S. R. Weller and S. J. Johnson, “Regular low-density parity-check codes from oval designs,” Eur. Trans. Telecommun., to be published.
[39] S. B. Wicker, Error Control Systems for Digital Communication and Storage. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1995.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:49:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

