784

IEEE PHOTONICS TECHNOLOGY LETTERS, VOL. 15, NO. 5, MAY 2003

Projective Geometry LDPC Codes for Ultralong-Haul WDM High-Speed Transmission
Ivan B. Djordjevic and Bane Vasic, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this letter, we investigate the performance of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes in long-haul optical communication systems for carrier-suppressed return-to-zero signal format at 40 Gb/s per channel in a wavelength-division-multiplexing environment. We are particularly concerned with high-rate codes based on projective geometries. These codes have large minimum distance and simple iterative decoding algorithms, which makes them good candidates for such high-speed application. We consider iterative decoding based on min-sum algorithm since it requires only simple addition and minimum operations and, as such, is suitable for high-speed optical transmission. Contrary to the common practice of considering the performance of error controlling schemes using the additive white Gaussian noise channel assumption, we consider the performance of the proposed LDPC schemes, taking into account in a natural way all major impairments in long-haul optical transmission such as amplifier spontaneous emission noise, pulse distortion due to fiber nonlinearities, chromatic dispersion or polarization dispersion, crosstalk effects, intersymbol interference, etc.
Index Terms—Error control, iterative decoding, long-haul transmission, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, optical communications, projective geometries.
I. INTRODUCTION
R ECENTLY, a number of high-speed long-haul optical communications systems have been demonstrated, commercialized, or implemented [1]. Although data flow through these systems has increased tremendously, it has become widely recognized that full utilization of the available bandwidth cannot be achieved without powerful error-control schemes.
A significant effort has been made to apply error-control techniques to various optical transmission systems [2]–[5] with a special emphasis on turbo codes [6]. In a series of articles [7]–[9], we showed that error performance and decoder hardware complexity offered by turbo codes can be greatly improved by using other types of iteratively decodable coding schemes, in particular low-density parity check (LDPC) codes. In this letter, we are concerned with LDPC codes based on finite geometries [10] because they require only simple encoders and we can be assured of large minimum codeword distances. The structure of finite geometry codes is of crucial importance for high-speed implementations for two reasons: 1) These codes
Manuscript received December 17, 2002; revised January 31, 2003. I. B. Djordjevic is with the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1TR, U.K. (e-mail: Ivan.Djordjevic@bristol.ac.uk). B. Vasic is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721, USA (e-mail: vasic@ece.arizona.edu). Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LPT.2003.810250

can lend themselves to encoders that can be realized by shift registers, and 2) due to their combinatorial structure, they can be decoded using reduced complexity belief-propagation algorithm.
Projective geometry based LDPC codes can be decoded by various belief-propagation decoding methods [10] such as one-step majority-logic decoding, bit flipping, and iterative decoding based on the sum-product algorithm. Although sum-product iterative decoding has been demonstrated to perform well in various types of channels, it is computationally intensive and it is not clear if it is suitable for optical communications at data rate 40 Gb/s or higher. However, the min-sum version of this algorithm, which is an approximation of a posteriori probability decoding, requires only simple addition and “finding minimum” operations and, as such, is suitable for high-speed optical transmission.
In order to assess the performance of the proposed coding scheme, we use a very realistic simulation model that takes into account in a natural way all major impairments in long-haul optical transmission such as amplifier spontaneous emission (ASE) noise, pulse distortion due to fiber nonlinearities, chromatic dispersion, crosstalk effects, intersymbol interference (ISI), etc. As noted in [7], this approach gives a much better picture of the code performance than the commonly used additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel noise model [3]–[5]. Our extensive simulations show that the LPDC codes perform well in the presence of all these impairments, and we are confident in proposing their use in optical communications for high-speed long-haul transmission.
II. SYSTEM MODEL DESCRIPTION
In wavelength-division-multiplexing (WDM) systems, multiple optical carriers at different wavelengths are modulated by using independent electrical signals and then transmitted over the same fiber. The optical signal at the receiver is split into separate channels by using an optical demultiplexer. Erbium-doped fiber amplifiers (EDFAs) and dispersion compensating fibers (DCFs) are deployed periodically to compensate the loss and accumulated dispersion of the standard single-mode fiber (SMF). A carrier-suppressed return-to-zero (CSRZ) modulator, considered here, is composed of a laser diode, a Mach–Zehnder (MZ) intensity modulator, another MZ modulator driven by a sinusoid at half bit-rate frequency, and an encoder. A typical direct detection receiver is composed of a polarization filter, an optical filter, a p-i-n photodiode, an electrical filter, a sampler, and a decision circuit, followed by a decoder.

1041-1135/03$17.00 © 2003 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:44:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DJORDJEVIC AND VASIC: PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY LDPC CODES

785

The propagation of a signal through the transmission media filter output signal. The autocorrelation function of the optical

is modeled by the nonlinear Schrödinger equation [11]

filter output noise can be expressed as

(6)

(1)

where is the distance propagated along the fiber, relative time gives a frame of reference moving at the group ve-
locity , , is the complex field amplitude of the pulse, is the attenuation coefficient of the fiber, is the group velocity dispersion (GVD) coefficient, is the second-order GVD, is the nonlinearity coefficient giving rise to Kerr effect nonlinearities, and is the Raman coefficient. Equation (1) can be solved using the split-step Fourier method, as described in [11].
The electrical field coming through the fiber to the optical filter input can be written as
(2)

where is the (optical) amplifier chain output signal field.

In (2),

is the th bit pulse shape, is the peak power,

and is the (coded) information content

, with

being the extinction ratio,

. Both the ASE noise

components and the multipath interference (MPI) components

are combined into a noise process , which is considered to

be colored Gaussian with autocorrelation function given by

(3)

[

and

are ASE and MPI autocorrelation func-

tions, respectively]. The power spectral density of ASE noise is

determined by the EDFA output filter, while the spectrum of

MPI noise is determined by the signal spectrum. The autocor-

relation function of ASE noise is

where

is the EDFA output optical filter autocorrela-

tion function, and is the power spectral density of ASE noise

in one state of polarization. Within the bandwidth of an optical

filter in EDFA, the noise power spectral density function can be

approximated as

, wherein is

the spontaneous emission factor, is the EDFA gain, is the

photon energy, and

is the number of amplifiers. , ,

and

are in fact the complex envelopes of corresponding

analytical signals.

The photodiode output noise process has the mean

(4)

and the variance

(5)

where

and

denote the impulse responses of the op-

tical and electrical filter, respectively, and

is the optical

where

is the optical filter autocorrelation function. No-

tice that the photodiode output noise process is not stationary

(the mean values and the standard deviation are functions of

time). In (5), is the electronic noise variance, which includes

both transmitter and receiver electronic noise (also known as

“back-to-back” noise), while is the photodiode shot noise

variance ( is an electron charge). If the polarization filter is

omitted, the second term in (5) should be multiplied by a factor

of two. The derivation (4) and (5) is given in our previous paper

[12].

III. CODE CONSTRUCTION

As mentioned in the introduction, our code construction is

based on projective geometry. The idea of using projective ge-

ometry for code construction is not new but has attracted much

attention lately, since it has been realized that some projective

geometry codes are LDPC codes [10], [14]. The renewed in-

terest for such codes is also due to the fact that they perform

well when decoded by suboptimal iterative algorithms that have

been developed recently [7], [8], [14].

In this section, we summarize basic structure and properties

of projective geometry codes. The detailed description can be

found in [10]. Note that the construction proposed here is more

general than the one given in [10], since it employs the ground

Galois field [GF( )], of arbitrary (prime power) order , whereas

in [10] only the case

was considered.

The finite projective geometries [PG( , )] are constructed

using (

)-tuples

of elements

from GF( ) ( -a prime, -positive integer), not all simultane-

ously equal to zero, called points. Two (

)-tuples

and

represent the

same point if

, where GF is a nonzero ele-

ment. So each point can be represented on

ways, referred

to as the equivalence class. It is obvious than that the number of

points in PG( , ) is

.

The equivalence classes (points) can be represented by

,

, where

. Let and be two distinct points in PG( ,

). Then the line passing through them consists of points

of the form

, where

.

Since

and

are the

same point, each line in PG( , ) consists of

points. The number of lines in-

tersecting at a given point is

,

and the number of lines in projective geometry is

.

Let us now form the incidence matrix

whose

rows correspond to the lines and columns to the points, with

columns being arranged in the order ,

.

if th point belongs to th line, and zero otherwise. Each row

has weight +1 and each column

. Any

two columns have exactly one “1” in common and any two rows

at most one “1” in common. Therefore, the point–line incident

matrix is in fact the matrix of parity checks of the LDPC code

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:44:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

786

IEEE PHOTONICS TECHNOLOGY LETTERS, VOL. 15, NO. 5, MAY 2003

(Since the code rate influence is included in factor, the reported coding gain is equivalent to the net effective coding gain of AWGN channel.) To calculate the BER, a bit sequence of length 10 is used.

V. CONCLUSION

Fig. 1. BER performance of PG LDPC(1 057 813) code at 40 Gb/s.

and the corresponding Tanner graph is free of cycles of girth (the length of shortest cycle) 4.

IV. PG LDPC CODE PERFORMANCE

In this section, we present the performance of LDPC codes

in the presence of fiber nonlinearities, residual dispersion, ISI,

and receiver noise resulting from signal–noise and noise–noise

interaction in the p-i-n photodiode. The influence of the transfer

functions of the optical and electrical filters is taken into account

as well. A WDM system with 40-Gb/s bit rate per channel and

a channel spacing of 100 GHz is considered. It is assumed that

the observed channel is located at 1552.524 nm (193.1 THz) and

that there exists a nonnegligible interaction with six neighboring

channels. The extinction ratio is set to 13 dB. The transmitter

and receiver imperfection is described through a back-to-back

factor, which is set to 23 dB.

A projective geometry-based LDPC (1057, 813) code with

code rate of

(redundancy of 30%), constructed

as described in Section III for

and

(

), is considered as an illustration. Notice that the same code

was discussed in [14], in the context of transmission of the bi-

nary phase-shift keying modulated signal over AWGN channel.

However, none of the decoding algorithms presented in [14] is

suitable for high-speed optical transmission since all of them

require the knowledge of standard deviation of the noise sam-

ples. In an optical communication channel, the noise statistics

are more complicated, which motivates the use of min-sum algo-

rithm that requires the knowledge of received samples only. An-

other reason why min-sum algorithm is suitable for high-speed

optical transmission is that it requires just addition and “finding

minimum” operations.

Fig. 1 shows the bit-error-rate (BER) results of a Monte Carlo

simulation. The optical filter is modeled as a super-Gaussian

filter of order eight and bandwidth 1.5 R (R -bit rate over

code rate), while the electrical filter is modeled as a Gaussian

filter of bandwidth 0.65 R . The transmission system consid-

ered has a dispersion map composed of SMF section, followed

by an EDFA to compensate the fiber losses in SMF section, and

DCF section to compensate both GVD and second-order GVD,

as well as another EDFA to compensate fiber losses in DCF

section.

Using the expression

Uncoded BER

(7)

the BER of uncoded signal is converted to factor in order to make the results comparable with previously reported ones. Coding gain of close to 10 dB for BER of 10 is found, the result better than any coding scheme proposed so far [3]–[5].

A novel error-control scheme for long-haul optical communication systems based on LDPC codes and iterative decoding has been presented in this letter. The LDPC code is constructed using projective geometries. As opposed to recent papers [3]–[5] where the AWGN assumption is applied, we consider the performance of projective geometry codes in the presence of ASE noise, pulse distortion due to fiber nonlinearities, residual dispersion, crosstalk effects, ISI, etc. The iterative decoding based on normalized min-sum algorithm has been demonstrated to give a coding gain of 10 dB at BER of 10 .
These codes have many unique features such as high code rate, large minimum distances, simple decoding algorithms, encoder can be realized using shift registers, etc., that may allow for very high speed implementations. Moreover, Hagenaruer et al. [15] realized that the sum-product algorithm is well suited for analog VLSI implementation. This kind of fast, analog iterative decoder is a very attractive option for optical communications.
REFERENCES
2 2 [1] B. Zhu et al., “3.2 Tb/s (80 42.7 Gb/s) transmission over 20 100 + km of nonzero dispersion fiber with simultaneous C L-band dispersion
compensation,” in Proc. Opt. Fiber Commun. Exhibit, 2002, Postdeadline Paper FC8-1–FC8-3. [2] W. D. Grover, “Forward error correction in dispersion-limited lightwave systems,” J. Lightwave Technol., vol. 5/6, pp. 643–654, May 1988. [3] O. A. Sab, “FEC techniques in submarine transmission systems,” in Proc. OFC Conf., vol. 2, 2001, Paper TuF1–3. [4] O. A. Sab and V. Lemarie, “Block turbo code performances for long-haul DWDM optical transmission systems,” in Proc. OFC Conf., vol. 3, 2001, pp. 280–282. [5] M. Akita et al., “Third generation FEC employing turbo product code for long-haul DWDM transmission systems,” in Tech. Dig. Opt. Fiber Commun. Exhibit, 2002, pp. 289–290. [6] C. Berrou and A. Glavieux, “Near optimum error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 44, pp. 1261–1271, Oct. 1996. [7] B. Vasic, I. B. Djordjevic, and R. Kostuk, “Low-density parity check codes and iterative decoding for long haul optical communication systems,” J. Lightwave Technol., to be published. [8] B. Vasic and I. B. Djordjevic, “Low-density parity check codes for long haul optical communications systems,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 14, pp. 1208–1210, Aug. 2002. [9] B. Vasic and I. B. Djordjevic, “Iteratively decodable block codes in long-haul optical transmission systems,” J. Opt. Commun., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 182–186, 2002. [10] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 2711–2736, July 2001. [11] G. P. Agrawal, Nonlinear Fiber Optics. San Diego, CA: Academic, 2001. [12] I. B. Djordjevic and B. Vasic, “An advanced direct detection receiver model,” J. Opt. Commun., to be published. [13] N. S. Bergano and C. R. Davidson, “Circulating loop transmission experiments for the study long-transmission systems using erbium-doped fiber amplifiers,” J. Lightwave Technol., vol. 13, pp. 879–888, May 1995. [14] R. Lucas, M. P. C. Fossorier, Y. Kou, and S. Lin, “Iterative decoding of one-step majority logic decodable codes on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 48, pp. 931–937, June 2000. [15] J. Hagenauer et al., “Analog turbo-networks in VLSI: The next step in turbo decoding and equalization,” presented at the 2nd Intl. Symp. Turbo Codes, Brest, France, Sept. 4–7, 2000.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:44:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

