IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 51, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2003

197

Polynomial-Complexity Noncoherent Symbol-bySymbol Detection With Application to Adaptive
Iterative Decoding of Turbo-Like Codes
Idin Motedayen-Aval, Student Member, IEEE, and Achilleas Anastasopoulos, Member, IEEE

Abstract—The problem of generating symbol-by-symbol soft decision metrics (SbSSDMs) in the presence of unknown channel parameters is considered in this paper. The motivation for this work lies in its application to iterative decoding of high-performance turbo-like codes, transmitted over channels that introduce unknown parameters in addition to Gaussian noise. Traditional methods for the exact evaluation of SbSSDMs involve exponential complexity in the sequence length. In this paper, a class of problems is identified for which the SbSSDMs can be exactly evaluated with only polynomial complexity with respect to the sequence length. Utilizing the close connection between symbol-by-symbol and sequence detection, it is also shown that for the aforementioned class of problems, detection of an uncoded data sequence in the presence of unknown parameters can be performed with polynomial complexity. The applicability of this technique is demonstrated by considering the problem of iterative detection of low-density parity-check codes in the presence of unknown and time-varying carrier-phase offset. Finally, based on the proposed exact schemes, an ultra-fast approximate algorithm for performing joint iterative decoding and phase estimation is derived that is well suited for hardware implementation.
Index Terms—Channel estimation, iterative decoding, joint detection and estimation, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, noncoherent channel, noncoherent detection, turbo codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
H IGH-PERFORMANCE codes, namely parallel and serially concatenated convolutional codes (PCCC, SCCC,) as well as low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, have received much attention in recent years [1]–[4], due to their remarkable performance and their low decoding complexity. Decoding of these codes is performed by exchanging some sort of reliability information about each coded bit between the nodes of the factor graph [5] describing the code constraints. The factor graph of a high-performance code operating in the presence of an unknown channel parameter is illustrated in Fig. 1. The block denoted “Code Constraints” represents the constraints imposed on the coded bits due to the code structure (e.g., the parity-check equations in the case of a linear code), while the blocks de-
Paper approved by C. Schlegel, the Editor for Coding Theory and Techniques of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received February 7, 2002; revised June 28, 2002 and August 21, 2002. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCR-0219531. This paper was presented in part at the International Conference on Communications (ICC), New York, April 28-May 2, 2002.
The authors are with the Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Department, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2122 USA (e-mail: idin@umich.edu; anastas@umich.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2003.809286

Fig. 1. Factor graph of a high-performance code in a block-independent channel.
noted “Channel Constraints” represent the constraints imposed by the unknown channel parameter. In the example of Fig. 1, the channel is assumed to be independent for each -symbol block, thus modeling channel dynamics with coherence interval equal to .
Solutions to the problem of decoding these high-performance codes depend on the affordable receiver complexity and the dynamics of the unknown channel parameters. When the code has an inherent trellis structure (as in the case of SCCC), the tasks of decoding and detection/estimation can be performed in a joint manner. One approach is to appropriately quantize the unknown parameter and apply well-known symbol-by-symbol (SbS) detection algorithms (e.g., the Bahl–Cocke–Jelinek–Raviv (BCJR) algorithm [6]) on the super-trellis composed of the unknown data and the unknown quantized parameter [7], [8]. Alternatively, one may opt for solving the problem without quantizing the unknown parameter, resulting in the approximate receivers proposed in [9]–[11].
When the code does not have an inherent trellis structure, or when a joint decoding and detection/estimation algorithm is not desirable due to complexity constraints, an adaptive iterative decoding algorithm can be obtained by augmenting the knownchannel iterative decoder with an auxiliary block that performs the detection/estimation task and exchanges reliability information about the bits with the decoder. In particular, concentrating on the “Channel Constraints” block of Fig. 1, an adaptive SbS soft-decision algorithm processes the input reliability messages and generates output reliability messages for each symbol, by performing some sort of marginalization of an appropriate sequence metric [12], [13, Ch. 1] over the nuisance parameters, i.e., over the unknown channel parameter and the rest of the coded bits. These messages are, in turn, processed by the “Code Constraints” block, resulting in the previously described iterative scheme. The main observation to be made in the aforementioned scheme is that the processing taking place in the “Channel Constraints” block does not assume any structure for the bit sequence, i.e., the bit sequence is treated as

0090-6778/03$17.00 © 2003 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:48:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

198

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 51, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2003

being uncoded. Regarding the details of the processing that is taking place inside the “Channel Constraints” block, we mention that the exact evaluation of the SbS soft decision metrics (SbSSDMs) involves exponential complexity1 with respect to the coherence interval . Thus, approximations have been introduced by either quantizing the infinite-dimensional messages [15], or by employing suboptimal algorithms [10], [16] (the term adaptive soft demodulator (ASODEM) was used in [11] to collectively describe these structures).
In this paper, two main results are presented regarding the evaluation of the SbSSDMs in the presence of unknown parameters. The first one is related to the theoretical complexity of generating exact SbSSDMs in the presence of unknown parameters, i.e., the complexity of the processing that is taking place inside the “Channel Constraints” block. In particular, it is shown that for an appropriately defined SbSSDM and for a specific class of problems, these metrics can be exactly evaluated with only polynomial complexity in the sequence length and without the need for exchanging infinite-dimensional messages. For expositional purposes, we first examine the simpler composite hypothesis testing problem [17] of uncoded sequence detection in the presence of unknown parameters. Showing that an exact solution to the sequence detection problem can be evaluated with polynomial complexity in the sequence length is a novel side result. Moreover, the basic ideas from the uncoded sequence detection problem are carried over to the problem of generating SbSSDMs.
The aforementioned contribution is mostly of conceptual value. Indeed, the associated complexity, although polynomial in , is rather prohibitive for practical receiver design. The second result presented in this paper addresses this issue. In particular, it is shown that by appropriately approximating (or even eliminating) some steps of the exact polynomial-complexity algorithm, while retaining some other critical steps, one can obtain practical (ultra-fast) algorithms with near-optimal performance. The applicability of these algorithms is illustrated by examining the problem of adaptive iterative detection of LDPC codes in the presence of time-varying unknown carrier phase offset.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. To illustrate the ideas used to solve the problem of generating SbSSDMs, the problem of joint uncoded data detection and parameter estimation is stated in Section II and a polynomial-complexity algorithm for the exact solution is derived. In Section III, having examined the sequence-detection case, the more difficult problem of generating SbSSDMs is stated and an efficient solution is presented as a generalization of the solution to the sequence-detection problem. The special case of noncoherent detection of quadrature amplitude modulated (QAM) signals is discussed in Section IV, together with fast suboptimal algorithms. Section V presents the application of these algorithms to noncoherent detection of LDPC codes. Finally, the conclusions are summarized in Section VI.

II. UNCODED SEQUENCE DETECTION IN THE PRESENCE OF UNKNOWN PARAMETERS

Consider the transmission of a length uncoded data se-

quence

, where each transmitted symbol

belongs to an -ary alphabet

.

Each sequence

is assigned an a priori probability

and transmitted across a channel which is

specified by the conditional probability density function (pdf)

of the observation vector

. The

conditional pdf depends on the vector parameter with admis-

sible values in the set . Furthermore, it is assumed that the ob-

servations are independent, conditioned on the transmitted se-

quence and the unknown vector parameter, i.e.,

(1)

The starting point of the techniques developed in this paper is a joint detection and estimation algorithm of the form

(2a)

where the only requirement is that the metric decomposed as

can be

(2b)

One such algorithm is the generalized-likelihood ratio test (GLRT) [17, Sect. 2.5]. The GLRT criterion is used in situations where no stochastic model for the unknown parameter is assumed at the receiver and a uniformly most powerful (UMP) test [17, Sect. 2.5] does not exist. This assumption may be made when an accurate stochastic description for the unknown parameters is not available at design time, or if one wishes to design a receiver without a particular stochastic description in mind in order to make the system more robust to different channel models. In this case, by choosing
, the solution of the joint data detection and parameter estimation problem, based on the GLRT, reduces to
(3)
We emphasize, however, that the GLRT criterion does not imply any type of optimality, in the sense of minimizing the sequence or symbol error probability. On the other hand, if a stochastic description for the unknown parameter is available, maximum a posteriori probability sequence detection (MAPSD) can be performed by averaging over the statistics of , thus producing the optimal estimate (which minimizes the sequence error probability) and is defined as

1We would like to point out that if the alternative approach of [14, Sect. 7.4] is taken, the channel parameter(s) are modeled as explicit nodes in the factor graph structure describing the system. In this case, passing infinite-dimensional messages and evaluation of integrals is required for the generation of the exact SbSSDMs. Since the complexity of this approach is higher than exponential, throughout this paper we will refer to the complexity of SbSSDM generation as exponential with respect to the sequence length.

(4)
Although this expression does not, in general, have the doublemaximization form of (2a) and (2b), in at least two very important cases, such a correspondence exists. In particular, 1)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:48:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MOTEDAYEN-AVAL AND ANASTASOPOULOS: POLYNOMIAL-COMPLEXITY NONCOHERENT SYMBOL-BY-SYMBOL DETECTION

199

the GLRT and MAPSD solutions coincide for noncoherent detection of equally likely, equal-energy signals with uniformly distributed phase [17]–[19]; and 2) for sequence detection in the presence of Gaussian parameters with a linear observation model, the MAPSD solution can be put in the form of (2a) and (2b) [20, pp. 672–673]. It is worth noting that the majority of the literature on wireless channels assumes one of these two models. In view of this observation, the exact metrics evaluated in this paper are optimal in a very well-defined sense (i.e., in the MAPSD sense) for the two problems mentioned above. Thus, the terms exact and optimal will be used interchangeably with the understanding that the latter is accurate in the two aforementioned scenarios.
Before proceeding with the development of the polynomial complexity algorithm for the exact evaluation of (2a) and (2b), we present the concrete example of noncoherent uncoded sequence detection in order to further clarify the type of problems that can be solved using this approach.
Example: Consider the problem of transmitting uncoded QAM symbols across an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel with unknown carrier phase. The lowpass equivalent of the observed vector at the output of a symbol-time sampled matched filter can be written as

(5)

where the components of are independent identically dis-

tributed (i.i.d.) complex circular Gaussian random variables

with zero mean and variance

for the real and imaginary

parts. The unknown parameter

is the unknown channel

phase, which takes values in the set

. To resolve

the phase ambiguity inherent in symmetric constellations, a

pilot symbol might be inserted in each block. In the following

expressions, pilot symbols are implicitly included as symbols

with strongly biased a priori information. The GLRT estimate

is given by

we further specialize to equally probable, equal-energy signals, the MAPSD solution can be simplified to
(7c)
which is equivalent to (2a) and (2b) if we define

(7d)

where

is the real part of and denotes the complex

conjugate of .

For the rest of the development of the polynomial-complexity

algorithms, all derivations will be based on the GLRT defini-

tion in (3), with the understanding that these derivations can be

generalized to the model in (2a) and (2b) and specialized to the

MAPSD case for the two problems mentioned earlier.

A. Exact, Low-Complexity Solutions
Two general approaches are available to obtain the GLRT solution, as depicted in Figs. 2(a) and 2(b). The system of Fig. 2(a) scans the parameter space and runs a “known-parameter” detector for each value in the parameter space. The generalized-likelihood function or the metric for each hypothesis (i.e., sequence) is computed and the GLRT estimate is produced as the hypothesis with the maximum metric value. Using this approach, the problem in (3) can be restated as

(8a)
(8b) (8c)

while the MAPSD estimate is given by

Clearly, the complexity associated with the known-parameter

sequence detection problem in (8b) is

,

(6a) where is the complexity of calculating one term of the form

and

is the complexity associated with

a maximization operation over values.2 However, searching

over the entire parameter space, as implied by (8c), is simply (6b) impossible to implement, since is an infinite set in general

[for a finite , this may actually be a simple and practical way

of solving (3)].

The alternative approach, shown in Fig. 2(b), examines all

possible sequences in by generating an explicit estimate of the

auxiliary parameter for each hypothesized sequence. This ap-

(7a) proach, which resembles an estimator-corellator structure [21], implies another equivalent form of (3) as

(9a) (7b)

where is the zeroth-order modified Bessel function of the first kind, a uniform distribution has been assumed for the phase
, and denotes the Hermitian transpose of the vector . If

(9b)
2In its simplest form, maximization over a set can be performed with complexity linear with respect to the set size.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:48:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

200

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 51, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2003

(a)
Fig. 2. (a) A “known parameter” detector is run for every allowable value of the auxiliary parameter. The GLRT estimate is the sequence with the maximum metric. (b) All possible sequences are examined to find the one with the best metric. Due to the dependence of the metric function on the value of the auxiliary parameter, its value must be estimated before the sequence metric is computed. (c) Partitioning of the parameter set and the associated sufficient set of data sequences.

The complexity of the parameter estimator in (9a) will depend

on the particular problem and is denoted by . The search in

(9b) is performed over all

possible vectors, thus

resulting in a complexity of

,

where

is the complexity associated with multiplying (or

adding if we operate in the logarithmic domain) numbers.

Thus, the overall complexity grows exponentially with respect

to the length of the data block, .

A natural question is whether

can be found with com-

plexity much smaller than . To be more precise, we are in-

terested in the following questions.

• Is it possible to sample the parameter space in such a way that, examining only a small number of points in is exactly equivalent to examining all values in ?

• Is there an efficient, low-complexity algorithm to perform this minimal sampling in an exact way?
It is our contention that, under some general conditions, the answer to both these questions is positive! In particular, motivated by the work in [18] and its recent reincarnation in [19], a general class of problems is identified in this paper, for which the exact GLRT solution [or the solution to the more general problem in (2a) and (2b)] can be obtained with only polynomial complexity with respect to the data sequence length (i.e., , for some integer ). This dramatic improvement over the traditional approach is a novel result and it essentially shows that this problem is not exponentially hard [22, Ch. 36].
The key idea in the proposed algorithm can be explained by looking at the approach depicted in Fig. 2(a). It is expected that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:48:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MOTEDAYEN-AVAL AND ANASTASOPOULOS: POLYNOMIAL-COMPLEXITY NONCOHERENT SYMBOL-BY-SYMBOL DETECTION

201

the sequence estimate corresponding to parameter values that

are close to each other is the same, i.e., the function remains

constant within a set of closely spaced values of . This implies

a minimal partitioning of the parameter space , and an associ-

ated sufficient set of data sequences that are potential solutions

to the GLRT problem. The elements of this set can be obtained

as using a single sample from each set in the partition, as

depicted in Fig. 2(c). Note that this algorithm is not equivalent

to a simple sampling of the parameter space, as it re-estimates

the parameter value based on each estimated sequence (e.g., to

calculate the metric for ,

is used rather than ).

The sufficient set can be explicitly written as

P A f g Fig. 3. Partition of parameter space 3 with N = 3 and = a ; a .
The three boundaries between the sets 3 are labeled with the appropriate set
on each side. Note that each set L need not be contiguous.

(10)
Using this sufficient set, an equivalent form of (9b), and thus, of (3), is

(13) implies a different partition

of

, where the sets are defined as3

for each (14)

(11) for

and

defining the sets

. We proceed by

In other words, the maximization over the set of all possible

data sequences can be restricted to the set without losing any

accuracy. For the class of problems studied in this paper, the

size of is much smaller than and, more importantly,

there exists a way to construct with complexity smaller than

. Once is found,

can be produced using (11), with

complexity

.

B. Construction of the Sufficient Set
In this section, we describe a general method for the efficient generation of the set , which is the determining factor in proving polynomial complexity of the algorithm presented herein. Since cannot be efficiently constructed from (10), we first generate a partition of the parameter space. This partition can then be used to find the sequences in . Toward this end, we define the following equivalence relation in :

(15)

for each

, where

is the

base- representation of . The sets simply represent all

possible intersections between the sets . We emphasize that

for the class of problems we are interested in, most of the sets

are empty. Collecting all sets , a fine partition of is

generated as

(16)

where, for notational simplicity, an arbitrary indexing of is

introduced and is defined as

. The above process is

illustrated with an example in Fig. 3. It follows from the defini-

tions in (12)–(14) that these sets have the property

and

(17)

(12)
As an equivalence relation, (12) implies a partitioning of . Let be the collection of all sets in this partition. Based on the
definition of in (10) and the equivalence relation in (12), a one-to-one mapping between and is established. Thus, in order to construct , we need only find the partition , as shown in Fig. 2(c). However, this partition is difficult to generate directly, since it is essentially equivalent to solving (8b) for all
. The generation of can be simplified by introducing another equivalence relation in as
(13)

for some

. Therefore, we established that

and thus, a one-to-one mapping between the sets in and

the vectors in exists. In particular, the set can be expressed

as

(18a)

with

for any

(18b)

Constructing is simpler than direct construction of , mainly due to the difference between the equivalence relations in (12) and (13). In particular, the sets are relatively easy to compute, as it will become evident in the specific example discussed in Section III. More importantly, building , and even-

Note that

refers only to the th position within a sequence,

3In order to simplify notation, it is assumed that the boundaries between these sets are distinct. The extension to the case where the boundaries could be the

whereas is defined based on the entire sequence. Equation same can be easily achieved with minor modifications.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:48:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

202

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 51, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2003

tually , can be done recursively in the index

. which clearly has exponential complexity with respect to . A

Once the partition has been constructed, can be gen- polynomial-complexity algorithm for the evaluation of

erated through (18), with the aid of (8b). This involves

can be derived as

computations with complexity

[see (8b)],

resulting in an overall complexity of

.A

further complexity reduction by a factor can be achieved by

generating the vectors in an iterative fashion (see [23] for

more details).

It is evident from the discussion so far that the overall algo-

rithm will have polynomial complexity if is polynomial in

and the partition can be generated with polynomial com-

plexity. Indeed, these two conditions precisely determine the

class of problems that we are interested in.

III. GENERATING SBSSDM

We now turn our attention to a problem similar to the one

discussed above. The only difference is that, now, we are inter-

ested in finding SbSSDMs for

, rather than making

a hard decision on a particular sequence. As mentioned earlier,

these soft metrics can be used as reliability information in an

iterative detection algorithm. The generation of a SbSSDM for

the symbol involves a marginalization operation over the nui-

sance parameters of (1), i.e., over and all other symbols

( ). In [13, Ch. 1], several such SbS metrics were defined.

Here, motivated by the metric in (2), we choose maximization

as the marginalization operator, both for the unknown parameter

and the unwanted part of the data sequence. This results in the

following general SbS metric:

(23)
Collecting all the vectors examined in the above maximization in the set

(24)

the expression for

can be rewritten as

(25)

(19)

where

denotes all sequences with the th symbol

equal to . It is noted that the data sequence resulting from

thresholding the metrics in (19) is exactly the sequence pro-

duced by the sequence detection algorithm in (2), i.e.,

(20)

To implement an algorithm that produces the numbers

for all values of and , all sets of the type

must be ex-

amined. The set of all vectors the algorithm must consider can

be constructed based on the sufficient set , defined in (10) and

(18), by expanding each vector

as follows: each position

in the vector

is changed to all the possible

values

, while keeping the rest of the

positions constant. The resulting expanded set can be precisely

written as

Furthermore, as in the case of sequence detection, by choosing

, is the exact GLRT estimate of (3),

while for the two special cases mentioned in Section II, corre-

sponds to the MAPSD solution. We will now present a polyno-

mial-complexity algorithm for evaluating the SbSSDM in (19)

for the case of

, i.e., for the metric

(21)

where the superscript denotes that a deterministic parameter model is used for , and thus, the GLRT metric is utilized.
A conceptually simple algorithm for finding the desired metrics based on (9b) can be stated as
(22)

(26)

The last expression simply shows that, at most,

vectors must be examined to produce

for all and .

Furthermore, these vectors are directly generated from the same

sufficient set related to the sequence detection problem. The

resulting algorithm for computing SbSSDMs is summarized in

Table I.

We conclude this section by pointing out the relation be-

tween this algorithm and the “bit-flipping” or “toggle/swap”

algorithms that have been proposed in the context of image

halftoning [24], [25] and multiuser detection [26], [27]. In

these algorithms, a “good” hard decision is first made on the

transmitted sequence. Then, a reasonable SbSSDM for the th

bit is evaluated by flipping the th bit of the original sequence

(alternatively, more bits in the neighborhood of the th symbol

are swapped). The final SbSSDM for the th bit is the sequence

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:48:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MOTEDAYEN-AVAL AND ANASTASOPOULOS: POLYNOMIAL-COMPLEXITY NONCOHERENT SYMBOL-BY-SYMBOL DETECTION

203

metric difference between the original and the flipped sequences. In the algorithm described in this paper, the process is not initiated by finding a “good” hard decision. Rather, a whole set of sequences is first generated (i.e., the sufficient set ) and each of the bits is flipped in each of these sequences, in order to generate the exact SbSSDMs. In this sense, the algorithm presented herein could serve as a theoretical justification for the ad hoc “bit flipping” algorithms presented in the literature.

IV. SPECIAL CASE: PHASE NONCOHERENT CHANNEL
We now consider the problem of transmitting uncoded QAM symbols across an AWGN channel with unknown carrier phase. The observation equation is exactly as described in the example of Section II.

A. Exact Algorithm for Computing SbSSDMs

The

metric for this problem can be written as

TABLE I GENERIC POLYNOMIAL-COMPLEXITY ALGORITHM
FOR SBSSDM GENERATION
TABLE II POLYNOMIAL-COMPLEXITY SBSSDM ALGORITHM
FOR QAM IN NONCOHERENT CHANNEL

(27a)

where

(27b)

Observe that since the set is one-dimensional (1-D), the sets

will each consist of one or more subintervals in the range [0,

2 ). The boundary points between the subintervals associated

with and can be easily calculated by solving (28) at the

bottom of the page. The computation needs to be performed for

every

and every

, and since (28) has either zero or two solutions in the range

[0, 2 ), there will be, at most,

such boundaries.

Keeping these boundaries in a sorted list and indexing them as

through , the sets

can be obtained

as

, where

and the choice

of left-closed, right-open intervals is completely arbitrary. Now

the set can be simply constructed using (18).

By utilizing the algorithm described in [23] to further reduce

the complexity of finding from , and by further integrating

steps 2 and 3 of the algorithm in Table I, the algorithm described

in Table II is obtained.

As noted in [19], for the simpler problem of sequence detec-

tion, the metric maximizations can be performed in the loga-

rithmic domain. As a result, the only quantities that are stored and updated are the inner products . This implies that in steps 11 and 14 in the algorithm depicted in Table II, we need only subtract and add a single term in this inner product, thus reducing the computational complexity by an additional factor
. Based on this observation, the overall complexity of the proposed algorithm can be estimated as
(29)

(28)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:48:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

204

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 51, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2003

Since

, the overall complexity is on the order

of

, as claimed. Note that the GLRT solution to the corre-

sponding sequence detection problem can be easily obtained by

not “expanding” the vectors , resulting in overall complexity

TABLE III ULTRA-FAST ALGORITHM FOR BPSK

(30)
This is exactly the algorithm proposed in [19] for the special case of equally likely, phase-shift keying (PSK) symbols, assuming a uniform probability distribution for the phase. This is due to the fact that in this particular case, the estimates in (6) and (7) are the same.

B. Fast Algorithms for Approximate Evaluation of the SbSSDMs

A closer look at the proposed algorithm reveals that the most

complex (and thus, time consuming) part of the algorithm lies in

generating the set , i.e., in steps 1–3 in Table II. In particular,

hardware implementation of the sorting operation might be a

formidable task. In light of this observation, a natural step in

designing a fast, approximate algorithm is to simplify or even

eliminate these two steps.

Specifically, an arbitrary partition of the parameter space ,

can be chosen to form a set that will be used in place of . To

further simplify this arbitrary choice, we consider a uniformly

spaced partition, i.e., the parameter space

is parti-

tioned by the boundaries

, for

, thus resulting in exactly vectors

. More gen-

erally, for a two-dimensional (2-D) , this sampling would be

equivalent to laying an appropriate grid on the parameter space

and using each set in the grid as one of the sets , and simi-

larly for higher dimension parameter spaces. Once the vectors

are generated, the algorithm proceeds with steps

11–14, by expanding the above vectors and evaluating the corre-

sponding metric (steps 1–3 and 5–10 are now eliminated). The

corresponding overall complexity can be estimated as

(31)

It is immediately evident that this approximation will get closer

to the exact algorithm as the number of samples is increased.

In fact, the exact procedure described earlier guarantees that this

can be done with only a finite number of samples, as long as this

sampling is performed in an optimal way. What is more inter-

esting is that even very small values of result in minimal per-

formance loss, as illustrated in the next section. This simplified

version of the algorithm can be quite powerful in the special case

of binary PSK (BPSK) or quadrature PSK (QPSK), with

, i.e., the set of boundaries being

. In this

case, if a scaled version

of the observation vector

is computed before the iterative detector, the entire algorithm

requires only a single multiplication operation (by a constant)

per coded bit per iteration! The description of this “ultra-fast” al-

gorithm is provided in Table III, for BPSK, where all processing

is done in the logarithmic domain (i.e.,

,

and similarly,

,

where the extrinsic metric has been scaled by a factor , which

is a design parameter of the ultra-fast algorithm).

Observe that although the evaluation of is required,4 this can be easily implemented by two small 1-D lookup tables, for the and the functions, respectively.
It is also worth noting that the ultra-fast algorithm described in Table III is not equivalent to a simple quantization of the parameter space. The four sample phase values are only used as a starting point in the general algorithm to avoid having to compute the partition exactly, and thus, the algorithm can start on step 5 of Table II. The expansion of the sequences in the set is still performed as before (steps 12–14 in Tables II and III). There is also an implicit re-estimation of the phase value based on each sequence when the noncoherent metric is calculated. The expansion of the sequences and the re-estimation of the phase value differentiate the algorithm in Table III from algorithms that use a simple quantization of the parameter space [15].

V. APPLICATION: JOINT DECODING AND PHASE ESTIMATION IN LDPC CODES

In this section, we consider the application of the fast SbS

algorithms developed earlier to the joint iterative decoding and

phase estimation of a binary LDPC code. To aid the estimation

process, a pilot symbol is added for every

coded symbols.

The observation equation for this system is given by

(32)

where is the energy per coded symbol,

is

the th coded bit, is AWGN with zero mean and variance

per dimension, and

is the random phase process.

It is assumed that

whenever is a multiple of ,

denoting the transmission of a pilot symbol with energy in

the beginning of each block of length . Thus, the effective

energy per information bit and the overall rate are given by

4N + 4 N 4Exactly

such operations are required for a block of length for

12N + 4 BPSK, resulting in approximately four such nonlinear operations per coded

symbol. The corresponding numbers for QPSK are

and 12, respec-

tively.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:48:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MOTEDAYEN-AVAL AND ANASTASOPOULOS: POLYNOMIAL-COMPLEXITY NONCOHERENT SYMBOL-BY-SYMBOL DETECTION

205

and

, where is the rate

of the code.5

In the simulations, two models are considered for the phase

process . In the first model, the phase is assumed to be

a uniformly distributed random variable in [0, 2 ), constant

within a block of length , and independent from block to

block. In the second, more realistic model, the phase process

is assumed to be a random walk with Gaussian increments, i.e.,

(33)

where is a zero-mean Gaussian random variable with vari-

ance . In both cases, the receiver operates with the assump-

tion of a block independent channel.

The factor graph representing this system is shown in Fig. 1.

In an iterative receiver for the above system, the sum-product al-

gorithm is performed [5], by exchanging well-defined messages

between the nodes in the factor graph in Fig. 1. The processing

and exchange of messages in the lower part of the graph, rep-

resenting the code constraints, is very well understood, so we

concentrate on the upper part of the graph and, in particular, on

the processing taking place inside each “Channel Constraints”

block.

Concentrating on a single block and denoting by

the incoming message corre-

sponding to the th coded bit, where

and

are

the a priori probabilities corresponding to the th coded bit

being or , respectively, we simulate three receivers

that use different methods for calculating the outgoing mes-

sages. The first receiver uses the sum-product algorithm,

which calculates the outgoing message for th coded bit as

with

(34)

where the zeroth-order Bessel function is present due to the implicit expectation with respect to the unknown phase, which is assumed to have a uniform distribution.
The second receiver considered herein generates and exchanges messages using the ultra-fast algorithm described in Table III.
Finally, in the third simulated receiver, the channel parameter (i.e., the unknown phase) is modeled as an explicit variable node within the factor graph structure. Without quantization of the phase, the expression for the outgoing message using this algorithm is equivalent to the outgoing message of the sum-product algorithm in (34). The difference is in the way the expression is evaluated. In this case, the expression for the outgoing message from the “channel constraints” block can be written as
with

(35)
5Note that a channel interleaver is implicitly present and incorporated within the LDPC code, since, contrary to the case of trellis codes, the order of the coded bits is irrelevant in LDPC codes.

Fig. 4. BER versus E =N for a length 4000 uniform LDPC code with variable and check node degrees three and six, respectively. The phase is constant within a block and block-to-block independent.

Evaluating this expression will require integration over , and

thus, exact evaluation of the expression is not practical. To avoid

this problem, the phase is modeled as a quantized variable node

in our simulations. Using levels of quantization, the expres-

sion for the outgoing message can be written exactly as in (35),

by substituting

with

. We note that this

method uses the same approach as the one taken in [15].

Before presenting the simulation results we would like to

note that several other algorithms can also be applied to solve

this joint decoding and detection/estimation problem (e.g., al-

gorithms based on expectation-maximization). However, since

the performance/complexity tradeoff of these algorithms does

not compare favorably to the ones examined herein, especially

the ultra-fast and the “quantized phase” algorithms, these ap-

proaches were not simulated.

A. Block Independent Phase Process

Simulation results for a length 4000 uniform LDPC code with

variable and check-node degrees three and six, respectively (re-

sulting in a rate

code), are shown in Fig. 4 for the

block-independent model for the phase process. Bit-error rate

(BER) curves are shown for block length sizes of

5 and

11. The BER curve for the coherent sum-product algorithm is

also shown for comparison purposes. The four different BER

curves shown for each value of correspond to the four ways

of computing the outgoing messages: the sum-product curves

utilize (34); the ultra-fast curves are produced by using the al-

gorithm described in Table III; and the last two curves labeled

“Quantized phase” represent the performance of a receiver that

uses (35) and modeling the phase as a quantized variable node

in the factor graph structure with four and eight quantization

levels.

The sum-product algorithm utilizing (34) results in the best

performance, however, this metric can only be computed with

exponential complexity with respect to . In light of this fact,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:48:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

206

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 51, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2003

Fig. 5. BER versus E =N for a length 4000 uniform LDPC code with
variable and check node degrees three and six, respectively. The phase process
is a Gaussian walk with increment having standard deviation of  = 5
degrees.

the almost optimal performance (less than 0.1-dB loss at a

BER of 10 and for

) of the ultra-fast algorithm

seems remarkable. The quantized phase curves show also an

almost-optimal performance (compared with the noncoherent

sum-product algorithm) for a receiver that uses

levels

of quantization for the unknown phase. However, it is observed

that using

levels of quantization results in a loss of about

0.6 dB (at a BER of 10 ) over the ultra-fast algorithm for both

and

. This shows that these two algorithms are

indeed quite different, although at first glance, they may seem

similar due to the fact that they both use four phase values as a

starting point. In fact, these two algorithms are different even if

maximization is used (in the quantized phase algorithm) as the

marginalization operation for the phase. It is also noted that the

quantized phase algorithm with four quantization levels is more

complex than the ultra-fast algorithm, as can be seen from (35).

Regarding the difference between coherent and noncoherent

detection, it is observed that at BER of 10 , there is a 1.2-dB

loss for

for the noncoherent sum-product receiver when

compared to the coherent sum-product receiver. This loss be-

comes 2.5 dB for

. However, a significant portion of this

loss is due to the pilot symbol insertion (i.e.,

dB for

and 0.97 dB for

).

B. Gaussian Random Walk Phase Process

Simulation results for the second, more realistic, model for

the phase are presented in Fig. 5 for the same LDPC code and for

significant phase dynamics given by

degrees. In view of

the very good performance of the ultra-fast algorithm, only this

receiver is considered herein. Since for small , the algorithm

suffers from reduced signal-to-noise ratio, while for large ,

the performance is dominated by a model mismatch error, it

is expected that an optimal value for the receiver parameter

exists. The results demonstrate that

is close to optimal

for the specific phase dynamics considered herein. For

, the performance loss compared to the coherent sum-product

algorithm is 0.9 dB (at a BER of 10 ).

As seen in Fig. 5, the performance can be further improved

by considering an “overlapping window” algorithm, which can

be employed as a variation of any of the algorithms previously

discussed. In this algorithm, when calculating soft decisions for

a given block of symbols, we take into consideration the

-symbol blocks immediately before and after the block we are

interested in. In other words, when calculating the soft decision

metrics for symbol positions to

in the codeword,

the ultra-fast algorithm takes into account the observations for

a block of length 3 , i.e., from symbol position

to

, but it only passes as outgoing messages the

soft decision metrics generated for the symbols in positions

to

. This “overlapping window” algorithm attempts

to exploit the correlation in the channel phase from one block

to the next, as opposed to previous algorithms that assumed

a block-independent model for the phase. It is observed from

Fig. 5 that this “overlapping window” algorithm with

results in a small improvement (0.2 dB at a BER of 10 ) over

the ultra-fast algorithm with

. The tradeoff is that the

“overlapping window” algorithm has approximately three times

the complexity of the ultra-fast algorithm.

VI. CONCLUSION
The related problems of GLRT-based sequence detection and SbSSDM generation for an uncoded sequence in the presence of unknown channel parameters were investigated in this paper. For both the sequence detection and the SbSSDM cases, a general class of problems was identified for which the exact GLRT solution can be computed with polynomial complexity with respect to the data sequence length. An algorithm was also presented to substantiate this claim. In two important special cases, this method can also be used to evaluate the optimal MAPSD solution and/or the corresponding SbSSDM. The algorithm was applied to iterative noncoherent detection of LDPC codes, and its performance was evaluated through simulation. The fact that joint iterative detection and parameter estimation, in the presence of significant parameter dynamics, can be performed without the need for costly multiplication operations might potentially lead to very high throughput hardware implementation of these schemes.
A research direction currently pursued by the authors is the application of the general ideas in this paper to other problems of interest in wireless communications. One such problem is data detection in the presence of flat, complex Gaussian fading, where the parameter space is the 2-D complex plane. As mentioned earlier, in this scenario, the optimal MAPSD metrics can be expressed in the form of (2).

REFERENCES
[1] C. Berrou and A. Glavieux, “Near-optimum error correcting coding and decoding: Turbo codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 44, pp. 1261–1271, Oct. 1996.
[2] S. Benedetto, D. Divsalar, G. Montorsi, and F. Pollara, “Serial concatenation of interleaved codes: Performance analysis, design, and iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 44, pp. 909–926, May 1998.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:48:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MOTEDAYEN-AVAL AND ANASTASOPOULOS: POLYNOMIAL-COMPLEXITY NONCOHERENT SYMBOL-BY-SYMBOL DETECTION

207

[3] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform.

Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.

[4] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman,

“Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs,” in

Proc. Int. Symp. Information Theory, Cambridge, MA, Aug. 1998, p.

117.

[5] B. J. Frey, Graphical Models for Machine Learning and Digital Com-

munications. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998.

[6] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear

codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory,

vol. IT-20, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.

[7] M. Peleg, S. Shamai (Shitz), and S. Galán, “Iterative decoding for

coded noncoherent MPSK communications over phase-noisy AWGN

channel,” Inst. Elect. Eng. Proc. Commun., vol. 147, pp. 87–95, Apr.

2000.

[8] C. Komninakis and R. D. Wesel, “Joint iterative channel estimation

and decoding in flat correlated Rayleigh fading,” IEEE J. Select. Areas

Commun., vol. 19, pp. 1706–1717, Sept. 2001.

[9] G. Colavolpe, G. Ferrari, and R. Raheli, “Noncoherent iterative (turbo)

detection,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 48, pp. 1488–1498, Sept. 2000.

[10] A. Anastasopoulos and K. M. Chugg, “Adaptive soft-input soft-output

algorithms for iterative detection with parametric uncertainty,” IEEE

Trans. Commun., vol. 48, pp. 1638–1649, Oct. 2000.

[11]

, “Adaptive iterative detection for phase tracking in turbo coded

systems,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 49, pp. 2135–2144, Dec. 2001.

[12] S. M. Aji and R. J. McEliece, “The generalized distributive law,” IEEE

Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 46, pp. 325–343, Mar. 2000.

[13] K. M. Chugg, A. Anastasopoulos, and X. Chen, Iterative Detection:

Adaptivity, Complexity Reduction and Applications. Norwell, MA:

Kluwer, 2001.

[14] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation,

Linköping Univ., Linköping, Sweden, 1996.

[15] A. P. Worthen and W. E. Stark, “Unified design of iterative receivers

using factor graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 843–849,

Feb. 2001.

[16] M. C. Valenti and B. D. Woerner, “Iterative channel estimation and de-

coding of pilot symbol assisted turbo codes over flat-fading channels,”

IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 19, pp. 1697–1705, Sept. 2001.

[17] H. L. Van Trees, Detection, Estimation and Modulation Theory, Part

I. New York: Wiley, 1968.

[18] K. M. Mackenthun, Jr., “A fast algorithm for multiple-symbol differen-

tial detection of MPSK,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 42, pp. 1471–1474,

Feb.-Apr. 1994.

[19] W. Sweldens, “Fast block noncoherent decoding,” IEEE Commun. Lett.,

vol. 5, pp. 132–134, Apr. 2001.

[20] H. Meyr, M. Moeneclaey, and S. Fechtel, Digital Communication

Receivers: Synchronization, Channel Estimation and Signal Pro-

cessing. New York: Wiley, 1998.

[21] T. Kailath, “A general likelihood-ratio formula for random signals in

Gaussian noise,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-15, pp. 350–361,

May 1969.

[22] T. H. Cormen, C. E. Leiserson, and R. L. Rivest, Introduction to Algo-

rithms. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1990.

[23] I. Motedayen and A. Anastasopoulos, “Polynomial-complexity, adaptive symbol-by-symbol soft-decision algorithms with application to noncoherent detection of LDPCC,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Communications, New York, NY, Apr. 2002, pp. 1677–1681.
[24] T. N. Pappas and D. L. Neuhoff, “Least-square model-based halftoning,” IEEE Trans. Image Processing, vol. 8, pp. 1102–1116, Aug. 1999.
[25] D. J. Lieberman and J. P. Allebach, “A dual interpretation for direct binary search and its implications for tone reproduction and texture quality,” IEEE Trans. Image Processing, vol. 9, pp. 1950–1963, Nov. 2000.
[26] Y. Sun, “Eliminating highest-error and fastest-metric-descent criteria and iterative algorithms for bit-synchronous CDMA multiuser detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Communications, Atlanta, GA, June 1998, pp. 1576–1580.
[27] P. Spasojevic and X. Wang, “Improved robust multiuser detection in nonGaussian channels,” IEEE Signal Processing Lett., vol. 8, pp. 83–86, Mar. 2001.
Idin Motedayen-Aval (S’02) was born in Tehran, Iran in 1976. He received the B.S. degree in computer systems engineering from the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, in 1999, and the M.S. degree in electrical engineering in 2001 from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, where he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree.
Achilleas Anastasopoulos (S’97–M’99) was born in Athens, Greece in 1971. He received the Diploma from the National Technical University of Athens, Athens, Greece in 1993, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Southern California, Los Angeles, in 1994 and 1999, respectively, all in electrical engineering.
He is currently an Assistant Professor at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science. His research interests lie in the general area of communication theory, with emphasis on joint parameter estimation and data detection, adaptive iterative algorithms, and coding for fading channels. He is the co-author of the book Iterative Detection: Adaptivity, Complexity Reduction and Applications (Reading, MA: Kluwer, 2001). Dr. Anastasopoulos was the recipient of the Myronis Fellowship in 1996 from the Graduate School of the University of Southern California.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:48:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

