ITW2003, Paris, France, March 31 -April 4, 2003

Loop Removal from LDPC Codes

James A. McGowan Dpt of Telecom. Eng. The Australian Nat. Univ. Canberra ACT 0200, Australia
James.McGowan@anu.edu.au

Robert C. Williamson Dpt of Telecom. Eng. The Australian Nat. Univ. Canberra ACT 0200, Australia
Bob.Williamson@anu.edu.au

Abstract - It is hypothesised that small loops in the graphical representations of low-density parity-check codes are detrimental to the code’s performance. In this paper we demonstrate a procedure for removing such loops from the codes. An algorithm based on the code’s adjacency matrix is used to locate unwanted loops, and then certain edges within the graph are exchanged to eliminate those loops (without simultaneously creating any others). This process can be repeated until there are no loops remaining with a size less than a particular limit. A comparison of some theoretical and experimental values for this limit is given.

1. INTRODUCTION
First introduced by Gallager in 1963 [ 5 ] , low-density parity-check codes (LDPCs) are being increasingly studied due to their high performance capabilities [3,8,9,12,14]. An LDPC code uses a large binary parity-check matrix H to verify codewords. Each row and column of H will have a predetermined number of Is, which is designed to be a very low fraction of the total number of elements. The columns of H correspond to the bits of the received message 2,and the rows correspond to parity-checks on those bits. Thus a correctly received codeword will satisfy the equation

Ha: _= 0 (mod 2).

(1)

The matrix H can also be conveniently represented as a
Tannergraph. Each row and each column of H are associated
with a node in the graph, and an edge will connect a row node with a column node if and only if their intersection in H is a 1. This graph is bipartite because the edges only pass between, not within, the two disjoint sets of check (row) nodes and variable (column) nodes. In a bipartite graph any even-length path of edges must finish in the same set it started, and an oddlength path will finish in the opposite set. A loop (or cycle) is a closed path with no repeated nodes, and must therefore be of
even length. There is at most one edge between any two nodes, and so
the shortest length a loop can have is 4. We refer to such loops as 4-1oops, and in general a loop of length n is an n-loop. The girth of a graph is the length of the shortest loop.
The most computationallyfeasible techniques for decoding LDPCs are based on Pearl’s belief propagation algorithm [131 which passes probability messages around the graph of a code to find the most likely original message. If the graph contains no loops then this decoding is always quickly computable. Unfortunately strong LDPCs need loops in their graphs [4], and so the algorithm is iterated repeatedly until it convergesto a solution or is told to stop. The main problem is that the value of

an incorrect bit in a loop will propagate back around to itself, effectively reinforcing its belief and resisting efforts of the algorithm to correct it. With longer loops, however, this effect is diluted and not as critical to the decoder’sperformance. LDPC graphs generally contain many loops of different sizes, and in this paper we investigate a process for removing all the shorter loops, which improves the effectivenessof the belief propagation decoding and thus results in an improved performance for the code.
Section 11introduces the adjacency matrix of a code, and shows how it can be used to find loops of a desired size. Section I11 presents a procedure that removes these loops once found, and verifies that no other unwanted loops are created at the same time. Section IV investigates how many loops can be removed from a given graph, and compares the theoretical and experimental results. Section V presents the simulation results, and compares the improved performance of the loopremoved LDPC codes. Conclusions are drawn in Section VI, and the Algorithm is included as an appendix.

11. LOOPDETECTION

Loops can only degrade the performance of an iterative decoder on average, a seemingly intuitive statement which has so far eluded proof [14]. Most LDPC generating algorithms include some acknowledgment of the desirability of removing small loops [10, page 221, but none to date have been able to
guarantee removal of all loops of a given length.
Our first requirement is an algorithm to locate loops of any
length. We can achieve this using the adjacency matrix of the code, as follows.
Denote all of the nodes of the graph as w1 212, . . . ,wp, and
define the adjacency matrix A = [aij]to be the p x p symmetric binary matrix

{ aij =

1 if an edge connects wi with wj 0 otherwise.

A natural ordering of the nodes for an LDPC graph will give the relationship:

showing that A is easily constructable from H. Consider the square of A:
(3)

0-7803-7799-0/03/$17.00 @ 2003 IEEE

230

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:27:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

The elements of A2 may be calculated from the formula

P

A2?3. x a i k a k j .

(4)

k=l

Note that this sum is also the number of paths of length 2 between vi and vj,because whenever a i k = akj = l we have two edges joining vi to V k to vj. This observation can be extended using induction to give [ 2 ] :
Theorem 1 The (2, j)-entry of A" equals the number ofpaths of length nfrom vi to vj.

Figure 1: Replacing the old edges e and e' with the new e2 and
e:.

The diagonal elements A; are the number of paths of length n starting and finishing at vi. These include the n-loops through vi, but also other degenerate loops that repeat nodes and/or backtrack along edges. The following theorem is used to avoid these unwanted cases when locating loops.
Theorem 2 In a graph with girth n, the nodes vi and v j are directly opposite each other in an n-loop iff

A;f2 2 2 and

(5)

A(*/2)-2= 0.
t3

(6)

Consider a graph of girth 4, as most random graphs are. For two nodes vi and vj to be opposite on some 4-loop we require that there are at least two paths of length 2 between them, and so

The only situation where this inequality does not automatically result in vi and v j being on a 4-loop is when the paths are able to backtrack along themselves, i.e. when vi = w j or i = j . Thus all non-diagonal elements of A 2 with value at least 2 will correspond to nodes on a 4-loop. This is equivalent to equation (6),because when n = 4 we have

111. LOOPREMOVAL
Once an unwanted loop is found, the next task is to remove it from the graph. It is possible to destroy it by swapping any edges around, but we need to do this in a way such that no new loops are formed.
Firstly we need an edge from the loop. The above detection technique will give us two nodes vi and vj. A node 01,of the loop adjacent to v j will be at distance n/2 - 1from vi,and so we take any V k (the two directions around the loop give two possibilities) that satisfies

> 0 and a j k = 1.

This gives a loop-edge e = 21j21k. We now find C,, the

set of all nodes at a distance greater than n - 1 from e. This

consists of those nodes U, for which A&:' = A:;' = 0.

An edge e' with both end-points in C, is randomly chosen.

If there are no edges with this property then e is not remov-

able from the loop, and a different loop-edge will need to be

selected. Let the end-nodes of e' be ve and U,. Delete edges e

aelnd--e'- v efrvokm, atshiengFriagp.h1,.and replace them with e2 =

and

Theorem3 Replacing e and et with e2 and e; will remove the original loop that e was part oJ and create no new loops of size n or less.

Once found, these loops can be removed using the method explained below, and we then have a graph with girth 6.
By induction we can now assume #at we have a graph with girth n, and wish to locate the n-loops in it. Again we need to
find at least two paths of length n/2 between vi and vj, and so
Theorem 1 immediately gives us

2 2.

(9)

Any vi and vj satisfying (9) are either on a genuine nloop or on smaller loops intersecting in a figure-of-eightshape (which cannot be the case here as the graph has girth n),unless there are paths between vi and vj with length less than n/2. The next shortest possible length is (n/2)- 2, and so (6) ensures that no such shorter paths occur.
A loop located in this way can be removed, and the search is repeated until the girth increases, in which case we start removing the now larger loops. Obviously each loop can be defined in terms of multiple pairs (an n-loop has n / 2 opposite pairs), but any pair is sufficientfor the removal algorithm.

We know from the definition of C, that e2 and eh did not exist before, so the exchange is possible to do. The old loop is definitely removed, as one of its edges has been deleted. In order to confirm that no new n-loops could have been produced, we examine the three possible cases:
A new loop comprising of e2 and other pre-existing edges would require a path from v j to v, of length n -1 or less. But vm E C,, and by the definition of C, this is not possible.
Similarly ve E C,, so there can be no loop containing eh with other old edges.
The other potential way to form a new loop would be to include both e2 and e;. There is nothing in our selection criteria preventing ve and vmbeing connected by a path of length 3. We know that v i and vj were previously on an n-loop however, and so with e removed the shortest path between them must have length n - 1. Therefore no new loop can be created with a length less than ( n1)+1+3+1 =n+4.

0-7803-7799-0/03/$17.00 @ 2003 IEEE

231

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:27:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

A more explicit statement of the algorithm suggestedby the above is given in the Appendix.
IV. LOOPSIZELIMIT The method described in the previous Section can be used to remove any undesirable loop from a graph, providing that sufficiently distant edges exist. For relatively small loops this is always possible. For larger loops, however, there is a length above which none can be removed. One method to find this limit theoretically is as follows. Let X be the average degree of the variable nodes, and p be the average check node degree. In this paper we have used regular graphs with X = 3 and p = 6, but irregular graphs could equally well have been chosen. By counting outwards from an arbitrary node [ l ] , we obtain
r-1
i=O r-1

1 E43

iE-04

1E-05

1 E06

1E 0 7

1 E48

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

EbiNo (dB)

Figure 2: The average coding performances for random LDPC codes when decoded by belief propagation with N,, = 300, R = 1/2 for the BIAWGNC. The codes are unmodified for the top line, have 4-loops removed for the middle line, and 4and 6-loops removed for the bottom line. The error bars, only visible for low BERs, represent 95% confidence intervals.

i=O

where N,, and N, are the number of variable and check nodes respectively, and T is half the girth g [6]. With fixed N u ,N,, X and p it follows that T (and g) must be bounded above.
When T is even (odd T reaches the same conclusion via a different calculation) let s = r/2. We can simplify (11) to get:
2s- 1

I E03 I E04 a m 1E05 1E 4 6

1E 0 7

1E 0 8

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

5.5

6

EWNo (dB)

Figure 3: As per Fig. 2 except with N , = 1000, R = 1/2.

and rearranging gives

After substituting our values of X = 3 and p = 6 we have

g = 4s _< 410glO (3N,,/2).

(18)

This upper bound for g applies to all graphs with the same basic parameters. In practice though this bound is rather loose, and the actual girths are lower (as shown by experiment). The following table shows the minimum N,, required for the loop removal algorithm to retum a graph with girth g (an approximate value observed over numerous random trials), and the theoretical maximum girth for a graph this size given by (18):

V. PERFORMANCE
Firstly a random LDPC of a certain size was constructed. A simulated message was sent through the binary input additive white gaussian noise channel (BIAWGNC) at a specific noise level (&/NO) and the message decoded using belief propagation with a maximum of 25 iterations. The simulation was repeated with 4-loops removed from the code, and then with 6-loops removed as well. This whole procedure was repeated many times (with many different random codes). The resulting average (over all codes) bit-error rates are plotted in Figs. 2 and 3.
Removing loops gave significant improvements in the performance of the LDPC codes. Fig. 2 shows the results for a (3,6)-regular LDPC code with N,, = 300 message bits. For
low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR)values the loop removal had
little effect on performance. The subtleties of the loops' effects on belief propagation are irrelevant when the noise level is so high. As the noise level decreased a noticeable difference between the 3 lines emerged. At a bit-error rate (BER) of lop6 a difference of 1.5 dB between the modified and unmodified codes is apparent. And this grows considerably as the BER drops further. To a lesser extent one can also see that remov-

0-7803-7799-0/03/$17.00 @ 2003 IEEE

232

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:27:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ing 6-loops is superior to only removing 4-loops, and has a gain of around 1dB at the lower BERs.
In Fig. 3 the effects of the loop-removal are more noticeable. Here we used longer codes, with N, = 1000 bits. Again there is little difference between the lines for low S N R values, but once Eb/No exceeds 3dB the performances start to diverge. The unmodified codes have a similar-shaped line to before, albeit at a lower BER, but the modified codes have a more rapid drop in BER.
The relatively flat line for the unmodified codes shows the existence of an error floor. Belief propagation finds certain combinations of 4-loops very difficult to deal with, no matter how large the code, and that is why the removal of 4-loops in particular has such a large effect [101.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper introduced a new method for removing loops from LDPC graphs. We used properties of the adjacency matrix to locate unwanted loops. We then found a pair of edges to exchange, essentially removing the loop from the graph. This was repeated until the loops reached a certain size, after which they were no longer removable. A theoretical analysis of this limit was shown to be a little higher than the results achieved in practice.
Simulations revealed that removing 4-loops from an LDPC gives a substantial increase in performance, with further improvements seen after removing 6-loops as well. Initial results suggest that these improvements still continue as longer loops are removed, but to a lesser extent.
This algorithm can be applied to any LDPC code, and results in a new code with equal size and complexity to the first, but which usually gets superior results from the belief propagation decoder. The size of removable loops increases with the code length, and we expect that longer codes will have even better potential gains from utilizing this algorithm.
VII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors would like to thank Prof. Brendan McKay for a helpful discussion on aspects of graph theory.
VIII. APPENDIX
There are various ways to optimize Algorithm 1. By calculating and storing the powers of A in advance, they need not be
recalculated every time. The highest power is An-’, but this
lengthy computation is not required as only two of its lines are used. In fact these lines can be initially added together to give a single vector, and then repeatedly multiplied by A to significantly reduce the complexity. Also, after two edges are swapped only minor alterations are needed to A, and consequently to the higher powers too.
REFERENCES
[l] B. Bollobas and E. Szemeredi, “Girth of Sparse Graphs,” Journal of Graph Theory, vol. 39, pp. 194-200.2002.
[2] E Buckley and E Harary, Distance in Graphs. Addison-Wesley, Redwood, Califomia, 1990.

[3] S.-Y. Chung, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, Analysis of SumProductDecoding of Low-Density Parity-CheckCodes using a Gaussian Approximation,IEEE Trans.Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 657-670, Feb 2001.
[4] T. Etzion, A. Trachtenberg, and A. Vardy, Which Codes Have CycleFree Tanner Graphs?, IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 21732181, Sep 1999.
[5] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge,MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[6] S. Hoory, “The Size of Bipartite Graphs with a Given Girth,” Journal of Combinatorial Theory - Series B, vol. 86(2), pp. 215-220,2002.
[7] R. Kannan, P. Tetali, and S. Vempala, “Simple Markov chain algorithms for generatingbipartite graphs and toumaments,” in 8th Annual Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, ACM-SIAM, pp. 193-200, San Francisco, California, 1997.
[SI M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Analysis of Low Density Codes and Improved Designs Using Irregular Graphs,“ Proceedings of the 30th ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pp. 249-258, 1998.
[9] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher,M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Improved Low-Density Parity-Check Codes Using Irregular Graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 585-598, Feb 2001.
[lo] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good Error Correcting Codes based on Very Sparse Matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399-431, March 1999.
[ l l ] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electronics Leners, vol. 33, pp. 457458, March 1997.
[12] G. Miller and D. Buahtein, Bounds on the maximum-likelihood decoding error probability of low-density parity-check codes, IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 2696-2710, Nov 2001.
[13] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[14] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, The capacity of low-density parity check codes under message-passing decoding, IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599-618, Feb 2001.
Algorithm 1 Removing all possible loops from a graph G ne4 repeat
A e the Adjacency Matrix of G (from eqn (2))
for all elements (i,j ) of A do if A:’’ 2 2 and A$”)-’ = 0 then {*}
Choose a IC such that A%’”)-’ > 0 and A k j = 1
+ C, e all columns {x : Ayz-l A:;’ = 0 )
E, all edges of G with both endpoints in Ce
if E, # q5 then
Choose an e‘ E Ee Swap the check nodes of e and e‘ in G Return to repeat end if end if end for if no n-loops were found then n+n+2 end if until no edges were swapped since last repeat

0-7803-7799-0/03/$17.00 @ 2003 IEEE

233

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:27:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

