IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 39, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2003

2567

Irregular Low-Density Parity-Check Codes: Construction and Performance on Perpendicular
Magnetic Recording Channels
Sundararajan Sankaranarayanan, Bane Vasic´, Senior Member, IEEE, and Erozan M. Kurtas, Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper, we propose an algorithm to design an irregular low-density parity-check code (LDPC), with a given degree distribution pair, from a random regular LDPC code. The proposed algorithm splits columns and rows of the regular code in order to achieve the desired degree distribution pair. Kou, Lin, and Fossorier have used column splitting to increase code rate. However, we use the splitting technique to achieve a given degree distribution pair in the bipartite graph of the resultant irregular code. The bit-error rate (BER) performance of high-rate irregular LDPC codes, constructed using this algorithm, were simulated on equalized perpendicular magnetic recording channels. In addition, this paper compares the performance of these irregular codes with that of random regular LDPC codes.
Index Terms—Degree distribution pair, irregular bipartite graph, low-density parity-check codes (LPDCs), perpendicular magnetic recording channels, sum-product algorithm.

I. INTRODUCTION

R ECENT STUDIES on the performance of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes in magnetic storage appli-

cations have been encouraging. This class of codes was first

introduced by Gallager in his thesis [1]. An LDPC code is

the set of solutions of to the linear system of equations

, where each row of the parity-check matrix ,

is called a parity-check equation. An LDPC code can be

represented by a bipartite graph, which consists of variable

nodes that are representative of the codeword bits and check

nodes that are representative of its parity-check equations. The

number of edges incident on a node is defined as its degree.

A ( , )-regular LDPC code has a bipartite graph with a

uniform variable (check) node degree

, and, hence, its

parity-check matrix has a uniform column weight (row weight).

An LDPC code that does not satisfy this property is referred

to as an irregular LDPC code. The degree distribution of the

nodes of an irregular graph with maximum variable degree

and maximum check degree can be specified by sequences

and

, where

is the fraction of variable nodes (check nodes) with

degree .

Manuscript received January 6, 2003. S. Sankaranarayanan and B. Vasic´ are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721 USA (e-mail: ssundar@ece.arizona.edu; vasic@ece.arizona.edu). E. M. Kurtas is with Seagate Technology, Pittsburgh, PA 15222 USA (e-mail: erozan.m.kurtas@seagate.com). Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2003.816481

Richardson et al. showed that LDPC codes from irregular bipartite graphs, with a carefully chosen degree distribution pair, performed very close to the Shannon capacity limit on a memoryless additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. In [2], Richardson et al. proposed an optimization method to construct good degree distribution pair ( , ) for systems that use a message-passing algorithm for iterative decoding on an AWGN channel. In addition, they had listed a table of good degree distribution pair ( , of rate one-half codes with various upper bounds on the maximum variable degree . As mentioned previously, LDPC codes constructed with large codeword length and that satisfy the good degree distribution pair are observed to perform very close to the Shannon capacity limit. In [3], Varnica and Kavcic´ modified the optimization method to construct good degree distribution pair of LDPC codes for intersymbol interference (ISI) channels.
In this paper, we present a general systematic method to achieve an irregular LDPC code, with a given degree distribution pair, by splitting columns and rows of of a regular code. The advantages of such a systematic construction method are twofold. First, this algorithm is a useful alternative to random generation of irregular codes. Second, it enables exploitation of the structural properties of a regular code in efficiently storing the resultant irregular code. It is well known that regular LDPC codes constructed from several combinatorial designs [4] exhibit a cyclic or quasicyclic property that simplifies their encoding procedure and also facilitates a memory-efficient storage of the codes. The emphasis of this paper is on the method to construct an irregular LDPC code, and, hence, we chose to generate its parent regular LDPC code pseudorandomly.
In Section II, we present details of the algorithm that is used to construct an irregular LDPC code with a given degree distribution pair. In Section III, we present the bit-error rate (BER) performance of irregular codes on equalized perpendicular magnetic recording channels. Finally, we conclude the paper with an observation that, at high rate, the performance of regular codes are comparable to that of irregular codes.

II. CONSTRUCTION OF IRREGULAR LDPC CODE

As mentioned previously, the underlying problem is to design

a systematic method to split rows and columns of a ( , )-reg-

ular LDPC code

with columns, which achieves an ir-

regular LDPC code with a desired degree distribution pair ( ,

). This transformation from a regular graph to an irregular one

0018-9464/03$17.00 © 2003 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:46:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2568

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 39, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2003

preserves the number of edges. Hence, the problem of achieving

in the irregular code is independent of that of achieving .

As a direct result of this statement, it is sufficient to just formu-

late the problem of achieving a desired .

Let us define a nonnegative integer vector whose ele-

ments

are the number of columns of

weight required in the resulting irregular code to achieve .

The vector can be obtained by solving the integer optimiza-

tion problem in (1) under a constraint defined by

.

(1)

The integer optimization problem aims to minimize the mean

error between and under the constraint of preserving the

total number of edges. The idea underlying the method to solve

the integer optimization problem is to determine the solution

in space and then search for in the neighborhood

of . It is straightforward to find

from

Fig. 1. Performance of irregular LDPC codes on [1, 2, 1]-equalized perpendicular magnetic recording channel.

(2) and
(3)

The error in rounding all components of

to the nearest

integer, as shown in (4), can be corrected by solving the linear

diophantine equation given in (5). The classical technique to

solve the equation involves eliminating the variables in (5) with

the Euclidean algorithm and reducing it to a univariate equation.

A solution of (5) is considered best if it results in which

satisfies (1).

(4)

(8)

An efficient incremental algorithm proposed by Contejean et al.

[5] can be used to obtain a design partition profile for columns

. To achieve a desired row-weight distribution , we

obtained a design partition profile for rows

using the

method described previously. The columns and rows of are

split using

and to obtain the parity-check matrix

of the irregular code. This irregular code

will have a

degree distribution pair (

,

) that is close to the

desired ( , ). This irregular code can be reconstructed by

storing the regular code along with partition distribution matrix

and design partition profile for rows and columns.

It is intuitive to note that splitting of rows may increase the

girth and minimum distance of the resultant irregular code. On

the other hand, column splitting may increase the girth and de-

crease the minimum distance of the resultant irregular code.

(5)

III. RESULTS

(6)

A column with “1”s can be partitioned in different ways,

as given by the well-known Euler’s formula [see (7)]. Let us define a partition distribution matrix , such that its elements
denote the number of

columns of weight in the partition of the th type. The par-

tition of the th type is one of the different ways to parti-

tion . The number of columns

of

that require

a partition of th type to achieve is given by a nonnegative

vector

called the design partition profile for columns.

The problem of finding

can be formulated as a system

of linear diophantine equations in (8).

(7)

The BER plots shown in this section correspond to the

performance of irregular/regular LDPC codes on perpendic-

ular (magnetic) recording channels. The impulse response

of the perpendicular recording channel is approximated as

, where

is a time index normalized by the channel clock , and is

the normalized recording density. The channel linear density is

adjusted according to the code rate. The output of the channel is

equalized to one of the generalized partial response targets by an

adaptive least mean-squared equalizer. The noise in the channel

is modeled as AWGN with variance , and the signal-to-noise

ratio (SNR) is defined as

, where

is the peak amplitude of an isolated transition response

for perpendicular recording.

The soft information is extracted from a partial response

channel using the Bahl–Cocke–Jelinek–Raviv (BCJR) al-

gorithm operating on a channel trellis and then used in a

sum-product algorithm (SPA) [6], [7], for LDPC decoding. The

soft information on variable nodes, obtained after five iterations

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:46:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SANKARANARAYANAN et al.: IRREGULAR LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES
TABLE I COLUMN AND ROW WEIGHT DISTRIBUTIONS

2569

In Fig. 2, we compare the BER performance of some of the

previously mentioned regular and irregular LDPC codes on a

perpendicular (magnetic) recording channel with

and

equalized to a partial response target of

. The

column and row weight distributions of the codes are given in

Table I. As we can see from this table, irregular LDPC codes,

namely, CS-1, CS-5 and CSRS-6, outperform the regular code

labeled CS-4 by at least 0.20 dB.

IV. CONCLUSION

Fig. 2. Performance of irregular LDPC codes on [1, 3, 3, 1]-equalized perpendicular magnetic recording channel.

of SPA, is used as a priori likelihoods for the next round of

applying the BCJR algorithm. The final hard decisions on the

variables are made after three iterations of the combined system

of the BCJR algorithm and SPA.

In Fig. 1, we compare the BER performance of regular and

irregular LDPC codes on a perpendicular (magnetic) recording

channel with

. The output of the channel is equal-

ized to a partial response target of

. The irreg-

ular LDPC codes are constructed by splitting columns and rows

of randomly generated regular LDPC codes. The weight dis-

tribution for columns and rows of these codes are decided by

trial-and-error with a computer program.The column and row

weight distributions of the codes are given in Table I. As we can

see from this figure, irregular LDPC codes, namely, CS-1 and

CS-5, perform just as well as the regular code labeled CS-3.

In addition, these irregular LDPC codes outperform the regular

code labeled CS-4. However, it should be noted that we have

constructed a regular (4352, 4096)-LDPC code (labeled as CS-0

in the figure) with three “1”s in a column that outperforms the

irregular codes (refer to Table I) by at least 0.25 dB.

In this paper, we have presented a systematic method to construct irregular LDPC codes with desired column and row weight distributions. In addition, we have analyzed their performance in perpendicular magnetic recording systems. It has been observed that, at a high code rate, the performance of irregular LDPC codes is comparable to that of regular LDPC codes. This observation agrees with the conclusion of Varnica and Kavcˇic´ that regular LDPC codes of high rate perform very close to theoretical limit of performance over ISI channels [8].
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallagher, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[3] N. Varnica and A. Kavcˇic´, “Optimized LDPC codes for partial response channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, 2002, p. 197.
[4] J. Colbourn and J. H. Dinitz, The Handbook of Combinatorial Designs. Boca Raton, FL: CRC, 1996.
[5] E. Contejean and H. Devie, “An efficient incremental algorithm for solving systems of linear diophantine equation,” Inf. Comput., vol. 113, no. 1, pp. 143–172, Aug. 1994.
[6] F. R. Kschischang, B. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[7] R. D. Cideciyan, E. Eleftheriou, and T. Mittelholzer, “Perpendicular and longitudinal recording: a signal-processing and coding perspective,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 38, pp. 1698–1704, July 2002.
[8] A. Kavcˇic´, X. Ma, and M. Mitzenmacher, “Binary intersymbol interference channels: Gallager codes, density evolution, and code performance bounds,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, submitted for publication.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:46:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

