IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 49, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2003

2141

Capacity-Approaching Bandwidth-Efficient Coded Modulation Schemes Based on Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
Jilei Hou, Student Member, IEEE, Paul H. Siegel, Fellow, IEEE, Laurence B. Milstein, Fellow, IEEE, and Henry D. Pfister, Student Member, IEEE

Abstract—We design multilevel coding (MLC) and bit-interleaved coded modulation (BICM) schemes based on low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. The analysis and optimization of the LDPC component codes for the MLC and BICM schemes are complicated because, in general, the equivalent binary-input component channels are not necessarily symmetric. To overcome this obstacle, we deploy two different approaches: one based on independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) channel adapters and the other based on coset codes. By incorporating i.i.d. channel adapters, we can force the symmetry of each binary-input component channel. By considering coset codes, we extend the concentration theorem based on previous work by Richardson et al. and Kavcˇic´ et al. We also discuss the relation between the systems based on the two approaches and show that they indeed have the same expected decoder behavior. Next, we jointly optimize the code rates and degree distribution pairs of the LDPC component codes for the MLC scheme. The optimized irregular LDPC codes at each level of MLC with multistage decoding (MSD) are able to perform well at signal-to-noise ratios (SNR) very close to the capacity of the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. We also show that the optimized BICM scheme can approach the parallel independent decoding (PID) capacity as closely as does the MLC/PID scheme. Simulations with very large codeword length verify the accuracy of the analytical results. Finally, we compare the simulated performance of these coded modulation schemes at finite codeword lengths, and consider the results from the perspective of a random coding exponent analysis.
Index Terms—Bit-interleaved coded modulation (BICM), coding exponent analysis, coset codes, density evolution, independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) channel adapters, irregular low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, LDPC codes, multilevel coding (MLC).
I. INTRODUCTION
M ULTILEVEL coding (MLC) [3], [4] and bit-interleaved coded modulation (BICM) [5], [6] are two well-known coded modulation schemes proposed to achieve both power and
Manuscript received June 3, 2002; revised April 29, 2003. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant NCR-9725568, by the Center for Wireless Communications at the University of California, San Diego, and by the UC Discovery Grant Program. The material in this paper was presented in part at the 2001 IEEE Information Theory Workshop, Cairns, Australia, September 2001 and the 2001 IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, San Antonio, TX, November 2001.
H. Hou and H. D. Pfister were with the University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0407 USA. They are now with Qualcomm, Inc., San Diego, CA 92121 USA (e-mail: jhou@qualcomm.com; hpfister@qualcomm.com).
P. H Siegel and L. B. Milstein are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0407 USA (e-mail: psiegel@ucsd.edu; milstein@ece.ucsd.edu).
Communicated by R. Koetter, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2003.815777

bandwidth efficiency. However, past research has primarily focused on the maximization of minimum Euclidean distance and asymptotic gains [3], [7]. Recently, the application of methods from information theory has helped to overcome the shortcomings of this traditional coding philosophy. It is proved in [4] that MLC together with multistage decoding (MSD) suffices to approach the channel capacity if the component code rates are properly chosen. Reference [4] also concludes that if we use Gray mapping and employ parallel independent decoding (PID) at each level separately, the information loss relative to the channel capacity is negligible if optimal component codes are used. Furthermore, it is recognized that Gray-mapped BICM provides mutual information very close to the channel capacity [6] and is actually a derivative of the MLC/PID scheme using a single binary code [4], [8]. Since the invention and refinement of turbo codes [9], the research community also realized the change in the paradigm of coding optimality, i.e., not to pay attention to only minimum distances. These discoveries allow us to draw one important conclusion: Using powerful component codes with properly designed rates for MLC or BICM enables us to get very close to channel capacity at a desired bandwidth efficiency.
On the other hand, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [10] have been shown to achieve low bit-error rates (BERs) at signal-to-noise ratios (SNR) very close to the Shannon limits on many interesting binary-input channels [11]–[13], and they outperform turbo codes when the block length of the code is large, even though the decoding complexity is less than that of turbo codes. Therefore, LDPC codes are considered to be among the most power-efficient binary codes for digital transmission.
In this paper, we explore the use of LDPC codes [10], [11] as the component codes of both MLC and BICM schemes designed to approach the channel capacity (also cf. [14], [15]). The BICM scheme we study refers to the scheme which does not iterate between the demodulator and the decoder.1 It is shown in [4], [8] that the concept of an equivalent binary-input component channel for each individual bit level is an effective tool for the analysis and design of these coded modulation schemes. Using this observation, we transform the design of LDPC codes for these coded modulation schemes into the design of LDPC codes for the equivalent binary-input component channels. Density evolution [1] has been proven to be a powerful tool for the anal-
1Some authors have studied iterative demodulation and decoding for the BICM and MLC schemes, e.g., [16]–[18].

0018-9448/03$17.00 © 2003 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:46:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2142

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 49, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2003

ysis and design of LDPC codes for various binary-input symmetric channels. However, the equivalent binary-input component channels of these coded modulation schemes are not necessarily symmetric. To address this problem, we use the idea of an independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) channel adapter, introduced in [15]. We show that the i.i.d. channel adapter and the equivalent binary-input channel can be considered together as a new “augmented channel” which is output symmetric, satisfying the symmetry condition in [1]. Therefore, the analysis and design of LDPC codes is greatly simplified. In [2], by considering LDPC coset codes instead of linear LDPC codes, concentration theorems are proven for LDPC coset code ensembles on channels with binary inputs and intersymbol interference (ISI) due to channel memory. In this paper, we apply the concept of LDPC coset codes to both MLC and BICM cases and provide a similar concentration theorem over almost all graphs, almost all input sequences (time-multiplex of coset code codewords), and almost all channel noise realizations. We also discuss the relation between the systems based on i.i.d. channel adapters and coset codes and show that these two systems have the same expected decoder behavior.
The outline of this paper is as follows. In Section II, we introduce the system model of MLC and BICM, including their encoder structures, decoding strategies, and related capacity results. In Section III, we first discuss the concept of an i.i.d. channel adapter and prove the corresponding properties. Next, we introduce the coset code scheme and present the coset code concentration theorem. In Section IV, we extend density evolution to evaluate the asymptotic performance of the LDPC component codes for the MLC and BICM schemes incorporating the i.i.d. channel adapter. We describe the optimization technique for both MLC (joint optimization of component code rates and code parameters) and BICM (only component code parameters) in this section, as well. In Section V, we present the optimization results for both Gray-mapped MLC and BICM schemes based on 4-PAM and 8-PSK modulation.2 We show that the optimized thresholds are very close to their associated capacities and we verify the validity of the code designs by very large block-size simulation results. Finally, we simulate the performance of these MLC and BICM schemes based on optimized LDPC codes at moderate block sizes and consider the results from the perspective of a random coding exponent analysis. Section VI concludes the paper.

Fig. 1. Encoder structure of the MLC scheme with LDPC component codes.

(AWGN) channel model, and we denote by and the channel

noise and the channel output, respectively. The spectral effi-

ciency (bits per symbol) of the scheme is equal to the sum

of the component code rates, i.e.,

.

Under the constraint of i.i.d equiprobable inputs, the capacity

of such a channel with the channel input and output is given

by3 [19]

(1)
B. Multistage Decoding (MSD) Applying the mutual information chain rule to (1) yields

This equation implies that the transmission of vector

can be separated into the parallel transmission

of over equivalent binary input channels, provided that

are known [4]. Accordingly, the component

codes are successively decoded based on the channel output

and the decisions from lower levels. This is the well-known

multistage decoding (MSD). The probability density function

(pdf)

for the equivalent channel

is given by

(2)

where

denotes the subset of all the symbols of

whose labels have the value in position ,

. The

equivalent channel is then specified by a set of pdfs [4]

II. SYSTEM MODEL

A. Multilevel Coding (MLC)

The encoder structure of the LDPC coded MLC scheme is

shown in Fig. 1. Each bit

is pro-

tected by a different binary LDPC code of length and rate

, where is the information word length in bits.

The mapping device maps a binary vector

to

a signal point

, where is the signal set and

.

We consider a discrete equivalent additive white Gaussian noise

(3)

At the receiver side, for each equivalent binary input channel

, an a posteriori probability (APP) module uses and the deci-

sions from lower levels to compute the log-APP-ratio (LAPPR)

for the coded bits, ,

. Applying Bayes’

rule, it can be shown that the LAPPR of is given by

2Since 4-PAM modulation represents one quadrature component in a 16-QAM modulation scheme, the results discussed here apply to 16-QAM directly. In general, the code design methods can easily be adapted to other high-order constellations.

(4)
3Throughout the paper, we denote the random variables corresponding to the transmitted and received symbols by capital letters.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:46:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HOU et al.: CAPACITY-APPROACHING BANDWIDTH-EFFICIENT CODED MODULATION SCHEMES

2143

Fig. 2. Gray-mapped 4-PAM modulation.

Fig. 3. Gray-mapped 8-PSK modulation.

Fig. 4. Capacity comparison for a Gray-mapped 4-PAM modulation on an AWGN channel.

and is used as the decoder input of the component code at level .

C. Parallel Independent Decoding (PID)

Since the , other, it can be shown that

are independent of each

The gap between

and

strongly depends on the mapping rule for the signal points. In

particular, [4], [6] showed that this gap is surprisingly small if

Gray mapping is employed. This result leads to a suboptimal

but quite effective decoding strategy, namely, the decoding of

the binary code at each level without using the decisions at

any other level. With this PID strategy, the system can also be

decomposed into an equivalent set of parallel binary-input

channels. Each equivalent binary-input channel is character-

ized by the pdf

Fig. 5. Capacity comparison for a Gray-mapped 8-PSK modulation on an AWGN channel.

(5)

where denotes the subset of all the symbols of whose

labels have the value

in position .

At the receiver side, the LAPPR of is calculated as

(6)
With the i.i.d equiprobable inputs constraint, we define the “PID capacity” [4]
(7)
We consider both Gray-mapped 4-PAM (Fig. 2) and 8-PSK (Fig. 3) modulations. In Fig. 4, capacity results are plotted for a Gray-mapped 4-PAM modulation on an AWGN channel. The

plot shows that the PID capacity suffers almost no degra-

dation compared to the channel capacity . For example, at

a spectral efficiency of 1 bit/symbol, the reliable transmission

SNRs corresponding to the channel capacity and the PID ca-

pacity are 2.11 and 2.27 dB, respectively. The curves also

suggest the optimal individual code rates at each level: at an

of 1 bit/symbol, if MSD is used, the optimal code rates for

each level are

; however, if PID is em-

ployed,

. Fig. 5 shows similar results

for a Gray-mapped 8-PSK modulation on an AWGN channel.

At an of 2 bits/symbol, the performance loss of the PID ca-

pacity (5.84 dB) compared to the channel capacity (5.77 dB) is

only 0.07 dB. Note that

since the Gray

labeling for and differs only by a rotation of 90 [4]. Fur-

thermore, if is known, the optimal decision region of is

independent of . It can be shown that the equivalent transmis-

sion model of when is known is the same as the equivalent

transmission model of when and are known. Therefore,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:46:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2144

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 49, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2003

we have4

. According to the

capacity results, the component code rate distribution at

2 bits/symbol is

for MSD

and

for PID.

D. Bit-Interleaved Coded Modulation (BICM)

A pragmatic but quite effective approach for bandwidth-ef-

ficient transmission is to use BICM which requires only one

encoder. The coded bits are interleaved bit-wise and grouped

into blocks of address bits

. The signal point

addressed by

is transmitted through the channel.

The decoding metric for each ,

is computed

the same way as for the MLC/PID scheme. Finally, the decoder

processes the deinterleaved metrics and outputs the decisions.

As pointed out in [4], the equivalent channel models for bits

,

are identical for BICM and MLC/PID.

The independence of the different bits for the BICM scheme,

which is inherent in the MLC/PID scheme, is based on the as-

sumption of an ideal bit interleaver. Note that the equivalent

channels for in the BICM scheme are used serially rather than

in parallel. Therefore, the MLC/PID capacity is the same as the

performance limit that can be achieved by the BICM scheme,

which is called the “BICM capacity” in [6].

determination of the noise thresholds [1] of LDPC code ensembles. The interpretation of the thresholds as predictors of actual decoder behavior and bounds on achievable performance relies upon a general “concentration theorem”—stating that, asymptotically in the block size, the decoder behavior for individual instances (of the code and the channel noise) concentrates around the average behavior of a cycle-free graph, which can be computed using the density evolution algorithm. The application of the concentration theorem and density evolution to the determination of the noise threshold of LDPC code ensembles is simplified by the symmetry of the channel /and decoding algorithm [1]. Specifically, under appropriate symmetry conditions, it suffices to consider the performance of the all-zeros codeword.
B. I.I.D. Channel Adapters
Our objective is to develop a similar algorithmic approach for the analysis of LDPC component codes for the MLC and BICM schemes. The application of density evolution and concentration theorem for the MLC and BICM schemes is complicated because, in general, the equivalent binary-input component channels are not necessarily symmetric where a binary-input channel is symmetric if
(8)

III. ANALYSIS OF LDPC COMPONENT CODES FOR THE MLC AND BICM SCHEMES

A. LDPC Codes

An LDPC code is a linear block code which is specified by

either its parity-check matrix

or its corresponding

generator matrix

satisfying

. An LDPC code

can be associated with a bipartite graph [1] which consists of

bit nodes,

check nodes, and a certain number of edges.

Each bit node represents a bit of the codeword. Each check node

denotes one parity check of the code. An edge exists between

the th check node and the th bit node if the entry

is .

An irregular LDPC code can be specified by either a degree dis-

tribution pair

[1], [11] or, equivalently, its corresponding

generating functions

and

where (resp., ) is the fraction of edges with bit (resp.,

check) degree and

(resp.,

) is the maximal bit

(resp., check) degree of any edge. A regular

LDPC code

has

,

. We define an LDPC code ensemble

as the set of all LDPC codes of length whose cor-

responding bipartite graphs satisfy the degree distribution pair

.

In [1], a numerical technique called density evolution is used

to analyze the performance of message-passing decoders on a

binary-input symmetric AWGN channel, enabling the accurate

with and as the input and output of the binary-input channel,

respectively [1]. Therefore, the decoding analysis of the all-

zeros codeword alone may not suffice to predict the average de-

coder behavior; in fact, for the specific Gray-labeled constella-

tion we considered in Section II, it is easy to see that this is the

case.

In the following, we introduce a new analytical tool: i.i.d.

channel adapters. We show that we can force the symmetry of

the equivalent binary-input component channels with the use of

i.i.d. channel adapters. Thus, the analysis and design of binary

LDPC codes are greatly simplified.

We use the MLC/PID scheme as an example, and the ex-

tensions to the MLC/MSD and BICM schemes are straightfor-

ward. Fig. 6 shows an MLC/PID scheme with an i.i.d. channel

adapter on each equivalent binary-input component channel.

Each i.i.d. channel adapter has three modules. The first one is

an i.i.d. source which generates binary symbol

,

according to an i.i.d. equiprobable dis-

tribution. The second one is a - adder and performs the

following operation:

, where is the LDPC-coded

bit. The last module is a sign adjuster and functions as follows:

, which means

if

and

if

, where is the APP module output and

is the LDPC decoder input. We can see that the last module

undo-es the effect of the second module. Therefore, each equiva-

lent binary-input channel ,

is transformed

into a new binary-input channel with input and output . We

have the following theorem.

Theorem 1: All of the new augmented binary-input channels as previously defined satisfy the symmetry condition. That is,

4Actually, it can be proven that both I(C ; Y jC ) and I(C ; Y jC ; C ) are equal to the uniform average of the capacities of two equivalent binary phaseshift keying (BPSK) modulations.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:46:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HOU et al.: CAPACITY-APPROACHING BANDWIDTH-EFFICIENT CODED MODULATION SCHEMES

2145

Fig. 6. The MLC/PID scheme with an i.i.d. channel adapter on each equivalent binary-input channel.

Fig. 7. The MLC/MSD scheme with an i.i.d. channel adapter on each equivalent binary-input channel.

Fig. 8. The BICM scheme with an i.i.d. channel adapter.

Proof: It is easy to see that,

, both

and are i.i.d. equiprobable random variables. Noticing that

and are independent, we have

Similarly, we have Then Theorem 1 follows directly.

We show the MLC/MSD and BICM block diagrams with i.i.d. channel adapters in Figs. 7 and 8, respectively. By similar arguments as in Theorem 1, it can be proven that each of the new augmented binary-input channels shown in Figs. 7 and 8 is symmetric, as well.
Therefore, for any of the new augmented binary-input outputsymmetric component channels, if we use an LDPC code for transmission through this channel, by [1, Lemma 1], the decoding (bit or block) error probability is independent of any particular codeword. Thus, the threshold analysis and code design of LDPC codes on these kinds of channels are greatly simplified as we need only consider the all-zeros codeword. Furthermore, by [1, Theorem 2], the average behavior of individual instances (of the code and of the noise) concentrate around the expected behavior when the codeword length gets sufficiently large.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:46:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2146

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 49, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2003

Theorem 2: The capacity of the new augmented binary-input

channel formed by adding an i.i.d. channel adapter to the orig-

inal equivalent binary-input component channel is equal to the

mutual information of the original binary-input channel with

i.i.d. equiprobable input distribution.

Proof: By Theorem 1, the new augmented channel with

input and output is output symmetric, and, therefore, the ca-

pacity of this new channel can be achieved by an i.i.d. equiprob-

able input distribution [20]. That is, the capacity of the new

channel is equal to the average of the mutual information be-

tween channel input

and output , where

[20]. However, no matter which value ( or ) the channel input

takes, the original binary-input channel sees i.i.d. equiprob-

able inputs because of the i.i.d. channel adapter, therefore lim-

iting the mutual information between

and , where

, to the i.i.d. mutual information of the original binary-

input channel. Therefore, the capacity of the new augmented

binary-input channel equals the i.i.d. mutual information of the

original binary-input channel.

By Theorem 2, if we can approach the capacity of the new augmented binary-input channel with the i.i.d. channel adapters, we are able to approach the i.i.d. channel capacity (see (1)) by the MLC/MSD scheme and approach the PID capacity (see (7)) by the MLC/PID scheme or the BICM scheme.
In a system with i.i.d. channel adapters, on each new augmented binary-input channel, the expected decoder behavior (BER) is effectively averaged over all possible LDPC graphs and all possible channel realizations. In particular, each channel realization includes one randomly chosen binary vector—length- for MLC and length- for BICM—chosen according to an i.i.d. equiprobable distribution and one channel noise realization. Therefore, the average of the expected behavior over the channel is an average with respect to both the i.i.d. binary vector and the channel noise.

C. LDPC Coset Codes and Concentration Theorem

information vector, the codeword is generated as
(9) where represents - addition and is the codeword of the associated linear code. The codeword of the coset code satisfies
(10)
where

is the syndrome of the corresponding coset leader and

. The coset code is linear if and only if

.

Since an LDPC code is a linear block code, an LDPC coset code

obeys this definition.

By decoder symmetry [1], it can be proven that the following

two ways of decoding an LDPC coset code are identical. One

way is to include the syndrome of the coset leader into the

iterative message-passing decoding algorithm as described in

[2], i.e., the message passed from check node to bit node

is determined by

where is the message passed from bit node to check

node . When the decoder makes a final decision on , after

subtracting , the decoder recovers the information sequence

according to (9). The other way is similar to the decoding

algorithm described in [20] (the example discussed there is

for a binary-symmetric channel (BSC)), where we remove

the coset leader first and then perform the message-passing

decoding on its associated linear LDPC code. That is, for each

bit position of a codeword,

, assuming that

is the LAPPR value of the corresponding bit position, we

calculate

, where is the th component of

coset leader . Then we use as the input to the associated

linear LDPC decoder, and the expression

In Section III-B, by incorporating i.i.d. channel adapters, we

showed that the new binary-input augmented channels are sym-

metric. Therefore, the analysis of LDPC codes is simplified. In

this section, we keep the channel unchanged. Instead, by con-

sidering a slightly broader class of codes—coset codes—we are

able to show that if the input sequence has an i.i.d. equiprob-

able distribution, for almost all graphs and almost all input se-

quences, the decoder performance over each equivalent binary-

input channel of the MLC and BICM schemes concentrates

around its expected behavior. The outline of the proof is very

similar to [1], [2], which is to form a martingale process by re-

vealing information one step at a time (of the graph ensemble,

the input sequences, and the channel noise realizations). If the

impact of the information revealing at one step is restricted to

a finite value independent of , a tight concentration bound re-

sults from the Azuma inequality [21].

1) LDPC Coset Codes and Decoding: Following the defini-

tion of [20], we specify a coset code by (or ) and a fixed but

arbitrary coset leader

. If is an

is used as the basis for the message passing from check nodes

to bit nodes. Finally, we recover from the final decision of the

decoder.

For the MLC scheme, we consider one LDPC coset code at

each level. If

is a codeword of a coset code at level , we define an input se-

quence of the MLC scheme as the time multiplex of code-

words

, i.e.,

Then, the mapper output is defined as

where

is assigned to

,

according to a given mapping rule. We call the symbol se-

quence, which is the input to the noisy channel.

For the BICM scheme, if is a codeword of an LDPC

coset code, we define

to be the

interleaver output. Then, the symbol sequence is given by

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:46:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HOU et al.: CAPACITY-APPROACHING BANDWIDTH-EFFICIENT CODED MODULATION SCHEMES

2147

Fig. 9. The modified directed neighborhood of depth 2 of the directed edge ~e = (V ; C ).

where

(we assume that divides ),

is mapped to

.

2) Concentration Theorem: First, we consider a given graph

(representing the LDPC code at level ) and a given input

sequence ( is the time multiplex of coset codewords

). At level , let be an arbitrary codeword of .

The coset-defining vector then is given by

. This

means that different (actually, any) codewords of can result in

the same coset codeword by using different coset-defining vec-

tors. In the following lemma, we will show that for a given ,

under the same (thereby, the same ), the number of errors

committed by the decoder is independent of .

Lemma 1: Let be the bipartite graph representing a given

binary linear LDPC code at level of the MLC scheme. Consider

the belief propagation decoding algorithm described in [10], [1]

which satisfies the decoder symmetry (including both bit node

symmetry and check node symmetry) defined in [1]. Let and

be two arbitrary linear codewords of . Assume that , the

input sequence of the MLC scheme, is the time multiplex of

coset codewords , , ,

. If

,

the number of decoding errors is exactly the same, irrespective

of whether or is the transmitted codeword.

The proof of Lemma 1 is given in Appendix A. From Lem-

ma 1, we conclude that the number of errors committed by

the decoder is a function of only graphs, input sequences, and

channel noise realizations.

The proof of the concentration theorem is for the MLC/PID

scheme, but it can be extended to the MLC/MSD and BICM

schemes in a very similar manner. For the message-passing de-

coder of each LDPC component code, we consider the first de-

coding approach described in Section III-C1. Similar to [1], to

simplify the subsequent notation, we assume that the number of

iterations that the decoder performs is denoted as . All subse-

quent notations refer to iteration , and we frequently omit the

index .

Here, we limit our consideration to regular LDPC codes.5

Reference [1] introduced the idea of a directed neighborhood

of depth

which consists of an edge

that connects a bit node and a check node , and all nodes

and edges traversed by paths of length at most ending at ,

where is the message-passing iteration number. Similar to [2],

we modify the directed neighborhood for the MLC/PID scheme.

The modified directed neighborhood of depth-

,

shown in Fig. 9, consists of the two nodes and , the edge

, all nodes and edges traversed by paths of length at most

ending at , one channel node , and its associated binary

symbols

. In the MLC/PID scheme, the

binary symbols

are part of the input se-

quence with corresponding to the coded bit from the com-

ponent code at level . The vector

maps

to a channel symbol associated with the channel node that

contributes to the message passing along edge . A modified di-

rected neighborhood of depth can be obtained by branching

out the neighborhood of depth .

Since the transmitted binary symbols associated with the

channel nodes influence the statistics of the messages passed

in the modified directed neighborhood, we must distinguish

between different neighborhoods by different types. We specify

each type of neighborhood by the transmitted binary symbols

on its associated channel nodes. For a

regular LDPC

code, the total number of the channel nodes in a modified

directed neighborhood of depth is given by

(11)

We can arrange the binary symbols of the channel nodes in a modified directed neighborhood into a binary vector

(12)

and the length of is defined as

. Since each

type of neighborhood is specified by a vector , the number of

possible modified directed neighborhood types of depth is

. As in [1], we say that the modified directed neighbor-

hood is tree-like if all nodes in the neighborhood are distinct;

otherwise, we say that it is not tree-like. The inequality proved

in [1] applies directly here

is not tree-like

(13)

where is a constant that may depend on

and , but is

independent of .

Let be the number of incorrect messages passed along

edge . Let be the random variable which has a value of

if is tree-like and otherwise. Given a modified directed

neighborhood , we define

5The extension of the proof to irregular LDPC codes is straightforward.

(14)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:46:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2148

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 49, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2003

as the expected number of incorrect messages passed along

with a tree-like neighborhood of depth at the th iteration

when is the neighborhood type.

We define the probability

as the probability

that a modified directed neighborhood is of type when the

input sequence of the MLC scheme is , is tree-like, and the

associated bipartite graph is chosen randomly from all possible

graphs of the code ensemble

.

Therefore, we can define the expected number of incorrect

messages passed along edge with a tree-like neighborhood

of depth after the th iteration when an input sequence is

transmitted as

the MLC/PID scheme. Then, for the same Theorem 3, we have

and as in

Proof: If and satisfy an i.i.d. equiprobable distribution, the resulting input sequence of the MLC/PID scheme is a sequence of i.i.d. equiprobable random binary symbols. Therefore, Theorem 3 applies directly.
It follows from the corollary that (for sufficiently large ) the decoding behavior of almost all input sequences converges to the expected value . Therefore, if we can find the maximum channel noise standard deviation, namely, the threshold such that goes to zero, almost all input sequences can transmit reliably up to the threshold value, but they have an error probability bounded away from zero above the threshold value.

(15) where

since is independent of if the type is known.

If all possible

modified directed neighborhood types

are equally likely, we call this equiprob-

able expected value of error , i.e.,

(16)

In the following, we present the concentration theorem based on coset codes and the proof is shown in Appendix B.

Theorem 3: Define an

binary random vector

where

are i.i.d.

equiprobable binary random variables. We assume that is the

input sequence of the MLC scheme. At level of the MLC/PID

scheme, over the probability space of all graphs

, all

realizations of , and all channel noise realizations, let be the

random variable that denotes the number of incorrect messages

among all bit-to-check node messages passed at iteration .

Then, for any , there exist positive numbers and (they

may depend on , , and , but not on ), such that if

,

we have

where is given by (16) and denotes level in the MLC scheme.

Corollary: Let

be the informa-

tion vector with each binary symbol i.i.d. equiprobable. Let

be an LDPC coset code for which is a code

graph in the LDPC code ensemble

and is a

coset-defining binary vector with each binary symbol satisfying

an i.i.d. equiprobable distribution. Define to be the random

variable that denotes the number of incorrect messages among

all

bit-to-check node messages passed at iteration ,

assuming

is the component code used at level of

D. Relation Between These Two Systems
We can see that the LDPC linear code system with i.i.d. channel adapters and the LDPC coset code system with the second decoding approach are virtually the same system. The critical difference between these two systems is that in the first system, we take the i.i.d. binary vector as a channel-adapting vector and, therefore, as part of the new augmented channel; however, in the second system, we consider the i.i.d. binary vector to be a time multiplex of coset-defining vectors and, therefore, as part of the LDPC coset codes.
In the first system, each codeword belongs to a linear code, and the averaged (over the channel) decoder behavior conditioned on a particular codeword is the same for each possible codeword since the new augmented binary-input channels are symmetric.
In the second system, one codeword is a codeword of a coset code, which is the - sum of a codeword of its associated linear code and a coset-defining vector, and the averaged (over the channel) decoder behavior conditioned on a particular codeword may be different from one codeword to another, since the equivalent binary-input channels are not necessarily symmetric. Therefore, a coset code concentration theorem is given for almost all possible input sequences (or its related coset codewords).
Nevertheless, the expected decoder behavior of the two systems is the same, since they have the same configuration (encoder and decoder structure) and the expectations are taken over the same probability space, i.e., over all possible LDPC graphs, over all possible i.i.d. binary vectors (referring to channel-adapting vectors in the first system and referring to coset-defining vectors in the second system), and over all possible noise realizations.
Next, we will determine the expected decoder behavior for the system with i.i.d. channel adapters by considering only the all-zeros codeword.
IV. DENSITY EVOLUTION AND CODE OPTIMIZATION
A. Density Evolution
Here, we briefly describe the manner in which we extend density evolution to the MLC and BICM schemes based on the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:46:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HOU et al.: CAPACITY-APPROACHING BANDWIDTH-EFFICIENT CODED MODULATION SCHEMES

2149

i.i.d. channel adapters. We consider transmitting the all-zeros

codeword on each augmented binary-input component channel.

First, we consider the Gray-mapped MLC/MSD scheme on an

AWGN channel. The conditional pdf

is the

Gaussian density function

if is real-valued (17)
if is complex-valued

where is the variance of the channel noise and

.

Note that

are the inputs to the mapping de-

vice. At level , assuming we know

, for any given

, from the relation between and

is LAPPR value of , given and

, we can cal-

culate the conditional pdf

. Since

are variables satisfying i.i.d. equiprobable dis-

tributions, all the signal points in the constellation are equally

likely to be transmitted. Therefore,

(18)

Then, is used as the initial density of the observed LAPPRs

of the augmented binary-input component channels in the den-

sity evolution program. Following [11], for a specified noise

standard deviation , at each level of the MLC/MSD scheme,

, we use density evolution to track the frac-

tion of incorrect messages

after decoding iterations on

a cycle-free graph corresponding to a specified degree distribu-

tion pair

. We let denote the density of the messages

passed from the bit nodes to the check nodes after iterations.

The density evolution can be described by

where

denotes convolution, and and are operators defined in

[11, eqs. (5) and (6)], respectively. For each level , we define

the corresponding noise threshold

to be the supremum of

the for which

.

Similarly, for the MLC/PID scheme, we have

served LAPPRs is the average of obtained in the MLC/PID

scheme, i.e.,

.

B. Code Optimization

In general, we need to optimize the LDPC component codes

so that the MLC scheme can approach the channel capacity. If

we know that the LDPC codes can achieve capacity for each

equivalent component channel, we can fix the component code

rates to the required rates computed based on mutual informa-

tion chain rule and simply optimize the thresholds of the com-

ponent code rates. However, for a fixed maximal bit (or check)

degree, no one had proved that LDPC codes can get arbitrarily

close to the capacity of these equivalent channels. Therefore,

in this work, to design an optimal MLC coding scheme with

LDPC codes as component codes, we perform joint optimiza-

tion of both the code rates and the degree distributions of the

LDPC component codes for all the levels. If the target system

spectral efficiency is and the code rate of the LDPC code

is

, we have

. Since

the optimal design of MLC schemes requires that the component

codes at each level have equal performance [4], under the con-

straint imposed by , we should optimize both the code rates

and the degree distributions of the LDPC component codes in

such a way that all the LDPC component codes have the same

noise thresholds.

For a 4-PAM modulation, the joint optimization is as follows.

Under the constraint of

1 bit/symbol, we randomly pick a

combination of

. For this combination of

we use a nonlinear optimization technique, called differen-

tial evolution [22], to search for the optimal degree distribution

pair

and its corresponding noise threshold

for the

LDPC code at each level. If the optimized LDPC codes at

both levels have different noise thresholds, we make the code

rate adjustments continuously to minimize the difference of the

noise thresholds of the LDPC codes at both levels. If the LDPC

codes at both levels have the same threshold value, we stop the

search algorithm and claim that we have found both the optimal

code rates and the degree distribution pairs of the LDPC codes at

both levels for the MLC scheme. This optimization method ap-

plies to both the MLC/MSD scheme and the MLC/PID scheme.

For the BICM scheme, the rate of the LDPC code is pre-

determined by the system spectral efficiency. In the case of

4-PAM modulation, if is 1 bit/symbol, the LDPC code rate

. Then, we just need to combine the differen-

tial evolution and density evolution to find a degree distribution

pair which has the best threshold.

V. NUMERICAL RESULTS

A. Thresholds and Very Large Block-Size Simulation Results

(19)
Recall that the MLC/PID scheme and the BICM scheme have the same equivalent channel models for each level. Therefore, for the BICM scheme, the initial density function of the ob-

By applying the optimization technique discussed above, we optimize both the code rates and degree distributions of the LDPC component codes for the MLC and BICM schemes. In the following, we primarily focus on the discussion of the optimization results for the 4-PAM modulation case, but show some optimization results for the 8-PSK modulation as well.
1) Gray-Mapped 4-PAM: In the case of 4-PAM modulation, the target is 1 bit/symbol. For the MLC scheme,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:46:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2150

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 49, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2003

TABLE I
i OPTIMIZED RESULTS FOR THE EQUIVALENT CHANNEL = 0, 1 OF THE R GRAY-MAPPED MLC/MSD SCHEME (4-PAM MODULATION), = 1
BIT/SYMBOL, AND THE CHANNEL CAPACITY IS 2.11 dB

TABLE II
i OPTIMIZED RESULTS FOR THE EQUIVALENT CHANNEL = 0, 1 OF THE R GRAY-MAPPED MLC/PID SCHEME (4-PAM MODULATION), = 1
BIT/SYMBOL, AND THE PID CAPACITY IS 2.27 dB

the optimized code rates of the two component LDPC codes

are very close to the capacity results shown in Section II.

For the MLC/MSD scheme, the joint optimization produces

slightly different code rate distributions for different : for

, the code rates of and are

and

and for

, and , the code rates are

and .

Similarly, for the MLC/PID scheme, the optimized code rate

combinations of and are

and

, respectively.

For the BICM scheme, we simply set the LDPC component

code rate to .

Table I lists the optimized results for the MLC/MSD scheme

with constraints of

and . For each

,

the threshold

(decibels) of the optimized degree

distribution pair is given. Note that the channel capacity is

2.11 dB. The degree distribution pairs of code and

with

both have threshold of 2.18 dB, which is

only 0.07 dB away from the channel capacity. By comparison,

the quasi-regular [13] rate-

LDPC code

and rate-

LDPC code

have much worse

thresholds of 3.29 and 3.32 dB, which are 1.18 and 1.21 dB

away from the channel capacity, respectively.

For the MLC/PID scheme, we list in Table II the optimized

results for and with

and . Note

that the PID capacity is 2.27 dB. The thresholds of the optimized

degree distribution pairs are very close to the PID capacity. The

degree distribution pairs of code and with

have thresholds of 2.35 and 2.32 dB,6 which are only 0.082 and

0.054 dB away from the PID capacity, respectively. By compar-

ison, the quasi-regular rate-

LDPC code and

rate-

LDPC code have thresholds of 3.44 and

3.35 dB, respectively.

Fig. 10 compares the simulation results for the Gray-mapped

4-PAM MLC/MSD scheme and the MLC/PID scheme on an

AWGN channel. The simulation refers to the i.i.d. channel

adapter system. In the implementation of the i.i.d. channel

adapters, for each binary-input component channel, we used

two identical random number generators (RNG) yielding

an i.i.d. equiprobable distribution at both the transmitter

and receiver sides. We set the same initial seed to each

pair of the RNGs. Therefore, each pair of RNGs generate

the same random sequence.7 The codeword length of each

component code is . For the MLC/MSD scheme, we

use the irregular LDPC codes optimized for the MLC/MSD

scheme with

on and in one case, and the

quasi-regular LDPC codes in another case. For the MLC/PID

scheme, we use the irregular LDPC codes optimized for the

6The slight difference between the thresholds is due to the step size used for the code rate adjustment.
7This method makes the scheme realizable in practical systems.

Fig. 10. Simulation of Gray-mapped MLC/MSD and MLC/PID schemes with 4-PAM modulation on an AWGN channel. The codeword length is 10 .

MLC/PID scheme with

on and in one

case, and the quasi-regular LDPC codes in another case.

However, the component code rates of the MLC/MSD scheme

are slightly different from the

MLC/PID scheme

. Each BER curve

represents one component code. The calculated thresholds for

all the component codes are shown, as well as the channel

capacity and the PID capacity. We observe that the calculated

thresholds accurately predict the performance of both the

MLC/MSD and the MLC/PID schemes with long LDPC com-

ponent codes: for the quasi-regular (resp., optimized irregular)

LDPC codes, the

values at which the BERs are below

are within 0.04 dB (resp., 0.06 dB) of their respective

thresholds. The simulation curves of the optimized irregular

LDPC codes for the MLC/MSD scheme are better than the PID

capacity and very close to the channel capacity as predicted by

the threshold results: both codes achieve BERs of

less

than 0.14 dB away from the channel capacity. The optimized

irregular LDPC codes have a substantial gain ( 1 dB) over the

quasi-regular LDPC codes in both the threshold and simulation

results. Also, the MLC/MSD scheme performs slightly better

than the MLC/PID scheme for both regular and irregular codes,

which is consistent with the threshold results as well.

The optimized results for the BICM scheme are shown in

Table III. The thresholds of these degree distribution pairs are

very close to the PID capacity (about 0.07 dB gap at

). The threshold of the regular rate-

LDPC code is

3.41 dB, more than 1 dB worse than the PID capacity. In Fig. 11,

we compare the simulation results for the Gray-mapped BICM

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:46:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HOU et al.: CAPACITY-APPROACHING BANDWIDTH-EFFICIENT CODED MODULATION SCHEMES

2151

TABLE III
OPTIMIZED RESULTS FOR THE GRAY-MAPPED BICM SCHEME (4-PAM MODULATION), R = 1 BIT/SYMBOL, r = 1=2, AND THE
PID CAPACITY IS 2.27 dB

Fig. 12. Random coding exponent analysis for coded Gray-mapped 4-PAM transmission of 1 bit/symbol.

B. Coding Exponent Analysis and Moderate Blocksize Simulations

Fig. 11. Simulation of Gray-mapped MLC/PID and BICM schemes with 4-PAM modulation on an AWGN channel. The codeword length is 10 .

scheme and the MLC/PID scheme with i.i.d. channel adapters

on an AWGN channel. The codeword length of each component

code is as well. For the BICM scheme, we use both the

irregular LDPC code from Table III with

and the

regular

LDPC code. For the MLC/PID scheme, we use the

codes from Fig. 10. Similar to the case of the MLC/MSD and the

MLC/PID schemes, for the BICM scheme, the simulated BER

curves are very close to the threshold results. It is interesting that

in both the regular and irregular cases, the BICM scheme can

perform as well as the MLC/PID scheme; however, the decoding

complexity and delay are only roughly half that of the MLC/PID

scheme.

2) Gray-Mapped 8-PSK: For the Gray-mapped 8-PSK

modulation, the target is 2 bits/symbol. First, we consider

the MLC/MSD scheme. As we mentioned in Section II, the

equivalent transmission model of if is known is the same

as the equivalent transmission model of if and are

known, therefore,

, where is given by (18). Hence,

we only need to optimize the degree distribution pairs for

the equivalent binary-input channels and . The optimized

component code rates are

for

, in agreement with the results predicted by the

capacity calculation. The gap between the thresholds of the

optimized degree distribution pairs for level and and the

minimum SNR for reliable transmission corresponding to the

PID capacity is only about 0.07 dB.

Similarly, the optimized degree distribution pairs for the

MLC/PID scheme and the BICM scheme have thresholds very

close to the PID capacity, as well.

As shown in Figs. 10 and 11, the thresholds predict the

asymptotic performance as the block length of the component

LDPC codes approaches infinity. We would also like to analyt-

ically compare these power- and bandwidth-efficient schemes

based on LDPC codes with a finite block size. However, there

are very few accurate analytical tools for analyzing LDPC code

performance at finite length. Therefore, we first compare these

schemes by the well-known random coding bound technique

[4], [20] which could provide a relation between the codeword

length and the required SNR (decibels) for a given word

error probability . For the MLC scheme, the analysis can

even give the relation between and component code rate

distributions

. Even though the

comparison is based on the average performance of a random

block code ensemble, the analysis is still a basis for us to inter-

pret the simulation results based on specific LDPC codes. By

the method described in [4], we carry out the coding exponent

analysis for the Gray-mapped 4-PAM transmission of

1

bit/symbol on an AWGN channel. The allowable word error

probability is

. For all these schemes, the required

(decibels) versus codeword length is calculated,

and the results are shown in Fig. 12. Note that for both the

MLC/MSD and the MLC/PID schemes, the codeword lengths

of binary component codes and of the Euclidean space signal

points are equal. For the BICM scheme, BICM refers to the

case where the codeword length means the length of binary

component code, and BICM refers to the case where means

the length of Euclidean space signal points. Note that for the

same , it is fair to compare the BICM and the MLC schemes

since they have the same (number of information bits) delay.

BICM has only half of the delay of MLC and we also show its

curve for reference purposes. The plot shows that as codeword

length goes to infinity, BICM , BICM , and MLC/PID all

approach the PID capacity, and the MLC/MSD gets very close

to the channel capacity. For the MLC/MSD and MLC/PID

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:46:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2152

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 49, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2003

Fig. 13. Random coding exponent analysis for the MLC/MSD and MLC/PID
schemes: component code rate distribution versus codeword length n.

Fig. 14. Simulation of the Gray-mapped 4-PAM modulated MLC/MSD and MLC/PID schemes on an AWGN channel. The codeword length is 10 .

schemes, we plot in Fig. 13 the relation between and .

The coding exponent analysis shows that the component code

rate distributions for very large block size are virtually the same

as those derived by the capacity calculation and those optimized

using LDPC component codes. However, the analysis also sug-

gests that for small to moderate block size, the component-

code rate distributions are slightly different. Next, we will use

Figs. 12 and 13 to explain some finite block-size simulation re-

sults based on LDPC component codes.

We construct optimized irregular LDPC codes with

for both the MLC/MSD and MLC/PID schemes. The com-

ponent codeword length is . Fig. 14 compares the simulation

performance of these two schemes. For comparison, we also plot

the simulation results based on quasi-regular LDPC component

codes. The results show that the optimized LDPC codes have ex-

cellent performance. In general, for each equivalent component

channel, the irregular LDPC codes outperform the quasi-regular

LDPC codes by about 0.7 at a BER of . As shown in the

threshold results, the simulation performance of the MLC/MSD

scheme is better than that of the MLC/PID scheme. For the

MLC/MSD scheme, the component code on level

per-

forms slightly worse than the code on level

, which sug-

gests that the code rates optimized by density evolution need to

be adjusted for a more balanced performance at finite block size

and is consistent with the conclusion drawn from the coding ex-

ponent analysis. The component code rates of the MLC/MSD

scheme used in the simulation are

, as

derived from the joint optimization results based on LDPC com-

ponent codes. However, the coding exponent analysis (Fig. 13)

shows that at a block size of , a better choice of code rates is

.

In Fig. 15, we compare the MLC/PID scheme and the BICM

scheme based on optimized irregular LDPC codes with

. For the MLC/PID scheme, the component codeword length

is . For the BICM scheme, the component codeword lengths

are and

. The simulated curves based on regular

Fig. 15. Simulation of the Gray-mapped 4-PAM modulated MLC/PID and BICM schemes on an AWGN channel.

LDPC codes are shown as well. By the coding exponent anal-

ysis, the performance of BICM and MLC/PID is essentially

the same. The simulation results shows a very similar trend: the

length- BICM scheme has virtually the same performance

as the MLC/PID scheme while having only about half the delay

and decoding complexity. On the other hand, the length-

BICM scheme, which has roughly the same delay and decoding

complexity as the MLC/PID scheme, performs better than the

MLC/PID scheme (about 0.1-dB gain at a BER of ). A

similar conclusion can also be reached from the coding expo-

nent analysis plot (see Fig. 12).

Another interesting phenomenon reflected in Fig. 12 is that

the BICM curve and the MLC/MSD curve cross around code-

word length

, which suggests that for codeword

length larger than , MLC/MSD should be better than BICM ;

while, for smaller codeword length, BICM should be more fa-

vorable. At

, these two schemes should be comparable

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:46:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HOU et al.: CAPACITY-APPROACHING BANDWIDTH-EFFICIENT CODED MODULATION SCHEMES

2153

as was found in the simulation of MLC/MSD and BICM performance, shown in Figs. 14 and 15.
In the moderate block size simulation discussed here, we simulate the MLC and BICM schemes in two ways: only using linear LDPC codes and using linear LDPC codes with i.i.d. channel adapters. In the first approach, we construct the generator matrix and encode the information bits with an i.i.d. equiprobable distribution. In the second approach, it suffices to just transmit the all-zeros codeword. The results show that within the precision of the Monte Carlo simulation, these two approaches have virtually the same performance. For a very large block size simulation, it is difficult to construct the generator matrix, therefore, we do not have simulation results for the first scheme in this situation. However, we conjecture that as the block size goes to infinity, these two approaches should have the same asymptotic performance as well. Therefore, at least for large block size, we can consider the thresholds of the LDPC codes in the MLC and BICM schemes with i.i.d. channel adapters as good approximations to the thresholds of the linear LDPC codes in the MLC and BICM schemes without i.i.d. channel adapters.

distributions and the degree distribution pairs of the MLC/MSD scheme, we showed that both the thresholds and simulation results of the optimized LDPC coded system are very close to the i.i.d. channel capacity. We also showed that the optimized BICM scheme can perform as well as the optimized MLC/PID scheme and that both approach the PID capacity. We compared the simulated performance of these schemes at moderate block sizes, and some conclusions drawn from the simulation were supported by a random coding exponent analysis. At small to moderate block size, BICM seems to be the more attractive alternative, achieving a better balance among complexity, delay, and performance.

APPENDIX A PROOF OF LEMMA 1

Let

be a noisy channel output realization and

be its associated LAPPR vector, where is

the LAPPR value computed based on . Consider the second

decoding approach described in Section III-A1. If we assume

that is the coset-defining vector, we have8

.

Similarly, we have

. We define

VI. CONCLUSION

We designed power- and bandwidth-efficient MLC and BICM schemes for the AWGN channel with binary LDPC component codes. For the decoding of the MLC scheme, we considered both MSD and PID strategies. The design of LDPC codes for these coded modulation schemes essentially was transformed into the design of LDPC codes for the equivalent binary-input component channels. One difficulty encountered in applying the concentration theorem and density evolution technique in the performance analysis of LDPC codes over these equivalent binary-input channels is that these channels are not necessarily output symmetric. To solve this problem, we took two different approaches: one based on i.i.d. channel adapters and the other based on coset codes. We proved that the augmented binary-input channel obtained by incorporating an i.i.d. channel adapter is output symmetric. Thus, the analysis and design of LDPC codes is greatly simplified in this case since it suffices to carry out the analysis for only the all-zeros codeword. Alternatively, by considering LDPC coset codes, we proved that the decoder behavior concentrates around its expected behavior, which corresponds to the average performance of a cycle-free graph with an i.i.d. equiprobable channel input distribution. After discussing the relation between these two approaches, we showed that these two systems indeed have the same expected behavior. Furthermore, based on simulation results, we conjecture that the original system, without either coset codes or i.i.d. channel adapters, has the same expected decoder behavior as the block size goes to infinity as does either of the alternative approaches.
We extended the density evolution technique to determine the noise thresholds of LDPC component codes for both MLC and BICM schemes incorporating i.i.d. channel adapters. It was shown that the computed thresholds accurately predicted the simulation performance of the associated LDPC codes for large block sizes. By joint optimization of the component code rate

Therefore, we have

By definition, because and are two codewords of , is

a codeword of as well. Thus,

, where

denotes a bit node and denotes a check node. Let denote the message sent from to at iteration , assuming

is the decoder input, and let

denote the message sent

from to at iteration , assuming is the decoder input.

From the bit node symmetry, at

Assume at iteration that we have

(20)

Since we have

, from the check node symmetry,

(21)

Furthermore, from the bit node symmetry, it follows that at iteration

Thus, by induction, at any iteration , (20) and (21) hold. There-

fore,

, where and are decoder decisions on

and , respectively. That is, both decoders commit exactly

the same number of errors.

0 8o = ( 1) . In the sequel of the proof, we will use the same notation
for the other variables.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:46:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2154

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 49, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2003

We can write

APPENDIX B PROOF OF THEOREM 3

Since Therefore, we get

, we have . If

(23) , we have

(22)

where

is averaged over all graphs, all input sequences,

and all channel realizations. This inequality means that we

can separate the proof into two parts. First, we show that the

random variable

is concentrated around its expected

value

, and, second, we prove the convergence of

to .

We start with the second term on the right-hand side of (22).

Let

, denote the expected number of incor-

rect messages passed along edge ; then by linearity of expec-

tation

We have where9

(24)

Now we consider the first term on the right-hand side of

(22). Recall that denotes the number of incorrect messages

among all bit-to-check node messages passed in the th it-

eration for a

, where is a graph in the ensemble

, is an input sequence, and is a channel noise

vector. Similar to [1], we define partial equalities on

based on information revealing. Define

.

Let ,

be a sequence of equivalence relations,

where the first steps of partial equivalence correspond to

edge revealing on the graph as specified in [1], the next

steps correspond to symbol revealing of the input sequence, and

the last steps correspond to the revealing of the channel re-

alizations which is also described in [1]. More specifically, we

have

if and only if the infor-

mation revealed in the first steps for both

and

is the same. By the definition,

means

.

Next, we define a Doob’s martingale process , , ,

by

(25)

where represents the expected number of incorrect messages

conditioned on the information revealed in the first steps,

assuming that the information revealed is consistent with

, which implies10

and

.

Applying Azuma’s inequality as in [1], [21] we have

where is the expectation over all input sequences. Note

that if is a sequence of i.i.d. equiprobable binary random

variables, each binary symbol in the type-defining vector

specified by (12) is equally likely to be zero or one. Thus, all

tree-like modified directed neighborhood types are equally

probable, i.e.,

,

. Next,

is

just as defined by (14), therefore,

where the last equality comes from (16). Since for some positive number , and

, we have

9Here Pr(sjT = 0) = Pr(s) since the input sequence is independent of whether or not the neighborhood is tree-like. Also,
E [Z jt ; s; T = 0] = E [Z jt ; T = 0]
since Z is independent of input sequence s if the type t is known.

(26)

if we can prove that

(27)

where may depend on , , and , but not on .

The first steps are edge revealing steps. Therefore, as in

[1], for

, we conclude that (27) holds with

. The last steps correspond to the revealing of the

channel realizations, so, again referring to [1], for

, we can use

.

Now, we consider the steps of symbol revealing on the i.i.d.

input sequence, i.e.,

. Let

.

For a given length- binary sequence , we define sequence

as follows:

,

, and

. In other words, differs from

only at position

. From this definition, we have

but

. Referring to the modified directed neighbor-

hood definition, we recall that each binary symbol belongs to

10E[Z ] is averaged over all graphs, all input sequences, and all noise realizations as we described before.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:46:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HOU et al.: CAPACITY-APPROACHING BANDWIDTH-EFFICIENT CODED MODULATION SCHEMES

2155

a channel node. Therefore, if differs from only at posi-

tion

, this binary symbol affects only two kinds of mes-

sage flow: the first kind is the message flow within the modi-

fied directed neighborhoods to which this binary symbol’s cor-

responding channel node belongs. As to the second kind of mes-

sage flow, note that this binary symbol is involved in checks

of the parity-check matrix if this binary symbol belongs to the

component code at level . Therefore, complementing this bi-

nary symbol also affects the message flow within the modified

directed neighborhoods to which those involved checks con-

nect. By (11), the number of channel nodes in a modified di-

rected neighborhood is upper-bounded by

. By the node

symmetry property [1], the number of neighborhoods to which

a channel node belongs is upper-bounded by

. By sim-

ilar reasoning, the number of neighborhoods to which those in-

volved checks connect is upper-bounded by

. There-

fore, in total, complementing one binary symbol in a sequence

, the number of neighborhoods within which message flow is

affected is upper-bounded by

, i.e., for any given

, , and

(28)

From the definition of , for

, we have

Using (28), along with the fact that for any random variable we can conclude that for any

That is, Therefore, for any

for , if we set

and choose

then Theorem 3 follows from (22) and (26).

REFERENCES

[1] T. J. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-

check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform.

Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.

[2] A. Kavcˇic´, X. Ma, and M. Mitzenamcher, “Binary intersymbol inter-

ference channels: Gallager codes, density evolution, and code perfor-

mance bounds,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 49, pp. 1636–1652,

July 2003.

[3] H. Imai and S. Hirakawa, “A new multilevel coding method using error

correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-23, pp. 371–377,

May 1977.

[4] U. Wachsmann, R. F. H. Fischer, and J. B. Huber, “Multilevel codes:

Theoretical concepts and practical design rules,” IEEE Trans. Inform.

Theory, vol. 45, pp. 1361–1391, July 1999.

[5] E. Zehavi, “8-PSK trellis codes for a Rayleigh channel,” IEEE Trans.

Commun., vol. 40, pp. 873–884, May 1992.

[6] G. Caire, G. Taricco, and E. Biglieri, “Bit-interleaved coded modula-

tion,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 44, pp. 927–946, May 1998.

[7] A. R. Calderbank, “Multilevel codes and multistage decoding,” IEEE

Trans. Commun., vol. 37, pp. 222–229, Mar. 1989.

[8] U. Wachsmann, “Coded modulation: Theoretical concepts and practical

design Rules,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. Erlangen-Nurnberg, Erlangen,

Germany, May 1998.

[9] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit

error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo codes,” in Proc. IEEE

Int. Conf. Communications ’93, Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp.

1064–1070.

[10] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA:

MIT Press, 1963.

[11] T. J. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-

approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. In-

form. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, Feb, 2001.

[12] S. Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the de-

sign of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon

limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.

[13] J. Hou, P. Siegel, and L. Milstein, “Performance analysis and code op-

timization of low density parity-check codes on Rayleigh fading chan-

nels,” in Proc. 38th Annu. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, and

Computing, Monticello, IL, Nov. 2000, pp. 266–275.

[14] J. Hou, P. Siegel, L. Milstein, and H. D. Pfister, “Design of low-density

parity-check codes for bandwidth efficient modulation,” in Proc. IEEE

Information Theory Workshop (ITW’01), Cairns, Australia, Sept. 2001,

pp. 24–26.

[15]

, “Multilevel coding with low-density parity-check compo-

nent codes,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommunications Conf.

(GLOBECOM’01), San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001, pp. 1016–1020.

[16] X. Li and J. A. Ritcey, “Bit-interleaved coded modulation with iterative

decoding,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 1, pp. 169–171, Nov. 1997.

[17] K. R. Narayanan and J. Li, “Bandwidth efficient low density parity check

coding using multi level coding and iterative multi stage decoding,” in

Proc. 2nd Turbo Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France,

July 2000, pp. 165–168.

[18] R. Narayanaswami, “Coded modulation with low density parity check

codes,” Master thesis, Texas A&M Univ., College Station, June 2001.

[19] G. Ungerboeck, “Channel coding with multilevel/phase signals,” IEEE

Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-28, pp. 55–67, Jan. 1982.

[20] R. G. Gallager, Information Theory and Reliable Communica-

tion. New York: Wiley, 1968.

[21] R. Motwani and P. Raghavan, Randomized Algorithms. Cambridge,

U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1995.

[22] R. Storn and K. Price, “Differential evolution—A simple and efficient

heuristic adaptive scheme for global optimization over continuous

spaces,” J. Global Optimiz., vol. 11, pp. 341–359, 1997.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:46:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

