A Novel Design Methodology for High-Performance Programmable Decoder Cores for AA-LDPC Codes *
Mohamrnad M. Mansour and Naresh RShanbhag
iClMS Research Center, ECE Dept. Coordinated Science Laboratory
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 1308 W. Main Street, Urbana, IL61801
(rnrnansour,shanbhag)@uiuc.edu

ABSTRACT
A new parameterized-core-based design methodology targeted forprograinniable decoders for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes is proposed. The inethodology solves the two major drawbacks of excessive memory overhead and complex on-chip interconnect typical of existing decoder implementations which limit the scalability, degrade the error-correction capability, and restrict the domain of application of LDPC codes. Diverse memory and interconnect optimizations are pcrfotined at the code-design, decoding algorithm, decoder architecture, and physical layout levels, with the following features: 1) Architecture-aware (AA)-LDPC code design with embedded structural features that significantly reduce interconnect complexity, 2) faster and memory-etficient turbo-decoding algorithm for LDPC codes, 3) programmable architecture having distributed memory, parallel message processing units, and dynamiclscalable transport networks for routing messages, and 4) a parameterized macro-cell layout library implernenting the main components of the architecture with scaling parameters that enable low-level transistor sizing and power-rail scaling forpowerdelay-area optimization. A 14mm2 programmable decoder core for a rate-f, Icngtti 2048 AA-LDPC code generated using the proposed methodology is presented, which delivers B throuphwt of I . 6 G b ~ ast 125MHz and consumes 760mW of power.
1. INTRODUCTION
With the renewed interest in iterative decoding via message-passing i n coding theory and the introduction of the concept of codes defined on graphs [I], lowdensity parity-check codes [2] have emerged as serious competitors to the well-known turbo codes [3] in terms of error-correction capability. However, efficient hardware implementation techniques of LDPC decoders remain largely immature compared to their turbo decoder counterparts, clearing the way for turbo codes to occupy !main stream applications ranging from wireless applications to
fiber-optics coinniunications. Hence, the quest for new hardware de-
sign methodologies for LDPC decoders has become a topic of increasing interest, gradually promoting LDPC codes as the coding technique of choice for inext generation applications.
The design of LDPC decoder architectures departs from the traditional decoder design in that it is intimatelyrelated to the structure of the parity-check matrix defining the code [4]. An LDPC code of length n IS defined by a random sparse parity-check matrix H m x n ,where m is the number of parity-check equations, and is typically described by a bipartite graph whose reduced adjacency matrix is H as shown in Fig. I . To the m rows of U there corresponds a set of m check nodes on one side of the partition, and to the n columns a set of II bit-nodes on other side of the pafiition in the graph. Two nodes in the graph
*This work was supported with funds from NSF under grants CCR 99.79381 and CCR 00-85929.

are connected if their corresponding entry in H is non-zero. In a regulur (c,r)-LDPC code, bit-nodes have degree c and check-nodes have degree r. The number and location of the non-zeros in H determine the computational load performed by the decoder as well as the memory size and the interconnect complexity needed to route and store the computation results.
LDPC codes are decoded iteratively using Gallager’s two-phase message-passing (TPMP) algorithm [2] which computes iteratively extrinsic probability values associated with each bit-node using disjoint parity-check equations that the bit participates in [2]. Each iteration consists of two phases of computations in which updates of all bitnodes are done in phase 1 by sending messages to neighboring checknodes, and then updates of all check-nodes are done in phase 2 by sending messages to neighboring bit-nodes. Updates in each phase are independent and can be parallelized.
Figure 1: Bipartite graph of a (2,3)-LDPC code.
LDPC codes are not standardized in the sense that a system designer has the flexibility of formatting the data according to a desired size and code-rate depending on the channel conditions, the required level of coding gain, or other system considerations, which make a code-programmable decoding platform extremely desirable. Moreover, with the emerging process technologies and the constantly evolving communications standards and applications, a parameterizable decoder core that is portable across technology generations with predicable design quality is even more attractive. However, state-of-the-art significantly falls short of these objectives, and only custom, FPGAbased, or synthesis-based hard decoders have been attempted. Inparalle1 decoder implementations [SI that mimic the topology of the bipartile graph, the randomness in communicating messages on the graph edges results in complex interconnect and poses serious implementa-
tion challenges for large n in terms of placement of m t n function
units and routing more than 2ncb wires, where b is the message bitwidth. Custom algorithms are needed for placement and buffer insertion to reduce route lengths and routing congestion, achieve timing closure, and increase hardware utilization. For large n, parallel decoder implementations quickly become intractable. Consider the ring placement strategy shown in Fig. 2 in which m =NlMl check function units are surrounded by n = 4N2M2 bit function units having respec-
tive aspect ratios of W IJhl and wz/h2. It can be shown [ 6 ] that in
a 0.18pm CMOS technology, the average interconnect length l ( n ) i s

0-7803-7795-8/03/$17.000 2003 IEEE

29

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:27:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

lower-bounded by

i(,,) 2 0 . l 5 h mm

for nq /hl = 5 and w z / h z = 2. assuming uniform distribution ofwires across function units. In addition, for a rate-f regular (3,6)-LDPC code, the area ofthe decoderA(n) is lower-bounded by

A(n) 2 0.045fimm2,

and the total number of wires N(n) forb = 4 is given by

N(n) = 24n.

Figure 3: Parallel decoder architectures: (a) Average interconnect length, (b) decoder area, (c) number of wirer, and (a) average interconnect power as a function of code length.

Figure 2: Ring placement strategy of function units.
Figure 3 plots thc functions i ( n ) . A ( n ) , and N(n) for typical values of n . The lizure clearly demonstrates that parallel architectures scale unfavorably with the code length and become impractical to implement. On the other hand, serial decoder architectures [7], in which computations are folded onto a subset of function uni6 and message communication takes place through centralized memory, require significant memory overhead that amounts to four times the number of edges i n the graph and suffer a throughput penalty due to the serial processing bottleneck.
This paper attempts to break the architechxal dependence an the code properties by proposing a new design methodology that jointly perfoims diverse optimizations at various system abstraction levels, namely, at the code-design, decoding algorithm, decoder architecture, and physical layout levels. The outcome is: 1) a class of structured or architecture-aware LDPC (AA-LDPC) codes having regularity features that significantly reduce interconnect complexity, 2) a faster and memory-efficient turbo-decoding algorithm for LDPC codes together with a new message update mechanism immune to quantization effects, 3 ) a code-programmable architecture having distributed memoiy, parallel lnessage processing units, and dynamic and scalable transport networks for storing, processing, and routing messages, respectively. capable of decoding ensembles of AA-LDPC codes, and 4) a parameterized Inacro-cell layout library containing layout implementations of the main components of the architecture which are characterized by a set of scaling and other feature parameters used by a coreoptimizer that enable low-levcl transistor sizing and power-line scaling for power-delay-area optimizations. Section gives an overview of the imetliodology and its subsections highlight the details. Section presents a programmable AA-LDPC decoder core generated using the proposed mcthodalogy. and Section concludes the paper
2. DESIGN METHODOLOGY
In this section, B paranicteri7rd-core-baseddesign methodology for high-throughput and memory-efficient programmable decoder cores

for LDPC codes is proposed. Figure 4 shows a How graph of the methodology. The following subsections highlight the main aspects of the methodology and their impact on reducing memory overhead and interconnect caiiiplexity
2.1 Architecture-Aware LDPC Codes
The interconnect problem stemming from the inherent randomness of LDPC codes is addressed by designing structured or architectureaware LDPC (AA-LDPC) codes having regularity features favorable for an efficientand scalable decoder implementation. The ensemble of AA-LDPC codes of length n and rate R is defined by a block paritycheck matrix H having B block rows and D block columns such as the one shown in Fig. 5 , where each block is an S x S sub-matrix and S is a code-independent parameter. These submatrices are required to
be either all-zeros Sx S matrices or permutation matrices. An S x S binary permutation matrix is simply the identity matrix lsxs whose
rows (or equivalently columns) are randomly permuted. Hence, a regular (c,r)-LDPC code would have r permutation matrices per block row and c permutation matrices per block column, and is denoted as a [D,B,S,c,r]-AA-LDPC code. A particular choice ofpermutation matrices and their positions in H define an instance of the ensemble ot [D,B,S,r]-AA-LDPCcodes. The code length is given by n =BS, and
the code rate is R 2 I -DIE. Figure 5 shows a parity-check matrix of
a regular [6,12,8,6]-AA-LDPC code.
The main advantages of AA-LDPC codes ovcrother classesof LDPC
codes are twofold. First, they transform the LDPC decoding problem
employing the TPMP algqrithm into a turbo-decoding problem [4] in which only one type of messages is processed, thus eliminating the storage required to save multiple check-to-bit messages (a savings of 75%). This follows from the fact that the ones in the rows in each block row of H do not overlap, and consequently, the black rows can be processed independently by passing messages only between adjacent block rows as apposed to potentially all rows as is the case with the TPMP algorithm. Second, taking the next step furthcr towards an
efficient and scalable decoder implementation (as compared to 1511, the
structure of AA-LDPC codes reduces the complexity of the interconnection network when it comes to forwarding and retrieving messages between the non-zero entries as defined in H. Observe that the ones in the rows of If, absent any structure, would generally have random column indices requiring r (n:I)-(de)multiplexers to accessr messages

30

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:27:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

S denote the received channel information about the bits, and hi,i =

I , ... ,D, denote the extrinsic reliability information obtained by de-

coding the bits assuming they belong only to the ith constituent code.

Let ydenote the total orposterior reliability information known about

S+zEl the bits, or y =

hi. Decoding proceeds according to the ex-

trinsic principle which asserts that decoder Di takes as input all in-

formation known so far about the bits that was previously generated

not using Dj, and generates as output updated extrinsic information hi

using the constraints ofthe ith constituent code.

Ymbru",."bli AA LDI.cdiiaL.rrorr
Figure 4: Proposed design methodology.

k

B = 12

4

I

IT

w sub-iteration I

s

- - Xs-u-b- I-iteration 3

Figure 6: Block diagram of the TDMT' algorithm showing the message exchange between the decoders Di, interleavers xi, and h m e r n o r y for D = 3.

H=

Ph,

p12 P6,

par vaa

Figure 5: Parity-check matrix of a regular 16,I2,8,6]-AA-LDPC
code (Pi, is 8 x E).

colresponding to the row. This solution quickly becomes impractical

for large n, or when multiple rows arc accessed in parallel to increase

decoding throughput. Moreover, the overhead of the control mecha-

nism of the (de-)multiplexers which keeps track of the column posi-

tions of all the ones in the parity-check matrix becomes too complex

to iinplcment. On the other hand, with the prescribed structure of AA-

LDPC codes, S rows can be accessed in parallel with a complexity of

rSlog(S) in terms of(2: I)-multiplexers, a reduction of order

---- rS(BS - 1) n - 1 ~ rSlog(S) log($

o(n)

Further, the reduction in control overhead is proportional to
--- ,.Slog(n) - 210g(n) O(log(n)).
rS/2log(S) logs

While the parity-check matrix shown in Fig. 5 has desirable architcctural properties, it is not a priori clear whether LDPC codes having such structure would achieve comparable bit-error rate (BER) perforinancc to randomly constructed codes of similar complexity. In [8IO], it was shown that indeed AA-LDPC codes based on cyclotomic cosets [8] and Ramanujan graphs [Y, I I] have BER performance that comparccs favorably with randomly generated codes.

2.2 Turbo-Decoding of AA-LDPC Codes
Since the rows in each block row in an AA-LDPC code do not overlap, a block row in H can be viewed by itself as a parity-check matrix o f a o even parity-check code having support only on rS bit positions. Consequently, H is considered as the concatenation of D constituent codes [4,9] which can be decoded in tandem in a "turbo-decoding" fashion by S messaee proccssing units (MPU's) that operate in parallel 18. IO]. The MPU's together form a soft-input soft-output (SISO) decoder which is designated by D. The algorithm is called the turbodecoding messagc-passing (TDMP) algorithm for LDPC codes. Let

The pseudo-code of the TDMP algorithm is listed below, and is described in Fig. 6 for D = 3. The algorithm performs D = 3 decoding sub-iterations on the block rows of H. Starting from block row 1, extrinsic reliability values h, are computed for each bit using SISO decoder D1 and the input channel reliability values 6 , assuming that the bit belongs lo the code defined by block row 1 (i.e., using h2 and hl, not hi). This extrinsic information is fed as apriori information through an interleaver (nl)to SISO decoder DI operating on the second block row. The interleaver can be factored into at most B S - t o S independent permuters following the structure of the AA-LDPC code. D2 in turn updates the extrinsic reliability values assuming that the bits belong to the code defined by block row 2 and generates updated values for h ~T.he process is repeated for the third block row. A single update of messages based on one block row is referred to as a subitemion, and a round of updates across all the block rows constitutes
a single decoding iteration, In the final iteration, hard decisions are made based on the posterior reliability values y read from the third SISO decoder.

Algorithm 1y = TDMP(S)

v,~t s hi + 0,i = 1,. .. ,D fork= 1 to MAXITER do
*?:Lfori=I toDdo + Di(hi,nj($Ii]))

$i]

(r)

end for end for

{Ii = index set}

The TDMP algorithm has two main advantages over the TPMP algorithm [4,9]: ( I ) It eliminates the storage required to save mulfiple check-to-bit messages and replaces them with a single message corresponding to the most recent check-message update, a savings of
4°C - nc x loo%= 75%,
~
4nc
and (2) it exhibits a faster convergence behavior requiring between 20%-50% fewer decoding iterations to converge for a given signal-tonoise ratio (and hence higher decoding throughput) compared to the TPMP algorithm.
2.3 Low-Complexity Message Computation
The commonly employed message-update mechanism based on Gallager's equations [Z] is prone to quantization noise which results in increased decoding latency and switching activity (and hence power

31

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:27:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

consumption) in ]he decoder. An alternative approach for computing

messages is to usc a simplified form of the BCJR algorithm [I21 tai-

lored to the syndrome trellis o f a n even parity-check code. A reduced-

complexity message update unit is presented that eliminates the need

for lookup-tables, hence simplifying implementation cost considerably

especially in parallel MPU implementations. In the proposed method,

messa"ces

are

undated

wine a I

simde

L'max-ouartet'' bivariate

function

Q(.r,y) defined as

Q(x,y) = max(r,y) - max(x+y,O)

which approximates the key equations of the BCJR algorithm in differential form. It can be shown that Q(,r,y) is a simpler (implementationwise) and more accurate approximation of the ideal key equations than other approximations available in the literature (e.g., [13]). In terms of Q(x,y),the key equations of the BCJR algorithm simplify to

Aa'= Q(Aa,y- A), AP'=Q(AP,y-h),

A = Q(Aa,AP),

r =A+(y-h).

(2)

Figure 7 shows a logic circuit implementing (I), and Fig's 8-9 show a parallel and a serial MPU implementation of(2).

2.4 Programmable Decoder Architecture
A programmable decoder architecture implementing the TDMP al-
gorithm for regular [D,B,S,r]-AA-LDPCcode ensembles is shown in Fig. IO. The architecture is composed of six main components: I ) A set of S MPU's for message computation, 2) Smemory modules (AMemory) each ofsize D x I that store the extrinsic messages pertaining to all constituent codes, 3) a dual-port memory module (7-Memory) of size B x S that stores the posterior reliabilities of all bits, 4) a memoiy module (H-Memory) of size D x r that stores the column positions of the permutation matrices in H used to index ?-Memory, 5 ) two networks R and R-' of size S/Zlog(S) for routing messages between y-Memory and the MPU's, and 6 ) a dual-port memory module (x-Memory) of size Dr x S/Zlog(S) that stores the switch control for the networks.

(a)

(b)

Figure 9 (a) Serial MPU,and (b) block symbol.

to deliver maximum bandwidth to the MPU's using single readiwrite
ports without the need for switching networks. The j t h &-Memory stores the j t h row of each block row in H, and the MPU's consume S rows from h-Memory in parallel. The R and R-' networks are shuffle-exchange networks consisting of an array of S/2 x log(S) 2by-2 switches and controlled by the n-Memory as shown in Fig. I I , capable of routing 2 s ~ 2 x ' 0 ~ (osu)t ofS! permutations without conHicts. Other reorangeable multistage interconnection networks such as the Clos and Bene5 networks widely used in multiprocessor, fiber optics, and photonics applications can be employed if arbitrary permutation routing capability is needed.
The decoder completes a decoding sub-iteration pertaining to the ith code in ( r + 4 ) cycles as follows:

1- The MPU's read all the extrinsic messages hi for code i from
h-Memory.

2- The corresponding posterior messages are read from y-Memory and permuted using the R network according to code i.

3- Updated A messages are written back to h-Memory

4- Updated y messages are written back to y-Memory after inverse permuting using the R-' network.

A single decoding iteration is completed in ( r + 4 ) D cycles

-REl, i ..................................... l_._...... .~@

",. ,..".?".n.

....................... _.............

1")

lhl

Figure 7: Max-quartet approximation function: (a) Logic circuit,

and (b) block symhol.

Figure 8: Parallcl MPU implementation,
For simplicity, serial MPU's are assumed. The H- and n-Memory modules are programmed according to the desired instance of the ensemble of [D,B,S,r]-AA-LDPC codes. The &-Memory is organized
32

Figure 10: TDMP decoder architecture.

0 I

2

2

3

3

4

4

5

5

6

6

7

7

Figure 11: Omega network.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:27:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2.5 Parameterized Macro- Cell Library
Core-based IC design methodologies offer valuable tradeoffs between the high quality of full-custom designs and the short design cycle time of synthesis-based design methodologies. Particularly effective to communication systems, in which applications, standards, and piacess technologies constantly change and evolve towards optimum system energy and tliroughput efficiencies, are those cores that otfer i n addition ilexibility between portability acrosstechnology generations and predictability of design quality This section presents an effective approach towards achieving the above objectivcs using a paramcterized-core-based IC design methodology targeted for AALDPC decoders. Using this methodology. a custom-quality layout of a n AA-LDPC decoder is synthesized using high-level algorithmic and architecturn1 specifications without passing tllrough the automated synthesis, place, snd route step. The novelty in this approach is the ability to perform low-level transistor sizing, power-rail scaling, and other geometric modifications through a small set of parameters that characterize the tnain building blocks of the core.
The methodology is based on a hierarchical parameterized cell layout librxy. The first level is a parameterized leaf-cell (PLC) library that accommodates a11 basic cells available in a standard cell library. In addition, each PLC in the library is characterized by a set ofscaling parameters (2)assigned to individual or groups of transistors within the cell depending on its functionality, fan-in, and fan-out. All PLC’s
arc designed using the I-D layout strategy in which the P- and N-
type transistors are placed across a horizontal centerline running parallcl to the power rails. Scaling up to five times the minimum size is done vettically within the cell, while the transistor folding technique is employcd for lager scaling factors. Moreover, the power rails are assigned a width parameter (0)that is determined based on the max-
e. imum current drawn by the cell as a function of A PLC can be
instantiated in virtually any size to within the technology’s minimum fcature size by setting its p and o parameters. A current macro-model based on [ 141 is uscd to determine the p parameters from the delay specs, the w parameter, as well the power consumption of the PLC.
The second level is a parameterized macro-cell (PMC) library specific to AA-LDPC decoder corcs which implements the MPU’s, Rinetworks. and memoly modules of a programmable AA-LDPC de-
s coder using the PLC library. The PLC’s in a PMC inherit their and
o parameters fmom the global parameters that characterize the PMC. A
core-optimizcr is used to determine the optimal parameter settings for a PMC. For example. Fig. I2(a) shows an un-optimized PMC implementing the “max-quartet” function of Fig. 7, and Fig. 12(b) shows an optimized vcrsion for a delay of Ions. Figure 13 shows pipelined implementations ofthc parallel and serial MPU’s shown in Fig.’s 8 and 9. The PMC of Figure 13(a)corresponds to a parallel MPU with r = 5 containing 13 Q blocks. 29 Rip-llops, and IO adders while the PMC of
Fig. I3(b)corresponds to a serial MPU with r =6 and 6 pipeline stages containing four Q blocks, 2 stacks, and 4 adders. Both PMC’s are op-
timized for a stage delay of Ions. Figure 14 shows an optimized PMC of the R-network of Fig. I I with S = 64 and delay of Ions. Similar PMC’s for the niemory modules were generated [see Fig. 15).

The core has an area of 14mm2 (3.75 times smaller than the decoder of [ 5 ] ) , attains a higher throughput by 60%, is capable of running at a higher clock frequency due to the absence of routing congestion and relatively short route lengths, and more importantly, decodes an LDPC code of twice the length. In the light of Fig. 3 and the problems existing LDPC decoder implementations suffer from, up to the authors’ knowledge the proposed methodology constitutes a superior approach in almost all respects to all known implementations in the literature. Figure 16 illustrates how the proposed decoder area scales with code length versus existing techniques.
(b)
Figure 12: PMC for the “max-quartet” function: (a) Unoptimized, and (b) delay-optimized for Ions.

3. IMPLEMENTATION EXAMPLE
To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed core-based design methodology. a TDMP decoder core targeted for rate-{, length 2048, [ 16,32,64,61-AA-LDPCcode ensembles was generated using the PMC libmy. The core has a four bit datapath, and is implemented in a 0. IX l m , I .8V CMOS technology. Figure 17 shows the layout of the core. The decoder achieves a throughput of I.bGbits/s at a clock frequency of I25MHz and consumes 760mW of power. Figure 18(a) plots the power distribution of the core amongst the memory (53.9%). MPU (37.7%),and R-network (8.4%) blocks. Figure 18(b) shows a similar plot for area distribution: memory (36.2%). MPU (55.3%). and R-netwod (8.5%).

(b) Figure 13: PMC for the (a) parallel MPU, and (b) serial MPU optimized for a stage delay of Ions.
4. CONCLUSION
A new design methodology that solves the problems of memory overhead and intereonnect complexity of current-day LDPC decoder

33

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:27:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 14: PMC for the R-network offig. 11.
implementations has beenproposed. The methodologyperforms memory and interconnect optimizations at various system abstraction levels and generates LDPC decoder cores with architectural programmabiiity and layout parametrization capabilities, which bode well with the demands of next generation communications applications. A decoder core denionstratinS the effectiveness of the proposed methodology has been presented.

Figure 16: Scaling of decoder area with code length.
[ I O ] M. M. Mansour and N.R. Shanbhag. "Hi&-UUoughput memory efficient deeodcr architcctums fur LDPC coder," rubmilred to IEEE Trmsuctionron VLSI Svslems,
2002. [Ill M.M.MmsourandN. R. Shanbhag,'%unruuctionofLDPCcodcsfmmRamanujan
graphs:' in ConJ on Info,Scimncer undSystem. Princeton Onivrrsi!~.Mar. 2002. [121 L. R. Buhl, J. Cockc, F. Jclinck, and J. Raviv. "Optimal dccoding oflincarcodcr for
minimizing iymbol c m r mc." lEEE Porunr. on 1.T. pp. 286287,Mar. 1974. 1131 X. YH~elal.."Efficienfimplcmcntationrofthcrum-produetalg~nthmfordccoding
LDPCcodsi:' in GLOBECOMZOOI, 2001, vol. 2. pp. 1036-1036E. [I41 Makram M. Mansour. Mobmmad M. Mmour. and A. Mchrotra. "Modified
Sakumi-Newton a m n f model and its applications ta CMOS digital circuit dcsign:' in IEEE CornpulerSocir!v Annumi Syposium on V u % Feb. 2003. pp. 62-29.

Figure IS: P M C for a 32 x 64 dual-port SRAM module.

Figure 17: Layout o f t h c AA-LDPC decoder core.

(b) Figure 18: Decoder core: (a) Power, and (h) area distribution.
34
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:27:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

