2003 4th IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications

TURBO DESIGN FOR LDPC CODES WITH LARGE GIRTH
Jin Lu and Jose M. E Mouru
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213
Jinlu, moura@ece.cmu.edu

ABSTRACT
LDPC codes, with performance extremely close to the theoretical limit, are gaining increased attention of the communication systems designers. LDPC codes with good girth properties are of particular interest. In this paper, we design large girth regular LDPC codes in a turbo-like manner. Specifically, we describe codes that are two sub-trees interconnected by an interleaver. Careful design of the interleaver block eliminates short cycles in its factor graph. We present designs for turbo-like LDPC codes with column weight j 2 3 and girth at least 8 and with column weight j = 2 and girth at least 16. These proposed codes support a wide range of code rates and code block length, suitable for most practical applications.
1. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [l], error correcting codes based on very sparse parity check matrices, exhibit performance close to the Shannon limit using iterative decoding [2]. Extensive research on turbo codes and LDPC codes has shown that, when decoded by the iterative message passing algorithm, LDPC codes show better decoding performance than turbo codes as the block length increases. Moreover, the high computational complexity associated with the BCJR algorithm is a major drawback for using turbo codes, while LDPC codes can he iteratively decoded using the sum-product algorithm with comparatively less complexity. Therefore, LDPC codes are actively being considered in numerous applications, including magnetic recording channels, optical fiber transmission, or wireless communications (fixed or mobile). For example, [3] studies LDPC codes for communication systems with multiple antennas, and [4] applies LDPC codes to orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM) systems in different fading environments.
LDPC codes can be represented by a bipartite graph, its factor graph [ 5 ] . These are composed of two sets of
This work was supponed by the Data Storage Systems Center at Cmegie Mellon University,and by NSF gram#ECS-0225449

nodes, namely, variable nodes and check nodes. Each variable node represents a bit in a code word and each check node corresponds to a parity-check constraint. If a variable node is constrained by a check node, there is an edge connecting these two nodes. The girth of the code, defined as the length of the shortest cycle in its factor graph, is a CIUcia1 parameter since large girth leads to reduced dependence in the message passing and more efficient iterative decoding when using the sum-product algorithm [6]. Moreover, large girth guarantees large minimum distance &in between
codewords, [7],therefore mitigating the error floor at high Eb/No. Hence, it is of increasing interest to design LDPC codes with good girth properties, [6].
In general, LDPC codes are generated by randomly constructing a low-density parity check matrix from a suitable ensemble, [8].However, structured regular LDPC codes are particularly desirable to simplify the hardware implementation of the encoding and decoding systems.
Cyclic and quasi-cyclic LDPC codes 191, a type of svuctured LDPC codes, are of much recent interest, [6, 101. They have low-complexity encoding and can be constructed algebraically. Though having relatively simple algebraic descriptions, their girth is quite limited. Tanner, [lo], proved that all codes with column weight j 2 3 whose parity check matrices are constructed from circulants must contain a 6cycle, so the girth of such codes is at most 6. For column weight j = 2 quasi-cyclic LDPC codes, Tanner, [6], also showed that the girth of the corresponding factor graph cannot be greater than twelve. This implies that the codes will fail to show the logarithmic relationship between girth and the code block length, [ 11. For sufficiently long lengths, random LDPC codes outperform cyclic and quasi-cyclic LDPC codes. Hence, their short ginh propexties seriously limits the application of cyclic or quasi-cyclic LDPC codes when very long codes are desired. Another drawback of such codes is that there are only a limited range of code lengths and code rates available, not flexible enough to be suitable in many tasks.
To overcome the above difficulties, we consider a new class of structured LDPC codes using turbo designs. The factor graphs of such codes contain two sub-trees that con-

0-7803-785&W03/517.00 02003 IEEE

90

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:21:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

nect to each other through an interleaver. This structure helps to create LDPC codes with large guth and flexible code rates. Another significant feature of turbo-like LDPC codes is that they require surprisingly small memory in its encoder and decoder design, which leads to low-complexity hardware implementations.
2. TURBO DESIGN OF LDPC CODES

Fig. 2. Lower tree TLof a turbo-like LDPC code with column weight 3, row weight 4, and height 4

Our designs are similar to the turbo structure: we interconnect two tree structures to create LDPC codes with large girth. The factor graph of such a code contains two heightbalanced sub-trees, denoted as an upper-tree TU,for which the leaf nodes are variable nodes, and a lower-tree T’, for which the leaf nodes are check nodes. We represent the
height of Tu and TL,say, its number of tiers, by h. The first tier of TUcontains only one check node-the root, as shown in figure 1. On the other hand, the root of TL(shown
in figure 2) is a variable node. The two trees are “combined” in a turbo-like manner such that the leaf-nodes of TL are connected to the leaf-nodes of Tu, see figure 3. We call the structure formed by the connecting edges between
the leaf-nodes of TLand Tu an “interleaver.” All the vari-
able nodes have uniform degree j and all the check nodes
have the same degree k, except for the roots of Tu and TL,
whose degrees are set to be k - 1and j - 1respectively. For example, a turbo-like LDPC code with h = 4, j = 3 and k = 4 is shown in figure 3. To make the code exactly regular, we connect the root (a check node) of TUand the root (a variable node) of TLdirectly by an edge, hence forming
i . a regular LDPC code shown in figure 3. It is easy to derive
that the code rate p = 1- For a given code rate p‘. just choose the two parameters j and k to satisfy the equation
i : p * = 1 - ’ for example, for p* = 8/9 and column weight
3, simply let j = 3 and k = 27 in each of the component
trees.

Fig. 3. Turbo-like LDPC code with column weight 3, row weight 4 and height 4
girth greater than or equal to 8. In particular, column weight 2 turbo-like LDPC codes can be further made free of any cycles with length less than 16.
3. CONSTRUCTING LARGE GIRTH LDPC CODES USING TURBO DESIGNS
Our goal in this section is to build turbo-like LDPC codes with large girth. For convenience, we introduce “auxiliary nodes” (represented by solid triangles) as shown in figure 4. For each leaf node in the upper tree Tu,since it connects to j - 1check nodes in the lower tree TL,we add j - 1auxiliary nodes to it and let these auxiliary nodes he its descendants. Similarly, we introduce auxiliary nodes to the lower
tree TL such that each leaf node of TLhas k - 1auxiliary

Fig. 1. Upper tree Tu of a turbo-like LDPC code with column weight 3, row weight 4 and height 4
The significance of the above structures lies in that it makes the design of large girth LDPC codes easy. As in isolation, no cycle exists in either of the sub-trees, the cycles in turbo-like LDPC codes are introduced by the interleaver. This paper discusses methods to devise interleavers that guarantee that the resulting turbo-like LDPC codes have

.
A”d”.ODh
Fig. 4. Auxiliary nodes in a turbo-like LDPC code with column weight 3, row weight 4 and height 4

91

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:21:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

nodes as its descendants. There is a one to one correspondence between auxiliary nodes of Tu and auxiliary nodes of T L . Figure 5 shows a path connecting Tu’s leaf node
A

of type-I cycles.
Theorem 1 To nurimize the girth of type-I cycles, cunnect auxiliary nudes in the lower tree TL indexed by the q-palternate decimal xq-pto auxiliary nudes in the upper tree
Tu indexed by the p-q-alternate decimal ? T S ( X ~ - ~ ) .
Proof: From its definition,CI contains four auxiliary nodes, say, a l , a2,a3, and ad, as shown in figure 6. Let the distance between a1 and a2 within the sub-tree Tu as d u ( a l , a z ) , and the distance between a3 and a4 within the sub-tree TL

Fig. 5 . Auxiliary nodes of Tu and TL

d,(p,,a,)

A to TL’Sleaf node B through Tu’s auxiliary node C and

TL’Sauxiliary node D. That means, in the original factor

graph, nodes A and B are directly connected by an edge.

Therefore, our task can be equivalently expressed as finding

an appropriate one-to-one mapping between auxiliary nodes

of TUand auxiliary nodes of TLthat guarantees large girth.

As mentioned, no cycles exist in any of the sub-trees in iso-

lation, so cycles present in the codes must contain “auxiliary

nodes,” which is at least four (two auxiliary nodes of TUand
two auxiliary nodes of TL).We classify the cycles into two disjoint categories: type-I and type-II cycles, depending on

Fig. 6. Type-I cycle containing two Tu’s auxiliary nodes a1 and a2 and two TL’Sauxiliary nodes us and a4

how many auxiliary nodes a cycle contains. Type-I cycles

contain four and only four auxiliary nodes and are denoted b y d ~ ( a 3 , a 4 )T. helengthofCI isdu(al,az)+dr.(as,a4)+

by Cl;type-I1cycles contain more than four auxiliary nodes 2. The minimum value of &(a3,a4) is 2 when a3 and a4

and are denoted by Clr.

are both descendants of the same leaf-node of TL.For this

Recall that k denotes the degree of the check nodes in a factor graph, or equivalently, the row weight of the

situation, to maximize the length of C,, du(u1,a2)should be as large as possible. However, for TU of height h, the

corresponding parity-check matrix; j denotes the degree of
the variable nodes. We introduce a p-q-alternate decimal
to index all the auxiliary nodes of Tu and a q-p-alrernafe
decinlal to index all the auxiliary nodes of 4,where p =

+ maximal value of du(a1, u2) is 2h. Therefore, the girth of
CI is less than or equal to 2h 4. If we show, following
+ the connecting rule in theorem 1, that all Cr formed have
length at least 2h 4, then theorem 1is proved.

k - 1 and q = j - 1. This will be useful in preventing

For TLof height h, we need h symbols in the q-p alter-

short cycles. We introduce it through an illustration. As- nate decimated labelling of all auxiliary nodes of TL.Num-

sume the p-q-alternate decimal representation of an index
is . v a1 v a2 v a3 v a4 It relates to its value in the decimal

ber the corresponding h coordinates of indices from 1 to h, starting from the rightmost coordinate. Similarly, h symbols are needed in the p-q-alternate decimated labelling of

P9PI
system as follows:

all Tu’s auxiliary nodes and we number the corresponding

v a1 v a2 v a3 v a4

=

(

a

1

x

p

q

~

+

a

~

x

p

q

t

a

3

x

q

+

a

~

)

1

othhceoroigrdhitnmaotesst

of their indices from 1to h , also starting from coordinate. The distance within TLbetween

P4PI
where0 S a1 5 p - 1 , O S a2 S q - 1 , O 5 a3 S p - 1,

ando 5 a4 5 q - 1.

The symbol-wisereverwl ?rs( al a2 a3 a4 ) is devvvv

PIPP
fined as ?is@v u2 v a3 v a4 ) = v a4 v a3 v a2 v a1 =

PIP9

QPPP

( a 4 ~ p ~ q + a ~ x p q + a ~ x p +Aaflte)r~s~ym. bol-wiserever-

sal, a p-q-alternate decimal number becomes a q-p-alternate

two auxiliary nodes with indices E and fj is d L ( 3 , f j ) = 2 k , where k is the leftmost coordinate where the indices E and
5 differ from each other. This also applies to the distance
within TUbetween two auxiliary nodes with indices ?rs(q
and ?rs(fj). After symbol-wise reversal, the E’s and 3 s sym-
bols at the coordinate k become 7is(E)’sand ns(fj)’s sym-
bols at the coordinate h + l - k , respectively. So the symbols
+ of ?is(E)and T S ( a~t the coordinate h 1- k must also
be different. Therefore,

decimal number. According to this type of index representa-

tion, we have the following theorems to maximize the girth

du(?rs(E),?~s(9)>2(h+l-k)

92

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:21:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

From figure 6, the length of such a CI is then
+ + + LC = ~ L ( I9, du (TS(%), as($) 2 2 2h 4
From the above analysis, all type-I cycles CI that result from the consuuction in theorem 1 are at least of length
+ 2h 4. This completes the proof. + We introduce now two operators and L.The operator
+ denotes the symbol-wise addition over the q-p-alternate
decimal or p-q-alternate decimal while the operator 1denotes the symbol-wise subtraction. Define the symbol-wise shifr S as any p-q-alternate decimal number that has the
same number of coordinates as ?is(I).Theorem 1 is extended to theorem 2 using these concepts. Theorem 2 To maximize the girth of type-1cycles, connect the auxiliary nodes in TLindexed by the q-p-alternate decimal xq--pto the auxiliary nodes in Tu indexed by the p-q-
alremate decimal a~(z~-,,)&(S),,-~ The proof of theorem 2 is similar to the proof of theorem 1. We do not provide the details. What theorem 2 says is that we are free to choose the value of ( S ) p - qin connecting xq-,,to ? i ~ ( x ~ - , , ) + ( S ) , , -I~n.the next step, we exploit this freedom in designing codes free of short type-I1 cycles.
Fig. 7. Length 4 type-I1 cycle in turbo-like LDPC codes with column weight j 2 3

Tu's leaf nodes in differentgroups to he distinct from each
other, then length-4 t y p e 4 cycles are avoided. To study length 6 type-11 cycles, we need to apply theo-
rem 2. When connecting any auxiliaty node of TLin group i to any auxiliary node of Tu in group j , we let the symbol-
wise shift to be exactly the same, denoted as Si,jF.or dif-
ferent i, j , Si,j needs not to he the same. The problem is
now how to choose appropriate Si,j,fori = 0, 1, .. . ,q x p
and j = 0,1,. .. ,p. The following theorem helps to choose S,,j to eliminate length 6 type-11 cycles:
Theorem 3 When applying symbol wise rever.sa1 and ship as(q+Si,j,a length 6 type-I1 cycle exists ifsymbolwise shifs Si,j satisJj one of the three conditions:
(i) For three diferent groups i, j , and k in TLand three different gmups 1, m, and n in Tu, one of the following equations is satisfied:

Si,L+Sj,miSk,n = si,m+sj,n+sk,L (1)

Sz,L+Sj,miSk,n = si,n+sj,L+sk,m (2)

S<,miSj,LiSk.n = si,~+Sj,n&Sk,m

(3)

Si,m+Sj,LiSk,n = Si,n+Sj,m+Sk,r (4)
si,n+sj,t+sk? = si,m+sj;,+sk,l ( 5 )

S i , n + S j , m + S k , ~ = S ~ , L + S ~ , ~ + S ~(6,)~

(ii)For two different groups i and j in TL,and two different groups m ond n in Tu,

0 < Si,nLSj+~Sj,mLSi,<mp = k - 1 (7)
(iii)For two different groups i and j in TL,and two different groups m and n in Tu,
0 < as(s~,n'sj,nisj,m<-qsp~=,(,j)- l ) ( k - 1)
(8)

Consider length 4 type-I1 cycles first. A length 4 type-II
cycle is shown in figure 7. Here we need to introduce the concept of group. Auxiliary nodes in Tu belong to the same
group if the symbols at the leftmost coordinate of their p-qdecimated indices are the same. Tu's leaf-nodes are in the same group if their descendants (auxiliary nodes) are in the
same group. According to this definition, the leaf-nodes of
Tucan be divided intop = k- 1groups. We notice that, the
p groups correspond t o p main branches of Tu, The auxiliary nodes and leaf-nodes of TLcan. likewise, be classified
into q x p = ( j - l)(k - 1) different groups, which correspond to ( j - 1)(k - 1)main branches of TL.The applica-
tion of symbol-wise reversal guarantees that each leaf-node
of TUis connected to q = j - 1groups out of totally qp groups in TL.Let leaf-nodes of Tu in the same group he connected to the same q = j - 1groups in TLand we col-
lect the indices of the q groups in a set. Make such sets of

Fig. 8. Length 6 type-I1 cycle (Type(a))
Equations (1-6) correspond to the type (a) length 6 cycles shown in figure 8; inequality (7) and inequality (8) are
derived from type (b) cycles and type (c) cycles shown in figure 9 respectively. Proof of theorem 3 is not provided here. For details, please refer to [ l l ] . According to the-
orem 3, by choosing suitable symbol-wise shifts Si,j for
i = 0 , 1 , .. . ,k - 1and j = 0,1,. .. ,( j - l)(k - 1)that
do not satisfy conditions (1-7), we can avoid all length 6

93

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:21:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 9. Length 6 type-I1 cycle
type-Il cycles while at the same time maximizing the girth of type-I cycles.
As an illustration, we applied the above methods to consnuct a (2457, 3, 9) regular LDPC code, rate 2/3, free of any cycles with length less than 8 and whose structure is
shown by the 819 x 2457 parity-check matrix H shown in
figure 10. In this matrix, along the solid l i e s there is a sin-
Fig. 10. Parity-check matrix of a (2457, 3, 9) LDPC code with girth 8
gle 1 in each row, while along the dashed thicker diagonals there are eight 1’s in each row, so that per row there are nine 1’s and in each column there are three 1’s.
In particular, for column weight j = 2 turbo-like LDPC codes, we can further prove that the minimum length of
+ type41 cycles is 8 and no 4k 2; k = 2,3,4,. .. (e.g.,
length 10 and length 14) type-II cycles exist. Again, Theorems 1 and 2 can be applied to maximize type-I cycles; Several theorems similar to theorem 3 are then employed to eliminate those length 8 and length 12 type-I1 cycles, hence forming a code with girth at least 16. For details, refer to 1111.
4. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a new class of well-structured LDPC codes-turbo-like LDPC codes. As mentioned, we can design large girth regular LDPC codes with flexible code rate in a turbo manner. Hence, large girth guarantees fast convergence of iterative decoding algorithms, large minimum distance between codewords, and alleviates error floor problems at high signal to noise ratio.
Another advantage of these codes is their reduced memory requirements. We need nj memory units to represent

a randomly constructed (n,j,k ) LDPC code when using look-up tables; look-up table has its drawback as it leads to a complicated memory-access architecture. In contrast, turbo-like LDPC codes can he described by a single ( j -
1)(k - 1) x ( k - 1)matrix storing the symbol-wise shifts
S,, For example, for the (2457,3,9) turbo-like LDPC code constructed in this paper, instead of storing 3x 2457 = 7371 row or column indices of those non-zero entries, we only
need to store (9 - 1)(3 - 1) x (9 - 1) = 128 entries of
the symbol-wise shift matrix S, a significant reduction over look-up table methods.
5. REFERENCES
[I] R. G. Gallager,Low-Density Parity Check Codes, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1963.
[2] D. J. C. Mackay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Transactions. on Inforniation llleory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399-431, Mar. 1999.
[3] http://mars.bell-lahs.com.
[4] Y. Li and .I.Moon, “Increasing data rates through iterative coding and antenna diversity in OFDM-based wireless communication,” appeared in IEEE Globecom’01, San Antonio, TX.
[5] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, H. A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 47, no.2, pp. 498519, Feb. 2001.
[6] R. Michael Tanner, Deepak Sridhara, and Tom Fuja, “A class of group-structured LDPC codes” to appear in ICSTA 2001 Proceedings, Amhleside, UK.
[7] R. Michael Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. on Infonnarion Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, Sep. 1981, pp. 533-547.
[8] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R.Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. on Information Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, Feh. 2001, pp. 619-637.
[9] R. L. Townsend and E.J. Weldon, “Self-orthogonal quasi-cyclic code,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory,vol. IT-13,no.2,pp. 183-195,April 1967.
[ 101 R. Michael Tanner, “Spectral graphs for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” in Proceedings of International Syniposiuni on Inforniation Theory, Washington, DC, June 24-29 2001.
[ I l l Jin Lu, Jose M. E Moura, “Turbo-like LDPC codes,” submitted, March 2003.

94

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:21:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

