ITW2003, Paris, France, March 31 -April 4, 2003

On products of graphs for LDPC codes

Jun Xu, Shu Lin

Ian E Blake

Department of Electrical and Computer Department of Electrical and Computer

Engineering, University of California at Engineering, University of Toronto,

Davis, Davis, CA 95616-5294 j unxu, Toronto, M5S 3G4, Canada,

shulin@ece.ucdavis.edu

ifblake@comm.utoronto.ca

Abstract - The notion of product block codes, whose generator matrix is the tensor product of the constituent generator matrices, is well established. 'Qpically they have good performance and a decoding algorithm with complexity on the order of the complexity of the constituent code decoding algorithms. There has been much recent attention on the constructionof bipartite graphs for low density parity check codes whose parity check matrices are the incidence matrices of right versus left vertices of the graph. The relation of properties of the incidence matrix to code performance is difficult to establish precisely although some guidelines are available. Two types of incidence matrix constructions are given here that show promise. In the first instance a combinatorial construction is given and secondly two types of graph products are considered here for their application to LDPC codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
The construction of low density parity check
(LDPC)codes and estimating their performance, is
of great interest, given their known ability to achieve error probabilities very close to the Shannon limit. Interesting progress has been made on the construction of irregular degree sequence bipartite graphs for binary erasure coding (eg. [lo]) and in fact, capacity achieving sequencescan be constructedfor this case. The graphs can be thought of as being constructed to maximize that probability that, at each stage of the decoding, there is a right vertex of degree one attached to a left vertex, which allows the decoding to progress.
To design LDPC codes for the binary symmetric channel however, the situation is less comforting. Here, typically, one designs a graph or parity check matrix for the code and simulates the performance,

trying to tie properties of the graph or incidence matrix in some manner to the performance of the sumproduct decoding algorithm(SPA).It appears that the design criteria currently available are intuitiveguidelines only. For example, notions of graph girth, graph cycle structure, expansion and second eigenvalue of graphs have all been considered for their effect on code performance ([131, [7], [2], [111) with varying degrees of effect.
As noted, our interest here is in investigating certain of these graph product constructions to determine the extent to which they might be useful in cod-
ing theory. Two particular constructions are of interest here: a hybrid product, defined in the next sec-
tion and the non-complete extended p-sum (NEPS)
[3] product, defined in graph-theoretic literature and considered in Section III. It is of interest to determine in what sense the properties of the constituent graphs are reflected in the product. It is also hoped that, as in the case of ordinary product codes, these graph theoretical constructions might lead to simpler
SPA algorithms for decoding, using decoding on the
constituent graphs to simplify the process. This aspect of the constructions is not pursued here.
11. HYBRIDPRODUCTS
This first constructionis discussed in greater detail in [7]; only a brief outline of one of the the constructions in that work is considered here.
Definition II.1 An arbitrary rectangular e x m inci-
dence ((0,l)) matrix M of a combinatorial or geometric structure to be rectangle free (RF) if there is
no set of row indices 1 5 21, a2 I l , il # a:! and col-
< < umn indices 1 j,, j 2 m, j 1 # j 2 such that M
contains 1's at positions ( i l , j l ) , ( 2 1 , j 2 ) , ( 2 2 , j l ) and ( h , j 2 ) .

a7803-77940/03/$17.00@ 2003 IEEE

6

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:38:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Let B be an kb x nb RF incidence matrix and let the appropriate size, as before. In this case we denote

the hybrid product as
A = { A I ,A2,. ..,AT}
A O f B. be a set of ka x n, incidence matrices such that any

vertical or horizontal catenation of two distinct ma- and refer to it as a circulant product. Clearly the ma-

trices from d is RF. Let y, (resp. p,) be the max- trix H corresponds to a bipartite graph with no cy-

imum column (resp. row) weight of any matrix in cles of length 4.If, in addition, the matrices of A are

A and let 'yb (resp. Pb) be the maximum column circulant, the overall matrix represents a quasi-cyclic

(resp. row) weight of B. Similarly let the quanti- code for which one might expect decoding efficien-

ties yi,ph, y';, p)b be the corresponding minimum cies.

weights. Then if r = Id1 is greater than max(yb, Pb) Considering a particular column of H it is clear

then we construct an kakb, nanb incidence matrix H by construction, that the rows of H with 1's in this

by replacing each one entry in B with a matrix of column, are orthogonal on the given column i.e. apart A and each zero entry by an all zeroes matrix of the from the given column, all rows have 1's in disjoint

appropriate order, in such a way that the matrices in column positions. There are at least y:?; such rows

each column and each row are distinct. Clearly the and hence, using the standard result from majority

matrix H is also RF and corresponds to the parity logic decoding, the minimum distance of the code C

check matrix of an LDPC code C. We refer to the with parity check matrix H , d, is

matrix B as the base matrix and the matrices Ai of A as the constituent matrices. We call the construction

+ d 2 yi'y; 1.

a hybrid product and express it as

The code C thus has no cycles of length 4 and

A 0 B.

a convenient bound on its minimum distance. The

From the properties assumed of the matrix B it is always possible to express it as a sum of
permutation-type matrices Pi , i = 1 , 2 , ..,r where
r = max(yb, pb) and where these matrices have at most one 1in each row and column. In this case the incidence matrix of the hybrid product is of the form

success of the construction depends on being able to construct a sufficient number of constituent matrices with the required properties. One technique that uses Euclidean geometries, which seem naturally suited to the problem, is briefly described.
The following example uses an m-dimensional Euclidean geometry EG(m,q ) over IFq, where q =

r

ps,to establish an interesting LDPC code. Many of

the incidence mauices derived from the geometries

i=l
where we abuse notation and equate the designation of the graph with its incidence matrix. While there is a natural association of the matrices Ai with a graph, the association of the matrices Pi with graphs is more

can be made cyclic, making them attractive for implementation. If the base matrix B is also cyclic the resulting code is quasi-cyclic. This is explored further in [7], as are many other aspects of the construction given here.

artificial and not pursued.

Example II.2 Consider the Euclidean geometry

In some cases the matrix B can be constructed as EG(2,7)(m = 2, s = 1, p = 7). The geometry has

a circulant matrix. In this case let the first row of 49 points and 56 lines, with 7points on a line. Each

+ + the matrix B correspond to the binary polynomial of the 8 bundles ofparallel lines contains 7 lines. Of
f(x) = a0 alz .-.an-lxn-l and succeeding the 56 lines, 48 of them do not pass through the on-

+ rows correspond to right shifts of this polynomial gin. The line-pointincidence matrix of these 48 lines
modulo xn 1 and kb = nb = n. If the number not through the originforms a circulant matrix with

of nonzero coefficients of the polynomial is then r we rows and columns of weight 8 which is taken as the

can replace the coefficientai in the matrix by Ai E A base matrix of the circulant construction. The con-

where zeroes are replaced by the all zeroes matrix of stituent matrices are chosen as any 7 matrix of the 8

0-7803-7799-0/03/$17.0@0 2003 IEEE

7

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:38:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

possible 7 x 49 line-point incidence matrices of the parallel bundles. The resulting parity check matrix of the code is then a 336 x 2352 matrix corresponding to a rate .857 code with minimum distance at least 8. The bit and frame error performance of this code is shown in Figure 1,compared against uncoded BPSK and the Shannon bound. Most notably at a bit error
rate of lo-?, the code pe$ormance is approximately
2 dB away from the Shannon bound and the error floor is somewhere less than this error rate. Recall that this performance is achieved with a relatively small length code with a regular and simple structure that will have a simplijed decoding algorithm based on the hybrid product of much smaller cyclic matrices. Furthermore its distance is a very modest 8. The construction is clearly an effective realization of LDPC codes with very good performance.

Id

IC'

IO"
',0-
!i 'OI

"1 1 \ 16.
IO '

I

10-1

'

8

1

'

"

"

'I

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

IO

ELL!?& (dB)

Figure 1: Error performance of the (2352,2016)hybrid code from EG(2,7) with SPA decoding.

flected in the product graph, with the thought that such constructions will be of use for coding purposes.
A particularly interesting graph construction is the non-complete extended p-sum (NEPS) of a set of graphs, definedas follows [3]:
DefinitionIlI.1 The NEPS of the graphs
GI, G2, ...,G, with basis B, an arbitrary set
of binary n-tuples, is the graph whose set of vertices is the Cartesian product of the set of vertices of of the respective graphs and in which two vertices
. . ( 2 1 , 2 2 , . a , Xn) and ( y l ,y 2 , . a , y,) are adjacent if
and only if there is an n-tuple (01,02,* * .,0), E B
Such that X i = yi holds exactly when pi = 0 and x i
is adjacent to yi in Gi when ,f3i = 1.
It is noted immediately that this concept contains many of the standard notions of graph product, including product and sum of graphs by choosing the
set 23 appropriately. For example, in these cases the set B consists of the sets ((0, l ) , ( 1 , O ) ) and ((1,l))
respectively. We define the complete p-sum (or just p-sum) of a graph to be the NEPS when the set 23 is chosen to be set of all binary n-tuples of Hamming weight p. While this will be a case of particular interest to us, we carry along the more general defini-
tion (for which the p in NEPS is misleading) . The
following theorem is of interest [3] as it relates the eigenvalues of the NEiPS product to those of the constituent graphs:
Theorem III.2 Fori = 1 , 2 , ,n let Gi be a graph with ni vertices and let Xi1,Xiz, ,Xi, be the spec-
tra of Gi. Then the adjacency matrix and spectra of
the NEPS graph with basis B are respectively

111. NEPS PRODUCTS

A = Er o E B A@p - . . @ A & , At: A.il,i2,...,in = C p E:!AB ...

A variety of graphs have been proposed for use in LDPC coding. These include expander graphs, for which perhaps the most useful criteria is the size of the second eigenvalue, bipartite graphs with prescribed degree sequences (e.g. [lo]), and graphs with large girth. Graphs with maximum second eigenvalue are particularly interesting ([9], [8]). In this work we restrict ourselves to considering the problem of graph product constructionsfor which the properties of the constituent graphs can be predictably re-

forik = 1,2,..-,nk,k = 1,2,-..n.
Eigenvalue distribution for a variety of interesting graphs for use in such a construction are known, such as the complete graph on n vertices, K,, H , the regular graph of degree n - 2 and 2k vertices and Knl,nzthe complete bipartite of n1and 722 vertices. In addition there are the two examples of Ramanujan graphs ([8], [9]) Rb,k and Rnb,k as the k-regular bipartite and non-bipartite graphs respectively (such

~7803-7799-0/03/$17.0@0 2003 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:38:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

graphs achieve the upper bound on the second eigenvalue).
It will be of interest that the graph products constructed be connected and bipartite and again we turn to [3] for the following (combining Theorems 7.13 and 7.19), valid for p-sum graphs:
Theorem III.3 Let GI, Gz,...,G, be connected
graphs each containing at least two vertices. Then the p-sum of these graphs is a connected bipartite
graph if and only if one of the following conditions
holds:
1. p is equal to n and exactly one of the graphs is bipartite.

By following the design criteria of no small cycles and good minimum distance, the hybrid product has been shown to give very good results via simulation [7]. At this point it is difficult to gain further analytical insight on these codes although further construction techniques will be of interest.
The NEPS construction seems very amenable to further analysis. In this initial study it was simply shown how the graph spectrum of constituent graphs can be used to determine the expansion properties of the NEPS product.
While the progress on aspects of this investigation has been modest, it is felt the case has been made that further investigation of these ideas will prove fruitful.

2. p is odd and less than n and all the graphs are bipartite

REFERENCES
Ian E Blake, Expander codes revisited, 3% Allerton Conference, September, 2002.

The theorems offer the possibility of constructing graphs with properties derived from the constituent graphs. A brief example is given:

Example III.4 Consider the (ordinary)direct prod-

uct of the graphs K , and h$,,k. Theproduct is bipar-

tite and regular with nq(q2 - 1)/2 vertices on each

side and each vertex with degree ( n - 1)k. The m a -

imum and second eigenvalue of the product are, re-

spectively, k ( n - 1 ) and 2(n - 1)-

with a ratio

the same as for a Ramanujan graph. Similar obser-

vations can be madefor a complete p sum graph with

the same constituent graphs.

Unfortunately such product graphs are of limited
interest from a coding theoretic point of view. Fur-
ther investigations however are expected to be more successful at using the ideas introduced to construct good LDPC codes.

IV. COMMENTS
Two types of graph products have been considered, the hybrid and circulant product and the NEPS product. The hybrid product could have been considered without reference to graphs although the criteria of no cycles of length 4 is best considered in the context of graphs.

D. Burshtein and G. Miller, Expander graph arguments for message-passing algorithms, IEEE Trans. Information Theory, vol. 47, pp. 782-790,2001.
D.M. CvetkoviC, M. Doob and H. Sachs, Spectra of Graphs: Theory and Application, Academic Press, 1980.
D.M. CvetkoviC, P. Rowlinson and S. SimiC, Eigenspaces of Graphs, Cambridge University Press, 1997.
P. Elias, Error-free coding, IRE Trans. Information Theory, vol. 4, pp. 29-37, 1954.
W. Imrich and S. Klaviar, Product graphs: Structure and recognition, Wiley-Interscience Series in Discrete Mathematics and Optimization,2000.
S . Lin, Hybrid constructions,preprint, 2002.
A. Lubotzky, R. Philips and P. Sam& Ramanujan graphs, Combinaforica,vol. 8, pp. 261-277, 1988.
G.A. Margulis, Explicit constructions of concentrators, Pmblems of Information Transmission,vol. 9, pp. 325-332, 1972 (English translation).
[101 M.A. Shokrollahi, Capacity achieving sequences, Codes, Systems and Gmphical Models, vol. 123, M A Mathematics and its Applications, B. Marcus and J. Rosenthal (eds.), 153166 (2000).
[ l l ] M. Sipser and D. Spiel”, Expander codes, IEEE Trans. Information Theory vol. 42, pp. 1710-1722, 1996.
[12] R. M. Tanner, Explicit concentrators from generalized Ngons, SIAM J. Alg. Disc. Math., vol. 5, 287-293 (1984).
[13] M. Tanner, Minimum distance bounds by graph analysis, IEEE Trans. Information Theory vol. 42, pp. 1710-1722, 1996.

0-7803-7799-0/03/$17.00 @ 2003 IEEE

9

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:38:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

