2003 4th IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Comrnunlcations

PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS OF FINITE-LENGTH LDPC CODES

Yingjian Xue

Haige Xiang

Dept. of Electronics Peking University Beijing, China 100871
xue@p!a,edu.cn

Dept. of Electronics Peking University Beijing, China 100871 xianghg@ph,edu.cn

ABSTRACT
In this paper, we are concerned with the finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes when used over Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) channels. We present the iterative decoding algorithm of LDPC codes, and we also discuss the encoding methods and the bipartite graph representation of LDPC codes ensemble. Finite-length LDPC codes performances are investigated, and the influence of cycle is pointed out. Simulation results show that irregular LDPC codes with variable and check nodes degree distribution optimized for infinite-length codes are not optimal for finite-length LDPC codes, and the error patterns of both regular and irregular codes are investigated as an effort to improve the performance and design methodology of finite-length LDPC codes.
1. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes were invented by Gallager [2] in 1962, hut were nearly forgotten for more than 30 years. In Gallager[Z], an iterative decoding scheme, which is now named belief propagation decoding algorithm, was proposed, and the analysis of decoding performance of LDPC codes was presented. Due to the lack of the computer simulation power that we now enjoy, the property to approach the Shannon channel capacity by LDPC codes under the belief propagation decoding algorithm was not fully investigated in Gallager[Z]. However, it was pointed out by Gallager that LDPC codes can break the cutoff rate in the binary input symmetric channel(BSC). The conjecture that the cutoff rate might be the achievable Shannon limit was denied decisively only until the invention of Turbo codes in 1993. If the opinion pointed out by Gallager in 1962 had made researchers at that time be aware of the importance of the iterative decoding algorithm, the whole history of channel coding research would have been totally changed. After the introduction of turbo codes by Berrou et a/. 191, LDPC

codes were rediscovered by Mackay[S] in 1996, and were shown to demonstrate the properties of good codes capable of asymptotically approaching Shannon limit. In recent years, LDPC codes have attracted a great deal of interest. For various channels including binary input additive white Gaussian noise (BIAWGN) channel, it was demonstrated [ I ] that with properly designed code construction parameters, LDPC codes can he used to transmit information reliably at rates which can be higher than those achievable with turbo codes. In fact, the state of art in the coding field is currently achieved by LDPC codes, which was accomplished by Chung et a1 [4] showing that LDPC codes can be within 0.0045dB from the Shannon limit at BER 10-6inBIAWGN channel using a block length of lo7. In [7], a design method of channel capacity approaching irregular LDPC codes was presented by using Gaussian Approximation (GA), and other optimization algorithms include the Density Evolution(DE)[11. Although codes designed by GA or DE can achieve desirable performance, the practicability of these methods as to design good finite-length LDPC codes is much reduced, which will be discussed in this paper.
By considering the performance of these codes under optimal (maximum-likelihood, ML) decoding, LDPC
codes have heen shown to possess some very desirable properties [2], [4]. ML decoding of LDPC codes is in general not feasible. Instead, the iterative soft-decoding algorithm proposed by Gallager can asymptotically approach the ML decoding when the code length approaches infinite. For finite-length LDPC codes, the iterative belief propagation decoding algorithm is not optimal.
In this paper, we investigate the decoding behavior of finite- length regular and irregular LDPC codes which have totally different error patterns. We also find that cycles in finite-length LDPC codes can greatly influence the performance of the iterative decoding algorithm, which shall be a major optimization factor in LDPC codes constmction. Some efforts to improve the performance of LDPC codes are also discussed.

0-7803-7858-w03/$17.00GI2003 IEEE

85

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:19:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

The paper is organized as follows. In Section 11, we provide some background information on LDPC codes and iterative belief propagation decoding algorithm. In Sections 111, we discuss the code construction method. In
Section IV,we analyze the error pattern of the decoding
algorithm for regular and irregular LDPC codes, respectively, and simulation results are discussed.

2. LDPC CODES AND THE ITERATIVE DECODING ALGORITHM

The LDPC codes are a kind of parity-check codes whose

code ensemble can he defined solely by the parity-check

matrix H with the following structural properties: 1) each

row consists of k “ones”; 2) each column consists of j

“ones”; 3) the number of “ones” in common between any

two columns is no greater than 1;4) bothj and k are small

compared to the length of the code and the number of

rows. Since j and k are small, H has a small density of

“ones” and hence is a sparse matrix. For this reason, the

code specified by is called an LDPC code. The LDPC

code defined above is known as a regular LDPC code. If

not all the columns or all the rows of the parity-check

matrix have the same number of “ones” (or weights), an

LDPC code is said to he irregular.

Low-density parity-check codes can also be defined on

a bipartite graph as in Fig I . The left nodes represent the

code bits, and are called variable nodes; while the right

nodes represent the parity check constraints each variable

node participates. The iterative decoding algorithm,

namely belief propagation, can he illustrated by a LDPC

code’s corresponding bipartite graph. In Fig I , the log

likelihood (LLR) message from a variable node Vj to its

neighboring check node is defined as

while the

log likelihood (LLR) message from a check node to its neighboring variable node is defined as ui-,i , with
m. I P(Xj = o Yi)
Uo+ = log

For irregular LDPC codes, we define d,” as the number

of the neighboring check nodes for a variable node v i,

and d; as the number of neighboring variable nodes of a
check node u j . We can derive two important iterative

equations,

d:-1

vi,j =

‘k-i

k=Q.ki i

And

m
Fig 1. A (3,4)-reguIar code of length 20. There are 20 variable nodes and 15 check nodes. The message flow of
the decoding algorithm is shown on the right.
For a LDPC code X with code length n and check
equations m, the iterative decoding algorithm of belief propagation can now be realized as the following computing procedures. 0. Initialization
uI”. . = u 0-i
4. if S = X H T = O
then Decoding ends successhlly (S denotes the syndrome vector)
else if Maximum loop limit reaches
then Decoding fails else Goto Step 1 to continue endif This can be generalized to irregular codes, where a variable number of degrees are allowed. Let

i=2

86

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:19:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

and
d
p ( x ) : = p .j xi-1
i=2
be the generating functions of the degree distributions for
the variable and check nodes, respectively, where 4. and
pi are the fractions of edges belonging to degree-
variable and check nodes, respectively. Using this expression, the nominal rate of the code is given by

The iterative belief propagation decoding algorithm can approach the optimal maximum likelihood (ML) decoding scheme if the code length can he infinite and hopefully no loop exists in the computation tree of the decoding process. But for finite-length LDPC codes, due to the existence of short length loops, the belief propagation decoding algorithm can not be thought as being optimal, and currently various methods have been investigated to improve the performance of the belief propagation decoding algorithm for the finite length LDPC codes. Recently, researchers have shown great interest on the optimization of iterative decoding algorithm for the fmitelength LDPC codes. The analysis of iterative decoders for LDPC codes with finite length is an unsolved problem.
3. CYCLES AND CODE CONSTRUCTION
An ensemble of LDPC codes C(n, 1 ,p ) is characterized
A ( x ) : = z @ - ' by its block length n, a variable node degree distribution , and a check node degree distribution
c p ( x ):=C p i x i - ' . FOI example, a typical element of
(IO, x', x', is shown in Fig 2. In [l], cycles are also defined as stopping sets in the analysis of finite-length LDPC codes.
Definition [Stopping Sets]: A stopping set S is a subset of V, the set of variable nodes, such that all neighbors of S are connected to Sat least twice.
The length of a cycle is defined as the number of edges that connect the points of a stopping set, and the girth is defined as the minimum length of all the cycles in the bipartite graph of a LDPC code. As one can see from Fig. 2, the set {vI,v2,v3. v4}is a stopping set (cycle), the cycle length is 12.
The existence of stopping set in LDPC codes can destroy the validity of the iterative belief propagation decoding algorithm, which may result in that the decoding outputs deviate from the ML decoding outputs. For a

Fig. 2. A specific element from the ensemble C (IO,x2, x?, and the set {vi, v2, v3, v4} is a stopping set.

regular (n.j, k)LDPC code, [2] shows that the girth length

rn is upper bounded by

-m- I <

logn

2 Iog(k-1Xj-1)

(2.1)

In fact, the girth length can also be related with the

minimum code distance of a LDPC codes ensemble. So,

we conjecture that better code design for the finite-length

LDPC codes is to make the girth length as large as possible which is the same as to maximize the minimum

code distance of LDPC codes. This viewpoint is supported by the simulation results of short-length LDPC

codes.

Given a pair of variable and check node degree

distributions, we construct the parity check matrix of

LDPC codes totally randomly under the constraint of

degree distribution, while at same time maximizing the

girth length which is upper hounded by equation 2.1 for

regular LDPC codes. As to irregular codes, it seems

impossible to obtain a similar form of upper bound expression, however, we have the following two well-

known results about cycles in an irregular LDPC codes

ensemble. 1). The behavior of the individual codes concentrates around the ensemble average and that this

concentration is exponential in the block length. 2) The

ensemble average converges to the ensemble average of

the cycle-free case as the block length tends to infinity. It

is these theorems that make the cycle-free assumption for

quite long code blocks justifies. So, for long enough

LDPC code, it can neglect the influence of cycles on its performance, however, for short-length LDPC codes

cycles in a code plays an important role in determining the

decoding performance. Now we are faced with an interesting question, for a

finite-length LDPC code ensemble, the iterative decoding algorithm becomes sub-optimal due to the existence of

cycles in the code ensemble, so, how much of the

performance loss of iterative decoding systems is due to

87

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:19:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the choice of codes and how much is due to the choice of
the suboptimal decoding algorithm? As indicated in [XI,
the most of the performance loss is due to the structure of the codes themselves. Even under the optimal ML decoding, the error floor of the performance curves for some code ensembles is also evident. This result gives us a direction of the LDPC codes research, showing that the emphasis of research efforts shall be put on the construction optimization of LDPC codes.
The simulations were carried out to evaluate the performance of both regular and irregular LDPC codes with somewhat short block length under the channel model of AWGN. For regular LDPC codes (5120, 3, 6), the girth is upper bounded by 9.4, which means that we can construct a regular code with no cycles of length 4 and 6 only, while cycles of length 8 exist. For irregular LDPC codes of length 5120, we choose the degree distribution functions
+ 1 ( x ) = 0 . 2 3 4 0 5 ~ '+0.21243x2 +0.14701x5
0 . 1 0 2 9 8 ~+~0 . 3 0 2 7 3 ~ ' ~
p(x)=0.71875x7 +0.28125x8
This degree distributions pair is a capacity-approaching pair given out in [7] for code length of infinity. These degree distributions are not optimal for the finite-length LDPC codes, which becomes more and more evident as the code length becomes shorter. However, a comparison between this irregular code ensemble and regular code ensemble may give us some insight of the behavior of the LDPC codes performance, and hopefully leads us to better understand and design finite-length LDPC codes ensembles.
4. SIMULATION RESULTS
Since the LDPC codes are linear codes, we use the allzero code word with antipodal signals transmitted over the AWGN channel, which facilitates the programming complexity with no loss of accuracy.
In Fig. 3., it shows the performance of both regular and irregular LDPC codes with code length of 5120. From the performance curves, we noticed that the regular code has no error floor while the irregular code demonstrates a significant error floor phenomenon.
Further analysis of the error patterns of the regular and irregular LDPC codes shows that the behavior of the decoding algorithm differs significantly in several ways: (1) No undetected errors were found for regular LDPC code, while irregular LDPC codes often decode to wrong

code words. For irregular LDPC code under simulation, it has variable nodes with degree 2 and cycles of 8, and the corresponding code hits involved in these cycles are the main reason that the irregular code decodes to the wrong code word, since the existence of these variable nodes and cycles makes the code ensemble's minimum code distance quite small. When decoding errors occur, the regular code simply fails to decode to the right code word when the maximum decoding iteration number limit reaches, so all the errors are detectable. (2) The error floor that the irregular LDPC code demonstrates is due to the degree 2 variable nodes associated with cycles of length 8. We construct the irregular code ensemble with variable node of degree 2 and 3 free of cycles of length 4 and 6, the existence of cycles of length 8 plays a major role when decoding at high SNR, and this area is just where the error floor gets evident. (3) At high SNR, the number of decoding errors each time by irregular LDPC code is quite small, mostly 4, and the related code bits are mostly in the same cycles. For regular LDPC code, all the errors at high SNR are caused by the decoding failure events, and number of decoding errors are quite large, mostly more than 300 each time, which demonstrates the phenomenon of error bursts. (4) For irregular LDPC code we tested, it has variable nodes with quite different degrees. Simulations data show that errors occur less likely to variable nodes of larger degrees than to variable node of smaller degrees. In other words, the code bits involved in more parity check syndromes are more reliable when decoded by the iterative decoding algorithm. ( 5 ) As can be seen in Fig. 3., at low SNR, irregular LDPC code outperforms regular code, while at high SNR, regular code is much better with no error floor. This result can only be applied to the finite-length LDPC code ensemble, since for code with quite large code block length irregular LDPC codes outperform regular LDPC codes. This also shows that for short length LDPC codes, the optimization method is yet to he investigated, since the optimized degree distributions for infinite code length are defmitely not optimal for fmite-length LDPC codes.
The above results show that both regular and irregular code have some desirable properties, and if we could combine the good sides of both codes together we may achieve a much better performance in the hture work. Another important open problem still to investigate is how to optimize finite-length irregular LDPC codes ensemble.

a0
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:19:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

,~~~.......\.......... ~;&.....\...... ~ ~ ..~......~...... .~~ :~ ....... <........ ~~~......~. ?~.......~~~~ ....~.......,

\ i ’ O ,l . . ......~ .........~:.\~~ ~~$.......... ~~ :~..~......~.... ~

~~ :........... ~~

.... ........ ~~~~~

:

~~~~~

....... i4

‘0 ’
1~................. ~. ~..~.......:...... ~ ~ ~ .~............ ? ~~ .......... ::..~.~.~........~..

~ ............... 4J

[7] S.-Y.Chung, “On the construction of some capacityapproaching coding schemes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 2000.
[8] Changyan Di, D. Proietti, I.E.Telatar, I. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of low-density
parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 48, Jun. 2002.
[9] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error correcting coding and decoding: Turbo codes,” in Proc. 1993 IEEE Intl Con$ Communications, Geneva, Switzerland, 1993, pp. 10641070.

J

1

2

3

1

EblNO (dB)

Fig. 3.Performance of regular and irregular LDPC codes over AWGN channel, code length n= 5120.
5. ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for many helpful comments and suggestions
6. REFERENCES

[I]T. J. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity- approaching low-density paritycheck codes,” IEEE Trans . Inform. Theory, vol. 41, Feb. 2001.
[2] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21-28, Jan. 1962.
[3] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density PariiyCheck Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[4] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Fomey, T . J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the Design of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon Limit,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theov, vol. 47, Feh. 2001.
[ 5 ] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 1645-1646, Aug. 1996.
[6] T. J. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 41, Feb. 2001.

89
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:19:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

