1636

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 49, NO. 7, JULY 2003

Binary Intersymbol Interference Channels: Gallager Codes, Density Evolution, and Code Performance Bounds
Aleksandar Kavcˇic´, Member, IEEE, Xiao Ma, and Michael Mitzenmacher, Member, IEEE

Abstract—We study the limits of performance of Gallager codes

(low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes) over binary linear inter-

symbol interference (ISI) channels with additive white Gaussian

noise (AWGN). Using the graph representations of the channel,

the code, and the sum–product message-passing detector/decoder,

we prove two error concentration theorems. Our proofs expand

on previous work by handling complications introduced by the

channel memory. We circumvent these problems by considering

not just linear Gallager codes but also their cosets and by distin-

guishing between different types of message flow neighborhoods

depending on the actual transmitted symbols. We compute the

noise tolerance threshold using a suitably developed density

evolution algorithm and verify, by simulation, that the thresholds

represent accurate predictions of the performance of the iterative

sum–product algorithm for finite (but large) block lengths. We

also demonstrate that for high rates, the thresholds are very close

to the theoretical limit of performance for Gallager codes over

ISI channels. If C denotes the capacity of a binary ISI channel

and if Ci i d denotes the maximal achievable mutual information

rate when the channel inputs are independent and identically

distributed (i.i.d.) binary random variables (Ci i d

C), we

prove that the maximum information rate achievable by the

sum–product decoder of a Gallager (coset) code is upper-bounded

by Ci i d . The last topic investigated is the performance limit of

the decoder if the trellis portion of the sum–product algorithm is

executed only once; this demonstrates the potential for trading

off the computational requirements and the performance of the

decoder.

Index Terms—Bahl–Cocke–Jelinek–Raviv (BCJR)-once bound, channel capacity, density evolution, Gallager codes, independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) capacity, intersymbol interference (ISI) channel, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, sum– product algorithm, turbo equalization.

I. INTRODUCTION
I F continuous channel inputs are allowed, the capacity of discrete-time intersymbol interference (ISI) channels with additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) can be computed using

Manuscript received February 26, 2001; revised February 21, 2003. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grants CCR-9904458 and CCR-0118701, and by the National Storage Industry Consortium. The material in this paper was presented in part at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Washington, DC, June 2001.
A. Kavcˇic´ and M. Mitzenmacher are with the Division of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138 USA (e-mail: kavcic@deas.harvard.edu; michaelm@eecs.harvard.edu).
X. Ma was with the Division of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA USA. He is now with the Department of Electrical Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong (e-mail: xma@ee.cityu.hk).
Communicated by R. Urbanke, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2003.813563

the water-filling theorem [1], [2]. In many applications, the physics of the channel do not allow continuous input alphabets. A prime example of a two-level (binary) ISI channel is the saturation magnetic recording channel, because the magnetization domains can have only two stable phases [3]. Other examples include digital communication channels where the input alphabet is confined to a finite set [4].
The computation of the capacity of discrete-time ISI channels with a finite number of allowed signaling levels is an open problem. In the past, the strategy has been to obtain numeric [5] and analytic [6], [7] bounds on the capacity. Very often authors have concentrated on obtaining bounds on the achievable information rate when the inputs are independent and uniformly distributed (i.u.d.)—the so-called symmetric information rate [5]–[7]. Recently, a Monte Carlo method for numerically evaluating the symmetric information rate using the forward recursion of the Bahl–Cocke–Jelinek–Raviv (BCJR) algorithm [8] (also known as the Baum–Welch algorithm, the sum–product algorithm, or the forward–backward algorithm) has been proposed by Arnold and Loeliger [9], and independently by Pfister, Soriaga, and Siegel [10]. The same procedure can be used to numerically evaluate the i.i.d. capacity, which is defined as the maximal achievable information rate when the inputs are independent and identically distributed. This marks the first (arbitrarily close in the probability- sense) approximation to the exact result involving the channel capacity of a discrete-time ISI channel with binary inputs. Also, recently, tight lower [11] and upper [12], [13] bounds have been computed using Monte Carlo methods for Markov channel inputs. The remaining issue is to devise codes that will achieve the capacity (or at least the i.i.d. capacity).
The ability to achieve (near) channel capacity has recently been numerically demonstrated for various memoryless [14], [15] channels using Gallager codes, also known as low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [16]. The theory of Gallager codes has vastly benefitted from the notion of codes on graphs first introduced by Tanner [17] and further expanded into a unifying theory of codes on graphs by Wiberg et al. [18] and Forney [19]. MacKay and Neal [20], [21] showed that there exist good Gallager codes with performances about 0.5 dB worse than turbo codes [22]. A major breakthrough was the construction of irregular Gallager codes [23], and the development of a method to analyze them for erasure channels [14], [24]. These methods were adapted to memoryless channels with continuous output alphabets (e.g., AWGN channels, Laplace channels, etc.) by Richardson and Urbanke [25], who also coined the term “den-

0018-9448/03$17.00 © 2003 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:48:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KAVCˇ IC´ et al.: BINARY INTERSYMBOL INTERFERENCE CHANNELS

1637

sity evolution” for a tool to analyze the asymptotic performance

of Gallager and turbo codes over these channels [26]. The use-

fulness of the tool was demonstrated by using it to optimize

codes whose performance is proven to get very close to the ca-

pacity, culminating in a remarkable 0.0045-dB distance from the

capacity of the memoryless AWGN channel reported by Chung

et al. [27].

In this paper, we focus on developing the density evolution

method for channels with binary inputs and ISI memory. The

computed thresholds are used for lower-bounding the capacity,

as well as for upper-bounding the average code performance.

The main topics of this paper are: 1) concentration theorems

for Gallager codes and the sum–product message-passing de-

coder over binary ISI channels; 2) a density evolution method

for computing the thresholds of “zero-error” performance over

these channels; 3) theorems establishing that the asymptotic

performance of Gallager codes using the sum–product algo-

rithm is upper-bounded by the symmetric information rate and

the i.i.d. capacity; and 4) the computation of the BCJR-once

bound, which is the limit of “zero-error” performance of the

sum–product algorithms if the trellis portion of the algorithm

is executed only once.

The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we describe

the channel model, introduce the various capacity and infor-

mation rate definitions, and briefly describe the sum–product

decoder [28]. In Section III, we introduce the necessary notation

for handling the analysis of Gallager codes for channels with

memory and prove two key concentration theorems. Section IV

is devoted to describing the density evolution algorithm for

channels with ISI memory. In Section V, computed thresholds

are shown for regular Gallager codes. Section V also presents

a theorem regarding the limit of achievable code rates using

binary linear codes. In this section, we also develop the notion

of the BCJR-once bound, which has a practical implication;

namely, it is the limit of performance of the sum–product

algorithm if the trellis portion of the algorithm is executed only

once. This provides a concrete example of how we can trade off

the computational load (by doing the expensive BCJR step only

once) with the decoding performance. Section VI concludes

the paper.

Basic Notation: Matrices are denoted by boldface upper

case letters (e.g., ). Column vectors are denoted by underlined

characters, e.g., . Random variables (vectors) are typically

denoted by upper case characters, while their realizations are

denoted by lower case characters (e.g., a random vector has

a realization ). The superscript denotes matrix and vector

transposition. If a column vector is

,

then a subvector collecting entries

is denoted

by

. The notation

denotes

the probability of

, while

denotes

the probability of

given that

occurred. The

probability mass functions of discrete random variables will

be denoted with the symbol “ ,” e.g., the probability mass

function of a discrete random vector evaluated at will

be denoted by

, i.e., it is the probability that

takes the value . The probability density function (pdf) of

a continuous random variable will be denoted by the symbol

Fig. 1. Factor graph representation of the ISI channel.

“ .” For example, the pdf of a continuous random vector

evaluated at the point will be denoted by

.

II. THE CHANNEL, GALLAGER CODES AND DECODING

A. Channel Model, Graph Representation and Capacity

Assume that we have a binary discrete-time ISI channel of

finite length , characterized by the channel response polyno-

mial

, where

. The

input to the discrete-time channel at time

is a real-

ization of a random variable drawn from a binary alphabet

. The output of the channel is a realization

of a random variable drawn from the alphabet

. The

channel’s probabilistic law is captured by the equation

(1)

where is a zero-mean AWGN sequence with variance

whose realizations are

.

The channel in (1) is conveniently represented by a trellis

[29], or, equivalently, by a graph where for each variable

there is a single trellis node [18], [19]. Define the state at time

as the vector that collects the input variables

through

, i.e.,

. The realization of the random vector

can take one of values. With this notation, we can factor

the function

(2) where each factor is

(3)
This factorization is represented by the factor graph in Fig. 1. Each node of the graph (denoted by the letter “T”) represents a factor (3), while each edge connected to the node represents a variable on which the factor depends. Edges terminated by a small filled circle ( ) are half edges. Half edges may be considered terminals to which other graphs may be connected. For details on factor-graph representations, see [19], [28].
For the channel in (1), the capacity is defined as
(4)

where

is the mutual information1 between the

channel input and the output evaluated for a specific probability

X Y 1Some authors refer to I( ; ) as the average mutual information
(AMI), see, e.g., [1], [6], [7].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:48:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1638

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 49, NO. 7, JULY 2003

mass function

of the channel input, where

. Another quantity related to the mutual information is

the maximum i.i.d. mutual information rate (the i.i.d. capacity),

defined as

(5)

where the supremum is taken over all probability mass functions

of i.i.d. random variables ,

. Clearly,

.

We shall also use the symmetric information rate

(6)

Fig. 2. Bipartite graph representation of a regular Gallager coset code (L ; R ) = (2; 3).

The degree of a node is the number of edges connected to it. which is the information rate obtained when the input sequence Two degree polynomials is Bernoulli- , i.e., when the inputs are i.u.d.

Conjecture 1: For the binary ISI channel modeled by (1),

and

holds.

Neither the capacity nor the i.i.d. capacity

are known

in closed form. Only if the channel coefficients are

for

(i.e., if the channel does not have memory) do we have

, in which case the capacity is known and can be

evaluated via numerical integration [1], [6]. For channels with

ISI memory,

can be very accurately numerically evalu-

ated (with probability ) using the Arnold–Loeliger method [9].

These numerical evaluations also confirm (though they do not

prove) that

for binary ISI channels.

are defined [23], where

and

are the maximal vari-

able- and check-node degrees, respectively. If represents the

total number of edges in the graph, then the value represents

the fraction of the edges that are connected to variable nodes

of degree . Similarly, represents the fraction of the edges

that are connected to check nodes of degree . Clearly

B. Gallager Coset Codes

The design code rate2 is

A Gallager code (also known as an LDPC code) is a linear

block code whose parity-check matrix is sparse [16]. Here, we

will extend this definition to include any coset of a linear block

code with a sparse parity-check matrix. An information block

is denoted by a

vector

. If a sparse

binary parity-check matrix is denoted by , then

denotes the

generator matrix corresponding to (with

the property

). A Gallager coset code is specified

by a parity-check matrix and an

coset-defining vector

. The codeword is an

vector

(7)

where

, and denotes binary vector addition. The

codeword satisfies

A regular Gallager coset code is a code for which

and

. The graph in Fig. 2 represents a regular Gallager

coset code for which

.

We define the ensemble

of Gallager coset

codes as the set of all block codes that satisfy (7) and (8),

whose codewords are of dimension

, whose graph

corresponding to the parity-check matrix has variable and

check degree polynomials

and , respectively, and

whose binary coset vector can take any of values.

Before transmission over the channel (1), the variables

are converted to variables

as

(8)

(9)

The code is linear if and only if ; otherwise, the code is a

coset code of a linear Gallager code.

It is convenient to represent a Gallager coset code by a bipar-

tite graph [17], [19], [28]. The graph has two types of nodes:

variable nodes (one variable node for each entry in the vector )

and

check nodes (one check node for each entry in the

vector ). There is an edge connecting the th check node and

the th variable node if the entry

in the th row and th

column of is nonzero. Thus, each check node represents a

parity-check equation

, where the symbol

denotes binary addition. An example of a graph of a Gallager

coset code is depicted in Fig. 2.

Since there is a one-to-one correspondence between the vectors and , the term codeword will be used interchangeably to de-
scribe either of the two vectors.
C. Sum–Product Decoding by Message Passing
In the literature, several methods exist for soft detection of symbols transmitted over ISI channels [8], [30]–[34]. There also exist several message-passing algorithms that decode codes on graphs [16], [17], [23], [25]. Here, we will adopt the algorithm
2The true code rate of a code defined by a graph will always be greater than or equal to the design code rate. In practice, they are often extremely close, so we do not distinguish between them throughout the paper.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:48:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KAVCˇ IC´ et al.: BINARY INTERSYMBOL INTERFERENCE CHANNELS

1639

Check-to-Variable Messages: The next step is to compute

the messages going from the check nodes back to the variable

nodes. Let the variable node be of degree , i.e., it is connected

to variable nodes, and let it represent a parity-check equation

for which

. In round , let

(where

) denote the messages arriving from the variable nodes to the

check nodes. The rule for computing the message

is

(11)

Fig. 3. Joint code/channel graph.

and is depicted in Fig. 6. Here

referred to in the coding literature as the “sum–product” algorithm [18], [28], but is also known as belief propagation [35], [36]. When applied specifically to ISI channels, the algorithm also takes the name “turbo equalization” [37]. For convenience in the later sections, we describe here the “windowed” version of the algorithm.
First, we join the channel factor graph (Fig. 1) with the code graph (Fig. 2) to get the joint channel/code graph depicted in Fig. 3. The exact schedule of the message-passing algorithm seems to have only very little effect on the convergence value but may affect the convergence speed. However, to do the analysis in Section III, we must adopt a message-passing schedule because the schedule affects the structure of the message-flow neighborhood defined in Section III. Here, we describe the scheduling choice presented in [38] often referred to as turbo equalization [37] due to the resemblance to turbo decoding [22].
Trellis-to-Variable Messages: Assume that the received vector is . In the th round of the algorithm, we compute the

trellis output messages , where the messages (these are

available from the previous round of the message-passing de-

coding algorithm on the code subgraph of the joint channel/code

graph) are considered as the extrinsic information (in the initial

round

). The output message is computed by running

the “windowed” version of the BCJR algorithm. The windowed

BCJR algorithm for computing the message starts trellis

stages to the left and to the right of the th trellis node. The for-

ward-going and backward-going message vectors are started as

, where is an all-ones vector of size

. The computation of the message follows the BCJR

algorithm described in [8]; schematically depicted in Fig. 4. In

the Appendix, this algorithm is reproduced for completeness.

Variable-to-Check Messages: Once the messages are

computed, we compute the messages going from the variable

nodes to the check nodes. A detailed explanation of this com-

putation can be found in [25], [27]. Here, we just state the result.

Let the th variable node be of degree , i.e., it is connected to

check nodes. In the th round, let be the message arriving

from the trellis node and let (where

) denote

the messages arriving from the check nodes (in the initial round,

). The rule for computing the message

is

(10)

and is depicted in Fig. 5.

Variable-to-Trellis Messages: The last step required to com-

plete a round of the message-passing sum–product agorithm is

to compute the messages

passed from the variable nodes

to the trellis nodes. The rule for computing the message

is

(12)

and is depicted in Fig. 7. The Full Message-Passing Algorithm: The algorithm is ex-
ecuted iteratively, where the stopping criterion can be chosen in a number of different ways [39]. Here we assume the simplest stopping criterion, i.e., conduct the iterations for exactly
rounds. In short, the algorithm has the following form

• Initialization

1) receive channel outputs

;

2) for

, set

;

3) set all check-to-variable messages

;

4) set

.

• Repeat while

1) for

compute all trellis-to-variable messages

[Fig. 4 and the Appendix];

2) compute all variable-to-check messages

[Fig. 5

and (10)];

3) compute all check-to-variable messages

[Fig. 6

and (11)];

4) for

compute all variable-to-trellis messages

[Fig. 7 and (12)]; 5) increment by .

• Decode

1) for

decide

,

where we use

.

III. CONCENTRATION AND THE “ZERO-ERROR” THRESHOLD
In this section, we will prove that for i.u.d. information sequences, for almost all graphs and almost all cosets, the decoder behaves very closely to the expected behavior. When we say here that an information sequence is i.u.d., we mean that the channel input is a sequence of independent and uniformly distributed random variables. We will then conclude that there exists at least one graph and one coset for which the decoding probability of error can be made arbitrarily small on an i.u.d.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:48:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1640

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 49, NO. 7, JULY 2003

Fig. 4. Message-passing through the trellis—the “windowed” BCJR algorithm.

The section is organized as follows. In Section III-A, the basic notation is introduced. Section III-B gives the concentration result, while Section III-C defines the “zero-error” threshold and concludes that there exists a Gallager coset code that achieves an arbitrarily small probability of error if the noise variance is below the threshold.

A. Message-Flow Neighborhoods, Trees, and Error Probabilities

Fig. 5. Computation of messages from variable nodes to check nodes.
Fig. 6. Computation of messages from check nodes to variable nodes.
Fig. 7. Computation of messages from variable nodes to trellis nodes.
information sequence if the noise variance does not exceed a threshold. The proofs follow closely the ideas presented in [24], [25] for memoryless channels and rely heavily on results presented there. The main difference is that the channel under consideration here has an input-dependent memory. Therefore, we first must prove a concentration statement for every possible input sequence, and then show that the average decoder performance is closely concentrated around the decoder performance when the input sequence is i.u.d.

For clarity of presentation, we consider only regular Gallager

codes, where every variable node has degree

and every check node has degree

. In the joint

code/channel graph (Fig. 3), consider an edge that connects a

variable node to a check node . In [25], Richardson and

Urbanke define a directed neighborhood of depth (distance

) of the edge . Here, we cannot define a neighborhood based

on the distance because the joint code/channel graph (Fig. 3)

is not a bipartite graph. Instead, we define a message-flow

neighborhood of depth (which equals the directed neigh-

borhood if the graph is bipartite). Let

be the message

passed from the variable node to the check node in

round . The message-flow neighborhood of depth of the

edge is a subgraph that consists of the two nodes and

, the edge , and all nodes and edges that contribute to the

computation of the message

. In Fig. 8(a), a depth-

message-flow neighborhood is depicted for the following pa-

rameters

. The row of bits (binary

symbols) “ ” given above the trellis section in Fig. 8(a)

represent the binary symbols of the codeword corresponding

to the trellis nodes that influence the message flow. Since

the channel has ISI memory of length , there are exactly

binary symbols that influence the message

flow. Fig. 8(b) is an equivalent short representation of the

depth- neighborhood depicted in Fig. 8(a). A message-flow

neighborhood of depth can now be obtained by branching out

the neighborhood of depth . This is depicted in Fig. 9.

Since the channel has memory, the transmitted binary sym-

bols do, in fact, influence the statistics of the messages in the

message-flow neighborhood. We, therefore, must distinguish

between neighborhoods of different types, where the type de-

pends on the transmitted bits. The neighborhood type is de-

fined by the binary symbols that influence the message at the

end (top) of the message-flow neighborhood. We simply index

the types by the binary symbols in the neighborhood (with an

appropriate, say lexicographic, ordering). For example, the mes-

sage-flow neighborhood of depth in Fig. 9 is of type

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:48:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KAVCˇ IC´ et al.: BINARY INTERSYMBOL INTERFERENCE CHANNELS

1641

(a)

(b)

Fig. 8. Equivalent representations of a message flow neighborhood of depth 1. In this figure, (I; W; L; R) = (1; 1; 2; 3).

In Fig. 8(a), the binary symbol can be read as the symbol

directly below the node , i.e.,

. The corresponding

bipolar value of the symbol is

. Define

as the probability that the tree of type and depth delivers an

incorrect message, i.e.,

tree type

(14)

The probability in (14) is taken over all possible outcomes of

the channel outputs when is the tree type, i.e., when the binary

symbols that define are transmitted.

We define the probability

as the probability that a

message-flow neighborhood (of a random edge) is of type

when the transmitted -long sequence is and the code graph

is chosen uniformly at random from all possible graphs with

degree polynomials and , i.e.,

neighborhood type transmitted sequence

(15)

Fig. 9. Diagram of a message-flow neighborhood of depth `. The neighborhood type is  = [0101; . . . ; 1111; . . . ; 0000; 1110; . . . ; 1001].

There are as many possible types of message flow neighbor-

hoods of depth as there are possible fillings of binary digits in

Fig. 9. One can verify that for a regular Gallager code there are

exactly

possible types of message-flow neighborhoods of

depth , where

Note that the probability defined in (15) does not depend on the coset ; also note that there always exists a vector such that for any chosen parity-check matrix the vector is a codeword of the coset code specified by and .
Next, define the error concentration probability when is the transmitted sequence as
(16)

We index these neighborhoods as where

(13) Define the i.u.d. error concentration probability

as the

error concentration probability when all

neighborhood

types ,

, are equally probable

A tree-like neighborhood, or simply a tree of depth is a mes-

sage-flow neighborhood of depth in which all nodes appear

only once. In other words, a tree of depth is a message-flow

neighborhood that contains no loops. Just like message-flow

neighborhoods, the trees of depth can be of any of the

types

, where

.

Define as the binary symbol corresponding to the message

node at the top of the message-flow neighborhood of type .

(17)

In the next subsection, we prove that for most graphs, if is

the transmitted codeword, then the probability of a variable-to-

check message being erroneous after rounds of the message-

passing decoding algorithm is highly concentrated around the

value

. Also, we prove that if the transmitted sequence is

i.u.d., then the probability of a variable-to-check message being

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:48:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1642

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 49, NO. 7, JULY 2003

erroneous after rounds of the message-passing decoding algorithm is highly concentrated around the value . To do that, we need the following result from [23]. Define as the probability that a neighborhood of depth is not a tree when a code graph is chosen uniformly at random from all possible graphs with degree polynomials and . In [23], it is shown that

neighborhood not a tree

(18)

where is a constant independent of .3

B. Concentration Theorems

Theorem 1: Let be the transmitted codeword. Let

be the random variable that denotes the number of

erroneous variable-to-check messages after rounds of the

message-passing decoding algorithm when the code graph is

chosen uniformly at random from the ensemble of graphs with

degree polynomials

and . Let be the number of

variable-to-check edges in the graph. For an arbitrarily small

constant

, there exists a positive number , such that if

, then

(19)
Proof: The proof follows closely the proof of the concentration theorem for memoryless channels presented in [25]. First note that

and

(23)

Combining (22) and (23), if

, we get

(24)

Theorem 2: Let be a random sequence of i.u.d. binary

random variables (symbols)

. Let

be

the random variable that denotes the number of erroneous vari-

able-to-check messages after rounds of the message-passing

decoding algorithm when the code graph is chosen uniformly at

random from the ensemble of graphs with degree polynomials

and , and when the transmitted sequence is . Let

be the number of variable-to-check edges in the graph. For an

arbitrarily small constant

, there exists a positive number

, such that if

, then

(25)

Proof: Using Theorem 1, we have the following:

(20)

The random variable

depends on the deterministic

sequence and its probability space is the union of the en-

semble of graphs with degree polynomials , , and the

ensemble of channel noise realizations (which uniquely define

the channel outputs since is known). Following [23], [25], we

form a Doob edge-and-noise-revealing martingale and apply

Azuma’s inequality [40] to get

(21)

where depends only on , , and . Next, we show that the second term on the right-hand side of
(20) equals by using inequality (18). Again, this is adopted from [25], but adapted to a channel with ISI memory. We have

(26)

Next, recognize that if is an i.u.d. random sequence, all neigh-

borhood types are equally probable, i.e.,

.

Using this, we prove that

(22)
3Actually, in [23] this fact is shown for a bipartite graph, but the extension to joint code/channel graphs of Fig. 3 is straightforward.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:48:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KAVCˇ IC´ et al.: BINARY INTERSYMBOL INTERFERENCE CHANNELS

1643

codes. Let be a random variable representing the number

of erroneous variable-to-check messages in round of the

message-passing decoding algorithm on the joint channel/code

graph of the code

. Then

Now form a Doob symbol-revealing martingale sequence

(31)
Proof: If and are chosen independently and uniformly at random, then the resulting codeword in (7) consists of i.u.d. binary symbols, and Theorem 2 applies directly.

If we can show that
(27)
where is a constant dependent on , , and (but not dependent on ) then if we apply Azuma’s inequality [40], we will have
(28)

Then, by combining (28) and (26), for

, we

will get (25). So, all that needs to be shown is (27).

Consider two random variables

and

. The

random vectors and have the following properties:

1) the first symbols of and are deterministic and equal

; 2) The

th symbol of is the random

variable , while the

th symbol of is fixed (non-

random)

; 3) the remaining symbols

and

are i.u.d. binary random vectors statistically independent

of each other. Fixing the

th symbol,

can affect at most a constant number (call this number )

of message-flow neighborhoods of depth . The constant

depends on , , and , but it does not depend on . Therefore, for any given neighborhood type , we have

(29)

C. “Zero-Error” Threshold

The term “zero-error” threshold is a slight abuse because the

decoding error can never be made equal to zero, but the concen-

tration probability can be equal to zero in the limit as

,

and hence the probability of decoding error can be made arbi-

trarily small. As in [25], the “zero-error” noise standard devia-

tion threshold is defined as

(32)

where the supremum in (32) is taken over all noise standard deviations for which

(33)

Corollary 2.2: Let be an information block chosen uni-

formly at random from

binary sequences of length .

There exists a code

in the ensemble

of

Gallager coset codes, such that for any

, the probability

of error can be made arbitrarily low, i.e., if is the number

of erroneous variable-to-check messages in round of the

message-passing decoding algorithm on the joint channel/code

graph of the code

, then

(34)

Proof: Define an indicator random variable
if (35)
otherwise.

Using the notation

, we can verify that

Defining

, and using (29), we get

From Corollary 2.1, for , , and chosen uniformly at

random we have

. Since the expected

value is lower than

, we conclude that there must exist

at least one graph and one coset-defining vector such that

for chosen uniformly at random we have

i.e., there exists a graph and a coset-defining vector such that for chosen uniformly at random (30)

(36) Inequality (27) follows from (30).

Corollary 2.1: Let be any information block consisting of The assumption

binary digits. Let

be a code chosen uniformly

at random from the ensemble

of Gallager coset

guarantees

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:48:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1644

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 49, NO. 7, JULY 2003

Since

, it follows that for every

exists an integer such that for every

. Then, for

, we have

, there We also drop the function argument since it is common for all we have convolved pdfs. Then (39) may be conveniently expressed as
(41)

(37)

The desired result (34) follows by combining (36) and (37).

IV. DENSITY EVOLUTION AND THRESHOLD COMPUTATION

A. Density Evolution

Define

as the pdf of the message

obtained

at the top of a depth- tree of type , see Fig. 8. With this no-

tation, we may express the i.u.d. error concentration probability

as

Equation (41) denotes the evolution of the average density (pdf) through a variable node, Fig. 5.
To express the density evolution through a check node (Fig. 6), we require a variable change, resulting in a cumbersome change of measure. A convolution can then be defined in the new domain and an expression can be found for the density evolution through check nodes [25]. Here we do not pursue this rather complicated procedure because a numerical method for density evolution through check nodes can easily be obtained through a table lookup, for details see [27]. Here we simply denote this density evolution as
(42)

where

is symbolic notation for the average mes-

sage density obtained by evolving the density

through

a check node of degree . We further express (42) by the fol-

lowing notation:

(43)

Similar to (41), the average density (pdf) of messages (Fig. 7) is obtained using the convolution operator
(38)

Here,

is the average pdf (averaged over all tree types)

of the correct message from a variable node to a check node

in round of the message-passing algorithm on a tree. We can

obtain the pdf

in several different ways. Here, we per-

form the averaging in every round and enter a new round with

an average pdf from the previous round, i.e., we evolve

into

. This method was used in [14] for discrete mes-

sages and in [25] for continuous messages, where it was termed

density evolution.

Denote by

the average density (pdf) of a message

in the th round of the message-passing algorithm (averaged

over all tree types), see Fig. 5. Let

denote the average

pdf of a message in the th round of the message-passing

algorithm on a tree. Then the average density (pdf)

is

given by

(39)

where stands for the convolution operation, and

de-

notes the convolution of

pdfs. As shorthand, we use the

following notation:

(40)

(44)

Note that in this equation the degree distribution is averaged

with respect to the nodes, rather than the edges. This explains the

term

, which is the fraction of variable nodes

with degree . The notation

is symbolic shorthand.

The step that is needed to close the loop of a single density

evolution round is the evolution of the average density

into the average density

, i.e., the evolution of message

densities through the trellis portion of the joint code/channel

graph. We denote this step as

(45)

where is symbolic notation for trellis evolution and denotes the pdf of the channel noise (in this case a zero-mean Gaussian with variance ). Even though no closed-form solution for (45) is known, it can be calculated numerically using Monte Carlo techniques.
The density evolution is now given by

• Initialization

1)

;

2) set • For

(where is the Dirac function). to

1)

;

2)

;

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:48:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KAVCˇ IC´ et al.: BINARY INTERSYMBOL INTERFERENCE CHANNELS

1645

3)
4) • Compute 1)

; .
.

B. Threshold Computation

With the density evolution algorithm described in the pre-

vious subsection, the zero-error threshold can be evaluated

(up to the numerical accuracy of the computation machine) as

the maximal value of the noise variance for which

,

where is the numerical accuracy tolerance.

With a finite-precision machine, we must quantize the

messages, resulting in a discrete probability mass function.

For a sufficiently large number of quantization levels, the

discrete probability mass functions are good approximations of

continuous density functions (pdfs) , , , and . In

the for-loop of the density evolution algorithm in Section IV-A,

steps 2) and 4) are straightforward convolutions (easily im-

plemented numerically using the fast Fourier transform [41]).

Step 1) of the for-loop can easily be implemented using a table

lookup as explained in [27], or using a rather cumbersome

change of measure explained in [25]. Actually, only step 3) of

the for-loop needs further explanation. Since no closed-form

solution is known for evolving densities through trellis sections,

we employ a Monte Carlo approach to obtain a histogram that

closely approximates . This has first been suggested in [26]

for trellises of constituent convolutional codes of turbo codes.

In [26], Richardson and Urbanke run the BCJR algorithm on

a long trellis section when the input is the all-zero sequence.

Here, since the channel has memory, the transmitted sequence

must be a randomly chosen i.u.d. binary sequence. The length

of the sequence must be very long so that we can ignore the

trellis boundary effects.

To implement step 3) of the for-loop in the density evolu-

tion algorithm in Section IV-A, for

we generate the

symbols

independently and uniformly at random.

They are then transmitted over the noisy ISI channel to get the

channel output realization . We generate the extrinsic infor-

mation for

as follows. For all

, first

create independent realizations according to the pdf (actu-

ally, histogram) , and then set

. For

,

we compute the a priori probability that the message symbol

equals as

V. ACHIEVABLE RATES OF GALLAGER CODES

A. Achievable Rates of Binary Linear Codes Over ISI Channels

In Section II, we pointed out that

is the limit (as

) of the average mutual information between and

when is an i.i.d. sequence with

Since the input process, the channel, and, hence, the output process and the joint input–output process are all stationary and ergodic, one can adopt the standard random coding technique [1] to prove a coding theorem to assure that all rates are achievable (for the definition of achievable, see [2, p. 194]). We use the expression “standard random coding technique” to describe a method to generate the codebook, where codewords are chosen independently at random and the coded symbols are governed by the optimal input distribution. For a generic finite-state channel, see [1, Sec. 5.9] or [42] for a detailed description of the problem and the the proof of the coding theorem. For the channel in (1) with binary inputs, we present a somewhat stronger result involving linear codes.4

Theorem 3: Every rate

is achievable; further-

more, the rate can be achieved by linear block codes or their

coset codes.

Proof: From [5], if the channel input is an i.u.d.

(Bernoulli-1/2) sequence, we have

where the second equality follows from the fact that the channel

in (1) can be driven into any known state , with at most

inputs (where is the ISI length). For any , there exists a

positive integer such that

and

where the starting state is a known vector of binary values,

say

. Now we consider the following

transmission scheme. We transmit a binary vector , where be-

fore every block of symbols we transmit the known sequence

, i.e.,

Using these prior probabilities and using as the channel

outputs, we run the BCJR algorithm [8] to compute the trellis

outputs . We then equate

to the histogram of the

values

, where

, and is chosen

large enough to avoid the trellis boundary effects. In [26], this

technique is accelerated by forcing the consistency condition on

the histogram. In ISI channels, however, consistency generally

does not hold, so we must use a larger trellis section in the

Monte Carlo simulation.

(46) ...

Clearly, from (46), for any

, we have

and

4Here we use a different (and apparently simpler) proof methodology. However, the proof only applies to finite-state channels for which we can guarantee that we can achieve any state with a finite number of channel inputs (e.g., ISI channels with finite ISI memory); not for a general finite-state channel.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:48:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1646

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 49, NO. 7, JULY 2003

The symbols of the vector are transmitted over the channel in (1) to obtain a vector at the channel output. Similar to the vector in (46), we partition the vector as
...

the real code rate is

. The received sequence also has the

same block length. However, from [2, proof of Theorem 8.7.1,

p. 198], the decoding error probability can be made arbitrarily

small even if we only use the typical-set decoding with respect

to and , which is not the full received sequence.

To prove the second part of this theorem, we should note

that the error probability bound only depends on the statistical

properties of the random codebook. We can generate a code-

book by drawing codewords uniformly at random as in [1, The-

orem 6.2.1, p. 206].

where for any any

, we have

For binary ISI channels, define the capacity

as the

supremum of rates achievable by binary linear codes under

any decoding algorithm. A consequence of Theorem 3 is

and
Clearly, we have a memoryless vector-channel as follows: Input: whose realization is a binary vector

Output: whose realization is real vector

.

The probability law of the vector channel is defined by the

following conditional pdf:

since the known sequence is transmitted before every vector

. This channel transition probability law is well defined [1],

[42], hence,

;

is also well defined. Note that the

pdf

is not dependent on , which makes it possible to

factor the joint pdf as

showing that the vector channel is indeed memoryless. Further,

quantize the output vector to get a quantized vector

. Due to [1, Ch. 7], we can always find a quantizer

to get a discrete channel such that the corresponding average

mutual information

;

is greater than the given

rate . Since is arbitrarily small, we can choose integers and

such that

Similar to [2, proof of Theorem 8.7.1, p. 198], we can prove

that is achievable for the obtained discrete memoryless

channel. The reader should note that the random code we

generated has

codewords, which are statistically inde-

pendent. The coded symbols are i.u.d., each with probability

. Every codeword consists of vector symbols from

, say

. The transmitted block

is

with length

. So,

(47)

Formulating the exact relationship between

,

,,

and is still an open problem since to the best of our knowledge

neither the literature nor the theorems presented in this paper

answer this question. For example, it is our belief that the strict

inequality

must hold because binary linear codes

cannot achieve spectral shaping required to match the spectral

nulls of the code to the spectral nulls of the channel (see [43]

for matched spectral null codes), but we cannot back up this

statement with a proof. Further, we know (at least for some ISI

channels) that

. An example can be constructed

by concatenating an outer regular rate- Gallager code whose

variable node degree is

and check node degree

is

, with an inner matched spectral null biphase

code [43] of rate . For this special construction, the resulting

code is a linear (coset) code of rate– . If we use this code for

transmission over the dicode channel (

channel), though

not explicitly shown here, we can compute that the zero-error

threshold of message-passing decoding is above

(where

for this channel it can be numerically shown using the algorithm

in [9], [10] that

).

While the exact relationship between ,

, and is

still an open problem, we can prove a relationship between the

zero-error threshold of the message-passing decoder of Gallager

codes, and the values

and

.

Proposition 1: Let be the rate of a Gallager code and let

be the threshold computed by density evolution using i.u.d.

inputs. Then

, where

and

are

evaluated at the noise standard deviation

.

Proof: According to the concentration theorem, the

average probability of error (averaged over all random choices

of the graph, the coset vector , and the information-bearing

vector ) can be made arbitrarily small if

. That

means that there exists at least one graph that achieves an

arbitrarily small average probability of decoding error (aver-

aged over all random choices of the coset vector and the

information-bearing vector ). Pick the parity-check matrix

corresponding to this graph as our code matrix. We design the

following transmission scheme. The messages are chosen

uniformly at random and the coset vectors are chosen also

uniformly at random. The resulting transmitted sequence is

i.i.d. with probability of each symbol , that is, the sequence

is i.u.d. If the transmitted sequence is i.u.d., we cannot find a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:48:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KAVCˇ IC´ et al.: BINARY INTERSYMBOL INTERFERENCE CHANNELS

1647

code with rate higher than

such that the decoding error

is arbitrarily small. But since the decoding error (averaged over

all messages and all cosets ) for the sum–product decoder

of Gallager codes can be made arbitrarily small for

, we

conclude that the code rate must be smaller than the value for

evaluated at

. Therefore,

TABLE I
L THRESHOLDS FOR REGULAR GALLAGER CODES ( h D 0 D ( ) =

= 3); CHANNEL

B. Thresholds for Regular Gallager Codes as Lower Bounds on

The two proofs presented in the preceding subsection

establish that the curve rate versus threshold

for a

Gallager code over a binary ISI channel is upper-bounded

by the curve

versus , and upper-bounded by the

curve

versus . Thus, we have a practical method for

numerically lower-bounding

. Furthermore, by virtue

of specifying the degree polynomials

and , we also

characterize a code that can achieve this lower bound. This

is a bounding method that is different from the closed-form

bounds [6], [7] or Monte Carlo bounds [5] proposed in the

past, where no bound-achieving characterization of the code

is possible (except through random coding techniques which

are impractical for implementations). Further, we compare the

thresholds obtained by density evolution to the value

computed by the Arnold–Loeliger method [9], showing that

the thresholds are very close to

in the high-code-rate

regions

. This is exactly the region of practical

importance in storage devices where high-rate codes for binary

ISI channels are a necessity [3]. The codes studied in this paper

do not provide tight bounds in the low-rate region, but the

threshold bounds can be tightened by optimizing the degree

polynomials and , see [44].

In this paper, we present thresholds only for regular Gallager

codes5 in the family

, where

and is allowed

to vary in order to get a variable code rate

. This

family of codes provides a curve versus threshold that is very

close to

for high code rates, but not for low code rates.

To get tighter bounds in the low information rate regime,

we would have to revert to irregular Gallager codes [14],

[15], [44]. Table I tabulates the codes and their respective

thresholds for the ISI channel

with additive

Gaussian noise (this channel was chosen for easy comparison

to some previously published bounds [5]–[7]). The density

evolution bounds ( versus SNR ) are plotted in Fig. 10. For

comparison, the i.i.d. capacity numerically evaluated using the

Arnold–Loeliger method [9] is also plotted in Fig. 10. (Note that

for this channel, we can numerically verify that

at any signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of interest.)

In [7], Shamai and Laroia introduce a curve for which they

conjecture that it may be a lower bound on

(dash-dotted

line in Fig. 10). Although the curve is only a conjecture, it is

a very useful quick way to estimate

because it involves

5Thresholds for irregular Gallager codes can also be obtained via density evolution.

L Fig. 10. The i.i.d. capacity C and thresholds for regular Gallager codes
with message node degree = 3.

evaluating a one-dimensional integral, and also it seems to be

a relatively accurate estimate of

as verified in [9]. For

this reason, we compare the thresholds computed by density

evolution to both

and to the Shamai–Laroia conjecture.

Fig. 11 indicates the position of the threshold SNR for two

regular Gallager codes (the

code of rate

and the

code of rate

) along with the SNR values for

the Shamai–Laroia conjecture at these rates and the best known

value for

computed by the Arnold–Loeliger method [9].

(Again, note that for this channel, numerical evaluations show

.) Also shown in Fig. 11 are the SNR values for

which simulated Gallager codes of lengths

achieved bit-error rates of . First, observe that the thresh-

olds accurately predict the limit of code performance as the

block length becomes very large. Next, observe that for the

code

of rate

, the threshold is tight (tighter than

the Shamai–Laroia conjecture), establishing that regular Gal-

lager codes are relatively good codes for high rates. For the code

of rate

, the threshold is far away from the SNR

values corresponding to

and the Shamai–Laroia conjec-

ture, respectively, suggesting that good Gallager codes in the

low-rate regime should be sought among irregular codes [14],

[44].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:48:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1648

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 49, NO. 7, JULY 2003

Fig. 11. Comparison of bit-error rate simulation results for finite-block-length Gallager codes of rates r = 0:5 and r = 0:9 to C thresholds and to the Shamai–Laroia conjectured bound.

and to the density evolution

C. The BCJR-Once Bound

Due to the high computational complexity of the BCJR

algorihm, several authors suggest applying the BCJR step only

once [33], [45] and subsequently iterating the message-passing

decoding algorithm only within the code subgraph of the

joint channel/code graph (see Fig. 3). Clearly, this strategy

is suboptimal to fully iterating between the channel and the

code subgraphs of the joint channel/code graph, but does

provide substantial computational savings, which is of particular

importance for on-chip implementations. The question that

remains is how much does one lose in terms of achievable

information rate when this strategy is applied. We develop

next what we call the BCJR-once bound

which

answers this question.

Let be a realization of a random channel input sequence

. Let be a realization of the channel output sequence .

So, is a sufficient statistic for determining from (without knowledge of the code). Therefore (see, e.g., [2, p. 37]),
.
Property 2:

-

Proof: Let

denote the conditional entropy of

given , and let

denote the entropy of . From

the independence bound [2, p. 28] it follows that

If is a vector of i.i.d. random variables, we have

Let

be the random variable representing the message

passed from the th trellis node to the variable node in the first

round of the sum–product algorithm (i.e., it is the output of the

BCJR algorithm applied once in the first iteration of decoding).

Denote the vector of realizations

by , which is

a realization of a random vector . We assume that the input

sequence is i.u.d., and define the BCJR-once bound as

(48)

(49)

Evaluated when is a Bernoulli- random (i.u.d.) se-

quence, the right-hand side of (49) is

- , in the limit

, and the left-hand side is

.

Further, we have the following result for the BCJR-once

bound

- if we “disregard the channel memory.”

Two straightforward properties can be established for the BCJR-once bound.
Property 1:
-
Proof: The BCJR algorithm computes

Proposition 2: Let the channel input and the BCJR-once

output form a memoryless channel. For such a channel, any

rate

- is achievable.

Proof: The proof follows the proof of Theorem 8.7.1 in

[2, pp. 198–206].

In view of the definition (48) and Proposition 2, it is tempting

to refer to

- as the BCJR-once capacity (or rate) in-

stead of the term we chose—the BCJR-once bound. However,

it is easy to show that the value

- is not a capacity

(nor a rate) of a meaningful physical channel. This is because

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:48:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KAVCˇ IC´ et al.: BINARY INTERSYMBOL INTERFERENCE CHANNELS

1649

the physical channel

is not memoryless as assumed of the sum–product algorithm is executed only in the first

in Proposition 2, and we have

decoding round.

-

On the other hand, we believe it is appropriate to refer to

- as a bound because in Section V-D we show

that the rate achievable by message-passing decoding of

randomly constructed Gallager (coset) codes is upper-bounded

by

-.

The BCJR-once bound

- for the channel in (1)

can be computed by i) running the BCJR algorithm on a very

long trellis section, ii) collecting the outputs, iii) quantizing

them, iv) forming a histogram for the symbol-to-symbol tran-

sition probabilities, and v) computing the mutual information

of a memoryless channel whose transition probabilities equal

those computed by the histogram. Another way is to devise a

method similar to the Arnold–Loeliger method for computing

(see [9]). First, we note that for i.u.d. input symbols,

. Thus, the problem of computing

-

reduces to the problem of computing

Proposition 3: Let be the rate of a Gallager code and

let

- be the BCJR-once noise tolerance threshold

(computed by density evolution using i.u.d. inputs). Then

- , where

- is the BCJR-once bound

evaluated at the noise standard deviation

-.

Proof: The threshold

- is computed using the

density evolution method described in Section IV-A, where the

trellis evolution step is executed only in the first round. Thus, the

threshold

- is computed as the threshold of a Gallager

code of rate on a memoryless channel, whose channel law

(conditional pdf of channel output given the channel input) is

given by

Here is the output of the windowed BCJR algorithm when the window size is , and clearly, due to the channel symmetry

As evident from the density averaging in the trellis portion of

the density evolution, the function

is the

average conditional pdf of

of

conditioned on

i.e.,

(50)

, taken over all conditional pdfs

under the constraint

,

where

is the binary entropy function defined as

. For a given channel output

realization , the BCJR algorithm computes

.

So, we can estimate (50) by generating an -long i.u.d. input

sequence, transmitting it over the channel and running the BCJR

algorithm on the observed channel output to get

for every

. The estimate

-

converges with probability to

- as

.

The BCJR-once bound

- (computed in the manner

described above for

) is depicted as the dashed curve

in Fig. 12 (the same figure also shows three other curves:

1) the curve for

as computed by the Arnold-Loeliger

method, 2) the thresholds presented in Section V-B, and 3) the

BCJR-once thresholds for regular Gallager codes which are

presented next in Section V-D).

D. BCJR-Once Thresholds for Gallager Codes

Just as we performed density evolution for the full

sum–product algorithm over the joint channel/code graph,

we do the same for the BCJR-once version of the decoding

algorithm. The only difference here is in the shape of the

depth- message flow neighborhood, while the general method

remains the same. Denote by

- the noise toler-

ance threshold for the BCJR-once sum–product algorithm

for a Gallager-code/ISI-channel combination. The threshold

- can be computed by density evolution on a tree-like message-flow neighborhood assuming that the trellis portion

For this channel, when the noise standard deviation is , the

channel information rate is

, where

. Similar to the proof of Proposition

1, we use a Gallager code where the coset vector is chosen

uniformly at random in each block transmission. For this

Gallager code of rate , the transmitted symbols are i.u.d. From

the concentration theorem, we have that if

-,

then the probability of decoding error is arbitrarily small. Since

the probability of error can be made arbitrarily small, must

satisfy

- . Now, let

, and we get

-

-

-

Again, we choose the family of regular Gallager codes with a

constant variable node degree

and a varying check node

degree . The channel is

with AWGN.

The BCJR-once thresholds are given in Table II, and the corre-

sponding plot is given in Fig. 12. Fig. 12 shows the BCJR-once

bound derived in Section V-C. It can be seen that the regular

Gallager codes have the capability to achieve the BCJR-once

bound at high information rates if the BCJR-once version of

the message-passing decoding algorithm is applied. For com-

parison, Fig. 12 also shows the curve for

as computed

by the Arnold–Loeliger method [9]. (It can be numerically ver-

ified for this channel that

.) The figure shows

that the BCJR-once bound is very close to

at low SNRs,

but is about 1 dB away from

at higher information rates.

The difference between the full sum–product threshold curve

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:48:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1650

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 49, NO. 7, JULY 2003

L h D TABLE II
BCJR-ONCE THRESHOLDS FOR REGULAR GALLAGER CODES ( = 3); CHANNEL ( ) =

0D

L Fig. 12. The BCJR-once bound C - and the BCJR-once thresholds
for regular Gallager codes with = 3 compared to capacity C and full sum–product thresholds (computed in Section V-B).

and the BCJR-once threshold curve also seems to be closely ap-

proximated by the difference between

and

-.

We thus conclude that, say at rate

, we can expect to see

a loss of 1 dB if we execute the BCJR algorithm only once at

the very beginning of the sum–product decoding algorithm (as

opposed to executing the trellis sum–product algorithm in every

iteration of the decoder).

VI. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we have developed a density evolution method

for determining the asymptotic performance of Gallager codes

over binary ISI channels in the limit

, where is the

block length. We proved two concentration theorems: 1) for a

particular transmitted sequence and 2) for a random transmitted

sequence of i.u.d. symbols. The noise tolerance threshold was

defined as the supremum of noise standard deviations for which

the probability of decoding error tends to zero as the number of

rounds of the decoding algorithm tends to infinity. We also es-

tablished that the code rate versus the noise tolerance threshold

traces a curve that is upper-bounded by the i.i.d. capacity of bi-

nary ISI channels. We have computed the thresholds for regular

Gallager codes with three ones per column of the parity-check

matrix over the dicode channel

and

showed that they get very close to the limit of i.i.d. capacity in

the high code rate region. For low code rates, regular Gallager

codes do not perform close to the i.i.d. capacity. A good low-rate

code should, therefore, be sought in the space of irregular Gal-

lager codes. We showed via Monte Carlo simulations that codes

with increasing code lengths approach closely the threshold

computed by density evolution.

We also explored the limits of performance of Gallager codes

if a slightly more practical sum–product algorithm is utilized.

Since the computational bottleneck in the sum–product algo-

rithm for ISI channels is the trellis portion of the algorithm, it

is computationally advantageous to run the trellis portion of the

algorithm only once at the beginning of the first decoding iter-

ation, i.e., the “BCJR-once” version of the algorithm. This al-

gorithm suffers from a performance loss compared to the full

sum–product algorithm. We computed the maximal achievable

rate of the BCJR-once sum–product algorithm and showed that

for the dicode channel

, the asymptotic

performance loss at high rates is about 1 dB, while for low rates,

the loss is minimal. Approximately, the same difference (at most

1.1 dB) was observed for the thresholds computed for the full

sum–product algorithm and the BCJR-once version.

We conclude the paper by pointing out some remaining chal-

lenges in coding for binary ISI channels. While

can now

be numerically evaluated [9], [10], the computation of the ca-

pacity remains a challenge. A method for lower-bounding by

extending the memory of the source is presented in [9], sug-

gesting that at high rates, and

are close to each other (at

low rates, and

differ substantially). In channels of prac-

tical interest, i.e., channels with signal-dependent noise [11],

due to the signal-dependent nature of the noise and

may not be close to each other even in the high-rate region.

There is a need for a practical tool for computing the lower

bound on by optimizing the trellis transition probabilities of

an extended-memory source [9]. Another challenging problem

is to move the performance thresholds of practical codes be-

yond

. A viable strategy may be to somehow combine the

beneficial spectral-shaping characteristics of matched spectral

null codes [43] with Gallager’s low-density parity-check con-

straints, but it is not clear how to achieve this and still have a

relatively simple encoder/decoder. Even for linear binary codes

(i.e., non-spectral-shaping codes) the optimization of irregular

Gallager codes to achieve

is also a challenging problem.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:48:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KAVCˇ IC´ et al.: BINARY INTERSYMBOL INTERFERENCE CHANNELS

1651

APPENDIX
We briefly describe the windowed BCJR algorithm mainly for completeness of the text. Our description uses a compact matrix notation. For a conventional description, we refer the reader to [8]. The notation in this appendix refers to Fig. 4. We start with the messages available from the code portion of the graph and available from the channel output, where
, and is the codeword length. First, set

(51)

Then, for every , form a diagonal matrix of size

,

where is the ISI length of the channel. Enumerate the states of

the finite-state machine with numbers through . Set the th

diagonal element of as

if th state is reached when the channel input at time is

if th state is reached when the channel input at time is .

Next, for every , form a matrix of size

, with the

entry in the intersection of the th row and th column given by

if no trellis branch connects states and

otherwise

where

is the noiseless channel output when the finite-

state machine corresponding to the ISI channel transitions from

state to state . Now, for each form the two vectors of size

For every , compute (52)

(53)

For each , compute the vector as

(54)

where denotes the Hadamard (i.e., element-wise) product of

two vectors. Denote by

the sum of the elements of

that correspond to the states that are reached if the channel

input is , i.e., the element

is included in the sum if

state is reached when the channel input is . Similarly, denote

by

the sum of the elements of that correspond to

the states that are reached if the channel input is . Then, the message to the code portion of the graph is computed as
The windowed BCJR algorithm described in this appendix is not the most economical method (in terms of memory). Our aim was to give a compact description for completeness of the text. In practice, to achieve a numerically stable method, the multiplications in (52) and (53) need to be normalized such that the vector obtained by successive multiplication from the left all have the property that the sum of their elements equal to [8]. For other implementations of the windowed BCJR algorithm, see [46]–[48].
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Sae-Young Chung for extremely helpful discussions on implementations of the density evolution algorithm, Dieter Arnold for providing the latest results on capacity computations long before they appeared in print, and Xiaowei Jin and Nedeljko Varnica for helping with the simulations of Gallager codes of finite block lengths.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Information Theory and Reliable Communication. New York: Wiley, 1968.
[2] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory. New York: Wiley, 1991.
[3] K. A. S. Immink, P. H. Siegel, and J. K. Wolf, “Codes for digital recorders,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 44, pp. 2260–2299, Oct. 1998.
[4] J. G. Proakis, Digital Communications, 4th ed. New York: McGrawHill, 2000.
[5] W. Hirt, “Capacity and information rates of discrete-time channels with memory,” Ph.D. dissertation, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH), Zurich, Switzerland, 1988.
[6] S. Shamai (Shitz), L. H. Ozarow, and A. D. Wyner, “Information rates for a discrete-time Gaussian channel with intersymbol interference and stationary inputs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 37, pp. 1527–1539, Nov. 1991.
[7] S. Shamai (Shitz) and R. Laroia, “The intersymbol interference channel: Lower bounds on capacity and channel precoding loss,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 1388–1404, Sept. 1996.
[8] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-20, pp. 284–287, Sept. 1974.
[9] D. Arnold and H.-A. Loeliger, “On the information rate of binary-input channels with memory,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications 2001, Helsinki, Finland, June 2001.
[10] H. D. Pfister, J. B. Soriaga, and P. H. Siegel, “On the achievable information rates of finite state ISI channels,” in Proc. IEEE Global Communications Conf. 2001, San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001, pp. 2992–2996.
[11] A. Kavc˘ic´, “On the capacity of Markov sources over noisy channels,” in Proc. IEEE Global Communications Conf., San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001, pp. 2997–3001.
[12] P. Vontobel and D. M. Arnold, “An upper bound on the capacity of channels with memory and constraint input,” in Proc. IEEE Information Theory Workshop, Cairns, Australia, Sept. 2001.
[13] S. Yang and A. Kavc˘ic´, “Markov sources achieve the feedback capacity of finite-state machine channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, July 2002, p. 361.
[14] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 585–598, Feb. 2001. Also in Proc. 30th Annu. ACM Symp. Theory of Computing, pp. 249–258, 1998.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:48:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1652

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 49, NO. 7, JULY 2003

[15] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-ap-

proaching low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform.

Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.

[16] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA:

MIT Press, 1962.

[17] B. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE

Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.

[18] N. Wiberg, H.-A. Loeliger, and R. Kötter, “Codes and iterative decoding

on general graphs,” Europ. Trans. Commun., vol. 6, pp. 513–526, Sept.

1995.

[19] G. D. Forney, Jr., “Codes on graphs: Normal realizations,” IEEE Trans.

Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 520–548, Feb. 2001.

[20] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of

low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 1645–1646,

1996.

[21] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse

matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.

[22] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit

error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” in Proc. IEEE

Int. Conf. Communications, Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp.

1064–1070.

[23] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman,

“Improved low density parity check codes using irregular graphs and be-

lief propagation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Cam-

bridge, MA, Aug. 1998, p. 117.

[24] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, and M. A. Shokrollahi, “Analysis of

random processes via and-or tree evaluation,” in Proc. 9th Annu.

ACM-SIAM Symp. Discrete Algorithms, 1998, pp. 364–373.

[25] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity

check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform.

Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.

[26]

, “Thresholds for turbo codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Informa-

tion Theory, Sorrento, Italy, June 2000, p. 317.

[27] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, Jr., T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On

the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the

Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.

[28] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and

the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp.

498–519, Feb. 2001.

[29] G. D. Forney, Jr., “Maximum-likelihood sequence estimation of digital

sequences in the presence of intersymbol interference,” IEEE Trans. In-

form. Theory, vol. IT-18, pp. 363–378, Mar. 1972.

[30] J. Hagenauer and P. Hoeher, “A Viterbi algorithm with soft-decision out-

puts and its applications,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommunications

Conf., Dallas, TX, Nov. 1989, pp. 1680–1686.

[31] Y. Li, B. Vucetic, and Y. Sato, “Optimum soft-output detection for chan-

nels with intersymbol interference,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol.

41, pp. 704–713, May 1995.

[32] M. P. C. Fossorier, F. Burkert, S. Lin, and J. Hagenauer, “On the equivalence between SOVA and max-log-MAP decodings,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 2, pp. 137–139, May 1998.
[33] Z.-N. Wu and J. M. Cioffi, “Low-complexity iterative decoding with decision-aided equalization for magnetic recording channels,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 19, pp. 699–708, Apr. 2001.
[34] M. Tüchler, R. Kötter, and A. Singer, “Iterative correction of ISI via equalization and decoding with priors,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Sorrento, Italy, June 2000, p. 100.
[35] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning and Intelligent Systems. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[36] R. J. McEliece, D. J. C. MacKay, and J.-F. Cheng, “Turbo decoding as an instance of Pearl’s belief propagation algorithm,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 140–152, Feb. 1998.
[37] J. Douillard, M. Jezequel, C. Berrou, A. Picart, P. Didier, and A. Glavieux, “Iterative correction of intersymbol interference: Turbo-equalization,” Europ. Trans. Commun., vol. 6, pp. 507–511, Sept. 1995.
[38] J. Fan, A. Friedmann, E. Kurtas, and S. McLaughlin, “Low density parity check codes for magnetic recording,” in Proc. Allerton Conf. Communications and Control, 1999.
[39] D. J. C. MacKay. Gallager codes—Recent results. [Online]. Available: http://wol.ra.phy.cam.ac.uk/.
[40] R. Motwani and P. Raghavan, Randomized Algorithms. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1995.
[41] A. V. Oppenheim and R. W. Schafer, Discrete-Time Signal Processing. Englewoods Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1989.
[42] A. Lapidoth and E. I. Telatar, “The compound channel capacity of a class of finite-state channels,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 44, pp. 973–983, May 1998.
[43] R. Karabed and P. H. Siegel, “Matched spectral-null codes for partial response channels,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 37, pp. 818–855, May 1991.
[44] N. Varnica and A. Kavc˘ic´, “Optimized LDPC codes for partial response channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, July 2002, p. 197.
[45] T. Souvignier, A. Friedmann, M. Öberg, P. Siegel, R. E. Swanson, and J. K. Wolf, “Turbo codes for PR4: Parallel versus serial concatenation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, Vancouver, BC, Canada, June 1999, pp. 1638–1642.
[46] S. Benedetto, D. Divsalaar, G. Montorsi, and F. Pollaara, “Algorithm for continuous decoding of turbo codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 314–315, Feb. 1996.
[47] A. Viterbi, “An intuitive justification and a simplified implementation of the MAP decoder for convolutional codes,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 260–264, Feb. 1998.
[48] B. Bai, X. Ma, and X. Wang, “Novel algorithm for continuous decoding of turbo codes,” in IEE Proc. Commun., vol. 46, Oct. 1999, pp. 314–315.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:48:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

