APPROXIMATE-MIN' CONSTRAINT NODE UPDATING FOR LDPC CODE DECODING 
Christopher Jones, Esteban Valles, Michael Smith, and John Villasenor 
Electrical Engineering Department, University of California, Los Angeles. CA, 90095, USA 
{christop, evalles, miksmith, villa) @icsl.ucla.edu 
ABSTRACT 
This work inrmduces a technique for updaring messages 
rhar originare ar rke consrrainr nodes of bi-partite graphs in 
Low-Density Parity-Check codes. The rechnique computes only 
WO ourgoing magnitudes ar each consrrainr node and exhibirs 
no measurable performance loss as compared ro exact belief 
propagation which compures a unique magnirude for each 
departing edge fmm a given consrrainr node. The technique 
eliminares rke need for memory based table look-up in rhe 
consrrainr node processing and hns been implemented using 
only shifr, add, and comparison operarions. Finite wordlength 
resulrsfor a 'worsf-case' code indicare rhar 6 bir quamizalion 
yields performance rhar is similar IO rhar pmvided by full 
$oaring poinr compurarion. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes were proposed by 
Gallager in the early 1960s [I]. The structure of Gallager's 
codes (uniform column and row weight) led them to he called 
regular LDPC codes. Gallager provided simulation results for 
codes with block lengths on the order of hundreds of bits. 
However, these codes were too short for the sphere packing 
bound to approach Shannon capacity, and the computational 
resources for longer random codes were decades away from 
being broadly accessible. 
Following the groundbreaking demonstration by Berrou er 
al. [Z] of the impressive capacity-approaching capability of 
long random linear (turbo) codes, MacKay [3] re-established 
interest in LDPC codes during the mid to late 1990s. Luby 
er al. [4] formally showed that properly constructed irregular 
LDPC codes can approach capacity more closely than regular 
codes. Richardson, Shokrollahi and Urbanke [5] created a 
systematic method called density evolution to analyze and syn- 
thesize the degree disrriburion in asymptotically large random 
bipartite graphs under a wide range of channel realizations. 
In his original work, Gallager also introduced several decod- 
ing algorithms. One of these algorithms has since been iden- 
tified for general use in factor graphs and Bayesian networks 
[61 and is often generically described as Belief Propagation 
(BP). In the context of LDPC decoding, messages handled 
by a belief propagation decoder represent probabilities that 
a given symbol in a received codeword is either a one or 
a zero. These probabilities can be represented absolutely, or 
more compactly in terms of likelihood ratios or likelihood 
differences. The logarithmic operator can also be applied 
to either of these scenarios. Due to the complexity of the 
associated operator sets and wordlength requirements, the log- 
likelihood ratio form of the Sum-Product algorithm is the 
Funded by Office of Naval Research Conma NO14-01-C-0016 
form that is best suited to VLSl implementation. However, 
this form still posses significant processing challenges as it 
employs a non-linear function that must be represented with 
a large dynamic range for optimal performance. The aim of 
this paper is to manipulate and simplify the most challenging 
portions of the log-likelihood version of belief propagation. 
Throughout the rest of the paper, unaltered log-likelihwd 
belief propagation with be described as Full-BP. 
Even Full-BP algorithms suffer performance degradation as 
compared to the optimum ML decoder for a given code. This 
is due to the fact that bipartite graphs representing finite-length 
codes without singly connected nodes are inevitably non-tree- 
like. Cycles in bipattite graphs compromise the optimality of 
belief propagation decoders. The existence of cycles implies 
that the neighbors of a node are not in general conditionally 
independent (given the node), therefore graph separation does 
not hold and Pearl's polytree algorithm [61 (which is analogous 
to Full-BP decoding) inaccurately produces graph a-posteriori 
probabilities. Establishing the true ML performance of LDPC 
codes with length beyond a few hundred bits is generally 
viewed as an intractable problem. However, code conditioning 
techniques [7] can be used to mitigate the non-optimalities 
of iterative decoders and performance that approaching the 
Shannon capacity is achievable even with the presence of these 
decoding non-idealities. 
The next section provides background on LDPC repre- 
sentation with bi-partite graphs and matrices over GF(2). 
Section Ill is presented in several parts. In the first pan, our 
modified version of Full-BP is introduced and its performance 
is contrasted to that of Full-BP. Next. we provide a discussion 
of the steps taken in the derivation of this technique. At 
the end of Section 111 a complexity comparison between the 
proposed technique, Full-BP, and a previously proposed re- 
duced complexity technique [SI is provided. Section IV gives a 
discussion of finite precision issues and provides performance 
data for several quantization schemes. Section V describes the 
LDPC codec that has been developed at UCLA based on the 
constraint update technique of this paper. Concluding remarks 
are made in section VI. 
11. LOW-DENSITY 
PARITY-CHECK CODES 
Like turbo codes, LDPC codes belong to the class of codes 
that are decodable primarily via irerarive techniques. The 
demonstration of capacity approaching performance in turbo 
codes stimulated interest in the improvement of Gallager's 
original LDPC codes to the extent that the performance of 
these two code types is now comparable in AWGN. The highly 
robust performance of LDPC codes in other types of channels 
such as partial-band jamming, quasi-static multi-input multi- 
I57 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:28:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Fig. I. 
length 6 cycle are circumscribed with bold lines. 
Matrix and graph descriptions of a (9. 3) code. A length 4 and P 
ouput (MIMO) Rayleigh fading, fast MIMO Rayleigh fading, 
and periodic fading is evidenced in 191 and [IO]. 
LDPC codes are commonly represented as a bipartite graph 
(see Fig. lb). In the graph, one set of nodes. the variable 
nodes, correspond to the codeword symbols and another set, 
the consrrainr nodes, represent the constraints that the code 
places on the variable nodes. in order for them to form a 
valid codeword. Regular LDPC codes ,have bipartite graphs 
in which all nodes of the same type are of the same degree. 
A common example is the (3.6) regular LDPC code where all 
variable nodes have degree 3, and all constraint nodes have 
degree 6. The regularity of tlus code implies that the number 
of constraint nodes (which is the same as the number of parity 
check bits) equals exactly half the number of variable nodes 
such that the overall code is rate 112. 
The parity check matrix H of a linear binary (n, k) 
systematic code has  dimension (n - k )  x n. The rows of 
H comprise the null space of the rows of the code's k x n 
generator matrix G. H can be written as, 
H = [ H i  H z ] ,  
(1) 
where HI is an (n - k )  x k matrix and Hz is an (n - 
k )  x (n - k )  matrix. Hz is constructed to be invertible, so 
by TOW transformation through left multiplication with H;', 
we obtain a systematic parity check matrix H,,, that is range 
equivalent to H ,  
H
~
,
~
 
= H;'H = [ H;'H~ I,-* ] 
~ 
(2) 
The left-hand portion of which can be used to define a null 
basis for the rows of H. Augmentation of the left-hand portion 
of the systematic parity check matrix Hsy8 with Ik yields the 
systematic generator matrix, 
G~~~ = [ 
( H ; ~ H ~ ) ~  
1 .  
(3) 
The rows of Gsys span the codeword space such that 
G.,,HT = G.,.H& 
= 0. It should be noted that although 
the original H matnx is sparse, neither H,,, nor Gsy8 is 
sparse in general. Gsys is used for encoding and the sparse 
parity matrix H is used for iterative decoding. A technique 
that manipulates H to obtain a nearly lower triangular form 
and allows essentially linear time (as opposed to the quadratic 
time due to a dense G matrix) encoding is available and was 
proposed by [I I]. 
The matrix and graph descriptions of an (n = 9, k = 3) 
code are shown in Fig. 1. Structures known as cycles, that 
affect decoding performance, are shown by (bold) solid lines 
in the figure. Although the relationship of graph topology to 
code performance in the case of a specific code is not fully un- 
derstood, work exists [7] that investigates the effects of graph 
structures such as cycles, stopping sets, linear dependencies, 
and expanders. 
111. REDUCING THE COMPLEXITY OF FULL-BP 
DECODING 
A. Tke Appmximare-Min*-BP technique 
Before describing the technique, we introduce notation that 
will he used in the remainder of the paper. On the variable 
node (left-hand) side of the bi-partite graph, U messages arrive 
and V messages depart. At the constraint node (right-hand) 
side of the graph U messages arrive and U messages depart. All 
four message types are actually log-likelihood ratios (LLRs). 
For instance, a message li arriving at a constraint node is ac- 
tually a shorthand representation for U = ln(p(u = O)/p(u = 
1)). The constraint node a-posteriori pmbability. or UAPP:is 
defined as the constraint node message determined by the d, 
variable messages that amve at a constraint node of degree-d,. 
The notation U, = UAPP\vj denotes the outgoing constraint 
message determined by all incoming edges with the exception 
of edge u j .  Message uj represents inrrinsic information that is 
left purposefully absent in the exrrinsic message computation 
U .  
1 -  - UAPP\vj. Our algorithm (called Approximate-Min*- 
BP, or A-Min*-BP) updates constraint messages as follows, 
1 
initialize 
fork = I  ... d, 
urnin = ,min (Iu,~), 
a0 = m 
{ 
j=I..d. 
if ( k  # m i n )  
6* = IABP (6'-',uk)I 
a* = st-1 
else: 
end 
6APP\v,i. 
= 6 d c  
6APP = IABP' ( & 4 P P l ~ , i . , ~  
where 6* is a storage variable, and ABP' will be defined 
shortly. Constraint message updates are found by applying the 
following additional operations on the above quantities. 
~uj 
= sgn(uj) sgn(uAPP)6APP 
j=(l..d.}\min 
A P P  
APP\omj. 
Urnin = sgn(urnin) sgn(0 
16 
158 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:28:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Fig. 2. A-MWBP dwxing compared to Full-BP d e d n g  for fow differen1 
rate It2 LDPC codes. Length 10k irregular max left d e g e  20. length Ik 
im&u 
max le11 degree 9. le& 
Sk regular (3.6). length lk regular (3.6). 
The propared algorithm incurs negligible performance loss. Note thal m e  
t/2 BPSK conrtraiined capacity is 0.18 dB ( E b / N d  All simulalionr were 
performed with the same initial random seed. 
The above constraint node update equations are novel and 
will be described in further detail. Variable node updating 
in our technique is the same as in the case of Full-BP. 
Extrinsic information is similarly described as before via 
4 = VAPP\u,, however the processing required to achieve 
these quantities is much simpler, 
where d, is the variable node degree 
B. Derivation and complexity of rhe A-Min*-BP rechniqus 
Derivation of the Approximate-Min*-BP constraint node 
update begins with the so called 'Log-Hyperbolic-Tangent' 
definition of BP constraint updating. In the equation below, 
sign and magnitude are separable since the sign of LnTanh(x) 
is determined by the sign of 2. 
This equation is highly non-linear and warrants substantial 
simplification before mapping to hardware. To begin, the 
above computation can be performed by first considering the 
inner recursion in (5). 
A total of d, table look-ups to the function AInBp = 
In (9) 
followed by d, - 1 additions complete the 
cornputatlo# in (6). Furthermore, the linearity of the inner 
recursion allows intrinsic variable values to be 'backed-out' 
of the total sum before d, ourer recursions are used to 
form the d, extrinsic outputs. To summarize, computation of 
all d, extrinsic values (in (-5)) 
follow from d, table look- 
ups, d, - 1 additions, d, subtractions, and a final d, table 
look-ups. The cost of computing the extrinsic sign entails 
d, - 1 exclusive-or operations to form the APP extrinsic sign, 
followed by d, incremental exclusive-or operations to back- 
out the appropriate intrinsic sign to form each final extrinsic 
sign. 
Variable node computation (4) is more stiaightfonvard. 
However, a possible alternative to (4) is given in [I21 where 
it is noted that codes lacking low degree variable nodes 
experience little performance loss due to the replacement of Vj 
with VAPP. However, codes that maximize rate for a given 
noise variance in an AWGN channel generally have a large 
fraction of degree-2 and degree-3 variable nodes [SI. Low 
degree nodes are substantially influenced by any edge input 
and VAPP may differ significantly from corresponding prop- 
:rly computed extrinsic values. We have found experimentally 
that using VAPP alone to decode capacity approaching codes 
degrades performance by one dB of SNR or more. 
We continue toward the definition of an alternative con- 
straint update recursion by rearranging (5) for the d, = 2 
case, 
~ 
Two applications of the Jacobian logarithmic identity 
(In(& + e&) = max(a, b) +In (1 +e-ls-bl)) [I31 result in 
the Min* recursion that is discussed in the rest of the paper, 
Note that (8) is not an approxima!ion. It is easy to show that 
d,-1 
recursions on ABp' yield exactly UAPP in equation (5). 
Furthermore. the function In (1 + e--l"i) rangesover (ln(Z),O) 
which is substantially more manageable than the range of 
the function ALnEP, Range (In (eu 
= (oo,O) from 
a numerical representation point of view. 
owever, the non- 
linearity of the recursion (8) implies that updating all extrinsic 
information at a constraint node requires d, (d, - 1) calls to 
ABP'. This rapidly becomes more complex than the Zd, look- 
up operations (augmented with 2d, - 1 additions) required to 
compute all extrinsic magnitudes based on the form in (5). 
Again, in this earlier case intrinsic values can be 'backed-out' 
of a single APP value to produce extrinsic values. 
Instead of using the recursion in (8) to implement Full- 
BP we propose that this recursion be used to implement an 
approximate BP algorithm to be referred to as Appmximnre- 
Mi"*-BP (A-Mi"*-BP). The algorithm works by computing 
the proper extrinsic value for the minimum magnitude (least 
reliable) incoming constraint edge and assigning the UAPP 
I59 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:28:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
I 
Fig. 3. 
Nodincar function (ABP') a1 the core of proposed algorithm 
and rlngte I double line approximations to the fundon that can easily be 
implemented in combhsotial logic. 
magnitude in conjunction with the proper extrinsic sign to all 
other edgis. 
To provide intuition as to why this hybrid algorithm yields 
good performance, note first that a constraint node represents 
a single linear equation and has a known 'solution' if no 
more than one input variable is unknown. Consider the fol- 
lowing two scenarios. First, if a constraint has more than 
one unreliable input, then all extrinsic outputs are unreliable. 
Second, if a constraint has exactly one unreliable input, then 
this unknown input can be solved for based on the extrinsic 
reliability provided by the 'known' variables. In this second 
case all other extrinsic updates are unreliable due to the 
conbibution of the unreliable input. The approximation in 
the suggested algorithm assigns less accurate magnitudes to 
would-be unreliable extrinsics. but for the least reliable input 
preserves exactly the extrinsic estimate that would be produced 
by Full-BP. 
We next show that UAPP always underestimates extrinsics. 
Here the notation Urn" represents the extrinsic information 
that originates at constraint node m and excludes information 
from variable node n. Rearrangement of ( 5 )  (with standard 
intnnsidextrinsic notation included [ 141) yields the following, 
n'EN(m)\n . 
(10) 
1 - e-Iu*ppI 
Ife-1U*PPI 
= 
Note first that the function g(z) = & 
(a product of 
which comprises the RHS of (IO)) ranges over ( O i l )  and is 
non-decreasing in the magnitude of x. The first (parenthesized) 
term on the right-hand side of (IO) equals the extrinsic value 
U,,,,, under the operator g(.), i.e. g(U,,,,). The second term 
scales this value by the intrinsic reliability g(u,,). 
Hence, 
the monotonicity and range of g(x) ensure that lUAPPl < 
lUmn1. 
We provide the inverse function, g-'(z) = In z, 
for 
reference. 
Underestimation in A-Min*-BP is curtailed by the fact that 
the minimum reliability g(vmin) dominates the overall product 
that forms U A P P .  This term would have also been included 
in the outgoing extrinsic calculations used by Full-BP for all 
but the least reliable incoming edge. The outgoing reliability 
of the minimum incoming edge incurs no degradation due to 
underestimation since the proper extrinsic value is explicitly 
calculated. Outgoing messages to highly reliable incoming 
edges suffer little from underestimation since their correspond- 
ing intrinsic g(vmn) values are close to one. The worst case 
underestimation occurs when two edges 'tie' for the lowest 
level of reliability. In this instance the dominant term in (IO) is 
squared. An improved version of A-Min*-BP would calculate 
exact extrinsics for the two smallest incoming reliabilities. 
However, the results in Fig. 2, where the algorithm (using 
floating point precision) is compared against .Full-BP (using 
floating point precision) for short and medium length regular 
and irregular codes, indicate that explicit extrinsic calculation 
for only the minimum incoming edge is sufficient to yield 
performance that is essentially indistinguishable from that of 
Full-BP. 
The proposed algorithm is similar to the Offset-Min-BP 
algorithm of [8] where the authors introduce a scaling factor 
to reduce the magnitude of extrinsic estimates produced by 
Min-BP. The Min-BP algorithm finds the magnitude of the 
two least reliable edges arriving at a given constraint node 
(which requires d, - 1 comparisons followed by an additional 
d, - 2 comparisons). The magnitude of the least reliable 
edge is assigned to all edges except the edge from which the 
least reliable magnitude came (which is assigned the second 
least reliable magnitude). For all outgoing edges, the proper 
extrinsic sign is calculated. As explained in 1141 these outgo- 
ing magnitudes overestimate the proper extrinsic magnitudes 
because the constraint node update equation follows a product 
rule (LO) where each term lies in the range (0,l). The Min-BP 
approximation omits all but one term in this product. To reduce 
the overestimation, an offset (or scaling factor) is introduced to 
decrease the magnitude of outgoing reliabilities. The authors 
in [8] use density evolution to optimize the offset for a given 
degree distribution and SNR. The optimization is sensitive to 
degree sequence selection and also exhibits SNR sensitivity 
to a lesser extent. Nevertheless, using optimized parameters, 
performance within 0.1 dB of Full-BP performance is possible. 
By way of comparison, A-Min*-BP improves performance 
over Min-BP because the amount by which UAPP underesti- 
mates a given extrinsic is less than the amount by which Min- 
BP overestimates the same extrinsic. Specifically, the former 
underestimates due to the inclusion of one extra term in the 
constraint node product while the latter overestimates due to 
the exclusion of all but one term in the product. A direct 
comparison to Offset-Min-BP is more difficult. However, a 
simple observation is that in comparison to Offset-Min-BP, 
A-Min*-BP is essentially 'self-tuning'. 
The range and shape of the non-linear portion (ABp') of the 
A-Min*-BP computation are well approximated using a single, 
160 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:28:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Fig. 4. Complexity cornpairan for Uvee mmtRjnl update lechniquer. Full-BP and A-Mi”*-BP have aselially the same performance. The simplest technique. 
Offset-Mis-BP, experiences about a 0.ldB loss [IZ]. Numerical valuer are shown for a raie 112 code wim: n - k = 5000. and average righl d e w  d,=8. 
or at most a 2-line, piecewise linear fit, as shown in Fig. 3. 
All of the fixed precision numerical results to be presented in 
section IV use the 2-line approximation (as do the floating 
point results in Fig. 2). Hence, the entire constraint node 
update is implemented using only shift and add computations, 
no look-ups to tables of non-linear function values are actually 
required. 
The cost of constraint node updating for Full-BP (imple- 
mented using (5)). A-Min*-BP, and Offset-Min-BP are given 
in Fig. 4. The latter two algorithms have similar cost with the 
exception that d, - 1 table look-up operations in A-Min*-BP 
are replaced with d, additions in Offset-Min-BP (for offset 
adjustment). Note that use of a table is assumed for the 
representation of ALnBP. While ABP’ is well approximated 
using a two line piecewise fit employing power of 2 based 
coefficients. Variable node updating occurs via (4) for all three 
algorithms. 
IV. NUMERICAL IMPLEMENTATION 
Minimum complexity implementation of the A-Min*-BP 
algorithm necessitates simulation of finite wordlength effects 
on edge metric storage (which dominates design complexity). 
Quantization selection consists of determining a total number 
of bits as well as the distribution of these bits between 
the integer and fractional parts (/,F) of the numerical rep- 
resentation. The primary objective is minimization of the 
total number of bits with the constraint that only a Small 
performance degradation in the waterfall and error-floor BER 
regions is incurred. Quantization saturation levels (Sat = 2‘) 
that are too small cause the decoder to exhibit premature 
error-floor behavior. We have not analytically characterized 
the mechanism by which this occurs. However, the following 
provides a rule of thumb for the saturation level, 
Sat = -In ( p )  9 In (’ - 
”) 
where p = e-Sot 
This allows literal Log-Likelihood Ratio (LLR) representation 
of error probabilities thal are as small as p. In practice, this 
rule seems to allow the error-flwr to extend to a level that is 
about one order of magnitude lower than p .  
In the results that follow, simple uniform quantization has 
been employed, where the step size is given by 2-F. To 
begin, Fig. 5 shows that low SNR performance is less sensitive 
to quantization than high SNR performance. A small but 
noticeable degradation occurs when 2 rather than 3 fractional 
bits are used to store edge metrics and 4 integer bits are used in 
both cases. In summary, 1 bits of precision (Sign, 4 Integer, 2 
Fractional) are adequate for the representation of observation 
and edge metric storage in association with the considered 
code. 
When power of 2 based quantization is used, the negative 
and positive saturation levels follow [-2”, 
2I-l - 2-F]. 
An alternative approach arbitrarily sets this range between a 
maximum and a minimum threshold and sets the step size 
equal to s = 2 * MazRange/2TDta’B’1S. 
This approach to 
quantization is more general than the previous since the step 
size is not limited to powers of 2. We have found that in the 
low SNR regime, smaller quantization ranges are adequate, 
but the optimal step size remains similar to that needed at 
higher SNRs. Thus, operation at lower SNRs requires fewer 
overall bits given the general range approach to quantization. 
For example for EafN, = l.OdB, when MaxRange = 10 
and a total of 6 bits were used, no performance degradation 
was observed. For higher SNR values, MaxRange = 16 was 
the best choice. This agrees with the results obtained using 
binary quantization with (1,F) = (4,Z). The performance 
of this quantizer i s  described in Fig. 5 by the curve labeled 
‘6bit G.R.’ (or 6 bit general range) where in this case the 
range is set equal to (-10,10)@1.OdB;(-12,12)@1.2dB;(-16, 
16)@1.4dB and a total of 6 bits ( I  sign, 5 quant-bits) is used. 
Hence in this case the general range quantizer is equivalent 
to the (1.4.1) power of 2 quantizer at high SNR. At lower 
SNRs, the best case range was smaller than (-16.16) such that 
general range quantization offers an added degree of freedom 
in precision allocation that is useful in the context of LDPC 
decoding. 
.
.
 
V. THE UCLA LDPC CODEC 
We have implemented the above constraint update technique 
along with many other necessary functions in order to create 
a high throughput Monte Carlo simulation for arbitrary LDPC 
codes. The design runs on a Virtexll evaluation board from 
Nallatech systems and is interfaced to a PC via a JAVA API. 
161 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:28:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
r- 
Fig. 5. 
BER VI licralionr. for different fined EbIN,. 
(a) BER VI. EbIN,, for different fixed numberr of iterations. (h) 
A block diagram $provided 
in Fig. 6. The Gaussian noise 
generator developed by the authors in [I51 is instantiated next 
to the decoder so as to avoid a noise generation bottleneck. 
This block directly impacts the overall value of the system as 
a Monte Carlo simulator for error-Hoor testing as good noise 
quality at high SNR (tails of the Gaussian) is essential. Since 
the LDPC decoding process is iterative and the number of 
required iterations is non-deterministic, a How control buffer 
can be used to greatly increase the throughput of the overall 
system. 
Through the use of JAVA as an soft interface to the board, 
we have been able to facilitate the initiation and monitoring 
of simulations from remote locations. Researchers around the 
world have successfully uploaded their own LDPC codes for 
testing on the "UCLA Monte Carlo System". 
VI. CONCLUSION 
A reduced complexity decoding algorithm that suffers little 
or no performance loss has been developed and is justified both 
theoretically and experimentally. Finite wordlengths have been 
PCI Interface to JAVA 
Config / Data * 
Remd Ems 
Rg 6 
Ar&temre 
block dragram 
carefully considered and 6 to 7 bits of precision have been 
shown to be adequate for a highly complex (a length 10,000 
dim,, = 20 irregular LDPC) code to achieve am error floor 
that is code rather than implementation limited. 
REFERENCES 
[I) R. G. Gallaper. "Low-denrity panty-check coder:' IRE Trans Infornc. 
Thwp, vol. IT-8, pp. 21-28. Jan. 1962. 
[21 C. Berm", A. Glavieux. and P. Thitimjrhima "Near Shannon llrmt 
error-corntine codine and decodine: Turbo coder:' in Pror l r E E  Inr~ 
I 
.. 
I
I
 
Con) Contmun., Geneva Switzerlanci May 1993. pp. IoM-lmo. 
131 D. 1. C. MucKay, "Gmd error-correding coder based on very rpane 
malficer,'' IEEETrans. Infomi. Theop, vol. 45, pp. 39W31, Mar. 1999. 
[4] M. Luby. M. Mitrenmscher. A. Shohllalu. and D. Spiel-. 
"Im~ 
proved low-denrity pantycheck coder using irregulw graphs: 
IEEE 
Tronr. In&mi. Theory. vol. 47, pp. 585-598, Feb. 2001. 
151 T. Richardron, A. Shokrollahi. and R. Urbmke. "Design of capacity 
appmoching irregular IOW density parity check coder: IEPE Trans. on 
Inform Theory. vol. 47, pp. 618437. Feb 2001. 
(61 1. Pearl. Pm&bili~,lc Reumin,q in lnrelli~qenr Syrrenlc Nemorkj sf 
Plausible lnfumce. 
I71 T. Tian. C. Jones. 1. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel. "Characterirution 
and selective avoidance of cycler in imgular LDPC code conrmction:' 
Inreniarional Corlfrrence on Coninrunirnrionr (ICC) 2003. 
[SI J. Chen and M. Forsotier. "Density Wolution for BP-hared decoding 
algorithm of LDPC coder and their quantized venions:' in Pmr. IEEE 
Globeconi. Taipei. Taiwan. Nov. 2002. 
19) C. Jones, A. Marache. T. Tim. J. Villasenor, and R. Wesel. "LDPC 
the Military Coniniunlca,ions Conference. On 2003. 
[IO] C. Jones. R. Tian. A. Matache, R. W e d ,  and J. Villarenor. "Rohusmerr 
of LDPC Coder on Petidic Fadim Channelr:' 
in Proreediner of 
San Fraociico, C A  Morgan KaufmaM. 1998. 
Coder - UniYerially G
d
 for Wireless Channels:' in ProcerdIgr 
Of 
.. . 
GlobeConr, Nu" Z 0 2 .  
check coder." IEEE Tronr. on lnfomoml. llieo?, vol. 41, pp. 638456, Feh 
2MI. 
[I I] T. Richardson and R. Urbmke. "Efficient encoding of low-dolsity 
~~~~ 
1121 1. Chen. A. Dholakia E.Eleflhetiou. M. Fossotier, and X:Y. 
Hu. "Near 
optimum reduced-complexity decoding algonhm for LDPC codes:' 
in 
Pmr. IEEE In!. Sy!. lnfomz. The"?, 
Lrurme, Swiwerland, Jul. 2002. 
[I31 E.Elefthenou. T. Mirlelholrer, and A. Dholakia. "A reducen-complexity 
decoding algonthm for low-density parity-check cader:' IEE Elerrmn. 
[I41 1. Chen m d  M. Forsotier. "New optimum uluversal belief propagation 
hued decoding of LDPC coder," /E€€ Tronr. on Conmi.. vol. 50, no. 3, 
Mar. 2002. 
[I51 L. Dong-U, I. Villarenor, and W. Luk. "A hardware Gaussian noise 
generalor for eiploriag chmel code behavior at very low bit ermr 
rdles." h In proreedings of FCCM. May 2003. 
Leiirn. "01. 37. pp. 102-104. Jan. 2001. 
162 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:28:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
