DT-16

NEW HIGH RATE LOW DENSITY PARITY C H E C K COUES FOR M U L T I - T R A C K RECORDING
Mohammed Zaki Ahmed. PmIJ. Davey. Terry Donnelly and Warwick W. C l e m C.R.I.S.T.. D.C.E.E..UniversityofPlymouth,DrakeCircuPsL,AXAA, UK. email: raki@ieee.org
Iniruduclian
High rdc (Codc Ratc > 0.9) L o w Dcniity Parity Chcck (LDPC) crrur currccliun codcs arc applied to a multi-track PR4 channel experiencing cross-talk i n this paper. Simulations were done for an LDF'C code o f block size 4800 bits, and 192 parily-check equations (resulting in a code rate o f 0.96) and LDPC cc&s hlock s i x 5120 and rate O.Y. A t sucli high rates and hlock lengths. the bipanitell] graphs o f the codes have cycles of length 4. These cycles result in approximatiom whcn using Ihc sum-pmducl idgorilhm (SPA) in dccdisg Ihc codcal2l. Daigning 'good' codcs (that i s codcs that du nut hive lcngth 4 cyclcs) id thcsc ralcs uau;dly re~ultsin very weak codes. High-rate LDPC codes are difficult to design or search for. It has k e n found that the pres" of cycles of length 4 at thesc rates does not affect the code performance significantly when Using Ihe SPA. as the codes are very weak. A new decoding methodl3lhas been found that improves the performance of codes with cycles o f length 4.
Svstem Model The system used consisls of a %rid concatenation o f an LDPC codc a ~ adParlial Rcspnmc (PR) class 4 channel. The recording channel simulated is a two-lrsck PR channel with linear and symmelric ITI. The chmncl noise is asrumed IDbe Addilive While Ginir4;in Noire (AWGN). Run-Length Limited (RLL) data are encoded using the LDPC H milmix md interleaved at regular intervals in the overdl sequence written I o the channel. This results in very few instancesof the minimum run-length conwaint d changing to d+l, similar changes occur in tlie inaxinluni mnlength constraint. The LDPC H matrix was made systematic in order to simplify the encoding procedure. The PR4 channel i s considered to be sn inner code and decoded using the multi-track lrellib dercribcd b y Ahmedl41 and the Bahl nlgurilhm[S].The A Pristeriuri Pruhilhilily (APP) was evaluated from the input Apriori Probabilities CAP). and Ilte eilrinsic information obtained The 'oulcr' codc i s an LDPC cudc dccluled using Ihc SPA. Thc inncr and uulcr dccudcrs cxchdngc only extrinsic informalinn (e) defined as e = APPIAP. The stopping criteria Cor the SPA WJS when a valid codeword was reached. and the ileratiw procedure started wifh decoding the inner code. A inaximum numher of 200 iterations was set for the SPA llist terminated the algnrithm in the case ofa non-convergent block. Figure I shows the implemented decoding scheme.

Pn.,.bs
",

]zi$zz -I"/

.*--,_.,

7--7,

_\.,_I I

I I&",< I . "C"'""'I:

YLIICIIIS

Figure 2: PcrSommnce

The SNR i 9 delined a\ SNR = 10 log (1/(2d)) where c? i F tlie variance of the AWON. The SPA an the I1 matrix starts with AP values o f 0.5 as this @webeller performance compared to using thc channcl AP V B ~ U C I .Bcllcr pccS~r"cc was iiko nhlninctl h y \lurring Ihc decoding wing Ihc chonnel AP vducs and the BCJRdecoder campored to using the SPA decoder ill llir hl,iil. This i s because there are no ;ylproximnlione in the APP eslimates from the BCJR decoder and lhe initial estini.~tes d extrinsic infolmotion itre hetter tlim i f llie SPA is used. 11 wn\ ohserred hy lhe

author that a5 W1 increnscd beyond ahoul 3118, the SPA had convergence problems. T h e v convcrgccncc pmhlcm\ arc diic to Ihc SPA not hcing ablc t o decudc multi-lrack \ymhuls

aimultmcously. Cosclusions

F i y r e 2 sug@ Ihal weak LDPC codes decoded u4ng !he SPA do not significantly impmve rcsilicncc to IT1 compa~cd10 ming an adaptivc lrclli~[4l.Rcccnl rcru11~[31wggcnr Ilia1 IDPC

codev with cycles of lcngth 4 c m be decodedwith il giiin of upto 0.5dB a1 code rilles of U.K. 'The iipplicaiion ;ml invealigzitionof rhr new d e a l i n g merllod that caters for c)cles of length 4 to lhir particular channel is currently under investigmion. A non-binary equivalent of the SPA is illso

currently under investigation.

information Theory, 27(5):5331547,Sep 1981.
121R.G. Gellager. Low-Density Parily-Check Code.;. Phd, MIT, 1963. [31 M.A. Ambroi., M.Z. Ahmed et ill. Iterarive decoding of binary codes h y portilioning lhe II matrix. Uriivcnity nf Plymouth, Inlcmal Mono. 2002. [4] M.Z. Ahmed e l ill.Track squeeze using adaptive inter-track interference eqasli%lion. IEEE Transaclions OII Magnctica. 3X(S), .;cp 2W?. (51 L.R. Bahl et ill. Oplimal decoding of linear codes fur minimising syhmol error mte. IEEE Transactions in Infonnalion Thcory. 20:2841?87. mar 1974.

m
:0
52 ?
.ew
E
8
0
8
wF3

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:50:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

