DT-10

PERFORMANCE OFLOW DENSITY PARITY CHECK (LDPC) CODE? ON HIGH-DENSITY MAGNHI'IC TAPE RECORDING SIGNALS
Shilpi Sahu, Hongwei Song, and B.V.K. Vijaya Kumar Data Storage Systems Center
Camegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213

Introduction Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes introduced by Gallager [ I ] are error-comctiag codes. which ih iterative soft decoding sinlulations provide about 468 SNR gain over PRML channels making them iittriictive lor data sloragr applications. We have investigated the perfarmiince of LDPC codes with real high-density magnetic 1:lpe recording signals from metal particle (MP) media. It is believed that LDPC codes may be more appropriate for tape recording systems where the per-channel data rate requirement
is significantly lower than that of hard dick drives.

Writing and Reading Blocks of hinwv dilta were encoded with a rate-819 LDPC code. The encoded blocks were write-equalized and were recorded many times on MP3 media at different recording densities, ranging from 250Khpi to 300Khpi. The data was read hack using a head from a
commercial LTO tape drive. The analog readhack signal was then IOX oversampled and was fed offlineto an equaliiation and timing recovery loop using VCO-haned Muller and Mueller timing e m r detection. The equalization target irrside the phase locked loop (PLL) was EPR4. Output of the PLL was then fed to the LDPC iterative soft decoder. N o Run Length Limited code (RLL) was used for these experiments. Each encoded data block w a 4608 bits long and was preceded by a 4T preamble of length 200 bits.

~

User bits

LDPC Encoding

Encoded bits

tt:ir Write and
Read from

Magnetic tape

........................E...s..t..i.m....a..t..e..d..................

............f .........................................
Estimated user bits

....
~
:.................I.terative

soft decoding

Figure 1. Block Diagram of LDFC Code Evaluation with Real Magnetic Tape Recording Signals

Results The results presented here are for a palricular MP3 sample and with a commercia1 LTP tape drive head. This head/media combination was tested at various linear densities from 250 Kbpi to 300 Kbpi. Due to space liniilatioils. wc p i e ~ ~tthe~ rtesults for a sample of 10 blocks at 300 Khpi.

6
ri 24
go
-2

Pigure2. ye pattern aner the EPR4 equalizer In the PLL
PLL bandwidth O.OOSX/r Estimdled SNR after- 13.3dB cuuilliziltion

-4

-6 i 0 1000 2mO 3000 4000

Im3 Table 1. Results after decoding a sample of 10 blocks.

Blo I Channel t

LDPC Errors (iter 1-5)

nnnnn

onono

Channel el'l'on are the e m i x after thc chiinncl dccodcr in Fieurc I.Ncrt cdunin represents crrors after each LDPC iteration.
In some blocks (e.g., block # 4).

LDPC dccodcr can even correct 20

0%

errors. Result.; were ohwrvcd for MI

P
9

hlncks. ciich block 4608 hits long.

e

Fivcn thc cntrccct timing iiifornutioti,

b

after the channel decoder. -400errors

Y

were ohserved. No errors were ohserved after LDPC decoding. Table I shows that eYen at 300Khpi. full

zFWA
0

potential of LDPC iterative decoding

is yet to be exploited.

Conclusion Our results suggest that itcriltive LDPC decoding can play an importnnt rnle in increasing the linear recording density of magnetic tape vecording system.;. Howcvcr, ilt high rrcordirrg dcmsitics. iinotlm signific:int problcm is hccaiisc of timing rccovcry ilf low SNRc. M;my blocks suffer from Inss of lock due to paor timing rccnrery. So, along u d h the implementation of LDPC codes, advmced signal processing and timing recovery
schemes 121 need to he employed. We will present at the conference results at even higher densities. hut with more advanced timing recovery.

References [ I1R.G. Gallager, Low Detisilj Porilj CRcd ro&s. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, 1963. [2] I. Liu, H. Song, and B. V. K. Vijaye Kumiir, S p h o l 7inziqq Rernvo:\. for Lonm-SNR Parrial R C S ~ O I ZRS Cerorrliiig Cliomels,IEEE ClokCom 2002.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:38:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

