976

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 11, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2003

High-Throughput LDPC Decoders
Mohammad M. Mansour, Member, IEEE, and Naresh R. Shanbhag, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—A high-throughput memory-efficient decoder architecture for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes is proposed based on a novel turbo decoding algorithm. The architecture benefits from various optimizations performed at three levels of abstraction in system design—namely LDPC code design, decoding algorithm, and decoder architecture. First, the interconnect complexity problem of current decoder implementations is mitigated by designing architecture-aware LDPC codes having embedded structural regularity features that result in a regular and scalable message-transport network with reduced control overhead. Second, the memory overhead problem in current day decoders is reduced by more than 75% by employing a new turbo decoding algorithm for LDPC codes that removes the multiple checkto-bit message update bottleneck of the current algorithm. A new merged-schedule merge-passing algorithm is also proposed that reduces the memory overhead of the current algorithm for low to moderate-throughput decoders. Moreover, a parallel soft-input–soft-output (SISO) message update mechanism is proposed that implements the recursions of the Balh–Cocke–Jelinek–Raviv (BCJR) algorithm in terms of simple “max-quartet” operations that do not require lookup-tables and incur negligible loss in performance compared to the ideal case. Finally, an efficient programmable architecture coupled with a scalable and dynamic transport network for storing and routing messages is proposed, and a full-decoder architecture is presented. Simulations demonstrate that the proposed architecture attains a throughput of 1.92 Gb/s for a frame length of 2304 bits, and achieves savings of 89.13% and 69.83% in power consumption and silicon area over state-of-the-art, with a reduction of 60.5% in interconnect length.
Index Terms—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, Ramanujan graphs, soft-input soft-output (SISO) decoder, turbo decoding algorithm, VLSI decoder architectures.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE PHENOMENAL success of turbo codes [1] powered by the concept of iterative decoding via message-passing has rekindled the interest in low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes which were first discovered by Gallager in 1961 [2]. Recent breakthroughs to within 0.0045 dB of AWGN-channel capacity were achieved with the introduction of irregular LDPC codes in [3], [4] putting LDPC codes on par with turbo codes. However, efficient hardware implementation techniques of turbo decoders have given turbo codes a clear advantage
Manuscript received September 10, 2002; revised February 3, 2003. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCR 99-79381 and Grant CCR 00-73490.
M. M. Mansour was with the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801 USA. He is now with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, American University of Beirut, Beirut, 1107 2020 Lebanon (e-mail: mmansour@aub.edu.lb).
N. R. Shanbhag is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801 USA (e-mail: shanbhag@uiuc.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVLSI.2003.817545

over LDPC codes allowing them to occupy mainstream applications ranging from wireless applications to fiber-optics communications. Hence, the quest for efficient LDPC decoder implementation techniques has become a topic of increasing interest, gradually promoting LDPC codes as serious competitors to turbo codes on both fronts.
The design of LDPC decoder architectures differs from the decoder design for other classes of codes, in particular turbo codes, in that it is intimately related to the structure of the code itself through its parity-check matrix. The iterative decoding process of both codes consists of two main steps [5]: 1) computing independent messages proportional to the a posteriori probability distributions of the code bits and 2) communicating the messages. The complexity incurred in both steps depends on how messages are communicated with respect to the process of computing the messages. In turbo codes, the communication mechanism is defined by a simple pseudorandom message interleaver that is external to the process of computing the messages, while the computational complexity is proportional to the code length and memory. On the other hand, the communication mechanism for LDPC codes is defined by a pseudorandom bipartite graph and is internal with respect to message computation (i.e., an internal interleaver), while the computational complexity is very low ( order of the logarithm of the code length). In both cases, the performance depends on the properties of the interleaver: the scrambling of channel burst errors for turbo codes, and the extremal properties (such as girth and expansion coefficient) of the bipartite graph defining the code for LDPC codes.
However, unlike turbo codes, the lack of any structural regularity in the message communication mechanism of LDPC codes has far reaching consequences on the decoder implementation such as: 1) complex interconnects that limit the amount of inherent parallelism that can be exploited efficiently in a parallel decoder implementation and 2) stringent memory requirements in a serial decoder implementation that limits the applicability of LDPC codes in latency and power-sensitive applications. The dependence of the decoder architecture on the code properties is depicted in the traditional LDPC design flowgraph in Fig. 1(a), where the dependence of the architecture on the code structure is depicted by a dashed line. All current decoder architectures [6]–[11] apply optimizations at one system abstraction level, and either retain the disadvantages of or introduce further disadvantages at other levels, while the limited code-design optimizations introduced in [12] require significant overhead in terms of network control and source synchronization.
This paper attempts to break the architectural dependence on the code properties by performing optimizations at three levels of abstraction—code-design level, (decoder) algorithmic

1063-8210/03$17.00 © 2003 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:45:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MANSOUR AND SHANBHAG: HIGH-THROUGHPUT LDPC DECODERS

977

Fig. 2. TDMP algorithm versus the TPMP algorithm.

Fig. 1. LDPC decoder design flowgraph: (a) traditional and (b) proposed.
level, and architectural level—according to the proposed design flowgraph shown in Fig. 1(b) where the architecture is decoupled from the code structure. In particular, the contributions of the paper are: the concept of structured or architecture-aware LDPC codes to solve the interconnect problem, a new decoding algorithm based on the turbo-decoding principle for LDPC codes along with an efficient message-update mechanism to solve the memory overhead problem and improve the convergence speed of the decoder, and a new programmable and scalable high-throughput turbo-decoder architecture for LDPC codes that achieves savings of 89.13% and 62.8% over existing architectures for frame lengths of 2304, with a reduction of 60.5% in interconnect length.
First, LDPC codes are essentially random in nature (and hence, require highly irregular hardware interconnectivity), which goes against efficient VLSI implementation paradigms that call for regular and structured design. This immediate difficulty is best addressed by designing good and architecture-aware LDPC codes having regularity features favorable for an efficient decoder implementation. Two classes of high-performance codes based on cyclotomic cosets [13] and Ramanujan graphs [14], [15] targeted for short-to-medium and large code lengths, respectively, are shown to posses these features.
Second, the memory overhead problem in current decoder implementations is addressed by proposing the concept of turbo-decoding of LDPC codes [5], [13]. The overhead

problem refers to the memory overhead of the two-phase message-passing (TPMP) algorithm [2] commonly employed in current day decoders. Related ideas in the context of optimized two level generalized low-density (GLD) codes were considered in [16]. An LDPC code is viewed as a code concatenated from a number of constituent codes connected through interleavers [5] which are defined by the parity-check matrix of the code. The turbo-decoding message-passing (TDMP) algorithm decodes each of these constituent codes in tandem by passing messages only between adjacent decoders in the pipeline as opposed to all other decoders as is the case with the TPMP algorithm (see Fig. 2). The advantages of the TDMP algorithm are twofold: 1) it eliminates the storage required to save multiple check-to-bit messages and replaces them with a single message corresponding to the most recent check-message update and 2) it exhibits a faster convergence behavior requiring 20%–50% fewer decoding iterations to converge for a given SNR (and hence, higher decoding throughput) compared to the TPMP algorithm.
Moreover, a new parallel soft-input soft-output (SISO) message update mechanism in the form of a message processing unit (MPU) based on the BCJR algorithm [13], [17] is proposed. The MPU implements the recursions of the BCJR algorithm using metric differences based on simple “max” operations that do not require lookup tables and incur negligible performance loss compared to the ideal case. The proposed update equations perform better than the approximations proposed in [18] both in terms of accuracy and hardware complexity, and, contrary to the observations made in [6], it is shown that the SISO MPU is indeed suitable for high-throughput applications.
Finally, at the architectural level, an efficient programmable architecture based on the TDMP algorithm is proposed that handles both regular and irregular LDPC codes. A regular and scalable dynamic message-transport network for routing messages to and from the MPUs is proposed. Among other features, the decoder architecture is flexible enough to handle GLD codes [16], [19] as well by simply modifying the MPUs.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces LDPC codes and the standard TPMP algorithm. Section III presents basic and improved LDPC decoder architectures, and identifies their drawbacks in terms of hardware complexity. Architecture-aware LDPC codes are introduced in Section IV. Sections V and VI propose the TDMP algorithm and the SISO MPU for message computation. Section VII presents a programmable TDMP architecture for AA-LDPC codes together with the memory and message-transport network architectures. Finally, Section VIII presents some simulation results, and Section IX concludes the paper.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:45:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

978

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 11, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2003

n m Fig. 3. Bipartite graph of a binary regular (2, 3)-LDPC code of length 9. The
graph has = 9 bit nodes and = 6 check nodes. The sum of the values of all bit nodes connected to a check node is equal to zero.

II. BACKGROUND

We start with a formal definition of LDPC codes and the stan-

dard iterative decoding algorithm.

Fig. 4. Message updates on the TPMP algorithm. (a) Bit-to-check update and (b) check-to-bit update.

A. LDPC Codes

An LDPC code is a linear block code defined by a sparse

parity-check matrix

and is described by a bi-

partite or factor graph [20] (see Fig. 3) whose reduced adja-

cency matrix is . The graph has on one side check nodes

corresponding to the rows of , and on

the other bit nodes

corresponding to the

columns of . A bit-node is connected to a check node

if the entry of is 1. The rate of the code is at least

. In a regular

-LDPC code, bit nodes have de-

gree and check nodes have degree in the graph. The number

of edges in the corresponding bipartite graph is the Hamming

weight of given by

, and the density of

is defined as

. The minimum

distance of these codes increases linearly with the block length

for a given code rate and node degrees and [2].

In an irregular

-LDPC code, the bit-node and chec-

knode degrees are drawn from the sets and , respectively.

Typically, regular codes are easier to encode and have a sim-

pler decoder architecture than irregular codes, however the latter

achieve higher coding gain (e.g., [3], [4] report a rate-0.5 ir-

regular code that has a threshold of 0.0045 dB from AWGN-

channel capacity, outperforming the best codes known so far in-

cluding turbo codes).

set of check nodes involving bit-node , is the index set of

bit nodes involved in check node :

• Initialization: For

, the check-to-bit messages

from the ith check node to the th bit node are

initialized to zero for all , with

.

• At iteration :

— Phase 1: Compute for each bit node the message

corresponding to each of its check node neigh-

bors according to [see Fig. 4(a)]

(G1)

Note that the check-message

from the pre-

vious iteration is excluded from the summation in

(G1) to eliminate correlation between messages. This

is achieved by removing the index from the index set

of the summation using the notation

, imple-

menting the so-called extrinsic principle.

— Phase 2: Compute for each check node the message

corresponding to each of its bit node neighbors

according to [see Fig. 4(b)]

B. The Standard Message-Passing Algorithm

(G2)

LDPC codes are decoded iteratively using the TPMP algo-

rithm proposed by Gallager [2]. The algorithm computes itera-

tively extrinsic probability values associated with each bit-node

using disjoint parity-check equations that the bit participates in

[2]. Each iteration consists of two phases of computations in

which updates of all bit nodes are done in phase 1 by sending

messages to neighboring checknodes, and then updates of all

check nodes are done in phase 2 by sending messages to neigh-

boring bit nodes (see Fig. 3). Updates in each phase are inde-

pendent and can be parallelized.

The TPMP algorithm [2] consists of the following main steps,

where is the intrinsic channel reliability value of the th bit,

is the check-to-bit message from check node to bit-node

at the th iteration,

is the bit-to-check message from

bit-node to check node at the th iteration, is the index

where

,

and is a sign correction factor that depends on

and the sign of the terms

in (G2). As in (G1),

the message

targeted for check node is left out

of the summation in (G2) to implement the extrinsic

principle.

• Final iteration: Compute for all bit nodes the posterior

reliability quantity given by

(G3)

Hard decisions are then made based on the sign of , and the syndrome of the codeword is checked

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:45:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MANSOUR AND SHANBHAG: HIGH-THROUGHPUT LDPC DECODERS

979

Fig. 5. LDPC decoder architectures: (a) parallel TPMP architecture, (b) serial TPMP architecture, (c) Interconnect-aware TPMP architecture, and (d) memory aware architecture implementing the MSMP algorithm.

for errors. Note that decisions are made using all information known about the bits, and hence all check-to-bit messages are included in the summation of (G3).

III. IMPROVED TPMP-BASED LDPC DECODER ARCHITECTURES
In this section, we characterize the hardware complexity of conventional LDPC decoder architectures based on the TPMP algorithm. Their drawbacks in terms of interconnect and memory overhead are identified, motivating the need for interconnect-aware and memory-aware architectures that mitigate these problems.

A. Hardware Complexity of Conventional TPMP Architectures

Direct decoder implementation based on the TPMP algorithm

for randomly constructed LDPC codes in the form given in Sec-

tion II-B presents a number of challenges. The check-to-bit mes-

sage update equation (G2) is prone to quantization noise since

it involves the nonlinear function and its inverse. The func-

tion

has a wide dynamic range (it rapidly increases for

small ) which requires the messages to be represented using

a large number of bits to achieve a fine resolution, leading to

an increase in memory size and interconnect complexity (e.g.,

for a regular (3, 6)-LDPC code of length

with 4-bit

messages, an increase of 1 bit increases the memory size and/or

interconnect wires by 25%).

Moreover, a parallel decoder implementation [7], [11] ex-

ploiting the inherent parallelism of the algorithm such as the one

shown Fig. 5(a) is constrained by the complexity of the phys-

ical interconnect required to establish the graph connectivity of

the code and, hence, does not scale well for moderate ( 2K)

to large code lengths. Long on-chip interconnect wires present

implementation challenges in terms of placement, routing, and

buffer-insertion to achieve timing closure. For example, the av-

erage interconnect wire length of the rate-0.5, length

,

4-bit LDPC decoder of [7] is 3 mm using 0.16- m CMOS tech-

nology, and has a chip area of

mm of which only 50%

is utilized due to routing congestion. In Fig. 5(a), the bit func-

tion units (BFUs) implement (G1) and the check function units

(CFUs) implement (G2).

On the other hand, serial architectures [8], [9] in which

computations are distributed among a number of function

units that communicate through memory instead of a complex

interconnect, as shown in Fig. 5(b), require a substantial

memory overhead that amounts to four times the Hamming

weight of the parity-check matrix. Each function unit requires

separate read/write networks with complex control to access

memory, and hence it is practical to use only a small number

of function units compared to the parallel case, resulting in

a low-throughput decoder. A heuristic approach aimed at

simplifying implementation complexity was proposed in [9] by

relaxing the inequality

in (G1). However, this leads to

considerable loss in coding gain due to correlation between the

messages and premature ending of decoding iterations.

B. Interconnect-Aware Decoder Architectures
An interconnect-aware decoder architecture targeted for moderate- to high-throughput applications was proposed in [13] to solve the interconnect problem of TPMP-based decoders. Fig. 5(c) shows the corresponding architecture. In this approach, structural regularity features are embedded in the parity-check matrix that reduce the complexity of the interconnect in implementation. The matrix is decomposed

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:45:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

980

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 11, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2003

into

submatrices with separate function units allocated to

process each column and each row of these submatrices. Each

of the function units reads its messages from local memory

controlled by a modulo- counter, and writes its results in

remote memory pertaining to other function units using a

simple static network with the counters serving to synchronize

the memory operations. Compared with the parallel approach,

the complexity of the interconnect due to this approach is

scaled down by a factor of . On the other hand, compared with

the serial approach, it requires only half the amount of memory,

and the switching networks for memory access are eliminated.

In addition, two frames are processed simultaneously by the

decoder [13] LDPC codes constructed using this approach

compare favorably in terms of coding gain with randomly

constructed codes having similar complexity for bit error rates

(BERs) as low as .

C. Memory-Aware Decoder Architectures
A merged-schedule message-passing (MSMP) algorithm that addresses the memory overhead problem of LDPC decoder architectures targeted for low- to moderate-throughput applications was proposed in [5] In the MSMP algorithm, the computations of both phases of the TPMP algorithm are merged into a single phase as described in the pseudocode listed below in Algorithm 1, resulting in a considerable reduction in memory requirements. An MSMP decoder architecture is shown in Fig. 5(d).

Algorithm 1. Merged-Schedule Message-Passing Algorithm to
to

MAXITER to

(G4) to

end while

The savings are mainly due to eliminating the storage

required to save the multiple bit-to-check messages computed

using equation (Gl). Since the computations in this equation

are additive in nature, the condition

can be satisfied by

first computing the total sum

and

then subtracting the intrinsic message

. Thus, only

one copy of the total bit-to-check message is maintained

in a buffer for each bit holding this total sum [refer to

Fig. 5(d)]. Updated check-messages to the bit under consider-

ation are accumulated in a temporary buffer having size

and initialized with the intrinsic channel reliabilities . The

buffer maintains a single running sum of the bit-to-check

messages instead of multiple copies pertaining to different

check nodes. Unlike [9], a copy of the intrinsic check-to-bit

messages

is saved in a buffer of size

so that it is subtracted from the cumulative sum in the next

iteration to implement the condition

in (G2). At the end

of each iteration, and are interchanged and is reloaded

with the ’s. The architecture stores

messages

as opposed to , a savings of (75–50/ )%, and hence the

name memory-aware decoder architecture. The CFU block

implements equation (G4) defined in the pseudo-code below

with the -function preeoded in a lookup table (LUT). Multiple

CFU blocks scheduled to operate on distinct bits instead of one

as shown in Fig. 5(d) can be used to increase throughput. Extra

logic must be added to ensure correct operation in case some

conflicts are not removable through scheduling. However, the

complexity of the interconnect is still the bottleneck motivating

the need for further transformations at the code design and

algorithmic levels.

D. Discussion
The architectures presented so far benefit from optimizations performed at one abstraction level and hence do not achieve simultaneously the desired objectives of reduced memory overhead, reduced interconnect complexity, and scalability while maintaining the code performance promised by randomly constructed LDPC codes. In Sections IV–VI, we address these objectives through combined efforts targeting the code structure, decoding algorithm, and architecture.

IV. ARCHITECTURE-AWARE LDPC CODE DESIGN

In this section, we propose a class of architecture-aware

LDPC codes that solves the interconnect, memory overhead,

and scalability problems associated with LDPC decoders.

Motivated by Gallager’s original construction of LDPC

codes [2], we view the parity-check matrix of a regular

)-LDPC code as a concatenation of parity-check matrices

, corresponding to supercodes

This

in turn enables us to decompose the interconnection network

defined by the overall matrix into smaller networks or

interleavers that connect together adjacent supercodes. This

step transforms the LDPC decoding problem into a turbo

decoding problem [1], with the codes

acting

as constituent codes. Related ideas in the context of GLD

codes concatenated from two supercodes were studied in [16].

To enable efficient implementation of the interleavers, we

propose an architectureaware decomposition of the matrices

into null or pseudo-permutation matrices. The

major advantages of the architecture-aware decomposition and

the associated turbo decoding algorithm as discussed in this

section and Section V, are that they reduce the complexity of the

interconnect by , decrease the memory requirements by at

least 75% compared to serial TPMP architectures, and improve

the decoding throughput due to the faster convergence of the

turbo-decoding algorithm compared to the TPMP algorithm.

We start by introducing the concept of trellis representation

of parity-check codes and their relation to LDPC codes and the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:45:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MANSOUR AND SHANBHAG: HIGH-THROUGHPUT LDPC DECODERS

981

Fig. 6. A Trellis representation of a (4, 3)-SPC code. The 8 codewords shown on the right correspond to all possible eight sequences of edge labels starting from the root and ending in the toor.

TPMP algorithm. The interconnect problem is identified, and then an architecture-aware decomposition of is presented to solve this problem.

A. Trellis Representation of Parity-Check Codes

The rows of a parity-check matrix correspond to par-

itycheck equations constraining the values of the bits in a

codeword. Hence, if the th row contains ones at column

positions

, then this implies that the bits

, of a codeword must have even parity, or

The set of all codewords of length having even parity forms a

code called the single parity-check (SPC) code of length

and dimension

denoted as

-SPC code.

The codewords of an

-SPC code can be represented

conveniently using a trellis of length composed of nodes and

labeled edges as shown in Fig. 6. A node in the trellis is a state

that represents the parity of the edge labels starting from the

leftmost node (called the root) and ending in that node. The

nodes in the top row including the root and the rightmost node

(or toor) correspond to even parity states, while those in the

bottom row correspond to odd parity states. A sequence of edge

labels from the root to the toot defines a codeword of length

having even parity. The set of all such sequences defines

an

-SPC code.

A parity-check matrix

of an LDPC code containing

ones per row,

, can be represented using

trellises corresponding to

-SPC codes. Using this

representation, it is possible to describe an LDPC code and the

corresponding flow of messages of the TPMP algorithm using

an alternative graph based on the bipartite graph of the code. In

this graph, a check node of degree is replaced by the trellis of

an

-SPC code, while the bit nodes are removed. The

edges incident on a check node in the bipartite graph are con-

nected to the appropriate sections of the trellis corresponding to

that check node, and the edges incident on a bit nodeare con-

nected directly to each other. If two rows in overlap in

column positions, then their trellises are connected by edges at

those overlapping positions. Fig. 7 shows a portion of the bipar-

tite graph of Fig. 3 represented using trellises connected through

edges. For a larger random such as the one shown in Fig. 8(a),

the connections between the trellises quickly become congested,

and hence they are represented as a random interleaver as shown

in Fig. 8(b).

The bit-to-check and check-to-bit messages associated with

the nodes of a bipartite graph are replaced by a single type

of message called a SISO message in the trellis flowgraph.

Fig. 7. Trellis representation of a portion of the bipartite graph of Fig. 3.

Section VI describes how these SISO messages are computed using a SISO decoder based on the BCJR algorithm [13] and [17]. This SISO decoder will replace the BFU and CFU blocks of Fig. 5 for message computation in the remainder of the paper.

B. Gallager’s Construction of LDPC Codes

According to the definition given in Section II-A, the parity-

check matrix of a regular

-LDPC need not satisfy any

properties other than the row and column regularity constraints

as shown in Fig. 8(a). We call this construction method the

random construction method. The Gallager [2] or normal con-

struction method constructs ensembles of regular -LDPC

codes of length by defining the parity-check matrix

of

a code as a concatenation of submatrices, each containing

a single 1 in each column as shown in Fig. 8(c) for a regular

(3, 4)-LDPC code of length 16. The first of these submatrices

having size

defines a supercode as the direct

sum of parity-check (

-subcodes. Note that sat-

isfies a subset of the parity-check equations of , and hence

is a subspace of . The other submatrices

, are

pseudorandom permutations of , each of which defines a

supercode on the corresponding subset of the parity-check

equations. Hence, is simply the intersection of the supercodes

.

When the TPMP algorithm is applied to the random

matrix , the message flowgraph takes the form shown in

Fig. 8(b) where the two-state trellises represent the rows of

as even parity-checks, and the random interleaver rep-

resents the flow of messages between the trellises according

to the columns of . This random interleaver creates the

interconnect complexity bottleneck referred to earlier. With

the normal matrix in Fig. 8(c), however, the interleaver

can be factored into constituent interleavers according to

. The corresponding flow of messages can be

modeled naturally as shown in Fig. 8(d) where the short

two state trellises represent SPC subcodes. The analogy

with turbo codes is depicted in Fig. 8(e) where the long

trellises represent convolutional codes with constraint length

2. The rows corresponding to each supercode in

do

not overlap, and hence the constituent SPC subcodes can

be decoded in parallel without exchanging information. But

this decomposition of the parity-check matrix again presents

a problem when it comes to forwarding and retrieving

messages between these decoders and memory. The reason

is that the ones in any row have random column indices

requiring

-multiplexers to read messages corre-

sponding to a row, and then

-demultiplexers to write

the results back in memory in proper order. This solution

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:45:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

982

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 11, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2003

2 Fig. 8. Analogy between LDPC and turbo codes: (a) random parity-check matrix of an LDPC code, (b) message flowgraph of the TPMP algorithm when applied
to a random parity-check matrix, (c) normal parity-check matrix decomposed into r n submatrices, (d) message flowgraph of the TDMP algorithm, (e) message
flowgraph of a turbo decoder, (f) architecture-aware parity-check matrix, and (g) message flowgraph corresponding to an AA-LDPC code.
quickly becomes impractical for large code lengths , or mechanism of the (de-)multiplexers which keeps track of the when multiple tows are accessed in parallel to increase column positions of all the ones in the parity-check matrix decoding throughput. Moreover, the overhead of the control becomes too complex to implement.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:45:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MANSOUR AND SHANBHAG: HIGH-THROUGHPUT LDPC DECODERS

983

Fig. 9. Examples of pseudo-random permutation matrices. (a) Matrix with S = 6; S = 5, (b) an acyclic permutation matrix with S = 6, and (c) a cyclic permutation matrix with S = 6. The label denotes a one at column
position i.

C. Architecture-Aware LDPC Codes

We propose an architecture-aware decomposition of the parity-check matrix that limits the column positions of the ones

in a row, while still yielding LDPC codes with comparable

BER performance to that of randomly constructed codes. In

this method, the parity-check matrix binary submatrices where

is decomposed into are code-independent

parameters such that

. These submatrices, which we

call pseudo-permutation matrices, satisfy the following two

conditions: each column has at most one 1, and each row has at most one 1. For example, binary permutation matrices with

satisfy these conditions. Note that zero columns,

zero rows, and null matrices are allowed under this definition.

Fig. 9 shows three examples of pseudo-permutation matrices.

A regular -LDPC code can be constructed such that its

parity-check matrix has r permutation matrices per block row

and permutation matrices per block column (

,

and is arbitrary). An irregular LDPC code would have these

matrices positioned according to the degree distribution of the

code, with

in general. Note that a normal matrix can

be made architecture-aware by setting

and

,

and permuting the columns in each block row independently to

satisfy the above two conditions. We associate the following two

parameters with

and

. Figs. 8(f)

and 10 show the parity-check matrix of a (3, 4)-regular and an

irregular AA-LDPC code, respectively. The regular code has

and

,

. The irregular code has

and

,

, where the block rows of

contain four or five permutation matrices and the block

columns two to four permutations matrices. Since each row of

the submatrices has at most a single nonzero element, only

instead of

-(de-)multiplexers are needed to access

messages from memory, where

, a reduction of order

Further, these (de-)multiplexers can be controlled by simple sequencers programmed to trace the corresponding permutations, resulting in a reduction in control overhead of

Fig. 8(g) shows the message flowgraph corresponding to an AA-LDPC code where the interleavers are factored into smaller

Fig. 10. An architecture-aware parity-check matrix with parameter S = 6.

interleavers of size for forwarding messages between super-

codes.

While the parity-check matrix shown in Fig. 10 has desirable

architectural properties, LDPC codes having such structure also

provide comparable BER performance to randomly constructed

codes of similar complexity. Fig. 11 (a)–(b) compares the BER

performance of randomly constructed LDPC codes free of 4-cy-

cles and two structured code-design methods: 1) using cyclo-

tomic cosets [13] in Fig. 11(a), and 2) using Ramanujan graphs

[15], [21] in Fig. 11(b). These two methods generate LDPC

codes whose parity-check matrices are architecture-aware [13],

[21], [22]. The figures clearly show that the BER performance

of the structured codes using the techniques in [13], [15], [21],

[22] compares favorably with the randomly generated codes in

the -

regions shown in the figures.

Note that it is also possible to randomly specify the size,

number, structure, and positions of the pseudo-permutation sub-

matrices in an AA-LDPC code. We call this method the gener-

alized pseudo-permutation construction method of AA-LDPC

codes. Fig. 11(c) compares the performance of an AA-LDPC

code with

,

,

and rate 0.5 where

the permutation matrices are chosen and positioned in

such that the girth of its graph is 6, with a randomly constructed

code of the same length, rate, and girth. For code lengths more

than 2K, careful consideration must be made regarding the min-

imum distance of the code to avoid error-floors at high SNR.

D. Discussion
The interconnect problem was identified by analyzing the message flow between two-state trellises pertaining to the TPMP algorithm. By decomposing the parity-check matrix of an LDPC code in such a way as to restrict the column positions of the ones, the LDPC decoding problem is transformed into a turbo-decoding problem where messages flow in tandem only between the adjacent supercodes as opposed to potentially all the subcodes absent any structure on the parity-check matrix. The interleavers are factored into smaller interleavers that are practical to implement. Fig. 8(e) illustrates the analogy with turbo codes where the supercodes are convolutional codes represented by contiguous trellises as opposed to SPC subcodes, and Fig. 8(g) shows how the interleavers factor out in an AA-LDPC code. Three conclusions can be drawn:

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:45:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

984

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 11, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2003

Fig. 11. Performance of AA-LDPC codes constructed from: (a) cyclotomic cosets [13], (b) Ramanujan graphs [15], [21], and (c) generalized pseudo-permutation matrices.

1) the turbo decoding algorithm is a practical algorithm for decoding AA-LDPC codes resulting in equivalent message communication complexity as that of turbo codes as discussed in Section V; 2) the algorithm processes one type of messages (SISO messages) corresponding to the extrinsic information from each supercode as opposed to bit and check messages in the TPMP algorithm; and 3) the computations of the messages are simpler in the case of LDPC codes compared to convolutional codes since they are based on short and independent trellises as discussed in Section Vl.
V. TURBO DECODING OF AA-LDPC CODES
So far, we have established the analogy between LDPC codes and turbo-codes and identified an appropriate structure for the parity-check matrix to solve the interconnect problem. The next step is to solve the memory overhead problem. To this end, we

propose a new turbo-decoding message-passing (TDMP) algorithm [5] for AA-LDPC codes. The throughput and improvement in coding gain of the proposed algorithm over the TPMP algorithm, in addition to its memory advantages, are identified.

A. The Turbo-Decoding Message-Passing (TDMP) Algorithm

In this section, we propose the TDMP algorithm in the context

of regular LDPC codes for simplicity. The algorithm applies to

irregular codes as well with some minor modifications. As be-

fore, assume that an

normal parity-check matrix

defines a regular -LDPC code with structure similar to

that shown in Fig. 8(f) or Fig. 10. The decoding procedure is

described with reference to Fig. 8(f) and Fig. 12. For each bit,

extrinsic reliability values are computed using SISO decoder

assuming that the bit belongs to the first code . This extrinsic

information is fed as a priori information through an interleaver

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:45:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MANSOUR AND SHANBHAG: HIGH-THROUGHPUT LDPC DECODERS

985

Fig. 12. Block diagram of the TDMP algorithm showing the message
exchange between decoders for the case of three super-codes. P ,  , and D are the memory, interleaver, and decoder blocks of the ith super-code, i = 1; 2; 3:

each sub-iteration. The natural positions are

restored after

iterations.

• Final iteration: — Repeat steps 1–3 for the first — At sub-iteration :

sub-iterations.

1) Compute the posterior reliabilities using

to the SISO decoder for . The second SISO decoder updates the extrinsic reliability values assuming that the bits belong to . The process is repeated for . A single update of messages based on one supercode is referred to as a sub-iteration, and a round of updates across all the supercodes constitutes a single decoding iteration. In the final iteration, hard decisions are made based on the posterior reliability values read (after de-interleaving) from the SISO decoder operating on the last supercode .

• Input: A regular

-LDPC code

of length defined by

;

permutations

; intrinsic channel reliability

values

.

• Output: Codeword such that

.

• Storage: memory buffers of size

denoted by

and initialized to zero. denotes the

th element of . A set of counters

that point

to the head of these buffers.

• At iteration : Carry out decoding sub-iterations corre-

sponding to the supercodes

such that:

— At sub-iteration :

1) Compute the extrinsic reliabilities using the channel values , assuming
, as prior information that the codeword belongs to all supercodes except the th supercode. This computation can be done using the BCJR algorithm as discussed in Section VI, or using (G2) with a slight modification as

where is the set of column indices of the

bits of the subcode in that contains bit , and

is a sign-correction term that depends on

the size of and the sign of the arguments of

2) Permute according to .

3) Save

in

and advance

for

.

The positions of the messages corresponding to

each supercode rotate across the buffers with

2) Make hard decisions:

B. Throughput Advantage of the TDMP Algorithm
The BER performance and the rate of convergence of the TDMP algorithm are compared with the TPMP algorithm by simulating two LDPC codes and over a memotyless AWGN channel assuming BPSK modulation. is a regular (3, 5)-LDPC code of length 1200, while is a regular (4, 7)-LDPC code of length 4200. 100 000 frames were simulated using a maximum of 32 decoding iterations. Fig. 13(a) and (c) show the BER plots for and , respectively. The figures demonstrate that at the same SNR and for the same number of iterations, the proposed TDMP algorithm achieves much better BER. In particular, at SNR = 2.5 dB and with five iterations, the TDMP algorithm provides an order of magnitude improvement in the BER.
The number of iterations required for convergence using both algorithms is plotted in Fig. 13(b) and (d). As shown, the TDMP algorithm requires significantly less iterations to converge, where in some cases it requires close to half the number of iterations to converge compared to the TPMP algorithm. Hence, the decoder throughput can be improved by decreasing the number of iterations in order to achieve the same performance as that of the TPMP algorithm.

C. Memory Advantage of the TDMP Algorithm

In terms of memory, the total storage requirements of the

TDMP algorithm for a general irregular LDPC code having

bit node degrees

, is

,

corresponding to the extrinsic messages of all but one of

the supercodes. On the other hand, a parallel architecture

implementing the TPMP algorithm needs to store

messages, serial and interconnect-aware architectures need

to store

messages, while the MSMP architecture

needs to store

messages. Therefore, the sav-

ings compared to parallel, serial, interconnect-aware TPMP

architectures, and memory-aware MSMP architectures are

,

, and

, respectively. Fig. 14 plots the sav-

ings for regular (3, 6)-LDPC codes of length

and rate

0.5. The plot shows significant savings in memory overhead are

achieved by the TDMP algorithm over state-of-the-art which is

valuable in applications where power is at a premium.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:45:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

986

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 11, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2003

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 13. BER performance of the TDMP algorithm versus the TPMP algorithm for the two codes: (a), (b) C and (c), (d) C .

message update mechanism in the form of a soft-input softoutput message processing unit (MPU) based on the BCJR algorithm [13], [17] is proposed. These MPUs are used in the TDMP decoder architecture to be discussed in the next section, and replace the BFU and CFU blocks of the basic and improved decoder architectures of Fig. 5.
The check-to-bit message update equation (G2) reproduced below,

Fig. 14. Memory savings of the TDMP architecture compared to parallel serial
and MSMP architectures for regular (3, 6)-LDPC codes of length n = 2048 and
rate 0.5.
VI. REDUCED-COMPLEXITY MESSAGE COMPUTATIONS
This section presents an algorithmic optimization that addresses the way messages are generated. A reduced-complexity

involves the nonlinear function

and its identical inverse

. Typically,

is imple-

mented in hardware using a lookup table (LUT). This update

equation has two drawbacks:

1) It is prone to quantization noise due to the nonlinearity

of

and its inverse. In [13], it was shown that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:45:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MANSOUR AND SHANBHAG: HIGH-THROUGHPUT LDPC DECODERS

987

and the dynamic range is limited when quantized. These disadvantages translate to algorithmic performance loss where convergence speed is reduced thereby increasing the decoding latency, switching activity and hence the power consumption of the decoder. 2) A typical parallel implementation of (G2) requires LUTs, where is the check node degree. The size of these LUTs becomes significant with increase in precision. Moreover, they tend to increase the minimum clock period since they fall on the critical path, and hence must be pipelined. For large , a parallel implementation becomes impractical to implement, while serial implementations create a throughput bottleneck. An alternative approach for computing the check-to-bit messages was proposed in [13] by using a simplified form of BCJR algorithm [17] tailored to the syndrome trellis of an -SPC code. Related ideas were independently proposed in [6], [18]. The key equations of the algorithm for any section of such trellis reduce to
(1a)
(1b)
(1c)
where is the input prior and intrinsic channel reliability value of the code bit associated with that trellis section, is the updated output reliability of that code bit, and , are intermediate forward and backward state metrics, respectively. Equations (1a) and (1b) are called the forward and backward state metric recursions, respectively. In the context of LDPC codes, the length of the trellis is the number of bits per check node, or
for regular -LDPC codes, and is typically very small (3 to 8) compared to K for turbo codes.
The key equations involve the function which can be approximated using the Jacobian algorithm [23] as

Fig. 15. Approximation of f (x; y) using the correction function in (3). Also shown is the approximation using the principal part only and the error incurred (dashed regions).

approximation without a correction function and the resulting

error between the two (hatched regions). Note that this approx-

imation can be applied in turbo decoders as well.

To minimize the effects of quantization noise on the compu-

tations, (1a)–(1c) can be transformed so that metric differences

and

rather than absolute metrics

are involved. This transformation was independently proposed

in [13] and [18]. Such a transformation maximizes the effec-

tiveness of the limited dynamic range of the metrics and elim-

inates the need for normalization to avoid overflow. Moreover,

only one set of forward and backward state metrics, instead of

two, needs to be processed. The transformed key equation (1a)

becomes

where

(2)

(4)

with regarded as a univariate correction function. This cor-

rection function can be approximated by a LUT or a piecewise-

linear function [6]. Both approximations are not well suited for

high throughput applications since their computation time be-

comes the dominant part in (2).

We propose a simpler approximation of

given

by

(3)

where the factors are easy to implement in hardware. In fact,

using signed-magnitude representation and quantization bits,

can be implemented using logic gates, which is even less

than a full adder which requires

gates. Fig. 15 compares

the ideal

as a function of for two values of with the

proposed approximation in (3). The approximation almost per-

fectly matches the ideal

. Also shown in the figure is the

and

is the principal

part of the approximation, while

is a bivariate correc-

tion function. A similar argument holds for (1b) and (1c). The

simplest approximation of

is to use the principal part

. Although this approximation is very simple to imple-

ment, it incurs a loss of more than 1 dB in coding gain. Another

method is to approximate the correction function

by a

2-D LUT indexed by

and

, or use two copies of a

piecewise linearized univariate correction function . How-

ever, the overhead of these approximations in terms of delay and

area becomes substantial for large .

We propose a simpler (in terms of hardware implementation)

and more accurate approximation of

based on (3) given

by

(5)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:45:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

988

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 11, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2003

Fig. 16. Approximation of q(x; y) using q (x; y), q (x; y), and Q(x; y).

with the resulting approximation of quartet” function

given by the “max-

Fig. 17. Comparison of the BER performance achieved using versus the constant approximation q (x; y) and the ideal q(x; y).

In [6] and [18],

(6) was approximated using the function

if

and

if

and

otherwise,

(7) Fig. 18. Max-quartet function Q(x; y): (a) Logic circuit, and (b) symbol.

where

is a constant that depends on the channel SNR.

However, there is no constructive method to compute this con-

stant. Moreover, this approximation requires routing the con-

stant to all relevant logic units on chip, which in a parallel imple-

mentation amounts to adding wires more than twice the number

of edges in the bipartite graph defining the code1 .

Fig. 16 compares the ideal function

and the

proposed

, together with the no-correction case

, and the constant-correction case

of

. The plots shown in

the figure are a function of with regarded as a “stretching

factor.” The figure demonstrates that the proposed approxi-

mation

matches the ideal

best. In terms of the

function

, the key equations simplify to

(8)
0 1More specifically, for a regular (c; r)-LDPC code having m check nodes,
the number of units that require the constant is m(3r 1) compared to mr edges in the graph.

Fig. 17 compares the BER performance of the TDMP algo-

rithm employing the BCJR key equations using the ideal func-

tion

, the “max-quartet” function

, and the con-

stant approximation function

. The figure demonstrates

that there is negligible loss in coding gain incurred by the pro-

posed approximation compared to the ideal case.

In terms of hardware, the correction function

can be

implemented using (

) gates, assuming signed-magnitude

arithmetic on bits, compared to (

) gates for

.

Fig. 18 shows a logic circuit implementing the function

.

Table I compares the number of gates required to implement

the function

using the above approximations together

with the average approximation error incurred. The proposed

approximation has a clear advantage over

both in terms

of accuracy and hardware complexity. The error incurred using

on the other hand outweighs its advantage in terms of

hardware simplicity.

Fig. 19 shows a trellis and the corresponding parallel dataflow

graph (DFG) aligned below the trellis sections implementing

the key equations. Since this DFG accepts soft messages ( )

and generates update soft messages ( ), we call it a soft-input

soft-output message processing unit (MPU) and designate it

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:45:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MANSOUR AND SHANBHAG: HIGH-THROUGHPUT LDPC DECODERS

989

TABLE I NUMBER OF LOGIC GATES AND PERCENTAGE ERROR INCURRED USING THE
q FUNCTIONS (x; y), q (x; y), Q(x; y) TO APPROXIMATE q(x; y)

cursions are first performed by traversing the trellis from both

ends, saving the intermediate metrics in the buffers designated

by the grey-shaded rectangles in the figure. When the middle of

the trellis is reached, the and units perform the dual opera-

tion of generating the output reliabilities and then updating the

state metrics. The state metrics are not saved from this point on-

ward. For full throughput operation, skew buffers are provided

to align the input and output metrics. Note that this dataflow

graph is similar to the parallel-window DFG proposed in [24]

in the context of turbo MAP-decoding. The latency of the MPU

is proportional to , where is typically less than eight. The ap-

proach in [6] results in a latency of

, however in order

to achieve comparable performance to our approach, it requires

the use of one or two LUTs for every computation of

which tend to increase the clock period by more than a factor of

2 as well as the area of the MPU.

VII. PROGRAMMABLE TDMP DECODER ARCHITECTURE

Fig. 19. A SISO MPU based on the BCJR algorithm used for message computation: (a) a two-state trellis and (b) a parallel dataflow graph of the
MPU showing the resource utilization of the  and -recursions with time.
by the symbol shown in the figure. The function units in the DFG employ the “max-quartet” function of Fig. 18 to implement each of the three key equations in (8). The and re-

In this section, we propose a programmable decoder architec-

ture implementing the TDMP algorithm for both regular and ir-

regular AA-LDPC codes that builds upon the optimizations per-

formed in earlier sections. The architecture is shown in Fig. 20,

and the underlying parity-check matrix of the code is decom-

posed as shown in Fig. 10, and has the following parameters:

1) , the size of the sub-matrix partitions (assuming permuta-

tion matrices); 2)

, the number of submatrices per

block row; 3)

, the number of submatrices per block

column; 4) , the maximum number of permutation matrices

per block row; and 5)

, the number of permuta-

tion matrices in the block columns. The architecture includes

memory modules for storing messages, MPUs that operate

in parallel, and read/write networks for transporting messages

between memory and these MPUs. The parameter acts as a

scaling parameter.

The decoder completes a single decoding iteration by per-

forming a round of updates across the supercodes. An update

corresponding to a single supercode constitutes a subitera-

tion which involves the following steps:

1— The read-network performs read operations from memory, where is the maximum node degree of . It then forwards messages to each of the MPUs.
2— The MPUs update the messages in parallel as described in Section VI.
3— The updated messages are routed by the write-network to the appropriate memory modules scheduled to receive messages related to .
4— The messages are written in the designated memory modules and the address counters are updated.

In the remainder of this section, we describe the memory architecture of the decoder, followed by the architectures of the read and write-networks.

A. Memory Architecture
The messages of the decoder are assumed to be stored column-wise in memory modules such that the th module stores the messages of the th block column of the parity-check matrix. The memory modules store messages column-wise in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:45:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

990

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 11, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2003

Fig. 20. Decoder architecture implementing the TDMP algorithm. The last row in the banks of the memory modules store the outputs of the decoder.

shows a snapshot of the memory contents across four decoding sub-iterations (or one iteration) to update the four supercodes of the LDPC code defined by the parity-check matrix in Fig. 10. For simplicity, the contents of the memory modules are labeled with the supercode number, and the stars in the third column denote the most recently updated messages. The horizontal arrows in the middle column point to the locations to be written, while the third column shows the updated positions of the pointers after the write operation.

Fig. 21. Architecture of a memory module.

B. Read-Network Architecture

memory banks as shown in Fig. 21. The first row of each bank

in the th module always stores the intrinsic channel reliability

messages, while the remaining rows store (

) messages

extrinsic with respect to the first target supercode scheduled to

utilize these messages. The extrinsic messages generated earlier

by this supercode are not stored since they will not be used

by the decoder operating on the target supercode to generate

new messages. The contents of the banks in each module are

consumed sequentially from top to bottom. The banks however

are updated row-wise in a circular fashion using a counter

that counts modulo (

) and keeps track of the next row

scheduled to receive messages from the target supercode being

decoded. The use of pointers to update memory constitutes an

improvement targeted for restricting data movement (and hence

reducing power consumption) over our earlier work in [5] and

[21] which employed rotating buffers that physically rotate the

data itself rather than a pointer.

The last row in the banks of the memory modules at the final

iteration contains the output messages of the decoder. These

messages can either be extrinsic messages suitable for an outer

joint iterative equalization and decoding scheme, or posterior

messages otherwise. For the latter case, the MPUs operating on

the last supercode at the final iteration need to add the prior re-

liabilities to their outputs for making hard decisions. Table II

This section presents a dynamic network architecture for transporting messages from memory to the constituent SISO MPUs according to the TDMP algorithm in Section V-A. Fig. 22 shows the architecture of the read-network on the left side, and the right side shows the sequence and order in which the messages are read and processed at different stages of the network. The candidate messages (corresponding to multiple supercodes) to be read are shown as contents of the memory modules directly above the network. The structure of the target supercode that will receive these messages is shown in the lower right part of the figure. The read-network performs the following functions:

a) Block selection: The appropriate messages of the source

supercodes are read from memory using a row of block

selectors. The th block selector selects the th memory

module (permutation matrix) out of the possible blocks

as shown in Fig. 23 using a set of ( )-multiplexers,

where

, controlled by a single se-

quencer (X-SEQ) that keeps track of the position of the

th permutation matrix (if present) in each of the block

rows. Table III summarizes the hardware complexity of

the logic units of the network. The four blocks of the ex-

ample supercode are selected as shown next to the row of

block selectors in Fig. 22.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:45:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MANSOUR AND SHANBHAG: HIGH-THROUGHPUT LDPC DECODERS

991

TABLE II CONTENTS OF THE MEMORY MODULES AS THEY ARE ACCESSED DURING THE FOUR SUB-ITERATIONS TO DECODE THE LDPC CODE OF FIG. 10

Fig. 22. Read-network architecture of the TDMP algorithm. Candidate messages corresponding to multiple supercodes to be read are shown in the memory modules above the network. The right part of the figure shows the action of the network on these messages as they get routed to the decoders.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:45:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

992

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 11, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2003

Fig. 23. Architecture of a block selector.
TABLE III MESSAGE-TRANSPORT NETWORK LOGIC AND CONTROL RESOURCES

Fig. 25. Architecture of an S-to-S permuter.
multiplexers are very cheap to implement in current VLSI technology using transmission gates or pass-transistor logic. The sequencers of the read-network can programmed to implement various instances of a parity-check matrix of an AA-LDPC code for given parameters , , , and . This feature makes the architecture a programmable architecture which is attractive in applications where a single decoder is used to decode multiple AA-LDPC codes of the same parameters , , , and , but with different permutation matrices.

C. Write-Network Architecture

Fig. 24. Architecture of a column accumulator.
b) Column accumulation: The messages from each block selector are accumulated on top of earlier messages read from previous supercodes (including the intrinsic channel reliabilities of the bits) using a row of column accumulators. Fig. 24 shows the architecture of a column accumulator composed of full adders. This operation does not change the order of the messages as shown in the row of messages next to the row of adders in Fig. 22.
c) Message permutation: The messages from the blocks are independently permuted to match the structure of the permutation matrices of the target supercode using a row of permuters. A permuter is an -to- mapper that can be implemented using a set of ( )-multiplexers as shown in Fig. 25. The multiplexers are controlled independently by sequencers, where the th sequencer of the th permuter keeps track of the position of the th message of the th permutation matrix in all block rows. The permuter reduces to a simple shift register in the case of cyclic permutation matrices. The order of the messages after permutation according to the target code is shown next to the row of permuters in Fig. 22. Finally, these messages are forwarded to the MPUs such that the th MPU receives the th message from every block as shown in the lower right corner of the figure.
The resources of the read-network are summarized in Table III. The overall complexity of the read-network in terms of standard library gates is given by

where ), and

1-bit multiplexers (similarly for

gates, with

. Note that

Fig. 26 shows the write-network architecture which performs the reverse operations of the read-network excluding column accumulation. Briefly, it performs the following functions:
a) Message permutation: The updated messages from the MPUs are restored back to their natural order by inverse permuting them using a row of permuters such as the ones shown in Fig. 25. The restored order of the messages in shown next to the row permuters in Fig. 26.
b) Block relocation: The messages corresponding to the target supercode are written back to memory using a row of block relocators. A block relocator as shown in Fig. 27 writes the appropriate block to the th. memory module if the th sub-matrix of the target supercode is not the zero matrix, and remains idle otherwise. The lower right part of Fig. 26 shows the result of the block relocation operation.
The overall complexity of the write-network is given by

where

. Like the read-network, the write-network is also

programmable.

VIII. SIMULATION RESULTS
To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed TDMP algorithm coupled with the reduced-complexity MPUs and the dynamic message-transport networks, a decoder architecture implementing these ideas was synthesized. Power and area characterizations were done using the Synopsys tool suite based on a 0.18- m, 1.8-V standard cell library. During power characterization, a frame consisting of random noise was assumed as input to the decoder. The datapath of the decoder is five bits wide. The target LDPC code is a rate-2/3 irregular LDPC code of length 2304 constructed from Ramanujan graphs [15] The edge merging transformation [21] was used to obtain the factor graph and the parity-check matrix of the code. The

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:45:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MANSOUR AND SHANBHAG: HIGH-THROUGHPUT LDPC DECODERS

993

Fig. 26. Write-network architecture of the TDMP algorithm. Messages from the target supercode to be written in memory are shown above the network. The action of the network on these messages and the resulting contents of the memory modules are shown on the right part of the figure.

Fig. 27. Architecture of a block relocator.

resulting permutation matrices of the parity-check matrix are

acyclic matrices of size

.

At a clock rate of 200 MHz, the maximum throughput of the

decoder is 1.92 Gbits/s, which corresponds to an iterative de-

coder throughput of 192 Mbits/s assuming ten decoding iter-

ations are performed per frame. The average power consump-

tion is 1,176 mW, and the decoder area is 9.41 mm . The high

throughput is mainly attributed to the fast convergence behavior

of the TDMP algorithm which requires between 20%–50% less

iterations to converge compared to the TPMP algorithm. The

distributed memory architecture which allows for parallel ac-

cess of messages, and the message-transport networks which

keep the follow of these messages into and out of the MPUs

uninterrupted (e.g., due to resource conflicts and scheduling as

is the case in [12]) also contribute to the high throughput of the

decoder.

A. Quantization Effects
To compare the effects of quantization on the algorithmic performance of the TDMP algorithm using Gallager’s equations and the proposed MPU based on the “max-quartet” approximation, a gate-level simulator was developed for both techniques, and the results are shown in Fig. 28. In [13], a similar experiment was performed considering the TPMP algorithm instead. Fig. 28(a), (d) show the percentage of valid frames decoded and the switching activity of the decoder (the number of iterations required for convergence), respectively, using unquantized Gallager equations, 6-bit quantized Gallager equations, and 6-bit quantized MPUs using the “max-quartet” approximation in (6).

Fig. 28(b), (e) and (c), (f) show the results for 5-bit and 4-bit quantization, respectively. The results demonstrate that the optimized MPU is superior to the Gallager’s equations particularly for 4-bit quantization where it attains more than 1 dB of improvement in coding gain. Moreover, 5-bit quantized MPUs achieve even better performance than 6-bit quantized Gallager equations. The average improvement in coding gain achieved at 6-bit, 5-bit, and 4-bit quantization levels is 6.02%, 12.19%, and 120.92%, respectively. Note also the reduction in switching activity due to the decrease in the number iterations.
B. Power and Area Distribution
Fig. 29(a) shows the average power distribution profile as a function of the supercodes in each of the main blocks of the decoder. The vertical bars show (starting from the bottom) the power consumed by memory due to reads, the readnetwork, the MPUs, the write-network, and memory due to writes. The bimodal nature of the profile is due to the structure of the paritycheck matrix and the edge-merging transformation (see [21] for details). The power consumption of the decoder is 1,176 mW. As expected, memory reads consume most of the power (50.42%) followed by the MPUs (20.73%). The remaining blocks of the architecture consume 28.85% of the power.
Fig. 29(b) shows the area distribution of the decoder among the read and write-networks, memory modules, and MPUs. The area of the decoder is 9.41 mm . The networks (including the peripheral interconnects) occupy 5.17 mm or 54.94% of the area of the decoder. The optimized MPUs occupy a small portion of the area, 1.73 mm (18.38%). More importantly, the reduced memory requirement of the TDMP algorithm is evident in that memory occupies only 2.51 mm or 26.67% of the area.
C. Comparison with a TPMP Decoder Architecture
The TDMP decoder architecture was also compared with a decoder architecture implementing the TPMP algorithm and Gallager’s update equations such as [8]. The TDMP decoder

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:45:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

994

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 11, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2003

Fig. 28. Comparison of quantization effects on the performance of Gallager’s update equations versus the SISO MPU based on the BCJR algorithm for: (a), (d) 6-bit, (b), (e) 5-bit, and (c), (f) 4-bit quantization levels using the TDMP algorithm.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 29. (a) Average power dissipation in the main blocks of the decoder as a function of the super-codes and (b) area of the decoder as distributed amongst the read and write-networks, memory modules, and MPUs.

architecture was designed to deliver the same throughput as the TDMP architecture using also a five bit datapath. Fig. 30(a) compares the power consumed by the transport networks, MPUs (check and bit function units for the TPMP decoder), and memory. The figure demonstrates the power efficiency of the TDMP decoder compared to the TPMP decoder, resulting in a savings of 74.28%, 83.06%, and 93.81% in power consumption in the networks, MPUs, and memory modules, respectively. The overall savings in power consumption is 89.13%. In terms of area, Fig. 30(b) similarly shows significant reduction in the

area of the networks (61.98%), MPUs (63.28%), and memory modules (80.52%), respectively. The overall area savings is 69.83%. Finally, the TDMP decoder requires 60.5% less interconnect wires (including both networks and peripherals) than the TPMP decoder.
IX. CONCLUSIONS
The design of high-throughput and memory efficient decoder architectures for regular and irregular LDPC codes has

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:45:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MANSOUR AND SHANBHAG: HIGH-THROUGHPUT LDPC DECODERS

995

(a)

(b)

Fig. 30. Comparison of (a) power consumption and (b) area occupied by the transport networks, MPUs, and memory modules of the TDMP architecture versus the TPMP architecture.

been considered at the code-design, decoding algorithm, and architectural levels. Optimizations at the code-design level aim at decoupling the decoder architecture from the code properties by decomposing the parity-check matrix of the code into permutation matrices resulting in architecture-aware LDPC codes. Reducing memory requirements and improving decoder throughput have been addressed algorithmically through a novel turbo decoding algorithm of LDPC codes. Moreover, an efficient message update mechanism has been presented in the form of a message processing unit that reduces the switching activity of the decoder and requires fewer quantization bits than other methods in the literature. Finally, a scalable memory architecture and message-transport networks have been proposed that constitute the main building blocks of a generic LDPC decoder architecture.
Simulations have demonstrated the effectiveness of the methodology pursued for efficient decoder designs in terms of power consumption, area, and interconnect complexity.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Berron, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error correcting coding and decoding: Turbo codes,” in IEEE Int. Conf. on Communications, 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[2] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[3] T. Richardson, M. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[4] S.-Y. Chung et al., “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limits,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[5] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “Turbo decoder architectures for low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, Taipei, Taiwan, R.O.C., Nov. 2002, pp. 1383–1388.
[6] X. Y. Hu et al., “Efficient implementations of the sum-product algorithm for decoding LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, vol. 2, San Antonio, TX, 2001, pp. 1036–1036E.
[7] C. Howland and A. Blanksby, “Parallel decoding architectures for low density parity check codes,” in Proc. 2001 IEEE Int. Symp. on Circuits and Systems, Sydney, Australia, May 2001, pp. 742–745.
[8] E. Yeo et al., “VLSI architectures for iterative decoders in magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 748–755, Mar. 2001.

[9] E. Yeo et al., “High throughput low-density parity-check decoder architectures,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001, pp. 3019–3024.
[10] G. Al-Rawi and J. Cioffi, “A highly efficient domain-programmable parallel architecture for LDPCC decoding,” in Proc. Int. Conf. on Information Technology: Coding and Computing, Apr. 2001, pp. 569–577.
[11] Vector-LDPCT™ Core Solutions, Flarion Technologies, Feb. 2002. [12] T. Zhang and K. K. Parhi, “VLSI implementation-oriented (3; k)-reg-
ular low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems (SIPS), Antwerp, Belgium, Sept. 2001, pp. 25–36. [13] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “Low-power VLSI decoder architectures for LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. on Low Power Electronics and Design (ISLPED), Monterey, CA, Aug. 2002, pp. 284–289. [14] J. Rosenthal and P. O. Vontobel, “Constructions of LDPC codes using Ramanujan graphs and ideas from Margolis,” in Proc. 38th Allerton Conf. on Communication, Control, and Computing, 2000, pp. 248–257. [15] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “Construction of LDPC codes from Ramanujan graphs,” presented at the 36th Annu. Conf. on Information Sciences and Systems 2002 (CISS’02), Princeton, NJ, Mar. 2002. [16] J. Boutros, O. Pothier, and G. Zemor, “Generalized low density (Tanner) codes,” in Proc. ICC’99, Vancouver, Canada, June 1999, pp. 441–445. [17] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-20, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974. [18] E. Eleftheriou, T. Mittelholzer, and A. Dholakia, “Reduced-complexity decoding for low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 37, pp. 102–104, Jan. 2001. [19] M. Lentmaier and K. S. Zigangirov, “Iterative decoding of generalized low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. ISIT 1998, Aug. 1998, p. 149. [20] F. R. Kshischang, B. J. Frey, and H. A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001. [21] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “Memory-efficient turbo decoder architectures for LDPC coding,” presented at the IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems (SiPS’02), Oct. 2002, pp. 159–164. [22] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “On the architecture-aware structure of LDPC codes from generalized Ramanujan graphs and their decoder architectures,” in Proc. 37th Annu. Conf. Information Sciences and Systems (CISS’03), Baltimore, MD, Mar. 2003, pp. 215–220. [23] P. Roberston, E. Villebrun, and P. Hoeher, “A comparison of optimal and sub-optimal MAP decoding algorithms operatiting in the log domain,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, 1995, pp. 1009–1013. [24] H. Dawid and H. Meyr, “Real-time algorithms and VLSI architectures for soft output MAP convolutional decoding,” in Proc. Personal, Indoor, and Mobile Radio Communications, (PIMRC). Wireless: Merging onto the Information Superhighway, vol. 1, 1995, pp. 193–197.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:45:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

996

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 11, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2003

Mohammad M. Mansour (S’98–M’03) received the B.E. degree with distinction in 1996 and the M.S. degree in 1998, all in computer and communications engineering, from the American University of Beirut (AUB), Beirut, Lebanon. He received the M.S. degree in mathematics in August 2002, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering in May 2003, from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC).
Currently, he is an Assistant Professor of Electrical Engineering with the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department of AUB. During the summer of 2003, he was a Postdoctoral Research Associate at the Coordinated Science Laboratory (CSL), UIUC. From 1998 to 2003, he was a research assistant at CSL. In 1997, he was a research assistant at the ECE department of AUB, and in 1996 he was as a teaching assistant with the same department. His research interests are VLSI architectures and integrated circuit (IC) design for communications and coding theory applications, digital signal processing systems, and general purpose computing systems. Dr. Mansour received the Harriri Foundation award twice, in 1996 and 1998, the Charli S. Korban award twice, in 1996 and 1998, the Makhzoumi Foundation Award in 1998, and the Phi Kappa Phi awards twice, in 2000 and 2001.

Naresh R. Shanbhag (M’88–SM’00) received the B. Tech. degree from the Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi, India, in 1988, the M.S. degree fromWright State University, Dayton, OH, in 1990, and the Ph.D. degree from the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, all in electrical engineering in 1993.
From July 1993 to August 1995, he was with AT&T Bell Laboratories at Murray Hill, NJ, where he was responsible for the development of VLSI algorithms, architectures, and implementation of broadband data communications transceivers. In particular, he was the lead chip ar chitect for AT&T’s 51.84 Mb/s transceiver chips over twisted-pair wiring for Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM)-LAN and broadband access chip-sets. Since August 1995, he has been with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and the Coordinated Science Laboratory, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC), where he is presently an Associate Professor and the Director of the Illinois Center for Integrated Microsystems. He founded the VLSI Information Processing Systems (ViPS) Group, whose charter is to explore issues related to low-power, high-performance, and reliable integrated circuit implementations of broadband communications and digital signal processing systems at UIUC. He has published numerous journal articles/book chapters/conference publications in this area and holds three U.S. patents. He is also a coauthor of the research monograph Pipelined Adaptive Digital Filters (Norwell, MA: Kluwer, 1994). Dr. Shanbhag received the the 2001 IEEE Transactions on VLSI Systems Best Paper Award, the 1999 IEEE Leon K. Kirchmayer Best Paper Award, the 1999 Xerox Faculty Award, the National Science Foundation CAREER Award in 1996, and the 1994 Darlington best paper award from the IEEE Circuits and Systems society. From July 1997–2001, he was a Distinguished Lecturer for the IEEE Circuits and Systems Society. From 1997 to 1999, he served as an Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS: PART II. He is currently the Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VLSI SYSTEMS. He was the Technical Program Chair of 2002 IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:45:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

