The 14mIEEE 2003 InternationalSymposiumon PersonalJndoor and Mobile Radio Communication Proceedings

Very-Low-Complexity Decoding Algorithm for Low-Density Parity-Check Codes

Hui-Shi Song and Ping Zhang

Wireless Technology Innovation Labs

Box 92, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, 100876

Beijing, China

-

songhuishiGdl63.com

Alxtruct: In this paper, we propose a new very-low-complexity (VLC) decoding algorithm for lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes. This new algorithm only need subtract a correcting factor to improve the accuracy of the soft message values delivered by a previously proposed simplified belief-propagation (BP) -based algorithm called uizifOriizly most powerfid (UMP) algorithm. However, the VLC algorithm outperforms the UMP algorithm greatly. The correcting factor can be obtained by simulation or theoretical derivation. This new VLC algorithm is much simpler to implement than BP algorithm, and also simpler than previously proposed nornrnlized BP-based algorithm in which the operation of dividing a normalization factor is needed. However, the performance of the VLC algorithm is slightly better than that of the izorninlized BP-based algorithm. Also, the VLC algorithm is universal in that the decoding is independent of the channel characteristics. Simulation results demonstrate that the performance of the new VLC algorithm can nearly approach that of BP on the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel.
Irrdex Terms: Belief propagation qlgorithm, very-low-complexity decoding, low-density parity-check codes, iterative decoding.
1. INTRODUCTION Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes [Z], first
proposed by Gallager i n the 196Os, and later rediscovered by MacKay and Neal [3]. [4], have been of great academic and practical interest recently. Like Turbo codes [5],LDPC codes can also achieve near Shannon limit error performance 161, [7], [8]. and thus represent a very promising prospect for error control coding [ I ] .
A n LDPC code is a linear block code specified by a very sparse parity-check matrix, which contains mostly 0’s and
only a small number of 1’s [Z].LDPC codes are classified into
two groups, regular LDPC codes and irrcgular LDPC codes [ 3 ] . Irregular LDPC codes have better performance than regular LDPC codes [6]. As a linear block code, an LDPC code can be represented by a bipartite graph. Suppose the
Iqw-density parity-check matrix H has N columns and h.1rows,
and all the rows of the matrix are linearly independent (the designcd code ratc R=l -(M/N)),the corresponding bipartite graph consists of N bit nodes, M check nodes, and a certain number of edges. Each bit node, called a “left node”,
Supporred by N a l i o n a l I5-S63 I’rojeci tinder Contract 2001 A A I2301 6

represents a bit of the codeword. Each check node, called a “right node”, represents a parity check of the code. An edge exists between a bit node and a check node if and only if there is a 1 in the corresponding entry in the parity-check matrix. The corresponding bit node and check node may be nominated as the left and right neighbor nodes of the edge.
Regular LDPC codes are those for which all nodes of the same type have the same degree, where the degree of a node is the number of edges for which it is a neighbor node. If an LDPC code is a regular code, and its code block length is n , and all left nodes in its corresponding bipartite graph have degreejand all right nodes have degree k , we may refer to the LDPC code as a (n, j , k ) code. Seen from the code’s parity-check matrix H, n columns exist in H, and all the column weights a r e j and all the row weights are k , and the column (row) weight is the number of 1’s per column (row). If we assume the number of rows in H is m, then n X j - m X k ,
/n=(nXj)/ k , code rate R=l-(nz/n)=l-(j / k ) . For irregular LDPC codes, the left nodes (correspondingly the right nodes) can have different degrees. If an edge’s left (right) neighbor node has degree i, the edge can be regarded as having left (right) degree i. In the theory of LDPC codes it is customary and useful not to focus on particular codes but to consider ensembles of codes. An irregular LDPC code ensemble is
specified by a degree distribution pair ( A , p ) or its
corresponding generating functions h ( x )= Xf~yhixi-’ and
p(x) = 1f4y.~.pix’-’ , where hi( p i ) is the fraction of edges
with left (right) degree i and d I m a (xd,.,,, 1 is the maximal
left (right) of any edge. Currently, due to the better performance of irregular LDPC codes than regular codes, many papers have proposed, some design methods to attain capacity-approachingirregular LDPC codes, e.g., [ 6 ] ,[93.
Among the LDPC decoding algorithms, which consist of hard decision decoding and soft decision decoding, soft decision iterative decoding based on the belief propagation (BP) algorithm, which usually may be seen as likelihood propagation, can achieve a much better performance [101. In order to reduce the hardware implementation complexity of the BP algorithm with the precondition that no severe performance degradations occur, some reduced complexity decoding algorithms based on BP algorithm has been proposed for LDPC codes [ l I], [12], and we may refer to the algorithms as un(form1y most powe$il (UMP) BP-based algorithm. Furthermore in [ 11, a decoding algorithm named normalized BP-based algorithm has been proposed in order to efficientlydecode LDPC codes with larger check weight.

0-7803-7822-9/03/$17.0002003 IEEE.

161

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:37:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

The 14thIEEE 2003 InternationalSymposium on Persona1,lndoorand Mobile Radio Communication Proceedings

In this paper, we propose a novel very-low-complexity (VLC) iterative BP-based decoding algorithm, which only need subtract a correcting factor to improve the accuracy of
the soft message values delivered by the UMP algorithm. This
new algorithm is also universal and simpler to implement than the normalized BP-based algorithm. And besides, this new algorithm possesses slightly better performance than the normalized algorithm. The correcting factor in the new algorithm can be obtained by Monte Carlo simulation or theoretical derivation.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 11, we give a brief review of the BP algorithm, the UMP BP-based algorithm and the normalized BP-based algorithm. Then the new VLC BP-based algorithm is given in Section 111. Some simulation results are presented in Section IV to show the performance of the proposed new VLC BP-based algorithm. Section V contains our cbnclusion.
11. A BRIEF REVIEW OFBP, UMP AND
NORMALIZED BP-BASED ALGORITHMS
In this section, we give a brief review of the three decoding algorithms. Firstly, BPSK modulation is assumed, which maps a codeword c=(c 1 , c2, . .., cN)into a transmitted sequence s=(sl, s2, ..., sN), according to s1,=2c,,-1,for n = l , 2, ..., N . Then s is transmitted over a channel corrupted by additive white Gaussian noise (AWCN). The received value corresponding to si, after the demodulator' is ylr=sn+vJJw,here vII is a random variable with zero mean and variance No. Secondly. we assume an LDPC code with parity check matrix H=[H,,,,] is used. We denote the set of bits that participate in
check ni by N(/72)={n:H,,,,=l 1: Similarly, we define the set of
checks in which bit n participates as M(n)={nz:H,=l}. We also denote N(nz)\n as the set N(m) with bit n excluded, and M(n)\ni as the set M(n)with check nz excluded.

update z,,,, as the extrinsic information for the next round, and compute for the decision of the curr'ent round. The BP algorithm may be written as follows.
Initialization: For each ni, n, set z,= F,,.
Iterative Processing: For each round, process the three following steps.
1) Horizontal step (processing in check nodes) : For each m , n ,
2) Vertical step (processing in bit nodes) : For each m, n , update by
J I I ' E M( II)\JIJ
For each n , update z,, by (4)
I I I E M ( II )
3 ) i a r d deczJion and stopping criterion test:
i) Create 2 = [?,I such that i l l= 1 if zIl > 0 , and P n = O if Z, < 0 .
ii) If Hi. = 0 then 2 is considered as a valid
decoded word and the decoding process ends; if the number of rounds exceeds some maximum number and is not a valid codeword, a failure is declared and the decoding process ends; otherwise the decoding repeats from Step 1).

A. B P Algorithnt
A Log-Likelihood Ratio (LLR) passing along the edge connecting bit node 11 and check node ni provides the decision
information about bit IZ i n each decoding round. And in advance we define the following notations associated with a given decoding round.
F,,:The LLR of bit n which is derived from the received
value ,I,-,,.In BP decoding, we initially set Fn=(2/No)y,,. L,,,,: The L L R of bit n which is sent from check node ni to bit
node n . It is obtained from the information { h .n:'E N(ni)\n }, where the notation z,,,, will be introduced next. z,,: The L L R of bit n which is sent from the bit node n to check node 172. It is obtained from the a prior$
information F,,and the information {L,,,,: m' E
M(n)\ni}.
z,,: The N posteriori LLR of bit n computed at each round. It is obtained from the a priori information F,, and the information {L,: m e M(n)}.
For each round, we have the a priori information pn}
obtained fi-om the received values (yl,}, and the extrinsic information ,z, delivered by the previous round. We need to

B. (IMP BP-Based Algorithm This algorithm adopts some approximation to simplify BP
algorithm, which deals with T, and L, in (1) and (2) approximately. The resultant UMP BP-based algorithm is described below.
Initialization: For each m, n, set z,,,,=y,,. Iterative Piocessing: For each round, process the three following steps. 1) Horizontal step (processing in check nodes):
For each nz, n ,
For each nz,
For each nz, n ,

162
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:37:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

The 14mIEEE 2003 International Symposium on Persona1,lndoorand Mobile Radio Communication Proceedings

2; Verticul Jtep (processing in bit nodes) : For each in, iz, update G~by

ill k M ( ii )\ill
For each n, update z,, by

zii = Y,i +

Liil

(9)

iiiEM ( I ? )

3 ) Hrird decrsiotz and stopping ci*itet.ioiztest: Thia stcp is the same as Step 3) of BP algorithm.

C. N orniulized BP-Bused A lgoritlztn
This algorithm only changes the calculation of ( 7 ) through normalization, i.e., divides L, in (7) by a normalization
factor a . which can be obtained by simulation or theoretical derivation. And the computation formula about a is given
in [I].

111. VERY-LOW-COMPLEXITYBP-BASED
ALGORITHM
We may denote L l and Lz, respectively, as follows [I]:
1 L, =)~,,,,,, where L,,,,,is that in (2).

1, 1 1 [ 2

L , N o ziii,I, = -.

nin
llkN(ill]\il

where .&

zIiiii1 is

i l ' € N ( i l l ) \ I1

that in (7). From [ I ] : we h o w that L2>LI. Hence, utilizing the similar idea i n [ I ] of decreasing the value of L2 to improve the
decoding perforniance, however, in order to further reduce the decoding complexity we prefer subtraction to division used in the normalized BP-based algorithm [ l ] . In other words, we
can define a correcting factor a to let L, = L, -a , where a is a positive real number. To determine a , we niay selcct the criterion of forcing the mean of L, - a to

equal the mean of L , ,i.e.,

a = E(L,) - E ( L ,)

(10)

The correcting factor a can be obtained either by Monte

Carlo simulation or through theoretical derivatton, and whose

theoretical derivation will be presented in the following

sU bscction.

E ( L , )= E In

x, E(L,)=E(min(l I , M 2 I,...,jXW I>> (12)

Since Xi's, i=l, 2, ... , W, are independent, identically

distributed (i.i.d.) random variables, and the probability

density functio- n (pdf) o f X l can be written as

[ , f x , (x>= _ 4JJN_2O7_6

(x- 2 / N 0 ) 2 8/ N o >+

>1 (x+2/ NO)*

8/ No

(13)

A . Tlie?reticaI Derivation of the Correcting Factors We fii'st derive the correcting factors for the first decoding

round. From BP algorithm, we know that zirli=l ( 2 / N , ) y i r ,

/ / = I . 2, . . . , N,in the initialization step. For convenience, we

{x, w} let

: i = 1,2,.. ., = (z,i,,i.: n ' E N(m)\ n } , where

W=/c-l, and k is the degree of the nz-th right node in the LDPC bipartite graph [ I ] . Then

Based on ( 1 6), ( 1 7 ) and ( 1 Oj, the correcting factors can be obtained, and during the computation process the numerical calculation approach may be used.
B. Simulation Results of the Correcting Factors Based on the derivation above and Monte Carlo simulation, we can get the correcting factors for the first decoding round (or iteration), as in Fig. 1 . However, the correcting factors

163
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:37:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

The 14thIEEE 2003 International Symposium on Persona1,lndoor and Mobile Radio Communication Proceedings

after the first round are very difficult to derive. Thus, we have performed many simulations for the subsequent decoding iterations with the hope of finding the laws of the correcting factors, as illustrated in Fig. 1 . Note that in Fig. 1 we omitted the simulation curves after the fourth iteration because that these curves are almost the same as those for the first four iterations. Also note that in Fig. 1 the analysis curve for the first iteration is inaccurate for larger signal to noise atio (S’NR)since we only take the first 10 terms into account in computing (1 7).

JY. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this scction, we present the simulation results for the regular LDPC (1008, 3, 6) code above to show the error pcrformance of the new VLC algorithm proposed in this paper. Fig. 2 demonstrates the bit error performance of the (1008, 3, 6) code. We can see that the ncw VLC algorithm outperforms greatly the UMP algorithm, and slightly outperforms the normalized algorithm, and alinost approaches BP algorithm. Note that the normalized factor for the (1008, 3, 6) code used in the normalizcd BP-based algorithm is 1.4 obtained from
[11.

+.

J

Km

e 1E3,

b

2 1E4:

1E-5

1E-6 05

l

~

i

’

l

~

l

~

10

15

20

25

30

E,% (dB)

Fig. I . Correcting factors obtained by siniulations and analysis for a (1 008,
3 , G ) LDPC code
From Fig.1. we conclude that the changing laws of the correcting factors are almost similar for many decoding rounds. Hence, we can select the correcting factor for the (1008, 3, 6) LDPC code according to Fig. I . And besides, generally speaking, the correcting factor chosen should correspond to the SNR range in which the bit error rate (BER) is about 10.’ to W4. For the (1008, 3, 6) LDPC code, the corresponding SNR is about 2.0 dB, thus we choose 0.37 from Fig.1 as the correcting factor. Besides, in order to make this
factor independent of the channel characteristics, we let the factor divided by 2iNo. For 2.0 dB, the resulting correcting factor is about 0.12.
Note that the algorithm proposed here is different from the offset BP-based algorithm [ 131 for several reasons as follows. First, the two algorithms are not entirely identical in that the
offset algorithm has a maximization operation. Second, the calculation methods of the correcting factors of the two algorithms are different. This algorithm here utilizes theoretical derivation. or simulation especially after the first decoding iteration, while the offset algorithm employs density evolution. Third, this algorithm here mainly aims to reduce the implementation complexity with subtraction replacing division operation in the normalized BP-based algorithm, while the offset algorithm mainly intends to improve the decoding performance.

Fig. 2. Error performance for iterative decoding of a ( I 008, 3, 6 ) LDPC
code with BP. Normalized. VI-C, and UMP RI’-based algorithms
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a new very-low-complexity (VLC) BP-based iterative decoding algorithm for LDPC codes, which only need subtract a correcting factor to improve the accuracy of the soft message values delivered by the UMP algorithm. The correcting factors of the new algorithm can be obtained by simulation or theoretical derivation, and the theoretical derivation about the factors is given here. This new algorithm is niuch,simper to implement than BP algorithm, and also simpler than the normalized BP-based algorithm. The VLC algorithm. is also universal in that the decoding is independent of the channel characteristics. The VLC algorithm possesses slightly better performance compared to the normalized algorithm, and its performance can almost approach that of BP. Some simulation results are presented which testify the superior error performance of the new algorithm.
REFERENCES
[1J J . Chen and M . P. C. Fossorier. “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Comzirn., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406-414, Mar. 2002.
[2] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes.

164
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:37:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

The 14mIEEE 2003 International Symposium on PersonalJndoorand Mobile Radio CommunicationProceedings

Cambridge, M A : M.I.T. Press, 1963. 131 D. .I. C. MacKay and R. M . Neal, “Near Shannon limit
performance of low density parity check codes,”
Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp.1645-1646, Aug. 1996. [4] D. J . C. MacKay, “Good error-col-rectingcodes based on
very sparse matrices,” IEEE T I T ” Inform. Theory, vol.
45, pp. 399-431, Mar. 1999, [ 5 ] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near
Shannon limit error-correcting coding: Turbo codes,” in
lCCV3, May 1993, pp. 1064-1070.
[6] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity
check codes,” IEEE Trans. Infui-m. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 519-637, Feb. 2001. [7] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of
low-density parity check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theoi;v, vol. 47. pp. 599-518, Feb. 2001. [8] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, T. J . Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE C o m ~ n z ~Lne,ft.,vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58-60, Feb. 2001.

[9] J. Hou, P. Siegel, and L. Milstein, “Performance analysis and code optimization of low density parity-check codes on Rayleigh fading channels,” IEEE J . Selected Areas
Commun., vol. 19, pp. 924-934, May 200 1 . [ I O ] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems:
Networks of Plausible Interference. San Mateo, CA:
Morgan Kauhann, 1988. [ l 11 M. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H . Imai, “Reduced
complexity iterative decoding of low density parity
check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, pp. 673-680, May 1999. [12] A. J. Felstrom and K. S. Zigangirov, “Time-varying
periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45,pp. 2181-2191, Sept. 1999. [13] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Density evolution for two improved BP-based decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 6 , no. 5, pp. 208-210: May 2002.

165
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:37:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

