@TlELSIKS 2003

Serbia and Montenegro, NiS, October 1-3, 2003

Affine Geometry LDPC Codes in Ultra-Long Haul Optical Transmission Systems

Ivan B. Djordjevic'. Bane Vasic'

Absrracr- In this paper we investigate the performance of lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes in long haul optical communication systems. We are particularly concerned with high-rate codes based on affine geometries. These codes have large minimum distance and simple iterative decoding algorithms. which makes them good candidates for high-speed applications such as optical communications. We consider both hit-flipping iterative decoding and iterative decoding hased.on min-sum algorithms. We demonstrate a significant performance improvement with respect to the state-of-the-art error control schemes employed in long-haul systems. Contrary to the common practice of considering the performance of error controlling schemes using the AWGN channel assumption, we consider the performance of the proposed LDPC schemes taking into account in a natural way all major impairments in long-haul optical transmission such as ASE noise, pulse distortion due to fiber nonlinearities, chromatic dispersion o r polarization dispersion, crosstalk effects, intersym hol-interference, etc.
I n d a Term-Error control, low-density parity check codes, affine geometries, iterative decoding, optical communications, long-haul transmission
I. INTRODUCTION
In today's ultra long-haul WDM transmission systems [ I ] the usage of fonvard error correction (FEC) [2-41 is unavoidable. The coding gain allows effectively to increase the amplifier spacing, the transmission distance and/or system capacity. Reed Solomon (RS) codes, complying with ITU-T Rec. G.975, has widely been used in transoceanic submarine systems as the first generation of FEC codes used in optical communications. The second generation of FEC codes was based on the concatenation of two RS. Sab and Lemaire proposed [3-4] using turbo codes [5] for Alcatel long-haul submarine transmission system. However, turbo decoders have high complexity, and developing integrated circuits operating at multi-gigabit per second speeds is a challenging task.
In this paper we show that emor performance and hardware complexity can be improved by using other types of iteratively decodable coding schemes, in particular lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes. We are concerned with codes based on finite geometries [6] because they require only simple encoders and we can be assured of large minimum
'Ivan B. Djordjevic is with University of Bristol. Depanment of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Optical Communications Research Group, Queen's Building, Rm 2.19% Bristol. BSB ITR, U K ; E-mail: I\,an.Djordjevic@bristol.ac.uk
'Bane Vasic is with University of Arizona. Department of Electrical and Computer Engineerinz. Tucson; A 2 85721. USA, Email: vasic@ccc.arizona.edu

codeword distances. The smcture of finite geometry codes is of crucial importance for high-speed implementations. because these codes can lend themselves to encoders that can be realized by shift registers, and because they can be decoded using the belief propagation algorithm.
We show that affine yeometry LDPC codes provide a significant system performance enhancement with respect to the state-of-the-art error control schemes employed in optical communication systems. An improvement of 3-4 dB over RS(255, 239) code is demonstrated in just a few iterations. The affine geometry code considered outperforms the turbo code based on a product of two BCH (128,113,6) codes proposed in [3] by 0.4 dB.
Contrary to the common practice of considering the performance of error control codes assuming the AWGN channel noise model [3-41, we use a very realistic simulation model that takes into account in a natural way all major impairments in long-haul optical transmission such as amplifier spontaneous emission (ASE) noise, pulse distortion due to fiber nonlinearities, chromatic dispersion or polarization dispersion, crosstalk effects, intersymbolinterference (IS]), etc. We show that the LPDC codes perform well in the presence of all these impairments, and we are confident in proposing their use in optical communications.
11. SYSTEMDESCRIPTIOANNDCODE CONSTRUCTION
In wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) systems. multiple optical carriers at different wavelengths are modulated by using independent electrical signals and then transmitted over the same fiber. The optical signal at the receiver is split into separate channels by using an optical demultiplexer. Dispersion compensators, consisting of an erbium-doped fiber amplifier (EDFA) and dispersion compensating fiber (DCF), are put periodically to compensate the loss and accumulated dispersion of the standard single mode fiber (SMF). The most frequent signal formats are non re" to zero (NU)and return to zero (U).An N U modulator consists of a laser diode, a Mach-Zehnder intensity modulator and an LDPC encoder. A typical direct detection receiver is composed of a polarization filter, an optical filter, a PIN photodiode, an electrical filter, a sampler and a decision circuit, followed by an LDPC decoder.
The propagation of a signal through the transmission media is modeled by the nonlinear Schrodinger equation [7]

0-7803-7963-2/03/$17.00 02003 IEEE

75

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:25:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

where z is the distance propagated along the fiber, relative
time T = I - I V , gives a frame of reference moving at the
group velocity vg,A(z,7) is the complex field amplitude of the
pulse, a is the attenuation coefficient of the fiber, PZ is the group velocity dispersion (GVD) coefficient, P3 is the second-
order GVD, y is the nonlinearity coefficient giving rise to Kerr
effect nonlinearities and TR is the Raman coefficient. The
equation ( I ) can be solved using the split-step Fourier method, as described in [ 7 ] .
The electrical field coming through the fiber to the optical filter input can be written as
r(t) = s(t)+ n(t),
where s(r), the (optical) amplifier chain output signal field can be written as

In (Z), p,,(r) is the nthbit pulse shape, P is the peak power and
b,, is the (coded) information content b, E { r , I}, with r being

the extinction ratio, 0 < r iI . Both the ASE noise components and the multipath interference (MPI) components are combined into a noise process n(t), which is considered to be colored Gaussian with autocorrelation function given by

R , ( r f = R”SE(I)+RMP,(I)’

(3)

( R A , ( T ) and R,,, ( T ) are ASE and MPI autocorrelaction

functions, respectively). The power spectral density of ASE noise is determined by the EDFA output filter, while the spectrum of MPI noise is determined by the signal spectrum. The auto correlation function of ASE noise is

R,,(T)= N o R E D j z A (w~h)e,re R E D F A ( 5 ) is the EDFA
output optical filter autocorrelation function, and No is the power spectral density of ASE noise in one state of polarization (SOP). Within the bandwidth of an optical filter
in EDFA, the noise power spectral density function can he
approximated as N u ns,,(G - 1) hf Nom,, wherein n3 is

the spontaneous emission factor, G is the EDFA gain, hf is the photon energy, and NamPis the number of amplifiers. r(f), s(r) and p.(t) are in fact the complex envelopes of corresponding analytical signals.
The photodiode output noise process has the mean

-m
and the variance

(d odl R N = Rh, G)R” (7 - ’

(6)

where RA,(T) is the optical filter autocorrelation function.

Notice that the photodiode output noise .process is not stationary (the mean values and the standard deviation are functions of time). In ( 5 ) G:, is the electronic noise variance,
which includes both transmitter and receiver electronic noise
-
(also known as “hack-to-back’’ noise), while qI is the
photodiode shot noise variance (q is an electron charge). If the polarization filter is omitted, the second term in ( 5 ) should be multiplied by a factor of two. The derivation of the expressions (4) and (5) is given in our previous paper [SI.
In optical communications, it is a custom to use a Q-factor (definition is given in Appendix A) as a figure of merit rather than signal-to-noise ratio, and in this letter we will follow this convention (more details on calculating the Q-factor in uncoded systems can be found in [SI).
As mentioned in the Introduction, we use affine geometry, also called Euclidean geometry, LDPC codes. The detailed description of these codes can be found in [6]. Here we summarize their basic structure and properties and generalize their construction to any prime-power (in [6] just power o f 2 were considered). The ni-dimensional affine geometry, denoted as AG (n?, p‘), over GF(p’) is a set o f m-tuples. referred to as poinrs, selected from GF@”). Let a be a
primitive element of GF@””). Then 0, a’,a’,a’, ..,, aP’-? form the all pm‘points of AG(m, p’).
The pm m-tuples over GF@’), representing the points in AG(m, p’), form an m-dimensional vector space over GF@’). The one-dimensional subspace is called a line o r a block, and the number of points in a line is p‘. The affine geometry has the following properties: any two points are connected by only one line, two lines are either parallel (they do not have points in common) or intersect at only one point. Let us define the point-line incident matrix as a vxb matrix H=(h:,) whose rows corresponds to the points and columns to the lines, in which h,=l if i-th point belongs to j-tb line. Dimensions of the
( / ( matrix are v = f m and b = p’(”’-’)pAm- 1) p’ - 1) . The

matrix has the following properties: its row and column
weights are (f’ -I)/($ -1) and p’ , respectively; and the

density o f ones is p-(”-’)’,which is small for m, s a.The
minimum distance is at least p’ + 1 . Since any two points are
connected by one and only one line, no two rows or columns have more than one “1” in common. Therefore, the point-line incident matrix is in fact the matrix o f parity checks of the LDPC code and the corresponding Tanner graph is free of cycles of girth (the length of shortest cycle) 4.

.--
where h,(r) and h,(r) denote the impulse responses of the
optical and electrical filter, respectively, and S ( r ) is the
optical filter output signal. The autocorrelation function of the optical filter output noise can be expressed as

111. DECODING
Affine geometries LDPC codes have large minimum distances and their Tanner graph has a girth of six. As shown in [ 6 ] , they can be decoded by various decoding methods such as one-step majority-logic, bit-flipping, and iterative decoding based on the sum-product (message-passing) algorithm. Although sum-product iterative decoding has been

76

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:25:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

demonstrated to perform well in various types of channels, it is computationally intensive and it is not clear if it is soitable for optical communications at data rate I O Gbls or 40 Gbls or higher. However, the min-sum algorithm, which is an approximation of "a posteriori" probability decoding, requires only simple addition and "finding minimum" operations and, as such, is suitable for high-speed optical transmission. In this paper, we use message-passing based on min-sum approximation and bit-flipping (BF). The bit flipping technique, initially proposed by Gallager [9], is a simple harddecision iterative decoding technique, and is most suitable for very high speed receiver architectures. The idea behind the bit-flipping algorithm is to flip the least number of bits until all parity checks are satisfied or the maximum number of iterations is reached. The min-sum algorithm (MSA) is described in Appendix B.
IV. LDPC CODEPERFORMANCE
In this section we present the peformance of LDPC codes in the presence of residual dispersion, fiber nonlinearities, IS1 and receiver noise resulting from signal-noise and noise-noise interaction in the PIN photodiode. The influence of the transfer functions of the optical and electrical filters is taken into account as well. A WDM system with 10 Gbis bit-rate per channel and a channel spacing of 50 GHz is considered. It is assumed that the observed channel is located at 1552.524 tun (193.1 THz) and that there exists a non-negligible interaction with six neighboring channels. The extinction ratio is set to 13 dB. The transmitter and receiver imperfection is described through a back-to-back Q-factor which is set to 23 dB. An affine geometry based LDPC (1056, 813) code with code rate of R=0.7699 (redundancy of =30%), constructed as described in section II for m=p=2 and s=5 (b=1056), is considered.
10'

attenuation coefficient, dispersion, dispersion slope, nonlinear refractive index and effective cross-sectional area are set to
0.21 dB/km, 17 ps nm" W', 0.065 ps nm.2 !ud,2.6.10-2D
m21W and 80 pm2, respectively. Corresponding DCF parameters are 0.5 dB/km, -100 ps nm.' km-', -0.33 ps nm-2 km-', 2.6.10-20 m2/W and 30 pm2. An average power per channel of 0 dBm and a NRZ signaling format are assumed.
For a BER value of IO4, the LDPC (1056, 813) scheme with simple bit-flipping decoding outperforms -the conventional RS(255,223)+RS(255,239) code by more than 1.5 dB, while the soft-decision variant based on the min-sum algorithm is better by 2.1 dB. It also outperfoms the much more complex block turbo code based on a product of two BCH (128, 113, 6) codes (with 5 iterations and comparable redundancy of 28%) by 0.4 dB. (More details on RShurbo code performance in optical communications can be found in [3-41). Notice that the complexity of the RS/turbo decoder is much hi&er than that of a LDPC decoder of equal or comparable length. Another important observation is that coding gain at lower BER (not shown in the figure) will be larger because of the steeper waterfall curve of LDPC codes
[Ill. For RZ signal format, Fig. 2, the coding gains comparable
with NRZ format are found.

10'
lDa
Lw L m 1x10' d
I
LL ~ 1x10"
t

,... i 2 4 4 4'6 i 8 5 0 5.2 5 4 5.6 5 8 6:D 6'2 6:4
Q' [dB]
Fig. 2 Bit-error-rate vs. Q-factor with MSA in decoding for affine geometry LDPC (1056,813) for RZ
v. CONCLUSION

1 ti' 10'

,,

,\,

, j,, \ ,, ,

,

,

,I

A novel error control scheme for long haul optical communication systems based on LDPC codes and iterative decoding is presented in this paper. The LDPC code is constructed using affine geometries. The bit-flipping decoding

6

7

B

9

10

11

12

13

14

algorithm and iterative decoding based on min-sum algorithm

Q'[dB]

'

Fig I Bit-error-rate vs. Q-factor for AG(2,2') based LDPC code

Figure 1 shows the BER results of a Monte Carlo

simulation. The optical filter is modeled as a super-Gaussian

filter of order eight and bandwidth 2Rb (&-bit rate over code

rate), while the electrical filter is modeled as a Gaussian filter

of bandwidth 0.65%. The transmission media considered has

a dispersion map composed of standard single-mode fiber

(SMF) and dispersion-compensating fiber (DCF) sections

having a residual dispersion of 272 pslnm. The SMF

are applied. In just a few iterations, a 3-4 dB improvement over RS (255, 239) code is found. The proposed code outperforms the turbo code based on a product of two BCH(128, 113,6) codes proposed in [3] by 0.4 dB.
As opposed to recent papers [3-4] where the AWGN assumption is applied, we consider the performance of affine geometry codes in the presence of ASE noise, pulse distortion due to fiber nonlinearities, residual dispersion, crosstalk effects, intersymbol-interference, etc.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:25:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

and messages to be passed !?om bit node v to check node c, I!:,:, according to:

+ E p m LO)”.C = ”

AY” ’

(B3)

drt

The last step in iteration j is to compute updated normalized

+C,4L’ log-likelihood ratios U,”; according to:
PmII = P(”14

(84)

For each bit xv the estimation is made according to

;.=( I, if )!v < 0 .

(B9

0, otherwise

Decoding halts when a valid codeword ( ~ , h c , u=2Ov) or a

maximum number of iteration has been reached. The steps (B2) and (83) can be viewed as propagation of “beliefs” in a code bipartite graph [ll-121.

loolooloo
010010010 001001001
H=
IOOOOIOIO 0l0l000Ol
,o 0 I O I O I O O>
Fig. B I An example of a bipartite graph
Decoding can be done as follows. First, a priori information of the hit at position v, p!’, is taken as the channel sample and messages passed from node v to node c in the bipartite
graph, $,: are initialized to pt).
In j-th iteration we update the messages to be passed from check node c to bit node v, A,:( as

REFERENCES
[I] G. Vareillc, B. Julien, F. Pitel, I. F. Marcerou, ”3.65 Tb/s (365x1 I .6 Gb/s) transmission experiment over 6850 km usin 22.2 GHz channel spacing in NRZ format, in froc. 2$ European Conference on Opricol Communications, 2001. Vol. 6. pp. 14-15.
[2J W. D. Grover, ”Fonvard Error Correction in Dispersion-Limited Lightwave Systems,”Journal o/ Lighrwove Technolop, Vol. 56, pp. 643 -654, 1988.
[3J 0. A. Sab, “FEC Techniques in Submarine Transmission Systems,“ in froc. Optical Fiber Communication Conference, 2001, Vol. 2, pp. TuFI-I -TuFI-3.
[4] 0. A. Sab. V. Lemarie, “Block Turbo Code Performances for Long-Haul DWDM Optical Transmission Systems.” in froc. OpficalFiber CommunicationConfirence. 2001. Vol. 3. pp. 280
-282. [5J C. Berrou A. Glavieua ‘.Near Optimum Ermr-Correctin..
Coding and Decoding: Turbo Codes.” IEEE Transactions on
Communications, vol. 44. pp. 1261-1271, 1996.
[q Y. Kou. S . Lin, M.P. C. Fossorier, “Low-Density Parity-Check
Codes Based on Finitc Geometries: A Rediscovery and New Results”. IEEE Transacfions on Information Theory, Vol. 47, No. 7, pp. 271 1-2736, 2001.
.17.1 G. P. Arrawal. Nonlinear Fiber O D ~ ~ CSaSn. Diego. CA: I Academic-Press, 2001.
[XI I. B. Djordjevic, B. Vasic, ”An Advanced Direct Detection Receiver Model”, in press. Journal of Omical Commnnicatiom.
[9] R. G. Gallagcr, Lo); Density Pari& Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Pres. 1963.
[IO] B. Vasic, ”Structured iteratively decodable codes based on
Steiner systems and their application in magnetic recording”, in froc. Globecom. 2001, vol. 5, pp. 2954 -2960, San Antonio,
USA, 2001. [I 11 B. Vasic. “Combinatorial Consirum.ons of SlnrcNred Low-
Density Parity Check Codes for Iterative Decoding” submined to IEEE Tromactiom on Information Theory. [I21 I. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative Decoding of Binary Block and Convolutional Codes“ IEEE Tram. Inform Theory, Vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 439-446, March 1996. [I31 N. S . Bergano, C. R.Davidson, “Cikulating Loop Transmission Experiments for the Study Long-Transmission Systems Using Erbium-Doped F i k r Amplifiers,” Vol. 13, No. 5, pp. 879-888, May 1995.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:25:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

