ARCHITECTURE-AWARE LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES
Mohammad M. Mansour and Naresh Shanbhag
Coordinated Science Laboratory, ECE Department University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL
mmansour@uiuc.edu, shanbhag@uiuc.edu

ABSTRACT
A high-throughput memory-efficientdecoder architecture for archit~ E ~ U ~ O - B WloBwI ~-density parity-check (LDPC)codes is proposed based on a novel turbo-decoding algorithm. The aichltecturebenefits from various optimizationsat the code-design,decoding algorithm, and decoder architecture levels. The interconnect complexity and memory overhead problems of current decoder implementations are reduced by designing slructured or erehiteeture-aware LDPC codes and employing a new turbo-decoding algorithm. An efficient memory architecture coupled with a scalable and dynamic transport network for storing and routing messages are proposed. Simulations demonstrate that the proposed architecture attains a throughput of 1.92Gbits/s for a frame length of 2304 bits, and achieves saving of 89.13% and 62.80% in power consumption and silicon area over state-of-the-art. with B reduction of 60.5% in interconnectWires.

disjoint parity-check equations that the bit participates in [2]. Each iteration consists of two phases of computations in which updates of all bit-nodes are done in phase 1by sending messages to neighboring check-nodes. and then updates of ail check-nodes are done in phase 2 by sending messages to neighboring bit-nodes. Updates in each phase are independent and can be parallelized.

c1

CZ

c3

c4

c5

C6

1. INTRODUCTION
The phenomenal success of turbo codes [ I ] powered by the concept of iterative decoding via message-passing has rekindled the interest in low-density panty-check (LDPC) codes first discovered by Gallager in 1961 [Z]. Recent breakthroughs were achieved with the introduction of irregular LDPC codes in [3] putting LDPC codes on a par with turbo codes. However, efficient hardware implementation techniques of turbo decoders have given turbo codes a clear advantage over LDPC codes allowing them to occupy mainstream applications ranging from wireless applications to fiberoptics communications. Hence. the quest for more efficient LDPC decoder implementation techniques has become a topic of increasing interest, gradually promoting LDPC codes as serious competitors to turbo codes on both fronts.
The design of LDPC decoder architectures differs from the de-
coder design for other classes of cades, in particular turbo codes, in that I t is intimately related to the structure of the code itself through
its parity-check matrix [4]. An LDPC code is defined by a random
sparse parity-check matrix H = [h,jlmxnand is described by a
bipartite graph (see Fig. I)whose reduced adjacency matrix is H. The graph has on one side m check nodes { c,, c 2 ,. . . ,cm} conespondingtothemrowsofH,andon theothern bir-nodes ( b l , b z , . , . ,b,) corresponding to t h e n columns of H. A bit-node b, is connected to a check-node c, if h,, = 1. In a rrgular (c, r)-LDPC
code, bit-nodes have degree c and check-nodes have degree T in the graph, while in an irregular (C,R)-LDPC code, the hit- and check-node degrees are drawn from the sets R a n d C.respectively.
LDPCcodes aredecoded iteratively using Gallager's two-phase message-passing (TPMP) algorithm [Z] which computes iteratively extrinsic probability values associated with each bit-node using
This work was supported with funds from NSF under grants CCR 9979381 and CCR 00-85929.

Figure 1: Bipanite graph of a regular (2.3)-LDPC code
Unlike the case for turbo codes, the randomness in communicating messages on the bipartite graph in LDPC codes results in complex interconnects for large n in a parallel decoder implementation, and stringent memory requirements in a serial decoder implementation limiting the applicability of LDPC codes in latency and power sensitive applications. All current decoder architectures ( [5,6]; see references in [7]) address the interconnect and memory problems by applying optimizations at one system abstraction level, and either retain the disadvantages of or introduce further disadvantages at other levels.
This paper attempts to break the architectural dependence on the code properties by jointly performing optimizations at the codedesign, (decoder) algorithmic, and architectural levels. First, the interconnect problem stemming from the inherent randomness of LDPC codes is addressed by designing architecture-aware LDPC (AA-LDPC) codes having regularity features favorable for an efficient decoder implementation. Second, the memory overhead problem in current decoder implementations employing the TPMP algorithm is addressed by proposing a turbo-decoding messagepassing (TDMP) algorithm for LDPC codes [4,7,8]. Moreover, a new parailel message update mechanism in the form of a message processing unit (MPU) is proposed that implements the recursions of the well-known BCJR algorithm 191 in differential form based on simple "max" operations that do not require lookup tables and incur negligible performance loss compared to the ideal case. Finally, at the architectural level, an efficient TDMP decoder architecture based on a regular and scalable dynamic message-transport network for routing messages to and from MPU's is proposed. Among other features, the decoder architecture is flexible enough to handle regular and irregular AA-LDPC codes, as well as gener-

0-7803-716i-3103/$i7.0082003 iEEE

II-57

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:35:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 mtroduces the concept of AA-LDPC codes. Section 3 briefly presents the TDMP algorithm, and Section 4 presents the TDMP decoder architecture. Finallv, Section 5 presents some simulation results.
2. ARCHITECTURE-AWARELDPC CODES
In this section. we introduce the concept of architecture-aware

H=

x1
x.
X6 XI
".^>x1
XI x2
xi

X.
XI XI
X* XL

."=x,, x>

X I xo

"-, ,

I,

XI XI

*I xi

xg X?

XI

x1 <I

*I

X6 x2

XI x2

x1

x1

x1

XI

x4 *,
xg x,

0=3

block matrix H having B block rows and D block C O ~ u m n Ssuch as
s s the one shown in Fig. 2, where each block is an x hinary sub-
matrix and S is a codeindependent parameter. These submatrices

are required to be either all-zero S x S matrices or permutation matrices. An S x S binary permutation matrix is simply the identity matrix I s x s whose rows (or equivalently columns) are ran-

domly permuted. Hence, a regular ( c ,T)-LDPC code would have ' T permutation matrices per block row and c Permutation -"

ces per block column, while an irregular LDPC code would have these matrices positioned according to the degree distribution of

the code. The code length is given by n = S B . and the code rate is R 2 1- D / B . Figure 2 shows a parity-check matrix of a regular (2,4)-LDPC code for S = 6 having two and four permutation

matrices per block column and row, respectively.

The main advantages of AA-LDPC codes over other LDPC

codes are twofold. First, lhcy transform the LDPC decoding prob-

lem employing the TPMP algorithm into a turbo decoding prob-

lem [4] thus eliminating the storage required to save multiple checkto-bit mcssages (a savings of 75 %). This follows from the fact that the ones in the row8 in each block IOW of U do not over-

lap. and consequently. the block rows can be processed indepen-

dently by passing messages only between adjacent block rows as

opposed to potentially all rows as is the case with the TPMP algorithm. Second, Yakking the next step further towards an efficient decoder implementation (as compared to [2]), the structure of AA-

LDPC codes reduces the complexity of the interconnection network when it comes to forwarding and retrieving messages be-

tween the non-zero entries as defined in H. Observe that the ones I n the rows of H. absent any structure. would generally have ran-

dom column indices requiring r (n:l)-multiplexers to read r mes-

sages corresponding to the row, and then T (l:n)-demultiplexers to write the results back in memory in proper order. This solution quickly becomes impractical for large code lengths n, or

when multiple cows are accessed in parallel to increase decoding

throughput. Moreover, the overhead of the control mechanism

of the (de-)multiplexers which keeps track of the column posi-

tions of a\l the ones in the parity-check matrix becomes too com-

plcx to implement. On the other hand, with the prescribed struc-

ture of AA-LDPC codes, only 7.9 (J:I) instead of rS (n:l)-(de-

)multiplexers are needed to access messages from memory, where

J <B ~

<< n. Further, every S of these (de-)multiplexers can

bc controlled by a common simple sequencer programmed to trace

the corresponding permutations.

While the parity-check matrix shown in Fig. 2 has desirahle

architecturalproperties, i t is not apriori clear whether LDPC codes

having such structure would achieve comparable BER performance

t o randomly constructed codes of similar complexity. In [7.8, IO].

it was shown that indeed AA-LDPC codes based on cyclotomic cosets [SI and Ramanujan graphs [IO, I I ] have BER performance

that compares favorably with randomly generated codes.

F , 2:A~parit~y.chec~k ~ of an AA-LDPC code s = 6.
The label denates a one at column position i within a block.

3. TURBO DECODING OF AA-LDPC CODES

this section, we briefly describe the turbo-decoding message-
passing (TDMP) algorithm [4,lO] for AA-LDPC codes. and present
. , - . a reduced-comolexitv message wdate mechanism in the form of a
soft-input soft-output (SISO) message processing unit (MPU) 17, 81 based on the BCJR algorithm 191. For more details on the
TDMP algorithm and the MPU, the reader is referred to [4,7,8,IO].
Assume an AA-LDPC code is defined by a D x B parity-check block matrix H having parameter S . The D block rows of U are
processed in tandem by S MPU's that operate in parallel. The MPU's together form a SISO decoder which we designate by D.
The messages corresponding to the D block rows are stared in B memory modules M I , .. . ,MB,where M i has S memory banks and (c, - 1) words per bank (c, 2 1 is the number of non-cero sub-matrices in block column j , j = 1,., , , B).

A (channelvalues)

sub-it%ation

x

1- sub-iteration I

1 - sub-iteration3

Figure 3: Black diagram of the TDMP algorithm showing the message exchange between the decoders for D = 3. M,,ai, and D, are the memory. interleaver, and SlSO blacks of the ith block row.

The TDMP algorithm is described for simplicity with reference to the matrix shown in Fig. 2 for D = 3. The algorithm performs D = 3 decoding sub-iterations on the block rows of H, and the operations of the algorithm in each of these sub-iterations are
illustrated in the unfolded block diagram shown in Fig. 3. Stafting from block row I , extrinsic reliability values are computed for each bit using SISO decoder D1 and the input channel reliability values X,,j = I , . , . , n . assuming that the hit belongs to the code defined by block row I . This extrinsic information is fed as a oriori information throueh an interleaver (TI) to SlSO decoder D, operating on the s e c o d block row. The interleavercan he factored into at most B S-to-S independent permuters fallowing the structure of the AA-LDPC code. DZin turn updates the extrinsic
reliability values assuming that the bits belong to the code defined
by block row 2. The process is repeated for the third block row. A single update of messages based on one block row is referred to as
a sub-ireration, and a round of updates across all the block rows

U-58

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:35:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

constitutes a single decoding iteration. In the final iteration, hard decisions are made based on the posrerior reliability values read (after de-interleaving) from the third SlSO decoder.
The TDMP algorithm has two main advantages over the TPMP algorithm (4, IO]: ( I ) It eliminates the storage required to save multiple check-to-bit messages and replaces them with a single message corresponding to the most recent check-message update, and (2) it exhibits a faster convergence behavior requiring between 20 %-SO % fewer decoding iterations to converge for a given SNR (and hence higher decoding throughput) compared to the TPMP algorithm.
3.1. Low-Complexity Message Computation
The commonly employed message-update mechanism based on Gallager’s equations 121 was shown 181 to be prone to quantization noise rcsulting in increased decoding latency and switching activity (and hence power consumption) in the decoder. In [81, nn alternative approach for computing messages was proposed by using a simplified form of the BClR algorithm 191 tailored IO the syndrome trellis of single parity-check code (see [7,9] for termnology). In this section. we present a reduced-complexity message update unit based on [9] that eliminates the need for lookup-tables, hence simplifying implementation cost considerably especially in ysrallel MPU implementations. In the proposed method, messages are updated using a simple “max-quartet” bivariate function Qiz:, y) defined as
+ Q ( x ,y) = max(z. y) - max(z y, 0 )
which approximates the key equations of the BCJR algorithm in diifcrmtial form. In 171, we showed that Q ( z , y ) is a simpler (implementation-wise) and more accurate approximation of the ideal key equations than othor approximations available in literature (e.g., [ I Z ] ) . Figure ?(a) shows a logic circuit implementing ( I ) . In terms of Q ( z ,y), the key equations of the BClR algorithm simplify it1

4. DECODER ARCHITECTURE
A decoder architecture implementing the TDMP algorithm for regu l a ~and irregular AA-LDPC codes is shown in Fig. 5 . The archi-
tecture is composed of B memory modules FM storing messages, S
MPU’s that operate in parallel, and read/write networks for transporting messages between memory and these MPU’s. The decoder
completes a single decoding iteration by performing a round of D updates across the black rows of H. An update corresponding to
a single block row i constitutes a sub-iteralion which involves the following steps:
I - The read-network (shown in Fig. 6 ) performs c read opcrations from memory, where cis the maximum bit-node degree of the block row, using r block selectors that select the appropriate messages corresponding to all other block rows (than i) from memory. These messages are then accumulated on top of earlier messages read from previous black rows (including the intrinsic channel reliabilities of the bits) using a row of T column accumulators. Finally, after c accumulation steps, thc resulting messages are independently permuted to match the structure of the permutation matrices of block row iusing a IOW of T pemuters. The network then forwards r messages to each of the S MPU’s.
2- The MPU’s update the messages in parallel as described in Section 3.I
3- The updated messages are routed by the write-network to the appropriate memory modules scheduled to receive messages rehted to block row i . The write network, shown in Fig. 7, performs the reverse operations of the read network. excluding message accumulation.
4- The messages are written in the designated memory modules and the address counters are updated.
Memory-
a : - J ..,

Ao’=Q(AnlX),Ap’ = Q ( A & A ) , A = Q ( A o , A P ) . (2)

Figure 4(bj shows a parallel dataflow graph implementing the key

equations ofthe BCJR algorithm using the function Q ( z ,y).

... - _ --5o A i

A*

hi

h, i

A.

l

(ill

(b)

Figure 4: A SlSO MPU using the max-quanet function: (a) Logic circuit for Q(z,y), and (b) dataflow graph ofthe MPU.

Figure 5 : TDMP decoder architecture
5. SIMULATION RESULTS
A TDMP decoder architecture for an AA-LDPC code of length 2304 having a five bit datapath was synthesized using 0.18fim

U-59
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:35:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

From Memory ,~~~.......... ~~ .......~~ ........ ~ ...... ~~ .......~ .... ....~.....~ ....... ~~ ........~ ..........~ ...............,

(a)

(b)

Figure 8: (a) Average power dissipation. and (h) area distribution

of the main blocks of the TDMP decoder.

To S MPU's Figure 6: Read-network architecture ofthe TDMP algorithm.

From MPU's
t s ts~ ) r ~ ~ ~ b ,.... ~ ...... ~ ...,. ..... ~ ......,. ~ ~ . . ~~ ...... ~~ ....... ~

....... ~..~.....~. ~ ~.

.....~~ .......,

..'

~

(a)

(hl

Figure 9; Comparison oS(a) power consumption, and (h) area be-

tween the TDMP and the TPMP architectures.

To Memory
Figure 7: Write-network architecture ofthe TDMP algorithm.
1.8V CMOS technology, and power and area characterization were done using the Synopsis 1001 suite. The decoder attains a thraughput of 1.92GbitsJs at 200MHz. The average power consumption is 1,179 mW, and the decoder area is 4.92mm2. Figure 8 shows Ihe average power and area distribution of the main blocks of the decoder. As expected, memory reads consume most of the power (50.42 7%) followed by the MPU's (20.73%). The remaining blocks of the architecture consume 28.85 % ofthe power. The networks (including the peripheral interconncctl occupy 3.G7mm2 or 74.6% of the area of the decoder. The optimized MPU's occupy only an area of0.48mmz (9.86%). More importantly, the reduced memory requiremcnt ofthe TDMP algorithm is evident in that memory occupies only 0.76 mrn' or 16.06% of the area.
The TDMP decoder architecture was also compared with a decoder architecture implementing the TPMP algorithm and Gallager's update equations having the same throughput. Figure 9(a) compares the power consumed by the transport networks, MPU's (check and hit function units Tor the TPMP decoder), and memory. The figure demonstrates the power efficiency of the TDMP decoder compared to the TPMP decoder, resulting in a savings of 74.28 %, 83.06Y0, and 93.81% in power consumption in the networks. MPU's, and memory modules, respectively. The overall savings in power consumption is 89.13%. In terms of area, Fig. 9(b) similarly shows significant reduction in the area of the networks (61.76%). MPU's (33.33%),and memory (73.68%). respectively. The overall area savings is 62.80%. Finally, the TDMP decoder requires 60.5% less interconnect wires (including both networks and peripherals) than the TPMP decoder.

6. REFERENCES
[I C. Berrou, A. Glavieux. and P. Thitimajhhima. "Near Shannon Limit Error-Correcting Coding and Decoding: Turbo Codrr:' in IEEE hi. C O @on Communicariow. 1993.pp. 1064-1n70.
I21 R . F.Gatlager. Low-Den.yi,y Parity-Check Codrr, MIT Press. Cambridge, MA, 1963.
I31 T. Richardson. M.Shokrollahi.and R. Urbanke. "Design of capacity-
approaching irregular low-density parity-checkcodes," IEEE Tranr.
mm Info. Theorv. vol. 47. no. 2. pp. 619-637. Feb.2001
[4] Mohammad M. Mansour and Nmsh R. Shanhhag, "Turbo decoder architectures for low-density parity-check codes:' in Proc. IEEE GLOLIECOM, Taipei. Taim" Nov. 2002.
151 Flarion Technologies. "Vector-LDFCTMcoresolutions:' Feb. 2002.
161 C. Howland and A. Blanksby. "Parallel decoding architectures for low density parity check coder."in Proc. r f 2 W l IEEE In,. S ~ m opn Circrrin.s and S.~urrmsS. v d n q . May 200 I,pp. 742-745.
[71 Mohammad M. Mansour and Naresh K. Shanbhag, "Highthroughput memory efficient decoder architecturesfor LDPC codes," suhmitnd IO IEEE Tranmcrio,tron VLSl Sysrcms, 2002.
[SI Mohammad M. Mansour and Naresh R. Shanhhag, "Low~powcr VLSl decoder architecture, for LDPC codes," in ISLPED 21M12. ~onrureS.C A , A U ~ 2. 002, pp. 2x4-289.
191 L. R. Bahl. J . Cockc, F lelinek, and I. Raviv. "Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate:' IEEE lintis on 1.7:. pp. 284-287, Mar. 1974.
I101 Mohammad M. Mansour and Naresh R. Shanbhag, "Mrmory~ efficientturbo decoder architrcturcs for LDPC codes:' in Sips 2002. son Diego. C A . oct. 2002.
[ I I ] Mohammad M. Mansour and Narcrh R. Shanhhag, "Conslmcliun of LDPC codcs from Ramanujan graphs:' in ConJere,rcr on It$fr,. Scirncer and Syriern,~2002, Princeton Uniwrrity. Mar. 2002.
1121 X. Y, Hu et al., "Efficient implementationsof the sum~producralL gorithm for decoding LDPC codes,'' in GLOBECOM 2001, 2001, vol. 2, pp. 1036-10368.

LI-60
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:35:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

