Results on Non-uniform Error Correction Using Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
Hossein Pishro-Nik, Nazanin Rahnavard, and Faramarz Fekri School of Electrical and Computer Engineering Georgia Institute of Technology Atlanta, Georgia 30332-0250 Email: {hossein, nazanin, fekri}@ece.gatech.edu

Abstract— We propose a technique for designing low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes over nonuniform channels. In particular, we investigate LDPC codes for volume holographic memory (VHM) systems . We show that the proposed coding scheme for holographic memories has easy design procedure and results in efficient codes. An important property of the proposed technique is that we can design simple codes whose performance is close to the Shannon limit, while they are very good in terms of the error floor effect. We also derive a capacity bound and the stability condition for the proposed codes over the binary erasure channel. We briefly discuss other applications like punctured codes, OFDM systems and multilevel coding.

Fig. 1. Several parallel channels

I. INTRODUCTION

In this paper, we deal with designing LDPC codes over a set

of parallel subchannels. Consider Figure 1 in which we transmit

bits over several binary-input output-symmetric channels. For

simplicity, let assume the channels are independent. One trivial

approach is to design a separate error correcting code for each

of the channels. Here, we are interested in designing only one

LDPC code as shown in Figure 1. Suppose we use a code of

length n. We transmit any codeword over the set of channels

such that n(j) bits in any codeword are transmitted over the jth

channel.

Let pj

=

. n(j)
n

Assume 0

<

pj

<

1

for j

=

1, ..., kr.

Let zj be the random variable that is equal to the log likelihood

ratio of a received bit from the jth channel. Then, if the bits that

are transmitted over the different channels are chosen randomly

from the n bits in a codeword, the mentioned set of parallel

channels can be modelled as a single channel having the log

likelihood ratio that has the distribution

k

PZ (z) = pj PZj (z).

(1)

j=1

Therefore, good degree distributions for LDPC codes can be found by the methods described in [1] and [2] for the corresponding PZ (z).
Our aim in this paper is to show that for certain practical problems, we can use a better method that has some advantages over the above method. We first consider VHM systems and

This work was supported partially by Air Force Office of Scientific Research under grant F49620-02-1-0053, National Science Foundation under grant ANI0117840, and the State of Georgia through Yamacraw, Georgia’s Electronic Design Center.

show that they can be modelled as a set of parallel channels as Figure 1. Then, we introduce the ensemble of graphs that are used over parallel channels. We present the asymptotic analysis of the performance of the corresponding codes. We then discuss the design methodology for the practical systems. Specifically we present some results for the VHM systems.
Throughout the paper we assume the following terminology. By a graph we mean a simple graph, i.e., a graph with no loops ( edges joining a vertex to itself) and no multiple edges (several edges joining the same two vertices). For a square matrix A, r(A) shows the spectral radius of A. In other words, r(A) = max{|η| : η is an eigenvalue of A}.
II. NON-UNIFORM ERROR CORRECTION
A. VHM systems
In some practical applications, such as page oriented memories, we need to perform non-uniform error protection. For example, in holographic data storage, the information is recorded and retrieved in the form of two-dimensional data pages, i.e, two-dimensional patterns of bits. These bits are subject to different sources of noise. However, the SNR decreases as we move from the center to the corner in the page. Typically, raw bit error rate might vary by two orders of magnitude over a page. The common approach to solve the non-uniform error protection problem is to use an interleaver followed by an error correcting code [3]. It has been shown that if we use an LDPC code that is optimized for the nonuniform channel, we can get a much better result [4], [5] . In fact, the simulations show that we can increase the storage capacity of a typical holographic data storage by more than 50 percent if we use the optimized LDPC codes instead of an interleaver and an RS code. In this

GLOBECOM 2003

- 2041 -

0-7803-7974-8/03/$17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:35:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

…

paper we discuss the design criteria for the LDPC codes that are used in systems such as VHM’s. We will also briefly discuss other applications such as rate-compatible codes, OFDM systems and multi-level coding.
Consider an N × N page in a VHM system which consists of N 2 pixels. Each pixel is subject to a noise with a probability density that is dependent on the pixel location in the page. Generally, pixels at the corner of a data page have a higher probability of error than those at the center of the page. We divide this page into kr regions such that, in each region, pixels are subject to almost the same noise power. Let the regions be R1, R2, ..., Rkr as shown in Figure 2. All the bits in a page are written or read simultaneously. Thus, this page can be modelled as kr parallel binary input channels as in Figure 1.
Region kr
Region 2
Region 1

Let Λ = {λ(j)(x) : j = 1, ..., kr}. Let also ρ(x) = ρixi−1 be as defined in [2]. We define the ensemble g(Λ, ρ) as the ensemble of bipartite graphs with the degree distributions given by Λ and ρ. In other words, in the ensemble g(Λ, ρ), bits of different types can have different degree distributions. In fact, we propose to use the prior knowledge about which bits are transmitted over each channel should in the design of the code. Our aim in this paper is to show that this method has some advantages for certain applications.

C. Asymptotic Analysis
Following [2], we can find the density evolution formulas for the the ensemble g(Λ, ρ). Let us define

q(j)

=

|E(j)| |E|

(4)

Let m(vlc),(j) denote the message that is sent from a variable node of type j (i.e. v ∈ W (j)) to its incident check node c in the l’th iteration of the message passing algorithm. Let also mc(lv)
denote the message that the check node c sends to its incident variable node. Let Pl(j) and Ql denote the densities of random variables m(vjc),(l) and mc(lv) respectively. Then, it can be shown
that the formulas for density evolution can be written as

Pl(j) = P0(j)

λ(j)(Ql)

(5)

Fig. 2. Different regions in a typical data page in holographic recording. Raw BER is almost constant in each region.

B. The ensemble g(Λ, ρ)
Here, we introduce the ensemble that we propose to use over
the set of parallel channels. Again, suppose we use a code
of length n, and we transmit each codeword over the set of channels such that n(j) bits from every codeword is transmitted through the jth channel. Let (x1, x2, ..., xn) be a codeword. Let also W (j) be the set of bits in the codeword that are transmitted over the jth channel (type j bits). Thus we have |W (j)| = n(j), where | · | denotes the cardinality of the set. For example, in the VHM system, W (j) is the set of bits in the jth region (i.e., W (j) = {xi : xi ∈ Rj}). Now we define the ensemble g(Λ, ρ) of bipartite graphs that we proposed to be used
for nonuniform error protection. Let E be the set of edges in the graph and let E(j) be the set of edges that are incident with a variable node of type j. Also let Ei(j) be the set of edges adjacent to the variable nodes of type j and degree i. We define

λ(j)(x) =

λ(ij)xi−1

(2)

where

λ(ij)

=

|Ev(j,i)| |E(j)|

(3)

Pl =

q(j)Pl(j)

(6)

Ql = Γ−1(ρ(Γ(Pl−1))))

(7)

where denotes convolution and Γ is defined in [2] . Let C(j) be the capacity of the j’th binary channel in Figure 1 and

suppose that we use an LDPC code from the ensemble g(Λ, ρ).

Let also Pe be as defined in [2]. It is easy to prove the following

lemma.

Lemma 1: Suppose C(j) < 1 for j = 1, ..., kr and kr < ∞.

Then,

for

any

i, j

∈

{1, 2, ..., kr}

we

have

lim
l→∞

Pe(Pl(j))

=

0

if

and

only

if

lim
l→∞

Pe(Pl(i))

=

0.

Using lemma 1 and (5),(6) and (7) we can optimize the degree

distribution of the code for the given channels. It seems that

the design of good codes from the ensemble g(Λ, ρ) is more

difficult than the design of the ordinary irregular LDPC codes.

However, we will show that finding a good degree distribution

for the set of parallel channels is much simpler than the opti-

mization of the ordinary LDPC codes. In fact, this is one of the

advantages of using the ensemble g(Λ, ρ).

The stability condition of [2] can also be generalized for the

the ensemble g(Λ, ρ). For simplicity, let us derive the stability

condition for the case that all the channels in Figure 1 are binary

erasure channels having different erasure probabilities. Let j be the erasure probability of the j’th channel. Note that in this

case the system of parallel channels is equivalent to a binary

erasure channel with the erasure probability

kr

= pj j

(8)

j=1

GLOBECOM 2003

- 2042 -

0-7803-7974-8/03/$17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:35:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

where

pj

=

. n(j)
n

However,

as

we

mentioned

before

it

is

better

to work with the set of parallel channels instead of the equiva-

lent single channel. Let x(lj) be the fraction of erasure messages

emitted from the variable nodes of type j in the l’th iteration.

Then the density evolution formulas are

x(lj) = x(0j)λ(j)(1 − ρ(1 − yl−1))

kr

yl =

q (j ) x(l j )

(9)

j=1

x(0j) = j for j = 1, 2, ..., kr

We define





Xl = 

xl(1) x(l 2)
.
.
.

 .

(10)

x(l kr )

The stability condition for the ensemble g(Λ, ρ) can be stated

as following.

Theorem 1: Let j < 1 for j = 1, ..., kr and A be a (kr −

1) × (kr − 1) matrix whose element in the j’th row and the i’th column is αji = λ (j)(0)ρ (1)q(i)x(0j).

• If r(A) > 1, then there exists a strictly positive con-

stant ζ = ζ(Λ, ρ, X0) such that for all l ∈ N and for j = 1, ..., kr, we have x(lj) > ζ. • If r(A) < 1, then there exists a strictly positive constant

ζ = ζ(Λ, ρ, X0) such that if for some l ∈ N and for j =

1,

..., kr,

x(l j )

≤

ζ

then

lim
l→∞

x(l j )

=

0

for

j

=

1,

..., kr.

Proof: By expanding the the density evolution formula

into the Taylor series at zero and neglecting the high order

terms, we get

Xl = AXl−1

(11)

If

Xl

is

sufficiently

small,

then

we

have

lim
l→∞

X

l

=

0

if

and

only if lim Ak = 0. But this is equivalent to r(A) < 1. The

k→∞

rest of the proof is similar to the proof of the stability condition

in [2].

III. PRACTICAL CODE DESIGN
Let us consider the problem of designing efficient LDPC codes for the VHM systems. LPDC codes are very good candidates for these systems. This is because as we mentioned before, the whole data in a page is read or stored simultaneously. Therefore, it is possible and desirable to use long LDPC codes. It is known that long LDPC codes can have performance close to the Shannon limit. However, this is not sufficient because it is desirable to have a bit error rate less than 10−12 in the VHM systems. This implies that the code should not have error floor. In fact, this is an important criterion for the code. In this section we show that we can easily design good codes for the VHM systems using the ensemble g(Λ, ρ).
It is shown in [6] that if λ2ρ (1) < 1, then the minimum distance and the size of the minimum stopping set in the expurgated ensemble increase linearly with the code length. On

the other hand, if λ2ρ (1) > 1, these quantities are logarithmic with a high probability. However, it is shown in [7] that for capacity achieving codes we must have λ2ρ (1) > 1. Therefore, as it is mentioned in [6], to achieve the capacity, we must have a small minimum distance. This implies that the capacity achieving codes have an error floor . In fact, the capacity achieving codes of practical lengths usually have an error floor before the bit error rate of 10−7. Now, we discuss the code design for the non-uniform error correction. For simplicity, we first consider the binary erasure channel. the problem of the VHM systems in which we have (BIAWGN) channels will be discussed later.

A. The binary erasure channel
Again consider the case that all the channels in Figure 1 are binary erasure channels having different erasure probabilities. Let j be the erasure probability of the j’th channel. Here, we compare the performance of ordinary irregular LDPC codes and the codes from the ensemble g(Λ, ρ). Let us first give an upper bound for the rate of the codes from the ensemble g(Λ, ρ) over maximum likelihood (ML) decoding. This bound is valid for the iterative decoding as well. The bound is similar to the bound given in [8]. Let ϕi be the fraction of check nodes of degree i. Let define Φ(x) = ϕixi. By a simple observation, we can
i
find the following upper bound for the capacity of the LDPC codes over the BEC.
Theorem 2: To have arbitrarily small probability of error on a BEC with erasure probability , we must have

1 − R ≥ 1 − Φ(1 − )

(12)

where = kr q(j) j and q(j) is given by (4).
j=1
Proof: Let construct a matrix H from the parity matrix H by selecting each column of H with probability (1 − ) in-
dependently and replacing it with the zero vector. The nonzero
columns of H correspond to the erased bits. If we pick a row
from H at random, this row is equal to zero in H with the probability Φ(1− ). Therefore, on the average we have mΦ(1− ) zero rows in H . Thus, if we define Zn := rank(H ), then we have

E(Zn) = E(rank(H )) ≤ m − mΦ(1 − ) + o(1)n = n{(1 − R)[1 − Φ(1 − )] + o(1)}. (13)
The rest of the proof is similar to what presented in [8].

As an example, consider the case that the number of channels kr = 4 and

1 = .1α, 2 = .25α, 3 = .5α, 4 = .95α,

(14)

where α is a constant. Suppose we want to use half-rate LDPC codes of length 104 in which 2500 bits are transmitted over each
channel. Note that the whole system can be modelled as a binary erasure channel with the erasure probability = .45α. As

GLOBECOM 2003

- 2043 -

0-7803-7974-8/03/$17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:35:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

a first approach, we consider the performance of the optimized half-rate LDPC codes for the erasure channel from [9]. We also find good codes using the ensemble g(Λ, ρ). Let discuss the design of codes from g(Λ, ρ). First, to prevent the error floor problem we require that λ2ρ (1) < 1. Second, we choose the degree distribution to be semi-regular. By a semi-regular degree distribution, we mean a degree distribution in which the variable nodes of the same type (variable nodes corresponding to bits that are transmitted through the same channel) have the same degree. We also require that the degree distribution of the check nodes be concentrated at two consecutive values. We denote the ensemble of semi-regular codes by g(D, ρ) where D = {dj : j = 1, ..., kr} and dj is the degree of variable nodes of type j. For the above example, a semi-regular degree distribution consists of at most four different degrees for the variable nodes because there are four channels. The semi-regularity condition is in some sense similar to the code construction in [10]. It may sound that the semi-regularity is too restrictive and the performance of the codes that are designed in this way would be much worse than the fully optimized codes. However, this is not the case. For the length n = 104, the best half-rate ordinary irregular code that we found in [9] has the following degree distribution

λ1(x) = 0.2498x + .2472x2 +.1480x5 + .0033x6 + .3517x19, (15)
ρ1(x) = x7

we generated a code of length 104 from the ensemble defined

by (λ1, ρ1) and called it the code A. Note that the maximum variable-node degree is 20 for this code. Let now design a semi-

regular code from the ensemble g(D, ρ). To simplify the design

we restrict the maximum variable node degree to be 7. There-

fore, there are only a few choices left. We can easily find the

best possible code with the given constraints using the density

evolution. For example, we found the following degree distri-

bution

d1 = 4, d2 = 7, d3 = 3, d4 = 2, dc = 8

(16)

where dc is the degree of check nodes. Let the code B be a randomly chosen code of length 104 from the ensemble that defined by the above degree distribution. Since the maximum variable node degree in code B is 7, we also generated the best code given in [9] with the maximum variable node degree 7 (by the best code we mean with respect to threshold). Denote the code C to be a randomly chosen code of length 104 from this ensemble. Figure 3 shows the performance of these codes. First, we note that both codes A and C show error floors. However, we did not observe any error floor for the code B at the bit error rates as low as 10−9. We also note that for almost all practical purposes, the code B is the best among these codes. It is worth noting that the maximum variable-node degree of the code A is much higher than the code B. We also note that the code B has a lower bit error rate than the code C for all values of , the average channel erasure probability. In the figure, the performance of the code B over one single binary erasure channel is also shown. We observe that the performance of the code over the nonuniform channel (4 parallel channels) is much

better than its performance over a single channel. This shows

that we have taken advantage of the nonuniformity of the chan-

nel in the code design. Additionally, by slightly relaxing the constraints on the ensemble g(D, ρ), we can get a closer per-

formance to the capacity.

Since we are concerned with the error floor, we need to be careful about variable nodes of degree 2. In fact, any cycle whose variable nodes have degree 2 constructs a stopping set. Since we chose the values of di’s and dc (for the code B) such that the condition λ2ρ (1) < 1 is satisfied, by suitably expurgating the ensemble we can avoid small (sublinear) stopping

sets. Thus, if one of these cycles exists in our code, we just

regenerate the code. Since the probability of having these small stopping set is less than 1, after a few times, it is very likely

that we get a code with no small stopping set. Note that to

check whether the code contains any of these cycles, it suffices

to set

1 = 0 2 = 0, 3 = 0, 4 = 1,

(17)

and check for decoding error. If the code can decode with no error, we conclude that it does not have any cycle consisting of variable nodes of degree 2. In fact, as it is shown in [11], by suitably expurgating the ensemble, the error floor effect can be sufficiently reduced.
It is shown in [12] and [7] that the existence of degree-two nodes is necessary for the capacity achieving codes. However, small stopping sets are caused by variable nodes of degree 2. In the next section we show that even by avoiding degree 2 variable nodes, we can find very good codes from the ensemble g(D, ρ). Therefore, it is very likely that the codes do not have the error floor problem.

10−1

10−2

10−3

10−4

BER

10−5

10−6

code B, Nonuniform channel

code A

10−7

code C code B Uniform channel

10−8

10−9 0.3

0.32

0.34

0.36

0.38

0.4

0.42

0.44

0.46

0.48

Average erasure probability of the channel

Fig. 3. Performance of different half-rate LDPC codes over the BEC.

B. Binary Input Additive White Gaussian Noise Channel
Let us now return to the VHM systems. As we mentioned before, any page of the VHM system can be considered as a set of parallel channels. Consider the VHM systems that is used in [5]. In this system we divide each page into four regions (kr = 4). The noise is assumed to be gaussian. Therefore, the system can be modelled as a set of four binary-input additive

GLOBECOM 2003

- 2044 -

0-7803-7974-8/03/$17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:35:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10-2

10-3

10-4

Bit Error Probability

10-5

10-6

n=104 n=105
Shannon Limit

10-7

10-8

10-9

2.4

2.6

2.8

3

3.2

3.4

3.6

3.8

4

Eb/N0 (dB)

Fig. 4. Performance of the irregular LDPC code of rate .85.

white gaussian noise (BIAWGN) channels. The relative SNR’s of different regions are:

SN R2 − SN R1 = 1.61dB

SN R3 − SN R1 = 2.80dB

(18)

SN R4 − SN R1 = 3.74dB

Again we want to design a code of rate .85 from the ensemble g(D, ρ). This time we even impose more restrictions. Since in
these memories it is very important not to get error floor (remember bit error rate of at least 10−12 is needed), we decide to avoid degree 2 nodes in the graph. For this system, we found
the following degree distribution

d1 = 3, d2 = 4, d3 = 7, d4 = 10, dc = 40

(19)

where dc is the degree of check nodes. Figure 4 shows the performance of this code for the block lengths of 10000 and 100000 . As it is shown in the figure at the bit error rate of 10−9 the gaps from the capacity are only .65 dB and 1.04 dB for the lengths 105 and 104 respectively. Moreover, the codes do not
present any error floor at least for the bit error rates higher than 10−9. In fact, our experience shows that it is almost always possible to find very good codes from the ensemble g(D, ρ)
having small maximum variable-node degree when the number of channels is greater than 3. This means we can avoid the high
complexity degree distribution optimization. When the number of channels is 2 or 3, a small relaxation in the restrictions is
needed. For example, one possibility is to allow the variable
nodes of each type to have two different degrees.

C. Other applications
The approach we took in this paper to design LDPC codes for the nonuniform error correction have several other applications. Punctured LDPC codes, OFDM systems and multilevel coding are among these applications.
Puncturing is one of the most common methods to construct rate-compatible codes. In this method, to change the rate of a code to a higher rate, we puncture (delete) a subset of the codewords bits. It is possible to show that, a punctured code can be

modelled as a code that is used over two parallel channels as Figure 1. In this model, punctured bits are transmitted over the second channel that has a zero capacity. Then, the density evolution formulas given in this paper can be used to find optimum puncturing distributions for LDPC codes.
In OFDM systems we deal with several parallel channels in which some bits experience higher SNR’s. In this case, we are not usually concerned about the error floor problem, but we have other restrictions. Specifically, we cannot use long codes. It can be shown by simulations that for finite-length cases, codes from the ensemble g(Λ, ρ) can have better performance than the ordinary irregular codes over the parallel channels. A similar situation exists in multilevel coding.
IV. CONCLUSION
In this paper we proposed a method to design good LDPC codes over a set of parallel channels. This method is useful for many applications such as the volume holographic memories, OFDM and rate-adaptive coding systems. We showed that the proposed method has several advantage over the conventional method. First, the design procedure is very simple since we do not need to perform the high-complexity optimization algorithms that is necessary for conventional LDPC codes. Second, using the proposed method, we can find codes that have nearShannon limit performance and do not have error floor. Third, in some applications that the code length cannot be large, the proposed codes can have better performance than the ordinary LDPC codes.
REFERENCES
[1] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, 2001.
[2] T. J.Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, 2001.
[3] W. Chou and M. A. Neifeld, “Interleaving and error correction in volume holographic memory systems,” Appl. Opt., vol. 37, pp. 6951–6968, 1998.
[4] H. Pishro-Nik, N. Rahnavard, and F. Fekri, “Nonuniform error correction using low-density parity check codes,” in Proc. of Fortieth Annual Allerton Conference, Urbana-Champaign, IL, Oct. 2002.
[5] H. Pishro-Nik, N. Rahnavard, J. Ha, F. Fekri, and A. Adibi, “Low-density parity-check codes for volume holographic memory systems,” Appl. Opt., vol. 42, pp. 861–870, 2003.
[6] C. Di, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Weight distributions: How deviant can you be?,” in 2001 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Washington, DC, 2001.
[7] P. Oswald and M. A. Shokrollahi, “Capacity-achieving sequences for the erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 48, pp. 3017–3028, 2002.
[8] H. Pishro-Nik and F. Fekri, “On the maximum-likelihood decoding of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” in Proc. of in 37th Annual Conference on Information Sciences and Systems, Baltimore, MD , March 2003.
[9] http://lthcwww.epfl.ch/research/ldpcopt/. [10] I. Kanter and D. Saad, “Error-correcting codes that nearly saturate shan-
non’s bound,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 83, no. 13, pp. 2660–2663, 1994. [11] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “Finite-length density evolution and
the distribution of the number of iterations for the binary erasure channel,” Available at http://lthcwww.epfl.ch/research/ldpcopt/. [12] M. A. Shokrollahi, Codes, Systems, and Graphical Models, ch. Capacityachieving sequences, pp. 153–166. Springer, 2001.

GLOBECOM 2003

- 2045 -

0-7803-7974-8/03/$17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:35:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

