ISlT 2003.Yokohama,Japan,June 29 -July 4,2003

A Systematic Construction of Irregular Low-Density Parity-Check Codes from Combinatorial Designs

Sundarara ja n Sankaranarayananl Dept. of Electrical & Computer Engg.
Univ. of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721 e-mail: ssundaraece.arizona.edu

Bane Vasi@ Dept. of Electrical & Computer Engg.
Univ. of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721 e-mail: vasicQece.arizona.edu

Erozan M. Kurtas
Seagate Technology
Pittsburgh, PA 15222
e-mail: Erozan . M . KurtasQseagate.com

I. INTRODUCTION

In this paper, we propose an algorithm to design an irregu-

lar low-density parity-check (LDPC) code, with a given degree

distribution pair, from a combinatorially constructed regular

LDPC code. Richardson et al. [l]showed that long LDPC

codes from irregular bipartite graphs with carefully chosen

degree distribution pair performed very close to the Shannon capacity limit. Al_so,-they had listed a table of good degree distribution pai: (A, O),-of rate one-half irregular LDPC codes

‘“I

.....

such that A, E A (w, E 0)represent the percentage of variable

(check) nodes with degree i ( j ) . It is known that the cyclic

or quasi-cyclic property of regular LDPC codes, constructed Figure 1: Performance of irregular code on a memoryless

from combinatorial designs [2],helps to simplify their encod- channel ing procedure and also facilitates a memory-efficient storage of

the codes. The proposed algorithm involves splitting columns and rows of a regular LDPC code systematically in order to achieve an irregular code with a given distribution pair. Also, this algorithm is a useful alternative to random generation of irregular codes because it enables to exploit the structural properties of the regular code in efficiently storing the resultant irregular code.

+ given by ufnt = [u$~”‘]xj for

# 0, that satisfies (1). A

column with k ones can be partitioned in pk different ways

as given by the well known Euler’s formula. Let us define a

partition distribution matrix WT.,such that its elements wij
(i = 1,2, ...,p k ; j = 1,2, ...,k) denote the number of columns

of weight j,in the partition of the ith-type. The partition of

the ith-typeis one of the pk different ways to partition IC. The

11. CONSTRUCTIOOFNIRREGULALRDPC CODE
The algorithm aims to design a: irregular LDPC code with a degree distribution pair (ATeqO, T e q )f,rom a (d,, &)-regular LDPC code ( H T e 9w)ith b columns. This transformation from a regular graph to an irregular one prese_rvesthe number of
edges. Hence, the problem of achieving ye*in the irregular
code is independent of that of achieving RTeq.
Let us define a non-negative integer vector Oant whose el-
ements u Y t ( j = l ,2, ...,k = d,) are the number of columns of weight j required i?, the resulting irregular code, to achieve
p e gT. he vector Uznt can be obtained by solving the inte-

number of columns (h3coLUmonf)HTegthat require a partition
2f the ith-type to achieve ui is given by a non-negative vector
hcolumn called the @.signpartition profile for columns. The problem of finding hYLumncan be formulated as a system of
LDEs written as WhColUm-- n 0Znt.An efficient incrzmental
algorithm, proposed in [3], can be used to solve for hcolumn. To achieve a desired QTeq, obtain a design partition profile for rows (hTowu)sing the method described above. The columns
and rows of HTe9are split using polumannd $Ow to obtain
the parity-check matrix of the irregular code.
111. RESULTS

ger optimization problem in (1) under a constraint defined by
Cf=ljuj= bk.

The bit-error rate performance of iteratively decoded irregular LDPC codes, namely CS-1, CSRS-2, and CSRS-3, on

a memoryless AWGN channel is shown in Fig. 1. It can be

observed that the performance of irregular codes improve as

their degree distribution pair approach the good degree dis-

tribution pair presented in [l].

The idea underlying the method to solve the intzger op-
timization problem is to determine the solution (UreaL)in
Wk space and then search for dznt in, the neighborhood of
+ea1 . It is straightforward to find Ureal. The error ii.e.,
e = bk - Cjk_,j[u$“”in‘]r)ounding all components of Urea‘

REFERENCES
[l] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE k n s . Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619-637, Feb. 2001.

to the nearest integer can be corrected for by solving the linear diophantine equation (LDE), using the well known Euclid’s al-
gorithm, written as CVj,u;ea~fOjx=j e , j = 1 , 2 , ...,IC. A
solution of the equation is considered best if it results in fiint,

[2] J. Colbourn, and J. H. Dinitz, “The handbook of combinatorial designs,”Boca, Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1996.
[3] Evelyne Contejean and Herd Devie, “An efficient incremental algorithm for solving systems of linear diophantine equation,” Information and Computation, vol. 113, issue 1, pp. 143-172,

‘This work was supported by Seagate Technology.

August 1994.

1
0-7803-7728-1/03/$170.200003 IEEE.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:27:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

