TURBO LIKE DECODING OF LDYC CODES

algorithm splits lhegrnphin fig.l.(n) into rhelwo trees show in fig l.(h). Duringthe pilrlilion prwess, some wriable nodes ;and those edges incideni on them may split into different cycle~freecomponents. e.g.. see the

variahlc mxlc I,in figurc !(a) that ih aplil intolwo. *oc fig, l.lh). Whcn interchanging inl'mmtim haw-

Jill Lu and JOS4 M. F. Moura

different components, we need to remergc those edgm together. 8% shown in fig. Uc). We relb to these

Drpartment ofElectrical and Computer Engineering. Cainegir Mellon Univrrity. 5W Fwks Ave.. Pittrhurgh,PA, U.S.A.

Turho-like decoding algorithm ITLDA]

Introduction
Low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes exhibit performance close to the Shannon limit. High-rate LDPC codes are actively k i n g considered in megnetic recording because, when decoded by the iterative message-passingalgorithm, they show bctter decoding performance than turbo codes as the black length increases. However, their decoding complexity is a challenge.
In this paper. we develop G new decoding scheme for LDPC codes that effectively reduces the dcccding complexity. We refer to it as fro-ho i i b dercoding. By grnpli Imnsformations, ue di\,ide systemntically an arhitrary factorgraphwithcyclcr intoscvcrd cycle-frccpnrtr thal arcconnccld tocach othcr hy iiitcrlcavcrs. forming an equivalent turbo-like structuie. Turbo-likedecoding then decodes in each cycle-free compnenl and shares probabilisticinformation among them. We show t h t turbo-like decoding converges to decoding success faster than the sum-product decoding algorithm at comparable BER performance. Grdoh Parlition Aleorithm We present now an algor-ithmthat partitions a factor graph W i t h cycler into ~everslcycle-free componcnts (Irccs or rorcsts)conncctcd by intcrlcavcr-likc struct~~rcTs.hc algorithm is its rollows:
I. Gcncratc a trcc T,; from thc original factor graph G . Let G, =G-T,, , i.e.. G , i s the
remaininggraph when d 1 edges iii 7,:ire tlclcl~tlrum G . Le1 C ,=T(;and m = I.

Awimpa factoroq-,h C contain\ K cycle-freecompanents C,, C , , ..,. C,.
step I: l"jfjJlililti0" Step 2: For i = I : K
. Dccnlc thc i 111 cycb-frcc conlponcill C, uisg clic updalal inf~~miotiofrnom i t ? inlcrlcilvcr
and thcn triinbmil thc new prohahilihc inrwmstion t u it& intcrl~avcr. End Step 3: Compiile Ihe decoding output. If wcccw i$ achieved, go Io step 4. Orherwire, go back to Qep2. Step 4: End. The message updating equations are the same as those for the rum-product decoding algorithm. Advantsees of turlx-like decodina ;>leorithm
11 is well known [F. R. Kschischangand B.J. Frey, Feb. 19981that with a cycle-free faclor graph. [he
sum-product algorithm terminates in a finite number of steps and yields minimum rymhol crror probability. Therefore. iii isolation. the 100iil decuding for each cycle-filee component is optimal. TLDA ig still iterative: each component transmits its a ,,osro.in~ip~ohrrhiI(iAr~PP) informiition 10 the others through interleavers and. in turn, these components usc these APPs as a priori inrormatiun IO slart lheir own dccoding proooss.
BER "etiurmance ond comoutational cost

2. IT the remaininggraph G, is cycle-free go to step 4.
If NOT. m = m+l.go to step 3. 3. Assume G , contains 11 disconncxtedparlsP,. P2,..., P".
Fori = I:"
Generate a tree for the i t h disjoint part P; .
End Lct C m = T , u T , u . . . u T ~iindG, =G,-Cm,g~tost'epZ.
, 4. C,, = G,,End.
From thisalgorilhm. G = C , uC, U...UCm,, and C,'siirecyele-lree. Fig. I shows lhat this

-We considcl-B randomly gcnerntcd regular LDPC code wit11 uniform column weight 2. Its block
leneth is 5850 bin and its code rate is 819. We cornoilre hv IO' Monte Carlo simulations in the d o t s

.

I

k l o w the T L D A and thc stendard sum-product algorilhm in an AWGN channel. The plot on the left

shows that the two algorithmshave Fimilar BER perlorrriance. while the plot on the right shows that

T L D A is SO 70faster thin the sum product alprithm at low SNR (Wc havc pinvcd that the

R

computational cost per iteration o f T L D A isexactly the same :is the computational cost per ireration of sum-product iilgorithm).

0 ow

,,.,,l'--mGl;.;-.---.;;-.l-^*;ia-;-u-.J .~

= -.\-

Fig. I.(a)

Fig.1. (h)

Fig.1. IC)

.'. ,. .. .. .. .-i ', .I I* 7 ,, .!.

% .I

, ,. ",I,

F i g 2 SNR

~g.3.

SNR

Acknowledement: This work is supported by the DSSC at Carncgie Mellon University

DT-11

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:20:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

