IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 7, NO. 4, APRIL 2003

171

Graph-Theoretic Construction of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
Ivana Djurdjevic, Shu Lin, and Khaled Abdel-Ghaffar, Member, IEEE

Abstract—This letter presents a graph-theoretic method for constructing low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes from connected graphs without the requirement of large girth. This method is based on finding a set of paths in a connected graph, which satisfies the constraint that any two paths in the set are either disjoint or cross each other at one and only one vertex. Two trellis-based algorithms for finding these paths are devised. Good LDPC codes of practical lengths are constructed and they perform well with iterative decoding.
Index Terms—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, sum–product algorithm, Tanner graph, trellis.

I. INTRODUCTION
R ECENTLY graph-theoretic approaches for constructing LDPC codes [1] have become a topic of great interest. Good LDPC codes have been constructed based on either random graphs [2]–[4] or specific graphs [5]–[7], especially graphs with large girth. These codes perform extremely well with iterative decoding, such as the sum–product algorithm (SPA). In this paper, we present a general graph-theoretic method for constructing LDPC codes based on finding a set of paths in a connected graph that cross each other at most at one vertex without requiring the graph to have a large girth. We present the code construction in the following section and a trellis-based algorithm to implement the construction in Section III. In Section IV we present a divide-and-conquer version of the algorithm to construct LDPC codes from very large connected graphs, and finally we conclude the paper.

II. CONSTRUCTION OF CODES

Let

be an undirected connected graph with vertex

set of size and edge set . A path in is a finite alternating

sequence of distinct vertices and edges, beginning and ending

with a vertex, such that each edge is incident with the vertices

preceding and following it. A path of length contains

vertices. A cycle is a closed path which begins and ends at the

same vertex. The girth of a graph is the length of a shortest cycle

[8].

Manuscript received September 27, 2002. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was Prof. K. Narayanan. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCR0096191, Grant CCR-0117891, Grant ECS-0121469, by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration under Grant NAG 5-10480, and by Accel Partners. This paper appeared in part in the Proceedings of the Conference on Information Sciences and Systems, Princeton, NJ, March 2002.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Davis, CA 95616 USA (e-mail: idjurdje@ece.ucdavis.edu; shulin@ece.ucdavis.edu; ghaffar@ece.ucdavis.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2003.809990

For

, let be a set of paths of length , which

satisfies the constraint that any two paths in are either disjoint

(i.e., have no vertex in common), or singularly crossing (i.e,

have exactly one vertex in common). This constraint is called

the disjoint-crossing (DC) constraint. Let

be the

binary matrix whose rows correspond to those vertices that lie

on the paths in and whose columns correspond to the paths

in , where

if and only if the th vertex is on the th

path in . This matrix is called the incidence matrix of . Since

the length of each path in is , each column of has weight

. It follows from the DC constraint that no two columns (or

two rows) of have more than one 1-component in common. If

is very small compared to the number , is a sparse matrix.

Then the null space of over GF(2) gives an LDPC code

of length whose Tanner graph [9] has no cycles of length 4,

and hence its girth is at least 6. If the rows of have the same

weight (i.e., each vertex of is intersected by the same number

of paths in ), then is a regular LDPC code. Since no two rows

in have more than one 1-component in common and each

column has weight

, then

check sums orthogonal on

each code bit can be formed [10], [11]. Massey’s orthogonality

theorem [10], [11] implies that the minimum distance of is at

least

. The rate of depends on the number of paths in

and the number of vertices of . The path set is called a

code construction path set.

III. TRELLIS REPRESENTATION AND A PATH SEARCHING ALGORITHM

Given a graph

, its paths of length can be rep-

resented by a trellis of sections with

levels of nodes

[12], labeled

. Each level of consists of the ver-

tices of . For

, a node at the th level is con-

nected to a node at the

th level by a branch if and only

if

is an edge in . This -section trellis is called the

path trellis of of length . A path of length in is a path

in starting from a node at the 0th level and ending at a node

at the th level, such that all the nodes on the path are different.

Fig. 1(a) and (b) show a complete graph with 7 vertices and its

path trellis of length 2, , respectively.

To find a set of paths of length in that satisfies the

DC constraint, an extend-select-eliminate (ESE) algorithm is

devised to parse the path trellis of . Suppose we have parsed

the trellis up to the th level with the ESE algorithm, with

. For

, let denote the set of survivor

paths of length terminating at the th node of the th level

(i.e., the paths that satisfy the DC constraint up to the th level).

Now we extend all the paths in to the

th level through

the branches diverging from node . At node of the

th

1089-7798/03$17.00 © 2003 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:47:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

172

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 7, NO. 4, APRIL 2003

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 1. Complete graph of: (a) 7 vertices; (b) its path trellis of length 2; and (c) and a set of paths found by the ESE algorithm.

level, select a set

of paths of length that satisfies the

DC constraint and eliminate all the other paths that terminate at

node . This results in a survivor path set

at node of level

. This ESE process continues until the th level is reached.

Then the union of the survivor sets,

, gives

a code construction path set . To maintain all the sets of sur-

vivor paths at each level to have about the same size, we create

a priority list of the nodes at each level, where the nodes with

the smallest number of survivor paths terminating at them at any

given level have the highest priority for the survivor path selec-

tion at the following level.

Applying the ESE algorithm to the path trellis shown in

Fig. 1(b) yields the set of paths of length 2 that satisfies

the DC constraint shown in Fig. 1(c). Expressing each path in

terms of the vertices lying on it, the paths in are: (1,2,4),

(1,3,7), (1,5,6), (2,3,5), (2,6,7), (3,4,6), (4,5,7). The incidence

matrix of is

The null space of gives a regular (7,3) LDPC code with min-

imum distance 4 whose Tanner graph has girth 6.

With the above construction method, we have constructed

three LDPC codes based on complete graphs with

, 200,

and 400 vertices,

and , and parameters (640,541),

(1287,1087), and (2738,2339), respectively. Fig. 2 shows the bit

and block error performances of the three LDPC codes decoded

with the SPA (assuming BPSK transmission over the AWGN

channel). For their lengths and rates, they perform very well

with respect to their Shannon limits. For example, with SPA de-

coding, at the BER of 10 , the (2738,2339) code of rate 0.854

performs only 1.5 dB away from the Shannon limit, which is 2.6

dB for this code rate.

IV. DIVIDE-AND-CONQUER ALGORITHM

For a large connected graph

, especially a large

complete graph, it may be prohibitively complex to process

Fig. 2. Error performance of three LDPC codes constructed based on complete graphs of 100, 200, and 400 vertices, respectively.

the path trellis of by the ESE algorithm. To overcome this

problem, we can take a divide-and-conquer approach. Consider

a complete graph with vertices. Suppose we want to

construct a set of paths of length in that satisfies the DC

constraint. We will assume in the following that is divisible

by . (If this is not the case, then some slight modifications

to the following approach are needed.) We partition the vertex

set into subsets

, each with

vertices.

Let be the subgraph of induced by the vertex subset .

For each subgraph , we first construct a set of paths of

length in that satisfies the DC constraint using the ESE

algorithm.

Next we form a trellis with levels of vertices, labeled

. For

, the th level of consists of

nodes which correspond to the

vertices

in subgraph . For

, the nodes at the th level are

connected to the nodes at the

th level by branches which

are the edges connecting the vertices in to the vertices in

. We process with the ESE algorithm to find a set

of paths of length in that satisfies the DC constraint. Each

path in contains one and only one vertex from each subgraph

and is called a connecting path for the subgraphs. The union

is a set of paths in that satisfies

the DC constraint. The computational complexity of processing

the connecting trellis with the ESE algorithm is about the

same as that of processing the path trellis of length of each

subgraph with the ESE algorithm. We then form the incidence

matrix for as defined in Section II. The null space of

gives an LDPC code.

In case

for some prime and some

positive integer , we can construct a set of connecting paths

without processing the connecting trellis as follows. We es-

tablish a one-to-one correspondence between the elements

in the finite field

and the nodes in each level of the

connecting trellis . In particular, let be the node corre-

sponding to the element

. We then form a short-

ened Reed–Solomon (RS) code [11] of length , dimension

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:47:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DJURDJEVIC et al.: GRAPH-THEORETIC CONSTRUCTION OF LDPC CODES

173

Fig. 3. Error performance of LDPC code constructed based on complete graph of 582 vertices using divide-and-conquer algorithm.

2, and minimum distance over

. Let

be a codeword in the RS code. Corresponding to this code-

word, we have a path in the trellis connecting the nodes

, in this order. Let be the set of the

paths corresponding to the codewords in the RS code.

Since the code has minimum distance , any two codewords

in the RS code agree in at most one element. Therefore, any

two paths in satisfy the DC condition and the union

is a set of paths in that also satisfies

the DC constraint.

As an example, consider the complete graph with 582 ver-

tices. Let

. We form 6 subgraphs of , each subgraph is

a complete graph with 97 vertices. Using the above divide-and-

conquer ESE algorithm, and an RS code of length 6, dimen-

sion 2, and minimum distance 5 over GF(97), we obtain a set

of 10 429 paths of length 5, which satisfies the DC constraint.

Note that in this case the largest part of the path set,

paths, are connecting paths from the set . The incidence ma-

trix for is a 582 10 429 matrix. Its null space gives a

(10429,9852) LDPC code with rate 0.945 and minimum dis-

tance at least 7, whose Tanner graph has girth at least 6. The

bit and block error performances of this code with the SPA de-

coding are shown in Fig. 3. At the BER of 10 , it performs 1

dB away from the Shannon limit. No error floor occurs above

the BER of 10 . The code also has a good frame error perfor-

mance. We can use a subset of to construct a shorter code.

V. CONCLUSION AND REMARKS

In this letter, we have presented a graph-theoretic method for

constructing LDPC codes whose Tanner graphs have girth at

least 6 based on any connected graph. For a connected graph

with girth , no two paths of length

that

diverge from the same vertex can remerge at another vertex.

Hence, if we choose

, the ESE algorithm

can be made more efficient.

A path set of length in a connected graph that satisfies the DC constraint can also be constructed by selecting the paths one by one such that each selected path satisfies the DC condition with all previously chosen paths. Once a path is selected, all of its branches are deleted from the trellis . When a node in the path trellis has no incoming or outgoing branches, it is removed from the path trellis. The above process continues until no path in the path trellis can be chosen without violating the DC constraint or the path trellis is completely disconnected. This is a depth-first searching algorithm. Note that performing the path search in a complete graph in this way is equivalent to the random construction proposed by MacKay in [13]. However, the difference exists when the starting graph is not complete. The construction of a parity-check matrix of an LDPC code by the ESE algorithm uses a different approach. The parity-check matrix is not formed in a column by column manner. It is formed in a systematic way, rather than by random trials. The drawback of the ESE algorithm is its complexity which is exponential in the number of vertices in a graph. To overcome this problem, we use divide-and-conquer method for larger graphs in order to obtain larger codes. In all our examples the starting graph is complete. We did so because it provided the largest number of paths.
Finally, if we allow the paths in the code construction path set to have various lengths no greater than (in terms of Tanner graph, this is equivalent to allowing various degrees for the variable nodes), we may choose a set of path lengths to optimize the code performance with the SPA decoding similar to the random construction of irregular LDPC codes in [3].
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-18, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] M. Sipser and D. Spielman, “Expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 1710–1722, Nov. 1996.
[3] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs and belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 585–598, Feb. 2001.
[4] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[5] J. Rosenthal and P. O. Vontobel, “Constructions of regular and irregular LDPC codes using Ramanujan graphs and ideas from Margulis,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inform. Theory, June 2001, p. 4.
[6] P. O. Vontobel and R. M. Tanner, “Construction of codes based on finite generalized quadrangles for iterative decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inform. Theory, June 2001, p. 223.
[7] P. O. Vontobel and H. A. Loeliger, “Irregular codes from regular graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inform. Theory, June-July 2002, p. 284.
[8] D. B. West, Introduction to Graph Theory, 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2001.
[9] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.
[10] J. L. Massey, Threshold Decoding. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963. [11] S. Lin and D. J. Costello Jr, Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and
Applications. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1983. [12] S. Lin, T. Kasami, T. Fujiwara, and M. Fossorier, Trellises and Trellis-
Based Decoding Algorithms for Linear Block Codes. Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic, 1998. [13] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–432, Mar. 1999.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:47:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

