IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 39, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2003

2579

Array Codes for Erasure Correction in Magnetic Recording Channels
Weijun Tan, Student Member, IEEE, and J. R. Cruz, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—A type of quasi-cyclic binary low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes based on array codes, which have low encoding complexity and good performance, are considered for use in magnetic recording channels. Their error correction capability, for both electronic and media noise, and more importantly, for erasures, is investigated using simulations. Compared with random binary and q-ary LDPC codes, these codes offer a good tradeoff between performance and complexity.
Index Terms—Array codes, erasures, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, magnetic recording channels (MRCs).
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes are one type of linear block codes described by a very sparse paritycheck matrix. Decoded with a belief-propagation (BP) algorithm, LDPC codes have been shown to have remarkable performance in many communication channels, including magnetic recording channels (MRCs).
LDPC codes were originally constructed using a random search. While these random codes have attractive performance and moderate decoding complexity, the encoder presents a challenge due to the large memory required to store the matrix and the often prohibitive complexity of the matrix multiplication. This motivated the search for cyclic or quasicyclic algebraic LDPC codes, which can be encoded using shift-register circuitry in linear time. One issue, however, is whether algebraic codes have as good a performance as random codes. Array codes are one type of these codes that have been shown to have good performance [1], [2].
Array codes are two-dimensional (2-D) codes introduced for burst error correction (see [3] and references therein). They have a structure similar to Reed–Solomon (RS) codes but over a Galois ring. Furthermore, some of the array codes are maximum distance separable (MDS) codes, which ensures their capability to correct a certain number of errors and/or erasures using algebraic decoding. It was found in [1] that the array codes introduced in [3] have sparse parity-check matrices over GF(2). This makes array codes decodable as binary LDPC codes and suitable for soft iterative decoding. These LDPC codes and their shortened variations were proposed for possible use in asymmetric digital subscriber line (ADSL) systems in [2].
Erasure is one important type of impairment other than random noise in many communication systems. In MRCs,

sources causing erasures include thermal asperity (TA) and media defects (MDs). Erasures can be corrected by error correction codes such as RS codes. It was suggested in [4] that LDPC codes can also be used for this purpose.
Array codes have very good erasure correction capability using algebraic decoding [3]. However, this algebraic decoding algorithm is a hard-decision decoding technique. We are motivated by the extraordinary performance of array codes under algebraic decoding to investigate whether they have similar performance under BP decoding, for both error and erasure correction.
II. REVIEW OF ARRAY LDPC CODES
We review briefly the array codes introduced in [3] and their corresponding LDPC forms [1], [2] in this section. Array codes are usually decoded algebraically. In this paper we are interested in the decoding of array codes as LDPC codes.
Array codes can be defined by three parameters ( , , ), where is an odd prime and , . Following the descriptions and derivations in [1] and [2], the parity-check matrix of these codes can be expressed as

(1)

where is a single-cyclic-shifting matrix, and the exponent

sequences ’s as well as ’s are not all equal. Note that the

parity-check matrix in (1) is a more general form than the one

in [1], [2], which can be obtained by setting

and

. This matrix has column

weight

, row weight

and is free of cycles of

length four. The code defined by this matrix has length

and dimension

. It can be easily seen

that these codes are quasicyclic, making them very attractive for

practical implementations. Additional properties of these codes

have been recently reported in [5].

Simulations in [1] and [2] showed that these array LDPC

(ALDPC) codes perform as well as random codes on additive

white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels, as far as correcting

random errors due to noise.

Manuscript received December 17, 2002. The authors are with the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK 73019-1023 USA (e-mail: wjtan@ou.edu; jcruz@ou.edu). Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2003.816485

III. SYSTEM AND ERASURE MODELS
The system model under investigation is shown in Fig. 1. Specifically, after the run-length-limited (RLL) code, an LDPC code is used on an EPR4-equalized MRC corrupted by both

0018-9464/03$17.00 © 2003 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:49:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2580

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 39, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2003

5 5 Fig. 1. System model. The MRC is equalized to an EPR4 channel. A random
interleaver and deinterleaver are used for ALDPC codes.

= 0 Fig. 3. Simulation results for full erasures (CSI known) of length L , 128
and 256 bits on a Lorentzian channel with AWGN noise.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS

Fig. 2. Erasure model for MD. The erasures are assumed rectangular with depth . CSI is assumed known for deep erasures.
random noise and erasures. The decoding system consists of two a posteriori probability (APP) decoders: typically, the log-MAP decoder matching the channel and the BP decoder matching the LDPC code. A uniform random interleaver is employed between the LDPC encoder and the MRC channel when an ALDPC code is used.
Erasures in this paper refer to the sudden loss (including TA) or fading of the signal during read back, which we call full and partial erasures, respectively. For a deep fade, we assume that channel state information (CSI) is available and an erasure flag is set to force both the channel value (signal plus noise) and the channel decoder output extrinsic log-likelihood ratio (LLR) to zero [4]. For partial erasures, especially for those with small fading depths, CSI is assumed not available unless otherwise specified.
We assume that one fixed-length single erasure with random starting location occurs in every transmitted codeword. Due to the nature of the erasure sources in MRCs, the bits in erasure are assumed contiguous. We further assume a rectangular window for the erasures, and use two parameters to model them: is used to represent the fading depth, ranging from zero (no erasure) to one (full erasure), and the erasure length is the number of bits in erasure out of all bits in the codeword. Shown in Fig. 2 is the erasure model used in this paper.
Note that a TA detector based on thresholding has already been employed in the read channel of a magnetic recording system, but such detector cannot handle MDs. Fortunately, one technique to accomplish this task was introduced recently in [6]. Basically, the violations of the run length constraints are monitored and used to trigger the MD flag. If either flag is activated, the corresponding LLRs are cleared to zero. This technique was proved successful using simulations.
Provided the CSI is available for TA, the channel values in the TA are zeroed out, which was proved beneficial in [7]. This is exactly equivalent to a full erasure MD with known CSI. Therefore, we will only consider MDs in the sequel.

We use the following three codes: 1) ALDPC code (127,4,36),

which is a (4572,4067) code with

and

; 2)

a random binary LDPC code (4608,4096) with

and

; and 3) a q-ary

LDPC code (1152,1024)

with

and

[7]. These three codes have

very similar specifications in terms of code length, code rate,

and column and row weights for the parity-check matrix. The

two binary codes are decoded using a standard log-BP algorithm

and the q-ary code using a fast-Fourier-transform (FFT)-based

BP algorithm. The maximum number of iterations is set to 50.

The MRC is modeled either as a Lorentzian or

Lorentzian–Gaussian channel. For the cases when all noise

being considered is electronic AWGN noise, a Lorentzian

channel is used, while for cases when 10% of the noise

considered is electronic AWGN and 90% media noise, which

is modeled as a first-order jitter noise, a Lorentzian–Gaussian

channel is used. In both cases, the normalized channel density

is selected to be

and the RLL code is not implemented

in the simulations.

First let us look at full erasures, for which the CSI is known,

i.e., the LLRs for bits in erasure are set to zero. The erasure

lengths of interest are 0 (no erasure), 128, and 256.

The simulated results of frame error rate (FER) are shown in

Figs. 3 and 4. It was found that the q-ary code performs slightly

better than the two binary codes for erasures of length

,

i.e., the q-ary code has better erasure correction capability. At

FER

, the q-ary code is 0.25 dB better. In all other

cases, there is no obvious difference among them. More impor-

tantly, the ALDPC code when used with a random interleaver

is as good as the random binary code. Recalling the fact that

the complexity of q-ary codes with typical length

is

12 times that of binary codes and a large amount of memory is

needed to store the parity-check matrix of random codes, it turns

out that ALDPC codes are a very good performance–complexity

tradeoff.

Similar performance is observed for

partial erasure

without CSI, as shown in Figs. 5 and 6. Again, the q-ary code is

superior to the two binary codes for long erasures

. At

FER

, the coding gain is about 0.2 dB. It is worth noting

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:49:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TAN AND CRUZ: ARRAY CODES FOR ERASURE CORRECTION IN MRCs

2581

= Fig. 4. Simulation results for full erasures (CSI known) of L 0, 128 and
256 bits on a Lorentzian–Gaussian channel with 10% AWGN and 90% jitter
noise.

Fig. 6. Simulation results for partial erasures of L = 0, 128 and 256 bits with  = 0:35 (CSI unknown) on a Lorentzian–Gaussian channel with 10% AWGN
and 90% jitter noise.

dominant environment. By comparing these codes to random binary and q-ary LDPC codes, it was shown that although the q-ary codes are superior to binary codes for long erasures, the ALDPC codes have similar performance to random codes in all other cases while having much lower complexity.
Based on these results, we conclude that ALDPC codes are a very good tradeoff between performance and complexity and practical considerations may dictate their use in future systems.

Fig. 5. Simulation results for partial erasures with  = 0:35 (CSI unknown) of L = 0, 128 and 256 bits on a Lorentzian channel with AWGN noise.

that the amplitude fading is quite detrimental to the system per-

formance. The FER performance for

partial erasure

is very close to that for full erasure with CSI. This implies that

when the erasure depth

, or more accurately

as reported in [8] using density evolution, the CSI availability is

very helpful to the system performance.

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we investigated the performance of ALDPC codes on MRCs with erasures in AWGN and in a jitter noise

REFERENCES
[1] J. Fan, “Array codes as LDPC codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, 2000, pp. 543–546.
[2] E. Eleftheriou and S. Olcer, “G.gen: LDPC codes for G.dmt.bis and G.lite.bis,” ITU Telecommunication Standardization Sector, Clearwater, FL, Study Group 15, Temp. Doc. CF-060, Jan. 2001.
[3] M. Blaum and R. M. Roth, “New array codes for multiple phased burst correction,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 39, pp. 66–77, Jan. 1993.
[4] M. Yang and W. E. Ryan, “Performance of (quasi-)cyclic LDPC codes in noise bursts on the EPR4 channel,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommunications Conf., vol. 5, 2001, pp. 2961–2965.
[5] T. Mittelholzer, “Efficient encoding and minimum distance bounds of Reed-Solomon-type array codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Informormation Theory, 2002, p. 282.
[6] T. Morita, Y. Sato, and T. Sugawara, “ECC-less LDPC coding for magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 38, pp. 2304–2306, Sept. 2002.
[7] H. Song and J. R. Cruz, “Reduced complexity decoding of q-ary LDPC codes for magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., submitted for publication.
[8] W. Tan and J. R. Cruz, “Analyzing LDPC codes on partial response channels with erasures using density evolution,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 39, pp. 1081–1087, Mar. 2003.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:49:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

