Performance of Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) Code with UMP BP-based 
Algorithm and Quantizer on Rayleigh Fading Channels 
‘Akinori Ohhashi 
Tomoaki Ohtsuki 
Department of Electrical Engineering, Tokyo University of Science 
2641 Yamazaki, Noda, Chiba 278-8510 Japan 
E-mail: oohashi@pc.email.ne.jp, ohtsuki@ee.noda.sut.ac.jp 
Abstract- 
In this paper. we evaluate the error raie perfomance of 
u)PC codes with the BP algonlhm and the LIMP HP-based algorithm on 
Rayleigh fading channels. We also evaluate the effects of quantization with 
two algorithms on Rayleigh fading channels. We show that the LIMP BP- 
based algorithm can achieve a good trade-off betweenerror a t e  performance 
and decoding complexity. We also show that the ermr me performance for 
5-bit or 7-bit quantization is identical to that for no qaantization. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Low-density parity check (LDPC) codes, proposed by Gal- 
lager [ l] in the 1960s. and later rediscovered by MacKay and 
Neal [2] [3], appear as a class of codes that can yield very 
good performance on the binary symmetric channel (BSC) as 
well as on the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) chan- 
nel. LDPC codes can achieve near Shannon limit error perfor- 
mance with practical decoding complexity on a AWGN chan- 
nel [4]-[6], outperforming turbo codes of the same block size 
(interleaver size) and code rate. LDPC codes have certain ad- 
vantages, such as simple descriptions of their code Structure 
and fully parallelizable decoding implementations. 
LDPC codes can be decoded with a soft decision iterative 
decoding algorithm called belief propagation (BP) algorithm 
[7], or sum-product algorithm. The BP algorithm provides 
powerful tool for iterative decoding of LDPC codes. Unfor- 
tunately, the hardware implementation of the BP algorithm is 
limited by its complexity. In [E] the reduced complexity iter- 
ative decoding algorithm based on the BP algorithm has been 
proposed for LDPC codes. This algorithm is referred to as uni- 
formly most powerful (UMP) BP-based algorithm. The UMP 
BP-based algorithm needs only real additions and is univenal 
as it does not need any a priori information about the channel 
state. Therefore, this algorithm has a beneficial effect on com- 
munications where the channel state changes frequently. As 
the result of the performance evaluation on an AWGN chan- 
nel, the UMP BP-based algorithm has been shown to achieve 
very good trade-off between the decoding complexity and the 
error rate performance. 
Recently, LDPC codes have attracted much attention in wire- 
less communications as well. As a decoding algorithm partic- 
ularly in wireless communications, a simpler decoding algo- 
rithm is preferred. The uniformly most powerful (UMP) BP- 
based algorithm has a lower decoding complexity than the BP 
algorithm. In addition, the UMP BP-based algorithm is uni- 
venal as it does not need any a priori information about the 
channel state. However, the performance of LDPC codes with 
the UMP BP-based algorithm in wireless communications has 
not been clarified. Also, in practice, an LDPC decoder must 
operate on finite precision, quantized data. However, the ef- 
fects of quantization on the error rate performance of LDPC 
codes with the UMP BP-based algorithm have not been clari- 
fied. In this paper, we evaluate the error rate performance of 
LDPC codes with the UMP BP-based algorithm on Rayleigh 
fading channels. We also evaluate the effects of quantization 
on the error rate performance of LDPC codes with the BP algo- 
rithm and the UMP BP-based algorithm on a flat Rayleigh fad- 
ing channel and a 2-path Rayleigh fading channel with equal 
power. As the result of these evaluation, We show that the 
UMP BP-based algorithm can achieve a good trade-off be- 
tween error rate performance and decoding complexity. We 
also show that the error rate performance for 5-bit or 7-bit 
quantization is identical to that for no quantization. 
11. LOW DENSITY PARITY CHECK CODES 
A low density parity check (LDPC) code is a linear emr- 
correcting code defined by a parity-check matrix that contains 
mostly zeros and only a small number of ones. An LDPC code 
can be represented by a Factor Graph [141. If the parity-check 
matrix H has N columns and M rows, the codewords consist 
of sequences x of N bits that satisfy a set of M parity checks 
defined by the parity-check equation H x  = 0. The number 
of message bits is K = N - M, and the rate of the code is 
R = KIN. The corresponding Factor Graph consists of N bit 
nodes, M check nodes, and a certain number of edges. Each 
bit node represents a bit of the codeword. Each check node 
represents a parity check of the code. An edge exists between 
a bit no& and a check node if and only if there is a “I” in the 
corresponding entry in the parity-check matrix. 
Regular LDPC codes are those for which the parity-check 
matrix has a uniform column weight j as well as a uniform 
row weight k, where the column (row) weight refers to the 
number of “I” in a column (row). An (N, j ,  k) LDPC code 
has the block length N and the parityxheck matrix with the 
column weight j and the row weight IC. 
1881 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:25:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
111. DECODING 
ALGORITHM 
A. Belief Pmpagation Algorithm 
The BP algorithm iteratively updates two types of proba- 
bility information, q.",, and r,,,,. The probability information 
qz,, and q:," 
are the messages sent from the hit node n to the 
check node m along a connecting edge, indicating the prior 
probability for z, = 0 and z = 1, respectively. Also, the 
probability information rg, and r t ,  are the messages sent 
from the check node m to the bit node n along a connecting 
edge. Roughly speaking, .I,,, 
and rt, are the likelihood in- 
formation for zn = 0 and zn = 1 from the mth parity-check 
equation. Therefore, rkn and rt, can he considered as the 
extrinsic information for the nth bit node from the mth check 
node. The a posterior probability for a bit is calculated by 
gathering all the extrinsic information from the check nodes 
that connect to it. 
We denote the set of check nodes connecting to the hit node 
m as M(n) and the set of bit nodes connecting to the check 
node n as N(m), 
respectively. 
We can write the BP algorithm as follows. 
. 
Initialization: For each m and n, q:,, and q!,,,, are ini- 
. Iterative Professing 
tialized to fi and f:, respectively. 
Step 1: Processing in check nodes (see to Fig. 1) 
Define bq,, 
= q,!,,, 
- qkn and for each m, n and 
z E{O, l},computer:,,. 
72% = 0/2)(1 +(-I)= H hn,) 
(1) 
"'€N("I)\" 
Step 2: Professing in hit nodes (see to Fig. 2) 
For each m, n and z €10, I}, update q;,,. 
4:,., = a " d :  
II 
r:,,* 
(2) 
m'EM(n)\n% 
where am" is chosen such that q:,, + q:,,, = 1. For 
eachnandz E{O. I},updateqi andq; usedforcheck 
n~ 
n2 
Fig. 2. Processing in check nodes 
Stop of Step 3. 
4: = 0.f: 
rL, 
(3) 
-EM(") 
where a, is chosen such that q: + qf, = 1. 
First, create 2 = [?"I 
such that ?" = 1 if q!, > 0.5 
and en = 0 if q!, < 0.5. Next, check x = [e,,]. 
1. If €I? 
= 0 , the algorithm halts and x is consid- 
2. Otherwise, the algorithm repeats from Step I .  
3. If the algorithm reaches the maximum number of 
Step 3: Check Stop Criterion 
ered as a valid decoding result. 
iterations, the algorithm is terminated. 
B. UMP BP-based Algorirhm 
In the BP algorithm the calculation of rmn requires a lot of 
computations. Some approximation can be made to simplify 
the BP algorithm. In the UMP BP-based algorithm, the com- 
putations are reduced and no a priori information about the 
channel is required 181. Also, the UMP BP-based algorithm 
can he performed efficiently by using a log-likelihood ratios 
(LLRs) as the likelihood information for bits. 
We can write the UMP BP-based algorithm as follows. 
. 
Initialization: For all n and m E M(n). imn 
and e, 
are initialized to the hard decisions of the recieved signal 
yn. Also, we set ?:, = in, IC,/ 
= lynl , and for each 
m E M(n), lYmnl = 1Y"l. 
. 
Iterative Processing 
Step 1: Processing in check nodes 
For all n and each m E M (n), 
define umn 
umn = z:, @ 
in,,, [mod21 
(4) 
"'EN("L)\n 
where A a2 B represents the modulo-2 sum. For each 
m and n, 
I,,, = (-1)r- 
min 
l ~ ~ , ~ l  
(5) 
n' EN(,,~)\,, 
1882 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:25:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
TABLE I 
DECOD~NGCOMPLEX~TY 
FOR AN [ N . ; .  2;) LPPCCODE 
BP Algorithm 
3 N j  + N 
I 
additions 
NI + N 
I 
dwisions 
"I 
11Nj - 9 N  
I mulrip- 
UMP BP-based Algorithm 
Step 2: Check Node tn Bit Node 
For each 71 and each 711 t M(n), update zn,,, by 
Z"," = ICs/ + 1 I,",,. 
(6) 
".'EM(")\", 
For each n, update 2, by 
z,,=lc,,/+ 
I,,,," 
(7) 
"L'EM(4 
Step 3: Check Stop Criterion 
First, create 2 = [*,%I such that 2, = 2; if z, > 0 
and 2, = ?;, 
fB 1 if t, < 0. Also, form E M(m), 
x = [?,,,,,] 
such that create ?+,,n = 2FZ if znln > 0 and 
2,,,n=2F,631ifzn,.<0. 
1. If H? = 0 , the algorithm halts and x is considered 
as a valid decoding result. 
2. Otherwise, for each m E M(n), set /ym,./ = Izrrin/ 
and the algorithm repeats from Step I. 
3. If the algorithm reaches the maximum number of 
iterations, the algorithm is terminated. 
Iv. DECODING COMPLEXITY 
The decoding complexities associated with the BP and the 
UMP BP-based decoding algorithms are summarized in TA- 
BLE 1. In this TABLE, all the operations associated with 
modulo-2 arithmetic have been neglected as conventionally 
done. Based on TABLE I, for a code rate 112 (N. 
j, 2j) 
LDPC code, the total complexity associated with one itera- 
tion of the BP decoding algorithm consists of 3Nj + 1 ad- 
ditions, l l N j  - QN multiplications, and N j  + hT divisions. 
On the other hand, the total complexity associated with one 
iteration of the UMP BP-based decoding algorithm consists of 
NjZ(8j - 7 + [log, Zj]) additions. Consequently, it follows 
that the UMP BP-based decoding algorithm requires additions 
only and, thus, achieves significant computation savings with 
respect to the BP algorithm. 
v. QUANTIZATION 
AND CLIPPING 
In the hardware implementations, the received signals are 
quantized and the LDPC decoder must operate on finite preci- 
sion, quantized data. Before quantizing the received signals, it 
is necessary to clip them. Clipping is defined by the eq. (8). 
where y,, is the received signal, A,,,, 
and -A.,,,, 
are the clip- 
ping thresholds. The clipped received signals are uniformly 
quantized at the quantizer. Fig. 3 shows the input-output char- 
acteristic of a uniform quantizer of the midrise type for 3-bit 
quantization where y,, is the received signal (after clipping) 
and &, is the quantized received signal. The received signal 
yn is quantized to Z3 level (-40, - 3 0 ,  - 2 0 ,  -D, 0, 2 0 ,  
30.40) between -A,,,, 
and Amas. The quantized received 
signals are used as input to the iterative decoder. 
Fig. 3. 
Example of a 3-bit uniform quamiralion in the clipping level 
I-&==. 
Amazl 
VI. SlMULATlON RESULTS 
In the following, simulation results are presented. In Figs. 
4, 5, 6, and 7, the simulation has been conducted to compare 
the bit error rate (BER) of the BP algorithm with that of the 
UMP BP-based algorithm. In Table 11, the simulation param 
eters are presented. 
Figs. 4 and 5 depict the BER of LDF'C code with the BP algo- 
rithm and the UMP BP-based algorithm on a flat Rayleigh fad- 
ing channel and a 2-path Rayleigh fading channel with equal 
power, respectively. When the maximum number of iterations 
for two algorithms is 50, the BER of the UMP BP-based algo- 
rithm is almost identical to that of the BP algorithm on both 
channels. Also, when the maximum number of iterations for 
each algorithm is the smallest value for which the near con- 
vergence performance is achieved (200 for the BP algorithm 
and 50 for the UMP BP-based algorithm) on both channels, at 
the BER of 
the BER of the lJMP BP-based algorithm is 
about 0.35 dB and 0.40 dB worse than that of the BP algorith- 
mon on a flat Rayleigh fading channel and a 2-path Rayleigh 
1883 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:25:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Check Cddes under Measage-Passing Decoding," IEEE Tmm. Infons 
Theory. vol. 47.pp. 599-618, Feb. 2WI. 
T. Richardson. A. Shokmllahi and R. Urbanke. "Design of Capacity- 
Approaching Irregular Low-Density Parity Check Cddes: IEEE T m m  
l!@m Thuoty.vol. 47. pp.619437. Feb. 2001. 
I. Pearl. Pmbobilisiic Rrmoning in Imlligrnr Syslum: NurWork of 
Pluurihk lnfermce. San Maleo. C A  Morgan K a u f m n .  1988. 
M. Fossorier. M. Mihljevic a d  H. lmai ''Reduced Complexity Iter- 
ative Decodingd Low Density Parity Check Codes b a d  on Belief 
Propagagation." IEEE Trmr on Cotmnua. vol. 47. pp. 673480. May 
1999. 
M. Chiani. A. C o l i  and A. Ventura. "Evaluation of LowDensily 
Parity-Check Coder over Blmk Fading Channels." ICC Z!XW. vol. 3. 
pp. 1183-1187.JuneZOW. 
H. Jilei. P. H. Siege1 and L. B. Milstein. "Performance Analysis and 
Code Oplimimlion of Low-Density Parily-Check Codes on Rayleigh 
Fading Channels:' IEEE. hm. 
vol. 19. pp. 926934. May 2WI. 
II I 1  H. Futaki and T. Ohauki. "Low-Density Parity-Check (LDFC) Coded 
OFDM Systems." U C Z W I  Foll. vol. I. pp. 82-86. Feb. 2001. 
[I21 
H. Futaki and T. Ohtsuki. "Performance of Low-Densiiy Padty-Check 
(LDFC) Coded OFDM Systems? ICCZlWZ. 
1131 H. Futaki and T. Ohtsuki. "Low-Density Pwily-Check coded OFDM 
Systems with M-PSK:' IEEE VTC2lWZ spring. 
1141 F. R. Kschischang. B. 1. Frey and H. A. Loeliger. "Faclor Graphs and 
the Sum-Product Algorighm." IEEE Tmnr Infonn. Tbeory. vol. 47. 
no. 2. pp. 498-519. Feb. 2001. 
P. Dnl. C. E. Batomley. and T. Cmf1:Jakes 
Fading Model Revisited." 
IEEEIrcrmn. La.. vol. 29. no. 13. pp. 1162-1163.June 1993. 
TABLE II 
SIMULATION PARAMETER 
161 
171 
181 
19) 
1101 
fading channel with equal power, respectively. Therefore, the 
UMP BP-based algorithm achieves a good trade-off between 
the decoding complexity and the error performance on a flat 
Rayleigh fading channel and a 2-path Rayleigh fading channel 
with equal power. 
~
i
~
~
,
 
6 and 
depict the BER of LDx 
code with the BP 
algorithm and the UMP BP-based algorithm With and with- 
out quantizer on a flat Rayleigh fading channel and a 2-path 
Rayleigh fading channel with equal power, respectively. The 
1151 
BERs for 5-hit and 7-hit quantization are almost identical to 
that for no quantization in two algorithms on a flat Rayleigh 
fading channel and a 2-path Rayleigh fading ChaMel with 
equal power, respectively. 
VII. CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, we have evaluated the BER of LDPC codes 
with the BP algorithm and the UMP BP-based algorithm on 
a flat Rayleigh fading channel and a 2-path Rayleigh fading 
channel with equal power. We have also evaluated the effects 
of quantization on the error rate performance of LDFC codes 
with the BP algorithm and the UMP BP-based algorithm on 
a flat Rayleigh fading channel and a 2-path Rayleigh fading 
channel with equal power. We showed that the UMP BP-based 
algorithm can achieve a good trade-off between the error rate 
performance and the decoding complexity on these Rayleigh 
fading channels. Therefore, the UMP BP-based algorithm is 
expected to he applied to wireless communications. We also 
showed that in the BP and the UMP BP-based algorithms, the 
error rate performances for 5-hit or 7-hit quantization are iden- 
tical to that for no quantization on these channels. 
Ill 
I21 
131 
141 
I51 
REFERENCES 
R. C. Gallager. bw.Dem;ly PorityChecP Codes. Cambridge. M A  M. 
1. T. Pres, l%3. 
D. 
J. C. MacKay, " G d  Error-Correcting C d e s  Bawd on Very Spane 
Malrices," IEEE Tmm. Infonn Tbhrory. vol. 45. pp. 339-431. Mar. 
1999. 
D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal. "Near Shannon Limit Performance 
of Low Density Parity Cheek Codes.'' Ekrmn. h r .  vol. 32. pp. 1645- 
1646. Aug. 1996. 
S. Y. Chung. G.D. Forney. Jr.. T. J. Richardson. R. L. Urbanke, "On 
the Design of Low Density Padty Chek Codes within 0.KMSdB of the 
Shamon Limi1:'IEEECCorunun. Len.. vol. 5. pp. 5860. Feb. 2001. 
T. Richardson and R. UrbanLe. 'The Capacity of Low-Density Pady 
1884 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:25:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
\: 
, 
. . .  
. . .. 
,. 
IO' 
I 
.
,
 
-. -e.. 
. 
0 
5 
IO 
IS 
EbNO (dB) 
BP 3-bit quantimtion (iter 200) 
IO" 
BP 5-bit quantization (itcr200) 
. .-A-- BP no quantization (iter 200) 
-e- 
~ UMP BP 3-bit quantization (itcr 50) 
- -X. . UMP BP 5-bit quantization(i1er SO) 
~A~ 
~ LIMP BP no quantization (iter SO) 
IS 
104 
0 
5 
IO 
E b N O  (dB) 
Fig. 4. BER versus EdNo dB for !he (504.252) LDPC code with BP and 
~ i g .  
6. BER venw &/NO dB forthe (504.252) LDPC code with BP algo- 
rithm and LIMP BP-baed algorithms with and without quaaizer on a Rat 
Rayleigh fading channel. 
UMP BP-based algonlhm on a flat Rayleigh fading channel. 
I 
\. 
I 
z I 
c 
~~ 
~ .......... 
BP (iter 200) 
Fig. 7. BER Venus LGblNo dB tor the (5W%.252) LLJI'L cWe wlth B Y  al- 
and UMP BP-based algorithms on a 2-path Rayleigh fading channel with 
equal average power. 
gorithm md UMP BP.based 
2-path Rayleigh fading channel with equal average power. 
without 
on a 
1885 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:25:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
