Low-Density Parity-Check Decoder Architecture for High Throughput Optical Fiber Channels

Anand Selvarathinam, Euncheol Kim, Gwan Choi Department of Electrical Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station
{manivann, eckim, gchoi} @ee.tamu.edu

Abstract
A requirement–specific decoder design for forward errorcorrection in 2 Gbps optical fiber communication system is presented. Low-density parity-check codes are used to achieve high bit error rate performance. Several novel error- decoding architectures are proposed and their design configurations explored to identify optimal cost/performance design. Serial, parallel and scalable architectures are studied. The result is a scaleable architecture that consists of 1.3 million CMOS gates running at 295 Mhz and it achieves a throughput of 2.51 Gbps.
Keywords
LDPC Decoder, Serial Architecture, Parallel Architecture, Fibre Channel, VLSI, Hardware Scaling
1. Introduction
This paper presents a design study of an LDPC decoder targeted for an optical fiber channel that is attached to RAID servers. This work is motivated by the need for 2 Gbps optical fiber-channel [1] products employed for a storage area network (SAN) protocol. A communication medium, Q Logic Corp.'s SANbox2 16-port 2G-bps Fiber Channel switch achieves performance in Gbps range. A key component in SAN is Hitachi Data Systems Corp.'s Thunder 9200 Fiber Channel RAID unit, which provides the backbone for 2G-bps Fiber Channel RAID controllers.
First generation Fiber Channel based on standard document of FC-PH[2] can transfer information at data rate of 1Gbps. And this rate is increased up to 2Gbps ~ 4Gbps for the second generation Fiber Channel which is described in FC-PH-2[3] standards document. With increased data rate and its flexibility in adapting Upper Level Protocols, Fiber Channel is making significant impact on various data communication applications. One notable success is Fiber channel incorporated with storage devices, using SCSI as an upper layer protocol. Compared with traditional SCSI, the benefits of mapping the SCSI command set onto Fiber Channel include faster speed, increased number of devices that can be connected, larger distance allowed between devices.

The Fiber Channel specification requires a BER (bit error rate) performance of less than 10-12. To achieve this requirement, Fiber Channel uses simple encoding to detect error at physical layer. To recover from transmission failures, upper layers are burdened with managing retransmission of data for recovery. The recovery process thus slows down the effective data transmission rate and/or limits the connection distance between communication nodes.
Our approach uses Forward error correction (FEC) based on LDPC codes for error management in fiber channel. In FEC [4][5], source data is encoded and transmitted through the channel. At the receiving end, the decoder corrects the errors based on the properties of the encoded data. However effective FEC may be, attaining a low BER from the decoder is a difficult challenge for low power transmission of messages. The code must have a highly efficient error correction mechanism to provide low error rates.
Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes, a class of linear block codes [6], is found to provide, theoretically, very low bit error rates. LDPC codes have been shown to provide near Shannon-limit error correction performance [7]. The fact that LDPC codes can be decoded using an iterative Log-MAP algorithm makes it especially attractable for highspeed fiber channel. Log-MAP algorithm is amenable to hardware implementation due to its low complexity and the ability to simplify computations to simple digital logic. Recently, a number of LDPC decoder architectures have been explored [8],[9],[10],[11],[12],[13].
Key issues that govern architectural decisions are latency, bit error rate (BER) performance, and hardware resource availability. A serial architecture that decodes one bit at a time is presented in [8]. This architecture processes a bit per clock cycle. Therefore, the latency is proportional to the code block length N. The serial decoder processes one bit node in each clock cycle, and the bit-node processing unit is repeatedly used to process all other bits to minimize hardware resources. Serial architectures, though cost effective and practical for a hardware implementation, suffer from large decoder latency. In contrast, a parallel decoder design can minimize the decoding latency. However a rigid parallel architecture such as that proposed in [13] requires excessively large amount of hardware resources. A desirable

Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Computer Design (ICCD’03) 1063-6404/03 $ 17.00A©uth2o0r0iz3edIElicEeEnsed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:39:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

architecture would be a compromise design that optimally makes tradeoff between the two conflicting design attributes: low latency and high hardware complexity.
We have developed a scalable architecture that makes judicious trade off between the attributes of the above two architectures. Some of its key features are: a) Hardware Scaling- Logic blocks in the decoder iteration
stage are scaled by the parallelization factor M.
b) M-Way Memory- To process bits in parallel, the memory is first partitioned to smaller blocks. Novel minimum-structure memory is developed that allows multiple and concurrent read/write accesses as necessary to support parallelism.
c) Switch Logic- To route the information to and from the appropriate memory slices.
d) Parallelizing Constraints- Additional constraints are introduced to the code construction to make possible memory partitioning without degrading BER performance.
The scalable architecture reduces the decoder latency by a factor of M over the serial architecture that has a delay of N clock cycles.
Latency = Block Length/ Parallelization Factor = N/M
Where N is in the order of thousands of bits and M ranges from 2 to N/6 for a rate ½ code. The typical value of N is 1000 [14]. The trade off of this speedup is increased hardware cost. Thus parallelization factor is carefully determined to suit hardware resource availability and application requirements.
Besides the low latency and efficient hardware implementation, acceptable level of BER performance should be maintained. Here, we limit our attention to regular LDPC codes and the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. It is well known that (3,k) regular LDPC codes provide good BER performance for moderate lengths if the associated parity check matrix H is randomly constructed.
We explore a variety configuration of the three different architectural approaches (serial, parallel and scalable) to determine the most suitable architecture for the target application. For each architectural approach, several design parameters, e.g. level of scaling in scalable architecture approach, are varied and design configuration that projects best combination of complexity and decoding latency is chosen. These circuits are carefully synthesized and analyzed. Detailed description of the design issues, implementation and analysis are presented in the following sections. The design and simulation results point that the serial architecture has high latency and hence cannot support the high throughput required for the target application. The parallel architecture provides the required throughput, but has an unacceptably larger gate count. A particular

configuration of the scalable architecture is determined to be the most optimal for the target Fiber channel application, providing a low latency with a moderate hardware complexity. The resulting circuit is a 1.3 million-gate design that suffices the throughput of the application.
The next section describes the background material on LDPC decoding. Section 3 presents the serial LDPC architecture. Section 4 presents the parallel architecture, along with the implementation issues. Section 5 presents a detailed description of the scalable architecture. Section 6 presents performance and hardware complexity for the various architectures. Section 7 concludes the paper.

2. Decoding of LDPC codes

The decoder for LDPC codes is a soft-input iterative message passing decoder that passes extrinsic information in the form of log likelihood ratios (LLR).

L c i ri

§ Pr lo g ¨¨© P r

ci ci

1 ri 0 ri

· ¸¸¹

Where ci is the transmitted bit and ri is the received bit. A log–MAP iterative algorithm is implemented that
uses the logarithmic summation of hyperbolic tangents of the LLRs (of bit nodes) to implement the parity check constraint for each row. Each parity check thus evaluated provides update for the individual bit nodes by excluding the bit node’s LLR information from the parity check.
The update from the check node is then used to update the bit nodes by adding the updates from the channel and the updates from other parity checks. The updated bit node LLRs are passed to the next iteration stage.
The LDPC decoder structure is shown in Figure 1. The decoder has the following blocks: Bit Clock, Counter, Initializer, H Matrix ROM, Iteration Stage and Decision Logic. The bit clock is the rate at which the all the components of the decoder are clocked. Counter is used to synchronize the decoding of the bits. Counter generates the address for the H matrix. The H matrix ROM stores the positions of 1’s in the parity check matrix. The H matrix provides the address of three memory locations (corresponding to three parity-check constraints) that

Figure 1. Overall decoder structure
Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Computer Design (ICCD’03) 1063-6404/03 $ 17.00A©uth2o0r0iz3edIElicEeEnsed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:39:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

correspond to the incoming bit node. The initializer finds the LLR values through table look up for the received signal from the channel that has been corrupted by additive white Gaussian noise. Each iteration stage takes LLR values from previous stage and generates LLR values for the next stage.
3. Serial architecture
Architectures differ in the implementation of the iteration logic stage. The iteration logic stage for a serial architecture [8] is shown in Figure 2. The architecture processes all the three edges of bit nodes in parallel. The inputs to the iteration logic stage are the LLRs of the incoming bits. L0, L1 and L2 represent the LLRs of the three edges of a bit node. LL represents the output of the initializer and is the estimate from the channel.
Ȍ Circuit (Ȍ (x) = log (tanH (|x/2|))) operates on the incoming LLR values of each bit. The parity check is summation of Ȍ values of the bit nodes connected to the check node. The parity checks that correspond to the three edges of the incoming bit node are only updated in the current clock cycle. The parity check is updated by reading the previous sum from memory and added to the incoming bit node LLR and stored back in the same memory location (check node). The H matrix generates address lines that provide the exact location of the parity checks within the memory block that edges of the incoming bit node

participate. The Ȍ values are stored in a FIFO while the parity
check constraints are computed, as the values are required for the subtraction operation. Subtraction is performed to obtain the bit node update once the N-K parity checks are computed. The parity check update for a given bit node edge is excluded and the summation of all the remaining updates from parity checks (for those edges) along with the channel estimate (LL) is sent for the given bit node edge to the next iteration stage. For a BPSK signal, Decision logic stage determines the sign bit to decode the message. Decision logic stage uses the sum of the check to bit messages (Leq0, Leq1, Leq2 in Figure. 2) and LL to make a hard decision on the bit. The architecture uses 4 bits to represent the LLR and 20 iterations in the decoding algorithm [14].
4. Parallel Architecture
LDPC decoder can also be implemented as a parallel decoder. Parallel architecture processes all the bit nodes simultaneously as shown in figure 3.

Figure 2. Serial architecture – iteration stage

Figure 3. Parallel architecture – iteration stage
The bit node and check node updates are performed in one clock cycle. All the bit nodes and their LLRs are stored in registers. In figure 3, three registers are used to store the three different updates for each bit, namely LL0, LL1 and LL2. Thus the number of registers is 3*N, where N is the block length. In an iteration, the LLR values in the registers are transformed in the Ȍ domain. Ȍ Circuits are needed for all the three lines of each bit node and hence 3*N circuits are required. At the check node, Ȍ transformed LLR values are added for all bit nodes. Hence, subtraction is required to obtain the update for an individual bit node. After subtraction, Ȍ-1 circuit is required to transform back to the LLR domain and again 3*N circuits are required. A threeinput adder shown in figure 3 performs the final bit node update for each edge of bit node. Ȍ--1 computation, along

Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Computer Design (ICCD’03) 1063-6404/03 $ 17.00A©uth2o0r0iz3edIElicEeEnsed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:39:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

with the processing of Lextrinsic values, is thus performed in the same clock cycle for all bit nodes. Hence, the iteration stage processes all the bit nodes in one clock cycle. This restricts the clock speed of the design, but the enhancement due to parallel processing is significant over the clock speed reduction resulting in a very high throughput. The high throughput is achieved at the expense of high hardware resource requirements.
5. Scalable architecture
Let us look at the effect of parallelization on the iteration logic stage.
Combinational logic units to support a bit-slice operation on LLR include adder, subtractor and Ȍ circuit. These units are scaled up by a factor of M for parallel processing as shown in figure 4. The FIFO width is also increased by factor of M to store the LLR information for M
Figure 4. Combinational logic scaling bit nodes. The LLRs corresponding to all the bit nodes processed in parallel are fed simultaneously to the next iteration stage. Each group of parity check equations is a separate block of memory that can independently read and write in every clock cycle. 3*M memory blocks are required to process all the three edges of M consecutive bit nodes. Thus memory [15] is partitioned by a factor of M. Maximum parallelization is achieved when each such memory block stores information about a single parity check constraint. Additional switch logic is introduced to route the LLR information to the appropriate memory blocks. Data readout

from the memory passes through a second switch logic to restore the original bit ordering of LLR information.
Parallelization is achieved by increasing the bus width and scaling the combinational logic. The rest of the decoder, which are the initializer and decision logic, is not affected. Hence the parallelization implementation does not require excessive amount of hardware resources and is roughly one million gates. Parallelization also increases delay overhead due to switch logic. Timing analysis of the scalable architecture (M=500) yielded an approximate clock speed of 200 Mhz for an ASIC implementation using TSMC 0.35micron technology. The throughput of the decoder is calculated as given: # of bits processed per clock cycle M = 500 Throughput =M * ClockSpeed / No of stages = 5 Gbps
6. Cost and performance analysis
The following two tables describe the hardware requirements and achievable throughput with the different types of architectures. The gate count and throughput are directly proportional to the number of instantiations of the iteration stage. In general, serial architectures have high latency but less hardware resource requirements. The serial architecture has an implementation complexity of about one million gates per iteration stage. With a maximum clock speed of 500 Mhz on an ASIC implementation, the throughput achievable is 25 Mbps. The parallel architecture has the highest throughput possible because of processing the entire code block in one clock cycle. We have assumed that only one iteration stage is instantiated in hardware and used repetitively for 20 stages of decoding. With a block length of 2040 and a clock speed of 100 Mhz, a very high throughput of 10 Gbps is achieved through the parallel design. We have explored a wide variety of architectures: serial, scalable and parallel architectures, and for different instantiations of these architectures. Table 1 is a particular example of a single instantiation of iteration stage and compares the hardware complexity of the different architectures. The hardware complexity values are obtained from the synthesized netlist. Table 2 shows the corresponding clock speed and throughput of those designs for the single instantiation of the iteration stage. The number of iteration stages is constrained by hardware resource limitations. A large number of iterations ensure reliable decoding while lesser iterations result in unreliable messages. For a rate ½ code, it is found that BER performance improvement is insignificant beyond 20 iterations. Therefore, 20 iterations are used for different architectures.

Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Computer Design (ICCD’03) 1063-6404/03 $ 17.00A©uth2o0r0iz3edIElicEeEnsed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:39:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Table 1. Hardware complexity of architectures

Architecture Types
Serial architectures Scalable architecture
M = 20

Gate Count 819440 872450

M = 40

928250

M = 80

1039850

M = 170

1290950

M = 340 Parallel architecture

1765250 2693450

20 iterations of LDPC decoding can be implemented in hardware with different configurations. With one hardware instantiation of the iteration stage, the same stage is used repeatedly for subsequent iterations of a code word. This reduces the throughput of the decoder. By using multiple instantiations, the throughput can be improved at the cost of hardware complexity. Hence, multiple instantiations of iteration stages can be used for decoding ranging from 1 to 20. Hence, architectures can have different possible number of hardware instantiations but are restricted to factors of 20. This is because pipelined designs work without any synchronization problem if integer number of repetitions is used to achieve 20 iterations.

Table 2. Clock speed and throughput of architectures

Architecture Types
Serial architecture Scalable architecture 20 40 80 170 340 Parallel architecture

Maximum Maximum

Clock Rate Throughput

(Mhz)

(Gbps)

500
434.8 363.6 303 295.8 271.7 100

0.025
0.434 0.725 1.21 2.51 4.62 10.2

Hence six different configurations are possible for each architecture with instantiations of 1,2,4,5,10 and 20. Since the number of hardware instantiations is different for each configuration, the throughput also differs due to the difference in the number of pipelined stages. The hardware complexity also scales with the number of instantiations. Each configuration has a unique throughput and hardware complexity. Therefore, all architectures are represented as a XY plot with hardware complexity along the Y-axis and throughput along the X-axis as shown in figure 5.

2
10

101 noslili m ni eagst of # 100

10-1 10-2

10-1

100

101

throughput in Gbps

serial M=20 M=40 M=80 M=170 M=340 fully parallel

102

103

Figure 5. Gate Count Vs throughput

In figure 5, serial architecture, for example, has six different possible implementations. Six different plots can be had on the graph and are shown by the blue curve joining those points. The leftmost plot has the lowest gate count and throughput. The complexity-throughput curves for serial, parallel and scalable architectures (scalable architecture has different M values, the parallelization factor) are hence shown. The target specification requires a throughput of 2 Gbps and shown by the vertical bold line in figure 5. The design configuration on the right side of this line has a throughput greater than 2 Gbps. The data in figure 5 show that the scalable architecture with M=170 is the least complex design (# of gate counts) that meets the specification. M=80 architecture has the next lowest hardware complexity compared to M=20 and M=40 architectures to achieve a throughput of 2 Gbps.

7. Conclusion

Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Computer Design (ICCD’03) 1063-6404/03 $ 17.00A©uth2o0r0iz3edIElicEeEnsed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:39:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

A design study to determine the implementation of error correction circuit using LDPC codes for the 2 Gbps optical fiber communication system is presented in this paper. We have explored different architectures that have a range of decoding latencies and hardware requirements for an LDPC decoder. Existing serial architectures have simple hardware structures but unable to support the high throughput requirements of the communication system. Parallel architectures have high throughput but have a complex design. Scalable architecture makes a fair trade off between the two extremes and provides a variety of configurations to choose from. A particular configuration of the scalable architecture, M=170, has the least hardware complexity and achieves the desired throughput.
8. References
1. QLogic’s SANbox 2 switch article available at http://www.eweek.com/article2/0,3959,45974,00.asp, October 22, 2001.
2. Fibre Channel – Physical and Signaling Interface (FCPH), ANSI X3.230, Rev 4.3, 1994.
3. Fibre Channel – 2nd Generation Physical Interface (FC-PH2), ANSI X3.297, Rev 7.4, 1997.
4. H. Kidorf, N. Ramanujam, I. Hayee, J. X. Cai, B. Pedersen, A. Puc and C. Rivers, “Performance Improvement using Forward Error Correction Codes”, Proc. Optical Fiber Communication conference, vol. 3, pp. ThS3-1 - ThS3-3, 2000.
5. O. A. Sab and V. Lemaire, “FEC techniques in submarine transmission systems”, Proc. of Optical fiber communication conference, vol. 3, pp. 280-282, 2000.

6. R.G. Gallager, “Low-Density Parity-Check Codes”, IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp.21-28, Jan 1962.
7. D.J.C. Mackay and R.M. Neal, “Near Shannon Limit Performance of Low Density Parity Check Codes”, Electron. Lett., vol.32(18), pp. 1645-1646, Aug 1996.
8. S. Sivakumar, “VLSI Implementation Of Encoder And Decoder For Low-Density Parity-check codes”, Master’s Thesis, Texas A & M University, December 2001.
9. E. Yeo, P. Pakzad, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam, “High Throughput Low-Density Parity-Check Decoder Architectures”, Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM’2001, Vol.5, pp. 3019-3024, 2001.
10. T. Zhang et al, “On Finite Precision Implementation of Low Density Parity Check Codes Decoder”, Proc. IEEE ISCAS’2001, Vol. 4, pp. 202 –205, 2001.
11. C.Howland, H.Blanksby, “Parallel Decoding Architectures for Low Density Parity Check Codes”, Proc. IEEE ISCAS’2001, Vol. 4, pp. 742 –745, 2001.
12. W.K Leung, W.L Lee, A. Wu, L. Ping, “Efficient implementation technique of LDPC decoder” Electron. Lett.., vol. 37(20), pp. 1231-1232, Sept 2001.
13. T. Zhang, K.K Parhi, ”VLSI implementation-oriented (3, k)-regular low-density parity-check codes”, Proc. of 2001 IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems, pp. 25-36, 2001.
14. Flarion Technologies, Inc, “Vector-Low Density Parity-Check Coding solution Data Sheet”, 2001 at “www.flarion.com/products/ldpc_data_sheet.pdf”.
15. A. Selvarathinam, G. Choi, K. Narayanan, A. Prabhakar, E. Kim, “A Massively Scaleable Decoder Architecture for Low-Density Parity-Check Codes”, Proc. IEEE ISCAS’ 2003, Vol. 2, pp. 61-64, 2003.

Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Computer Design (ICCD’03) 1063-6404/03 $ 17.00A©uth2o0r0iz3edIElicEeEnsed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:39:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

