168

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 7, NO. 4, APRIL 2003

Optimized Low-Density Parity-Check Codes for Partial Response Channels
Nedeljko Varnica and Aleksandar Kavcˇic´

Abstract—We optimize irregular low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes to closely approach the independent and uniformly distributed (i.u.d.) capacities of partial response channels. In our approach, we use the degree sequences optimization method for memoryless channels proposed by Richardson, Shokrollahi, and Urbanke and appropriately modify it for channels with memory. With this optimization algorithm we construct codes whose noise tolerance thresholds are within 0.15 dB of the i.u.d. channel capacities. Our simulation results show that irregular LDPC codes with block lengths 106 bits yield bit error rates 10 6 at signal-to-noise ratios 0.22 dB away from the channel capacities.
Index Terms—Density evolution, independent and uniformly distributed (i.u.d.) channel capacity, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, partial response channels.
I. INTRODUCTION
S INCE the invention of turbo codes [1] and the rediscovery of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [2] (invented by Gallager [3]) the Shannon limits for several memoryless channel models have been practically achieved. The capacity achieving irregular LDPC codes are based on the optimization of the edge degree sequences in bipartite LDPC code graphs. Luby et al. originally proposed this optimization for the binary erasure channels [4]. This concept was broadened to a variety of channels, including the memoryless binary-input additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels [5], [6]. However, the capacity achieving code constructions for partial response channels remained an open problem.
The i.u.d. capacity is the information rate when the channel inputs are independent and uniformly distributed (i.u.d.). From [7] we know that random linear codes can achieve the i.u.d. capacities of the partial response channels. However, it is not clear whether LDPC codes can approach these capacities. In this letter we construct irregular LDPC codes with noise tolerance thresholds [5] within 0.15 dB of the i.u.d. channel capacities. Our strategy is to optimize the LDPC code degree sequences to achieve higher noise tolerance thresholds. The optimization is performed using the density evolution algorithm for channels with intersymbol interference (ISI) memory [7].
The described optimization yields codes that exhibit a performance very near the i.u.d. capacity. Our simulation results for codes of length 10 bits show that bit error rates 10 are
Manuscript received July 26, 2002. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was Prof. M. Fossorier. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCR0118701.
The authors are with the Division of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138 USA (e-mail: varnica@hrl.harvard.edu; kavcic@hrl.harvard.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2003.810000

achieved at signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs) less than 0.22 dB away from the i.u.d. capacity limits.
II. BACKGROUND A partial response channel is a binary-input/continuous-output AWGN channel with ISI memory. The probabilistic law of this channel is captured by
(1)

where is the length of the channel memory.

represents a zero-mean white Gaussian

random vector with

. denotes the antipodal

binary input vector and

is the discrete-time contin-

uous-valued output vector. The channel memory is captured by

the vector of coefficients

, often given in

polynomial form

.

The i.u.d. capacity of a binary-input channel is defined as

(2)

i.e., it is the information rate when the input sequence is

i.u.d. A numerical method for computing this capacity for chan-

nels with ISI memory has recently been proposed in [8] and [9].

This capacity represents an upper bound on the achievable rates

(such that the probability of error can be made arbitrarily small)

for random linear binary codes for channels with memory [7].

Our goal is to design LDPC codes that approach this ca-

pacity. In the sequel we use the normal code/channel graph

from [7]. Following [4] we define an ensemble of LDPC codes

with the variable and check degree vectors (sequences)

and

, where denotes the frac-

tion of edges connected to variable nodes of degree , and

denotes the fraction of edges connected to check nodes of de-

gree . Here and denote the maximum variable and the

check node degree, respectively. The code rate equals

. Using density evolution [5], [7],

given the degree sequences

, we can evaluate the noise

tolerance threshold ,i.e., the maximal noise standard devia-

tion for which the code will be decoded with zero probability of

error.

We denote the average probability density function (pdf) of

the log-likelihood-ratio message emitted from a check node to

a variable node after iterations by . The average pdf of the message emitted from a variable node to a check node is de-

noted by . The average pdf obtained by evolving the density

through the channel trellis is denoted by . Denoting the

1089-7798/03$17.00 © 2003 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:47:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VARNICA AND KAVCˇ IC´ : OPTIMIZED LDPC CODES FOR PARTIAL RESPONSE CHANNELS

169

convolution operator by and the convolution of , we have [7]

pdf’s by (3)

(4)

Here

is the symbolic notation for the average

message density obtained by evolving the density through a check node of degree (see [7]). The average probability that a variable-to-check edge carries an erroneous message after iterations equals

3. update according to (4).

4. compute and according to (6) and (7).

5. if

update through the channel trellis;

otherwise

.

6. increment and repeat steps 2–6 until reaches a prede-

fined number of iterations .

Using Algorithm I we perform the optimization in a very

similar fashion to [5]. That is, given an initial degree sequence

we optimize the degree sequence by minimizing the approx-

imate number of iterations

needed to take the probability

of error from down to , where

Denoting an arbitrarily chosen small constant by we conduct the minimization under the following constraints [5], [6]

(5)

(9)

Here we use

as short notation for .

III. OPTIMIZATION

We slightly change the scenario of density evolution de-

scribed in [7]. Instead of running the BCJR algorithm after

each variable-to-check density update1 , we apply the BCJR

once, then the variable-to-check density update

times,

then the BCJR once, and so on.

Following [5] we rewrite the probability of error (5) as

(6)

where represents the probability of error after iterations

when is used for the first

iterations and the singleton

is used in the th iteration, i.e.

(7)

When iterations are performed with parameters

and

in the th iteration is changed to , the probability of error

equals

(8)

Multiplicative factors in (6) and (8) are identical because
we do not update through the channel trellis after is changed to .
The density evolution algorithm with calculations of quantities relevant for the optimization is given by Algorithm I.
Algorithm I (density evolution):

This can be accomplished by means of linear programming.

The optimization of the check degree sequence is analogous

to the method for optimizing described above. Alternatively,

we can limit the search space for by allowing it to have only a

few nonzero entries. This often gives satisfactory results and is

advantageous with respect to the algorithm execution time.

Although

always holds for continuous message

pdf’s [5], this is not always the case when the pdf’s are dis-

cretized. To minimize the number of values of for which the

last constraint in (9) represents an equality, we need to initialize

to a sufficiently small value. On the other hand, for very low

values of , the values of , even for small ’s, become compa-

rable to the computer precision floors. Therefore, we introduce

a probability limit to ensure that is not too low. As we

update (improve) we increase such that

for

almost all values of

. The degree sequence optimiza-

tion algorithm is given by

Algorithm II (degree optimization):

1. initialize

and (say,

).

2. initialize the degree sequences and , such that

equals the desired code

rate.

3. compute and ,

using den-

sity evolution (Algorithm I) with the degree sequences

and , assuming the noise standard deviation equals .

4. find that minimizes

under the given constraints

(9) using a linear program and update

.

5. if

update

; goto step 3.

Algorithm II terminates when the updated degree sequences

can not further increase . Since this is a local optimization

method, we need to restart with different initial and until

satisfactory sequences are found.

1. initialize

,

,

.

2. update according to (3).

1A variable-to-check density update is one iteration of density evolution through the LDPC portion of the graph.

IV. RESULTS
We performed our optimization method on the Dicode and the EPR4
channel. We empirically chose to maximize the speed of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:47:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

170

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 7, NO. 4, APRIL 2003

TABLE I GOOD DEGREE SEQUENCES FOR THE
DICODE AND THE EPR4 CHANNEL

shorter ). We stopped the optimization when we reached thresholds within 0.15 dB of the i.u.d. capacity. Examples of optimized degree sequences for the design code rate and their respective thresholds are shown in Table I. More thresholds are plotted next to the i.u.d. capacities in Fig. 1.
We used the degree sequences from Table I to construct irregular LDPC coset codes of length 10 bits at the code rate
. Coset code simulation results are presented in Fig. 2. We see that these codes achieve the bit error rate 10 (we simulated 10000 blocks) at SNR’s less than 0.22 dB away from the i.u.d. capacities.
Based on the experiments it is tempting to conclude (we cannot offer a proof) that the optimal LDPC codes asymptotically approach the i.u.d. capacities as the maximum degrees
and the block lengths grow infinitely large.

V. CONCLUSION

We have presented an algorithm that optimizes the degree se-

quences of the LDPC message passing decoder for partial re-

sponse channels. Our strategy adapts the optimization method

for memoryless channels [5], [6] to the density evolution al-

gorithm for channels with ISI memory [7]. With this strategy

we constructed irregular LDPC codes with the noise thresh-

olds within 0.15 dB of the i.u.d. capacity. Simulations show that

coset codes of length 10 bits for both the Dicode and the EPR4

channel at code rate

achieve bit error rates 10 at

SNR’s less than 0.22 dB away from the i.u.d. capacities.

The optimization method we presented in this letter can also

be used to optimize outer LDPC codes in a serially concatenated

probabilistic coding scheme that yields codes that surpass the

i.u.d. channel capacities [10].

Fig. 1. The i.u.d. capacity curves and the LDPC code thresholds for the Dicode
and the EPR4 channels. The thresholds are close to C over the entire range of code rates from r = 0:5 to r = 0:9.

Fig. 2. Bit error rate versus SNR for the Dicode and the EPR4 channels; code length 10 bits; code rate r = 0:7.

density evolution and the spreading of probabilities to .

A good choice is

for the Dicode channel, and

for the EPR4 channel (longer channel memory tends to imply

REFERENCES
[1] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Communications, Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 1645–1646, 1996.
[3] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1962.
[4] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Improved low density parity check codes using irregular graphs and belief propagation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inform. Theory, Cambridge, MA, Aug. 1998, p. 117.
[5] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[6] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney Jr., T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 47, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[7] A. Kavcˇic´, X. Ma, and M. Mitzenmacher, “Binary intersymbol interference channels: Gallager codes, density evolution and code performance bounds,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, to be published.
[8] D. Arnold and H.-A. Loeliger, “On the information rate of binary-input channels with memory,” in Proc. IEEE ICC 2001, Helsinki, Finland, June 2001, pp. 2692–2695.
[9] H. D. Pfister, J. B. Soriaga, and P. H. Siegel, “On the achievable information rates of finite state ISI channels,” in Proc. IEEE Global Communications Conf. 2001, San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001, pp. 2992–2996.
[10] X. Ma, N. Varnica, and A. Kavcˇic´, “Matched information rate codes for binary ISI channels,” in Proc. Int. Symp. on Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, July 2002, p. 269.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:47:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

