ISIT 2003, Yokohama, Japan, June 29 -July 4,2003

On the Application of a LDPC Codes to Arbitrary Discrete-Memoryless Channels
Amir Bennatanl and David Burshtein’
Department of Electrical Engineering - Systems, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv. 69978, Israel. abnQeng.tau.ac.il, burstynQeng.tau.ac.il

Abstract - We present three structures of modified With q-ary based MQC and GQC ensembles, the focus on

LDPC code ensembles designed for transmission over weight-distribution is replaced by types. We derive expres-

arbitrary discrete memoryless channels. We show sions for the asymptotic average ensemble type spectrums of

that all configurations,under maximum-likelihoodde- Gallager’s q-ary LDPC codes and of GF(q) based LDPC codes.

coding, are capable of achieving the capacity of any For codes with sufficiently high connectivity, we bound the

discrete memoryless channel. We discuss practical it- spectrums of both structures arbitrarily close to the spectrum

erative decoding of our structures and present simula- of the random coding ensemble (the bound obtained for Gal-

tion results confirmingthe effectiveness of the codes. lager’s codes is valid only for prime values of q).

Building on these results, we prove that all three config-

I. QUANTIZECDOSETENSEMBLES

urations, under ML decoding, are capable of achieving the capacity of an arbitrary discrete memoryless channel. More

The concept of quantization mapping is based on Gallager [4] precisely, we show that for regular ensembles with sufficiently

and McEliece [ 6 ] ,and is designed to overcome the shaping gap. large connectivity, a typical code in the ensemble enables re-

Given a probability assignment Q ( a ) , aE {0, ..., A - 1) ( A is liable communication at rates arbitrarily close t o channel ca-

the channel alphabet size) a quantization ~ Q ( so)f,length T , pacity. is a mapping from the set of vectors ( 0 ,l } T t o ( 0 ,...,A - l}
such that the number of vectors mapped to each element a is

111. PRACTICADELCODING

zTQ(a). Applying the quantization to a vector of length N T is The BQC-LDPC belief propagation decoder is based on the

performed by breaking the vector into N sub-vectors of T bits well-known LDPC decoder with differences involving symbol-

each, and applying ~ Q ( xt o)the sub-vectors. The quantization nodes, derived from a factor graph representation by McEliece

of a code is obtained from applying the quantization t o each [6].The MQC-LDPC and GQC-LDPC belief propagation de-

of the codewords.

coders are modified versions of the belief propagation decoder

Given a binary code ensemble C , the corresponding binary introduced by Gallager [3]for arbitrary alphabet LDPC codes,

coset ensemble is obtained by adding, for each code C in C, employing q-dimensional vector messages. Efficient implemen-
V I C codes of the form {c @ E C} for all vectors v E (0, l}N tation of belief propagation decoding of arbitrary-alphabet

(we neglect a slight deviation from the definition used in [l]). LDPC codes is discussed in [2]and [7]. A BQC ensemble is obtained from a binary code ensemble In keeping with experience available from standard LDPC

by applying a quantization to each code of the corresponding codes, quantized coset LDPC codes favor irregular graphs and

coset-ensemble.

irregular quantizations (appropriately defined). We present

MQC-LDPC codes are based on Gallager’s LDPC codes BQC-LDPC codes capable of reliable transmission over the

defined over arbitrary alphabets, employing modulo-q addition (31. This structure assumes that the parity-check matrix elements remain mostly binary, although the codewords are defined over a larger alphabet. A coset arbitrary-alphabet en-

AWGN channel (determined by simulations) within 1.1dB of the Shannon limit, and MQC-LDPC codes within 0.9 dB of the limit, at rate 2 bits per channel use, and a bit error rate of about lop5.

semble is defined in a manner similar to the binary case. The quantization concept is similarly extended, with the mapping

REFERENCES

from the set of binary vectors being replaced by a mapping
from the set (0, ..., q - 1) (we assume q 2 A ) . GQC-LDPC
codes are based on LDPC codes defined over a Galois fields

A. Bennatan and D. Burshtein, “On the Application of a LDPC Codes to Arbitrary Discrete-MemorylessChannels”, submitted for publication IEEE Trans. on Inform. Theory.

GF(q) and allow parity-check matrices over the entire range

M. C. Davey and D. MacKay, “Low-Density Parity Check Codes

of field elements.

over GF(q)”,ZEEE Comm. Letters, vol. 2, pp. 165-167, June 1998.

11. M A X I M U MLIKELIHOOD( M L ) DECODING
In [I]we derive bounds on the ensemble average ML decoding error probability of quantized coset ensembles, as a function of the ensembles from which they were formed. With BQC ensembles, the bound is a function of the weight distribution of the binary ensemble, and of the quantization applied.

R. G. Gallager, Low Density P a r i t y Check Codes, M.1.T Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1963.
R. G. Gallager, Information Theory and Reliable Communication, John Wiley and Sons, 1968.
R.J. McEliece, “AreTurbo-likeCodes Effective on Nonstandard Channels?” IEEE Information Theory Society Newsletter, vol. 51, pp. 1-8, December 2001.

‘This research was supported by the Israel Science Foundation, grant no. 22/01-1 and by a fellowship from The Yitzhak and Chaya Weinstein Research Institute for Signal Processing at Tel Aviv University.

T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity check codes under message-passing decoding”, IEEE Trans. on Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599-618, February 2001.

0-7803-7728-1/03/$17.00 02003 IEEE.

293

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:23:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

