A Massively Scaleable Decoder Architecture for Low-Density ParityCheck Codes
h a n d Selvarathinam, Gwan Choi, Krishna Narayanan, Abhiram Prabhakar, Euncheol Kim
Department of Electrical Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, T X 77843-3259 (manivann, gchoi, krishna, pahhiram, eckim)@ee.tamu.edu

ABSTRACT
A massively scalable architecture for decoding lowdensity parity-check codes is presented in this paper. This novel architecture uses hardware scaling and memory
partitioning to achieve a throughput of 100 Ghps.
Simulation results show that this throughput is achieved without significant bit-error performance degradation.
Keywords
LDPC Decoder, Parallel Architecture, VLSI, BER/FER, Hardware Scaling
1. INTRODUCTION
Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes have been shown to provide near Shannon-limit error correction performance [I]. Recently, a number of LDPC decoder architectures have been explored [2],[3],[4l,ISI,[61.[71. A serial architecture that decodes one hit at a time is presented in [2]. A rigid parallel architecture is also proposed (71 that requires excessively large hardware resources.
Key issues that govern architectural decisions are latency, hit error rate (BER) performance and hardware resource availability, Serial architectures, although may he cost effective and practical for a hardware implementation, suffer from large decoder latency. Our approach reduces decoding latency by:
a) Hardware Scaling- Logic blocks in the decoder iteration stage are scaled by the parallelization factor M.
h) M-Way Memory- To process bits in parallel, the memory is first partitioned to smaller blocks. Novel minimumstructure memory is developed that allows multiple and concurrent read/write accesses as necessary to support parallelism.
c) Switch Logic- To mute the information to and from the appropriate memory slices.
d) Parallelizing Constraints - Additional constraints are
introduced to the code construction to make possible memory partitioning without degrading BER performance.

Our approach reduces the decoder latency by a factor of M over the serial architecture that has a delay of N clock cycles.
Latency = Block LengchI ParallelizationFactor = NIM
Where N is in the order of thousands of hits and M ranges from 2 to NI6 for a rate % code. The typical valueof N is 1000 [8]. The trade off of this speedup is increased hardware cost. Thus parallelization factor is carefully determined to suit hardware resource availability and application requirements.
Besides the low latency and efficient hardware implementation, acceptable level of BER performance should he maintained. Here, we limit our attention to regular LDPC codes and the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. It is well known that (3,k) regular LDPC codes provide good BER performance for moderate lengths if the associated parity check matrix H is constructed at random.
In this paper, we propose a novel pseudo-random construction of the parity check matrix that is specifically designed to facilitate parallelization of the decoder. We show that this construction also results in good BER performance. The maximum parallelization achieved is 340X for a rate !h code and a block length of 2040. ASIC design analysis using TSMC 0.35micron technology file yielded an implementation with a clock speed of
approximately 200 Mhz at M=500 (N=3000). This circuit
achieves a throughput of 100 Cbps.
The next section explains the decoding of LDPC codes using the serial LDPC architecture. Section 3 presents the parallel architecture, along with the implementation is sues. Section 4 summarizes the key simulation results and discussions. Section 5 summarizes the paper.
2. BACKGROUND
2.1 Decoding of LDPC codes
The decoder for LDPC codes is a soft-input iterative message passing decoder that passes extrinsic information in the form of log likelihood ratios (LLR). A log-MAP

0-1803-7761-31031$17.0082003 IEEE

U-61

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:39:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

iterative algorithm is implemented that uses the logarithmic summation of tanH values of the LLRs to implement the parity check constraint for each row. The update from the check node is then used to update the bit nodes and the updated LLRs are passed to the next iteration stage. We begin with a discussion of the bit wise serial architecture used for decoding LDPC implemented in [2]. The architecture processes all the three edges of a
Figure 1. Iteration logic stage bit node in parallel. The key component of the decoder is the iteration logic stage shown in figurek. The H matrix
ROM stores the oositions of 1’s in the u.aritv. check matrix.
The H matrix ROM output is the address of three memory locations shown as address-in in the figure. The initializer uses a look-up table to compute the LLR values corresponding to the received signal. The iteration stage takes the LLR values provided by previous iteration stage and computes the output LLR for the next iteration stage or the decision logic. Decision logic stage uses the sum of the check to bit messages (LeqO, Leql, LeqZ in Figure. 1) and LL (output from the initializer) to make a hard decision on the bit. The architecture uses 4 bits to represent
the LLR and 20 iterations in the decoding algorithm [XI.
Our proposed architecture is a scaleable design with a parallelization factor M.
3. Parallel Architecture Overview The architecture presented in this paper scales the iteration logic stage of the aforementioned serial architecture. Parallelization in our approach is made possible by simultaneously processing M bit nodes and making certain that each of the M consecutive bit nodes are associated with different parity checks. This constrains the location of the I s in consecutive columns of the parity check matrix. Simulation results show that the BER performance does not degrade due to this parallelization constraint.

3.1 Construction of the Parity Check Matrix

Gallager’s construction of the parity check matrix satisfies

the following two constraints [9].

i)

Each column hasj (r3) 1’s.

ii)

Each row has k (>j) 1’s.

In this paper, we consider only j=3 and k=6. The

architecture does not change with

the value of k. The number of

BANK RAMS in figure.1 increases

proportionately with j. For

hardware implementation, the

author in [2] has introduced two

more constraints.

iii) First, second and third 1s

in a column are in three

different row groups. This

facilitates processing all

the three edges of a

column (hit node) in

parallel.

The Is do not occur in

-4-

.bo

consecutive columns in

S-.T-._l

*.U-.

the same row. If the Is

.. . ..... .

occur in consecutive

columns, then the memory has to read and write

for the same location in the current clock cycle,

which is not feasible.

In addition to the above constraints, the parallel

architecture imposes the following constraint on the H

matrix.

V)

The columns are grouped in to blocks of M

columns, where the ith block contains columns (i-

I)M+I to iM. In each block, the first 1 in the M

consecutive columns do not overlap in row

position. Similarly, the second and third Is do

not overlap in the row position. Consider a (12,6) LDPC code. The H matrix for M =2 will

be,

100110100101

01 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 0 1 0

H=01 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 1 0 1

100101101010

01 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 1

1001100l0110

~~

~

~~~~

In this matrix, each column corresponds to a coded bit. Also, successive M (=2) columns do not have Is’ row

positions overlap. This allows simultaneous processing of M columns, e.g., columns 1 and 2, columns 3 and 4, etc. do not overlap. BER performance close to that of the serial architecture is achieved in our simulation results.

U-62
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:39:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3.2 Parallel Architecture: Implementation and Issues Let us, look at the effect of parallelization on the iteration
logic stage. Each group of parity check equations is a separate block of memory that can independently read and write in every clock cycle. 3*M memory blocks are

of 200 Mhz for an ASIC implementation using TSMC 0.35micron technology. The throughput of the decoder is
calculated as given: #of bits processed per clock cycle M = 500
Throughput=M * ClockSpeed = lOOGbps

4. RESULTS

A pseudo random paritycheck matrix is
E& B constructed with all the aforementioned

I

constraints. The matrix is used as input to the decoding algorithm implemented in

FA*

T software and the bit error rate performance

is obtained for an all zero codeword. The

BER and FER (Frame error rate) metric are

:::&O

obtained for various values of EbMo and

compared to that for different values of M.

Eb is the energy per bit and No is the noise

power spectral density. From the BER
B curve shown in Figure 3, the maximum

difference in Eb/No values for a given BER

'-mnD I I )

is less than 0.2 dB when compared to the

T serial architecture (no parallelization).

Similarly from the FER curve (Figure 4),

"'D1&1 I

the maximum difference in EhMo values

for any given FER is less than 0.2 dB. Our

Figure 2: Parallel Architecture-MemoryPartitioning

required t o process all the three edges of M consecutive bit nodes. Thus memory is partitioned by a factor o f M. Maximum parallelization is achieved when each such memory block stores information about a single parity check constraint. The partitioning of memory for M = 2 is
shown in Figure 2. Additional switch logic is introduced to route the LLR information to the appropriate memory blocks. Data readout from the memory passes through a
second switch logic to restore the original bit ordering of LLR infomation.

simulation results indicate that the performance loss is insignificant for different values of M. All the plots shown in Figure 3 and Figure 4 are obtained for a code length N = 2040. The maximum theoretical possible value of M depends on the value of N-K and column weight j: M=(N-K)/j. This limitation is attributed to the Gallager's constraint on the
Id'

Combinational logic units to support a hit-slice operation on LLR include adder, subtractor and log (tanh (~12)) circuit. These units are scaled by a factor of M for parallel processing. The FIFO width is also increased by factor of M to store the LLR information for M bit nodes. The LLRs corresponding to all the bit nodes are fed to the next iteration stage.

lo
"'",..

Parallelization is achieved by increasing the bus width and scaling the combinational logic. The rest of the decoder, which are the initializer and decision logic, is not affected.
Hencc the parallelization implementation does not require excessive amount of hardware resources and is roue-hlv, I O million gates. Parallelization also increases delay overhead
due to switch logic. Timing analysis of the parallel architecture (M=500) yielded an approximate clock speed

,i6

$ 0 ~~;

,,, ,II

Ip

2,

22

21

25

EINolnde

Figure 3: Bit Error Rate (BER) for various M

matrix. Our results shown in Figure 3 indicate that there is

Il-63
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:39:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

no significant BER performance degradation even at a high degree ofparallelization: N=2040, j=3, M=340.
Figure 4: Frame Error Rate (FER) for various M
5. CONCLUSION
We have presented a scalable architecture that reduces the decoding latency d an LDPC decoder. Existing serial architectures have simple hardware structures hut take N clock cycles to decode the message. The parallelization approach presented in this paper simultaneously processes M bits in the intermediate sum computation as well as check node update. The combinational logic is scaled by
the parallelization factor M while the memory is
partitioned into M blocks. Simulation results show that the LDPC decoder performance is not affected by parallelization. Our design can achieve a throughput of 100 Ghps.

6. REFERENCES
I . D.J.C. Mackay and R.M. Neal, “Near Shannon Limit Performance of Low Density Parity Check Codes”, Electron. Lett., vo1.32(18), pp. 1645-1646, Aug 1996.
2. S. Sivakumar, “VLSI Implementation Of Encoder And Decoder For LowDensity Parity-check codes”, Master’s
Thesis, Texas A & M University, December 2001.
3. E. Yeo, P. Pakzad, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam, “High Throughput Low-Density Parity-Check Decoder Architectures”, Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM’2001, Vo1.5, pp. 3019-3024,2001.
4. T. Zhang et al, “On Finite Precision Implementation of Low Density Parity Check Codes Decoder”, Proc. IEEE ISCAS’2001, Vol. 4, pp. 202 -205,2001. 5 . C.Howland, H.Blankshy, “Parallel Decoding Architectures for Low Density Parity Check Codes”, h o c . IEEE ISCAS’200 1, Vol. 4, pp. 742 -745,2001.
6. W.K Leung, W.L Lee, A. Wu, L. Ping, “Efficient implementation technique of LDPC decode?’ Electron. Lett.., vol. 37(20), pp. 1231-1232,Sept 2001.
7. T. Zhang, K.K Parhi, ”VLSI implementation-oriented (3, k)-regular lowdensity parity-check codes”, Proc. of 2001 IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems, pp. 25-36,2001 8. Flarion Technologies, Inc, “Vector-Low Density Parity-Check Coding solution Data Sheet”, 2001 available at http://www.flarion.com/products/ldpc-data-sheet.pdf
9. R.G. Gallager, “Low-Density Parity-Check Codes”, IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp.21-28, Jan 1962.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:39:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

