2025 13th International Symposium on Topics in Coding (ISTC) | 979-8-3315-8983-7/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ISTC65386.2025.11154487

Quantum LDPC Codes with Enhanced Error-Floor Performance under Min-Sum Decoding
Michele Pacenti, Dimitris Chytas and Bane Vasic´ Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA
{mpacenti, dchytas}@arizona.edu, vasic@ece.arizona.edu

Abstract—Quantum low-density parity-check codes are a promising approach to fault-tolerant quantum computation, offering potential advantages in rate and decoding efficiency. Quantum Margulis codes are a new class of QLDPC codes derived from Margulis’ classical LDPC construction via the two-block group algebra framework. We show that quantum Margulis codes, unlike bivariate bicycle codes which require ordered statistics decoding for effective error correction, can be efficiently decoded using a standard min-sum decoder with linear complexity, when decoded under depolarizing noise. This is attributed to their Tanner graph structure, which does not exhibit group symmetry, thereby mitigating the well-known problem of error degeneracy in QLDPC decoding. To further enhance performance, we propose an algorithm for constructing 2BGA codes with controlled girth, ensuring a minimum girth of 6 or 8, and use it to generate several quantum Margulis codes of length 240 and 642. We validate our approach through numerical simulations, demonstrating that quantum Margulis codes behave significantly better than BB codes in the error floor region, under min-sum decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
Recently, a class of codes known as bivariate bicycle (BB) codes [1] was introduced and tested in an experimental faulttolerant setup. BB codes belong to the broader class of generalized bicycle (GB) codes [2], which are constructed from pairs of circulant matrices. Building on GB codes, a more general framework known as two-block group algebra (2BGA) codes was recently proposed [3]. These codes are defined through parity-check matrices derived from the Cayley graphs of certain groups. Notably, GB codes emerge as a special case of this construction. The authors of [3] provided minimum distance bounds and enumerated all 2BGA codes with optimal parameters (up to permutation equivalence) for blocklengths below 200, demonstrating that their minimum distance scales with the square root of the blocklength. A specific instance of 2BGA code, where the group utilized for the construction is the special linear group of 2× 2 matrices over GF(p), namely SL(2, Zp), is called quantum Margulis code [4], [5].
In this paper, we investigate decoding of quantum Margulis codes. We conjecture that QLDPC codes with weaker group symmetries perform better under message-passing decoding. We empirically show that quantum Margulis codes, not having
We acknowledge the support of the National Science Foundation under grants CIF-2420424, CIF-2106189, CCF-2100013, CCSS-2052751, and a generous gift from our friends and Maecenases Dora and Barry Bursey. Bane Vasic´ has disclosed an outside interest in his startup company Codelucida to The University of Arizona. Conflicts of interest resulting from this interest are being managed by The University of Arizona in accordance with its policies.

such strong symmetries, performs particularly well under iterative decoding, achieving BB-like error rates without requiring ordered statistics decoding (OSD) when decoding on the depolarizing channel. This allows them to be decoded with linear complexity O(n), in contrast to BB codes, which typically require O(n3). Since decoder performance is also heavily influenced by the Tanner graph’s girth, we develop an algorithm to generate 2BGA codes with controlled girth (up to 8). We apply our algorithm to construct several instances, including codes of length 240 with girth 6, and length 642 with girth 8, and evaluate their decoding performance under minsum (MS) decoding with depolarizing noise through numerical simulations, and show that they perform much better than BB codes when decoded with the same decoder. The extended version of this work can be found in [5]. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we provide the necessary preliminaries. Section III presents the construction of quantum Margulis codes, starting with a review of the classical Margulis construction and extending it to the quantum domain. In Section IV, we describe an algorithm for constructing 2BGA codes with desired girth. Section V analyzes the decoding of quantum Margulis codes using message-passing algorithms and investigates the impact of graph symmetries on decoding efficiency. Section VI provides numerical results on the performance of quantum Margulis codes. Finally, Section VII concludes the paper with a discussion of key findings and potential directions for future research.
II. PRELIMINARIES
A. Calderbank-Shor-Steane codes
Let (C2)⊗n be the n-dimensional Hilbert space, and Pn be the n-qubit Pauli group; a stabilizer group is an Abelian subgroup S ⊂ Pn, and an n, k, d stabilizer code is a 2kdimensional subspace C of (C2)⊗n that satisfies the condition si |Ψ = |Ψ , ∀ si ∈ S, |Ψ ∈ C. An n, kX − kZ⊥, d CSS code C is a stabilizer code constructed using two classical [n, kX , dX ] and [n, kZ , dZ ] codes CX = ker HX and CZ = ker HZ , respectively, such that CZ⊥ ⊂ CX and CX⊥ ⊂ CZ [6]. The minimum distance is d ≥ min{dX , dZ }, with dX being the minimum Hamming weight of a codeword in CX \ CZ⊥, and dZ being the minimum Hamming weight of a codeword in CZ \ CX⊥. Notice that if HX HTZ = 0 it immediately follows that CX⊥ ⊂ CZ and that CZ⊥ ⊂ CX , thus it is sufficient to satisfy such constraint when designing the two parity check matrices HX and HZ to obtain a valid CSS code.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:48:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

B. Cayley graphs
Given a group G and a set of generators S, it is possible to construct the Cayley graph Cay(G, S) of G with respect of S, such that Cay(G, S) = (G, ES) is a graph where there is a vertex for every element g ∈ G, and there is an edge for every pair (g, gs), with s ∈ S, if S acts on the right. Alternatively, if S acts on the left, the edges have the form (g, sg). For this paper we will only consider bipartite Cayley graphs, obtained
as double covers of Cayley graphs. In a bipartite Cayley graph Cay(G × {0, 1}, S) the sets of left and right vertices are two copies of G, and the edges have the form ((g, 0), (gs, 1)). If S = S−1, then the graph is undirected, meaning that for each edge ((g, 0), (gs, 1)) there also exists the edge ((gs, 0), (g, 1)).

C. Noise model and decoder

In this paper, we consider the depolarizing noise model,

where each physical qubit has a probability of undergoing

through an X, Z or Y error with probability ǫ/3, and with

probability 1−ǫ has no error, and we assume perfect syndrome

measurements.

We consider the min-sum (MS) decoder [7] for decoding

quantum Margulis codes. Let λj be the a priori log-likelihood

ratio for the j-th variable node, obtained as λj = log

1−αj αj

,

where αj is the prior probability of error for that qubit. The

variable-to-check message is computed as:

νjℓ,i = λj +

µiℓ′,j ,

(1)

i′∈N (j)\i

where N (j) indicates the set of indices of the neighbors of the node labeled j. The check-to-variable message is expressed as:

µℓi,j = (1 − 2si) ·

sgn(νjℓ′−,i1) · min |νjℓ′−,i1|, (2)

j′∈N (i)\j

where the sign function is defined as

sgn(x) = −1 if x < 0

(3)

+1 otherwise.

In this work we also consider the normalized version [7] of the MS decoder, denoted with nMS, where check-to-variable messages are multiplied by a scalar β ∈ [0, 1]. The error estimate eˆ is given by the hard decision on the soft information of the variable nodes, such that





eˆj = sgn λj +

µiℓ,j  .

(4)

i∈N (j)

The decoding procedure continues until the maximum number of iterations has been reached, or until the error estimate eˆ matches the input syndrome.

D. Two-block group-algebra code construction
Two-block group-algebra (2BGA) codes can be constructed from a group G and two sets of generators, A acting on the left and B acting on the right. Because of this property, their action on elements of G commute, and a left-right (LR) Cayley

complex can be constructed [8]. A CSS code can be defined on the LR Cayley complex, by assigning X checks, Z checks and qubits to different sets of vertices in the complex. More details can be found in [5]. The parity check matrices of the code will have the form

HX = [A B] HZ = [BT AT ],

(5)

where A, B are the biadjacency matrices of the bipartite
Cayley graph of G generated by A and B, respectively, while AT , BT correspond to the biadjacency matrices of the same graph generated by A−1 and B−1, respectively. Since the
action of the two sets of generators commute, it holds that AB + BA = 0, therefore HX HTZ = 0.

III. QUANTUM MARGULIS CODES

A. Classical Margulis construction
Margulis codes [9] are a well-known class of classical LDPC codes constructed from Cayley graphs of certain groups. Let G be SL(2, p) the special linear group whose elements consist of 2 × 2 matrices of determinant 1 over Zp, being p prime. Let S be a set of generators of SL(2, Zp) chosen according to the construction we report below, and let S−1 be the inverse of S. Let G0 = Cay(G, S) be the bipartite Cayley graph of G with respect of S and G1 = Cay(G, S−1) be the bipartite Cayley graph of G with respect of S−1; consider M0, M1 the biadjacency matrices of G0, G1, respectively. The parity check matrix of the Margulis code has the form

H = [M0 M1].

(6)

The resulting code has blocklength n = 2(p2 − 1)p, rate R = 1/2, variable degree dv = |S| and check degree dc = 2|S|. A similar construction is based on Ramanujan graphs by Lubotzky et al. [10], [11], however we will only consider Margulis construction for this paper. Margulis shows that if the set of generators are chosen such that there is no multiplicative relation between them, the girth of the graph grows as log p; moreover, he gives an explicit construction of the generating set for any degree satisfying this property. More details can be found in [9], [5].

B. Quantum Margulis construction
The construction from Margulis can be extended to fit the design proposed in Section II-D. Let G = SL(2, Zp), with p prime. In principle, one can use Margulis’ method to obtain two sets A, B of r generators each and their inverses A−1, B−1. Let A act on the left and B act on the right; we construct the left-right Cayley complex as in Section II-D,
and the associated quantum code. The parity check matrices HX , HZ have the form illustrated in (5).
The quantum code has length n = 2(p2 − 1)p, regular variable degree dv = r, and regular check degree dc = 2r. Because both HX and HZ have |G| rows and 2|G| columns, the rate of the quantum code R → 0 for n → ∞; however, because they always have redundant rows, we are able

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:48:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

to construct finite length codes with non-trivial dimension1. We notice that there are few differences between classical and quantum Margulis codes: first, the girth of the classical Margulis codes is shown to increase as O(log n/ log r), while for the quantum Margulis code it is bounded by g ≤ 8. This is a well-known fact about HP and LP codes, as well as for 2BGA codes [12]. Although there are 8-cycles that cannot be removed from the Tanner graph, one can still eliminate 4cycles and 6-cycles. Notice that Margulis’ argument on the girth still holds inside each separate block A, B, thus one can use his construction to obtain codes with less short cycles while increasing the blocklength. However, in this paper we construct our codes using a randomized algorithm, that can be adopted to construct any 2BGA code without short cycles.
IV. CONSTRUCTING 2BGA CODES WITH HIGH GIRTH
The girth of a Tanner graph significantly affects the performance of iterative decoders, as shorter cycles degrade message-passing efficiency. In classical LDPC design, eliminating short cycles, particularly four- and six-cycles, is a key goal. We propose an algorithm that, given a group G, selects a generator set to avoid such cycles in the resulting Tanner graph. The process iteratively expands a tree rooted at the identity of G, as detailed in Algorithms 1 and 2. Starting from a random generator set, Algorithm 2 builds layers of the graph by multiplying each node in layer Lℓ by all generators except the one that produced it (denoted al). For even ℓ, the next layer consists of check nodes; for odd ℓ, it splits into variable nodes from the disjoint blocks A and B. Due to the graph’s directionality, elements are multiplied by inverses of A and B when expanding from check to variable nodes. Cycle detection is performed by verifying uniqueness in Lℓ+1; duplicates indicate a cycle, prompting a generator replacement. If no cycles are found up to depth γ/2, and G is Abelian, the 2BGA code has girth at least γ. On the other hand, if G is non-Abelian, a tree rooted at every element of G is constructed using the candidate generating set, and if no cycles are found, the code has girth at least γ (this is because in this case the code’s Tanner graph does not have G-symmetry [5]). Otherwise, the process restarts from a new generator set. An example Tanner graph with a four-cycle is shown in Fig. 1, where black and gray represent variable nodes from blocks A and B, and red indicates both check nodes and cycle-forming edges.
V. DECODING OF QUANTUM MARGULIS CODES
In this section, we analyze the performance of quantum Margulis codes under iterative decoding. We show that a simple nMS decoder with flooding schedule can closely approach BPOSD performance.
Message-passing decoders often fail on QLDPC codes due to error degeneracy, which is linked to structures in the Tanner graph called quantum trapping sets (qTS), or symmetric stabilizers [12]. It has been observed that MS and belief
1Note that this generally depends on the specific choice of the group and of its generating set. In general, the code has trivial dimension.

Algorithm 1 get_generators

Input: A group G, the size of the generating set w and a target girth γ

Output: A set of generators S that generate a code with girth ≥γ

1: S ← dc random elements of G 2: C ← ∅ 3: f ← 1, ℓ ← 1 4: while f = 1 and ℓ < γ/2 do

⊲ Cycle to remove

5: if Not the first iteration then

6:

Replace s ∈ C with s′ ∈ G \ S in S.

7: end if 8: S, f, C, ℓ ← generate_tree(S, γ)

9: end while

10: if G is non-Abelian then

11: for g ∈ G do

12:

S′ ← gA ∪ Bg

13:

f ← generate_tree(S′, γ)

14:

if f = 1 then

15:

Restart from line 1.

16:

end if

17: end for

18: end if

Figure 1: 4-cycle in the expanded neighborhood of a check with dc = 4. Red, square nodes indicate checks, while circles indicate variable nodes. Black and gray variable nodes indicate qubits belonging to the two blocks A and B.
propagation (BP) struggle with half-weight errors in symmetric stabilizers, as these patterns lead to conflicting beliefs and prevent convergence. In [13], this behavior was modeled as a linear dynamical system under an isolation assumption, showing persistent oscillations for symmetric error patterns.
To break this symmetry, [13] proposes asymmetric update rules applied selectively to variable nodes. However, we observe that the nMS decoder does not get trapped in symmetric stabilizers of quantum Margulis codes. In the extended version of this work [5] we show that the group G does not act on the vertices of the Tanner graph of the corresponding 2BGA code, if the two generating sets A, B are not normal subgroups. It follows that if G is non-Abelian, this condition is rarely met. Being SL(2, Zp) non-Abelian, this property holds for quantum Margulis codes. By avoiding such group symmetry, the messages propagating in the Tanner graph become less symmetric, allowing the decoder to converge even in presence of degenerate errors. To support this, we simulate half-weight errors inside symmetric stabilizers for both a Margulis code and a BB code. In Fig. 2, we plot Wk = |eˆk| + |e| + |s|,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:48:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Algorithm 2 generate_tree

Input: S, Lℓ, γ, ℓ Output: Generators S, flag f , cycle detected C, depth ℓ.

1: Lℓ+1 ← ∅

2: for l ∈ L do

3: if ℓ is even then

4:

Lℓ+1 ← l · aj ∀a ∈ A \ al

5:

Lℓ+1 ← bj · l ∀b ∈ B \ bl

6: else

7:

LR, LL ← ∅

8:

LR ← l · a−j 1 ∀a−j 1 ∈ A−1 \ al−1

9:

LL ← bj−1 · l ∀b−j 1 ∈ B−1 \ b−l 1

10:

Lℓ+1 ← LL ∪ LR

11: end if

12: end for 13: if ℓ = γ/2 then

14: return

15: end if 16: if No vertex with more than one incident edge in Lℓ+1
then 17: generate_tree(S, Lℓ+1, γ, ℓ + 1) 18: else 19: C ← cycle edges 20: f ← 1

21: end if

22: return

100

80

60

40

20

0

0

20

40

60

80 100

Figure 2: Evolution of the weight of the estimated error in the MS decoder.
where s is a stabilizer, e ⊂ s is the error, and eˆk is the decoder’s estimate at iteration k. For the Margulis code, the decoder converges within 15 iterations (Wk → 0), while for the BB code, it stalls at a local minimum (Wk = 3). We further validate this behavior through simulations in Figs. 3–4, where we compare nMS and OSD performance for quantum Margulis codes of lengths 240 and 642, where observe that as the number of iterations increases, the nMS decoder increasingly matches the performance of OSD, suggesting that some error patterns require more iterations to escape trapping sets, as

10-2

10-4

10-6 0.01

0.06

Figure 3: Performance of MS decoding compared with BPOSD0 for a length 240 quantum Margulis code, for different amounts of maximum decoder iterations.
hinted in Fig. 2. Interestingly, in Fig. 4, we show how the nMS decoder clearly outperforms BP, and even post-processing with OSD fails to reduce the error floor further. Quantum Margulis codes thus offer a major advantage over other QLDPC codes: they enable high-performance decoding with a standard MinSum decoder, avoiding the need for OSD. Since OSD requires Gaussian elimination with O(n3) complexity, it is impractical for low-latency or large-scale quantum systems, making nMS a more scalable solution for fault-tolerant architectures.
VI. PERFORMANCE OF QUANTUM MARGULIS CODES
In this Section, we run extensive Monte Carlo simulations to validate the performance of quantum Margulis codes. We use Algorithm 1 to generate several codes of length 240 and 642 (corresponding to p = 5, 7 respectively) and different dimension. For each code, we simulate nMS decoding under a simple depolarizing noise model on data qubits (indicated with the parameter ǫ), and perfect syndrome measurements. The nMS decoder utilizes a flooding (parallel) schedule, and a normalization factor β = 0.875 for all codes. We run a maximum of 300 iterations for n = 240, and of 700 iterations for n = 642. For each value of depolarizing probability ǫ, the simulation is carried out such that 1 · 105 samples and 20 decoding failures are collected. All the codes with n = 240 have girth 6, while the ones with n = 642 have girth 8. All the codes are (3, 6) regular. We have included the codes that showed the best decoding performance in Fig. 5, where the codes with n = 240 are represented by solid lines, and the codes with n = 642 are represented by dashed lines. Different values of k are represented by the markers depicted in the legend. We also included simulation results for the 288, 12, 18 BB code from [1] (in red), decoded with nMS, using β = 0.875 and for a maximum of 300 iterations. Such code exhibits a very strong error floor mostly due to uncorrectable errors in symmetric stabilizers. Among the codes with n = 240, the one with lower error rate has k = 2, able to approach approximately a logical error rate of 10−8 for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:48:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10-2

10-4

10-6

0.02

0.1

Figure 4: Performance of MS decoding compared with BPOSD0 and MSOSD0 for a length 642 quantum Margulis code, for increasing number of maximum iterations.

100

10-2

eight, equipped with an inherent asymmetry that aids the standard nMS decoder to converge without the need of the computationally expensive OSD, when considering a depolarizing error model. This represents a significant improvement in decoding complexity, reducing it from O(n3) to O(n), making these codes more viable for practical quantum error correction. Future directions may include a more comprehensive study of 2BGA codes obtained from different groups, to verify their performance under different decoders. Also, it is possible that the particular structure of some groups translate into good properties of the corresponding 2BGA codes; for instance, groups like P SL(2, q), with q prime may originate codes with good expansion properties, that could be characterized by their error correction capability. Other groups may allow larger graph automorphisms, or present geometrical structures that could be more suitable for certain hardware implementations. In any case, when it comes to decoding circuit-level noise, the decoding advantage of quantum Margulis codes is lost, as we are forced to use OSD post-processing due to the different structure of the decoding matrix. This highlights the urgency of developing novel decoders for circuit-level noise, that are able to exploit the optimized structure of the original Tanner graph while accounting for noise correlations, avoiding the need of OSD.

10-4

10-6

10-8

10-2

10-1

Figure 5: Simulation results for several codes sampled from the output of Algorithm 1.
ǫ = 0.01. Among the codes with n = 642, the one with highest k = 14 is also the one with weaker performance, approaching a logical error rate of approximately 2 · 10−6 for ǫ = 0.02, while the best is the one with k = 2, able to approach a logical error rate of 3·10−8 for ǫ = 0.03. It is worth noticing the code with k = 10, that approaches a logical error rate of around 7 · 10−8 for ǫ = 0.03, which is remarkable given its higher rate.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
In this work, we introduced quantum Margulis codes, a new class of QLDPC codes derived from Margulis’ classical LDPC construction through the 2BGA framework. Our construction algorithm allows for control over the girth of the Tanner graph, ensuring that short cycles are minimized. Using this approach, we generated codes with girths of at least six and

REFERENCES
[1] S. Bravyi, A. W. Cross, J. M. Gambetta, D. Maslov, P. Rall, and T. J. Yoder, “High-Threshold and Low-Overhead Fault-Tolerant Quantum Memory,” Nature, vol. 627, no. 8005, pp. 778–782, 2024.
[2] R. Wang and L. P. Pryadko, “Distance Bounds for Generalized Bicycle Codes,” Symmetry, vol. 14, no. 7, 2022.
[3] H.-K. Lin and L. P. Pryadko, “Quantum Two-Block Group Algebra Codes,” Physical Review A, vol. 109, p. 022407, Feb 2024.
[4] M. Pacenti and B. Vasic´, “Quantum Margulis Codes,” in 60th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing, Sept. 25-27 2024.
[5] M. Pacenti, D. Chytas, and B. Vasic, “Construction and decoding of quantum margulis codes,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.03936, 2025.
[6] A. R. Calderbank and P. W. Shor, “Good Quantum Error-Correcting Codes Exist,” Physical Review A, vol. 54, pp. 1098–1105, Aug. 1996.
[7] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu, “Reduced-Complexity Decoding of LDPC Codes,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, 2005.
[8] I. Dinur, S. Evra, R. Livne, A. Lubotzky, and S. Mozes, “Locally testable codes with constant rate, distance, and locality,” in Proceedings of the 54th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2022, (New York, NY, USA), pp. 357–374, Association for Computing Machinery, June 2022.
[9] G. A. Margulis, “Explicit Constructions of Graphs without Short Cycles and Low Density Codes,” Combinatorica, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 71–78, 1982.
[10] J. Rosenthal and P. Vontobel, “Constructions of Regular and Irregular LDPC Codes Using Ramanujan Graphs and Ideas from Margulis,” in IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, p. 4, June 2001.
[11] D. J. MacKay and M. S. Postol, “Weaknesses of Margulis and Ramanujan-Margulis Low-Density Parity-Check codes,” Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 74, pp. 97–104, 2003.
[12] N. Raveendran and B. Vasic´, “Trapping Sets of Quantum LDPC Codes,” Quantum, vol. 5, p. 562, Oct. 2021.
[13] D. Chytas, N. Raveendran, and B. Vasic´, “Enhanced Min-Sum Decoding of Quantum Codes Using Previous Iteration Dynamics,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.05021, 2025.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:48:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

