2025 IEEE 68th International Midwest Symposium on Circuits and Systems (MWSCAS) August 10-13, 2025. Lansing, Michigan, USA

2025 IEEE 68th International Midwest Symposium on Circuits and Systems (MWSCAS) | 979-8-3315-8934-9/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/MWSCAS53549.2025.11244472

Automation and High-Level Synthesis of Analog Computing Processors based on Margin Propagation
Ankita Nandi∗, Krishil Gandhi†, Mahendra Pratap Singh‡, Shantanu Chakrabarttyˆ, and Chetan Singh Thakur∗ †Sardar Vallabbhai National Institute of Technology Surat, India, ‡Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal, India,
∗Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India, ˆWashington University in St. Louis, USA

Abstract—The Margin-Propagation (MP) is a paradigm for designing analog computing circuits that, like digital circuits, are scalable across biasing conditions and process nodes. Like digital circuits, MP-based analog circuits and systems are modular and robust to process, voltage, and temperature variations. These features make MP-based analog circuit design amenable to automation and high-level synthesis. This paper proposes such a design framework using factor graphs as the foundational descriptors to specify the interdependency between different analog computational primitives. Using Python scripting language, the proposed framework translates an input factor graph to its equivalent SPICE-compatible circuit netlist that can be used to validate the intended functionality using an MP-based messagepassing algorithm. The proposed framework also allows for the integration of design optimization strategies such as precision tuning, variable elimination, and mathematical simplification. We demonstrate the versatility of our framework for tasks such as Bayesian inference, Low-Density Parity Check (LDPC) decoding, and analog Artificial Neural Networks (ANN). Netlist simulation results align closely with software implementations, affirming the efficacy of our proposed automation tool.
Index Terms—AI and edge computing circuits and systems, Neural Networks and Neuromorphic Systems, Margin Propagation, SPICE automation, analog computing, Bayesian inference, LDPC decoder, and Artificial Neural Networks.
I. INTRODUCTION
Margin-Propagation (MP) is a versatile analog computing paradigm that has been successfully demonstrated in the design of analog signal processors and machine learning (ML) processors [1], [2], [3]. Like digital designs, MP-based analog designs can be pre-characterized and are scalable across temperature, biasing regimes, and process technology nodes, thus making MP-based framework amenable to automation and synthesis using standard cells [4], [5] (Fig. 1a). This paper leverages the advantages of MP-based designs to propose an automation tool that utilizes factor graphs as descriptors that can be used to generate a SPICE-compatible netlist and for design validation. Factor graphs can model various signal processing tasks, such as Kalman filters and stochastic models [6]. When combined with MP, they create a powerful platform for designing analog signal processors.
The key contributions of this paper are:
• An automation tool to synthesize MP analog computing circuits using input factor graphs to produce SPICE netlists.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 1. (a) The MP standard analog cell is positioned at the intersection of essential characteristics required for a standard cell, as depicted in this Venn diagram; (b) A schematic representation of the generalized MP circuit with N inputs where S serves as a tunable parameter for accuracy [4].

• Implementation of Bayesian inference for different networks with varying nodes and features. The accuracy of the generated circuits corresponds to software accuracy.
• Implementation of an MP-based LDPC decoder proposed in [1] for 32−bit, 64−bit and 96−bit codelengths. The netlist-derived Bit and Frame Error Rate plots strongly correlate with software results.
• Implementation of an ANN on the IRIS dataset. The netlistderived accuracy strongly correlates with software results.
The paper is structured as follows: Section II covers factor graph-based systems, Section III details the proposed tool, and Section IV presents the results and discussion, followed by the conclusion in Section V.

II. FACTOR GRAPHS & POSTERIOR INFERENCE USING MP
Factor graphs consist of variable nodes, denoted by V = {x1, . . . , xN }, representing the random variables in a system, and factor nodes, denoted by F = {f1, . . . , fM }, representing functions that define relationships between the variables. For message passing to occur between variables, the probability of a specific variable xk given the observations of a subset of other variables, denoted as Xobs, is determined by the posterior distribution p(xk|Xobs). Let Xunobs represent the set of unobserved variables, such that Xobs ∪ Xunobs ∪ {xk} ⊆ V. Then p(xk|Xobs), factorized using joint probability distribution:

M

p(xk|Xobs) =

fi(Xi)

(1)

Xunobs i=1:i∈Xobs

where the sum is taken over all possible assignments of the unobserved variables. Crucially, the observed variables Xobs

979-8-3315-8934-9/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE

468

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:51:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 2. This figure shows the proposed flow of the tool for synthesizing analog MP-based systems. The associated figures in each stage refer to the design of a Bayesian network for illustration. Stage 1 of this figure shows the factor graph representation to be synthesized. This factor graph is translated into a computational graph in Stage 2, which is then mapped onto analog circuits in Stage 3. The MP-based analog standard cell library is input at Stage 3. Finally, the corresponding netlist is generated in Stage 4 and validated for accuracy through functional simulation in Stage 5.

are fixed at their observed values during this summation. The log-sum-exponential transformation is essential for numerical stability, especially when dealing with small probabilities. Thus, taking the logarithm, we have:

M

log p(xk|Xobs) = log

exp

log fi(Xi)

Xunobs

i=1:i∈Xobs

(2)

This log-sum-exponential formulation can be approximated

by the MP formulation [7]. The generalized MP circuit imple-

mentation is illustrated in Fig. 1b [4]. Any MP implementation

is defined by the size of the input vector (say of size N ) and

the accuracy tuning factor (denoted by S), which collectively

form the current mode inputs to the circuit, i.e. x1,1, · · · xN,S. The higher the value of S, the better the accuracy. Another

input to the circuit is the current C, a hyper-parameter tuned

depending on the application. The solution to the circuit is the

current h(X).

Thus, the MP form of equation (2) is given by the following:

M

log p(xk|Xobs) = M P |Xunobs

log fi(Xi), C (3)

i=1:i∈Xobs

where,

M i=1:i∈Xobs

log

fi(Xi)

would

be

associated

to

input

current xi,j, and h(X) represents log p(xk|Xobs).

MP approximates the log-sum-exponential function used

in conventional message-passing algorithms with a piecewise

linear (PWL) function, reducing message entropy while main-

taining performance. As demonstrated in [8], the sparsity of

messages is linked to their differential entropy, which serves as

a theoretical metric for energy-efficient computation. MP-based

decoding achieves significant entropy reduction with minimal

performance loss. This establishes a foundation for designing

parameterized, energy-efficient analog computing architectures

where performance can be dynamically adjusted based on application constraints. The additional advantages of modularity and scalability, similar to digital circuits, offer a unique opportunity for automation and high-level synthesis, which we will discuss in the following section.
III. PROPOSED AUTOMATION FRAMEWORK
This section outlines the proposed automation flow in five stages (Fig. 2) and includes an example implementation.
1) Factor Graph Generation: The process starts by modeling the system as a factor graph through two alternatives: • User-Provided Factor Graph: If a factor graph already exists, the user can directly input it into the framework. For example, when designing LDPC decoders, the code’s parity-check matrix plays the role of the factor graph. • Factor Graph Construction: Alternatively, the tool can construct a factor graph based on the user’s input, such as a Bayesian network represented as a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG).
2) Computational Graph Generation: Building upon the factor graph, Stage 2 generates the computational graph. It maps crucial mathematical operations required at each factor node by using the following flow: • Analyzing the factor graph to determine the number of inputs for each operation and the respective connections. • Computational optimization eliminates redundant variables using variable elimination algorithms. It also implements mathematical and boolean simplifications, if any. • Graph generation by Graphviz Python package [9] and validation against software implementation (which is the benchmark for subsequent functional validations).
3) Analog Circuit Mapping: Here, computations from the computational graph are mapped to analog circuits by:

469

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:51:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 3. Case study of a Bayesian network modeling a predator catching its prey (Node C), which depends on detecting the prey (Node F) through auditory (Node A) and visual (Node V) senses. These sensory inputs also influence the process of finding a mate (Node M) [12]. The Bayesian network, represented as a DAG, is first converted into a factor graph, followed by constructing a computational graph based on factor node computations after variable elimination. Optimization techniques, including Boolean simplification and precision tuning, are applied before generating the final optimized analog map.

• Optimizing computations with corresponding MP-based compound standard analog cells from a pre-defined library implemented for varying accuracy, precision, power, and area budget. This is done using the behavioral model design based on the computational graph for varying accuracy. Since MP accuracy is proportional to the number of MP modules, higher accuracy is penalized by an area overhead [5]. A power-delay projection is made based on the operation regime. Subthreshold operations serve as power saver modes while strong inversion operations are for high performance [2].
• Functionally validating this stage using software tools.
4) Netlist Generation: The analog circuit map then serves as the blueprint for netlist generation, which contains the components and their interconnections, which are essential for circuit simulation. Netlists are generated by:
• Pre-defined Standard cells: Synthesis of the standard cells involves computational mapping and transistor sizing using established techniques [10], [11].
• Final netlist is generated based on the analog circuit map by instantiating the standard cells from the library using Python scripts for subsequent simulation.
5) Functional Validation: The generated netlists are validated using SPICE tools, with Cadence Virtuoso for visual inspection and Cadence Spectre for functional validation. Layouts are created in Cadence Layout GXL via automatic placeand-route, similar to digital synthesis.

Example Design of a Bayesian network

We illustrate the working of the proposed tool using a Bayesian network for prey-catching inference [12] (Fig. 3). In this example, the nodes are binary, meaning if we consider any of the above four nodes as X, then its samples are either ‘0’ or ‘1’. In the rest of the text, we represent the notation X= 0 as ‘X0’ and X= 1 as ‘X1’. The process begins by factorizing the probabilities to convert them to a factor graph. For the DAG in Fig. 3, we write

p(C) = p(C/F )p(F/A, V )

(4)

Thus, the factor nodes are f1 = p(C|F ), f2 = p(F |A, V ). It can be observed that f3 = p(M |V ) is unrelated to node C. For a small network such as this, we can visually eliminate unrelated variable nodes, but for large networks, this is not feasible. Thus, we need the computational graph.
Continuing from the factor graph generated, the probability of catching prey, C = 1 for all the possibilities of finding the food F , using (1) is
p(C1) = p(C1/F 1)p(F 1/A, V ) + p(C1/F 0)p(F 0/A, V ) (5)
The computational graph is then mapped to an analog circuit and finally converted to a SPICE netlist. As the messages between nodes are represented as currents, for validation, input magnitudes are scaled as multiples of 1µA (for strong inversion operation). The Bayesian network’s output, represented by the Soft-OR’s output current, was 0.524µA, closely matching the expected mathematical value p(C1|V 1) = 0.555.
Using the computational graph-based netlist with eight multipliers and two adders (pre-optimization), we generate a layout. Multipliers map to Soft-AND operations [10], and adders are represented by current summation (Kirchhoff’s law). The final layout (Fig. 4) includes eight Soft-AND gates, with the first layout inset showcasing a single Soft-AND gate. A second inset within this layout points to a 2-transistor unit MP-circuit. The diode is implemented using a gate-drain shorted n-type MOSFET.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
We assess the tool’s efficacy by validating its generated Bayesian Networks, LDPC decoders, and ANN circuits.
1) Bayesian networks: We tested five Bayesian networks from Kaggle [13]. The pgmpy [14] library provided ground truth accuracy and the results from the tool generated netlists in Table I. Table I shows a negligible drop in the accuracy of the generated netlists compared to their software counterpart for the Bayesian networks.
2) LDPC Decoder: We implement a 32-bit regular LDPC code with a 4-degree factor node and a 3-degree variable node (Fig. 5a). The design in [1] integrates MP and non-MP designs.

470

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:51:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 4. Layout for the tool-generated netlist corresponding to the Computational Graph in Fig. 3 consisting of eight Soft-AND gates (each mapped to a multiplier), using the place-and-route options offered by Cadence Layout GXL. The first inset figure zooms into the layout of a single Soft-AND gate, which also highlights the layout of a unit MP circuit, which has been shown in Fig. 1b.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 5. (a) Tanner Graph for a (32,8) LDPC Decoder; (b) Bit Error Rate (BER) and (c) Frame Error Rate (FER) of the simulated netlist w.r.t. the software implementation for code lengths 32−bit (synthesis runtime= 32ms), 64−bit (synthesis runtime= 39ms) and 96−bit (synthesis runtime= 51ms).

Netlist generation runtime is 32ms. We extend the 32-bit code to 64-bit and 96-bit using the protograph technique [15]. Fig. 5b and Fig. 5c confirm that netlist simulations’ bit and frame error rates align with software-based decoding. The difference between software and SPICE results, also observed in [1], is attributed to continuous-time analog simulations. The similarity of our results with [1] validates the tool’s efficacy in implementing and integrating MP and non-MP modules.
3) Artificial Neural Network (ANN): We design an artificial neural network (ANN) consisting of an input layer with 4 nodes, a hidden layer with 8 nodes, and an output layer with 3 nodes. The network utilizes multiply-accumulate (MAC) operations and employs the ReLU activation function. For a training accuracy of 92%, software testing on the IRIS dataset achieved 90.5% using MP computational modules. The generated netlist simulation yielded 90% accuracy. The ANN achieves a software inference accuracy of 90.5% and a netlist accuracy of 90%. The tool generates netlists in under 1s on an Intel i7 processor, significantly faster than manual implementation.

TABLE I ACCURACY AND RUNTIME OF DIFFERENT BAYESIAN NETWORKS

Model
Airplane Titanic Pistachio Thyroid Drought

#Variable Nodes 22 8 17 15 19

Software Accuracy (%)
82.38 77.99 77.12 95.3 97.93

Netlist Accuracy (%)
82.27 77.91 77.12 95.3 97.93

Synthesis Runtime (ms)
6.1 5.8 5.9 5.9 6

process, from high-level factor graph descriptions to SPICEcompatible netlist generation, while supporting non-MP module integration. Validation against custom designs demonstrates its scalability and practicality. The pre-print version [16] shows that, unlike others, this work attempts to automate the synthesis of analog computing systems for inference. Future versions will explore synthesizing other graphical models and machinelearning architectures for analog computing.

V. CONCLUSION
This work presents an automated synthesis flow for designing analog computing systems using the MP framework. MP designs, being pre-characterizable, modular, and robust like digital designs, offer a promising path for automating large analog computing systems. The tool manages the entire design

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors acknowledge the MoU between the Indian Institute of Science and the Washington University in St. Louis (WashU) and the McDonnell International Scholars Academy for enabling research collaboration.

471

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:51:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

REFERENCES
[1] G. Ming and S. Chakrabartty, “A 100 pJ/bit, (32,8) CMOS Analog Low-Density Parity-Check Decoder Based on Margin Propagation,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, vol. 46, no. 6, pp. 1433–1442, 2011.
[2] P. Kumar, A. Nandi, A. Saha, K. S. P. Teja, R. Das, S. Chakrabartty, and C. S. Thakur, “Aryabhat: A digital-like field programmable analog computing array for edge ai,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 71, no. 5, pp. 2252–2265, 2024.
[3] K. Rashed, A. Undavalli, S. Chakrabartty, A. Nagulu, and A. Natarajan, “12.3 a scalable and instantaneously wideband 5gs/s rf correlator based on charge thresholding achieving 8-bit enob and 152 tops/w compute efficiency,” in 2024 IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference (ISSCC), vol. 67. IEEE, 2024, pp. 222–224.
[4] P. Kumar, A. Nandi, S. Chakrabartty, and C. S. Thakur, “Process, Bias, and Temperature Scalable CMOS Analog Computing Circuits for Machine Learning,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 128–141, 2023.
[5] P. Kumar, A. Nandi, S. Chakrabartty, and C. T. Singh, “Bias-Scalable Near-Memory CMOS Analog Processor for Machine Learning,” IEEE Journal on Emerging and Selected Topics in Circuits and Systems, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 312–322, 2023.
[6] H.-A. Loeliger, “An introduction to factor graphs,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 28–41, 2004.
[7] M. Gu and S. Chakrabartty, “Synthesis of Bias-Scalable CMOS Analog Computational Circuits Using Margin Propagation,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 243–254, 2012.
[8] M. Gu, K. Misra, H. Radha, and S. Chakrabartty, “Sparse decoding of low density parity check codes using margin propagation,” in Proceedings of the 28th IEEE Conference on Global Telecommunications, ser. GLOBECOM’09. IEEE Press, 2009, p. 5496–5501.
[9] J. Ellson, E. Gansner, L. Koutsofios, S. C. North, and G. Woodhull, “Graphviz— open source graph drawing tools,” in Graph Drawing, P. Mutzel, M. Ju¨nger, and S. Leipert, Eds. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2002, pp. 483–484.
[10] A. Nandi, P. Kumar, S. Chakrabartty, and C. S. Thakur, “Margin propagation based analog soft-gates for probabilistic computing,” in 2024 37th International Conference on VLSI Design and 2024 23rd International Conference on Embedded Systems (VLSID). Kolkata, India: IEEE, 2024, pp. 378–383.
[11] P. G. Jespers and B. Murmann, Systematic design of analog CMOS circuits. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2017.
[12] C. S. Thakur, S. Afshar, R. M. Wang, T. J. Hamilton, J. Tapson, and A. van Schaik, “Bayesian estimation and inference using stochastic electronics,” Frontiers in Neuroscience, vol. 10, 2016.
[13] Kaggle, “ Your Machine Learning and Data Science Community,” - :. [Online]. Available: https://www.kaggle.com/
[14] A. Ankan and A. Panda, “pgmpy: Probabilistic graphical models using python,” in Proceedings of the 14th Python in Science Conference (SCIPY 2015). Citeseer, 2015.
[15] J. Thorpe, “Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) Codes Constructed from Protographs,” IPN Progress Report, vol. 1, pp. 1–7, 2003.
[16] A. Nandi, K. Gandhi, M. P. Singh, S. Chakrabartty, and C. S. Thakur, “KALAM: toolKit for Automating high-Level synthesis of Analog computing systeMs,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https: //arxiv.org/abs/2410.22946
472
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:51:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

