IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS–I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 72, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025

4235

UniDec: A Unified Factor-Graph-Based Decoder Fully Compatible With 5G NR LDPC/Polar Codes

Houren Ji , Yi Zhang, Yutai Sun , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Yongming Huang , Fellow, IEEE, Xiaohu You , Fellow, IEEE, and Chuan Zhang , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In comparison to 4G, 5G wireless needs to support a broader range of applications. Therefore, both low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes and polar codes have been standardized by 5G new radio (NR) to fulfill the requirements of data channel and control channel, respectively. Usually, LDPC/polar decodings are implemented by separate hardware, leading to low area efficiency. Though decoders which can handle both codes have been proposed, how to compromise between throughput and efficiency has always been a persistent dilemma due to the absence of a unified and smooth integration methodology. To this end, by fully utilizing the common parts of graph-theoretic algorithms for both codes, this paper presents a unified decoder (UniDec) which is fully compatible with 5G NR LDPC/polar codes. This UniDec enables three key approaches: 1) unified processing nodes for both codes, 2) configurable permutation networks with multi-parallelism, and 3) flexible scheduling for 5G NR parameter configuration, guaranteeing both high data throughput and area efficiency. Implemented in 40nm CMOS, the UniDec attains a maximum of 33.64× throughput and 5.98× area efficiency compared to its multi-mode counterparts. Even compared with the state-of-the-art (SOA) dedicated ones, the UniDec still maintains a competitive edge in terms of throughput, energy, and area efficiency. It is noted that this methodology can be generalized to other factor-graph based signal processing algorithms.
Index Terms—Graph-based architecture, LDPC codes, polar codes, message passing, unified decoder.
I. INTRODUCTION
I N CONTRAST to 4G limited for a single application scenario, 5G wireless needs to support three major appli-
cation scenarios while achieving satisfactory performance [1].
Aiming to support diverse application scenarios [2], 5G must be capable of delivering differentiated and customized services. In 5G, baseband processing is one of the components that integrate most core technologies. Effectively integrating these key technologies to provide diverse services will be
Received 6 July 2024; revised 9 February 2025 and 19 May 2025; accepted 22 May 2025. Date of publication 18 June 2025; date of current version 30 July 2025. This work was supported in part by NSFC under Grant 62122020 and Grant 62331009; in part by Jiangsu Provincial NSF under Grant BK20211512, Grant BG2024004, Grant BK20243059, and Grant BM2023016; in part by the Major Key Project of Peng Cheng Laboratory (PCL) under Grant PCL2021A01-2; and in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities. This article was recommended by Associate Editor W. Liu. (Corresponding authors: Xiaohu You; Chuan Zhang.)
The authors are with LEADS, National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory, Frontiers Science Center for Mobile Information Communication and Security, Southeast University, Nanjing 211189, China, and also with Purple Mountain Laboratories, Nanjing 211100, China (e-mail: xhyu@seu.edu.cn; chzhang@seu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2025.3575534

essential for the future development of baseband processing. However, the separate technologies are usually integrated roughly for implementation to meet various demands, resulting in numerous challenges such as high costs, high power consumption, and limited flexibility [3]. Therefore, a unified integration methodology for baseband processing algorithms should be fully explored to enhance the efficiency of hardware implementations.
In the realm of baseband processing technologies for 5G, channel coding is crucial for achieving capacity in transmission. Both low-density party-check (LDPC) codes [4] and polar codes [5] have been standardized by 5G new radio (5G NR) in enhanced mobile broadband (eMBB) scenario [6]. They are employed respectively as data channel and control channel coding to fulfill communication requirements. Numerous algorithms [7], [8], [9] related to these two codes have attracted great attentions and experienced significant development [10], [11], [12], [13]. In practical application, the decoding algorithms for LDPC/polar codes have been implemented in various hardware architectures [14], [15], [16], [17] to improve the throughput, efficiency and flexibility. An unrolled parallel LDPC decoder [14] is proposed to achieve ultrahigh throughput but has limited configurability. To support multiple code rates and block lengths, the reconfigurable circular-shift networks [18], [19] are employed to handle various lifting values with different permutation constraints. In [20], an area efficient LDPC decoder [20] is proposed to support all the lifting sizes specified in the 5G NR standard. Its decoding throughput is greater than 20Gbps. To reduce the hardware complexity further, a novel check-node LDPC decoder [21] is presented, offering improved area-throughput performance. The polar decoder [22] is designed with optimal parameters to make trade-offs between the latency and area overheads. The aforementioned dedicated decoders are constrained to a single decoding algorithm. To optimize both throughput and efficiency for multi-codes, multi-mode decoders are considered to integrate LDPC/polar decoding implementations.
Consequently, several studies have focused on multi-mode decoders [23], [24], [25], [26], [27] to provide the diverse communication services. Guessing Random Additive Noise Decoding (GRAND) [28] is a universal decoding scheme for any linear block codes. The multi-mode GRAND decoders [29], [30] allow the superior error-correction performance for short-length codewords. However, their excessive complexity

1549-8328 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:45:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4236

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS–I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 72, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025

with long-length codewords prevents them from achieving full compatibility with 5G NR standard. In [23], a merged factor graph scheme is proposed for belief propagation (BP) decoding. Based on BP decoding, a joint LDPC-polar decoding structure is presented in [24]. To this end, the first LDPCpolar decoder is introduced in [26] for the 5G NR standard. The decoder combines the decoding algorithms by the addcomparison-add calculation pattern. However, decoding mode and pattern configurations restrict throughput and efficiency in various scenarios. The dual-mode 5G decoder [31] supports the lifting size-128 in LDPC mode and the length-1024 in polar mode, but lacks configurability for various scenarios. Therefore, there is still a need for a unified and smooth integration methodology to develop an efficient hardware architecture for multi-mode decoding.
In this paper, we propose a unified factor-graph based decoder (UniDec) that is fully compatible with 5G NR LDPC/polar codes. Based on the graph theory in [32], the UniDec utilizes the common parts of graph-theoretic algorithms for both codes to reduce the implementation complexity. By describing the common aspects using the hardware formula representation [33], we propose a unified integration methodology to derive the factor-graph based architecture for 5G NR LDPC/polar codes. In this architecture, the unified processing nodes and configurable permutation networks are proposed to improve throughput and efficiency. Besides, the flexible scheduling for both codes is supported through 5G NR parameter configuration to ensure 5G NR compatible decoding.
Contributions and Paper Outline:
The contributions of this work are summarized as follows.
• Based on our unified integrated methodology, we utilize the hardware formula representation to derive the UniDec for LDPC/polar codes. The UniDec consists of core decoding logic units and extrinsic memory units. The core decoding logic units include unified processing nodes and configurable permutation networks, aiming to enhance throughput and hardware efficiency. The extrinsic memory units serve to store intermediate soft messages and control instructions for flexible scheduling.
• In core decoding logic units, the unified processing nodes are proposed by extracting the common operators for LDPC/polar decoding. This allows these unified processing nodes to share decoding logic and reconfigure with different functions for both codes, reducing hardware complexity. Configurable permutation networks are introduced to achieve the interconnection of unified processing nodes. To maximize throughput and efficiency of the network, multi-parallelism control schemes are also proposed to support multi-frame processing for both codes.
• In extrinsic memory units, the data information memory is shared to store intermediate soft messages for memory saving. The control information memory is dedicated to storing control instructions for 5G NR parameter configuration. The instructions are constructed by extracting code parameters such as code lengths, code rates, and memory

Fig. 1. Schematic representation of BG1 in 5G NR standard.

access conflicts. Based on these 5G NR parameters, the decoder follows the intrinsic decoding rules for flexible scheduling, ensuring full compatibility with 5G NR standards for LDPC/polar decoding.
Based on the aforementioned methods, the proposed architecture is implemented in an area of 1.64 mm2 at 500 MHz based on 40 nm CMOS technology. It can deliver peak throughputs of 21.87 Gb/s and 10.24 Gb/s in LDPC and polar modes, respectively. Compared with the state-of-theart (SOA) multi-mode decoder [26], our decoder attains a maximum throughput of 33.64× and an area efficiency of 5.98×, respectively.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews the basic structures of 5G NR LDPC/polar codes and hardware formula representation. In Section III, we derive the unified factor graph based architecture with the hardware formula representation. The hardware design details of the UniDec are provided in Section IV. The hardware results are provided to compare with the SOA multi-mode and dedicated decoders in Section V. Section VI draws the conclusions.

II. PRELIMINARIES

A. 5G NR LDPC/Polar Codes

In 5G eMBB scenarios, LDPC codes are utilized as the

data channel codes, employing a quasi-cyclic structure. Quasi-

cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) codes are represented by an mb × nb

base graph, where each element in the base graph corresponds

to a Z × Z submatrix. This submatrix can either be a zero

matrix or a cyclically shifted identity matrix, determined

by the zero-one elements and shifted values in the base

graph. Consequently, base graphs can accommodate various

information

bit

lengths

K

and

code

rates

R=

K Nb

by adjusting

the parameter Z for an Mb × Nb parity-check matrix (PCM)

H, where Mb = Z · mb and Nb = Z · nb.

To satisfy the diverse communication requirements across

various scenarios, 5G NR LDPC codes employ two distinct

types of base graphs, BG1 and BG2. The BG1 structure is

shown in Fig. 1 with dimensions 46 × 68, supporting code

rates from 1/3 to 8/9 and the maximum information bit length

8848. The BG2 has 42 rows and 52 columns that supports

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:45:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JI et al.: UniDec: A UNIFIED FACTOR-GRAPH-BASED DECODER FULLY COMPATIBLE

4237

Fig. 2. BP decoding factor graphs derived from the base graphs of (a) QC-LDPC codes and (b) polar codes.

code rates from 1/5 to 2/3 and the maximum information bit

length 2540. To ensure the scalability, there are 51 lifting sizes

Z ranging from 2 to 384 to generate PCMs [34], providing

various ranges of information bit lengths and code rates to

meet communication demands.

Polar codes are the first codes proven to achieve channel

capacity I(W) in a binary-input discrete memoryless channel

W. They synthesize N independent copies of channels W to be a set of polarized channels WN(i), 0 ≤ i < N. In practice, the bit channels whose I(WNi ) approach 1 are selected to construct
information set A with a size of K and the remaining bit

channels as frozen bits transmit fixed bits, usually value 0.

The encoding processing can be expressed as x = uG, where G = F⊗n is the generator matrix, F⊗n is the n-th Kronecker

product of F =

10 11

, n = log2 N. And the

notations

x and

u

denote the encoded and input vectors.

Polar codes have been selected for encoding control infor-

mation in the 5G eMBB scenario. These codes provide a code length range of 2n, where 7 ≤ n ≤ 9 for downlink. Considering

the significant difference in code length range compared to

5G NR LDPC codes, the decoding architecture design faces

challenges in achieving both flexibility and efficiency for both

codes simultaneously. Therefore, it is crucial to introduce a

hardware architecture based on a unified decoding algorithm

that effectively balances generality and specificity.

B. BP Decoding for 5G NR LDPC/Polar Codes
BP decoding is a message-passing algorithm employed for both LDPC/polar codes based on factor graphs. The factor graph consists of check nodes (CNs) and variable nodes (VNs), and the associated messages are updated iteratively through permutations between CNs and VNs.
For LDPC codes, the αc,v and βv,c denote the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) messages passed from the CN c to the VN v and from the VN v to the CN c, respectively. And γv denotes the a-posteriori-probability LLR (AP-LLR) messages of the VN v. The expression Vc/Cv represents all VNs/CNs connected to CN c/VN v, and the degree dc/dv denotes the size of Vc/Cv. The CN and VN message processing as Fig. 2(a) is presented as follows:

1) VN update: In the t-th iteration, βv(t,)c is calculated as

βv(t,)c = γv(t) − αc(t,−v 1).

(1)

2) CN update: In the t-th iteration, α(ct,)v is calculated as

α(ct,)v = ϕ(βv(t,)c).

(2)

3) AP-LLR update: In the t-th iteration, γv(t) is calculated

as

γv(t) = α(ct,)v + β(vt,)c.

(3)

To perform an approximate calculation, offset min-sum (OMS) algorithm [35] are applied for ϕ(β(vt,)c) function as

v

Y
∈Vc \v

sgn(βv(t),c)

max(
v

m∈Vicn\v(|βv(t),c|

−

θ),

0),

(4)

where the notation sgn() denotes signum function, and θ is an offset factor. The α(c0,v) and βv(0,c) are initialized with zero.
For polar codes, an n-stage factor graph contains (n+1)× N

nodes,

and

each

stage

includes

N 2

PEs.

Fig.

2(b)

shows

the

factor graph for polar codes, N = 8. Two types of directional

messages Lk,i/Rk,i are propagated over the factor graph, where k and i denote the stage and bit indices. The L/R messages

processing are presented as follows:

8

Á

ˆˆLk,2 j = φ ˆ

Lk+1, j,

Rk,2 j+1

+

Lk+1,

j+

N 2

,

ˆ

ˆ<Lk,2 j+1

=

φ(Lk+1, j, Rk,2 j)

+

Lk+1,

j+

N 2

,

Á

(5)

ˆˆRk+1, j = φ ˆ

Rk,2 j,

Rk,2 j+1

+

Lk+1, j+

N 2

,

ˆ

ˆ:Rk+1,

j+

N 2

= φ(Rk,2 j, Lk+1, j) + Rk,2 j+1,

where j denotes the j-th PE at one stage. The φ(a, b) function

is the OMS function [36] that expressed as

sgn(a)sgn(b) max(min(|a|, |b|) − θ, 0).

(6)

In summary, it is feasible to achieve both LDPC/polar decoding through BP algorithm within graphical models. However, the graphical structures derived from different base graphs in Fig. 2 encounter obstacles in transitioning from algorithmic models to unified hardware implementations. Hence, it is necessary to provide a hardware description for various architectures. Subsequently, extracting and summarizing common characteristics from this description can lead to a unified hardware architecture. In the following section, fundamental concepts of hardware description will be introduced before presenting our proposed unified hardware architecture.

C. Formula-Based Module Design and Connection
The hardware signal processing language (HSPL) [33] is proposed to provide a formal representation for complicated systems. The fundamental representation of the data path for any module can be denoted as:

O = I → M,

(7)

where I and O refer to the input vector and output vector of
the module M. Considering different data paths and module connections,
Fig. 3 illustrates different formula representations in a cascade or parallel connection. Fig. 3(a)-(b) show the data path passes

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:45:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4238

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS–I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 72, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025

Fig. 3. Formula hardware architecture representations in HSPL (a) x = u → A

(b)

x

=

u

→

A·B

(c)

x

=

u

→

Q
k

(A

·

B)

(d)

x

=

u

→

Qir
k

(A

·

B)

(e) x = u → Ik ⊗ A.

Fig. 4. Degree and parallelism transformation for the codes on graphs.

a module A, module A and module B in series, respectively,

where u and x denote input and output, the interpunct symbol ·

denotes the cascade connection. The same type of modules

connected in sequence are shown in Fig. 3(c), where the

product

symbol

Q
k

replaces

the

interpunct

symbol

to

denote

the cascade connection with k modules. In Fig. 3(d), the

representation of iteratively reusing k times can achieve the

same

function

as

that

in

Fig.

3(c),

where

the

symbol

Qir
k

refers

to the iterative data path with k times. Finally, the symbol

(Ik ⊗) indicates the parallel connection for k placed modules,

and the corresponding representation is illustrated in Fig. 3(e).

Therefore, the HSPL provides a method to describe the

algorithmic model at the hardware level. Based on the afore-

mentioned hardware representation, we can articulate the

hardware formulas for different graph structure. By extracting

common factors from these hardware formula, we can achieve

an efficient and unified hardware architecture for both LDPC

and polar codes on the factor graph.

III. HARDWARE FORMULA REPRESENTATION FOR CODES ON GRAPHS
BP algorithms can uniformly perform decoding for codes on graph models at the algorithm level [32]. Inspired by this, we extract and analyze the common features of factor graphs based on hardware formula representation. Subsequently, a unified integrated methodology can be proposed to derive the factor-graph based architecture at the hardware level.
In this section, we consider the hardware formula representation for the nodes in the factor graph. Specifically, we focus on two key attributes of these nodes: degree and parallelism, both of which need to be expressed in terms of hardware representations. The degree reflects the hardware complexity of the nodes, and the parallelism shows the number of instantiations of the nodes. By breaking down high degree nodes into multiple nodes with lower degrees, we can standardize the diverse factor graph structures of LDPC codes and polar codes at the hardware level.
The equations of (4) and (6) represent message-passing decoding for nodes of different degrees in the factor graph.

Fig. 5. Hardware representations for the existing decoding architectures for LDPC and polar codes.
While the factor graph of LDPC codes primarily consist of high degree-d, d > 3 nodes, there are only degree-3 and 2 nodes in polar codes. Therefore, we present the degree and parallelism transformations to unify the graph structures of these two codes in the hardware representation. Fig. 4 shows the degree and parallelism transformations of a degree-5 CN, and the corresponding hardware formula representations as an example, where the CMUi represents the CN function unit with i inputs.
In Fig. 4, we present the nodes with different degrees and parallelism in hardware formula representation, which can result in diverse data flow and timing features of decoding in implementation. Some existing architectures [15], [17], [37], [38] for LDPC/polar codes can be formulated as Fig. 5. These architectures can be represented in terms of degree and parallelism. The unified representation for different architectures provide the foundation for the unified architecture design of LDPC/polar codes.
The hardware formula representations in Fig. 5 primarily reflect the degree and parallelism of the architectures. However, the specific design of these nodes and the interconnection

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:45:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JI et al.: UniDec: A UNIFIED FACTOR-GRAPH-BASED DECODER FULLY COMPATIBLE

4239

Fig. 6. Overall architecture of the UniDec.

between them cannot be adequately depicted in Fig. 5. For example, the notation “CMUdL/P” only denotes the degree-d CN function module of LDPC/polar codes but the specific design details are not provided. Therefore, formula representation only reflects the architecture with different design parameters, such as degree and parallelism. Additionally, the
detailed design of unified processing nodes and configurable
permutation networks will be discussed in the following
section.

IV. UNIFIED ARCHITECTURE FOR 5G NR LDPC/POLAR CODES

A. Overall Architecture

Fig. 6 shows the overall architecture of the proposed UniDec. The UniDec can be divided into three main parts: 1) unified processing nodes, 2) configurable permutation networks, and 3) extrinsic memory units. The unified processing nodes and configurable permutation networks, regarded as the core decoding logic units, can be reconfigured to decode under two decoding modes with multi-frame processing. The extrinsic memory units consist of data information memory and control information memory, utilized for storing intermediate messages and managing timing scheduling, respectively.
In the overall architecture, we should confirm its degree and parallelism parameters as the hardware formula representation in Fig. 5. Regarding degree selection, we reuse the lowdegree nodes to achieve high-degree functions, ensuring high flexibility and low hardware complexity. As for parallelism selection, it is important to consider the factor graph structures for both codes and aim to balance throughput and hardware utilization. Therefore, we adopt block parallel layer decoding for LDPC codes and single column decoding for polar codes in this paper. With the maximum lifting value Zmax = 384 and polar code length Nmax = 2nmax = 512, we determine the node parallelism P of unified processing nodes as follows.

Â P = max Zmax,

Nmax Ã . 2

(8)

To maximize utilization for the given node parallelism P, we employ multi-frame processing to enhance hardware efficiency. The detailed design and multi-parallelism configuration are presented in the following sections.
B. Unified Processing Nodes
The unified processing node consists of two parts: the unified CN processing element (UCPE) and the unified VN processing element (UVPE). Further subdivision of these two parts results in five components, including data decompression units (DeCOMU), configurable adders, min-sum computation units (MSCU), first-in-first-out memory (FIFO), and adder stacks. Given the theoretical foundation outlined in (1)–(6), we delve into the detailed node design to optimize the common operational logic for both codes efficiently. Depended on the signal mode configuration, the decoding architecture can switch between LDPC mode and polar mode, with mode 0 for LDPC codes and the mode 1 for polar codes. The detailed designs are listed as follows.
1) DeCOMU: The DeCOMU aims to restore the messages computed in the previous iteration of CN processing. In the LDPC mode, the αc,v message restoration requires the two most minimums (min 1st, min 2nd) of β(vt−,c1), v ∈ Vc, the index of min 1st (min id), the sign bits of βv(t−,c1) for each VN v and their XORed sign (xor sign). The above messages are updated and stored in the shared memory and signed memory during each iteration. In CN processing, min 1st and min 2nd from previous iteration are used as the input1 and input2 for the DeCOMU in Fig. 7, min id, xor sign, and the sign bits of β(vt−,c1) for each VN v are also provided to DeCOMU to restore α(ct,−v1) as (4). After passing through signmagnitude to 2’s compliment (STC) units, the αc(t,−v1) message can be input to the configurable adder for β(vt),c updating as (1).
In polar decoding, updating stage messages in a given direction involve corresponding stage messages from the opposite direction in the previous iteration. Therefore, the Rk, 2 j/Rk, 2 j+1 (Lk+1, j/Lk+1, j+N/2) are supplied as input1 and input2 to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:45:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4240

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS–I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 72, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025

Fig. 7. Unified processing node design in the UniDec.
the DeCOMU when updating stage messages during L/R propagations. It should be noted that the min id is required to select between input1 and input2 to satisfy v ∈ Vc\v in (4) in the LDPC mode. In the polar mode, the DeCOMU only selects Rk, 2 j+1 (Lk+1, j+N/2) by the signal mode to achieve iterative computation as (5).
2) Configurable Adder: The configurable adder is tasked with processing extrinsic message during VN updates. In the LDPC mode, the configurable adder receives AP-LLR message γ(t) and α(t−1) message, and the extrinsic message β(t) is computed within the configurable adder which performs as a subtractor for VN updating as (1). In the polar mode, the configurable adder executes Rk, 2 j+1 + Lk+1, j+N/2 and then proceeds to achieve the first and third equations in (5) at the MSCU module.
3) MSCU: The MSCU serves as the core of the UCPE for CN updating. The MSCU is composed of 2’s compliment to sign-magnitude unit (CTS), comparing unit, and switch unit (SU). The SU has two states referred to as ‘BAR’ and ‘CROSS’ when the signal mode equals ‘0’ and ‘1’. Fig. 7 displays the detailed architecture of the MSCU, with parts colored in orange and purple to differentiate the functions related to LDPC and polar decoding modes, respectively.
In the LDPC mode, the MSCU is responsible for generating the compressed CN messages including min 1st, min 2nd, min id, xor sign, and the sign bit of the βv(t)c messages of VNs v connected to CN c, v ∈ Vc. Due to the blockparallel decoding architecture used in the LDPC mode, the compressed CN message is obtained by reusing the MSCU dc times. Therefore, the current magnitude of β(t) message,

serving as input2, is compared with the last min 1st and min 2nd (input1 and input3) to achieve CN updating as (4) when the SU is in the ‘BAR’ state. In addition to min 1st and min 2nd, the registers in Fig. 7 are also used to update xor sign and min id for the current CN c.
In the polar mode, the single-column architecture can update the messages for one stage in a single step. Hence, the incoming data Lk+1, j, Lk+1, j+N/2 + R2 j+1, and Rk,2 j, corresponding to the φ(a, b + c) and φ(a, d) function in (5), are selected as input1, input2, and input3 for the MSCU module. The module updates Lk,i and Rk+1,i in (5) when the SU is in the ‘CROSS’ state.
4) FIFO: In the block parallel scheduling of LDPC mode, the MSCU requires dc clock cycles to compute the compressed CN messages. After that, the AP updating will be executed for all dc VNs connected to the CN c as (3). To decouple the APLLR updating from CN updating, a FIFO, only works in the LDPC mode, is utilized to temporarily store the compressed CN messages for γ(t) message updating. The bit width of the FIFO is determined by the bit width of the compressed CN messages and the maximum lifting values Z, while the depth of the FIFO depends on the maximum row weight of the base graphs (BG1 and BG2) in 5G NR standard.
5) Adder Stack: The adder stack is designed to handle the message output from the MSCU in this iteration. In the LDPC mode, the adder stack performs the updating of γ(t) messages as specified in (3). In the polar mode, the output from MSCU needs to be added Lk+1, j+N/2/Rk,2 j+1 to achieve the updating of Lk,2 j+1/Rk+1, j+N/2 as described in the second/fourth equations in (5).
Fig. 8 provides an overview of the UCPE/UVPE design and visualizes hardware activation in both LDPC and polar modes. To differentiate between the structures and connections in each mode, the distinctive elements of polar codes are highlighted in blue in Fig. 8(b), while the non-essential components in the polar mode are shaded in grey when compared to the LDPC mode in Fig. 8(a).
C. Configurable Permutation Networks
The configurable permutation network is a crucial component for enhancing the flexibility and parallelism in the UniDec. The Banyan network [39] can be an excellent choice to establish a reconfigurable connection. The structure of a PN × PN combined Banyan network consists of two PN × PN Banyan networks with a total of pn + 1 stages, where pn = log2 PN and PN represents the network scale. In this paper, we adopt a 512 × 512 combined Banyan network with 10 stages, including 9 stages of two 512 × 512 Banyan networks and 1 interMUX stage.
The recursive structure of the Banyan network generated by SUs is depicted in Fig. 9. In this section, we propose MUX control schemes for both codes to facilitate unified processing node interconnection. Furthermore, a multi-parallelism strategy is also introduced for multi-frame processing.
1) Circular Shift Permutation for LDPC Mode: The Banyan networks are utilized in LDPC codes and enable the circular shift values SV or input data within the network scale, where

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:45:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JI et al.: UniDec: A UNIFIED FACTOR-GRAPH-BASED DECODER FULLY COMPATIBLE

4241

Fig. 8. Overview of UCPE and UVPE designs in (a) LDPC mode and (b) polar mode.
Fig. 9. 512 × 512 combined Banyan network in the UniDec.
0 ≤ S V ≤ PN. However, they still face numerous challenges in practical applications.

In [39], extensive modulo operations increase the decod-

ing delay of the implementation. The mapping scheme [40]

eliminates all modulo operations to shorten the critical path.

However, this approach requires pre-storing numerous control

signals for multi-parallelism. Therefore, we introduce a control

signal scheme to simplify its implementation. Given that the

Banyan network scales with a power-of-two, our proposed

control signal scheme eliminates all modulo operations [39]

and saves pre-stored memory for control signals [40].

We divide the simplified control signal scheme into two

parts: the first pn Banyan network stages and the final interMUX stage. Initially, the (k +1)-th stage of the control signals Ck for Banyan network, 0 ≤ k < pn, can be summarized as

(

Ck =

zeros(lk − sk, 1) ones(sk, 1), zeros(2lk − sk, 1) ones(sk − lk, 1),

sk ≤ lk, otherwise,

(9)

where the functions zeros(a, 1) and ones(a, 1) denote a 1 × a

zero vector and one vector, respectively, and the operator is a splicing operation, e.g., a a = [a a]. In (9), the parameters

sk and lk, which generate control signals Ck for (k + 1)-th stage, are determined by the circular shift value SV and the

network scale PN, as defined below:

(

sk = bin(s)[pn − k − 1 : 0], s = S V,

lk = bin(l) k,

l

=

PN 2

,

(10)

where the operators [k − 1 : 0] and k represent the least

significant k bit interception and k bit right shift for the

binary form of the variable a, i.e., bin(a), respectively. The

intercept and shift operations in (10) can significantly simplify

computations, allowing all control signals of pn stages to be generated simultaneously. This not only shortens the critical

path but also mitigates hardware implementation complexity.

Benefited from the recursive structure, the Banyan network can be divided into multiple subnetworks to achieve different

levels of parallelism. The parallelism of the combined Banyan

Á

network is defined as MP = log2

PN PM

, where PM is the

required scale of the Banyan subnetwork after splitting. And it

is evident that the control signals Ck determined as (9)(10) is a

special case when PM = PN. In contrast, when the parallelism

equals to k , k > 0, the control signals of the first k stage are

set to zero, e.g., Ck = zeros

PN 2

,

1

,

0

≤

k

<

k

.

For the final interMUX stage, the pn + 1-th stage of the

control signal Cpn is

(

Cpn = (2MP ) Cpn ,

(11)

Cpn = ones(S V, 1) zeros(PM − S V, 1),

where the operator is a multiple splicing operation, e.g., 3 a = a a a.
The equations of (9) and (11) determine all the control signals for each stage based on the parameters PN, PM, and SV. Besides, It should be noted that for the scheme mentioned above, the configuration of shift values for the top and bottom Banyan networks depends on the parallelism of the Banyan network and lifting values. Considering the parameters PM and Z, the above scheme assigns shift values S V1 for the top Banyan network, where S V1 = S V. As for the shift value S V2 of the bottom Banyan network, it must satisfy the condition

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:45:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4242

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS–I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 72, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025

S V2 = PM−Z + S V1. At this point, the arbitrary shift values and input data size within the scale PN can be achieved.
2) Shuffle Shift Permutation for Polar Mode: Compared with the application of Banyan networks in LDPC decoding, there is currently no control scheme aimed at enhancing the flexibility of polar decoders using Banyan networks. The fixed connections in the BP decoder [41] are designed for a single code length without flexibility. To enhance the flexibility, a half column architecture is proposed in [42] to accommodate code lengths. However, the stage messages need to be divided into multiple memory banks and processed with multiple clocks. This results in a reduction in throughput and hardware efficiency. Therefore, we propose the first multi-length/parallelism control signal scheme for polar codes based on the Banyan network to improve the throughput across different code length scenarios.
Based on the factor graph with shuffle shift permutation [41] for implementation, the shuffle/reverse-shuffle operators for L/R propagations between stages are depicted in Fig. 2(b). The operators can be denoted as the transformation functions L(i) and R(i), 0 ≤ i < N.

Fig. 10. (a) L and (b) R propagations of polar codes for combined Banyan network, PN = 8, MP = 0.

(

2i,

L(i) →

2

i

−

N 2

+ 1,

0

≤

i

<

N 2

,

otherwise.

R(i)

→

(

i 2

,

i 2

+

N 2

,

i % 2 = 0, otherwise.

(12)

Additionally, with the introduction of 512×512 Banyan net-
work, we can leverage the parallelism of the Banyan network
to facilitate multi-code parallel decoding, thus improving the
hardware implementation efficiency. The control signals Ctop and Cbot for the top and bottom
Banyan network are discussed for L/R propagations, respectively. To achieve the function L(i), the control signals Cktop for the first pn stage, 0 ≤ k < pn, can be expressed as

8ˆ<C0top = zeros

PN 4

,

1

ones

PN 4

,

1

,

C

top pn −1

=

PN 4

(zeros(1, 1) ones(1, 1)),

ˆ:Cktop = (2k−1) Ckcell, 1 ≤ k < pn − 1,

(

where

Ckcell = Ck ∼Ck, Ck = zeros(2pn−k−2, 1)

ones(2pn−k−2, 1).

(13)

And the bottom control signals Ckbot, 0 ≤ k < pn, are

Ckbot

=

(

Cktop, ∼Cktop,

1 ≤ k < pn − 1, otherwise,

(14)

where the operator ∼ in (13)(14) is a bitwise invert operation. Finally, the control signal Cpn of the final interMUX stage can be denoted as

C pn

=

Â PN 2

Ã

(zeros(1, 1)

ones(1, 1)).

(15)

According to the equations of (13), (14), and (15), the control signals for each stage can be determined for L propagation. For the parallelism configuration for L propagation, the control signals Cktop/bot, 0 ≤ k < k , are set to zero when the parallelism

MP equals to k , k > 0, and the k + 1-th stage of the control signal should be reconfigured as

Cktop = ∼Ckbot = (2k ) Ck .

(16)

The aforementioned control signal scheme can achieve the L propagation with multi-parallelism for polar codes. For R propagation, we present the control scheme generated through a recursive process as follows.

Cktop = ∼Ckbot = Cr(epcn.−1), 0 ≤ k < pn, where (Cr(et)c. = Cr(et−c.1) ∼Cr(et−c.1), 1 ≤ t < pn, Cr(e0c). = zeros(1, 1).

(17)

Similar to the parallelism configuration for the L propagation, the R propagation control signals for the first k stages are set to zeros when the parallelism MP equals to k , k > 0. Then the remaining stages should be reconfigured as

Cktop = ∼Ckbot = (2k ) Cr(epcm.−1), k ≤ k < pn,

(18)

where pm = log2 PM. Moreover, the control signal for the final interMUX stage is also influenced by the Banyan network’s parallelism. The control signal for the R propagation in the pn + 1-th stage is as follows:

C pn = (2pn−pm+1) Cr(epcm.−1).

(19)

It is worth noting that when the parallelism MP is set to 0, the parameters pm and pn are equivalent.
In conclusion, we propose the control signals of L/R
propagation with multi-parallelism in (13)–(19). For a detailed explanation, we analyze the case of L propagation with PN = 8 as an example, the control signals in Fig. 10(a) are

C0top = [0 0 1 1], C1top = [0 1 1 0], C2top = [0 1 0 1],

C0bot = [1 1 0 0], C1bot = [0 1 1 0], C2bot = [1 0 1 0],

C3 = [0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1].

(20)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:45:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JI et al.: UniDec: A UNIFIED FACTOR-GRAPH-BASED DECODER FULLY COMPATIBLE

TABLE I 5G NR FEATURE PARAMETERS CONFIGURATION

4243

Fig. 11. Memory structure of the UniDec.

Similarly, we give the control signals for R propagation with PN = 8 in Fig. 10(b), denoted as

C0top = [0 1 1 0], C1top = [0 1 1 0], C2top = [0 1 1 0],

C0bot = [1 0 0 1], C1bot = [1 0 0 1], C2bot = [1 0 0 1],

C3 = [0 1 1 0 0 1 1 0].

(21)

D. Extrinsic Memory Units
Fig. 11 illustrates the structure of the extrinsic memory units. The memory sharing structure contains the data information memory and control information memory. The data information memory stores the channel soft message and intermediate message. Meanwhile, the control information memory retains the configurable control instructions for timing management, ensuring compatibility with the 5G NR standard. Additionally, detailed quantization and memory utilization schemes for both decoding modes are also provided in Fig. 11. In the polar mode, the L/R messages are uniformly quantized to QP = 6 bits including 2 fractional bits [36], while the 6-bit quantization scheme [26] is also adopted for our decoder under the LDPC mode.
1) Data Information Memory: The data information memory can be divided into three parts: the channel AP-LLR memory, the share memory storing the intermediate message produced by unified processing nodes, and the sign memory activated only in the LDPC mode. As shown in Fig. 11, the total memory capacity of the three memories is 542, 208 bits, involving 208, 896 bits allocated to AP-LLR memory, 211, 968 bits to shared memory, and 121, 344 bits to signed memory.
Note that the AP-LLR memory keeps the channel probabilistic information, its bit length is determined by the sub-matrix size Z for block parallel LDPC decoding. And the depth is dependent on the number of columns nb in the base graph. In polar mode, Ln and R0 messages are stored in the memory for each frame. The parameters of AP-LLR memory

(D × W) are illustrated in Fig. 11, where D, W denote the bit width and depth of memory, respectively.
The share memory stores the intermediate message of unified processing nodes in each iteration. There is a notable difference in the intermediate message formats between the two codes. In the LDPC mode, the intermediate message consists of min 1st, min 2nd, min id, and the xor sign produced by the corresponding CNs. In contrast, the share memory stores the stage messages Li/R j, 0 < i, j < n in the polar mode. Finally, the bit width and depth of the share memory are determined as follows.
( W = max(Zmax · QL, Nmax · QP), D = max(nb, n − 1),
where QL = Qmin 1st + Qmin 2nd + Qmin id + 1. The sign memory is reserved only for LDPC mode to store
sign messages derived from the β(t) message for each CN. To support the two types of base graphs in 5G NR LDPC codes, the bit width and depth of the sign memory depend on the maximum lifting value Zmax and the maximum number of non-zero elements wb for BG1/BG2.
In summary, the amount of data that needs to be stored in LDPC or polar mode is consistent with that of dedicated LDPC/polar decoders [15], [38]. In the proposed design, the data memory stores the intermediate data generated in both modes without introducing any additional memory overhead.
2) Control Information Memory: The control information memory is used to store configurable control instructions for decoding scheduling. These instructions are generated by the local parameter, feature parameter, and control parameter configuration. Table I shows the 5G NR feature parameter configuration for both codes. We set up the parameters based on local parameters such as the decoding mode, information bit length K, and code rate R. The control parameters are derived from the feature parameters to execute decoding scheduling, ensuring compatibility with 5G NR LDPC/polar decoding.
According to the feature parameters in Table I, the 5G NR LDPC codes and polar codes can be denoted as L(bg, mb, nb, Z) and P(N, A), respectively. While P(N, A)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:45:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4244

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS–I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 72, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025

only requires the stage number n as the control parameter to regulate L/R propagation scheduling, L(bg, mb, nb, Z) should consider the VN index set Vc connected to the CN c, shift values SV in base graphs, and memory access conflict ρ for
block parallel layer scheduling. Since memory access conflicts
can only occur between adjacent layers of CNs in the base graph, we construct memory conflict set ρ as (22).

(

ρ(i, j) =

1, 0,

Vc(i)( j) ∈ Vc(i−1) otherwise,

∩

Vc(i),

0≤

j < dc(i),

(22)

where c(i) denotes the CNs in the i-layer of the base graph. Then, we execute read access scheduling as the condition (23).

ρ(i, j) == 0,

or ρ(i, j) == 1 || Vc(i)( j) < Vc(i−1)( j ).

(23)

where Vc(i)( j), Vc(i−1)( j ) represent the current VN indices for read access and write-back, respectively.
The control information memory in Fig. 11 shows feature parameters and control parameters for both modes. And the latency analysis will be presented in the following section.

E. Timing Schedule and Latency Analysis

For LDPC decoding, the block parallel layer scheduling can

decouple the data dependency between VNs and CNs. How-

ever, the stall clock cycles nhazard caused by read-write conflicts do affect the overall decoding latency. Fortunately, the base

graphs for 5G NR LDPC codes exhibit good orthogonality

between adjacent rows, which helps mitigate the impact of

read-write conflicts on decoding latency.

To improve the hardware efficiency, the proposed multi-

frame processing strategy based on the combined Banyan

networks allows for the simultaneous decoding of MF frames,

where MF =

P Z

2

,

and

2 represents the ceil operation to the

nearest power of 2. Therefore, the throughput of the decoder

under LDPC mode (ThpL) can be computed as

ThpL

=

Freq. × nb × Z × MF , (wb + nhazard) × Titer

(24)

where Titer denotes the number of iterations.

In polar decoding, the single-column architecture consists

of a maximum of 256 PEs for one stage. For cases where the

code length is less than 512, we configure multiple frames in

parallel under the Banyan network, enabling the decoding of

MF

frames

simultaneously,

MF

=

. Nmax
N2

Hence,

the

throughput

of the decoder under polar mode (ThpP) can be computed as

ThpP

=

Freq. × N × MF . (n − 1) × Titer

(25)

V. IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS
This section presents the implementation results of the proposed UniDec, along with a comparison to SOA decoders, including LDPC-only decoders, polar-only decoders, and decoders that support both codes.

Fig. 12. Post-layout and implementation results of the UniDec.
A. Hardware Implementation Details
Fig. 12 presents the post-layout and implementation results of the UniDec, synthesized by the Synopsys Design Compiler and placed/routed with the Synopsys IC Compiler in 40 nm CMOS technology. The values are quantized to 6-bit fixedpoint numbers and the node parallelism P is set to 384. The UniDec is fully compatible with the 5G NR standard and supports multi-frame processing for flexible parallel decoding.
The UniDec occupies a core area of 1.64 mm2, comprising 0.56 mm2 of logic and 0.87 mm2 of memory. Figure 12 highlights the logic components including the UVPE, UCPE, Banyan networks, and controller, as well as the memory components, which consist of AP-LLR memory, shared memory, signed memory, and configuration memory. Based on the parameters in Section IV-D, all memories are implemented using two-port register files. The power dissipation of the decoder is 135.83 mW at 500 MHz clock frequency. It can deliver peak throughputs of 21.87 Gb/s in LDPC mode and 10.24 Gb/s in polar mode, respectively.
The comprehensive design validation has been conducted by configuring control information, including decoding modes and code parameters. For a fair comparison, we refer to the code parameters of SOA decoders to provide several similar decoding cases for performance comparison. The comprehensive analyses are conducted on multi-mode decoders and dedicated decoders under different code parameters.
B. Comparison With SOA Decoders
The comparison results in Table II can be divided into three categories to achieve a comprehensive analysis for the UniDec: LDPC-only decoders, polar-only decoders, and the decoders supporting the two codes.
To demonstrate the advantages of the proposed architecture, we make the comparisons with the SOA multi-mode decoders [26], [31]. According to Table II, our UniDec demonstrates comprehensive superiority in both LDPC and polar modes compared with previous work [26], [31]. Thanks to the unified architecture with high node parallelism, the peak throughput of the UniDec outperforms the SOA decoder [26] with a maximum improvement of 33.64× and 6.06× in LDPC and polar modes, respectively. Meanwhile, the UniDec also attains a maximum of 5.98× and 1.07× area efficiency over [26], respectively. Compared to the multi-mode decoders [31] that only partially support the 5G NR standard, the UniDec offers

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:45:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JI et al.: UniDec: A UNIFIED FACTOR-GRAPH-BASED DECODER FULLY COMPATIBLE
TABLE II HARDWARE RESULTS COMPARISON FOR SOA MULTI-MODE DECODERS AND DEDICATED DECODERS

4245

full compatibility with both 5G NR LDPC/polar codes, while improving throughput and area efficiency through multi-frame processing.
Compared with the SOA LDPC-only decoders [20], [21], the proposed decoder still demonstrates competitive performance. In the LDPC mode, the UniDec achieves a 15.43% reduction in energy consumption over [20] while maintaining comparable area efficiency. For polar decoding, our decoder is designed specifically for short codes in 5G control channels, and it can deliver a peak throughput of 10.24 Gb/s within the 5G NR standard. In comparison to the SOA polar-only decoder [17], our decoder achieve a 1.35× boost in throughput.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper presents the UniDec for LDPC/polar codes to meet the requirements of 5G eMBB scenarios. By utilizing the graph theory and hardware formula representation, we propose a unified integration methodology to derive the factorgraph based architecture from graph-theoretic algorithms to hardware implementations. Besides, the unified processing nodes and configurable networks with multi-parallelism are proposed to improve the hardware efficiency. Implemented in 40 nm CMOS technology, the UniDec occupies a size of 1.64 mm2 core area at 500 MHz clock frequency. Thanks to the unified architecture and its efficient node and network connection designs, the UniDec in LDPC/polar modes

outperforms the SOA multi-mode decoder in terms of throughput by 33.64× and 6.06×, and area efficiency by 5.98× and 1.07×, respectively.
Moreover, a joint-graph architecture that includes detection and decoding is part of our future research. This aims to generalize our methodology to other factor-graph based signal processing algorithms.
REFERENCES
[1] IMT Vision Framework and Overall Objectives of the Future Development of IMT for 2020 and Beyond, document ITU-R M.2083, 2015.
[2] Study on Communication for Automation in Vertical Domains (CAV), Standard 3GPP TR 22.804, 2017.
[3] N. Al-Falahy and O. Y. Alani, “Technologies for 5G networks: Challenges and opportunities,” IT Prof., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 12–20, Jan. 2017.
[4] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[5] E. Arikan, “Channel polarization: A method for constructing capacityachieving codes for symmetric binary-input memoryless channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 3051–3073, Jul. 2009.
[6] 5G NR: Multiplexing and Channel Coding, Standard 3GPP TS 38.212 version 15.2.0, 2018.
[7] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[8] E. Arikan, “A performance comparison of polar codes and Reed–Mu¨ller codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 447–449, Jun. 2008.
[9] I. Tal and A. Vardy, “List decoding of polar codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 2213–2226, May 2015.
[10] K. Le Trung, F. Ghaffari, and D. Declercq, “An adaptation of minsum decoder for 5G low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), May 2019, pp. 1–5.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:45:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4246

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS–I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 72, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025

[11] Y. Ren, Y. Shen, Z. Zhang, X. You, and C. Zhang, “Efficient belief propagation polar decoder with loop simplification based factor graphs,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 69, no. 5, pp. 5657–5660, May 2020.
[12] S. A. Hashemi, C. Condo, and W. J. Gross, “Fast and flexible successivecancellation list decoders for polar codes,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 65, no. 21, pp. 5756–5769, Nov. 2017.
[13] F. Ercan, T. Tonnellier, and W. J. Gross, “Energy-efficient hardware architectures for fast polar decoders,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 322–335, Jan. 2020.
[14] R. Ghanaatian et al., “A 588-Gb/s LDPC decoder based on finitealphabet message passing,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 329–340, Feb. 2018.
[15] H. Cui, F. Ghaffari, K. Le, D. Declercq, J. Lin, and Z. Wang, “Design of high-performance and area-efficient decoder for 5G LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 879–891, Feb. 2021.
[16] Y. Ren, A. T. Kristensen, Y. Shen, A. Balatsoukas-Stimming, C. Zhang, and A. Burg, “A sequence repetition node-based successive cancellation list decoder for 5G polar codes: Algorithm and implementation,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 70, pp. 5592–5607, 2022.
[17] Y.-T. Chen, W.-C. Sun, C.-C. Cheng, T.-L. Tsai, Y.-L. Ueng, and C.-H. Yang, “An integrated message-passing detector and decoder for polar-coded massive MU-MIMO systems,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 66, no. 3, pp. 1205–1218, Mar. 2019.
[18] S. Song, H. Cui, and Z. Wang, “A universal efficient circular-shift network for reconfigurable quasi-cyclic LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 30, no. 10, pp. 1553–1557, Oct. 2022.
[19] H. Lam, S. Lu, H. Qiu, M. Zhang, H. Jiao, and S. Zhang, “A highefficiency segmented reconfigurable cyclic shifter for 5G QC-LDPC decoder,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 401–414, Jan. 2022.
[20] S. Lee, S. Park, B. Jang, and I.-C. Park, “Multi-mode QC-LDPC decoding architecture with novel memory access scheduling for 5G newradio standard,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 69, no. 5, pp. 2035–2048, May 2022.
[21] B. Jang, H. Jang, S. Kim, K. Choi, and I.-C. Park, “Area-efficient QCLDPC decoding architecture with thermometer code-based sorting and relative quasi-cyclic shifting,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 71, no. 6, pp. 2897–2910, Jun. 2024.
[22] D. Kam, B. Y. Kong, and Y. Lee, “Low-latency SCL polar decoder architecture using overlapped pruning operations,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 70, no. 3, pp. 1417–1427, Mar. 2023.
[23] J. Liu, S. Jing, X. You, and C. Zhang, “A merged BP decoding algorithm for polar-LDPC concatenated codes,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Digit. Signal Process. (DSP), Aug. 2017, pp. 1–5.
[24] N. Yang et al., “Reconfigurable decoder for LDPC and polar codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), May 2018, pp. 1–5.
[25] B.-S. Su, C.-H. Lee, and T.-D. Chiueh, “A 58.6/91.3 pJ/b dual-mode belief-propagation decoder for LDPC and polar codes in the 5G communications standard,” IEEE Solid-State Circuits Lett., vol. 5, pp. 98–101, 2022.
[26] S. Cao, T. Lin, S. Zhang, S. Xu, and C. Zhang, “A reconfigurable and pipelined architecture for standard-compatible LDPC and polar decoding,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 70, no. 6, pp. 5431–5444, Jun. 2021.
[27] Y. Yue et al., “A unified forward error correction accelerator for multimode turbo, LDPC, and polar decoding,” in Proc. ACM/IEEE Int. Symp. Low Power Electron. Design, Aug. 2022, pp. 1–6.
[28] K. R. Duffy, J. Li, and M. Me´dard, “Guessing noise, not code-words,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jun. 2018, pp. 671–675.
[29] A. Riaz et al., “Multi-code multi-rate universal maximum likelihood decoder using GRAND,” in Proc. IEEE 47th Eur. Solid State Circuits Conf. (ESSCIRC), Sep. 2021, pp. 239–246.
[30] A. Riaz, M. Medard, K. R. Duffy, and R. T. Yazicigil, “A universal maximum likelihood GRAND decoder in 40nm CMOS,” in Proc. 14th Int. Conf. Commun. Syst. Netw. (COMSNETS), Jan. 2022, pp. 421–423.
[31] B.-S. Su, C.-H. Lee, and T.-D. Chiueh, “A 58.6/91.3 pj/b dual-mode belief-propagation decoder for LDPC and polar codes in the 5G communications standard,” IEEE Solid-State Circuits Lett., vol. 5, pp. 98–101, 2022.
[32] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[33] G. Nordin, P. A. Milder, J. C. Hoe, and M. Pu¨schel, “Automatic generation of customized discrete Fourier transform IPs,” in Proc. 42nd Annu. Conf. Design Autom. (DAC), 2005, p. 471.

[34] T. Richardson and S. Kudekar, “Design of low-density parity check codes for 5G new radio,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 28–34, Mar. 2018.
[35] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Density evolution for two improved BP-based decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 208–210, May 2002.
[36] Y. Shen et al., “Improved belief propagation polar decoders with bit-flipping algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 68, no. 11, pp. 6699–6713, Nov. 2020.
[37] V. L. Petrovic´, M. M. Markovic´, D. M. E. Mezeni, L. V. Saranovac, and A. Radosˇevic´, “Flexible high throughput QC-LDPC decoder with perfect pipeline conflicts resolution and efficient hardware utilization,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 67, no. 12, pp. 5454–5467, Dec. 2020.
[38] Y. Sung Park, Y. Tao, S. Sun, and Z. Zhang, “A 4.68Gb/s belief propagation polar decoder with bit-splitting register file,” in Proc. Symp. VLSI Circuits Dig. Tech. Papers, Jun. 2014, pp. 1–2.
[39] X. Peng, Z. Chen, X. Zhao, F. Maehara, and S. Goto, “High parallel variation banyan network based permutation network for reconfigurable LDPC decoder,” in Proc. ASAP 21st IEEE Int. Conf. Appl.-Specific Syst., Archit. Processors, Jul. 2010, pp. 233–238.
[40] Z. Zhong, Y. Huang, Z. Zhang, X. You, and C. Zhang, “A flexible and high parallel permutation network for 5G LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 67, no. 12, pp. 3018–3022, Dec. 2020.
[41] E. Arıkan, “Polar codes: A pipelined implementation,” in Proc. 4th Int. Symp. Broad. Commun. (ISBC), 2010, pp. 11–14.
[42] S. Sun and Z. Zhang, “Architecture and optimization of high-throughput belief propagation decoding of polar codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), May 2016, pp. 165–168.
Houren Ji received the B.S. degree from the College of Electronics, Communication and Physics, Shandong University of Science and Technology, Qingdao, China, in 2018, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the School of Information Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in 2021 and 2025, respectively. His research interests include decoding algorithm for error-correction codes and VLSI design for digital signal processing.
Yi Zhang received the M.S. degree in integrated circuit engineering from Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in 2016, where she is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in electronic and information engineering.
She is an Associate Researcher at Purple Mountain Laboratories, Nanjing. Her research interests include VLSI architectures for digital signal processing accelerators, high-efficiency baseband chip design, and low-power integrated circuit design.
Yutai Sun (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) was born in 2000. He received the B.E. degree from the School of Information Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in 2022, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree. His research interests include error-correction codes, MIMO detection, and machine learning for wireless communications.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:45:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JI et al.: UniDec: A UNIFIED FACTOR-GRAPH-BASED DECODER FULLY COMPATIBLE

4247

Yongming Huang (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees from Nanjing University, Nanjing, China, in 2000 and 2003, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from Southeast University, Nanjing, in 2007. Since March 2007, he has been the Faculty of the School of Information Science and Engineering, Southeast University, where he is currently a Full Professor. From 2008 to 2009, he visited the Signal Processing Laboratory, Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden. He has authored or co-authored more than 200 peerreviewed articles and holds more than 80 invention patents. His research interests include intelligent 5G/6G mobile communications and millimeter wave wireless communications. He submitted around 20 technical contributions to IEEE standards, and was awarded a certificate of appreciation for outstanding contribution to the development of IEEE standard 802.11aj. He was an Associate Editor of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING and a Guest Editor of the IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS. He is currently an Editor-at-Large of the IEEE OPEN JOURNAL OF THE COMMUNICATIONS SOCIETY and an Associate Editor of the IEEE WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS.
Xiaohu You (Fellow, IEEE) received the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in 1985 and 1988, respectively. Since 1990, he has been with the National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory, Southeast University, where he is currently the Director and a Full Professor. He is an Academician of Chinese Academy of Sciences. He has long been engaged in teaching, scientific research, and organizational management of mobile communication systems, and made important contributions to the development of China’s 3G, 4G, and 5G mobile communications. From 1999 to 2002, he was the Principal Expert of the C3G Project, responsible for organizing China’s 3G Mobile Communications Research and Development Activities. From 2001 to 2006, he was the Principal Expert of China National 863 Beyond 3G FuTURE Project. Since 2013, he has been the Principal Investigator of China National 863 5G Project. He has contributed more than 200 IEEE journal articles and two books in the areas of adaptive signal processing and neural networks, and their applications to communication systems. His research interests include mobile communication systems, and signal processing and its applications. Dr. You was elected as an IEEE Fellow for his contributions to the development of mobile communications in China in 2011. As a first recipient, he won the First Class National Technological Invention Award, the Second Class National Science and Technology Progress Award, Tan Kah Kee Science Award, and other important awards. He served as the General Chair for the IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference 2013, the IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference 2016, and the IEEE International Conference on Communications 2019. He is the Secretary-General of the FuTURE Forum and the Vice-Chair of the China IMT-2020 Promotion Group and China National Mega Project on New Generation Mobile Network.

Chuan Zhang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.E. degree in microelectronics and the M.E. degree in very-large scale integration (VLSI) design from Nanjing University, Nanjing, China, in 2006 and 2009, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Minnesota, Twin Cities (UMN), USA, in 2012.
He is currently the Young Chair Professor of Southeast University. He is also with LEADS, National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory, Frontiers Science Center for Mobile Information Communication and Security of MoE, Quantum Information Center, Southeast University, and Purple Mountain Laboratories, Nanjing, China. His current research interests are algorithms and implementations for signal processing and communication systems. Dr. Zhang is a member of the Applied Signal Processing Systems TC of the IEEE Signal Processing Society, Circuits and Systems for Communications TC, VLSI Systems and Applications TC, and Digital Signal Processing TC of the IEEE Circuits and Systems Society. He received the Best Contribution Award of the IEEE Asia-Pacific Conference on Circuits and Systems (APCCAS) in 2018, the Best Paper Award in 2016, the Best (Student) Paper Award of the IEEE International Conference on DSP in 2016, three Best (Student) Paper Awards of the IEEE International Conference on ASIC in 2015, 2017, 2019, and 2023, the Best Paper Award Nomination of the IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems in 2015, three Excellent Paper Awards and two Excellent Poster Presentation Awards of the International Collaboration Symposium on Information Production and Systems from 2016 to 2018, the Outstanding Achievement Award of the Intel Collaborative Research Institute in 2018, and the Merit (Student) Paper Award of the IEEE APCCAS in 2008. He also received the Three-Year University-Wide Graduate School Fellowship of UMN and the Doctoral Dissertation Fellowship of UMN. He was a Distinguished Lecturer and currently the Chair of the Circuits and Systems for Communications TC of the IEEE Circuits and Systems Society. He serves as a Senior Editorial Board (SEB) Member for JETCAS, and a Steering Committee Member for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING. He served as an Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, and IEEE OPEN JOURNAL OF CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, a Corresponding Guest Editor for the JETCAS three times.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:45:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

