13156

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025

Reduced Complexity Dynamic Schedule for Layered Decoding of LDPC Codes
Xinle Jia , Yangcan Zhou , Zijian Qin, Jingjing Zhu, and Zhongfeng Wang , Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have been selected as the coding scheme of the data channel in 5G communication. To enhance the performance of conventional layered decoding of LDPC codes, various dynamic schedules have been proposed recently. However, these dynamic schedules suffer from high complexity. In this paper, we propose a reduced complexity dynamic layered schedule for LDPC codes, where the layer to be updated is determined based on the residual of each layer. Moreover, an adjustable parameter is introduced to achieve a better performancecomplexity trade-off. Simulation results show that the proposed method maintains excellent error-correction performance while the computational complexity is greatly reduced, compared to the prior dynamic schedules.
Index Terms—LDPC codes, layered decoding, dynamic scheduling schemes.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes were invented by Gallager in 1960s [1]. However, it was not until 1990 s, when LDPC codes were rediscovered [2], that they began to gain enormous attention. Quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) codes are one important class of constructed LDPC codes, which have been adopted by various communication standards for their superior performance and hardware-friendly features [3], such as IEEE 802.11n (WiFi), IEEE 802.16e (WiMAX) and 5G New Radio [4].
One commonly used decoding scheme of LDPC codes is the belief propagation (BP) algorithm. Based on the Tanner graph of the parity-check matrix (PCM), the BP algorithm propagates messages between check nodes and variable nodes iteratively. The message-passing schedules have a great impact on the decoding performance of the BP algorithm. Typically, static schedules and dynamic schedules are two main classes of decoding scheduling strategies for LDPC codes. Static ones determine the decoding order offline and keep it fixed throughout the iterations. The layered decoding algorithm [5], which is a primitive static schedule, updates layers of the PCM in a serial manner. For the 5G LDPC codes which have extremely irregular row degree and punctured bits, some variants [6], [7], [8] have further optimized the update order of layers, yielding better error-correction performance than ordinary layered schedule. In contrast to static scheduling strategies, the dynamic
Received 20 August 2024; revised 31 December 2024 and 3 March 2025; accepted 8 March 2025. Date of publication 14 March 2025; date of current version 15 August 2025. This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China under Grant 2022YFB4400600. The review of this article was coordinated by Prof. Rui Dinis. (Yangcan Zhou and Xinle Jia contributed equally to this paper.) (Corresponding authors: Zhongfeng Wang; Yangcan Zhou.)
Xinle Jia, Zijian Qin, and Jingjing Zhu are with the School of Electronic Science and Engineering, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210008, China (e-mail: xljia@smail.nju.edu.cn; qingjian@smail.nju.edu.cn; jingjingzhu@ smail.nju.edu.cn).
Yangcan Zhou is with the School of Integrated Circuits, Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen 518107, China (e-mail: yczhou2015@sina.com).
Zhongfeng Wang is with the School of Electronic Science and Engineering, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210008, China, and also with the School of Integrated Circuits, Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen 518107, China (e-mail: zfwang@nju.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVT.2025.3551240

ones decide the updating order online during the decoding. Since dynamic schedules utilize real-time information to find the optimal order of message-passing, they normally exhibit faster convergence speed and better error performance than the static ones, albeit at the cost of higher complexity. Moreover, compared to the static schedules, dynamic ones can overcome the trapping-set errors to some extent, which leads to a lower error-floor [9].
A series of dynamic schedules have been proposed in [8], [10], [11], [12], [13] to surpass the static ones, among which the residual-based BP (RBP) [10] determines the order of message passing based on the residuals of the check-to-variable (C2V) messages before and after an update. The RBP has fast convergence speed but its error-correction performance is poor when the number of iterations is large [11]. This behavior is caused by a substantial quantity of repeated updates of few edges. The node-wise RBP (NWRBP) [11] achieves outstanding error-correction performance by solving this defect of RBP via concurrently updating all C2V messages of a check node. The residualdecaying-based RBP (RDRBP) [12] introduces a decaying parameter to decrease those residuals that are always large, which also alleviates the greediness of RBP. The list-based RBP (L-RBP) [13] utilizes a concise residual list and partially renews it to mitigate the greediness of RBP, surpassing the previous schedules. However, these schedules all require a large amount of precomputation, which makes them highly inefficient. To reduce the complexity caused by precomputation, the residual-based layered BP (RB-LBP) was proposed in [8]. Although the complexity of RB-LBP is reduced to some extent, its error-correction performance is degraded drastically, as will be shown later.
To further reduce complexity and maintain good performance, we propose a coarse-grained metric, namely layer residual, to determine the decoding order of each layer. This metric can significantly reduce the number of residuals to be sorted. Furthermore, we introduce a parameter D to represent the number of layers to be updated following each round of precomputation. A larger D (i.e., updating more layers after one round of precomputation) leads to more significant reduction in the number of precomputations, which provides a way to achieve a better performance-complexity trade-off.

II. PRELIMINARIES

A. LDPC Codes

The LDPC codes can be defined by a sparse PCM H with dimension

M × N , where M is the number of check nodes and N denotes the

number of variable nodes (coded bits). The number of imformation

bits

K

=

N

−M

and

the

code

rate

R

=

K N

.

QC-LDPC

codes

are

a

specific class of structured LDPC codes. The PCM of QC-LDPC codes

is constructed using the base graph (BG). In constructing the PCM,

each negative element of BG will be expanded into a Z × Z all zero

matrix and each non-negative element S will be expanded into a Z × Z

identity matrix cyclically shifted S times, where Z is the lifting size.

For QC-LDPC codes, each row of BG forms a layer. Assume the BG

of QC-LDPC codes has m rows and n columns. Therefore, the PCM

H has m layers, M = m × Z rows, and N = n × Z columns. The

process of generating the PCM H of QC-LDPC codes is shown in

Fig. 1.

B. Normalized LBP Decoding Algorithm
The LBP decoding algorithm is performed by serially updating the layers of the PCM. Let ci be the ith check node and vj be the jth variable

0018-9545 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:43:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025

13157

more to the decoding [11]. Therefore, RBP gives this message a higher priority for updating to speed up the decoding process. For more details about the RBP algorithm, please refer to [11].

III. THE PROPOSED DYNAMIC SCHEDULE

A. Rationale of Our Design Choice

Fig. 1. The process of generating PCM of QC-LDPC codes.

node in the Tanner graph. Suppose mcti→vj is the C2V message sent from ci to vj in the tth iteration, qvtj→ci is the variable-to-check (V2C) message sent from vj to ci in the tth iteration, and Ltj, l is the a-posterior probability (APP) message of vj in the tth iteration before the lth layer
is updated. At the beginning of decoding, the APP messages and the
C2V messages are initialized as

Lj1, 0 = Cj , ∀j ∈ {0, 1, . . . , N − 1},

(1)

m0ci→vj = 0, ∀i ∈ {0, 1, . . . , M − 1}, vj ∈ U (ci),

(2)

where Cj is the channel log-likelihood ratio of vj and U (ci) is the set of the variable nodes connected to ci. During the decoding of the tth iteration, the V2C messages at the lth layer are calculated as

qvtj →ci = Ltj, l − mct−i→1 vj .

(3)

Then the C2V messages can be obtained by

mtci →vj

=

α

·

va∈U (ci)\vj

sign(qvt a →ci

)

·

min
va∈U (ci)\vj

qvt a →ci

,

(4)

where the normalized min-sum algorithm [14] is used and α is a
normalized factor. In all simulation later, this algorithm is used in the check node processing. U (ci) \ vj is the set of the variable nodes connected to ci except vj. After C2V messages are updated, the APP message forward to (l + 1)th layer is updated as

Ltj, l+1 = mtci→vj + qvtj →ci .

(5)

When an iteration ends, the decoding codeword xˆ is estimated. Suppose Tmax represents the preset maximum number of iterations. The iterative decoding will stop when HxˆT = 0 or t = Tmax.

C. RBP Decoding Algorithm

The dynamic schemes typically determine the optimal edge to update online through the precomputation. For the RBP decoding, the precomputation is utilized to calculate the residual of the C2V message rci→vj as follows

rci→vj = |mpcir→e vj − mci→vj |,

(6)

where mpcir→e vj denotes the C2V message after a potential update and mci→vj is the retained C2V message of the last update. Intuitively, when the BP algorithm converges, the residuals of C2V messages will move
toward zero. If the residual of a message is larger than others, it indicates
that this message is farther away from convergence and contributes

A dynamic scheduling algorithm consists of two steps: precomputation and iterative update. The precomputation is to use a metric to find the part of the Tanner graph that exhibits poor convergence. The metric used in RBP algorithm is an edge-based metric, which reflects the convergence degree of an edge [10]. NWRBP finds the edge with the largest residual and updates all edges in the same row concurrently. It can be interpreted as that NWRBP uses a row-based metric (the largest residual in each row) to characterize the convergence of a row [11], which is also adopted by RB-LBP.
The existing dynamic schedules typically exhibit high complexity, partly due to the substantial amount of residuals that need to be sorted, which arises from the extremely fine-grained residual metric. Hence, we aim to design a coarse-grained metric to reduce the computational complexity. Based on the rationale of the row-based metric that the largest residual of a row can reflect the convergence of that row, we further develop a layer-based metric named layer residual that accumulates the largest residuals of each row in a layer. Therefore, this layer-based metric can be used to reflect the overall degree of convergence for all rows within a layer. Although this metric is not as precise as the edge-based metric, it remains an effective approach and can lead to a remarkable reduction in computational complexity.
B. Layer-Residual-Based LBP (LRB-LBP) Algorithm
Based on the new metric above, we propose the LRB-LBP schedule which prioritizes updating the layer with the largest layer residual. The detail of the LRB-LBP decoding scheme is described in Algorithm 1. In Algorithm 1, lk is the kth layer from top to bottom of H, Ljt is the APP message of vj after the tth updates, qvpjr→e ci denotes the V2C message sent from vj to ci in the precomputation which is not used in the true iterative update, and LRk is the layer residual of the kth layer.
In Algorithm 1, the LRB-LBP firstly starts the precomputation. For each layer of H, qvpjr→e ci is first calculated in Line 7 where mci→vj is the C2V message retained from the last update. Then we find the minimum of |qvpjr→e ci | for each row of the layer, denoted as qvmji→n ci (Line 8), and compute mcpir→e vj using a modification of (4) where the second minimum is not needed (Line 9). It should be emphasized that finding the minimum and the second minimum requires (2dc − 3) comparisons while finding only the minimum needs (dc − 1) comparisons, where dc represents the average row degree of the PCM. As only one edge in each row requires the second minimum to calculate mcpir→e vj , and simulation results indicate that substituting the minimum for the second minimum in the precomputation can also achieve good error-correction performance, thus the second minimum is not considered here to further reduce complexity. But please note that in the real update the normalized min-sum algorithm is used (Line 14). Afterwards, the C2V residual rci→vj is calculated as (6). Then we find the largest residual in each row (Line 11) and add them up to get LR of each layer (Line 12). Empirically, the LR of the just updated layer is not calculated in the next round of precomputation to reduce complexity. Besides, those layers whose APP messages have not been updated in the last update do not need to be precomputed in the next round of precomputation, as their LR have not changed and can be retained directly. Finally, the precomputation is completed when the largest LR and the corresponding layer lq are found (Line 13). It should be noted that when identifying the layer with

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:43:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

13158
Algorithm 1: Layer-Residual-Based LBP.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025
TABLE I COMPLEXITY OF DIFFERENT DECODING SCHEDULES PER ITERATION

bits. Therefore, for 5G LDPC codes, the LRB-LBP performs the loop (Line 3 ∼ Line 17) at most (Tmax − 1) ∗ m times since an iteration has been performed.

IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION

A. Complexity Analysis

Algorithm 2: The Modified LRB-LBP.
the largest LR, the layer that has just been updated can be omitted. Hence, there is no need to reset the residuals of this layer to zero like other dynamic schedules.
After the precomputation, we perform the update in the layer lq using (3)–(5). The above precomputation and iterative update are executed repeatedly until the termination condition is satisfied. It is worth noting that t denotes the number of loops, and t = t + 1 when a layer is updated.
In Algorithm 1, the update of only one layer requires sorting for m LR, which still creates a mass of computation. Therefore, the modified LRB-LBP that introduces an adjustable parameter D is proposed to further reduce the computational complexity. As outlined in Algorithm 2, instead of updating only one layer, the modified LRB-LBP involves updating D layers with the D largest LR serially after one round of precomputation. By this way, one round of precomputation can be responsible for multi-layer updating, significantly diminishing the sorting times of m LR. It is intuitive that a larger D leads to lower computational complexity, while the error-correction performance may degrade due to the underutilization of real-time updated information. By adjusting the parameter D, a good performance-complexity trade-off can be achieved, which will be shown in Section IV-B.
It is worth noting that for 5G LDPC codes with punctured bits [15], the first iteration of the LRB-LBP algorithm is recommended to execute the static schedule in [7] to recover the the soft message of punctured

In this subsection, we first analyze the average decoding complexity

of a single iteration for different schedules. For LBP, an iteration is

completed after all layers of H are updated, whereas for some dynamic

schedules, this definition needs to be modified. For RB-LBP, an iteration

is completed after all rows of H are updated in a predetermined

order [8]. For RDRBP, NWRBP, and L-RBP, an iteration will be counted

after any E edges (M rows) are updated, where the symbol E is the

number of edges in the Tanner graph [11]. While for LRB-LBP, an

iteration consists of the updating of any m layers. We adopt the number

of additions and comparisons as the metric of the complexity for these

different schedules. Based on this metric, the results of analysis are

shown in Table I, in which the average column degree dv = E/N and the average row degree dc = E/M .
LBP, RB-LBP, and the proposed LRB-LBP all perform (3)-(5) for

the updates. Both (3) and (5) require one addition (subtraction is

treated as addition), thus each edge needs two additions and then one

iteration (E edges) demands 2E additions. Besides, each row needs

(2dc − 3) comparisons for (4), therefore one iteration (M rows) requires M (2dc − 3) comparisons. According to the flooding-like update manner of NWRBP, RDRBP, and L-RBP, the V2C message update

of a variable node requires (2dv − 1) additions. Then one update of NWRBP (dc variable nodes), RDRBP (1 variable node), and L-RBP (1 variable node) need dc(2dv − 1), (2dv − 1), and (2dv − 1) additions, respectively. Thus one iteration of NWRBP (M updates) demands

M dc(2dv − 1) = E(2dv − 1) additions and one iteration of RDRBP (E updates) and L-RBP (E updates) requires E(2dv − 1) additions. The complexity of the precomputation of RB-LBP, NWRBP, RDRBP,

and L-RBP has been analyzed in [12] and [13].

An

iteration

of

LRB-LBP

typically

requires

m−1 D

precomputations.

For each single precomputation, the proposed method needs M dc +

m(Z − 1) additions to run the operations in Line 7 and Line 12 of

Algorithm 1. Besides, it demands M (dc − 1) + M (dc − 1) + (m − 1) comparisons to run the operations in Line 8, Line 11, and Line 13

of Algorithm 1. Thus the number of additions and comparisons needed

for the whole iteration are calculated as below

m− D

1

· (M dc

+ m(Z

− 1))

≈

m− D

1 (E

+

M ),

(7)

m− D

1

·

(2M (dc

−

1)

+ (m − 1))

≈

2(m − 1) (E D

− M ).

(8)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:43:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025

13159

Fig. 3.

The FER performance and decoding complexity of K

=

3840, R

=

1 3

(BG2) 5G LDPC code with NWRBP, RDRBP, RB-LBP, L-RBP, and LRB-LBP

schedules, Tmax = 5.

Fig. 2. The ROC curves between the proposed algorithm and other dynamic schedules for different lifting size Z, where BG2 is used.

In order to highlight the reduced complexity feature of LRB-LBP, we calculate the ratio of the complexity (ROC) between the proposed algorithm and other dynamic schedules under different lifting factors, where BG2 is considered. In this paper, we equate one comparison to a half addition. Consequently, based on Table I, the complexity (C) is calculated as follows

C

=

NAdd

+

1 2 NComp.,

(9)

where NAdd and NComp. are the number of additions and the number of comparisons, respectively, both including updates and precompu-

tations. Fig. 2 depicts the ROC between the proposed algorithm and

other dynamic schedules for varying lifting size Z. At Z = 384, the

complexity of the proposed schedule with D = 10 is about one per-

cent

of

RB-LBP,

1 300

of

L-RBP,

one

thousandth

of

NWRBP,

and

1 2000

of RDRBP, which indicates that the proposed approach significantly

reduces the computational complexity.

B. Error-Correction Performance

In this subsection, the simulation that evaluates the error-correction

performance of LBP, NWRBP, RB-LBP, RDRBP, L-RBP, and LRB-

LBP is conducted with the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN)

channel and the quadrature phase shift keying (QPSK) modulation. The

normalized factor α is optimized for different codewords and schedules,

as

shown

in

Fig.

3

and

Fig.

4.

The

list

size

of

the

L-RBP

is

set

to

E 128

.

Fig. 3 depicts the frame error rate (FER) performance for the K =

3840, R

=

1 3

5G LDPC code, where Tmax

is set to 5. It can be observed

that the proposed LRB-LBP surpasses the low-complexity dynamic

schedule RB-LBP. At FER = 10−2, the proposed LRB-LBP has about

0.3dB gain compared to RB-LBP. It can be also found in Fig. 3 that

when D increases, the performance of the modified LRB-LBP degrades

slightly. However, even when D = 10, the performance of the modified

LRB-LBP still outperforms RB-LBP. The FER performance of the K =

1152,

R=

1 2

IEEE

802.16e

LDPC

code

with

different

schedules

are

shown in Fig. 4, where Tmax is set to 10. For this code, it is shown

that the performance of the modified LRB-LBP even with a large D

can still surpass that of RB-LBP. We notice from Fig. 3 and Fig. 4

that LRB-LBP exhibits a certain degree of performance degradation

Fig. 4.

The FER performance and decoding complexity of K

=

1152, R

=

1 2

IEEE 802.16e LDPC code with NWRBP, RDRBP, RB-LBP, L-RBP, and LRB-

LBP schedules, Tmax = 10.

compared with NWRBP, RDRBP, and L-RBP. However, according to the analysis in Section IV-A, we can expect that the computational complexity of LRB-LBP is much lower than that of NWRBP, RDRBP, and L-RBP, which will be verified later.
The simulation also measures the average number of iterations (AN I) of these schedules which are used to calculate the decoding complexity (DC) as follows

DC = AN I × C.

(10)

Fig. 3 shows the decoding complexity of RB-LBP, NWRBP, RDRBP, L-

RBP, and LRB-LBP schedules when they are applied to the K = 3840,

R

=

1 3

5G LDPC code. We can observe that the decoding complexity of

LRB-LBP is reduced by more than one order of magnitude and two or-

ders of magnitude compared to RB-LBP/L-RBP and NWRBP/RDRBP,

respectively.

As

shown

in

Fig.

4,

for

the

K = 1152,

R=

1 2

IEEE

802.16e LDPC code, the decoding complexity of the proposed LRB-

LBP is also drastically lower than that of other dynamic schedules.

To show the convergence behavior of the proposed schedule, the

FER vs iterations is simulated. Fig. 5 depicts the simulation results for

the

K

=

3840, R

=

1 3

(BG2)

5G

LDPC

code

with

different

schedules

at Eb/N0 = 0.85 dB, where the QPSK modulation is used. It can be

observed that the proposed LRB-LBP schedule has a faster convergence

speed than the RB-LBP, LBP, and Flooding schedules. Additionally, al-

though the decoding convergence of the NWRBP, RDRBP, and L-RBP

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:43:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

13160

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025

Fig. 5.

The FER performance of the K

=

3840, R

=

1 3

(BG2) 5G LDPC code

with different number of iterations at Eb/N0 = 0.85 dB.

is faster than that of our proposed algorithm, their decoding complexity is significantly higher than ours.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a reduced complexity dynamic layered schedule, namely LRB-LBP, is proposed for the LDPC codes. The residual of each layer is calculated to determine the layer to be updated. Besides, by introducing an adjustable parameter D, the modified LRB-LBP algorithm is proposed to further reduce the computational complexity. Through adjusting the number of layers updated after one round of precomputation, a good performance-complexity trade-off can be achieved. The complexity analysis and the simulation results demonstrate that the proposed LRB-LBP has lower computational complexity while maintaining excellent error-correction performance.

REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1963.
[2] D. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[3] Y. Zhou, J. Lin, and Z. Wang, “Efficient approximate layered LDPC decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., May 2017, pp. 1–4.
[4] 3rd Generation Partnership Project, “Multiplexing and channel coding,” 3GPP, Tech. Rep. 38.212-g40 V.16.4.0, 2020. [Online]. Available: https: //www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/archive/38_series/38.212
[5] D. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst., Oct. 2004, pp. 107–112.
[6] C.-Y. Liang, M.-R. Li, H.-C. Lee, H.-Y. Lee, and Y.-L. Ueng, “Hardwarefriendly LDPC decoding scheduling for 5G HARQ applications,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech, Signal Process., May 2019, pp. 1418–1422.
[7] K. Tian and H. Wang, “A novel base graph based static scheduling scheme for layered decoding of 5G LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 26, no. 7, pp. 1450–1453, Jul. 2022.
[8] B. Wang, Y. Zhu, and J. Kang, “Two effective scheduling schemes for layered belief propagation of 5G LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 1683–1686, Aug. 2020.
[9] A. I. V. Casado, M. Griot, and R. D. Wesel, “LDPC decoders with informed dynamic scheduling,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 12, pp. 3470–3479, Dec. 2010.
[10] G. Elidan, I. McGraw, and D. Koller, “Residual belief propagation: Informed scheduling for asynchronous message passing,” in Proc. Conf. Uncertainty Artif. Intell., Jul. 2006, pp. 165–173.
[11] A. I. V. Casado, M. Griot, and R. D. Wesel, “Informed dynamic scheduling for belief-propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Jun. 2007, pp. 932–937.
[12] H. Zhang and S. Chen, “Residual-decaying-based informed dynamic scheduling for belief-propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 23656–23666, 2019.
[13] Z. Yan, W. Guan, and L. Liang, “List-based residual belief-propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 984–988, May 2024.
[14] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu, “Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, Aug. 2005.
[15] D. Hui, S. Sandberg, Y. Blankenship, M. Andersson, and L. Grosjean, “Channel coding in 5G New Radio: A tutorial overview and performance comparison with 4G LTE,” IEEE Veh. Technol. Mag., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 60–69, Dec. 2018.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:43:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

