IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025

7959

AsLDPC: Improving Decoding Performance With Absorbing Set Characteristic Aware Low-Density
Parity-Check Code
Lanlan Cui , Fei Wu , Member, IEEE, Xiaojian Liu, Meng Zhang , Zhonghai Lu , Senior Member, IEEE, Miao Li, and Changsheng Xie , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Not AND (NAND) flash memory has been widely used in consumer electronics in recent years. Due to various interferences faced by NAND flash memory, data reliability has severely declined. Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are leveraged for popular triple-level cell (TLC) NAND flash due to their strong error correction capability. LDPC decoding is an iterative procedure of log-likelihood ratio (LLR). The absorbing sets cause inaccurate LLRs to continuously propagate, making decoding difficult to converge, and severely affecting decoding performance. To improve decoding performance after LLR quantization, we propose an absorbing set characteristic aware LDPC algorithm, called AsLDPC, which modifies the LLR of some nodes in the absorbing sets through two Steps. For Step One, we select variable nodes that fall into absorbing sets based on sign characteristics of LLR at the late iteration and modify the initial prior message. For Step Two, we adjust the LLR of check nodes that satisfy the variable nodes and utilize the revised LLR to continue iteration. AsLDPC abstracts the process of finding the node locations in absorbing sets into formulas, finds the erroneous nodes through calculation, and then modifies their LLR messages. Simulation results demonstrate that AsLDPC significantly reduces the frame error rate (FER) by 58% and 48.1% for two LDPC codes, respectively, when compared to the quasi-uniform quantization scheme, while also
Received 15 April 2024; revised 1 July 2024, 4 December 2024, 14 February 2025, and 23 March 2025; accepted 5 July 2025. Date of publication 14 July 2025; date of current version 7 November 2025. This work was supported in part by the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant 2022YFB2804303; in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant U22A2071 and Grant 62372197; in part by the Joint Fund for Intelligent Computing of Shandong Natural Science Foundation under Grant ZR2023LZH007; and in part by the Natural Science Basic Research Program of Shaanxi Province under Grant 2025JC-YBQN835. (Corresponding author: Fei Wu.)
Lanlan Cui is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, Shaanxi Key Laboratory for Network Computing and Security Technology, Xi’an University of Technology, Xi’an 710048, China, and also with the China-ASEAN Information Harbor Company Ltd., Nanning 530200, China (e-mail: cuilanlan@xaut.edu.cn).
Fei Wu and Changsheng Xie are with the Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail: wufei@ hust.edu.cn; cs_xie@hust.edu.cn).
Xiaojian Liu is with the ECC, DERA Company Ltd., Shanghai 200050, China (e-mail: 13916309864@163.com).
Meng Zhang is with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail: zgmeng@hust.edu.cn).
Zhonghai Lu is with the School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, 16440 Stockholm, Sweden (e-mail: zhonghai@kth.se).
Miao Li is with the School of Information Engineering, Zhongnan University of Economics and Law, Wuhan 430073, China (e-mail: limiao@ zuel.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2025.3588178

reducing decoding latency. Additionally, AsLDPC outperforms the uniform algorithm in terms of storage space efficiency and maintains accurate decoding capabilities for raw bit error rate (RBER) below 1.2e − 2.
Index Terms—NAND flash, low-density parity-check (LDPC) code, absorbing set, quantization.
I. INTRODUCTION
N OT AND (NAND) flash memory [1] has been widely used in consumer electronics, such as computers, mobile phones, digital cameras, and smart wearable devices, due to its large capacity, low power consumption, and nonvolatility [2]. However, for the high capacity triple-level cell (TLC) NAND flash memory, the various interference increases the raw bit error rate (RBER) of memory cells by over 10 times compared with multi-level cell (MLC) NAND flash. To ensure data reliability, error correction codes (ECCs) are employed. Due to the insufficient error correction capability of the Bose-Chaudhuri-Hocquenghem (BCH) codes, Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [3], [4], [5] replace them as the more popular error correction codes.
The absorbing sets [6] as the special Tanner subgraph structures of LDPC codes, make LDPC decoding difficult to converge. This phenomenon is called the error floor. The absorbing sets problem does not necessarily cause error floor for every received codeword. Nevertheless, absorbing sets, especially small absorbing sets degrade LDPC decoding performance gravely, as the inaccurate log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) in absorbing sets are passed cyclically. The demand for high data reliability makes it important to design a decoding algorithm with good decoding performance for TLC NAND flash.
In this work, we observed the symbol characteristics between the messages of nodes that can be correctly decoded and found that for variable nodes, the probability of the initial LLR and a-posterior probability (APP) LLR having the same sign is as high as 98%. For check nodes, the probability of the check node LLR and APP LLR having the same sign is 89.3%. Therefore, when the LLR messages have opposite signs in the above two cases, it indicates that the node cannot be correctly decoded, and in this paper, this is considered as a flag of the node falling into a absorbing set. Based on the above observation, we propose an absorbing set characteristic aware LDPC scheme (AsLDPC) to improve decoding performance.

1558-4127 c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:46:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7960

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025

After several iterations, some LLR values of nodes in the absorbing sets are adjusted, then decoding continues. Firstly, we choose the time to start AsLDPC, avoiding the bits that can be corrected from being mistakenly changed. We count the number of error bits in each iteration. When the error bits no longer increase, AsLDPC is started. Secondly, we lock the nodes that fall into the absorbing sets according to the sign characteristics of various nodes and observe whether the associated check nodes are satisfied. Finally, the satisfied check node is searched and the LLR is adjusted. Through the above process, the nodes in the absorbing set can be recovered based on the LLR of their connected nodes, thus speeding up the decoding convergence. Simulation results demonstrate that the proposed AsLDPC effectively reduces decoding iterations, latency, frame error rate (FER), and bit error rate (BER). Specifically, AsLDPC achieves a significant reduction in FER by 58% and 48.1% for two LDPC codes when compared to the quasi-uniform quantization scheme. Moreover, AsLDPC saves 11.9% to 17.4% of space compared to uniform quantization, while also enhancing error correction performance.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows: • Find the symbolic properties of the absorbing set nodes
by observing the symbolic properties of the nodes that can be correctly decoded. • Observe the error bits for different iterations and find that after reaching a certain number of iterations, only a few errors still exist. • Propose an algorithm to modify the LLR of some nodes in the absorbing sets at the late iteration based on the first contribution and develop a corresponding implementation algorithm. • Conduct experiments to verify the effectiveness of the proposed scheme. Experimental results show that our approach can achieve a reduction in the BER and FER with fewer iterations. And its space overhead is small. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the background and related work. Section III describes the proposed AsLDPC. Section IV gives the simulation results and analysis, and Section V concludes this paper.
II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
A. Basics of Flash Memory
Each NAND flash memory cell stores 1-bit or several bits value as the threshold voltage. A flash memory cell stores 1-bit value called single-level cell (SLC) NAND flash. Similarly, NAND flash that 2-bit value or 3-bit values are stored is called MLC NAND flash or TLC NAND flash respectively. The value is divided into multiple regions which are assigned voltage windows by the read reference voltages [7]. We break down the bit values for TLC into the most significant bit (MSB), center significant bit (CSB), and least significant bit (LSB) [8]. Due to the threshold voltage distribution of each state shifting and widening, raw bit errors occur. LDPC codes as the popular error correction code are used to correct errors [9]. For floating gate TLC NAND flash, the above state variation mainly from program/erase (P/E) cycles and

Fig. 1. The RBER under different P/E cycles and retention time.
retention time. We tested TLC flash chips under different P/E cycles and data retention time, and statistically analyzed the RBER. The results are presented in Fig. 1, which clearly demonstrates that the RBER increases significantly with the increment of P/E cycles and the extension of retention time. For LDPC decoding, when the RBER is at a high level, such as after P/E cycles > 3000 and retention time > 30 days, correcting errors generates more iterations and causes a large decoding latency. Once the error floor appears, the decoding overhead increases significantly. Considering that quantization aggravates the error floor phenomenon, the LDPC decoding iteration latency will be serious. Thus, designing a suitable LDPC decoding algorithm, using fewer iterations to correct errors is significant for TLC NAND flash.
B. Basics of LDPC
In TLC NAND flash memory, data reliability is further aggravated by factors such as P/E cycle, retention time, and inter-cell interference. LDPC codes effectively mitigate these reliability challenges in TLC NAND flash memory due to their robust error-correction capability. The LLRs are computed based on the data information transmitted through the flash memory channel, and during LDPC decoding, the decoding algorithm iteratively updates the LLRs to obtain the final values, which are then utilized to determine whether each bit represents a 1 or 0.
LDPC Basics: LDPC codes are a class of linear block codes with implementable decoders, which provide near-capacity performance on a large set of data transmission and data storage channels. LDPC codes are specified by a matrix containing mostly 0’s and relatively few 1’s [10], which is called parity-check matrix H. H matrix can be transferred into Tanner graph. Tanner graph contains two types of nodes, namely variable node and check node. Each variable node represents a column in H, and each check node denotes a row in H. When the element in a row and column in H is 1, the corresponding variable node and check node in the Tanner graph are connected by an edge. Fig. 2 shows a mapping of H to its corresponding Tanner graph.
Decoding Algorithm: A thorough research on the LDPC decoding algorithms is being done and a variety of algorithms are proposed, such as the bit-flipping algorithm, sum-product algorithm and min-sum algorithm [11]. Although the error performance of the min-sum algorithm is in general slightly

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:46:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CUI et al.: ASLDPC: IMPROVING DECODING PERFORMANCE WITH ABSORBING SET CHARACTERISTIC

7961

Fig. 2. Each column and row of parity check matrix H corresponding to the variable node and the check node, respectively. H can be transformed into the corresponding Tanner graph.

Fig. 3. Inaccurate LLR in the absorbing set causing decoding failure.

lower than that of sum-product algorithm, its implementation

complexity is greatly reduced, thus it is widely used. The min-

sum algorithm is summarized as follows.

1) Initialization: Suppose the corresponding LLR is

negative for bit 0, and the LLR of bit 1 is positive. During

LDPC decoding, the LLRs for the three types of pages are

initially calculated based on the threshold voltage distribution

and the positions of the reference voltages. Taking the MSB

as an example, the calculation formula is LLR(MSB) =

lpoPgi(xVVVV)llrr(ppi((PP01))=((xx))ddxx0++,

Vr Vl Vr Vl
1,

p(P3) (x)dx+

Vr Vl

p(P4) (x)dx+

Vr Vl

p(P2) (x)dx+

Vr Vl

p(P5) (x)dx+

Vr Vl

. . . , 7) represents the

p(P7) (x)dx
p(P6)(x)dx , threshold

where voltage

distribution function for the eight states of the flash memory.Vl

and Vr are the left and right reference voltages used to detect

the threshold voltage state. The calculations for CSB and LSB

follow a similar approach. These LLRs are then passed as

initial values to the variable nodes in the LDPC decoding

algorithm, and the iterative decoding process proceeds

accordingly. Then the check node and LLR messages of

variable node are updated iteratively to obtain the probability

that each bit is 0, that is APP. The final decoding results can

be theorized based on the APP. The process is explained as

follows.

2) Iterative Decoding: Let cn denote the n-th bit of a codeword. Let qmk n, rmk n be the LLR message of variable
node and check node, respectively. And let pn be the prior probability and Λnk is the posterior probability. Let N(m)
denote the set of variable nodes that participate in the check

node m and M(n) denote the set of check nodes that

participate in the variable node n. The set N(m) without

variable node n is denoted as N(m) \ n and the set M(n)

without check node m is denoted as M(n) \ m. The α is

scaling factor, which is a key parameter introduced to improve

decoding performance. Its role is to adjust the amplitude of

messages transmitted by check nodes, compensating for the

message loss caused by the minimum value operation.

Variable node message update:

qkmn = pn +

rmk−n1

(1)

m ∈M(n)\m

The APP update:

Λnk = pn +

rmk−n1

(2)

m ∈M(n)

Check nodes message update:

⎛

⎞

rmk n = ⎝

sign(qkmn )⎠ × α × minn ∈N(m)\n{|qkmn |}

n ∈N(m)\m

(3)

At the end of each iteration, decide xn = 1 if Λn > 0, and xn = 0 otherwise. If HxT = 0, or the maximum number of iterations is reached, stop decoding with x as the decoder output.
When the LDPC algorithm is applied to TLC NAND flash memory, it is necessary to convert the decoding algorithm to fixed-point algorithm. This quantization process loses LLR accuracy, resulting in a decrease in LDPC decoding error correction performance.

C. Basics of Trapping Sets and Absorbing Sets
Trapping set and absorbing set are the structure that exists in H matrix after it is constructed, and they cause the performance of LDPC code degradation. Let the sets V = v1, v2, . . . , vn and C = c1, c2, . . . , cm represent the variable nodes and check nodes of a Tanner graph. Also let A = v1, v2, . . . , va be a subset of V whose cardinality is a. Let E(A) and O(A) define the subsets of check nodes connected to variable nodes in A with even and odd degrees, respectively, where |O(A)| = b. Here, A is called an (a, b) trapping set. Further, A is defined to be an (a, b) absorbing set if each variable node in A has more neighboring check nodes in E(A) than O(A). Fig. 3 depicts a (3, 2) absorbing set. We can see three variable nodes are included in the cycle, and the connected odd check nodes are more than the even nodes.
In this paper, we mainly consider the absorbing sets. The absorbing set has a poor effect on decoding. When variable nodes in absorbing sets are false and check nodes in E(A) are satisfied, they spread incorrect messages. If check nodes in O(A) are unsatisfied, they can halt this spread. However, if O(A) has fewer nodes than E(A), even increased iterations cannot correct errors. Multiple absorbing sets in an H matrix severely degrade LDPC decoding performance. For NAND flash, LDPC codes require low BER and FER, but absorbing sets hinder BER reduction, posing a challenge for SSD error correction. This paper focuses on stable trapping sets. When the absorbing set is small, such as when the number of nodes in the closed cycle in the Tanner graph is 10 or 12, it hurts

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:46:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7962

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025

the decoding performance, and error floor occurs. When the number of nodes in the cycle is large, although the error floor may not appear, the absorbing set still has a negative effect on the decoding performance.
An absorbing set can lead to a slowdown in the convergence speed of decoding and a decrease in the reduction of decoding error rates. This is due to the continuous propagation of inaccurate LLRs within the absorbing set. As shown in Fig. 3, let’s assume that node a carries a message bit of 1, and its LLR should be positive. Assuming its initial LLR is 0.2. The LDPC algorithm judges the node message based on APP, which is equal to the initial LLR plus the LLRs of the check nodes connected to it. If the LLRs of the check nodes connected to node a within the cycle are −0.6 and −0.8, and the LLR of the check node outside the cycle is 0.4, then the final APP of node a is −0.8, and the decoding output is0, resulting in decoding error. In the next iteration, node a transmits LLR of −0.2,0, and −1.2 to the check nodes. The negative LLR values are incorrect messages that are propagated along the path within the cycle, causing errors to accumulate continuously, ultimately making it difficult to decode correctly.

D. Related Work
To improve LDPC decoding performance, many strategies have been proposed, which contain two types, constructing codes [12], [13], [14], and modifying the decoding algorithm. If the code exists, decoding performance can only be improved by the latter. Zhang and Chen [15] created a two-stage decoding algorithm that modifies certain variable nodes using LLR values and signs, rather than trapping set positions, requiring re-decoding. He [16] developed DLAPPS, a deep learning-assisted post-processing scheme based on layered normalized minimum sum algorithm, to significantly lower the error floor of LDPC codes, with its effectiveness highly dependent on the data. Kang et al. [17] devised a method to break trapping sets by modifying the parity check matrix, which disconnects check nodes linked to the variable nodes in the trapping sets. However, identifying these sets is challenging. Zhang and Siegel [18] introduced a (q+1)-bit quasi-uniform quantization method that expands the quantizer’s range, reducing error floors while preserving the decoding algorithm’s integrity. Zhang et al. [19] proposed an unbalanced inter-page errors aware read strategy called PEAR for 3D NAND flash memory to reduce RBER, decoding iterations, read levels, and read latency by optimizing read voltages based on threshold voltage drift. Du et al. [20] introduced PreLDPC, an LDPC-level prediction technique with fine-grained reading, reducing NAND flash read latency by early-stage level prediction and dividing read levels into finer decimal increments. Li et al. [21] introduced a method to enhance 3D NAND reliability by optimizing voltage characterization and read reference voltage estimation, focusing on reducing decoding errors. The above three tasks are to improve the decoding performance by optimizing the voltage. Zhang et al. [7] proposed adaptive LDPC coding method for 3D TLC NAND flash memory, called ALCod. By splitting and encoding bits separately for high-RBER pages/layers, and using known bits to enhance decoding, ALCod improves

Fig. 4. (a) The probability that the initial LLR sign of the correctly decoded node is the same as the LLR sign of the APP. (b) The probability that the check node LLR sign of the correctly decoded node is the same as the LLR sign of the APP.
decoding performance. Cui et al. [22] optimized LLRs by modeling voltage distributions and amplifying small LLRs, enhancing decoding efficiency. Reference [22] adjusts the LLR according to the error-prone locations of the flash memory. We focus on the structure of H matrix and optimize the LLR of nodes that fall into the absorbing set.
III. THE PROPOSED SCHEME AND IMPLEMENTATION
A. Observation
An analysis of the sign correlation between the initial LLR and the APP LLR of nodes that can be accurately decoded is presented, as illustrated in Fig. 4(a). This figure is derived from the averaging of results across 5000 frames of data tested at an Eb/N0 of 4.1dB. The analysis reveals that the likelihood of the initial LLR and APP LLR sharing the same sign for correctly decoded bits is as high as 98%. Furthermore, it is evident that the sample size decreases as the number of iterations grows, reflecting the early correction of most data. Considering the predominant similarity in LLR signs for correct nodes, we utilize the sign discrepancy between the initial LLR and APP LLR in the first step of AsLDPC to identify nodes potentially trapped in absorbing sets. A similar approach is also found in the literature [15]. We compute the probability of check nodes sharing the same sign as the APP LLR of nodes that can be accurately decoded, as visualized in Fig. 4(b). Post-averaging, we observe that 89.3% of decodable nodes exhibit matching signs for both types of LLR. Consequently, when a check node’s sign is contrary to the APP LLR, the corresponding node is more likely to be challenging to decode correctly. In Step Two, we change the LLR for such nodes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:46:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CUI et al.: ASLDPC: IMPROVING DECODING PERFORMANCE WITH ABSORBING SET CHARACTERISTIC

7963

Fig. 5. The change of the number of wrong bits over iterations for

(18656,16748) QC-LDPC and (1152,2304) WiMAX.

Fig. 6. The two-step optimization process of AsLDPC.

B. The AsLDPC Scheme Start Time
The proposed AsLDPC scheme is a modification of the min-sum algorithm, specifically targeting the LLRs of nodes within absorbing sets. These LLRs are altered during the later stages of decoding to minimize disruption to correctly decodable bits. The selection of an optimal iteration number for this modification is crucial. To determine the ideal timing, we meticulously track the error bits across various iterations, searching for discernible patterns. To clarify this process, we provide the code snippets employed in this research. We selected two distinct LDPC codes for comprehensive validation: QC-LDPC [23], [24], characterized by a low error floor, and WiMAX [25], with a higher error floor. The disparity in error floors between these codes underscores their divergent decoding performances, offering a robust demonstration of AsLDPC’s effectiveness. For the QC-LDPC code, we employed (18656,16748) codes with a 0.9 code rate, suitable for TLC NAND flash. The WiMAX code, with a 0.5 code rate, was represented by (2304,1152).
In our experiments with the (18656,16748) QC-LDPC code, we recorded the number of error bits at an Eb/N0 value of 4.2dB. The experiments were conducted with a maximum iteration limit of 32 and involved a total of 4000 frames. The results are visualized in Fig. 5. Concurrently, the error bit count for the WiMAX code is also depicted in Fig. 5, under identical statistical conditions. From Fig. 5, it is evident that for the QC-LDPC code, the error bit count decreases as the number of iterations increases. In contrast, the WiMAX code exhibits a slight peak followed by a downward trend. This variation is attributable to the iterative statistical analysis, which is inherently coarse-grained but does not detract from the overall trend observation. Both codes eventually approach zero error bits, suggesting that the majority of codewords are successfully decoded after a few iterations. To mitigate the influence of codewords that are already corrected, we initiate the AsLDPC algorithm post-this phase. Our initial experiments suggest setting the AsLDPC startup threshold to 29 for both codes, though this threshold may vary based on specific matrix configurations and decoding methodologies.
C. The Proposed AsLDPC Scheme
Given the aforementioned conditions, the decoding algorithm can be outlined as follows: As discussed in Section II-C, some codewords fail to decode even with extensive iterations

due to the propagation of erroneous LLRs within absorbing sets. To address this issue, two approaches are available: reducing the propagation of wrong messages and enhancing the correct message propagation. The latter is less effective, as once a bit message in an absorbing set cannot be corrected, the majority of check nodes outside the cycle must be small in number for successful decoding to occur. In this paper, we adopt the former method, which includes optimizing the initial LLR from the NAND channel and the LLR message of the check node. The LLR adjustment process is divided into two steps, as depicted in Fig. 6. The first step involves determining the location of the variable node within the absorbing set and optimizing its initial prior message. The second step entails locking the check node and adjusting its LLR message. These two steps are referred to as optimize initial LLR and optimize check node LLR, respectively.
Step 1 : optimize initial LLR If

sign Λ[klbit] × sign plbit < 0

(4)

and

ncheck [lbit ]

≤

wcol [lbit ] 2

(5)

Then

plbit = a

(6)

where, Λk[lbit] is the decision message of the variable node lbit. p[lbit] is the LLR message from the channel. ncheck[lbit] represents the number of the unsatisfied check nodes that a

bit lbit connects with in an iteration. wcol[lbit] is the column weight of current column that lbit locates. a is a constant and it is the parameter, determined from simulations. We select a

based on the closest performance with floating-point min-sum

decoding for test data.

In Fig. 6, Step 1 focuses on identifying variable nodes

within absorbing sets and fine-tuning their initial prior mes-

sages. This step’s objective is to optimize the initial prior

message. It involves identifying the variable nodes that are

part of the absorbing set, which means finding the columns

where these problematic nodes reside and adjusting their initial

prior messages. To do this, we select variable nodes that are

likely to be in absorbing sets. After several iterations, if a

bit continues to be incorrectly decoded, it suggests a high

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:46:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7964

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025

probability of being in an absorbing set. We then verify if the signs of the posterior probability and the initial prior message for this bit are consistent. If they differ, the bit is considered problematic, as correct bits generally have the same sign for these messages. Additionally, we examine the check nodes that the bit is connected to. As analyzed in Section II-C, the check nodes connected to variable nodes within an absorbing set exhibit a distinct characteristic: the check nodes outside the cycle are unsatisfied, while those inside the cycle are satisfied. Furthermore, the number of check nodes outside the cycle is smaller than those inside the cycle. Combining these observations, we conclude that fewer than half of the check nodes connected to variable nodes in an absorbing set are unsatisfied. Based on these conditions, we can determine that the variable nodes fall into absorbing sets, and the check nodes connected to them should indicate unsatisfied checks. If these nodes pass the checks but continue to transmit incorrect messages, it increases the probability of decoding failure. Nodes that meet these two criteria are identified as being in absorbing sets. Having selected these variable nodes, we minimize their impact using the constraints outlined in formulas (4) and (5), which involve message symbol transmission and check node satisfaction. This process ensures that the decoding algorithm’s performance is optimized.
To minimize the impact, the initial LLR must be adjusted. This LLR is initially received from the NAND flash channel at the outset of decoding and evolves with each iteration, significantly influencing the decoding process. It is crucial to refine this value. We address this by setting the initial prior message to a constant, as detailed in formula (6). This approach serves to update the initial LLR of nodes within the absorbing set, thereby enhancing the decoding accuracy and efficiency. The above process is the analysis of Step 1 .
The task of check node is to check the error of variable node in decoding iteration, and mark the wrong variable node as unsatisfied. In Step 1 some check nodes determine that the variable node in absorbing set is satisfied. Therefore, these check nodes need to be corrected. Let s be the satisfied check nodes that the bit lbit in Step 1 connects with, r[ks,lbit] is the updated result of the variable node at the current position. b is a constant, determined by meticulous simulations. The following step is performed.
Step 2 : optimize check node LLR If

sign Λk[lbit] × sign rsk,lbit < 0

(7)

Then,

rsk,lbit = b

(8)

From Step 1 , we select bits within absorbing sets, treating

them as unsatisfied. We further scrutinize check nodes whose

signs differ from the APP, as they should align in subsequent

iterations. If these signs oppose, it indicates an issue. If a

variable node in an absorbing set passes checks, it’s erroneous,

as it should not be satisfied. We optimize the LLR message of

these check nodes, setting them to the constant b chosen from

simulations. This operation mitigates message passing issues,

enhancing decoding performance.

Fig. 7. (a) The selection of parameter a. (b) The selection of parameter b.
To select the parameters a and b, we employed the method of controlling variables. Initially, we set b to 0 and simulated decoding outcomes for various a values, as depicted in Fig. 7(a). This analysis revealed that a should be optimized at 0. Next, with a set to 0, we simulated decoding results for different b values, as shown in Fig. 7(b). By comparing these results, we concluded that b should also be set to 0. Since the performance of LDPC codes is highly dependent on H matrix structure, the optimal values of parameters a and b should be determined through simulations for specific H matrices. When employing with different H matrices, re-optimization of a and b is recommended to achieve the best decoding performance.
For a clear grasp, we employ the formula from Step 2 to elucidate the analysis process.
AsLDPC alters two types of LLRs: the initial LLR and check node LLR. The initial LLR impacts every decoding decision and variable node update. By correcting inaccurate initial LLRs to 0, we prevent erroneous message propagation, allowing neighboring nodes to rectify. Adjusting erroneous check node LLRs has a more immediate effect on decoding. As illustrated in Fig. 8, cycle check nodes initially held values of −0.6 and −0.8. However, instead of passing these to node a, the required LLR transmission has been reset to 0. This prevents the spread of incorrect LLRs. Node a receives a value of 0.4 from outside the cycle, leading to an LLR of APP of 0.4 for node a. Consequently, the bit for this node is decoded correctly as 1. AsLDPC minimizes LLR sign flips, enhances decoding stability, and accelerates convergence.
D. Implementation Algorithm
In practical application, additional nuances must be taken into account. The complete decoding process is detailed

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:46:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CUI et al.: ASLDPC: IMPROVING DECODING PERFORMANCE WITH ABSORBING SET CHARACTERISTIC

7965

Fig. 8. The modified LLRs change decoding result.
in Algorithm 1. AsLDPC incorporates a (q + 1)-bit quasiuniform quantizer [18], as depicted in the algorithm. Define the maximum iteration count as Imax and the iteration threshold for the improvement mechanism as m. The normalization factors for variable nodes and prior probability are denoted as α and β, respectively. Set the bit-widths for variable nodes and APP to q and u, respectively. Utilize the received initial LLR message pn to update the APP Λnk.
Upon initiating decoding, bit data is initially evaluated by the initial LLR message from the NAND flash channel, as outlined in lines 1-5. Line 6 determines if the code is accurate, with successful decoding and output of results ensuing if affirmative. If not, initial prior messages are refined through lines 10-12. If the iteration count hasn’t reached the threshold for AsLDPC activation, standard decoding is executed as detailed in lines 14-21. Upon reaching the threshold for improvement, initial prior messages are updated according to line 25, and variable node messages are adjusted using line 26, forming the core operations of AsLDPC. Subsequent iterations continue until successful decoding or the maximum number of iterations is reached.
Moreover, in the implementation phase, certain considerations are vital: Upon initiating the improved algorithm at the 29th iteration for the two LDPC codes, a flag is appended to each bit per iteration to determine whether formulas (4) and (5) are adhered to. LLR quantization is grounded on the (q+1)-bit quasi-uniform quantizer, selected for its efficiency in bit usage. Additionally, to streamline operations, the mapping between floating-point LLR and fixed-point LLR can be pre-calculated and stored as a look-up table to minimize complexity. Following [18], for each bit, we maintain the marked value and track the accuracy of connected check nodes. A flag is set to 0 if the check nodes are correct, and to 1 otherwise.
IV. SIMULATION AND RESULTS
A. Experiment Methodology
We conduct simulation in C program to evaluate our AsLDPC. In order to test the performance of the AsLDPC, the floating-point normalized min-sum algorithm, (q+1)-bit quasiuniform quantization algorithm, and the uniform quantization algorithm are compared. Uniform quantization algorithm is

Algorithm 1 The Quantization Implementation Algorithm of

AsLDPC

Require: pn : Received initial LLR message from the channel. Ensure: yn : Decoding result of the kth iteration.
1: if Λkn > 0 then
2: yn = 1;

3: else

4: yn = 0.

5: end if 6: if −→yn HT = 0 then 7: Decoding success. Record the decoding result Λkn.
8: Break.

9: else

10: for i = 1; i < n; i + + do

11:

pn = pn × β.

12: end for

13: for k = 1; k < m; k + + do

14:

Update check node message rmk n using formula (3).

15:

if |rmk n| > 2q − 1 then

16:

|rmk n| = 2q − 1.

17:

end if

18:

Update variable node message qmk n using formula

(1) and saturate the result based on the (q + 1)-bit quasi-

uniform quantizer. Λnk are updated by formula (2).

19:

if |Λnk| > 2u − 1 then

20:

|Λnk| = 2u − 1.

21:

end if

22:

Evaluate the success of decoding, if unsuccessful,

repeat the preceding steps until the iteration reaches the

point to initiate the enhanced mechanism.

23: end for

24: for k = m; k < Imax; k + + do

25:

Find bit station of lbit by formula (4) and formula

(5), and let plbit = a.

26:

27:

Select the check nodes that are marked as satisfied.

Apply formula (7) to select check nodes, setting rsk,lbit = b. Update rkmn, qkmn, and Λkn, and quantize these values to

the predefined saturation level.

28:

Determine if decoding is successful. If not, iterate

until −→yn HT = 0 is met. Output yn as the decoded result.

29: end for

30: end if

commonly used. Quantitative lower LLR message accuracy. Floating-point algorithm has best decoding performance. Except for the floating-point min-sum algorithm, we use the algorithm and bit-width value to name the method, as AsLDPC (q-bit), quasi-uniform (q-bit), and uniform (q-bit), respectively.
Two kinds of LDPC codes, (18656,16748) QC-LDPC that we designed for TLC NAND flash and (2304,1152) WiMAX are used for simulations. (18656,16748) QC-LDPC code is chosen because it is a high-rate code which is widely used in flash memory, while WiMAX code is selected due to its general applicability in communications and its ability to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:46:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7966

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025

clearly demonstrate the error floor phenomenon. For the QCLDPC, the column weights are 5, 4 and 3, and the row weight is 38. The (18656,16748) LDPC code used in this paper has a code length of 2KB, which matches the commonly used 2KB page size in NAND flash memory. Therefore, it can be considered that our experimental condition is close to the data transmission capacity in actual NAND flash memory. The information about WiMAX is public. They have different error floors, to prove the universality of our method. The error floor of (18656,16748) QC-LDPC is very low, and it is not even observed in our result graph. (2304,1152) WiMAX’s error floor is high. For this article, these two codes are sufficiently representative.
The channel we use is the Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN), which can be used to simulate the NAND channel [26]. The encoded LLR message sequences are modulated by binary phase-shift keying (BPSK). For all algorithms, the maximum iteration is set to 32, and the iteration number of starting the AsLDPC is set to 29, that is m is 29. The correction factors α for two LDPC codes are 0.875 and 1, respectively. u is the bit width of the APP, set to 7-bit. q is the bit width of the check node, which is 4-bit. What needs to be stressed is that we additionally adjust the initial prior message, to multiply it with a correction factor, which is from the discovery in the experiment. For QC-LDPC, the factor β is 0.875, while for WiMAX, β is 0.15. Adjusting the initial value reduces FER and accelerates the convergence of the decoding. This phenomenon may come from the existence of absorbing sets.
The parameter a and b are both set to 0, which is determined through simulation search. For different matrices, the parameters change. a and b are set to 0, which means that the messages of the corresponding nodes are directly restored by the messages of other neighboring nodes.
B. Result Analysis
When the LDPC algorithm is implemented in hardware, the floating-point algorithm is converted to fixed-point algorithm, because the data accuracy decreases during the conversion process, which leads to a decrease in the accuracy of the message transmitted during decoding. In this case, the error correction performance of LDPC is degraded. Therefore, in any case, floating-point algorithm can be used as a reference standard for decoding results, and its error correction performance is the best.
Fig. 9(a) compares the FER of the floating-point minsum algorithm, quasi-uniform quantization method, uniform quantization and our AsLDPC algorithm for constructed QCLDPC codes. The decoder terminates when the maximum number of frames is 109 or the number of error frames reaches 30. The points in following figure of this section are obtained in this way. From the results, we can see that compared with quasi-uniform quantization, for a low Eb/N0, when Eb/N0 = 3.9dB, the 4-bit AsLDPC algorithm reduces FER by 64%. While for a little high Eb/N0, for example, at Eb/N0 = 4.15dB, the FER of our algorithm is reduced by 86%. In addition, the proposed 4-bit AsLDPC shows a higher FER compared with the 7-bit uniform FER, and a loss of

Fig. 9. (a) FER results of the (18656,16748) QC-LDPC code on the AWGN channel. (b) FER results of the (1152,2304) WiMAX code on the AWGN channel.
about 0.03dB gain compared with the floating-point algorithm. Also, AsLDPC achieves a lower FER compared with 6-bit uniform method while saving 2-bit space during decoding. For example, when Eb/N0 = 4.05dB, the FER of AsLDPC is 87% lower than that of 6-bit uniform quantization. In general, AsLDPC algorithm has better decoding performance than 7-bit quasi-uniform quantization and 6-bit uniform quantization in the whole RBER interval. A lower error rate directly improves data reliability. Furthermore, reducing the error rate minimizes the activation of the read-retry mechanism, thereby decreasing system read latency. At the same time, AsLDPC has a lower storage space than 6-bit uniform quantization, which reduces the hardware resource overhead of the implementation algorithm. The absence of error floor does not appear in this figure due to the good performance of the constructed (18656,16748) QC-LDPC code.
Additionally, we compare the decoding performance of ALCod [7]. As seen in Fig. 9(a), the FER of ALCod is not significantly different from AsLDPC. However, due to the increased redundancy in ALCod, the actual code rate decreases from 0.9 to 0.8, resulting in a reduction in the effective information that can be transmitted.
The FER to WiMAX codes of different algorithms are plotted in Fig. 9(b). It can be seen from the figure that floatingpoint algorithm performs better. As the Eb/N0 increases, the error floor of it appears the latest. When Eb/N0 > 2.4dB, the FER is significantly lower than other curves. When the data is quantized, the accuracy of the message transmitted by the decoding is limited, and the error correction performance is seriously reduced. The results indicate that our proposed algorithm has a better FER performance than quasi-uniform

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:46:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CUI et al.: ASLDPC: IMPROVING DECODING PERFORMANCE WITH ABSORBING SET CHARACTERISTIC

7967

Fig. 10. Decoding results under TLC channel.

Fig. 12. Decoding latency comparison of quasi-uniform algorithm and AsLDPC.

Fig. 11. The RBER of the upper page in TLC and the error tolerance capability of algorithms.
quantization for the same bit-width. For a low Eb/N0, at 2.1dB, our 4-bit AsLDPC algorithm decreases FER by 87% compared with the quasi-uniform quantization method. And for a high Eb/N0, our FER is reduced by nearly 1.5 times. That is to say, the gain of the new algorithm increases when the Eb/N0 is larger. These regions are critical for NAND flash because the RBER of the data stored in it belongs to this range, which is consistent with the actual application scenario. Besides, our method has a lower FER compared with uniform quantization. For Eb/N0 < 2.4dB, the FER of 4-bit AsLDPC is lower than 7-bit uniform FER, and for Eb/N0 > 2.4dB the two FERs are almost the same. It is worth noting that AsLDPC saves 3-bit space compared with uniform quantization.
The normal descending trend of FER should resemble the smoothly decreasing curve shown in Fig. 9(a). However, in Fig. 9(b), at Eb/N0 = 1.9dB, the curve flattens out, corresponding to an FER above 1e − 2. This indicates that error floor has emerged at this point, albeit not immediately apparent. Based on this observation, we can deduce that the error floor at this time is already at a relatively high level.
By calculated, AsLDPC reduces FER and BER by 58% and 60.7% for QC-LDPC. For WiMAX, AsLDPC reduces FER and BER by 48.1% and 38.2%. On average, FER performance of proposed AsLDPC is improved by 53.1%, and BER performance is improved by 49.5%.
All quantization algorithms are not as effective as the floating-point result when Eb/N0 is big because quantization exacerbates the numerical saturation problem in decoding. This also illustrates the importance of the quantification problem on the other hand. The quantization is also a branch of this research. In summary, experiment consequences demonstrate that the AsLDPC saves space with a lower error rate

compared with other quantification methods mentioned. The benefits of AsLDPC are two aspects: for LDPC codes with the error floor, AsLDPC has a lower error floor. For LDPC codes without error floor, the decoding error rate can be reduced.
To verify the effectiveness of AsLDPC under real TLC channel conditions, we conducted simulation experiments, as seen in Fig. 10. We compared the error correction performance of three algorithms, including the quasi-uniform algorithm, literature [22] and AsLDPC. The channel parameters used are the same as the literature [22]. The quasi-uniform algorithm has the highest FER and BER, much higher than the other two algorithms. AsLDPC has the lowest FER and BER. The two error rates of literature[18] are between the above two algorithms and higher than AsLDPC. AsLDPC has the best error correction performance.
Fig. 11 shows the RBER of the upper page under different P/E cycles and retention times, as well as the tolerable RBER levels of AsLDPC and quasi-uniform algorithm. The selection of the upper page is due to its wide range of RBER, which can demonstrate the adaptability of AsLDPC. The 3K and 3M in the figure refer to P/E cycle of 3000 and retention time of 3 months. The two lines in the figure represent the RBER that can be tolerated by the two algorithms, and there is a difference between them. AsLDPC can correctly decode when RBER lower than 1.2e − 2, and the quantum uniform algorithm can correct RBER below 5.5e − 3. These results are from Fig. 10. When P/E cycle < 5000 and retention time < 5 months, AsLDPC can almost correct all errors, except for data with layer 1.
Two LDPC codes are used in the experiment. Since there is little difference in the iteration number of QC-LDPC code under the two algorithms, the decoding latency gap is also small, and the detailed expansion is not done. The decoding latency comparison of WiMAX code under the two algorithms is shown in Fig. 12. The decoding time can be reduced by using AsLDPC, and the degree of reduction is related to the signal-to-noise (SNR). For example, at Eb/N0 = 3.7dB, the decoding time of AsLDPC increases by 1.7%. This may be because the total number of frames decoded at a high SNR is not enough, resulting in inaccurate results. The difference in decoding latency between the two algorithms is very small at this time. At Eb/N0 = 3.8dB, the latency is reduced by 12.6% using AsLDPC. At Eb/N0 = 4.1dB, the latency is reduced by 17%. In the whole decoding phase, except for the first point in figure, AsLDPC achieves lower decoding latency. With the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:46:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7968

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025

increase of SNR, the degree of latency reduction shows a gradually increasing trend. The advantage of this for NAND flash memory is to speed up the decoding convergence speed, reduce the overall latency, and improve NAND flash memory performance. The decoding results show that the AsLDPC algorithm can reduce the decoding time while ensuring the data reliability, and ultimately reduce the user response time.
In summary, AsLDPC achieves good decoding performance. Compared to the quasi-uniform quantization scheme, AsLDPC reduces error rates and decoding latency. The lower error rate enhances data reliability, while the reduced decoding latency improves data reading performance.

C. Overhead Analysis
The overhead of the AsLDPC is principally space (bitwidth) overhead. For 4-bit quantization, the size of the Look-Up-Table can be negligible. The space overhead mainly comes from the LLR of variable node, check node, and posterior probability results during the updating process. Fig. 13 shows the decoder architecture of AsLDPC. In order to implement the proposed algorithm, F0, F1, . . . , Fn−1, is added, which is used to store the flag to determine whether formula (4) is satisfied. If it is satisfied, the F corresponding to the bit is stored as 1, otherwise, it is 0. Therefore, the bitwidth of the flag is only 1 bit. The storage space is reusable to formulas (5) and (7).
We use formulas to show the overhead calculation more clearly. The space of the traditional min-sum decoding method can be calculated as Strad = VNlen × Si + VNnum × Wcol × SVN + CNnum × Wrow × SCN + VNlen × Sp. Where Strad is the whole space, Si, SCN , SVN and Sp are the bit-width of initial prior message, variable node, check node and APP, respectively. VNnum and VNlen represent variable node number and code length. Wcol is the column weight. Wrow is the row weight, and CNnum is the number of rows in the H matrix. For AsLDPC, the bit-width of the flag is added as SAsLDPC = VNlen × Si + VNnum × Wcol × SVN + CNnum × Wrow × SCN + VNlen × Sp + VNlen × Sflag. SAsLDPC is the space required by the AsLDPC algorithm, and the proportion of increased overhead is (SAsLDPC − Strad)/Strad. Sflag represents the bit width of the flag added by the AsLDPC algorithm, which is 1 bit. The overhead can be calculated by inputting the code length, information bit length, row and column weight, as well as the bit width of various LLR messages that appear in the formula into the calculation.
We use a set of data to represent the bit width of the stored information initial LLR bit width, variable node LLR bit width, check node LLR bit width, a posteriori information APP bit width, for example, {7, 7, 4, 7} for AsLDPC algorithm means that the initial LLR bit width in AsLDPC is 7 bits, the variable node LLR bit width is 7 bits, the check node LLR bit width is 4 bits, and the a posteriori information APP bit width is 7 bits. Substituting this information into the calculation formula of Strad and SAsLDPC, the storage space used by the algorithm can be calculated. The above four bit-width are {7, 7, 4, 7} for AsLDPC algorithm, (q+1)-bit quasi-uniform quantization. While for uniform quantization, the values are

Fig. 13. The decoder architecture of the proposed AsLDPC.
{7, 7, 7, 7} and {7, 7, 6, 7}. By calculating the above formula, it is observed that the space of AsLDPC only increases by 1.76% and 2.05% compared with the original algorithm for two codes. And AsLDPC decreases 17.4% and 11.9% space compared with the uniform quantization method for two codes, respectively.
Next, we analyze the computational complexity. For Step 1 , formulas (4) and (5) are judgment sentences, and their computational complexity is O (1). The complexity of formula (4) is O(n). Overall, the computational complexity of step 1 is O(n). The analysis of Step 2 is similar to that of Step 1 , and the final complexity is also O(n). Comprehensive the two steps, the computational complexity of the proposed algorithm is O(n).
D. Discussion
As the NAND flash memory age increases, hardware degradation occurs, and new types of errors may arise, rendering AsLDPC insufficient to fully correct errors. In such cases, the read retry scheme will be activated, and the data will be reread and passed to the decoder for decoding using the AsLDPC algorithm again. If the decoding remains unsuccessful, the process will continue until the maximum number of retries is reached. In future research, we will attempt to design an adaptive AsLDPC to address the error correction needs under different flash memory lifecycles and new error types. In addition, we plan to implement AsLDPC in the hardware platform and improve the hardware implementation method to further improve the algorithm performance.
V. CONCLUSION
To improve data reliability for TLC NAND flash, we propose AsLDPC algorithm. Firstly, we count the erroneous bits at different iterations and select the iteration where error bits number no longer changes as the time for starting the AsLDPC. After reaching this iteration, the sign characteristics among the LLRs are analyzed to select the node positions that fall into the absorbing sets. And let the initial prior probability from NAND channel at these locations be 0. Next, according to the bit position information selected in the last step, the LLR symbols of variable nodes that connect to the satisfied check nodes are observed, and some LLRs of related variable

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:46:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CUI et al.: ASLDPC: IMPROVING DECODING PERFORMANCE WITH ABSORBING SET CHARACTERISTIC

7969

nodes are also set to 0, then the decoding process is continued.
Simulation results show that compared with the quasi-uniform
implementation method, AsLDPC reduces FER by 58% and
48.1% for two types of LDPC codes, respectively, with a lower
iteration number. Meanwhile, the space overhead is no more than 2.39%. In addition, for the first code, AsLDPC achieves better performance than the 6-bit uniform algorithm while
reducing 11.9% space overhead. For WiMAX, 17.4% space is
saved by AsLDPC with a lower error rate than 7-bit uniform
algorithm.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Lv et al., “MGC: Multiple-gray-code for 3D NAND flash based highdensity SSDs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. High-Perform. Comput. Archit. (HPCA), 2023, pp. 122–136.
[2] K.-K. Yong and L.-P. Chang, “Error diluting: Exploiting 3-D NAND flash process variation for efficient read on LDPC-based SSDs,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 39, no. 11, pp. 3467–3478, Nov. 2020.
[3] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[4] Z. Yang, Y. Li, Y. L. Guan, and Y. Fang, “Source-constrained hierarchical modulation systems with protograph LDPC codes: A promising transceiver design for future 6G-enabled IoT,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 1103–1117, Apr. 2025.
[5] D. Lin, F. Yi, G. Yongliang, and M. Guizani, “Design of protograph LDPC-coded MIMO-VLC systems with generalized spatial modulation,” China Commun., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 118–136, Mar. 2024.
[6] H. Liu, Y. Li, L. Ma, and J. Chen, “On the smallest absorbing sets of LDPC codes from finite planes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 4014–4020, Jun. 2012.
[7] M. Zhang et al., “ALCod: Adaptive LDPC coding for 3-D NAND flash memory using inter-layer RBER variation,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 1068–1081, Nov. 2023.
[8] Y. Cai, S. Ghose, E. F. Haratsch, Y. Luo, and O. Mutlu, “Error characterization, mitigation, and recovery in flash-memory-based solidstate drives,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 105, no. 9, pp. 1666–1704, Sep. 2017.
[9] Y. Lv, L. Shi, L. Luo, C. Li, C. J. Xue, and E. H.-M. Sha, “Tail latency optimization for LDPC-based high-density and low-cost flash memory devices,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 544–557, Mar. 2022.
[10] F. Amirzade, M.-R. Sadeghi, and D. Panario, “Construction of protograph-based LDPC codes with chordless short cycles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 51–74, Jan. 2024.
[11] C. Lv, X. He, P. Kang, K. Cai, J. Xing, and X. Tang, “Mutual information-Maximizing Quantized layered min-sum decoding of QC-LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf., 2022, pp. 3490–3495.

[12] E. Ben Yacoub, “Trapping and absorbing set enumerators for irregular generalized low-density parity-check code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 69, no. 6, pp. 3637–3662, Jun. 2023.
[13] M. Battaglioni, F. Chiaraluce, M. Baldi, M. Pacenti, and D. G. M. Mitchell, “Optimizing quasi-cyclic spatially coupled LDPC codes by eliminating harmful objects,” EURASIP J. Wireless Commun. Netw., vol. 2023, no. 1, p. 67, Jul. 2023.
[14] S. Yang, A. Hareedy, R. Calderbank, and L. Dolecek, “Breaking the computational bottleneck: Probabilistic optimization of high-memory spatially-coupled codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 69, no. 2, pp. 886–909, Feb. 2023.
[15] X. Zhang and S. Chen, “A two-stage decoding algorithm to lower the error-floors for LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 517–520, Apr. 2015.
[16] J. He, “A deep learning-aided post-processing scheme to lower the error floor of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE 20th Int. Conf. Commun. Technol. (ICCT), 2020, pp. 1587–1592.
[17] S. Kang, J. Moon, J. Ha, and J. Shin, “Breaking the trapping sets in LDPC codes: Check node removal and collaborative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 1, pp. 15–26, Jan. 2016.
[18] X. Zhang and P. H. Siegel, “Quantized iterative message passing decoders with low error floor for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 1–14, Jan. 2014.
[19] M. Zhang, F. Wu, Q. Yu, and C. Xie, “PEAR: Unbalanced inter-page errors aware read scheme for latency-efficient 3-D NAND flash,” IEEE Trans. Device Mater. Rel., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 49–58, Mar. 2024.
[20] Y. Du, Y. Gao, S. Huang, and Q. Li, “LDPC level prediction towards read performance of high-density flash memories,” IEEE Trans. Comput.Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 3264–3274, Oct. 2023.
[21] Y. Li, G. Han, S. Huang, C. Liu, M. Zhang, and F. Wu, “Exploiting metadata to estimate read reference voltage for 3-D NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 9–17, Feb. 2023.
[22] L. Cui, F. Wu, X. Liu, M. Zhang, R. Xiao, and C. Xie, “Improving LDPC decoding performance for 3D TLC NAND flash by LLR optimization scheme for hard and soft decision,” ACM Trans. Design Autom. Electr. Syst., vol. 27, no. 1, p. 5, 2022.
[23] K. Liu, M. El-Khamy, and J. Lee, “Finite-length algebraic spatiallycoupled quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 329–344, Feb. 2016.
[24] Y.-L. Ueng, C.-Y. Leong, C.-J. Yang, C.-C. Cheng, K.-H. Liao, and S.-W. Chen, “An efficient layered decoding architecture for nonbinary QC-LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 385–398, Feb. 2012.
[25] WiMAX-Part, Mobile I: A Technical Overview and Performance Evaluation, vol. 1, WiMAX Forum, Clackamas, OR, USA, 2006.
[26] D. Lee and W. Sung, “Estimation of NAND flash memory threshold voltage distribution for optimum soft-decision error correction,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 440–449, Jan. 2013.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:46:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

