5566

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 73, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025

Collective Bit Flipping-Based Decoding of Quantum LDPC Codes
Dimitris Chytas , Nithin Raveendran , Member, IEEE, and Bane Vasic´ , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract— Quantum low-density parity-check (QLDPC) codes have been proven to achieve higher minimum distances at higher code rates than surface codes. However, this family of codes must cope with the stringent latency constraints imposed by quantum technology and tends to exhibit poor performance under iterative decoding, especially when the variable degree is low. In this work, we improve both the error correction performance and decoding latency of variable degree-3 (dv-3) QLDPC codes under iterative decoding. Firstly, we perform a detailed analysis of the structure of a well-known family of QLDPC codes, i.e., hypergraph product-based codes. Then, we propose a decoding approach that stems from the knowledge of harmful configurations apparent in these codes. Our decoding scheme is based on applying a modified version of bit flipping (BF) decoding, namely two-bit bit flipping (TBF) decoding, which adds more degrees of freedom to BF decoding. The granularity offered by TBF decoding helps us design sets of decoders that operate in parallel and can collectively decode error patterns appearing in harmful configurations of the code, thus addressing both the latency and performance requirements. Finally, simulation results demonstrate that the proposed decoding scheme surpasses other iterative decoding approaches for various dv-3 QLDPC codes.
Index Terms— QLDPC codes, bit flipping decoding, hypergraph-product codes, symmetric stabilizers, trapping sets, error-floor.
I. INTRODUCTION
QUANTUM low-density parity-check (QLDPC) codes have recently gained attention over topological codes due to their superior minimum distance and asymptotically
scaling code rates [1], [2]. However, QLDPC codes require long-range qubit connections, increasing noise and adding
delays [3], [4], further restricting the latency available for decoding. These latency constraints are aggravated by poor error correction performance in iterative decoders like belief propagation (BP) and min-sum (MS). Iterative decoding failure is mainly attributed to inherent properties of QLDPC codes,
such as degeneracy and short cycles [5], [6]. This degradation,
Received 11 July 2024; revised 11 November 2024 and 16 January 2025; accepted 19 January 2025. Date of publication 29 January 2025; date of current version 18 August 2025. This work is supported by the NSF under grants CIF-2420424, CIF-2106189, CCF-2100013, ECCS/CCSS-2027844, ECCS/CCSS-2052751, and in part by the CoQREATE program under grant ERC-1941583, and Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, under a contract with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and funded through JPL’s Strategic University Research Partnerships (SURP) program. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was L. Jin. (Corresponding author: Dimitris Chytas.)
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721 USA (e-mail: dchytas@arizona.edu; nithin@arizona.edu; vasic@ece.arizona.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2025.3535897

particularly in the error-floor region, is prominent in low variable degree QLDPC codes, where iterative decoding fails to correct low-weight error patterns that occur within harmful configurations known as trapping sets [7].
Several approaches modify message-passing rules or scheduling to break the symmetries imposed by symmetric stabilizers and improve performance. Poulin and Chung [5] introduced heuristic modifications to BP, including freezing, random perturbation, and collision, which enhanced performance for degenerate codes but are non-deterministic and do not exploit the code structure. BP with bias using Oscillating Trapping Sets (BP-OTS) [8] improves performance by modifying decoding rules for trapping sets in topological codes, though it hasn’t been demonstrated for other QLDPC families. Layered BP and MS algorithms [9] exploit degeneracy to improve performance, but their serial nature increases latency. Advanced post-processing techniques, such as ordered statistics decoding (OSD) [10], stabilizer inactivation (SI) [11], and BP with guided decimation [12], can further improve performance but at the cost of high complexity (O(n3), O(n2logn), and O(n2), respectively), where n is the blocklength of the code. Recently, additional post-processing techniques, such as those in [13] and [14], have been introduced to improve the efficiency of solving the matrix inversion problem in BP-OSD. The ambiguity clustering method [13] constructs a dynamic block or cluster structure within the parity-check matrix, enabling the decoder to address ambiguities by concentrating on localized error regions rather than tackling the entire system simultaneously. Similarly, localized statistics decoding [14] operates on disconnected subgraphs (or clusters) where errors are likely to occur, processing them independently and in parallel, although its complexity scales cubically with cluster size. Furthermore, recent advancements have integrated post-processing methods tailored to more accurate noise models, such as BP combined with ordered Tanner forest (BP+OTF) [15], sliding window BPGD decoding [16], and the SymBreak decoder [17].
BF decoding, introduced in [18], is a low-complexity alternative widely used in classical LDPC decoding due to its good trade-offs between performance and complexity [19]. Several BF variants have been proposed for quantum error correction (QEC). The small-set-flip (SSF) decoder [20] addresses degeneracy by flipping sets of bits within stabilizers rather than single bits, introducing asymmetry that helps decode degenerate errors. However, SSF requires large codes to be effective and is not guaranteed to correct errors within trapping

0090-6778 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:51:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHYTAS et al.: COLLECTIVE BIT FLIPPING-BASED DECODING OF QUANTUM LDPC CODES

5567

sets. SSF has also been used as a post-processing technique following BP [21] to reduce error weight before SSF decoding. The Turbo-XZ algorithm applies BF with iteration-dependent thresholds to correct error patterns in trapping sets but does not fully exploit degeneracy [22]. BF methods have also been applied to topological codes, such as progressive-proximity BF [23], which leverages structural properties for decoding.
Our proposed decoding scheme builds on BF but distinguishes itself by specifically targeting low-latency decoding with guaranteed correction of error patterns in specific QLDPC code structures. We employ two-bit bit flipping (TBF) decoding, previously explored in classical literature [24], which has shown superior performance over original BF decoding. TBF assigns more states to both variable and check nodes, allowing for higher granularity in variable node processing, thus enhancing error correction. Unlike alternatives like gradient-descent bit flipping (GDBF) [25] and its probabilistic versions, TBF uses low-complexity deterministic functions, facilitating both analysis and collective decoding.
The concept of collective decoding has been explored in classical and quantum error correction literature. Regarding the former, a set of diverse low-complexity decoders operating in parallel [26] achieves guaranteed error correction performance in a small number of iterations. Relating to QEC, collective BP decoding was used within the framework of deep neural network-based learning [27] wherein a trapping set-based importance sampling approach is used to learn new decoding rules.
Our collective decoding approach is solely defined based on the structure of the code. We keep in mind that two major types of harmful configurations impede iterative decoding, namely, classical and quantum trapping sets (or symmetric stabilizers), defined in Section. II-C. Hence, the decoding framework should be able to deal with error patterns that appear in those two configurations. Our approach is to first enumerate harmful configurations by using the shortest cycles of the code as a starting point and then exploit the parent-child relationships of these graphs in order to obtain the most dominant harmful graphs. After the enumeration process, the goal is to develop a set of diverse TBF decoders capable of decoding all error patterns within quantum trapping sets and all error patterns up to a certain weight within classical trapping sets.
Our focus is on variable degree-3 (dv-3) QLDPC codes from the generalized hypergraph product (GHP) code [10] family. GHP codes suffer from error-floor under iterative decoding, which performs poorly despite the large distance of the codes. Nevertheless, this family of codes can achieve higher distance when compared to hypergraph product (HP) codes. Also, when GHP are decoded with BP-OSD, they can achieve better performance free of error-floor than HP codes [10]. This fact demonstrates the potential of this family of codes and enables us to analyze them. We also note that our restriction of the variable node degree is only for the sake of analysis, and we remark that the method is extendable to higher variable node degree codes. Interestingly, we observed that for a family of dv-3 QLDPC codes, the 6-cycles lead to classical trapping sets which are only interconnected by quantum trapping sets which in turn emerge from the 8-cycles. Such analysis provides the

overview of the structure of dv-3 QLDPC codes. Based on the knowledge of harmful structures in this family of codes, we provide a systematic method of generating the set of TBF decoders able to collectively correct low-weight error patterns appearing inside both classical and quantum trapping sets.
Finally, we provide simulation results featuring the selected set of TBF decoders, and we show that it can surpass the performance of message-passing decoders such as MS and layered MS for three different dv-3 QLDPC codes.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we introduce the preliminaries of QEC along with an overview of syndrome BF decoding and classical and quantum trapping sets. In Section III, we analyze the structure of dv-3 GHP codes. In Section IV, we present syndrome-based TBF decoding, which is extended in Section V, where we introduce TBF-based collective decoding, and we propose a set of decoders that can correct up to weight-5 error patterns that appear inside certain classical trapping sets and all error patterns that appear inside quantum trapping sets. Finally, Section VI presents simulation results obtained over various dv-3 QLDPC codes.

II. PRELIMINARIES A. Stabilizer Formalism
Consider the n-fold Pauli group,

Gn ≜ {pP1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ pPn : p ∈ {±1, ±i}, Pj ∈ {I, X, Y, Z}},
where I, X, Y , and Z are called Pauli operators. Every element in Gn has eigenvalues ±1, and any two elements in Gn either commute or anticommute with each other. A stabilizer group S is an Abelian subgroup in Gn that does not contain −I. If S is generated by n − k independent generators, it defines a n, k, dmin stabilizer code C that encodes k logical qubits into n physical qubits, with dmin being its minimum distance. The elements of S are called stabilizers. The set of generators of S can be represented by the stabilizer matrix H, whose (i, j)th element is given by the Pauli operator corresponding to the jth qubit in the ith stabilizer. For a more thorough description of the stabilizer formalism, one can refer to [28].
By applying the binary mapping to the stabilizer matrix, S, we obtain a (n − k) × 2n binary matrix:

H = [HZ | HX ],

(1)

which we call the parity check matrix of C. Since the corresponding stabilizers of S commute with each other, it can be verified that [28]:

HX HZT + HZ HXT = 0.

(2)

In this work, we address HP codes, which constitute a class
of Calderbank-Shor-Steane (CSS) codes. A n, kX − kZ , dmin
CSS code [29] is a stabilizer code constructed using two clas-
sical codes, CX [n, kX , dmin,X ] and CZ [n, kZ , dmin,Z ], where
dmin ≥ min{dmin,X , dmin,Z } [30] and CZ ⊆ CX . Given the stabilizer matrix HX of CX and HZ of CZ⊥, the CSS code constructed from CX and CZ has the form

H=

HZ 0

0 HX

,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:51:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5568

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 73, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025

where HX HZT = 0 (unless specified otherwise, we assume all operations on binary matrices and vectors are performed on the binary field).
CSS codes facilitate binary decoding because of their structure, i.e., X errors are decoded using HZ, and Z errors are decoded using HX . Therefore, one can consider the two independent binary symmetric channels (BSCs) rather than the depolarizing channel, thus ignoring the correlation between the X and Z errors [31]. Let us denote as e = [eX , eZ ] the binary representation of a Pauli error acting on the n qubits. The corresponding input syndromes are obtained as sZ = eX HZT and sX = eZ HXT , or in a compact form, s = [sX , sZ ].
An all-zero syndrome vector indicates that all stabilizers commute with the error pattern. On the other hand, when the syndrome vector is non-zero, an error has been detected. The goal of a syndrome-based decoder is to produce an estimate error pattern, ˆe, which corresponds to a syndrome ˆs that matches s. We observe a decoding success if the initial error e is recovered up to a stabilizer, which means that e ⊕ eˆ belongs to the rowspace of the parity check matrix H. Error correction is unsuccessful when the decoder is not able to match the input syndrome s, or when the decoding process results in a logical error, such that e ⊕ eˆ commutes with all the stabilizers, but it’s not in the rowspace of H.
The HX and HZ stabilizer matrices can each be represented as a Tanner graph, denoted as G, which is a bipartite graph with two sets of nodes: n variable (qubit) nodes V = {v1, . . . , vn} and m check nodes C = {c1, . . . , cm}. The set of edges (non-zero entries of the stabilizer matrix) connecting the two sets of nodes is denoted as E. For a subset of nodes V1 ⊆ V, N (V1) denotes the set of its check node neighbors. The induced sub-graph of V1 is the graph containing the nodes V1 ∪ N (V1) along with the edges that connect the two sets. The degree of a node is the number of its neighbors. A dv-variable-regular LDPC code has a Tanner graph in which all variable nodes have the same degree, dv. The degree of a check node c is denoted by dc. For a Tanner graph G, the girth g is the length of the shortest cycle in G. For the rest of this paper, only one type of error (X error) and its decoding will be considered; without loss of generality, the notation H will refer to HZ , e will refer to eX , and s will refer to sZ .

B. Bit Flipping Decoding

Before introducing TBF decoding, we outline the

syndrome-based version of the parallel BF algorithm [32],

[33], a simple hard decision decoder for LDPC codes on the

BSC [32], [33]. The decoder iterates until the input syndrome

is matched or a maximum of L iterations is reached. Each

check node c ∈ C is satisfied if its estimated syndrome sˆc matches the input sc; otherwise, it is unsatisfied, with residual syndrome rc calculated as their XOR. In each iteration, the

algorithm flips variable nodes connected to more unsatisfied

than satisfied check nodes, i.e., flips v if χℓ1(v)

>

dv 2

,

where χ0ℓ (v) and χ1ℓ (v) represent the number of satisfied and

unsatisfied checks connected to v at the start of iteration ℓ.

For regular QLDPC codes, dv is uniform for each v ∈ V.

To adapt to quantum decoding, a syndrome-based BF decoder

that iteratively flips variable nodes to find an error pattern eˆ with syndrome sˆ = eˆHT matching s can be used.
C. Classical and Quantum Trapping Sets
In general, the failures of BF decoding can be characterized by the notion of trapping sets [34], which will be used for the rest of the paper. We note that definitions given below are adopted by [7] and [35]. According to the quantum decoding problem, a variable node v is said to be eventually converged if there exists a positive integer I such that for all ℓ ≥ I, eˆvℓ = eˆvℓ−1. Also, a check node c is eventually satisfied if there exists a positive integer I such that for all ℓ ≥ I, sˆℓc = sc.
Definition 1: A set of variable-nodes T is a trapping set, if there exists an error syndrome s, such that when the syndrome-based decoder is executed on s, any variable-node in T is either not-eventually converged or neighbor of a not-eventually satisfied check (or both).
If the sub-graph induced by the set of variable nodes T contains a variable nodes and b odd-degree check nodes, then T is labeled as a (a, b) trapping set. As in the Tanner graph representation, the variable nodes and check nodes of the trapping set-induced sub-graph are represented by circular and square nodes, respectively. The odd-degree check nodes are shown using black-shaded square nodes. The level of harmfulness of a trapping set under a certain decoder is characterized by its critical number, defined below (adopted by [7]):
Definition 2: Critical number of a trapping set is the minimal number of variable nodes that have to be initially in error for the decoder to fail to converge. The set of variable nodes that have to be initially in error for the decoder to fail to converge is called failure inducing set [7].
A particular family of trapping sets, i.e., fixed sets, are detrimental to the BF decoding performance. Based on definition 4 given in [35], a trapping set is considered to be a fixed set or fixed point of the bit flipping algorithm if the hard decision of the set of variable nodes T remains unchanged after the first round of decoding. Authors in [34] also observed that for T to be a fixed set, no variable node v ∈ T should be connected to more odd-degree than even-degree checks. If a fixed set containing a variable nodes exists, then BF decoding is not guaranteed to correct all error patterns up to a errors. Examples of fixed sets apparent in families of GHP codes are given in Fig. 1(a) and Fig. 1(c) respectively.
The quantum decoding problem introduces another type of harmful configuration, as the decoder needs to converge to an estimate error pattern ˆe such that ˆe ⊕ e is a stabilizer. This differs from the classical decoding problem where an exact match of error is required. We refer to error vectors e and f as degenerate errors if e ⊕ f is a stabilizer. Hence, it is equivalent to output any one of the degenerate errors as the candidate error pattern for matching the syndrome. However, in QLDPC codes whose minimum distance is higher than their stabilizer weight, certain degenerate errors can impede iterative decoding. A symmetric topology of the stabilizer sub-graph that contains degenerate error patterns e and f of equal weight will result in a decoding failure [7]. In the following sections,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:51:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHYTAS et al.: COLLECTIVE BIT FLIPPING-BASED DECODING OF QUANTUM LDPC CODES

5569

we will illustrate examples of such decoding failures when the iterative decoder attempts to converge to error patterns e and f simultaneously, thus not matching the input syndrome. This failure is caused by the symmetry of both the stabilizer and the iterative decoder update rules. Hence, such errors are referred to as symmetric degenerate errors, and the corresponding sets of variable nodes as symmetric stabilizers or quantum trapping sets. Below, we give the definition of symmetric stabilizers adopted from [7].
Definition 3: A symmetric stabilizer is a stabilizer with a set of variable/qubit nodes whose induced sub-graph has no odddegree check nodes, and that can be partitioned into an even number of disjoint subsets so that (a) sub-graphs induced by these subsets of variable nodes are isomorphic, and (b) each subset has the same set of odd-degree check node neighbors in its induced sub-graph.
Assuming that a code has girth g, it is well known that the shortest cycles of the code, namely the ones with length g and g + 2, constitute trapping sets for iterative decoding algorithms [35]. Therefore, a way to obtain larger configurations that are harmful to decoding is to exploit the parent-child relationship between trapping sets. We say that a trapping set T1 is a parent of T2 (or that T2 is a child of T1) if T2 contains a subset whose induced sub-graph is isomorphic to T1 [35]. We will use this notion in the following section to present the trapping set analysis of GHP codes. We note here that for the rest of the paper, we will refer to symmetric stabilizers as quantum trapping sets interchangeably.

III. TRAPPING SET ANALYSIS OF GENERALIZED HYPERGRAPH PRODUCT CODES

HP codes is a family of QLDPC codes constructed by the hypergraph product of any two classical codes [30]. Here, we focus on GHP codes which contain both generalized bicycle codes [36] and the class of HP codes, where one of the two parity-check matrices used in the product is square [10].
Our analysis is based on enumerating trapping sets that are children of the g- and (g + 2)-cycles of the code (similar to [37]). To search for the children trapping sets, we follow the procedure outlined in Algorithm. 1, which illustrates the case that considers the g-cycles of the code to be the parent trapping sets. In general, the effectiveness of a decoder is determined by the lowest weight error patterns it fails to correct and the frequency of these failures [35]. Larger trapping sets, formed by adding variable nodes to a smaller (parent) trapping set, often have lower critical numbers and introduce additional failure inducing sets, making them more challenging to correct.
The B1[[882, 24, 18 ≤ dmin ≤ 24]] GHP code [10] is used as a case study for the upcoming analysis. The A and B matrices that describe the B1 code are given below.

x27 0

0

0

0

1 x54

x54 x27 0

0

0

0

1

 

1

x54 x27

0

0

0

0

 

A

=

 

0

1 x54 x27 0

0

0

 

,

 

0

0

1 x54 x27 0

0

 

 

0

0

0

1

x54 x27

0

 

0

0

0

0

1 x54 x27

Algorithm 1 Search for Children Trapping Sets

Input: Set of variable nodes V, Set of check nodes C

Output: Expanded set of variable nodes Vexp

1: Initialize Vexp as a cycle of girth g within V 2: for r = 1 to 2 do

3: Cdeg=1 ← {c ∈ C : dc = 1, c ∈ N (Vexp)}

4: for each c ∈ Cdeg=1 do

5:

Expand c by radius r: Nr(c)

6:

if there exists c′ ∈ Cdeg=1 \ {c} with Nr(c) ∩

Nr(c′) ≠ ∅ then

7:

Vexp ← Vexp ∪ (Nr(c) ∩ Nr(c′))

8:

break

9:

end if

10: end for

11: if no common nodes found among degree-1 checks

then

12:

Cdeg=2 ← {c ∈ C : dc = 2, c ∈ N (Vexp)}

13:

for each c2 ∈ Cdeg=2 do

14:

Expand c2 by radius r: Nr(c2)

15:

if there exists c1 ∈ Cdeg=1 with Nr(c2) ∩

Nr(c1) ≠ ∅ then

16:

Vexp ← Vexp ∪ (Nr(c2) ∩ Nr(c1))

17:

break

18:

else if there exists c2′ ∈ Cdeg=2 \ {c2} with

Nr(c2) ∩ Nr(c′2) ≠ ∅ then

19:

Vexp ← Vexp ∪ (Nr(c2) ∩ Nr(c′2))

20:

break

21:

end if

22:

end for

23: end if

24: end for

B = (1 + x + x6)I7.
Each entry of the A circulant matrix corresponds to a 63 × 63 matrix (l = 63), with entry 0 representing the all-zero matrix, entry 1 corresponding to the identity matrix and entries x27 and x54 being the shifted versions (by 27 and 54) of the identity matrix. For B circulant matrix, each entry also corresponds to a 63 × 63 matrix which is repeated seven times across the diagonal of B (I7 corresponds to the 7 × 7 identity matrix). For the HZ matrix, each entry of both A and B matrices is transposed [10]. The code is regular, with dv = 3 and dc = 6. The HX and HZ matrices of the code are given as: HX = [A, B] and HZ = [BT , AT ]. Without loss of generality, since we only consider X errors, our focus is on the HZ matrix of the code.
A. 6-Cycles and Classical Trapping Sets
Let us now consider the 6-cycles of the B1 code. Interestingly, all 6-cycles are only formed between variable nodes that belong to the same circulant matrix. There are no 6-cycles formed between variable nodes that belong to both circulant matrices. The trapping which corresponds to a 6-cycle is the (3, 3) one can be seen in Fig. 1(a).
We start by considering the (3, 3) trapping set inside the BT matrix. By searching for children trapping sets, we obtain

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:51:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5570

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 73, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025

Fig. 1. Graphical representation of the (3, 3) trapping set in (a) and its children trapping sets. The (5, 5) trapping set in (b), the (6, 4) trapping set in (c), and the (8, 6) trapping set in (d). Each child of the (3, 3) trapping set is a juxtaposition of two, three, and four six-cycles, respectively. Odd-degree check nodes are represented by ■.
the configurations shown in Fig. Fig. 1(b),(c),(d), which correspond to interconnected 6-cycles. By enumerating the children of the 6-cycle we eventually get the trapping set depicted in Fig. 2(a), which is a (63, 63) trapping set. This configuration corresponds to each 63 × 63 entry of the diagonal of the BT matrix. We note that the BT matrix consists of seven (63, 63) trapping sets which are independent with respect to BT , meaning that the checks of each (63, 63) trapping set are not connected to variable nodes that belong to other (63, 63) trapping sets.
We now obtain a 6-cycle of the AT matrix, which is also the parent to trapping sets formed by juxtaposing 6-cycles. By searching for children trapping sets, we finally obtain the (49, 49) trapping set which is shown in Fig. 2(b). The AT circulant matrix is therefore comprised of nine (49, 49) trapping sets which are not interconnected with each other and are only connected with the (63, 63) trapping sets of the other circulant matrix. We stop our search here since the (49, 49) and (63, 63) trapping sets also constitute stopping sets [38], which are directly connected to pseudocodewords and are harmful when decoded over the BSC. Pseudocodewords are considered to be attractor points of iterative message passing decoders [39], analogous to codewords, thereby determining the performance of iterative decoding [40].

Fig. 2. The (63, 63) and (49, 49) trapping sets obtained by the the (3, 3) trapping set in the BT and AT circulant matrices respectively. BT contains seven (63, 63) trapping sets and AT contains nine (49, 49) trapping sets. (63, 63) trapping sets are only interconnected with (49, 49) trapping sets and vice versa. Note that only degree-3 check nodes appear in the trapping sets. We use two styles of dotted lines to represent connections between remote nodes. The five 6-cycles in a row, seen in (a), can be inferred from the polynomial 1 + x + x6.
Fig. 3. The evolution of a (4, 4) trapping set (a) leading into the formation of a symmetric stabilizer (c). The (5, 3) trapping set (b) is obtained after adding a single variable node and the (6, 0) trapping set is obtained after adding two variable nodes. The three line types used for the (6, 0) trapping set indicate that the lines do not overlap. Notice that variable nodes belonging to different circulant matrices are connected via one check node.

B. 8-Cycles and Quantum Trapping Sets
Let us now consider the 8-cycles of the code. We observed that 8-cycles are only formed between sets of variable nodes that belong to both circulant matrices and there is no 8cycle inside each circulant matrix independently. The trapping set corresponding to an 8-cycle is the (4, 4) one which can be seen in Fig. 3(a). Yellow-colored circles correspond to variable nodes of the BT circulant matrix, and green-colored variable nodes correspond to variable nodes of the AT circulant matrix. Now, we will try to connect the degree1 check nodes by adding one variable node. Apparently, as illustrated in Fig. 3(a), the degree-1 checks connected to yellow-colored variable nodes, share a neighboring variable node, thus forming the (5, 3) trapping set (Fig. 3(b)). Finally, all the dangling degree-1 checks are connected when we add one more node to the (5, 3) trapping set. This leads

us to obtain the (6, 0) trapping set, which is a symmetric stabilizer and is illustrated in Fig. 3(c). The (6, 0) trapping set consists of nine interconnected 8-cycles formed between the two circulant matrices. Each variable node is contained in three (6, 0) trapping sets and 18 8-cycles. Every 8-cycle of the code leads to the formation of the (6, 0) quantum trapping set. The set of six variable nodes inside the (6, 0) trapping set corresponds to the support of a check of the HX matrix. Also, Fig. 4 shows that the (6, 0) trapping sets interconnect the (63, 63) and (49, 49) classical trapping sets.
Beyond the B1 code, our analysis shows that similar classical trapping sets, such as the (49, 49) and (63, 63) are also found in other degree-3 codes like GHP, HP, and bicycle codes. These codes exhibit a 2D grid-like structure composed of 6-cycles. For instance, by applying Algorithm. 1 to the 6cycles of the B3[[1270, 28, 16 ≤ dmin ≤ 46]] GHP code [10],

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:51:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHYTAS et al.: COLLECTIVE BIT FLIPPING-BASED DECODING OF QUANTUM LDPC CODES

5571

Fig. 4. Overview of the structure of B1 code. The symmetric stabilizer interconnects the two types of trapping sets. The (63, 63) and (49, 49) trapping sets are represented as yellow and green circles, respectively, which indicate their symmetric structure.

we find that it contains five (127, 127) trapping sets. These configurations share a similar grid-like structure to the (63, 63) trapping set, except that each row of the grid contains six interconnected 6-cycles. Similarly, the C2[[1922, 50, 16]] HP code contains the (31, 31) trapping set. These low variable degree codes are also known to perform poorly under iterative decoding as they also exhibit (6, 0) quantum trapping sets.
Finally, for every dv-3, dc-6 GHP code, we conjecture that since one of the circulant matrices will be constructed by using a weight-3 polynomial, and provided that no 8-cycles lie inside the circulant, then the trapping sets of that circulant matrix will be a grid-like structure of 6-cycles. We also conjecture that in such case, the (6, 0) trapping set will be present. Hence, it is crucial to devise a decoding framework that is able to correct error patterns appearing in such configurations.

IV. TWO-BIT BIT FLIPPING DECODING

The trapping set analysis of the B1 code indicates that

BF decoder is expected to exhibit poor performance for

dv-3 GHP codes, despite being a good candidate for low-

latency applications. In particular, it has been proven that for

dv-3 variable-regular codes, the guaranteed error correction

capability

of

the

BF

algorithm

is

upper

bounded

by

⌈

g 4

⌉

−

1 [34]. Therefore, the fact that a dv-3 code with g = 6 or

g = 8 cannot correct certain weight two error patterns makes

the algorithm impractical. Also, the girth of QLDPC codes

is usually small, and in the case of HP and GHP codes,

it cannot be higher than eight. Hence, we are motivated to

utilize bit flipping-based decoders with better error correction

capabilities, accompanied by higher granularity, and allowing

collective decoding.

A. TBF Algorithm
We now present the quantum equivalent of the classical TBF algorithm [24]. In contrast to the BF decoder, which assigns two possible states to each variable and check node (one-bit precision), TBF uses two-bit precision, allowing more states to describe both variable and check nodes.

For the check nodes, an additional bit is used to describe
the value of the check in the previous iteration. A satisfied (unsatisfied) check node c is called previously satisfied (previously unsatisfied) if it was satisfied (unsatisfied) in the
previous decoding iteration and it is still satisfied (unsatisfied)
in the current iteration, which means that its residual syndrome rc = 0 (or rc = 1) for both iterations. In the other case, the check node is called newly satisfied (newly unsatisfied), which means that the residual syndrome rc flips in the current iteration. The states of a previously satisfied, a newly satisfied,
a previously unsatisfied, and a newly unsatisfied check node are denoted as 0old, 0new, 1old, and 1new, respectively.
Let zℓ = (z1ℓ, z2ℓ, · · · , zmℓ ) be a vector such that zcℓ ∈ {0old, 0new, 1old, 1new} gives the state of check node c at the end of the ℓth iteration. The check node update function Φ is defined as follows:

 

0old,

if (rcℓ−1, rcℓ) = (0, 0)



zcℓ

←

Φ(rcℓ−1,

rcℓ)

=

 


1new, 0new,



if (rcℓ−1, rcℓ) = (0, 1) if (rcℓ−1, rcℓ) = (1, 0)

(3)

  1old,

if (rcℓ−1, rcℓ) = (1, 1).

The initial states of check nodes are computed at iteration ℓ = 0 based on the received syndrome s, as follows:

zc0 ← ∆c(sc) ∈

{0old, 0new}, if sc = 0 {1old, 1new}, if sc = 1.

(4)

Hence, if the received syndrome of a check equals zero, the check can be initialized either as previously satisfied or as newly satisfied. On the other hand, if the received syndrome of a check equals one, the check can be initialized either as previously unsatisfied or as newly unsatisfied. This is an indication of the granularity offered by TBF decoding, which can be exploited via collective decoding.
In the case of variable nodes, the additional bit is used to represent their “strength”. A variable node v is classified as either a “strong” variable node or a “weak” variable node. The intuition behind this classification is that variable nodes are treated differently with respect to their strength. For example, a variable node that is marked as weak can be flipped more easily than a variable node marked as strong in the subsequent iteration. Therefore, v can be described by four states instead of two, which are the following: 00, 01, 10, 11, where the most significant bit (MSB) denotes the value of v and the least significant bit (LSB) denotes the strength of v.
Let wℓ = (w1ℓ, w2ℓ, · · · , wnℓ ), such that wvℓ ∈ {00, 01, 10, 11} gives the state of variable node v at the end of the ℓth iteration. The hard decision of v at the ℓth iteration is extracted using the MSB as: MSB(wvℓ ) and the error estimate vector ˆeℓ corresponds to the hard decision part of wℓ.
Let us spend some time understanding how the variable nodes are updated in the TBF algorithm. States of variable nodes are initialized to ∆v ∈ {00, 01} since we do not receive any channel values. The variable node update function used

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:51:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5572

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 73, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025

TABLE I
DESCRIPTION OF Ψ WHICH ASSIGNS THE STATE OF A VARIABLE NODE v AT THE (ℓ + 1)TH ITERATION BASED ON ITS CURRENT STATE wvℓ AND THE NUMBER OF ITS CURRENT ADJACENT UNSATISFIED CHECKS χℓ1(v)

to compute the updated variable node state is defined by:

 

wvℓ

,

if X ℓ(v) = (2, 0, 0)



wvℓ+1

=

 


00, 10,



if X ℓ(v) = (1, 0, 1) & wvℓ ∈ (01, 00) if X ℓ(v) = (1, 0, 1) & wvℓ ∈ (10, 11)

 

Ψ(wvℓ

,

χℓ1

(v)),

otherwise.

(5)

Here,

X ℓ(v)

=

(χℓ0old (v),

χℓ
0new

(v),

χℓ
1old

(v

))

denotes

the

3-

tuple containing the number of previously satisfied, newly

satisfied, and previously unsatisfied neighboring check nodes

of v respectively, and the function Ψ is described in Table I.

The function Ψ computes the next state of each variable node

by using the number of its adjacent unsatisfied checks χ1ℓ (v) and its current state wvℓ . In Table I, for the case of three unsatisfied checks, both weak and strong bits are flipped to

strong bits. In the case of two unsatisfied checks, strong bits

become weak and, in turn, weak bits are flipped to strong

bits. Finally, for one unsatisfied check, weak bits are flipped

to weak bits, whereas for no unsatisfied checks, bits become

strong while retaining their hard decision value. Note that Ψ

defines (5) for any input configuration except the following

two cases. Firstly, when a variable node v is connected to

two previously satisfied checks, zero newly satisfied checks,

and zero previously unsatisfied check nodes - i.e., X ℓ(v) =

(2, 0, 0), then, we do not modify the state of v. Secondly, when

X ℓ(v) = (1, 0, 1), the decoding rule forces v to become weak,

i.e., LSB is set to zero. All such subtleties can be captured in

the variable node update function in a TBF algorithm.

We note that (5) and Ψ function of Table I correspond to

a single example of a realization of a TBF decoder. More

generally, the variable node update can have many differ-

ent realizations giving more flexibility in the decoding rule.

We will use multiple realizations of (5) in order to develop

our collective decoding framework. Considering the definitions

given above, the syndrome-based TBF decoder is described in

Algorithm 2.

B. Designing TBF Decoders
The granularity offered by the variable node update function (5) can help us develop TBF decoders with diverse error-correction capabilities. Each TBF decoder can be uniquely determined as:
D = (Ψ, f ),

Algorithm 2 Syndrome-Based TBF Algorithm

Input: s, H, L

Output: eˆ

Parameters: Φ, Ψ, ∆v, ∆c

1: ℓ ← 0

2: eˆℓv ← 0, ∀v ∈ V 3: wvℓ ← ∆v, ∀v ∈ V 4: zcℓ ← ∆c(sc), ∀c ∈ C 5: rℓ ← s

6: while rℓ ≠ 0 and ℓ ≤ L do

7: ∀v : wvℓ+1 ← (5) 8: eˆvℓ+1 ← MSB(wvℓ+1), ∀v ∈ V 9: sˆℓ+1 = ˆeℓ+1HT (mod2)

10:

rcℓ+1 = sc ⊕ sˆℓc+1, ∀c ∈ C

11:

zcℓ+1 ← Φ(rcℓ, rcℓ+1), ∀c ∈ C

12: ℓ ← ℓ + 1

▷ Initializations
▷ Hard decision of wvℓ ▷ Estimated syndrome ▷ Residual syndrome

13: end while

where f is a function that determines how the variable nodes are updated as described next. Variable node function Ψ can be described as a look-up-table like the one shown in Table I, and in general, it can be applied to any subset of variable nodes. Multiple Ψ functions can be deployed to cover the whole set of variable nodes V. In such case, a Ψ function corresponding to a subset Vi ⊆ V will be denoted as ΨVi . For the majority of decoders we used in our simulations, Ψ is as described in Table I. This is based on the observation that one should be cautious while relaxing the bit flipping criteria of the Ψ function, as logical errors can be introduced in cases where bits with small number of unsatisfied checks are simultaneously flipped. Consequently, most of our decoders are defined by modifying the f function, which makes the bit flipping procedure more conservative.
We define f to be a sequence of nine binary values (flags) which determines how (5) is applied to any subset Vi ⊆ V of variable nodes, as:

f Vi = (I∆v , I∆c , W110, W200, W201, W101, W011,

W111, W020).

(6)

The first two parameters act on the initialization of variable
and check nodes, i.e., ∆v and ∆c, respectively. If I∆v = 1, then all variable nodes are initialized as ∆v = 00 (weak zero), otherwise, they are initialized as ∆v = 01 (strong zero). If I∆c = 1, then check nodes are initialized as ∆c(sc) ∈ {0new, 1new} (newly satisfied/unsatisfied), depending on their binary value, sc. If I∆c = 0, check nodes are initialized as ∆c(sc) ∈ {0old, 1old} (previously satisfied/unsatisfied) depending on their binary value, sc. For the rest of the parameters, the subscript 3-tuple corresponds to X ℓ(v), where v ∈ Vi. Now we will describe the effect of each parameter in the variable-
to-check update rule.
If W101 = 1, then the state of a variable node v connected to one previously satisfied, zero newly satisfied, and one pre-
viously unsatisfied check remains the same for that iteration,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:51:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHYTAS et al.: COLLECTIVE BIT FLIPPING-BASED DECODING OF QUANTUM LDPC CODES

5573

thus: wvℓ+1 =

wvℓ , Ψ(wvℓ , χℓ1(v)),

if (W101 = 1 & 1101(X ℓ(v)) = 1) if (W101 = 0 & 1101(X ℓ(v)) = 1).
(7)

where,

1101(X ℓ(v)) =

1, if X ℓ(v) = (1, 0, 1) 0, otherwise,

(8)

is the indicator function. The remaining parameters are also described using equations similar to (7). If W200 = 1, then the state of a variable node connected to two previously satisfied, zero newly satisfied, and zero previously unsatisfied check becomes weak, otherwise, if W200 = 0, the state of the particular variable node remains the same for that iteration. This is described by the following equation:

  00,

if (W200 = 1 & 1200(X ℓ(v)) = 1)



    

& wvℓ ∈ (01, 00)

wvℓ+1 = 10, if (W200 = 1 & 1200(X ℓ(v)) = 1)

(9)

   

& wvℓ ∈ (10, 11)

  

wvℓ

,

if (W200 = 0 & 1200(X ℓ(v)) = 1).

The same rule applies for W110. Finally, if W201 = 1, then the state of a variable node connected to two previously satisfied, zero newly satisfied, and one previously unsatisfied checks becomes weak. This is described by the following equation:


00,       wvℓ+1 = 10,









  

Ψ(wvℓ

,

χℓ1

(v)),

if (W201 = 1 & 1201(X ℓ(v)) = 1)
& wvℓ ∈ (01, 00)
if (W201 = 1 & 1201(X ℓ(v)) = 1)
& wvℓ ∈ (10, 11)
if (W201 = 0 & 1201(X ℓ(v)) = 1).

(10)

The rest of the parameters have the same behavior as W201. In the following section, we will exploit the structure
of GHP codes, analyzed in Section III, by using multiple instances of TBF decoders in parallel (collective decoding).

V. COLLECTIVE DECODING
Our collective decoding framework is denoted by
DND = {Di|i = 1, · · · , ND},
which is the set of TBF decoders we have at our disposal, where ND is the cardinality of the set and Di = (Ψi, fi) describes each individual decoder of the set, which is uniquely defined. The set of ND decoders is used in parallel so that it can provide guaranteed correction within the allowed decoding time budget. For the rest of the paper, if no superscript is defined for Ψ and f functions then we assume that they are applied to the whole set of variable nodes, V. Regarding the f function, although the number of all possible 3-tuples is more than nine, for the purposes of our decoding analysis and in order to limit the complexity, we choose to work with the aforementioned 9 bit-values. The total number of decoders we will have at our disposal is 29 = 512 and is denoted by

Fig. 5. Decoding of a (3, 3) trapping set for an instance of TBF decoding, where the flags W201 = 1 and W111 = 1 are enabled. The (3, 3) trapping set is considered to be a part of the (63, 63) trapping set. Each figure corresponds to the state of the decoder for each iteration. Light gray and dark gray colored circle nodes correspond to weak zeros and weak ones respectively, whereas black colored squares correspond to unsatisfied checks. Flag W201 initially flips all nodes in the support of unsatisfied checks and flag W111 prevents the bit v18 from being flipped during the third iteration. As a result, the algorithm converges in four iterations.
Dtot. These nine parameters were selected through empirical analysis of low-weight error patterns, as illustrated in the following example.
Consider a TBF decoder based on Table I, with all variable nodes initialized as strong zeros. Flags W201 and W111 assist in correcting errors in (3, 3) trapping sets, as in Fig. 5. Without these flags, each variable node would require at least two unsatisfied checks to change state, causing convergence to fail. With W201 and W111 enabled, no bits flip in the first iteration as each variable node has only one unsatisfied check. In the second iteration, bits in the three residual checks’ support are marked “weak” due to two previously satisfied and one unsatisfied check. During the third iteration, bits previously marked as weak flip, while bits connected to three unsatisfied checks turn strong, and others revert to weak. Variable nodes v1, v2, and v7, with only one unsatisfied check, flip in the next iteration, while v18 remains unchanged due to W111. This process ensures convergence within four iterations by limiting flips and preventing logical errors. The rest of the parameters were selected in a similar manner, by examining weight-4 and weight-5 harmful error-patterns.
A. Targeting Error-Floor
Based on the trapping set analysis of the code in Section III, our goal is to correct all error patterns that appear inside the (6, 0) trapping set and all error patterns up to weight-t inside the (49, 49) and (63, 63) trapping sets, where t is a chosen parameter. Since those configurations are replicated multiple

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:51:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5574

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 73, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025

Fig. 6. Uncorrectable weight-3 error configurations by BF decoder. These
• errors appear in smaller trapping sets within the (63, 63) and (49, 49) trapping
sets. Variable nodes in error are marked with . Note that in this case, ■ corresponds to an unsatisfied check.
times, the error-floor performance will be improved. We note here that we use the BF algorithm as a starting point of our analysis given below, because BF is a special case of a TBF decoder.
1) Dealing With Classical Trapping Sets: Since both (49, 49) and (63, 63) trapping sets are formed by grid-like structures of 6-cycles, the following analysis applies to both of them. We begin our analysis by considering BF, which flips every bit that has two or more unsatisfied checks in their neighborhood. BF can correct every weight-1 and weight-2 error pattern that appears in both (49, 49) and (63, 63) trapping sets. We now consider weight-3 error patterns. BF cannot correct the types of weight-3 error patterns that are depicted in Fig. 6. The weight-3 error patterns appearing inside the (3, 3) trapping set (Fig. 6(a)) constitute fixed sets for BF decoder (see Section IV), so the decoder fails to correct them because the number of unsatisfied checks of all bits equals to one, therefore no variable node can be flipped. Regarding the error patterns shown in Fig. 6(b),(c),(d),(e), BF exhibits oscillating behavior as it does not provide different treatment for variable nodes with two unsatisfied checks and variable nodes with three unsatisfied checks. All these error patterns can be corrected by using the following TBF-based decoder which is more cautious while flipping bits: D1 = (Ψ1, (0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 0)), where Ψ1 is given by Table I. D1 can correct the error patterns of Fig. 6 in five, four, one, one, and one iterations, respectively.
Regarding weight-4 error patterns, we continue our analysis using the D1 decoder as our basis. Our goal now is to first generate all possible weight-4 error patterns that can appear in the (49, 49) trapping set. For every weight4 error pattern for which D1 fails, we run the remaining 511 decoders, Dtot\{D1}. Eventually, we pick a decoder of that set which is able to correct the largest number of weight-4 error patterns for which D1 fails. It turns out that D2 = (Ψ2, (0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0)), where Ψ2 is given by Table I, is able to correct every single one of those error patterns. Now that we can correct all weight-4 error patterns inside the (49, 49) trapping set, we use both D1 and D2 decoders as our basis for testing the correction of all weight-4 error patterns appearing in the (69, 69) trapping set. Following the same approach as before, we found that

Algorithm 3 Generation of Set D

Input:t, Dtot, E2, · · · , Et Output: D, j − 1

1: j ← 2

▷ Initialization

2: D ← D1

3: Dtot ← Dtot\D1

▷ Remove selected decoder

4: F ER(i) ← 0, ∀i ∈ [1, 512]

5: while j ≤ t do

6: while (Ej ̸= ∅ & Dtot ≠ ∅) do

7:

E ←∅

8:

for ∀e ∈ Ej do

9:

Run D

10:

if D fails then

11:

E ← E ∪ e ▷ Uncorrectable error patterns.

12:

end if

13:

end for

14:

if E ≠ ∅ then

15:

for ∀e ∈ E do

16:

Run ∀Di ∈ Dtot

17:

store F ER(i)

18:

end for

19:

D = arg minDi∈Dtot F ER

20:

D ← D D ▷ Include to the set of decoders

21:

Ej ← Ej\EDj ▷ Correctable error patterns

22:

Dtot ← Dtot\{D} ▷ Remove selected decoder

23:

else

Ej ← ∅

24:

end if

25: end while

26: j ← j + 1

27: end while

decoder D3 = (Ψ3, (0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0)), where Ψ3 is given by Table I, can complement D1 and D2 decoders in correcting all possible weight-4 error patterns appearing in both (49, 49) and (63, 63) trapping sets.
Finally, we outline a recursive approach, presented in
Algorithm 3, that generates a set of TBF-based decoders that
can collectively correct all error patterns up to a certain weight, which appear inside classical trapping sets. Ej denotes the set of all error patterns of weight-j that are found inside the trapping set, while t denotes the desired error correction
capability inside the trapping set (we aim to correct all error patterns up to weight-t in the trapping set). Also, EDj , denotes the set of error patterns of weight-j that are correctable by the decoder D. All decoders of the set Dtot are able to correct all weight-1 error patterns, so the algorithm begins by initializing the set of available decoders as the D1 decoder. Then, for all error patterns of weight-2, the rest of all possible 511 decoders of the set, Dtot\{D1}, are simulated and the one with the lowest frame error rate (FER), D, is added to the set D. The error patterns that are correctable by D are removed from the set Ej. The process continues until either all error patterns of weight j are corrected or all the decoders of the set Dtot\{D1} have been used. After all error patterns of a certain weight are corrected, the weight is incremented

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:51:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHYTAS et al.: COLLECTIVE BIT FLIPPING-BASED DECODING OF QUANTUM LDPC CODES

5575

TABLE II
SET OF EIGHT TBF DECODERS WHICH GUARANTEE THE CORRECTION OF ALL ERROR PATTERNS UP TO WEIGHT-5 THAT APPEAR INSIDE THE (49, 49) AND (63, 63) TRAPPING SETS OF THE B1 CODE (CHILDREN OF THE (3, 3) TRAPPING SET). ALL DECODERS SHARE THE SAME Ψ FUNCTION

TABLE III
A REALIZATION OF THE Ψ FUNCTION, WHICH IS ONLY APPLIED ON VARIABLE NODES OF ONE CIRCULANT MATRIX AND IN CONJUNCTION WITH THE UPDATE RULE DESCRIBED BY TABLE I CORRECTS ERROR PATTERNS INSIDE QUANTUM TRAPPING SETS

and the process continues. Eventually, this approach outputs the set of decoders D that can correct up to weight-(j − 1) error patterns appearing inside a trapping set.
Finally, we point out that for each weight-j error pattern, we first generate the decoders needed to correct errors in the (49, 49) trapping set. This set of decoders is then used as the initial decoding set for handling similar patterns in the (63, 63) trapping set, as their structural similarities allow mutual error correction.
In Table II, we list a set of eight TBF decoders that guarantee the correction of all error patterns up to weight5 that appear inside the (49, 49) and (63, 63) trapping sets. Simulation results obtained by using this set of decoders are shown in Section VI.
2) Dealing With Quantum Trapping Sets: We consider again the plain BF algorithm. It is easy to see that all weight1 error patterns appearing inside the (6, 0) trapping set can be corrected by BF. However, when it comes to the weight-2 error patterns, BF can correct all of them except the ones that appear in diagonal positions of each 8-cycle, or (4, 4) trapping set. In that case, based on the decoding rule, BF keeps flipping all four nodes back and forth without treating differently the variable nodes with two or three unsatisfied checks. Hence, there are two weight-2 error-patterns per (4, 4) trapping set that result in failure inducing sets. This problem can be solved by using a less “aggressive” BF algorithm that introduces more granularity, such as D1. By observing the parameters of D1, it is clear that it will immediately flip all variable nodes with three unsatisfied checks while it will flag the variable nodes with two unsatisfied checks as “weak”, so it will be able to correct such error configurations in one iteration.
We continue our analysis by considering weight-3 error patterns, all of which are uncorrectable by D1 due to the symmetry of the (6, 0) trapping set. Since (6, 0) trapping sets are only formed between the two circulant matrices, we can deploy a TBF decoder that assigns different rules to variable nodes regarding which circulant matrix they belong to. For example, variable nodes with three unsatisfied checks in one circulant are immediately flipped, while variable nodes with three unsatisfied checks in the other circulant only get their energy reduced (become “weak”) so they can potentially be

Fig. 7. Progression of BF algorithm for a weight-3 error pattern appearing inside the (6, 0) trapping set. (a) represents the initial state of the decoder, and the error pattern is marked with gray. After every node with two unsatisfied checks has been flipped, state (b) is obtained, and then BF oscillates between states (b) and (c) as it always flips the same number of nodes belonging to the two different circulants. Such an error configuration can be resolved by treating nodes of different circulant matrices differently, thus inducing asymmetry.
flipped in subsequent iterations. This action introduces asymmetry and the overall decoder introduces a “timing offset” to the variable nodes of one circulant matrix. An example of a weight-3 error configuration that cannot be corrected by either BF or D1 is shown in Fig. 7. Such an error configuration can be corrected by employing different rules in each circulant matrix.
In conclusion, regarding the case of quantum trapping sets, we propose a single TBF algorithm that is more conservative in flipping the variable nodes of one circulant matrix and more aggressive with the variable nodes of the other circulant matrix. This approach enables the algorithm to handle all possible error patterns in the (6, 0) trapping set. We denote that algorithm as
D9 = ({Ψ9V1 , ΨV9 2 }, (0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 0)),
where ΨV9 1 is described by Table I, ΨV9 2 is described by Table III, V1 = {v1, v2, . . . , vn/2} and V2 = {vn/2+1, vn/2+2, . . . , vn}. Due to its inherent asymmetry, D9 can correct every error pattern inside the (6, 0) trapping set.
Finally, from this analysis it is clear that the set D9 = {D1, D2, D3, D4, D5, D6, D7, D8, D9} is able to correct any error pattern up to weight-5 appearing inside the (49, 49) and (63, 63) classical trapping sets and any error pattern appearing inside a (6, 0) quantum trapping set.
B. Further Optimizations
The analysis of the B1 code in Section III revealed that the code is comprised of nine (49, 49) trapping sets and seven (63, 63) trapping sets which are connected via symmetric stabilizers. We can correct higher-weight error patterns by

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:51:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5576

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 73, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025

assigning different decoding rules to variable nodes depending on which circulant matrix they belong to. The type of error patterns we aim to correct are comprised of up to weight5 error-patterns appearing inside classical trapping sets of one circulant matrix and error patterns appearing inside a symmetric stabilizer (quantum trapping set). For example, we observe that D1 and D9 are comprised of exactly the same function f with the difference that D9 assigns a different Ψ function to the variable nodes of the second circulant matrix. This means that the set {D1, D9} aims to correct all error patterns up to weight-3, which appear inside any of the classical trapping sets of the first circulant matrix plus error patterns appearing inside (6, 0) trapping sets. In a similar manner, we can define a new decoder
D10 = ({ΨV101 , ΨV102 }, $0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 0)),
where ΨV101 is described by Table III and ΨV102 is described by Table I. Hence, the sets {D1, D9} and {D10, D1} are employed to correct all classical weight-3 errors and errors inside symmetric stabilizers. Extending this idea, we can build sets of decoders based on Table II wherein we will complement each of the decoders with two additional decoders with the corresponding f function and two differing Ψ functions as for D9 and D10. This gives us a set of 24 decoders that can correct error patterns up to weight-5 that appear inside classical trapping sets - (49,49) and (63,63), and all error patterns inside quantum trapping sets - (6,0). As we will observe in the following section, this set of 24 decoders will help improve both the waterfall and error-floor performance over the previous set of decoders for three different degree-3 QLDPC codes. In a similar manner, one can develop a set of decoders that applies different rules to each of the 16 classical trapping sets of the code.
In terms of generalizing our decoder, we argue that a set of decoders capable of correcting error patterns within grids of interconnected 6-cycles of arbitrary sizes would achieve strong error-floor performance across various QLDPC codes with variable degree-3. Furthermore, this approach could be extended to higher-degree codes by adapting the Ψ and f functions to handle the increased degrees of freedom associated with higher check configurations.

VI. NUMERICAL RESULTS

We simulate the decoding performance of the proposed decoders from Section V. Unless noted otherwise, the maximum number of iterations is set to 50. We implement MS decoding for its better performance over BP when using a normalizing parameter. All decoders in the plots use parallel scheduling unless otherwise specified (e.g., layered decoding). Also, the set of decoders was run sequentially, as they were generated sequentially by Algorithm. 3.
To illustrate the efficiency of our framework, some plots include bounded distance decoding (BDD) performance. The BDD formula is:

t
BDD(n, p) = 1 −

n pj (1 − p)n−j ,

j

j=0

Fig. 8. Performance of collective bit flipping-based decoding for the B1 code. D4 surpasses nMS decoding while D24 also surpasses layered nMS decoding in the error-floor region.
where t is the error correction capability. For smaller block lengths, we apply BDD directly to ensure numerical stability, though for larger n and t, numerical instability can arise due to large binomial coefficients.
A. Comparison With MS Decoding
Fig. 8 illustrates the decoding performance of BF, normalized min-sum (nMS), layered nMS, and three sets of TBF decoders. The performance plot for layered nMS has been replicated from [9]. We note that the difference between the nMS plot in our implementation and the one in [9] is based on the fact that in the latter, the authors pick the normalization factor uniformly at random in {0.875, 0.9275} for every iteration, whereas we pick it to be equal to 0.875. The first set of TBF decoders is only comprised of D1 = D1 which can correct all error patterns up to weight-3 that appear inside the (49, 49) and (63, 63) trapping sets. The second set of TBF decoders is comprised of D4 = {D1, D2, D3, D9} which are given in Table II and can correct every weight-4 error pattern applied in either the (49, 49) trapping set or (63, 63) trapping set and every error pattern appearing in the (6, 0) trapping set independently. Finally, the third set of TBF decoders D24, is the one described in Section V-B. The poor performance of BF is attributed to its inability to correct error patterns of weight as low as two (see also Section V). On the other hand, we observe that D4 outperforms both BF and nMS, while D24 also outperforms the layered nMS, which demonstrates an error-floor behavior.
For the B3 code (Fig. 9), we compare the performance of the ensembles of decoders against the nMS algorithm. We note here that B3 code also contains the (6, 0) trapping sets, for which we can decode every error pattern that appears inside it (for more details about the A and B matrices that describe B3, refer to [10]). BF exhibits poor decoding performance, while our proposed set of four decoders (D4) can almost match the performance of the nMS in the error-floor region. Interestingly, the performance gain of the ensemble of 24 decoders is higher for the B3 code when compared to the B1 code. This happens because the one circulant matrix of B3 is also composed of grid-like structure of 6-cycles, similar to the B1 code, but the other circulant matrix has a girth equal to 10, which further enhances the performance of our scheme due to its sparsity.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:51:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHYTAS et al.: COLLECTIVE BIT FLIPPING-BASED DECODING OF QUANTUM LDPC CODES

5577

Fig. 9. Performance of collective bit flipping-based decoding for the B3 code. D24 surpasses nMS decoding. The set of proposed decoders provides better performance than that of the B1 code (for which it was originally designed for) due to the sparsity that the B3 code offers.

Fig. 11. Average number of iterations required by nMS and D24 for decoding the B3 code.
TABLE IV COMPARISON OF BF, TBF, AND MS DECODING BASED ON MEMORY AND
OPERATIONAL COMPLEXITY PER ITERATION

Fig. 10. Performance of collective bit flipping-based decoding for the 288, 12, 18 BB code. The ensemble of 24 decoders outperforms the nMS algorithm. BDD(288,8) performance is also included for comparison.
In addition, we choose to use our proposed ensemble of decoders for a family of dv-3 QLDPC codes that were recently proposed in [4], namely the Bivariate Bicycle (BB) LDPC codes. BB codes are the first example of high-rate, largedistance QLDPC codes achieving the pseudo-threshold close to 1% under the circuit-based noise model. These codes share a similar structure to the family of GHP that we studied, so we expect our proposed set of decoders to improve their performance as well. In Fig. 10 we compare the performance of nMS against that of D1, D4, and D24. For the 288, 12, 18 code, we notice that collective decoding still outperforms nMS, but the gain over the error correction performance is less than the one observed for the B1 and B3 codes. This happens because the 288, 12, 18 code does not contain the (63, 63) and (49, 49) trapping sets. Nevertheless, since BB codes still contain the (6, 0) trapping sets and their classical trapping sets are formed by juxtaposing 6-cycles, D24 performs about 10 times better than nMS for a crossover probability equal to 0.01. We also note that no error-floor behavior is observed for any of the three sets of decoders.
Fig. 11 demonstrates the average number of decoding iterations required by D24 vs. the nMS decoder for the B3 code (corresponding to Fig. 9). We observe that for a crossover probability of 0.01, D24 attains about 1000 times better

performance than nMS by only requiring about 2.5 iterations, while nMS requires 1.2 iterations. We note that a TBF-based decoding iteration is expected to require less latency than a nMS iteration; therefore, the collective decoding approach provides a good performance/latency trade-off.
Finally, to evaluate per-iteration complexity, BF and TBF maintain O(n) complexity by processing each variable node independently with counting and XOR operations, however TBF adds an extra bit for state tracking. TBF’s memory overhead doubles to store this additional bit, but the asymptotic complexity remains linear. In comparison, MS decoding also has O(n) complexity but involves higher arithmetic complexity with dv additions and minimum operations per variable node, making TBF more efficient in terms of operation simplicity. Table IV summarizes the memory and operational complexity of BF, TBF, and MS decoders. Evidently, TBF decoder provides a good trade-off between performance and complexity.
B. Comparison With SSF Decoding
We now aim to compare our framework against SSF. Our simulations reveal that SSF struggles for low-degree codes, such as BB codes, due to its inability to handle (3, 3) trapping sets. Specifically, SSF is limited by stopping syndromes, where there is no subset of generators in the X matrix capable of reducing the syndrome weight [41]. This limitation exists because SSF requires a monotonically decreasing syndrome weight, which prevents it from flipping bits in cases where an initial increase in syndrome weight is necessary for convergence (like in the example of Fig. 5). Fig.12 illustrates that SSF does not achieve a threshold for BB codes, with its performance degrading as block length increases. This is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:51:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5578

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 73, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025
TABLE V COMPARISON OF AVERAGE LOGICAL ERROR RATES FOR D24 AND SSF
DECODERS ON RANDOM HP CODES (dv = 3, dc = 6) OVER A BSC WITH CROSSOVER PROBABILITY p = 0.01. RESULTS ARE AVERAGED OVER 50 RANDOM CODES, SHOWING IMPROVED PERFORMANCE OF OUR FRAMEWORK AS BLOCKLENGTH INCREASES

Fig. 12. Performance of SSF for the family of BB codes. Decoding performance deteriorates as distance increases, and no threshold is achieved, unlike in Fig. 13.
Fig. 13. Decoding performance of the ensemble of 24 decoders for the family of BB codes. D24, which is designed to correct up to weight-5 errors appearing in (49, 49) and (63, 63) trapping sets, achieves a threshold approximating 3%.

VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTION
We presented a decoding method that applies to families of QLDPC codes with specific characteristics and can improve their error-floor performance under low-latency requirements. Our proposed decoder is a product of the trapping set analysis of dv-3 QLDPC codes and comprises multiple TBF decoders that run in parallel and can collectively correct error patterns appearing inside harmful configurations. Performance results demonstrated that our approach significantly outperforms MS, mainly in the error-floor region, and can do so in fewer iterations (on average, two iterations for a crossover probability of 0.01), thus addressing the stringent latency requirements of quantum decoding. Future work will be focused on further exploiting the structure of QLDPC codes, i.e., by assigning different decoding rules to variable nodes regarding the trapping set they belong to, which will, in turn, enable the decoding of higher-weight error patterns. Also, we aim to extend the ideas of diversity to stronger decoders and combine low-latency decoding and good waterfall performance.

consistent with literature [21], [42], where it has been indicated that SSF performs well only for large, higher-degree codes. On the other hand, our decoding framework is able to achieve a threshold of approximately 3% for the same family of codes, as shown in Fig.13.
Finally, Table V provides a quantitative comparison of our decoder with SSF for randomly generated HP codes of dv = 3 and dc = 6 (this evaluation procedure is also used in [42]). The random HP codes we construct are free of 4-cycles, and for our simulations, we assume a BSC inducing X errors with a fixed crossover probability of p = 0.01. We present the average logical error rate over 50 random codes, demonstrating that the TBF framework improves its performance with increasing code length. The same table confirms that (3, 3) trapping sets are detrimental for SSF.
In general, the arrangement of 6-cycles within the grid is important. Fewer TBF decoders are needed to correct errors within the (49, 49) trapping set than the (63, 63) set due to the sparser structure of the former, which has longer chains of interconnected 6-cycles. We conjecture that addressing error patterns within trapping sets formed by interconnected 6-cycles is key for decoding dv-3, dc-6 QLDPC codes, as shown by the strong error-floor performance of our proposed ensembles. Future research could focus on designing decoders to handle various juxtapositions of 6-cycles, enabling broader applicability across different codes.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author Bane Vasic´ has disclosed an outside interest in his startup company, Codelucida to The University of Arizona. Conflicts of interest resulting from this interest are being managed by The University of Arizona in accordance with its policies.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Panteleev and G. Kalachev, “Asymptotically good quantum and locally testable classical LDPC codes,” in Proc. 54th Annu. ACM SIGACT Symp. Theory Comput., 2022, pp. 375–388.
[2] A. Leverrier and G. Zemor, “Quantum Tanner codes,” in Proc. IEEE 63rd Annu. Symp. Found. Comput. Sci. (FOCS), Oct. 2022, pp. 872–883.
[3] Q. Xu et al., “Constant-overhead fault-tolerant quantum computation with reconfigurable atom arrays,” Nature Phys., vol. 20, no. 7, pp. 1084–1090, Jul. 2024, doi: 10.1038/s41567-024-02479-z.
[4] S. Bravyi, A. W. Cross, J. M. Gambetta, D. Maslov, P. Rall, and T. J. Yoder, “High-threshold and low-overhead fault-tolerant quantum memory,” Nature, vol. 627, no. 8005, pp. 778–782, Mar. 2024.
[5] D. Poulin and Y. Chung, “On the iterative decoding of sparse quantum codes,” Quantum Inf. Comput., vol. 8, no. 10, pp. 987–1000, Nov. 2008.
[6] Z. Babar, P. Botsinis, D. Alanis, S. X. Ng, and L. Hanzo, “Fifteen years of quantum LDPC coding and improved decoding strategies,” IEEE Access, vol. 3, pp. 2492–2519, 2015.
[7] N. Raveendran and B. Vasic´, “Trapping sets of quantum LDPC codes,” Quantum, vol. 5, p. 562, Oct. 2021.
[8] D. Chytas, M. Pacenti, N. Raveendran, M. F. Flanagan, and B. Vasic´, “Enhanced message-passing decoding of degenerate quantum codes utilizing trapping set dynamics,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 444–448, Mar. 2024.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:51:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHYTAS et al.: COLLECTIVE BIT FLIPPING-BASED DECODING OF QUANTUM LDPC CODES

5579

[9] J. Du Crest, F. Garcia-Herrero, M. Mhalla, V. Savin, and J. Valls, “Layered decoding of quantum LDPC codes,” 2023, arXiv:2308.13377.
[10] P. Panteleev and G. Kalachev, “Degenerate quantum LDPC codes with good finite length performance,” Quantum, vol. 5, p. 585, Nov. 2021.
[11] J. du Crest, M. Mhalla, and V. Savin, “Stabilizer inactivation for message-passing decoding of quantum LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop (ITW), Nov. 2022, pp. 488–493.
[12] H. Yao, W. A. Laban, C. Häger, A. G. I. Amat, and H. D. Pfister, “Belief propagation decoding of quantum LDPC codes with guided decimation,” 2023, arXiv:2308.13377.
[13] S. Wolanski and B. Barber, “Ambiguity clustering: An accurate and efficient decoder for qLDPC codes,” 2024, arXiv:2406.14527.
[14] T. Hillmann, L. Berent, A. O. Quintavalle, J. Eisert, R. Wille, and J. Roffe, “Localized statistics decoding: A parallel decoding algorithm for quantum low-density parity-check codes,” 2024, arXiv:2406.18655.
[15] A. de Marti iOlius, I. E. Martinez, J. Roffe, and J. E. Martinez, “An almost-linear time decoding algorithm for quantum LDPC codes under circuit-level noise,” 2024, arXiv:2409.01440.
[16] A. Gong, S. Cammerer, and J. M. Renes, “Toward low-latency iterative decoding of QLDPC codes under circuit-level noise,” 2024, arXiv:2403.18901.
[17] K. Yin et al., “SymBreak: Mitigating quantum degeneracy issues in QLDPC code decoders by breaking symmetry,” 2024, arXiv:2412.02885.
[18] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 1963.
[19] G. Sundararajan, C. Winstead, and E. Boutillon, “Noisy gradient descent bit-flip decoding for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 10, pp. 3385–3400, Oct. 2014.
[20] A. Leverrier, J.-P. Tillich, and G. Zemor, “Quantum expander codes,” in Proc. IEEE 56th Annu. Symp. Found. Comput. Sci., Berkeley, CA, USA, Oct. 2015, pp. 810–824.
[21] A. Grospellier, L. Grouès, A. Krishna, and A. Leverrier, “Combining hard and soft decoders for hypergraph product codes,” Quantum, vol. 5, p. 432, Apr. 2021.
[22] N. Raveendran, E. Boutillon, and B. Vasic´, “Turbo-XZ algorithm: Lowlatency decoders for quantum LDPC codes,” in Proc. 12th Int. Symp. Topics Coding (ISTC), Sep. 2023, pp. 1–5.
[23] M. Pacenti, M. F. Flanagan, D. Chytas, and B. Vasic, “Progressiveproximity bit-flipping for decoding surface codes,” 2024, arXiv:2402.15924.
[24] D. V. Nguyen and B. Vasic, “Two-bit bit flipping algorithms for LDPC codes and collective error correction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 1153–1163, Apr. 2014.
[25] T. Wadayama, K. Nakamura, M. Yagita, Y. Funahashi, S. Usami, and I. Takumi, “Gradient descent bit flipping algorithms for decoding LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 1610–1614, Jun. 2010.
[26] D. Declercq, B. Vasic, S. K. Planjery, and E. Li, “Finite alphabet iterative decoders—Part II: Towards guaranteed error correction of LDPC codes via iterative decoder diversity,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 10, pp. 4046–4057, Oct. 2013.
[27] A. K. Pradhan, N. Raveendran, N. Rengaswamy, X. Xiao, and B. Vasic´, “Learning to decode trapping sets in QLDPC codes,” in Proc. 12th Int. Symp. Topics Coding (ISTC), Sep. 2023, pp. 1–5.
[28] D. Gottesman, “Stabilizer codes and quantum error correction,” Ph.D. dissertation, California Inst. Technol., Pasadena, CA, USA, 1997.
[29] A. R. Calderbank and P. W. Shor, “Good quantum error-correcting codes exist,” Phys. Rev. A, Gen. Phys., vol. 54, no. 2, p. 1098, 1996.
[30] J.-P. Tillich and G. Zémor, “Quantum LDPC codes with positive rate and minimum distance proportional to the square root of the blocklength,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 1193–1202, Feb. 2014.
[31] D. J. C. MacKay, G. Mitchison, and P. L. McFadden, “Sparse-graph codes for quantum error correction,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 10, pp. 2315–2330, Oct. 2004.
[32] V. V. Zyablov and M. S. Pinsker, “Estimation of the error-correction complexity for Gallager low-density codes,” Problems Inf. Transmiss., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 18–28, 1976.
[33] M. Sipser and D. A. Spielman, “Expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1710–1722, Nov. 1996.
[34] S. K. Chilappagari, D. V. Nguyen, B. Vasic, and M. W. Marcellin, “On trapping sets and guaranteed error correction capability of LDPC codes and GLDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 1600–1611, Apr. 2010.
[35] B. Vasic´, S. K. Chilappagari, D. V. Nguyen, and S. K. Planjery, “Trapping set ontology,” in Proc. 47th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput. (Allerton), Oct. 2009, pp. 1–7.

[36] A. A. Kovalev and L. P. Pryadko, “Quantum Kronecker sum-product low-density parity-check codes with finite rate,” Phys. Rev. A, Gen. Phys., vol. 88, no. 1, Jul. 2013, Art. no. 012311.
[37] N. Raveendran, D. Declercq, and B. Vasic, “A sub-graph expansioncontraction method for error floor computation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 68, no. 7, pp. 3984–3995, Jul. 2020.
[38] C. A. Kelley and D. Sridhara, “Pseudocodewords of tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 4013–4038, Nov. 2007.
[39] D. Declercq, E. Li, B. Vasic, and S. K. Planjery, “Approaching maximum likelihood decoding of finite length LDPC codes via FAID diversity,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Sep. 2012, pp. 487–491.
[40] J. X. Li and P. O. Vontobel, “Pseudocodeword-based decoding of quantum stabilizer codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jul. 2019, pp. 2888–2892.
[41] L. Stambler, A. Krishna, and M. E. Beverland, “Addressing stopping failures for small set flip decoding of hypergraph product codes,” 2023, arXiv:2311.00877.
[42] A. Grospellier and A. Krishna, “Numerical study of hypergraph product codes,” 2018, arXiv:1810.03681.
Dimitris Chytas received the integrated master’s and M.Sc. degrees in electrical and computer engineering from the University of Patras, Greece, in 2019 and 2021, respectively. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering with The University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA. His research interests include the design and analysis of iterative decoders for quantum error correction (QEC). His recent journal and conference publications can be accessed at: https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=bqHaMn 8AAAAJ&hl=en.
Nithin Raveendran (Member, IEEE) received the bachelor’s degree in electrical and electronics engineering from BITS Pilani, the master’s degree from the Department of Electronic Systems Engineering (DESE), Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Bengaluru, and the Ph.D. degree in trapping sets of classical and quantum low-density parity-check codes from The University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA. He is currently an Assistant Research Professor at the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Arizona. His current area of research is broadly on quantum computation and communication, with a focus on quantum error correction on developing improved quantum error correction codes and best-performing iterative decoders. His recent journal and conference publications can be accessed on the Google Scholar link at: https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=FBrIdeAAAAAJ.
Bane Vasic´ (Fellow, IEEE) is currently a Professor of electrical and computer engineering and mathematics at The University of Arizona and the Director of the Error Correction Laboratory. He is also an inventor of the soft error-event decoding algorithm for intersymbol interference channels with correlated noise and a key architect of a detector/decoder for Bell Labs data storage read channel chips which were regarded as the best in the industry. His pioneering work on structured low-density parity check (LDPC) error-correcting codes based on combinatorial designs has enabled low-complexity iterative decoder implementations. He leads the Quantum Error Correction Group, Department of Energy, multiuniversity $115M-project led by Fermi National Laboratory to establish the Center for Superconducting Materials and Systems. He is a Co-PI of the $52M NSF Center for Quantum Network hosted at The University of Arizona. He is also funded by the NASA-Jet Propulsion Laboratory through the Strategic University Partnership Program for the development of quantum codes and error correction algorithms for NASA space missions and a PI on seven research grants funded by the National Science Foundation. He is a Fulbright Scholar, da Vinci Fellow, and the Past Chair of the IEEE Data Storage Technical Committee.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:51:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

