2025 IEEE 68th International Midwest Symposium on Circuits and Systems (MWSCAS) August 10-13, 2025. Lansing, Michigan, USA
Federated Transfer Learning for Two-stage Decoding of LDPC Codes
Linh Nguyen∗, Quoc Bao Phan∗, Cheol-Hong Min†, and Tuy Tan Nguyen∗ ∗Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL 32310, USA †Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of St. Thomas, St. Paul, MN 55105 USA
qp25c@fsu.edu, ltn25d@fsu.edu, cmin@stthomas.edu, tuy.nguyen@fsu.edu

2025 IEEE 68th International Midwest Symposium on Circuits and Systems (MWSCAS) | 979-8-3315-8934-9/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/MWSCAS53549.2025.11244494

Abstract—The performance of fifth-generation (5G) coding techniques, such as low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, is significantly affected by the error floor, which occurs in high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) regions. Federated transfer learning (FTL), with its ability to learn from distributed data, can effectively improve error correction in low-SNR environments and extract crucial decoding features for high-SNR conditions. This paper introduces a two-stage decoding method that integrates layered LDPC decoding with FTL to mitigate the error floor and enhance system performance. Experimental results demonstrate that this approach significantly reduces error rates and improves decoding efficiency.
Index Terms—Error floor, LDPC codes, FTL, reliability, twostage decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are widely used in modern communication systems due to their efficient error correction capabilities [1], [2]. However, standard decoding algorithms, such as sum-product and min-sum, perform effectively only in low to moderate signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) conditions, where signal and noise are distinguishable [3]. At higher SNRs, decoding can become trapped in local minima, leading to the “error floor” phenomenon [4], where the bit error rate (BER) ceases to improve. This limits performance in applications requiring ultra-reliable transmission, such as high-speed wireless networks and mission-critical communications. Addressing the error floor is crucial for maintaining low BER in these systems, especially as modern wireless networks demand higher data rates and lower latency. Recent advancements in machine learning have shown promise in improving decoding performance, motivating the exploration of hybrid approaches that integrate learning-based methods with traditional error correction techniques.
Federated transfer learning (FTL) is a machine learning method that combines learning from multiple data sources and transfers learned knowledge between different data sources [5]. Furthermore, FTL also transfers knowledge between trained models in different environments [6], with the aim of improving the training process without moving the original data or recreating the model from scratch. With this advantage, FTL is suitable for learning decoding features in low SNR regions
This work was supported by the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, FAMU-FSU College of Engineering, and the Center for Advanced Power Systems, Florida State University. (Corresponding author: Tuy Tan Nguyen.)

and transferring that knowledge to the LDPC decoding process in high SNR regions, which helps to reduce the error floor and improve system performance.
Recognizing the power of FTL, this paper proposes a twostage decoding method. In the first stage, learned features from low SNR conditions are leveraged to train a target model, which is then used for a refined decoding process. Subsequently, in the second stage, a layered decoding algorithm for LDPC codes is employed to correct the remaining errors, achieving optimal decoding performance. This strategic application of FTL significantly reduces decoding errors, leading to fewer retransmissions, improved data transmission rates, and a lower error floor. The principal contributions of this paper are:
1) We propose a novel integration of FTL with layered LDPC decoding to improve decoding performance while preserving data privacy in distributed environments.
2) We leverage FTL to learn decoding features in lowSNR conditions and enhance performance in high-SNR regions, effectively mitigating the error floor.
3) We conduct extensive simulations using quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) codes, demonstrating that our method consistently outperforms baseline LDPC decoders across multiple code rates and message lengths.
The subsequent sections of the paper are organized as follows: Section II introduces the mathematical background of the employed techniques. Section III illustrates the architecture and optimization strategies implemented in the proposed system. Section IV presents the results obtained from simulations performed on signal and image data. Lastly, Section V concludes our study.
II. BACKGROUND
A. QC-LDPC Codes
QC-LDPC codes [7] are widely used due to their structured parity-check matrices, which simplify decoding. The paritycheck matrix H is derived from a base matrix, where each “1” is replaced by a circulant permutation matrix. In 5G, two base graphs define QC-LDPC structures with predefined dimensions.
The layered min-sum decoding algorithm [8] improves convergence by iteratively updating messages within check-node subsets. The log-likelihood ratio (LLR) for each variable node

979-8-3315-8934-9/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE

233

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:44:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

A. Data Preparation
To train and evaluate the proposed model, we prepare sets of received words at varying SNR levels, categorized into R1 and R2. The set R1 = [1.0, 5.0] covers the waterfall region, where BER decreases sharply, while R2 = R1 ∪ [5.5, 9.0] extends to higher SNR values, including the error floor region.
For training, 80% of R1 is used to train the model, with the remaining 20% reserved for testing to evaluate generalization and prevent overfitting. In contrast, R2 is directly used during decoding to expose the model to a broader SNR range.

Fig. 1: Structure of the proposed system.
is computed from the received signal, and iterative message passing refines decoding decisions. Compared to traditional sum-product decoding, this approach reduces computational complexity while maintaining strong error correction performance.
B. Federated Transfer Learning

B. Federated Transfer Learning Settings
In the training process described in Algorithm 1 and Fig. 2, a neural network operates across clients under varying SNR conditions, defined by R1. Each client k encodes its message Dk using an LDPC encoder, transmits the encoded message ck through a channel with SNR g, and receives a signal sk. The neural network is trained to learn decoding features from low-SNR conditions, capturing essential patterns that improve message recovery. This knowledge is then transferred to highSNR regions, where achieving low BER is more challenging due to fewer decoding errors for correction. The mean squared error (MSE) is computed (*), and model parameters are updated using gradient descent (**), allowing continuous

FTL [9] enables decentralized model training without sharing raw data by combining federated learning and transfer learning. Each client k updates its local model as:

wkt+1 = wkt − η∇Lk(wkt , Dk),

(1)

where η is the learning rate. The server aggregates these updates into a global model:

K
wt+1 =
k=1

|Dk |

K j=1

|Dj

|

wkt+1

.

(2)

This process refines the global model iteratively across multiple training rounds, adapting to diverse noise environments while preserving privacy. The trained model learns and transfers decoding patterns from low-SNR conditions to high-SNR regions, improving the LDPC decoding process and mitigating the error floor. This improves the LDPC decoding process by allowing better feature extraction from received signals.

Algorithm 1: Federated Training for Learning Decoding Features

Input: Messages {Dk} for clients {k} ∈ K, LDPC

Encoder LDPC Encode, R1 set, Initial global model w0

Output: Trained global model wfinal

1 for round t = 1 to T do

2 for each client k in K do

3

wkt,local ← wt−1

4

for epoch e = 1 to E do

5

for each SNR g in R1 do

6

ck ← LDPC Encode(mk)

7

sk ← Channel(ck, SNR(g))

8

fk = f (wkt,local; sk) // Extract

decoding features

9

1 Lk = n

n
(sk[j] − fk[j])2

(*)

j=1

∆wk = −η∇wk Lk wkt,local ← wkt,local + ∆wk

(**)

III. PROPOSED DECODING SYSTEM
This section presents the proposed decoding system, integrating FTL with LDPC decoding to improve performance as in Fig. 1. Data is transmitted through an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel [10] at varying SNR levels, and a neural network is trained via FTL in the low SNR region. The trained model then assists a layered LDPC decoder in high SNR conditions to mitigate the error floor.

10

Send wkt,local to the server

/* Aggregate Updates */

11

K
wt ←
k=1

|Dk |

K j=1

|Dj

|

wkt,local

wglobal ← wt

12 return wfinal ← wglobal

(***)

234

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:44:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 2: Federated transfer learning setting.
adaptation to diverse SNR scenarios. After 50 epochs, clients send updated local model parameters wkt,local to the server, which aggregates them into a global model wt using weighted averaging proportional to |Dk| (***). The global model is redistributed for further training, repeating this process over 10 communication rounds. This iterative process enables wfinal to generalize decoding strategies across diverse SNR conditions without sharing raw data. Rather than focusing on low-SNR enhancements alone, FTL facilitates the transfer of learned decoding strategies to high-SNR regions, where achieving low BER is more challenging. This approach improves LDPC decoding efficiency while maintaining scalability in distributed environments.
C. Proposed Two Stages Decoding
The proposed two-stage decoding method enhances LDPC decoding by integrating a neural network-based feature learning stage with a conventional layered min-sum decoder. As illustrated in Fig. 3, the neural network first learns decoding patterns from low-SNR conditions, extracting key features that improve decoding efficiency. This knowledge is then applied to high-SNR regions, where achieving low BER is more

challenging. In the second stage, a layered min-sum LDPC decoder iteratively updates messages to reconstruct the transmitted codeword. By leveraging learned decoding strategies, this stage enables more efficient convergence, reducing the number of iterations and mitigating the error floor in highSNR conditions. This combination of machine learning-based feature extraction and structured LDPC decoding enhances BER performance across a wide SNR range, ensuring robustness, reliability, and adaptability in dynamic communication environments.
IV. EXPERIMENT RESULTS
A. Federated Transfer Learning Performance
The training process depicted in Fig. 4 illustrates the average loss variation across different SNR levels for message lengths of 256 bits, 512 bits, and 1024 bits per block, evaluated under various code rates. As the SNR increases, the average loss consistently decreases, reflecting the neural network’s improved ability to reduce noise in cleaner signal conditions. At lower SNR regions, such as 1.0 dB, the loss values remain higher, indicating the challenge of learning to mitigate significant noise levels. However, as the SNR improves to around 5.0 dB, the loss values converge towards zero, indicating that the model effectively generalizes across SNR levels, improving decoding accuracy.
Furthermore, shorter messages (such as 256-bit blocks) converge faster due to simpler noise patterns, while longer messages (e.g., 1024-bit blocks) require more training to handle greater complexity. Table I shows the accuracy of the proposed FTL system across code rates and message lengths. Lower code rates (e.g., 1/3, 2/5) achieve higher accuracy, such as 99.8% for 256-bit blocks and 99.2% for 1024-bit blocks at a 1/3 rate. Even at higher rates (e.g., 2/3), the method maintains strong performance, with a minimum accuracy of 98.3% for 1024-bit blocks, demonstrating its effectiveness in decoding longer sequences.

B. Proposed System Testing
Fig. 5 compares the BER performance of a standard minsum LDPC decoding with 10 iterations per frame, a layered LDPC decoding, and our proposed two-stage method, evaluated on 256-bit messages across 107 blocks for code rates

Fig. 3: Proposed two-stage decoding system.

TABLE I ACCURACY OF THE PROPOSED FTL SYSTEM ACROSS DIFFERENT CODE
RATES AND MESSAGE LENGTHS

Code Rate 1/3 2/5 1/2 2/3

Message Length (bits per block) 256 512 1024 256 512 1024 256 512 1024 256 512 1024

Accuracy (%) 99.8 99.4 99.2 99.7 99.6 99.3 98.9 98.8 98.6 98.8 98.7 98.3

235

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:44:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 4: Average loss vs. SNR for varying message lengths per block with different code rates: (a) 256 bits, (b) 512 bits, and (c) 1024 bits.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 5: BER performance comparison of standard min-sum LDPC decoding, layered LDPC decoding, and the proposed method for 256-bit messages across 10,000,000 blocks. Results are presented for code rates R: (a) 1/3, (b) 2/5, (c) 1/2, and (d) 2/3.

1/3, 2/5, 1/2, and 2/3 (Fig. 5a–5d). The two-stage system consistently improves BER, especially in the waterfall region and at higher SNRs, where it reduces the error floor. At a 1/3 code rate, the baseline reaches an early error floor, while the 1-stage method refines BER through iterative updates, and the two-stage system achieves the sharpest BER drop between 2 dB and 5 dB. A similar trend is observed at a 2/5 code rate, where the two-stage approach shows a steeper BER decline. For a 1/2 code rate, reduced redundancy increases the baseline error floor, while the two-stage method lowers BER between 3 dB and 6 dB. At a 2/3 code rate, where minimal redundancy challenges all methods, the two-stage system maintains a sharper BER decline between 2 dB and 4 dB, demonstrating its advantage across different SNR conditions. In terms of complexity, the two-stage design introduces modest overhead from the neural network but reduces the number of LDPC iterations by providing informative feature representations. It offers a favorable trade-off between performance and computa-

tional cost compared to single-stage methods. While additional stages may offer marginal gains, they introduce higher memory and synchronization overhead, especially in federated settings.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper proposes a two-stage decoding system that integrates FTL with layered LDPC decoding to enhance error correction in high-SNR regions. While single-stage decoders such as min-sum and layered decoding can extract features from low-SNR conditions, they struggle to eliminate the error floor. The two-stage method addresses this by transferring learned strategies to high-SNR scenarios, where achieving low BER is more challenging. Results show up to a tenfold BER improvement over baseline decoding at 4 dB SNR, along with a 30% reduction in decoding iterations. These findings confirm the benefits of incorporating FTL into LDPC decoding to improve efficiency, generalization, and scalability in future wireless systems.

236

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:44:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

REFERENCES
[1] L. Golowich and V. Guruswami, “Decoding quasi-cyclic quantum LDPC codes,” in 2024 IEEE 65th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), 2024, pp. 344–368.
[2] X. Jia, Y. Zhou, Z. Qin, J. Zhu, and Z. Wang, “Reduced complexity dynamic schedule for layered decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, pp. 1–5, Mar 2025.
[3] H.-Y. Kwak, D.-Y. Yun, Y. Kim, S.-H. Kim, and J.-S. No, “Boosted neural decoders: Achieving extreme reliability of LDPC codes for 6G networks,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 1089–1102, Jan 2025.
[4] H.-B. Lee and J.-W. Kim, “Modified CC-PEG algorithm for protographbased QC-LDPC codes over non-uniform channel,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 173 660–173 669, 2024.
[5] Y. Liu, X. Yuan, Z. Xiong, J. Kang, X. Wang, and D. Niyato, “Federated learning for 6G communications: Challenges, methods, and future

directions,” China Communications, vol. 17, no. 9, pp. 105–118, Sep 2020.
[6] E. Hallaji, R. Razavi-Far, and M. Saif, Federated and Transfer Learning: A Survey on Adversaries and Defense Mechanisms. Springer International Publishing, Oct 2022, p. 29–55.
[7] M. Fossorier, “Quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Jul. 2004.
[8] T. T. B. Nguyen, T. T. Nguyen, and H. Lee, “Low-complexity highthroughput QC-LDPC decoder for 5G new radio wireless communication,” Electronics, vol. 10, no. 4, Feb. 2021.
[9] W. Guo, F. Zhuang, X. Zhang et al., “A comprehensive survey of federated transfer learning: Challenges, methods, and applications,” Frontiers of Computer Science, vol. 18, p. 186356, Jul 2024.
[10] Y. Qiu and W. Chen, “Event-triggered communications over AWGN channels,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, pp. 1–1, Dec 2024.

237 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:44:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

