This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE Globecom 2011 proceedings.

Performance Analysis of Enhanced Verification-based Decoding for Packet-based LDPC
Codes over Binary Symmetric Channel

Bin Zhu and Defeng (David) Huang

Sven Nordholm

School of Electrical, Electronic

School of Electrical and

and Computer Engineering

Computer Engineering

The University of Western Australia

Curtin University of Technology

Crawley WA, Australia 6009

GPO Box U1987 WA, Australia 6845

email: {zhub,huangdf}@ee.uwa.edu.au email: s.nordholm@curtin.edu.au

Yingjun (Angela) Zhang Department of Information Engineering
Chinese University of Hong Kong Shatin, Hong Kong
email: yjzhang@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract—In this paper, frame error rate (FER) performance of enhanced verification-based decoding algorithm (EVA) is investigated for packet-based low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes over binary symmetric channel (BSC). By taking the false verification into account, a recursive statistical model is proposed to analyze the FER performance based on the packetlevel analysis. Simulation results demonstrate that the proposed model works for various packet sizes and channel parameters of practical interest with different verification constraints.
Index Terms—binary symmetric channel, enhanced verification-based decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, packet-level analysis.
I. INTRODUCTION
Operation units in a communication network are normally blocks of bits organized as packets. To directly handle the packets, packet-based codes (e.g. packet-based LDPC codes [1], LT codes [2] and Raptor codes [3]) have been developed. To decode packet-based LDPC codes, the verification-based algorithm (VA) [1] has been proposed by Luby and Mitzenmacher. As a low complexity algorithm, VA used simple rules to iteratively verify and correct unverified packets in a codeword until no more packets can be either verified or corrected. Luby et al. also analyzed the VA for q-ary symmetric channel (q-SC) with large q.
On the other hand, as pointed out by Luby and Mitzenmacher [1], VA is often used to decode a packet-based outer code in a communication system. Since there is an interleaver between the inner encoder and the outer encoder [4], and the output of the inner decoder is normally in the form of harddecision, binary symmetric channel (BSC) thereby is more suitable to model this scenario. Unlike q-SC with large q, the FER analysis for packet-based LDPC codes over BSC [5] requires additional bit-to-packet and packet-to-codeword probability parameter conversions.

In contrast to q-SC with large q, the performance of VA over BSC is limited by the high probability that a packet is falsely verified, since in VA the verification is only based on one neighboring check constraint. To improve the VA performance over BSC, an enhanced verification-based decoding algorithm (EVA) was developed in [6], which, as demonstrated by simulation results, significantly reduced the probability of false verification by verifying a packet with multiple check constraints.
In this paper, a novel statistical model is derived to analyze the performance of EVA over BSC by reformulating EVA from the message-passing (MP) perspective1. The proposed model extensively employs the packet-to-packet probability parameter conversion instead of the bit-to-packet conversion as in [5] during the iterative process, which significantly reduces the approximation errors due to the conversion between different levels. As a result, this packet-level statistical model provides a good estimate of frame error rate (FER) which takes account of the false verification and different verification constraints. Numerical results show that the proposed model works well for both regular and irregular packet-based LDPC codes over BSC.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, the enhanced verification-based decoding algorithm is introduced from the message-passing point of view. In Section III, the proposed statistical model to analyze FER performance of EVA is described. Numerical results are given in Section IV. Finally, the conclusion is drawn in Section V.
II. A MESSAGE-PASSING PERSPECTIVE FOR ENHANCED VERIFICATION-BASED DECODING
An EVA consists of two iterative stages: verification and correction [6]. At the verification stage, a packet is verified if the number of the linked check constraints that satisfy the sum of all the packets associated with its neighboring variable

This research was supported in part under Australian Research Council’s

1Note that the reformulation of the EVA in this paper is more complex than

Discovery Projects funding scheme (project number DP0877616).

that in [1] to take account the impact of the false verification for the analysis.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei9U7n8iv-.1D-4o2w4n4lo-a9d2e6d8o-n8/J1u1ne/$2246,2.00026©a2t 0081:134I:E11EUETC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE Globecom 2011 proceedings.

nodes equals zero is above the pre-defined threshold. At the
correction stage, one unverified packet can be corrected if all
the other packets incident to the same check node have been
verified. Its updated value is computed as the sum of the other
neighbor packets. During the decoding process, the verification constraints can
be adjusted dynamically along with the iterations based on a
pre-defined rule. In this paper, we consider the case that the
verification requirement is relevant to the degree of a node. Let dk,j denote the minimum number of verification constraints to verify a packet associated with a degree-j variable node at the k-th iteration. For a maximum of N iterations in EVA decoding, verification constraints at different iterations thereby are pre-defined by {dk,j | k = 1, . . . , N ; j = 1, . . . , λmax}, where λmax denotes the maximum degree of a variable node.
To facilitate performance analysis, the enhanced
verification-based decoding can be reformulated as a
message-passing algorithm, where the messages are passed
along the edges between the variable nodes and the check
nodes until a stop criterion is satisfied. Let V denote the set of variable nodes and C denote the
set of check nodes in the factor graph [7] that represents
the packet-based LDPC codes. Each packet of a packet-based
LDPC code is associated with a variable node and it is also
associated with each edge that is connected to the variable node. Let t and s denote the value and state of the packet, respectively. Further, t ∈ {0, 1}l, where l is the packet size. There are three possible states in EVA: a verified state V , a corrected state C, and an unverified state U . As a result, s ∈ {V, C, U }. Each message passing along the edges includes two elements: a value t and a state s denoted as (t, s). Specifically, we can define four types of messages, and their
notations as follows:
• A message from a variable node v (check node c) to a check node c (variable node v) in the verification stage is denoted as (mtv→c, msv→c) ((mct→v, msc→v)).
• A message from a variable node v (check node c) to a check node c (variable node v) in the correction stage is denoted as (μtv→c, μvs→c) ((μtc→v, μsc→v)).
Since the EVA is an iterative decoding method, we only
need to describe the procedure of message-passing in one iteration under certain verification constraints, e.g. the k-th iteration with dk,j (j = 1, . . . , λmax). In each iteration, both the verification and the correction stages include two steps:
message processing at the check node and message processing at variable node. Let Nc (Nv) denote the set of neighboring variable nodes (check nodes) adjacent with a check node c (variable node v). Let Nc\v denote the set of neighboring variable nodes linked with a check node c except a variable node v. The message-passing algorithm (from the performance analysis perspective) is then described in the remaining part
of this section. 1) Initialization Each variable node v has an input value
rv received from the channel. rv ∈ {0, 1}l. At k = 0, the message from a variable node v to a neighboring check node c includes mvt →c = rv and msv→c = U .

c

( ) m ,m t v1 →c

s v1 →c

( ) m ,m t c→va

s c→va

( ) m , m t vi →c

s vi →c

( ) m ,m t vi−1 →c

s vi−1 →c

v1

va

vi −1

vi

Fig. 1. Message passing and processing at a degree-i check node c in the verification stage.

2) Message processing at the check node in the verification
stage As shown in Fig. 1, a check node c sends the message (mtc→v, msc→v) to a variable node v by processing all other incoming messages from its neighboring variable nodes except
the variable node v. The message processing rules at check
codes in verification are as follows:
Input: (mtv→c, mvs→c), ∀ c ∈ Nv, ∀ v ∈ V. for each check node c do
for each variable nodes v ∈ Nc do if msv→c = U then

mct→v =

mvt k→c.

∀ vk∈Nc\v

if mtv→c = mct→v then

msc→v = V. else

msc→v = U.
end if else
mct→v = mvt →c and mcs→v = msv→c. end if end for end for
3) Message processing at the variable node in the verifica-
tion stage As shown in Fig. 2, with considering the dynamic verification constraints, a variable node v can determine its outgoing messages based on all incoming messages received from its adjacent check nodes and the channel. Given the verification constraints dk,j (j = 1, . . . , λmax), the message processing at the variable node in the verification stage at the k-th iteration is given as follows:
Input: ∀ c ∈ C, (mtc→v, msc→v), where v ∈ Nc and rv, ∀ v ∈ V. Initialize h = 0. for each degree-j variable node v do
for each check node c ∈ Nv do if msc→v = V then h = h + 1. if h ≥ dk,j then

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:34:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE Globecom 2011 proceedings.

c1

cj−1

cj

( ) m , m t c1 → v

s c1 → v

( ) m , m t c j−1 →v

s c j−1 →v

( ) m , m t cj →v

s cj →v

c1

( ) μ , μ t c1 → v

s c1 → v

cj−1

( ) μ , μ t c j−1 →v

s c j−1 →v

cj

( ) μ , μ t cj →v

s cj →v

( ) μ , μ t v → c1

s v → c1

v

rv

Channel

( ) m , m t v → c1

s v → c1

v

Fig. 4. Message passing and processing at a degree-j variable node v in the correction stage.

Fig. 2. Message passing and processing at a degree-j variable node v in the verification stage.
c

( ) μ

t v1

→

c

,V

( ) μ

t c→

va

,

C

( ) ( ) μ ,V t vi−1 → c

μ

t vi

→

c

,

V

v1

va

vi −1

vi

Fig. 3. Message passing and processing at a degree-i check node c in the correction stage.

for each check node c ∈ Nv do μvt →c = mct→v and μvs→c = V .
end for
end if
break.
else μvt →c = rv and μsv→c = U .
end if
end for
end for
4) Message processing at the check node in the correction
stage As shown in Fig. 3, the message processing at the check
node in the correction stage is as follows:
Input: (μvt →c, μvs→c), ∀ c ∈ Nv, ∀ v ∈ V. for each check node c do
for each variable node v ∈ Nc do μtc→v = μtv→c and μcs→v = μsv→c.
end for if ∃ va ∈ Nc, μsva→c = U and μvs→c = V , ∀ v ∈ Nc\va then

and end if

μtc→va =

μvt →c,

∀ v∈Nc\va

μsc→va = C.

end for
5) Message processing at the variable node in the correction stage As shown in Fig. 4, for a variable node v, if there is one incoming message including a corrected state (say from the neighboring check node c (c ∈ Nv)), the variable node v will update all its outgoing messages with value μtc→v and state V , as follows:
Input: (μtc→v, μcs→v), ∀ v ∈ Nc, ∀ c ∈ C. for each variable node v do
for each check node c ∈ Nv do if μsc→v = C then for each check node c ∈ Nv do mvt →c = μct→v and msv→c = V . end for break. else mtv→c = μct→v and msv→c = μsc→v. end if
end for end for
III. FER PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS OF EVA
In EVA, the packet that is verified will finalize its value and state. However, a verified packet can also be incorrect. If it is the case, then the packet is falsely verified. Since the verified packet fixes its value and state during the decoding process, a falsely verified packet results in an error frame directly. An unverified packet at the last iteration in the decoding also results in an error frame since unverified codewords are normally discarded and not passed to higher layers of a communication protocol [4]. As a result, in the proposed statistical model, we focus on the percentages of both kinds of packets.
We consider an ensemble of codes and treat the values and states of the codes as random variables. The following assumptions are thereby employed for the proposed statistical model:
• At each iteration, the values and states of the packets are statistically independent.
• The bit error probability ε for unverified packets does not change during the iterations.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:34:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE Globecom 2011 proceedings.

q(k −1) u

q(k −1) u

Cross-over probability ε as a parameter

q(k) f

Decoding at the k-th iteration

packet level probability and codeword level probability conversion using (2)

Q(k ) f

FER

q (k ) u

q(k) u

packet level probability and codeword level probability conversion using (3)

Q(k ) u

Fig. 5. A schematic diagram of the proposed statistical model for FER estimation at the k-th iteration.

The maximum number of iterations is preset to be N . At the k-th iteration for k = 1, 2, 3, . . . , N , let q˙u(k−1) (qu(k−1)) denote the probability that a packet associated with a variable node (an edge)2 remains unverified at the (k − 1)-th iteration, given that there is no falsely verified packets associated with variable nodes (edges) in previous iterations. In particular, q˙u(0) = 1 and qu(0) = 1. Note that for k > 0, q˙u(k) and qu(k) have different values only for irregular packet-based LDPC codes [8].
As shown in Fig. 5, the statistical model includes two inputs (q˙u(k−1) and qu(k−1)) and three outputs (q˙f(k), q˙u(k) and qu(k)). Among the three outputs, q˙f(k) and q˙u(k) are used for the calculation of FER, and q˙u(k) and qu(k) are used as the input for the next iteration. Further, Qf(k) and Q(uk) are defined as follows:
• Q(fk) denotes the probability of a codeword containing falsely verified packets at the k-th iteration, given that no packets of the codeword are falsely verified in the first k − 1 iterations.
• Q(uk) denotes the probability of a codeword containing at least one unverified packet but no falsely verified packet at the k-th iteration, given that no packets of the codeword are falsely verified in the first k − 1 iterations.
Using Q(fk), Q(uk) and the law of total probability [9], the FER after running EVA by N iterations is as follows:

F ER(N)

= Q(f1) + Qf(2)(1 − Qf(1)) + . . .

+Qf(k)(1 − Q(fk−1)) . . . (1 − Q(f1)) + . . .

+Qf(N)(1 − Q(fN−1)) . . . (1 − Qf(1))

+Q(uN)(1 − Q(fN))(1 − Qf(N−1)) . . . (1 − Qf(1))

N

k−1

N

= Q(f1) +

Q(fk) (1 − Qf(j)) + Qu(N) (1 − Q(fk)).

k=2

j=1

k=1

(1)

2The notation of a probability with a dot, e.g. q˙u(k−1) is defined from the node perspective, which can be interpreted as randomly selecting a variable node, the probability that a packet associated with the node satisfies some specific properties. A probability from the edge perspective can be interpreted similarly, and it is signified without a dot, e.g. qu(k−1).

To obtain (1), we use the fact that the FER can be calculated

by accumulating the probability of a codeword including

falsely verified packets in each iteration and the probability

of a codeword including unverified packets following the N -

th iteration.

Let q˙f(k) denote the probability that a packet associated with

a variable node becomes falsely verified at the k-th iteration in

the verification stage. Qf(k) thereby approximates as follows3:

⎧

Qf(k)

⎪⎨ ≈ ⎪⎩

1− 1−

1

−

q˙f(k) 2

n

1 − q˙f(k) n

dk,j = 1, ∀j otherwise

(2)

where n is the codeword length. And due to the statistical independence assumption, Qu(k) thereby is given as follows:

Q(uk) = 1 − (1 − q˙u(k))n

(3)

To obtain FER, we need to determine q˙u(k), qu(k) and q˙f(k). They are calculated from q˙u(k−1) and qu(k−1) in a recursive manner, as shown in Appendix A and Appendix B.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, a regular 4800-(3,6) LDPC code and an irregular 1920 LDPC code [10] with the degree distributions λ(x) = 0.25x + 0.75x2 and ρ(x) = x3 are used in the simulations. The total number of iterations N is set as 10.
To define the verification constraint dk,j, a confidence ratio method in [6] is applied. The confidence ratio is a constant for the variable nodes with different degrees at the same iteration. Therefore, dk,j = γ(k)j , where γ(k) is the confidence ratio at the k-th iteration and (·) denotes the nearest integers not less than (·). Note here, the number of distinct confidence ratios in the simulation is less than N . For simplicity, the same number of iterations is used for each distinct confidence ratio value in simulations. Let EVA-x denote that the number of distinct confidence ratios in EVA is x (x ≤ N ), and γi (i = 1, . . . , x) denotes the distinct confidence ratio values. In particular, VA in [1] can be viewed as EVA-1.
As shown in Fig. 6, the numerical results of the proposed statistical model using the regular LDPC code for EVA-2 (γ1 = 2/3 and γ2 = 1/3) are consistent with the simulation results for packet sizes of 32 bits, 64 bits, 128 bits and 256 bits, respectively.
As shown in Fig. 7, the numerical results of the proposed statistical model using the irregular LDPC code for both VA (EVA-1) and EVA-2 are consistent with the simulation results for packet sizes of 32 bits, 64 bits and 128 bits, respectively. We note that γ = 1/3 for VA and γ1 = 2/3 and γ2 = 1/3 for EVA-2. For the packet size of 128 bits, the deviation between the two curves at small ε in EVA-2 is due to the error frames resulting from the more detailed code structures, e.g. cycles, which is not considered in the proposed model.

3When dk,j = 1 for j = 1, 2, . . . , λmax, a packet that is falsely verified must be associated with at least another falsely verified packet. However, the above effect is negligible when dk,j > 1.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:34:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE Globecom 2011 proceedings.

10−1

Particularly at k = 1, let P r Vc0(i) = 1 and P r Vcr(i) = 0

for r ≥ 1.

Let pc(k) denote the probability that a packet associated with

an output edge of a check node in the verification stage is

correctly verified in the k-th iteration. Let Uc0(i)→v denote the

10−2

event that a packet associated with an output edge of a degree-

EVA−2; # of iterations = 10

i check node is correctly verified in the verification stage. As a result, pc(k) can be found as follows:

FER

10−3 10−4

10−3 channel parameter ε

Proposed model Simulation results 32 bits/packet 64 bits/packet 128 bits/packet 256 bits/packet
10−2

Fig. 6. Numerical results of the proposed model for EVA using a regular LDPC code.

100 # of iterations = 10
10−1

FER

10−2

EVA−2 decoding

p(ck) = =

ρiP r Uc0(i)→v

i

i−1

ρi

P r Vcr(i) P r Uc0(i)→v | Vcr(i)

i

r=0

(5)

where ρi denotes the fraction of edges connected to degree-i
check nodes. Let p(fkβ) denote in the verification stage the probability that
a packet associated with an output edge of a check node has
an error pattern4 with β bit errors but is verified at the k-th iteration. Let Ucβ(i)→v denote the event that a packet associated with an output edge of a degree-i check node has an error
pattern with β bit errors but is verified in the verification stage. Note that when β = 0, Ucβ(i)→v = Uc0(i)→v. This is consistent with the previous definition of Uc0(i)→v. p(fkβ) thereby reads as follows:

10−3 10−4

VA decoding
10−3 channel parameter ε

Numerical results Simulation results 32 bits/packet 64 bits/packet 128 bits/packet
10−2

Fig. 7. Numerical results of the proposed model for VA and EVA-2 are compared with simulation results for an irregular LDPC code.

V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we propose a statistical model from the message-passing perspective to analyze the decoding performance of EVA for packet-based LDPC codes over BSC. The proposed model takes the verification constraints and the false verification into account and directly applies the packet-level analysis to provide a good estimate of FER. The analytical results and simulation results demonstrate the validity of the proposed statistical model.

APPENDIX A AN ITERATIVE APPROACH TO CALCULATING q˙u(k), qu(k) AND
q˙f(k)
Let Vcr(i) denote the event that r (r ≥ 0) packets associated with i − 1 input edges of a degree-i check node c are correctly verified in the verification stage. The probability of Vcr(i) can be calculated from qu(k−1) as follows:

P r Vcr(i) =

i−1 r

1 − qu(k−1) r

qu(k−1)

i−1−r
.

(4)

p(fkβ) =

ρiP r Ucβ(i)→v
i

i−2

=

ρi

P r Vcr(i) P r Ucβ(i)→v | Vcr(i) .

i

r=0

(6)

The calculation of P r Ucβ(i)→v | Vcr(i) can be casted into an equivalent combinational problem related to the error pat-

terns. Since only the small order components play a dominate

role in calculating P r Ucβ(i)→v | Vcr(i) , we only consider β ≤ 2, and the total number of bit errors for the packets

associated with a constraint is less or equal to 2 + β. As a result, we only need to calculate P r(Ucβ(i)→v | Vcr(i)) for β ≤ 2, which is given in Appendix B. For β > 2, we impose that P r(Ucβ(i)→v | Vcr(i)) = 0.
Let qδ(kc) (qf(k)) denote the probability that a packet associated with an output edge is correctly verified (falsely

verified) only at the k-th iteration. A packet associated with

an output edge of a degree-j variable node can be verified,

if at least dk,j packets associated with an input edge of the

degree-j variable node are verified. We thereby define that

j

fj (dk,j , t) =

j x

(t)x(1−t)j−x. Therefore, qδ(kc) and

x=dk,j

4Due to the statistical independence assumption, different error patterns with the same number of bit errors (say β bit errors) lead to the same pf(kβ).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:34:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE Globecom 2011 proceedings.

qf(k) are obtained as follows:

Further, an unverified packet associated with an output

edge can be corrected if at least one packet associated with

qδ(kc) = qu(k−1)(1 − )l

λj fj (dk,j , pc(k))

j

(7) an input edge has been corrected. Let qc(kor) (q˙c(kor)) denote, at the k-th iteration, the probability that a packet associ-

ated with an output edge (a variable node) is corrected in

and

⎡

correction stage. qc(kor) = qˆu(k) 1 − ⎤

j λj 1 − p(ckor) j

and

l
qf(k) = qu(k−1)
β=1

l β

εβ(1 − ε)l−β ⎣

λj fj (dk,j , pf(kβ))⎦ , q˙c(kor) = qˆ˙u(k) 1 −

j Lj

1 − p(ckor)

j
, respectively.

j

Therefore, q˙u(k) and qu(k) are obtained as q˙u(k) = qˆ˙u(k) − q˙c(kor)

(8) and qu(k) = qˆu(k) − qc(kor) .

where λj denotes the fraction of edges connected to degree-j
variable nodes and there are β error bits in a packet of l bits. Let q˙δ(kc) (q˙f(k)) denote the probability that a packet associated
with a variable node that is correctly verified (falsely verified) only at the k-th iteration. As a result, q˙δ(kc) and q˙f(k) can be obtained as follows:

APPENDIX B APPROXIMATION OF P r Ucβ(i)→v | Vcr(i) FOR β ≤ 2
We consider an error pattern represented by an l × m array (for each entry, ‘1’ represents an error and ‘0’ represents no
error), where each column of the array represents a packet and m = i − 1 − r is the number of unverified packets

q˙δ(kc) = q˙u(k−1)(1 − ε)l

Lj fj (dk,j , pc(k))

j

associated with input edges connected to a degree-i check (9) node. The calculation of P r Ucβ(i)→v | Vcr(i) is equivalent
to finding the probability of an error pattern that makes the

mod-2 summation of entries for each of β rows in the array

and

equal to one. Therefore, we can obtain that

⎡

⎤

l
q˙f(k) = q˙u(k−1)
β=1

l β

εβ (1 − ε)l−β ⎣ Lj fj (dk,j , pf(kβ))⎦ ,
j
(10)

P r(Uc0(i)→v | Vcr(i)) ≈ (1 − ε)lm +

l 1

m 2

ε2(1 − ε)lm−2, (12)

where Lj is the fractions of degree-j variable nodes among all variable nodes.
The packet associated with a variable node or an edge that is falsely verified in the verification stage should not be taken into account in the correction stage, as the codeword with falsely verified packets has been accommodated in the calculation of Q(fk) (see (1)). Let qˆ˙u(k) (qˆu(k)) denote the proportion of the packets associated with variable nodes (input edges of a check node) that are unverified among the packets associated with variable nodes (input edges of a check node) that are not falsely verified at the correction stage. They are given as follows:

qˆ˙u(k)

=

q˙u(k−1) − q˙f(k) − 1 − q˙f(k)

q˙δ(kc)

,

qˆu(k)

=

qu(k−1) − qf(k) − 1 − qf(k)

qδ(kc)

.

Let p(ckor) denote the probability that a packet associated with an output edge is corrected in the correction stage at the k-th iteration. A packet associated with an output edge can be corrected only when all the other packets associated with input edges are correctly verified. pc(kor) thereby is obtained as follows:

p(ckor) =

ρi

1 − qˆu(k)

i−1
.

i

(11)

P r(Uc1(i)→v | Vcr(i)) ≈

m 1

ε(1 − ε)lm−1,

(13)

and

P r(Uc2(i)→v | Vcr(i)) ≈

m 1

m 1

ε2(1 − ε)lm−2.

(14)

REFERENCES

[1] M. G. Luby and M. Mitzenmacher, “Verification-based decoding for packet-based low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 120–127, 2005.
[2] M. Luby, “LT codes,” in Proc. 43rd Annu. IEEE Symp. Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2002, pp. 271–280.
[3] A. Shokrollahi, “Raptor codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 2551–2567, 2006.
[4] S. Haykin and M. Moher, Modern Wireless Communications. Prentice Hall, 2004.
[5] B. Zhu, D. Huang, and S. Nordholm, “Performance analysis of verification-based decoding for packet-based LDPC codes over binary symmetric channels,” in Proc. IEEE ICC ’09, Dresden, Germany, 2009.
[6] ——, “Enhanced verification-based decoding for packet-based LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 136–138, 2008.
[7] F. R. Kschischang, B. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 498–519, 2001.
[8] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge University Press, 2008.
[9] A. Papoulis and S. U. Pillai, Probability, Random Variables and Stochastic Processes. McGraw-Hill, 2001.
[10] D. J. C. MacKay, LDPC code database, [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:34:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

