This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE Globecom 2011 proceedings.

High-Throughput Low-Power LDPC Decoder and Code Design

Thomas Henige, Shadi Abu-Surra, Eran Pisek
Dallas Technology Laboratory Samsung Electronics
Richardson, Texas, USA

Abstract — In this paper, we present a method for creating LDPC codes which are specifically designed to be hardware friendly. Our method involves constraining the cyclic shift values in the base H-matrix to reduce the complexity of the cyclic shift hardware. We show that the decoder hardware implementation for these codes has higher throughput and lower power consumption than decoders designed for traditional LDPC codes. We provide results showing that these codes maintain the error rate performance expected of LDPC codes while achieving these throughput and power consumption improvements.
Keywords - low density parity check decoder; encoder; layered; LDPC; permutation network; shuffle; cyclic shift; constrained code design; low power hardware; high data rate; gigabit; communications; WiGig; flooding;
I. INTRODUCTION
Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes [1] have received a great deal of attention in recent years. This is due to their ability to achieve performance close to the Shannon limit [2], the ability to design codes which achieve high parallelization in hardware [3][4], and their support of high data rates. However, data rates in modern communication systems are everincreasing, and the rise of battery-powered mobile communication and computing devices necessitates low-power hardware design wherever possible. As a result, there is continuing work in the area of improving the power-efficiency and throughput of LDPC encoding and decoding hardware.
Traditionally, LDPC code design has focused on error rate performance and parallelization, while decoder hardware design has focused on throughput and power consumption. Often the approach used is code-first design, where the hardware is designed after a good-performing code has been created. In this paper, our approach is a hardware-first design approach focused on improving the cyclic shift function (alternatively referred to as a shuffle network or permutation network) used to vary the connections between the variable nodes (VN) and check nodes (CN) in the decoder.
This paper presents a method for designing LDPC codes which are inherently hardware-friendly. Initially, we discuss some background information on LDPC codes and the hardware required to perform cyclic permutations of the VN data in a layered decoder. We then present our approach to code design which minimizes the number of cyclic permutations that must be supported by the hardware. We show the improved hardware implementation for these codes, and

discuss the improved performance characteristics of this hardware. And finally, we demonstrate that the error-rate performance of these codes is comparable to codes designed by existing methods.
II. LDPC CODES AND LAYERED DECODER DESIGN
The structure of a specific LDPC code is determined entirely by its H-matrix. Because of the size and routing complexity involved in implementing a fully-parallel decoder (also known as a flooding decoder), most practical LDPC codes are structured to support partially-parallel decoders in hardware (also known as layered-schedule decoders).
To create a code with good performance which supports parallel decoding in hardware, one commonly used approach is protograph-based code design. Using this approach, a structured code is created by expanding a relatively small Tanner graph called a protograph [5]. The resultant code has an H-matrix, which can be described by a set of permutation matrices. In one form of protograph-based code design, an expansion factor Z is chosen. Each permutation matrix is of size Z×Z, and is created by performing a right cyclic shift on the Z×Z identity matrix. Fig. 1 shows an illustrative example of the base H-matrix of a protograph-based LDPC code designed using Z-factor expansion. Note that we use the term base Hmatrix to refer to the compact form of the H-matrix, where each cell represents a permutation matrix. In this example, the positive number x refers to the identity matrix shifted x times to the right (e.g., the number ‘5’ refers to the identity matrix cyclically shifted five times to the right), and the value ‘-1’ refers to the Z×Z all-zeros matrix. The shift value determines the connection of the VNs to the CNs for the particular row in the base H-matrix. The amount of the cyclic shift (i.e., the value x) ranges from 0 to Z-1 and generally varies across the rows and columns of the base H-matrix. Careful selection of the shift values is necessary to design a code with good errorrate performance.
For any row of the base H-matrix, each VN will be connected to at most one CN. This is easily explained because the row weight and column weight of the identity matrix (or, a cyclically shifted identity matrix) are both one. This condition is important to eliminate contention issues on the reading of VN information and the writing of CN messages back to the VN memory. This concept is usually generalized by dividing the H-matrix into layers. Each layer consists of a set of contention-free CNs (i.e., only one CN can access a given VN

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei9U7n8iv-.1D-4o2w4n4lo-a9d2e6d8o-n8/J1u1ne/$2246,2.00026©a2t 0081:135I:E59EUETC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE Globecom 2011 proceedings.
memory at a specific time), which are processed in parallel without contention. Note that one can treat each row of the base H-matrix as a layer. To increase decoding throughput it is possible to process more than one row of the base H-matrix in the same layer. In this case, the protograph of the LDPC code needs to be carefully designed to allow parallel processing of multiple base H-matrix rows in a single layer.

Figure 1. Base H-matrix of a protograph-based LDPC code designed using Z-factor expansion (Z=7)
A protograph-based LDPC code is well-suited to layered decoder design. To simplify description, unless otherwise stated we consider that each layer consists of one base Hmatrix row. We also refer to the hardware which processes all CNs in one row of the base H-matrix as the CN processor [6, Ch. 5]. In a layered decoder, one CN processor can be designed to serially process the different rows of the base H-matrix. That is, the decoder operates on one layer at a time, and processes the layers in sequence until a full iteration through all parity checks (i.e. the entire H-matrix) is completed. However, in order to use the same CN processor for each layer, the interconnect between the VNs and the CNs changes with each layer processed according to the cyclic shifts represented by the values in the base H-matrix. The base H-matrix has c columns, and each column corresponds to Z elements of the VN data. For each column, the hardware must be able to perform a number of cyclic shifts equal to the column weight of that column. Moreover, if the decoder supports multiple code rates (multiple base H-matrices), the CN processing machine needs to be designed to process any row in the set of base H-matrices. Consequently, the number of cyclic-shift possibilities which must be supported increases accordingly. The permutations of the protograph are usually designed to result in codes of good error-rate performance without paying attention to the number of cyclic-shift possibilities in each column across the set of base H-matrices. However, this can significantly increase the complexity of the CN processing hardware as will be shown later in this paper.
There are several hardware approaches to handling the cyclic shifts in the decoder. Fig. 2 shows one common approach. This approach uses an absolute right-cyclic-shift when data is prepared for the CN processor and a complementary absolute left-cyclic-shift when messages from the CN processor are returned to the VNs.

Figure 2. Layered LDPC decoder using absolute cyclic shifts
An improved approach [7] is to replace the dual rightshift/left-shift hardware with a single relative shift. This approach is shown in Fig. 3. The single shift performed in this method is a right relative shift equal to the difference between the current layer's absolute shift value and the previous layer's absolute right shift value. This approach will generally require less hardware (silicon) and have less overall path delay and power consumption than implementing two absolute shift functions.
Figure 3. Layered LDPC decoder using relative cyclic shift
In the hardware implementation of an LDPC decoder, the cyclic-shift functions are typically constructed with multiplexers created from CMOS logic or pass-transistor logic. Fig. 4 shows an example of a multiplexer-based implementation, using the 1st column of the code in Fig. 1 as an example. The logic for these multiplexers adds to the processing delay for each layer of the code. This delay limits the operating frequency of the CN processors, which in turn reduces the throughput of the decoder. Moreover, the switching of the multiplexer increases the power consumption of the decoder.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:35:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE Globecom 2011 proceedings.

[VN3,VN4,VN5,VN6,VN0,VN1,VN2]
[VN2,VN3,VN4,VN5,VN6,VN0,VN1]
[VN5,VN6,VN0,VN1,VN2,VN3,VN4]
[VN4,VN5,VN6,VN0,VN1,VN2,VN3]
Figure 4. Hardware implementation of cyclic shift
The approaches in Figs. 2 and 3 are effective decoder implementations for existing LDPC codes. However, if we take a step back and consider the hardware together with the code design, we can design codes with higher-throughput and lowerpower consumption. By paying attention to the cyclic-shift possibilities in each column across all base H-matrices, we can intelligently select them to optimize both hardware implementation and performance.
III. HARDWARE-FRIENDLY CONSTRAINED CODE DESIGN
The goal of our approach is to reduce the number of cyclic shifts per column to the minimal number without adversely affecting the error-rate performance of the decoder.
A. Constrained code design Our approach begins with two realizations. First,
implementing one cyclic shift in hardware is almost free. This is true since one shift is implemented by simply changing the interconnect ordering between VNs and CNs. Second, if we create the H-matrix for a code where the absolute shift values in consecutive rows of the same column are equally spaced, then the hardware only needs to implement one relative shift per column.
As an example, consider the code represented by the base H-matrix in Fig. 5. This code has 16 columns in the base Hmatrix and a Z-factor of 27, therefore the codeword length, N, is 432. Within each column, all cyclic-shifts are described by the first cyclic-shift value and a relative shift value. For example, in the third column of the base H-matrix in Fig. 5, the first cyclic-shift is ‘0’ and the relative shift is ‘2’, so the cyclic shifts in that column are ‘0’, ‘2’, ‘4’, and ‘6’. For each column, a different relative shift value is chosen in order to avoid short cycle lengths within the code.
Our approach therefore constrains the shift values which can appear in any given column of the H-matrix. It is not necessary to constrain each column to just one relative shift value: we can generalize this constraint by limiting the number of shifts per column to two, three, or some other fixed number of shifts. Loosening the constraint provides a greater degree of freedom in designing the code, which could be used to create codes with greater column weights, or to improve the error rate performance, but comes at the price of greater hardware complexity in the cyclic shift implementation in the decoder.

B. Inter-Iteration shift A decoder which implements a code designed with the
process just described can have very minimal cyclic shift hardware. Typically, the goal will be to use a single relative shift per column, though in some cases it may be desirable to increase this to some small number of shift values. In order to support iterative decoding, it will usually be necessary to have one additional relative shift value per column. This is required in order to align the VN data from the final layer of one iteration to the CNs of the initial layer of the next iteration. As an example, in the third column of the code in Fig 5 a relative right shift of 21 will be required to align the final VN data of one iteration to the CNs of the next iteration.
C. Shift offset Independent of the relative shift value used for each base
H-matrix column, the first valid shift entry of any column can contain a shift value from 0 to Z-1. This shift can be thought of as an offset applied to all of the shift values in one column. Such an offset does not affect the structure of the code, nor its characteristics such as the size and number of cycles in the code’s graph. It also does not affect the performance of the code over standard communication channels (AWGN, fading, etc.). Randomizing the shift offset values can be used to improve the error rate performance of the code under certain conditions, such as hardware impairments which produce periodic error patterns in the received VN data. This is similar to the use of a data interleaver. Fig. 6 shows the code from Fig. 5 with offset values applied to each column.
Figure 5. LDPC code (N=432, Z=27) constrained with one relative shift per column

Figure 6. LDPC code from Fig. 3 with offset shifts applied

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:35:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE Globecom 2011 proceedings.

D. Algorithm The general algorithm for creating a code of this form is: 1) Set the maximum column weight, wmax,for the LDPC code
2) Given a code length, a Z-factor, and a code rate determine the number of VNs and CNs in the protograph. Then, use protograph-based EXIT analysis [8] to design a protograph with good iterative decoding threshold, and which satisfies the wmax constraint.
3) Create the base H-matrix one column at a time by repeating the following process for each column:
a. Set the maximum number of relative shift values per column to s (It is recommended to start with s=1, then increase it if needed).
b. Choose a shift offset for the column, denoted as P.
c. Initialize the set of relative shifts to R = {0, 1,…, Z-1}.
d. Populate this column in the base H-matrix one row at a time as follows: i. Set i=0, and S0 = P;
ii. If R is not empty and number of relative shifts per column is less than s, choose a
relative shift X∈R. then update R=R\X. Else,
go to Step 3.a and use a larger s.
iii. If the corresponding protograph value is 0 (not used), put -1 in the base H-matrix cell
iv. If the corresponding protograph value is 1: 1. Examine the base H-matrix with Si in this row. If there are cycles of size 4, go to step 3.d.ii. Else, put Si in this row. (Note, this step is a variation of the progressive edge growth (PEG) construction of LDPC codes in [9]). 2. Update i= i+1, and Si = (Si-1+X) mod Z.
v. Repeat Step 3.d.iii though Step 3.d.v for each row in the column
e. Find the inter-iteration shift F which satisfies the following equation: F = (Z – Si) mod Z, where Si = the last S value of the given column
Note that step 3 of the algorithm is a greedy method which tries to minimize s. Consequently, restarting Step 3 of the algorithm several times with different choices of relative shifts can result in a smaller s. Also, the described algorithm guarantees that there are no cycles of size 4 in the code’s graph (See Step 3.d.iv). However, Step 3.d.iv can be easily modified to impose other constraints such as maximizing the size of the smallest cycle in the code’s graph. In the design example shown in Fig. 7, we restarted Step 3 several times and we were able to design

codes free of size 4 cycles with s=1, and we added a constraint to minimize the number of cycles of size 6. Moreover, we tested the minimum distance of the code at the end of each restart of Step 3 and selected the resultant code which maximizes the minimum distance. E. Multiple code rates
It is possible to use this method of constrained code design to create an entire code family. For example, a set of codes of with different code rates can be constructed, with all codes using the same codeword length and Z-factor, and all codes using the same relative shift constraints on each column (see Fig. 7).
Figure 7. LDPC code family using a single relative shift per column
F. Multiple block sizes It is also possible to extend the code family to codeword
lengths which are a multiple of the base code length. This can be done through multi-step lifting [10]. Fig. 8 shows an N=1728 length code created from the base code of Fig 3.
Figure 8. Base LDPC code lifted to create N=1728 code

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:35:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE Globecom 2011 proceedings.

IV. HARDWARE IMPLEMENTATION AND PERFORMANCE
Table I compares the decoder shift hardware resulting from different column shift constraints on the code: unconstrained, 1 shift per column, 2 shifts per column, and 3 shifts per column. The results for the unconstrained code are obtained from hardware synthesis on a decoder implementing IEEE 802.11ad (WiGig) LDPC codes [11] with rates 1/2, 5/8 and 3/4. We have excluded WiGig rate 13/16 from this analysis in order to make a fair comparison. These results form the baseline against which the other implementations are compared. For the constrained codes, we implemented shift hardware supporting the same rates, bit precision, and codeword size as the WiGig code. In all cases, the shift hardware had a precision of 8 bits per coded bit. The synthesis was performed targeting a lowpower 65nm CMOS process library.
The results in Table I show the effect of using constrained LDPC codes on the cyclic shift hardware. The 1-shift-percolumn results show a 75% reduction in the delay path and 76% reduction in the silicon area required by the shift hardware. Even when 2 or 3 shifts are used per column, the reductions are still significant.
Power consumption is reduced approximately in proportion to the silicon area. We make this claim based on the observation that toggle rates in the multiplexers and mux selection logic will not change significantly among the four code designs.
The effect on the entire decoder will be design-dependent to some extent, but in general there will be reduction in delay path, power consumption, and silicon area for any layeredschedule decoder. In our design, the shift hardware for the WiGig code (excluding rate 13/16) accounts for about 12% of the delay in the processing path, and about 9% of the total decoder area. Modifying this design to use a constrained code with one shift per column increases the overall decoder throughput by about 10%, and decreases total silicon area and power consumption of the decoder by about 7%.

TABLE I.

CYCLIC SHIFT HARDWARE IMPLEMENTATION COMPARISON:

CONSTRAINED AND UNCONSTRAINED LDPC CODES

Total num shifts
Num muxes per bit
Mux layers per bit
Total 65nm CMOS gates
Total Path Delay (ns)
Delay path reduction
Silicon area reduction

Unconstrained 10 9 4
58,856 0.65
---

1 shift per column 2 1 1 13,948 0.16 75% 76%

2 shifts per column 3 2 2 17,305 0.29 55% 71%

3 shifts per column 4 3 2 28,268 0.45 31% 52%

shift values for each column in the set of base H-matrices across all code rates. Therefore, a flooding decoder can easily support all code rates using the same hardware without the need to provide different VN to CN interconnects for different code rates.
V. CODE PERFORMANCE Simulations of the codes in Fig. 7 have shown good error rate performance. The bit error rates (BER) for the codes over AWGN channel are shown in Fig. 9, and the frame error rates (FER) are shown in Fig. 10. In each case, the decoder was run for a maximum of 20 iterations with early stopping after any iteration which converged to a valid codeword. Each Eb/No point was simulated until 100 frame errors occurred. The plot in Fig. 10 also shows the random coding bound (RCB) for each rate. The simulated frame error rate curves in Fig. 10 are 0.8dB to 1dB from the RCB bound at FER 10-3. This is outstanding performance for codes with this short block length (N=432) and column weight (wc≤4).
Figure 9. BER Performance of constrained LDPC codes

Although we have focused our discussion primarily on layered-schedule decoders, it should be noted that the codes presented in this paper offer benefits for flooding-schedule decoders as well. These codes use a common set of absolute

Figure 10. FER Performance of constrained LDPC codes

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:35:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE Globecom 2011 proceedings.

As a benchmark for comparison purposes, we again used the WiGig codes, performing the same set of simulations as for the Fig. 7 codes. The results of these simulations are shown in Fig. 11. Since the block sizes of the two codes are different, we compared each code to the RCB for its specific block size and rate. Table II shows Eb/N0 for each code and RCB at an FER of 10-2, as well as the Eb/N0 difference between them. As can be seen in the table, the constrained code (S) performs equal to or better than the unconstrained code (W) at rates 3/4 and 5/8, and only 0.11dB worse at rate 1/2. Overall, we can say that the constrained-shift codes perform as well as unconstrained codes such as the WiGig codes.

VI. CONCLUSIONS
We have presented our method of hardware-friendly LDPC code design. Our approach starts with knowledge of the most efficient hardware implementation of the cyclic shift functions required in a layered decoder. We then add a constraint to the code design process to minimize the number of cyclic shifts in each column of the code's H-matrix. We have shown that codes designed with the new constraint will allow decoder hardware to be designed with a more optimal shift function. The resulting codes can be designed to have equivalent error rate performance to codes designed without the shift constraint, while the optimized decoder will operate with lower power and higher throughput.

Figure 11. FER Performance of WiGig LDPC codes

TABLE II.

PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF CONSTRAINED (S) AND UNCONSTRAINED (W) CODES

Code

Code Eb/N0 @ FER=10-2

RCB Eb/N0 @ FER=10-2

Difference between RCB
and Code

S (432, R=1/2)

2.58

1.63

0.95

W (672, R=1/2)

1.36

2.20

0.84

S (432, R=5/8)

2.94

2.16

0.78

W (672, R=5/8)

2.68

1.90

0.78

S (432, R=3/4)

3.46

2.93

0.53

W (672, R=3/4)

3.29

2.68

0.61

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, "Low-density parity-check codes," Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electronics Letters, vol. 32, pp. 1645– 1646, Aug. 1996.
[3] E. Boutillon, J. Castura, and F. R. Kschischang, "Decoder-first code design," Proceedings of the 2nd Intl Symposium on Turbo Codes and Related Topics, pp. 459-462, Sep. 2000.
[4] T. Zhang and K. K. Parhi, "VLSI implementation-oriented (3,k)-regular low-density parity-check codes," IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems, pp 25-36, Sep. 2001.
[5] J. Thorpe, "Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from protographs," IPN Progress Report 42-154, Apr.-Jun. 2003.
[6] W. E. Ryan and S. Lin, Channel Codes: Classical and Modern, Cambridge University Press, 2009.
[7] A. Blanksby, B. Shen, and J. Trachewsky, "LDPC code set for mmwave communication," Proceedings of the 2010 ACM international workshop on mmWave communications, pp. 39-43, Sep. 2010.
[8] G. Liva, and M. Chiani,“Protograph LDPC Codes Design Based on EXIT Analysis,” IEEE Global Telecommunication Conference, GLOBECOM , pp. 3250-3254, Nov. 2007.
[9] Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386-398, Jan. 2005.
[10] S. A. Surra, E. Pisek, T. Henige, "Gigabit rate achieving low-power LDPC codes: Design and architecture", IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC), pp. 1994-1999, Mar. 2011.
[11] “IEEE 802.11ad. PHY/MAC Complete Proposal Specification (approved as IEEE 802.11ad D0.1),” http://tinyurl.com/2fqlkxx, May 2010.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:35:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

