Design of High-rate Long-length Structured QCLDPC with Good Error Performance

Xiong Yin, Zhaoxia Zheng,Yi Dan, Zhenglin Liu
Department of Electronic Science and Technology HuaZhong University of Science and Technology
Wuhan, China zxzheng@mail.hust.com.cn

Abstract—In order to improve error performance of data storage, this paper presents a code-design algorithm for a class of structured quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check (SQC-LDPC) codes with high rate ( R >= 0.9 ) and long-length （104 < n ）. In the design of parity-check matrix, optimized degree distribution pairs are obtained based on the combination of density evolution and differential evolution with a modified cost function. Moreover, both fewer short block-cycles and larger approximated cycle extrinsic message degree (ACE) are also considered. Simulation results indicate that codes in this design method its simulation curve is close to Shannon limit and have lower error floor.
Index term-SQC-LDPC, high-rate, long-length, error floor, ACE
I. INTRODUCTION
Currently, LDPC codes have attracted many researchers’ interest since they are shown to have a remarkable performance close to Shannon limit over BIAWGN (Binary-Input Additive White Gaussian Noise) channel [1]. In order to produce LDPC codes with good performance, density evolution is proposed [1] [2], which is a used to obtain the asymptotical performance of LDPC codes. Meanwhile, Tao Tian et al. demonstrate that ACE of cycles play important role in lowering error floor of LDPC [4]. Paper [5] further presents that short-length LDPC with good ACE spectrum performs better that other ones designed by pioneering method. Besides, Seho Myung et al. propose a class of implementation-oriented SQC-LDPC [6]. This kind of SQC-LDPC has the most prevailing structure currently due to the fact that it not merely is encoded efficiently but also has good performance. For example, this type of SQCLDPC is recommended by both IEEE802.16e and IEEE802.11n standard [7] [8].
However, these codes mentioned above either are not suitable to be implemented by hardware or are particularly applied to wireless communication requiring comparatively low-rate and short-length codes. In order to design LDPC code for data storage, we propose a new code-design algorithm of high-rate and long-length SQC-LDPC which enjoys good error performance and efficient implementation. In this algorithm, we modify original cost function to obtain optimized degree distribution pairs of high-rate irregular LDPC. Moreover, both fewer short block-cycles and larger ACE of parity-check matrix are taken into account. Simulation results indicate that this code-design algorithm perform well.

The outline of this paper is as follows. In section , three important code-design techniques in parity-check matrix construction are presented. In section , detailed code-design algorithm is proposed. In section , we list a table of optimized good degree distribution pairs. At the same time, SQC-LDPCs based on proposed code-design techniques are simulated over BIAWGN channel. Finally, conclusion is given in section .

II. DESIGN TECHNIQUES TO IMPROVE PERFORMANCE
In [6], SQC-LDPC with modified dual diagonal structure is proposed, which enjoys efficient encoding algorithm and have low error floor. The structure is as follows:

⎡ Px I 0 " 0 0 0⎤

⎢ ⎢

0 I I " 0 0 0⎥⎥

⎢ # 0 I % 0 0 0⎥

H

=

[H1

|

H

P

]

=

⎢ ⎢

H1

I

#

#

%%

#

#

⎥ ⎥

.

(1)

⎢ ⎢

# 0 0 " % I 0⎥⎥

⎢ 0 0 0 " 0 I I⎥

⎢ ⎣

Px

0

0"

0

0

I

⎥ ⎦

There are two parts in parity-check matrix H which

includes

the

information

part

H 1

and

the

parity

part

Hp .

The

structure

of

H 1

is

free

but

the

structure

of

Hp

is

fixed

for

encoding efficiently. In H p , I denotes an identity matrix with

[L, L] scale; Px is a circulant permutation matrix that shifts I

to the right by x times, 0 ≤ x ≤ L ; 0 is zeros matrix with [L, L] scale. In brief, the construction procedure of SQC-

LDPC is as follows: at first, obtain optimized degree distribution pairs; then get mother parity-check matrix MH
having as few block-cycles of short length as possible; finally, fill MH with appropriate Px to make the girth of H large as
possible as it can.

A. Modified Degree Distribution Optimization
Generally, density evolution is employed to compute the threshold of a given degree distribution pair and differential evolution is used to search the best degree distribution pair in global [1]-[3]. However, the data results of [1] are applied to low-rate LDPC without fixed structure. When this optimization

The work described in this paper was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant NO. 61006020) and Natural Science Foundation of HuBei Province (Grant NO. 2010CDB02705).

978-1-4577-1180-0/11/$26.00 ©2011 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:35:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

method is applied to high-rate SQC-LDPC, it is necessary to consider the special structure characteristic of SQC-LDPC. By analyzing the structure of H p , we can get that there are M −1
variable nodes with degree 2 and 1 variable node with degree 3 in H p if MH ’s scale is given [M , N ] . In this sense, the scale of MH determines the number of variable nodes with degree 2 and 3. If the length of SQC-LDPC n , its code rate R and identity matrix’s scale [L, L] are all given, the degree
distribution of variable nodes with degree 2 and 3 will be determined, since N = n L and M = N ⋅ (1− R) . Therefore, in
view of the characteristic of H p in SQC-LDPC, other two
new constraints are proposed besides previous ones in cost function of differential evolution. They are

P (dv2 ) = (M −1) N ,

(2)

1 N ≤ P(dv3 ) ≤ 1− P(dv2 ) .

(3)

In (2) (3), P (dv2 ) ( P (dv3 ) ) denotes the proportion
between variable nodes with degree 2 (3) and total variable nodes. We can find (2) and (3) correspond to the structure of H p . There are M −1 variable nodes with degree 2, so we have
(2). By the same token, there is 1 variable node with degree 3 in H p , in other words, at least 1 variable node with degree 3 in MH , so we have (3).

B. Fewer Block-cycles of Short Length
In the procedure of constructing MH , it requires that MH has as few block-cycles of short length as possible [6]. It is impossible to search all the possibilities of MH when M and N are comparatively large. So we propose a good method to get desired MH . This method is called Position-by-Position Filling (PPF), directly filling bit 1 in proper position of MH sequentially until all variable nodes degree and check nodes degree are met. This method, which is simple but effective, can not guarantee obtained MH is the best one but can guarantee obtained MH is better than most of other choices. It is a little similar to famous Progressive-Edge-Growth (PEG) algorithm proposed by Hua Xiao [9] [10], but PPF is from matrix perspective and PEG from Tanner graph perspective. Besides, with same parameters, MH obtained by PPF algorithm has fewer block-cycles than the one obtained by PEG algorithm.

Formally,

MH

is presented

as

follows:

{c0

,

c 1

,

...,

cN

}− 1

is

the

set

of

MH

’s

column

and

{r0

,

r
1

,

...,

rM

}− 1

is

the

set

of

row.

According to optimized degree distribution pair, compute the number of bit 1 in every column and row of MH . Bit 1

represents that this position will be filled by circulant

permutation. As the literature [9], denote the variable degree

{ } sequence by Dc = dc0 , dc1 ,..., dcN−1 , in which dcj is the

degree of variable node c j , 0 ≤ j ≤ N-1, in the non-decreasing

order, i.e. dc0 ≤ dc1 ... ≤ dcN−1 , and the check degree sequence

{ } by Dr = dr0 , dr1 ,..., drM −1 , in which dri is the degree of

check node ri , 0 ≤ i ≤ M-1 , and dr0 ≤ dr1 ... ≤ drM −1 . PPF algorithm is as follows.

Position-by-Position Filling Algorithm Initial H p part
for j = M to Ν −1 do
begin for k = 0 to dcj −1 do
begin if k = 0
( ) 1c0j fills position ri , cj , where 1c0j is the first bit 1
incident to cj , and ri is a row having the lowest check degree in MH so far. else
( ) 1ckj fills position ri , cj , where 1ckj is the kth bit 1
incident to cj , and note that at this time ri is the row that make MH have the fewest block-cycles. If there is more than one survivor, select the ri having the
lowest check node degree. end end In the beginning of PPF algorithm, we form a [M , N ] zero matrix to denote MH . Then fill M −1 columns in the front of MH to initial H p part. In this algorithm, as a result of putting small degree variable nodes in MH at first, we enlarge the
length of block-cycles between degree 2 and degree 3 which
are extremely vulnerable. To some extent, it enhances the error
performance of SQC-LDPC.

C. Enlarge Cycles’ ACE of Parity-Check Matrix

In [4], it finds that not only the length but also the

connectivity of cycles plays important roles in error-floor

performance. Namely, it is possible that some cycles of short

length with good connectivity perform well, while other cycles

of long length with bad connectivity do badly. The connectivity of cycles is denoted by ACE. The ACE of a length 2l cycle is

2l
∑ (di − 2) , where di denotes the degree of the ith variable
i =1
node in this cycle. It is specified that the ACE of a degree d

variable node is d − 2 , and the ACE of any check node is 0.

Furthermore, an advanced evaluation and design using ACE

spectrum is proposed in [5]. LDPC code using generalized

ACE constraint and PEG demonstrate lower error floor than

others designed by pioneering methods [11]. In view of this useful method, in the step that fills MH with appropriate Px ,

we should emphasize on not only making the length of cycles

larger but also enlarging ACE of cycles.

Cycles with small ACE is harmful, especially those cycles

consisting of small degree variable nodes. So we should avoid

this kind of cycle to improve error performance. According to modified dual diagonal structure of MH , it properly exits a

kind of small ACE cycle whose ACE is small even equals to 2,

for example, the cycle is composed by degree 2 variable nodes

of

Hp

and degree 3

variable nodes of

H 1

.

Let’s

take

Fig.

1

as

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:35:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

an example to explain the condition that MH has harmful cycles with small ACE.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. MH having 4, 6, 8, 10 cycles with small ACE

In Fig. 1, (a) presents cycles whose lengths are 6 and 10,

respectively. (b) presents cycles whose lengths are 4 and 8,

respectively. These four types of cycle have a common

characteristic: they are composed only by degree 2 variable nodes and two degree d variables (here, we assume the degree

of

variable

node

in

H 1

is

d

).

Their

ACEs

are

2× (d −1) .

When d = 2 like as Fig. 1, this type of cycle is more harmful

and must be eliminated.

III. CODE-DESIGN ALGORITHM
From what have been discussed above, we can get the detailed procedure to design parity-check matrix.
Code-design Algorithm • Step 1) Determine parameters of SQC-LDPC, for
example, in this study, we need R = 0.9 , n =15360 ; then select L =128 ; so we can get M =12 , N = 120 .
• Step 2) With cost function modified, globally search good degree distribution pairs for high-rate SQCLDPC based on density evolution and differential evolution.
• Step 3) Obtain MH by PPF algorithm.
• Step 4) Obtain H by sequentially filling MH with Px produced randomly.
Gaussian Approximation is applied in step 2) due to the fact that it is practical and timesaving. In step 3), there will be many block-cycles with small ACE like as Fig. 1, but they can be ignored and we only concern whether MH has as few block-cycles of short length as possible. Because ACE of cycles can be optimized when we fill MH with circulant permutation. In step 4), cycles of length four and length six will be eliminated by filling circulant permutation between variable nodes of degree 2 and degree 3; cycles of four, including variable nodes of other degree, will be eliminated. And the girth of H is six. As a result, we only need optimize ACE for cycles of length eight and ten between variable nodes of degree 2 and degree 3; Meanwhile, optimize ACE for cycles of length six, eight and ten including variable nodes of other degree. According to [6], let Pa1 → Pa2 → " → Pa2l → Pa1 be the chain corresponding to a 2l blockcycle. Cycles in Fig. 1 with small ACE will be created when

∑2l ( ) −1 i−1 ai ≡ 0 mod L

(4).

i =1

At this time, we need reproduce Px by random until (4) is not

met.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS

A. Good Degree Distribution Pairs Assume that the scale of MH is [12,120] and then we
have P (dv2 ) = 0.0917 and 0.0083 ≤ P (dv3 ) ≤ 0.9083 . By
the proposed degree distribution optimization method, we can get a table of good degree distribution pairs as follows.

TABLE I.

GOOD DEGREE DISTRIBUTION PAIRS FOR SQC-LDPC
WITH [M , N ] = [12,120]

(i)λ ( ( j)ρ ) represents the fraction of edges emanating from variable (check) nodes of degree i( j) and dvmax represents the maximum degree of variable node. For each degree distribution pair, the coefficient of λ and ρ are given as well as the threshold σ ∗ , the corresponding value of
( Eb No ) in decibels. From TABLE І, we can find that these
thresholds augment along with the increase of dvmax . When dvmax = 12 , obtained threshold is very close to Shannon limit.
B. Comparison with Other Design Methods
To illustrate the performance of SQC-LDPC designed by proposed method, we construct three SQC-LDPCs whose parameters are n = 15360 , R = 0.9 and [L, L] = [128,128] and degree distribution pair is dvmax = 9 column. These three SQC-LDPCs adopt different design methods, respectively. PEG-SQC-LDPC’s MH is obtained by PEG algorithm and its H by proposed method. Both MH and H of Proposed-SQCLDPC are obtained by proposed method in this study, while MH of Random-SQC-LDPC is created randomly and H doesn’t consider to optimize ACE of cycles.
After PPF is employed, the number distribution of their cycles of length 4 of MH are represented in TABLE .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:35:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE II. THE NUMBER OF CYCLES OF LENGTH 4
The first colomn reprents three different SQC-LDPC; the second column the number of cycles of length 4 between degree 2 and 3 nodes; the third column the number of cycles of length 4 in the whole MH . It indicates that MH of ProposedSQC-LDPC has the least cycles of length 4.
Fig. 2 shows their simulation curves over BIAWGN channel with BP decoding. The number of iteration times is 50 and the number of simulated frames is 10000 at every point.
Figure 2. performance comparison among three SQC-LDPC
In all cases of three SQC-LDPCs, their girth is 6 and their minimum length of the cycles between degree 2 and/or degree 3 nodes is 8. Besides, their degree distribution pairs are the column of dvmax = 9 . Fig. 2 shows that Proposed-SQC-LDPC embraces lower error floor than other two SQC-LDPCs. Random-SQC-LDPC have the worst error performance.
V. CONCLUSION SQC-LDPC, gradually developing from theoretical simulation to hardware implementation, is used wildly in

wireless communication field. This paper proposes three design techniques to improve error performance of high-rate SQCLDPC. At first, modified degree distribution optimization method is employed to search good degree distribution pairs. Additionally, PPF algorithm is used to get MH with fewer block-cycle of short length. Finally, ACEs of cycles are optimized when filling circulant permutation. Simulation results indicate that these techniques are efficient and SQCLDPC based on these methods have lower error floor and good waterfall performance.
REFERENCES
[1] Thmos J. Richardson, M. Amin Shokrollahi and Rüdiger L.Urbanke, “Density of Capacity-Approaching Irregular Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619-637, Feb. 2001
[2] Sae-Young Chung, Thomas J. Richardson and Rüdiger L.Urbanke, “Analysis of Sum-Product Decoding of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes Using a Gaussian Approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 657-670, Feb. 2001.
[3] Vitaliy Feoktistov and Stefan Janaqi, “Generalization of the Strategies in Differential Evolution,” Proceeding of the 18th Internation Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium, 2004.
[4] Tao Tian, Christopher R. Jones, John D. Villasenor, and Richard D. Wesel, “Selective Avoidance of Cycles in Irregular LDPC Code Construction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1242-1247, Aug. 2004..
[5] Dejan Vukobratović, Vojin Šenk, “Evaluation and Design of Irregular LDPC Codes Using ACE Spectrum,” IEEE Trans. Commun. Vol.57, no. 8, pp. 2272-2279, Aug. 2009.
[6] Seho Myung, and Kyeongcheol Yang, “Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes for Fast Encoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 51, no. 8, pp. 28942901, Aug. 2005.
[7] IEEE 802.16e/D8, Air Interface for Fixed and Mobile Broadband Wireless Access Systems.
[8] Z. Cai, J. Hao, P. H. Tan, S. Sun and P. S. Chin, “Efficient encoding of IEEE 802. 11n LDPC codes,” Electronics Letters, vol. 42, no. 25, Dec. 2006.
[9] X. –Y. Hu, E. ELEFTHERIOU, and D. –M. Arnold, “Progressive EdgeGrowth Tanner Graphs,” Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM 2001, San Antonio, Texas, USA, pp. 995-1001, Nov. 2001.
[10] X. –Y. Hu, E. ELEFTHERIOU, and D. –M. Arnold, “Irregular Progressive Edge-Growth (PEG) Tanner Graphs,” Proc. IEEE ISIT 2002, Lausanne, Switzerland, p.480, Jul. 2002.
[11] Dejan Vukobratović, Vojin Šenk, “Generalized ACE Constrained Progressive Edge-Growth LDPC Code Design,” IEEE Commun. Letters Vol. 12, no. 1, pp.32-34, Jan. 2008.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:35:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

