IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 58, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2011

2931

Hardware Implementation of a Backtracking-Based Reconfigurable Decoder for Lowering the Error Floor
of Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes
Xiaoheng Chen, Jingyu Kang, Shu Lin, Life Fellow, IEEE, and Venkatesh Akella

Abstract—Emerging applications such as flash-based storage systems and 10 gigabit Ethernet require that there is no error
floor even at bit error rates as low as 10 12 or so. It has been
found that trapping sets are responsible for the error floors of many LDPC codes with AWGN channels. This paper presents a hardware based backtracking scheme to break the trapping sets at runtime for lowering the error floor of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes. Backtracking is implemented as a self-contained module that can be interfaced to any generic reconfigurable iterative decoder for QC-LDPC codes. The backtracking module and a reconfigurable decoder are implemented with a FPGA and an 180 nm standard cell library. The results indicate that the overhead of backtracking is modest—about 5% in terms of logic and 13% in terms of memory for the first level backtracking and 14% in terms of logic and 46% in terms of memory for a two-level backtracking scheme. Furthermore, it is shown that the increase in latency due to backtracking is modest in the average case and can be controlled by the system designer by choosing the appropriate values for the number of trials and the number of iterations of the backtracking module.
Index Terms— error floor, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, reconfigurable computing, trapping set, very large scale integration.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes, discovered by Gallager in 1962 [1], were rediscovered and shown to approach Shannon capacity in the late 1990s [2]. LDPC codes are being considered for a wide range of applications such as high-density flash memory [3], satellite broadcasting, WiFi, and mobile WiMAX. With iterative decoding, most LDPC codes (including many standard codes for wireless communications) perform poorly at very low error rates. It is found that suddenly, the error probability of a code in the high signal-to-noise (SNR) region drops at a rate much slower than that in the region of low to moderate SNR (or even stops to drop). This is referred to as an error floor [4]. It is very difficult to construct codes that do
Manuscript received February 25, 2011; revised April 20, 2011; accepted May 14, 2011. Date of publication July 14, 2011; date of current version November 29, 2011. This work was supported in part by the NSF under Grants CCF-0727478 and CCF-1015548, in part by NASA under Grants NNX07AK50G and NNX09AI21G, and in part by gift grants from Intel and Northrop Grumman Space Technology. This paper was recommended by Associate Editor M. Laddomada.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Davis, CA 95616 USA (e-mail: xhchen@ucdavis.edu; jykang@ucdavis.edu; shulin@ucdavis.edu; akella@ucdavis.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2011.2158712

not exhibit an error floor at bit error rates as low as

or

so. However, many emerging applications such as optical com-

munication, 10 gigabit Ethernet, and NASA Landsat data con-

tinuity mission [5], require bit-error rates below

. Data

storage systems require even lower bit-error rates, say

or below. Even in applications that do not require very low bit

error rates, such as wireless communications, high error floors

are very undesirable because they degrade quality of service [6].

Thus, there is a compelling need to lower the error floor in LDPC

decoders.

It has been found that trapping sets are responsible for the

error floors of many LDPC codes with AWGN channels [4].

Constructing codes to avoid harmful trapping sets is a hard com-

binatorial problem, so decoder-based strategies are explored to

lower down the error floor of codes [7]–[9]. In [7], a variety

of decoder-based strategies have been proposed, including bit-

pinning, generalized-LDPC decoding, concatenation, bi-mode

decoding, and combinations of these methods. Although these

methods work well with some codes, they have limitations and

disadvantages. Concatenation not only requires a second de-

coder but also results in a loss of code rate and coding gain in the

waterfall region. Bit-pinning and bi-mode decoding are usually

customized for specific codes, hence they need a detailed knowl-

edge of the dominant (the most harmful) trapping sets, which

may be difficult to obtain for long or even moderate long codes

or codes whose parity-check matrices that are not so sparse. Fur-

thermore, [7] does not address hardware implementation issues

underlying these schemes. A postprocessing technique with se-

lectively biased messages is proposed in [8], [9]. However, this

method works well only when detailed knowledge of dominant

absorbing sets or trapping sets are obtained.

Instead of devising methods customized to a specific code, the

backtracking algorithm proposed in [10], [11] does not require

detailed knowledge of dominant trapping sets and can be used

to decode codes constructed based on a wide range of pseudo-

random and algebraic methods. It is shown that the backtracking

algorithm can break most of the trapping sets in the decoding

process and push the error floor down to a level very close to

that limited by the minimum distance of a code [11]. However,

the challenges of implementing such the backtracking scheme

efficiently in hardware has not been addressed.

Over the years, there has been a plethora of work on the

hardware implementation of iterative decoders for LDPC codes

[12]–[24]. However, most (if not all) of the existing work con-

tribute in improving the throughput and reducing the area (in-

cluding memory requirements) of the decoder. Decoders that

1549-8328/$26.00 © 2011 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:32:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2932

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 58, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2011

lower down the error floor of LDPC codes is rarely implemented has constant weight (the number of 1-entries in a row, also

in hardware, except for [6]. However, the decoder described in known as variable node degree), the LDPC code is referred to

[6] is designed specifically for the (2048, 1723) code (adopted as a

-regular LDPC code. If the columns and/or rows of

by the IEEE 802.3an standard) with the (8, 8) trapping set as the the parity-check matrix have multiple weights, then the null

dominant trapping set and thus lacks flexibility. The implemen- space of gives an irregular LDPC code. A binary -tuple

tation proposed in this paper is integrated with a reconfigurable

is a codeword in if and only if

.

(or flexible) quasi-cyclic LDPC decoder, therefore the same de- The LDPC code is represented graphically by a Tanner graph

coder can be used to lower the error floor of a family of struc- which consists of variable nodes (VNs) and check nodes

turally compatible quasi-cyclic LDPC codes. Furthermore, the (CNs).

backtracking based implementation used in this paper does not In terms of encoding and decoding implementation, the most

require detailed knowledge of the dominant trapping sets, so it advantageous structure of an LDPC code is the quasi-cyclic

can be used with codes constructed by a variety of methods. (QC) structure. QC-LDPC codes are adopted by many commu-

It is impractical to implement the algorithm described in [11] nications standards, e.g. the IEEE 802.11n (WiFi), the IEEE

for the following two reasons. First, there is a computation- 802.16e (WiMAX), and the (8176,7156) code for the NASA

intensive correlation operation in the first backtracking stage Landsat data continuity mission [5]. The parity-check matrix

of the algorithm proposed in [11], which requires multi-input for a QC-LDPC code is a

two-dimensional array (or

addition of multibit messages. This correlation operation in- block) of circulants or circulant permutation matrices (CPMs)

creases the area required for implementation significantly and and/or zero matrices of the same size, say

. Fig. 1 shows

reduces the throughput. Second, for the decoder to be of prac- the parity-check matrix structure of the rate-3/4 (1944,1458)

tical use, the additional latency imposed by backtracking has to QC-LDPC code from the IEEE 802.11n standard.

be minimized. The original algorithm does not address the latency issue. Furthermore, the hardware implementation of the B. Iterative Decoding With Backtracking

backtracking module should be amenable for integration with a generic high-performance iterative decoder and should be independent of the specific code being decoded, i.e., the same backtracking module should be capable of being used with any code.
This paper proposes a hardware-efficient architecture that addresses these challenges and thereby develops a hardware oriented variation of the backtracking algorithm that can be used by a system designer. This paper makes two major contributions—First, a Hamming distance criteria is introduced as a replacement for correlation function, which decreases the hardware complexity significantly without compromising the performance; Second, techniques are developed to reduce the number of iterations by as much as 75% compared to the direct implementation of the algorithm in [11]. We demonstrate that though the worst case latency of the backtracking scheme is very high, the average case latency can be modest and practical for many applications. Furthermore, two key parameters of backtracking—the number of iterations and number of trial nodes, can be selected by the system designer to meet the overall system level latency requirements of an application.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. An overview of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes and iterative decoding with backtracking is presented in Section II. The techniques to reduce complexity and latency are described in Section III and Section IV, respectively. The architecture of a reconfigurable LDPC decoder with backtracking is described in Section V and the results are presented in Section VI. Section VII concludes the paper.

Iterative message passing algorithms, such as the

sum-product algorithm (SPA) [2] and normalized min-sum

algorithm (NMSA) [25], are widely used to decode LDPC

codes. With these iterative decoding algorithms, VNs in the

Tanner graph are usually initialized with intrinsic messages

(also known as log likelihood ratios (LLRs)) sampled at

the channel. For each decoding iteration, the CNs and VNs

exchange and compute extrinsic messages on the edge of

Tanner graph. The decoding process is terminated when either

or the maximum number of iterations allowed has

been reached.

Iterative decoding algorithms are based on exchanging mes-

sages computed by CNs and VNs using the local information

available to those CNs and VNs, and thus are susceptible to trap-

ping sets, which in turn could lead to poor performance at very

low error rates. A trapping set

is a set of VNs in a

code’s Tanner graph which induces a subgraph with odd-de-

gree CNs. Suppose, in transmission of a codeword, an error pat-

tern with errors at the locations of the VNs of a trapping set

occurs. This error pattern will cause parity-check fail-

ures (i.e., the check-sums are not equal to zeros). In expressing

a trapping set, it is sometimes desirable to display both its set

of VNs and its set of odd-degree CNs. Hence, a trapping set

is also denoted by

. Fig. 2 shows a (7,1) trapping set with

and

. The CN is adjacent

only to one VN . For the (7,1) trapping set shown in Fig. 2,

if an error-pattern with 7 errors at the locations of the 7 VNs,

occurs, then a single check-sum corresponding to

II. BACKGROUND

the CN will fail.

Let

be the maximum number of iterations to be per-

A. Quasi Cyclic LDPC Codes

formed in the original decoding. Since there may be oscillations in decoding iterations when the decoder falls into a small trap-

A binary LDPC code of length is given by the null space ping set, we keep track of the minimum set of unsatisfied CNs,

of an

sparse parity-check matrix

over GF(2). , of all iterations up to

and its corresponding decoder

If each column has constant weight (the number of 1-entries output . If

, where is predetermined threshold, we

in a column, also known as check node degree) and each row say that the decoder falls into a small trapping set. The choice

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:32:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: HARDWARE IMPLEMENTATION OF A BACKTRACKING-BASED RECONFIGURABLE DECODER

2933

2 Fig. 1. The parity-check matrix of the rate-3/4 (1944,1458) QC-LDPC code (from the IEEE 802.11n standard) consists of a 6 24 two-dimensional array of 81 2 81 CPMs and zero matrices. The row weight for each block row (also known as CN degree) is 14. The column weight for each block column (also known as VN
degree) varies from 2, 3, and 6. The 84 CPMs are represented by shadowed square box. The number inside each box denotes the CPM offset, which is the position
of nonzero entry in the first CPM row. The 60 zero matrices are represented by white square box.

process up to

iterations with

. If the as-

sumption that is in the trapping set is wrong, the error-inducing

pattern in the decoder input LLR vector is most likely not af-

fected and hence the redecoding will most likely fail again; oth-

erwise, we expect a decoding success with high probability. If

redecoding fails, we choose another node

as a trial

node and start another redecoding process. This flipping and re-

decoding process continues until either a codeword is found or

all the VNs in

are tested. Each testing of a VN in

is called a trial.

= 3 Fig. 2. A (7,1) trapping set from a regular LDPC code with d

. The first

backtracking flips v , which works very well for many LDPC codes. However,

it cannot always correct the failure of the original decoding. If the original de-

coding fails in the (7,1) trapping set, the input LLRs at the v to v are very

likely error-inducing. In backtracking, after v is flipped, the problematic input

f . . . g LLRs at v to v stay unchanged. After v is removed from the trapping set, the
set of VNs, v ; v ; ; v , forms a (6,2) trapping set with two odd-degree

CNs, c and c . As a result, the redecoding may still fail in the (6,2) trapping set

due to its very small number of odd-degree CNs. This idea leads to the second

backtracking. In the first backtracking, after v is flipped and redecoding fails in

the (6,2) trapping set, two new unsatisfied CNs, c and c are revealed. In this

= f g case, we can start a second backtracking with C

c ; c , in exactly the

= f g same way as with C c in the first backtracking. Since the new candidate

( ) set N C contains two trapping set nodes v and v , it provides two more op-

portunities for successful redecoding and hence reduces the overall probability

of a decoding failure.

This first backtracking works very well for many LDPC codes

but cannot always correct a failure of the original decoding. If,

in a trial, a bit corresponding to a trapping set node is flipped, we

say the trial is a hit-trial. It is found in [11] that the information

contained in the hit trials can be used to repeat the backtracking

to overcome the failures in the first backtracking. The second

round of backtracking is carried out as follows.

Assume that all the

trials in the first backtracking

fail, and the -th trial fails with decoder output and min-

imum set of unsatisfied CNs ,

. It is shown

that a trial whose unsatisfied CNs are different from could

be the hit-trial for most of the time [11]. Let

. Assume BPSK transmission, each

code bit is mapped into

, i.e.,

and

of depends on the specific LDPC code to be decoded, the re-

. Since a hit-trial is very likely to result in the min-

quired decoding performance and the acceptable additional la- imum number of error bits among all the trials, the index of the

tency. Usually, is no greater than ten based on the simulation trial that is most likely a hit-trial is given by the inner product

results shown in [11].

between and

. most likely trials

Let

be the set of VNs connected to the unsatisfied CNs are used as the candidates for a hit-trial. Let

in . We refer to the VNs in

as the candidate VNs. It and

be the set of sets of unsatisfied CNs

is very likely that some candidate VNs are also contained in and the set of decoder outputs associated to the most likely

the trapping set. The backtracking scheme is a trial-and-error trials found in the first backtracking. Then, in the second back-

process to identify these VNs and is shown as follows. For each tracking, for each of the most likely hit-trials, we perform a

VN

, let be the bit in that corresponds to . In decoding process similar to the first backtracking process. Each

order to perturb the error-inducing pattern in the decoder input trial is performed with up to

iterations. The pa-

as much as possible, we set the input LLR at the VN to the rameter should be chosen to ensure a high successful decoding

maximum possible LLR value with a polarity opposite to that rate of the second backtracking and a further error floor perfor-

of its corresponding bit in . Then, we start the decoding mance improvement, while minimizing the latency overhead.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:32:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2934

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 58, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2011

TABLE I COMPARISON OF ERROR CORRECTION CAPABILITY IN TERMS OF NUMBER OF CORRECTED BLOCK ERRORS FOR THE CONVENTIONAL BACKTRACKING SCHEMES [11] USING THE CORRELATION BASED HIT-TRIAL SELECTION (DENOTED AS “CORRELATION” IN THE BELOW TABLE) AND THE IMPROVED BACKTRACKING SCHEME WITH THE HAMMING DISTANCE BASED HIT-TRIAL SELECTION (DENOTED AS “HAMMING DISTANCE” IN THE BELOW TABLE). WE COLLECT 500 BLOCK ERRORS VIA FPGA EMULATION FOR EACH SNR. THE PERCENTAGE OF CORRECTED BLOCK ERRORS OVER 500 CAPTURED BLOCK
ERRORS ARE ALSO LISTED

IV. LATENCY REDUCTION TECHNIQUES FOR THE BACKTRACKING ALGORITHM
Obviously, iterative decoding with backtracking requires more iterations to decode a received codeword compared to the original decoding. The simulation data in [11] indicates that in the worst case, tens of trials are required for successful decoding. As each trial consists of tens of iterations, the backtracking latency could be in the order of hundreds of iterations.

This overhead could result in a high latency for decoding

certain codewords, which in turn complicates the system level

design of receiver because it may entail additional buffering

and implementation of flow control.

We propose two techniques to reduce the latency introduced

by backtracking, which are described next. The first technique is

early trap detection, which effectively reduces the number of it-

III. HAMMING DISTANCE BASED REDUCED-COMPLEXITY HIT-TRIAL SELECTION CRITERIA

The correlation function

introduced in

Section II-B requires multi-input addition of multibit mes-

sages in implementation, and thus is not cost-effective in

terms of both silicon area and critical path delay. To reduce

the complexity of the backtracking algorithm, we propose

erations for each trial. The second technique is variable node degree based flipping scheme, which decreases the number of trials when decoding irregular codes. We also explore the trade-off between the number of iterations and the number of trial nodes used on the performance, so that the additional latency incurred by backtracking can be customized to a given application.
A. Early Trap Detection

to use the Hamming distance between the hard decision bits

of the input LLR and the decoder output of each trial in the

first backtracking, i.e.,

, as the hit-trial selection

criteria. For

, when

,

; otherwise,

. trials with minimal

are con-

sidered as the most likely hit-trials. This new criteria greatly

reduces the implementation cost of backtracking algorithm,

since the multibit additions in the original backtracking scheme

are replaced by single-bit addition.

To show the efficacy of this heuristic, we evaluate the error

performance of every code from the 802.11n and 802.16e

standard using FPGA-based emulation [18]. The input LLR,

the extrinsic message, and the updated LLR of the fixed-point

FPGA-based decoder are of 6-bit, 6-bit, and 8-bit, respectively.

Normalized min-sum algorithm is used for implementation.

For each simulation point (SNR), 500 block errors and their

associated decoder input LLRs are collected. We choose the

codes from these wireless standards for three reasons. First,

although these codes are not designed for low-error floor

applications, their error performance are significantly affected

by small trapping sets. Second, these codes have higher error

floors (usually at block error rate (BLER) of ) and short

code length (up to 2304), thus their error performance can be

simulated by FPGA within hours. However, emulation of codes

When a LDPC decoder is trapped, there are two observable

patterns in terms of the number of unsatisfied CNs over itera-

tions: this number either stops to change, or oscillate around a

certain minimum value. For example, if we record the number

of unsatisfied CNs on the iteration basis, the pattern would be

either like { , 36, 18, 14, 10, 10, 10, 10, }, or like { , 36,

18, 14, 10, 11, 12, 10, 13, 11, 10, }. For the first case, the

minimum number of unsatisfied CNs (10) is repeated; while for

the latter case, the number of unsatisfied CNs oscillates around

the minimum value (10).

Based on this observation, we propose an early trap detec-

tion method. For the original decoding or one trial in the first

backtracking, let

be the set of unsatisfied CNs with the

minimum

, let be the set of unsatisfied CNs for the

current iteration, let be the number of repetition times of

. In the first iteration,

is set by , and

is

set by one. Afterwards,

and

are updated on the it-

eration basis: if

, is increased by one; if

,

is set by , and

is reset to one;

otherwise, no change is applied. If reaches

, a pre-

determined threshold, the decoder is declared as been trapped,

and thus is stopped early.

B. Variable Node Degree Based Flipping Scheme

designed specifically for low-error floor application (BLER of or so) will take months. Third, the 802.11n and 802.16e
standards provide 126 codes with various lengths and code rates, a comprehensive simulation on these codes constitutes a no-bias study.
We apply the original backtracking algorithm and the improved backtracking algorithm to these captured block errors

The original backtracking algorithm does not specify the order to flip the candidate VNs. A straightforward flipping scheme is to flip the candidate VNs from leftmost column to the rightmost column. However, for irregular codes which contains VNs of various degrees, the small-degree VNs are more likely to fall into small trapping sets than the large-degree VNs, since they are not well informed from their limited number

with the same simulation parameters (

of connected CNs. Based on this observation, we propose a

,

, ), and find that these two algorithms VN degree based flipping scheme that gives priority to the

result in exactly the same number of corrected block errors. We small-degree VNs when choosing the candidate VN to flip.

summarize the error performance of four codes in Table I.

For example, consider the code shown in Fig. 1. When the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:32:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: HARDWARE IMPLEMENTATION OF A BACKTRACKING-BASED RECONFIGURABLE DECODER

2935

TABLE II COMPARISON OF ERROR PERFORMANCE AND LATENCY FOR THREE BACKTRACKING SCHEMES: CONVENTIONAL BACKTRACKING AS SHOWN IN [11], IMPROVED
BACKTRACKING WITH EARLY TRAP DETECTION, AND IMPROVED BACKTRACKING WITH BOTH EARLY TRAP DETECTION AND VN DEGREE BASED FLIPPING APPLIED. THE ERROR PERFORMANCE IS MEASURED BY THE NUMBER OF CORRECTED BLOCK ERROR. THE LATENCY IS MEASURED BY THE NUMBER OF ITERATIONS. THE PERCENTAGE OF CORRECTED BLOCK ERRORS AND LATENCY OF THE TWO IMPROVED SCHEME AGAINST THE ORIGINAL BACKTRACKING ARE ALSO LISTED

proposed flipping scheme is applied, the candidate VNs in the 19th block column are flipped first, since it is the first block column with smallest VN degree two. After all the candidate VNs with degree two are tested with selective flipping, we flip the candidate VNs with degree three, and so on.
C. Simulation Results

for the proposed iterative decoding scheme with double-backtracking setup is upper bounded by

(1)

Let be the average degree of CNs in the Tanner graph of the

code to be decoded. Then

and

To show the effectiveness of the proposed techniques, we

evaluate the error performance of three codes from the IEEE

(2)

802.11n standard and three codes from the IEEE 802.16e stan-

dard. Let

and

be the maximum number of per-

mitted trials and overall iterations, respectively. The simulation

parameters are

,

,

(the second

backtracking is disabled),

(up to 15 candidate VNs

can be selectively flipped),

(no constraint for the

number of overall iterations),

. As stated in the pre-

vious section, 500 block errors are captured for each simulation

point.

The results of error performance and latency are shown in

Table II. The error performance is measured by the number of

corrected block errors. The more block errors that are corrected

by the backtracking process, the lower the error floor is pushed

down. The number of iterations (of the decoding algorithm) is

used as the architecture and implementation-independent metric

to represent latency. Experiments show that that latency can be

reduced to 25% to 37% of the original backtracking algorithm

using the techniques described here. Furthermore, in most cases

we find almost no degradation in the error performance, though

in the worst case we found it to be about 14%. Next we will

develop an analytical model for latency and derive the upper

bound for the average case latency.

Usually is close to . Since we require

for

to be considered small in the first backtracking, then for

a given LDPC code, the choice of the parameters and

have an impact on the computational overhead. Since back-

tracking is only invoked at a relatively low block error rate

, say

. Hence, for moderate and , we

have

and hence

is very close

to . This means that the multiple trials in the proposed

double-backtracking setup in iterative decoding gives only a

marginal overall computational overhead.

Next we show that the result above holds in practice. We pick

four codes from wireless standards, and apply the backtracking

algorithm on them with the following simulation parameters:

,

,

,

(no constraint for the number of trials),

(no

constraint for the number of overall iterations). The results of

average decoding latencies before and after backtracking are

shown in Table III. Notice, that the average increase in latency

is very modest, almost negligible, for this application.

However, in the worst case the additional latency due to back-

tracking can be quite high. We show that limiting the number of

D. Latency Analysis

trials and the number of overall iterations for these trials provides an effective tradeoff between latency and error perfor-

As we have seen, iterative decoding with backtracking re- mance. Let and

be the number of BLER for decoding

quires more iterations to decode a codeword compared to the with and without backtracking. Then,

represents the

traditional iterative decoding. Suppose, for conventional itera- BLER improvement due to backtracking. We examine the re-

tive decoding (without bactracking) at a specific SNR, the block lationship between the BLER improvement and the number of

error rate is

and the average numbers of iterations to trials and number of overall iterations. The BLER improvement

decode a received word is . Let and be number is plotted against the number of trials and the number of overall

of trials required in the first and second backtracking, respec- iterations in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4, respectively. In Fig. 4, the number

tively. Assume that for each trial in backtracking, the maximum of overall iterations is plotted at an interval of 20. Notice that

number of iterations performed is set to , same as the orig- when,

and

, the improvement in per-

inal decoding. Then, the average number of iterations required formance is quite significant. In general, this shows us that the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:32:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2936

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 58, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2011

TABLE III THE AVERAGE DECODING LATENCY OVERHEAD IS VERY SMALL WHEN
COMPARED WITH THE ORIGINAL DECODING. ALSO, A HIGH RATE OF SUCCESSFUL DECODING IS OBSERVED FROM OUR EXPERIMENTS IF
BACKTRACKING IS INVOKED

Fig. 4. The BLER improvement in terms of the number of iterations.

3:

: VNs neighboring

4:

: decoder output corresponding

to

5:

: decoder input LLR vector

6: : the largest possible positive LLR value

7:

: the maximum number of trial times

8: (First Backtracking)

9:

;

10: for each

,

do

Fig. 3. The BLER improvement in terms of the number of trials.

11:

12:

;

parameters for the backtracking algorithms can be tuned to meet the system-level requirements. The decoding module is usually a part of a larger system, so depending on what else exists in the system, there maybe a slack in timing that can be used to pick the appropriate values for the number of trials and number of iterations.
The hardware efficient backtracking algorithm that incorporates the techniques introduced in this paper is shown in Algorithm 1. Next, we compare the performance of the improved backtracking algorithm tonal algorithm described in [11]. Table II shows the benefit of just early trap detection and the benefit of the combination of early trap detection and VN node based flipping. It is evident that the original algorithm did not address latency optimization while the algorithm proposed here is specifically geared to address this problem. Note that the latency can be reduced by as much as 75% in some cases.

13: redecode using as input LLR and

as the

maximum number of iterations, which outputs with

unsatisfied CNs in

14: if

then

15: stop and exit, output as the decoded codeword

16: else if

then

17: stop and exit, claim uncorrectable error

18: else if

then

19:

; insert into set

20: end

21: end

22: if second backtracking is disabled then

Algorithm 1 The Improved Backtracking Algorithm

23: stop and exit, claim uncorrectable error

24: end

1: Initialization: (from the original decoding with maximum number of iterations)

as the 25: find the smallest in

, with the corresponding

’s as

, and the corresponding decoder outputs

2: : the minimum set of unsatisfied CNs

’s as

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:32:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: HARDWARE IMPLEMENTATION OF A BACKTRACKING-BASED RECONFIGURABLE DECODER

2937

= 96 Fig. 5. The overall architecture for backtracking-based reconfigurable decoder that supports CPM size of up to P

. Note that the backtracking module

includes the whole logic part denoted as “backtracking module” at the bottom.

26: (Second Backtracking)

27: for

to do

28: for each

,

do

29:

V. BACKTRACKING-BASED RECONFIGURABLE DECODER
In this section, we describe a backtracking-based reconfigurable decoder, which contains a generic interface named backtracking module that interacts with a reconfigurable QC-LDPC decoder. The proposed architecture can decode a family of structurally compatible codes with much lower error floor than conventional decoder.

30:

;

A. Overall Architecture

31: redecode using as input LLR and maximum number of iterations, which outputs unsatisfied CNs in

as the with

The high-level architecture for the backtracking-based recon-

figurable decoder is shown in Fig. 5. The depicted decoder sup-

ports CPM size of up to

and thus accommodates

all the codes in the IEEE 802.11n and 802.16e standards. Note

32: if

then

that it is basically a reconfigurable decoder interfaced to a backtracking module. The backtracking module reads the LLR from

33:

stop and exit, output as the decoded codeword

34: else if

then

the input buffer and is responsible for configuring and controlling the reconfigurable decoder.
The backtracking algorithm is mapped to the backtracking

35:

stop and exit, claim uncorrectable error

module as follows. The decoder input LLRs are generated by the generator. In the original decoding, the initial LLRs from

36: end

input buffer are bypassed directly to the decoder. In each decoding trial, one VN is flipped to the largest possible LLR mag-

37: end

nitude with opposite sign bit. The 96-bit signals representing

38: end

hard decision bits from the memory and the 96-bit selection signals from the controller are passed to the generator to form

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:32:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2938

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 58, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2011

Fig. 6. An implementation of the y generator.

Fig. 7. An implementation of Hamming distance unit.

the modified input LLR , as shown in Fig. 6. The trial node

selection unit (TNSU) takes the output of tag memory and helps

the controller generates the selection signals of generator.

The difference detector compares the hard decision bits gen-

erated in the original decoding and current decoding trial, as

shown in line 18 of Algorithm 1. To compute the /diff signal,

the difference detector firstly performs an exclusive-OR opera-

tion on the two versions of hard decision bits, and then executes

a 96-bit OR operation on the resultant 96-bit vector. The result

of the 96-bit OR operation is computed iteratively over cy-

cles to form the /diff signal. The Hamming distance unit (HDU)

computes the Hamming distance, as shown in line 19 of Algo-

rithm 1. An implementation of HDU is shown in Fig. 7. The

12-bit signal dist representing the Hamming distance is passed

to the controller to determine the most likely hit-trials.

The controller generates the handshaking signals for the input

buffer and the reconfigurable decoder. The memory and tag

memory are used to store the required information for back-

tracking, i.e.,

and in Algorithm 1. The memory man-

agement unit (MMU) allocates and reclaims memory and tag

memory pages as described in Section V-C.

B. Reconfigurable Decoder With Optimum State Storage
The reconfigurable decoder interfaced with the backtracking module is similar to the configurable or programmable decoder with layered decoding [26] as described in [27], [28], which simultaneously processes the extrinsic messages of one CPM in the parity-check matrix of a QC-LDPC code and uses a permutation network to reorder and deliver messages to corresponding serial-in serial-out processing units. Configuration memory is

built into the decoder to store the code structure such as the off-

sets for all CPMs and the CN degrees for each block row. An

optimized circular shift network [29] is used to realize the per-

mutations. A -parallel reconfigurable decoder supports any

QC-LDPC code with CPM size

.

The backtracking algorithm requires the decoder to identify

its minimum set of unsatisfied CNs and to store the associated

hard decision bits and candidate VNs, which are updated on

the iteration basis. The iteration corresponding to the minimum

set of unsatisfied CNs is referred to as the optimum iteration.

The three-tuple of hard decision bits, candidate VNs, and the

number of unsatisfied CNs in each iteration is referred to as a

state. The state in the optimum iteration is named as the optimum

state, which is initialized as the state in the first iteration and is

updated by the state of the current iteration when the number

of unsatisfied CNs in the current iteration is smaller than the

current minimum number. Thus, at any given time, the state of

the current iteration and that of the optimum iteration must be

stored.

To compute the number of unsatisfied CNs, the

syndrome checks generated during the message update of each

block row is sent to a -input parallel adder, whose result is

accumulated with a register storing the partial sum of syndrome

checks. When a decoding iteration is finished, the register value

is the number of unsatisfied CNs in the current iteration.

The hard decision bits are stored in the memory, which

is organized as a set of pages containing

-bit words.

Each memory word corresponds to a group of VNs in the same

block column of the parity-check matrix. In layered decoding,

the syndrome checks in the current iteration are computed by the

hard decision bits generated in the previous iteration. Therefore,

three versions of the hard decision bits—corresponding to that

of the current, previous and the optimum iteration—are stored

in the memory. In implementation, three index registers are

used to keep track of these pages.

The candidate VNs information are stored in the the tag

memory, which is organized as a set of pages containing

-bit words. The structure of each page is designed in ac-

cordance with the decoder, since the messages of one

CPM is processed simultaneously and there are block

columns in the underlying parity-check matrix. Each bit in the

tag memory corresponds to a VN in the Tanner graph. If the VN

neighbors an unsatisfied CN, the bit content is one; otherwise

the bit content is zero. This information can be viewed as

meta information about a given VN, and hence we refer to

the memory as tag memory. Two versions of the hard decision

bits—corresponding to that of the current and the optimum

iteration—are stored in the tag memory. In implementation,

two index registers are used to keep track of these pages.

The tag information is generated by performing a circular

shift operation on the syndrome bits generated at the end of

each block row processing through existing QSN in the decoder.

However, there is a subtle problem. A given VN neighbors mul-

tiple CNs and contributes in multiple syndrome calculations.

Without proper protection scheme, it is very likely that a VN

tagged as one is updated to zero later since it is connected with

an satisfied CN. To solve this problem, an additional bit for each

CPM is appended to each word of the configuration memory. If

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:32:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: HARDWARE IMPLEMENTATION OF A BACKTRACKING-BASED RECONFIGURABLE DECODER

2939

Fig. 8. Writing the tag information for VNs corresponding to the CPM located in the 1st block row and the 0-th block column of the parity-check matrix for (1944,1458) code. (a) The configuration memory of the reconfigurable decoder. The memory content describes the parity-check matrix for the (1944,1458) QC-LDPC code from the IEEE 802.11n standard. The 84 memory words correspond to the 84 CPMs in the parity-check matrix. (b) The CPM in the 1st block row and the 0th block column of the (1944,1458) QC-LDPC code. The interconnect network between the VNs and CNs is determined by the 1-entry in the CPM. (c)
0 The tag information are generated by reusing the QSN. The selection signal is stored as the MSB in the configuration memory. The syndrome registers are shifted
rightly by 81 4 = 77 via the QSN.

the CPM is the first CPM in that block column, the bit is config- during the first backtracking. First, the capacity of memory

ured as zero, and the tag information is written directly to the tag and the tag memory are extended to

pages

memory; otherwise, the bit is configured as one, and the tag in- and

pages, respectively. There is a constant

formation is performed an OR operation with the existing value term 1 in the above two equations since the memory page

before being written to the tag memory.

storing the optimum state of the original decoding is still in use

Example Illustrating Tag Memory Update: Fig. 8(a) shows when generating optimum states for the second backtracking.

the configuration memory of a typical reconfigurable decoder Second, since the hit-trials are very likely to be replaced during

configured to decode the (1944, 1458) code as described in the first backtracking, we design a memory management unit

Fig. 1. Each configuration memory word has three fields. As (MMU) to allocate memory pages as requested by the decoder

noted above, the most significant bit (MSB) denotes whether and to reclaim the invalidated pages for memory efficiency.

the VN has been tagged or not in a prior syndrome calculation, As stated in Section V-B, the original decoding or each trial

the five bit field denotes the block column index and the 7-bit in the first backtracking requires three pages of memory and

field denotes the offsets that describe the CPM structure. Each two pages of tag memory. When the decoder is in the original

word in the configuration memory corresponds to one of the 84 decoding phase, the MMU will allocate three unused memory

CPMs in the underlying parity-check matrix.

pages (shown as uid0, uid1, and uid2 in Fig. 5) indexed as {0,

Suppose we are interested in updating the tag information for 1, 2} and two unused tag memory pages (shown as tag_id0 and

the 14th CPM, i.e., the CPM located in the 1st block row and 0-th tag_id1 in Fig. 5) indexed as {0, 1} to decoder. After the original

block column. Note that

denote the syndrome decoding or each trial is complete, the MMU will receive the

bits corresponding to this block row. Given that the tag infor- two memory indices (shown as uid_opt and tag_id_opt in Fig. 5)

mation for the VNs in the 0-th block column starts from the 0th corresponding to the memory and tag memory of the optimum

CPM, the selection signals for the multiplexors array are set to iteration. If the optimum state does not satisfy the constraint

1. The syndrome register is shifted right by

with in the original decoding and is not among the states with the

the help of the QSN. Fig. 8(b) (which indicates the high level smallest Hamming distance in the first backtracking, the pages

view of the code structure) shows that the -th VN is connected used in the previous decoding are resent to the decoder by the

to

mod 81-th CN. So, if the syndrome corresponding MMU for the next trial. Otherwise two new pages (one page for

to

mod 81 is 1 (which indicates that it is not satisfied), the memory and tag memory each) will be allocated for the

the corresponding VN is tagged as 1.

next trial along with the pages that do not represent the optimum

C. Memory Management Unit

state in the current trial. If no greater than valid optimum states are found in the first

To implement first backtracking only, the memory and backtracking, the indices of newly allocated pages are gener-

tag memory require three pages and two pages respectively, as ated linearly. For example, for the memory, after the original

shown in Section V-B. However, two design challenges arise decoding, the indices of newly generated pages are in the order

for the second backtracking, which requires the storage of of

. If more than valid optimum states are

optimum states corresponding to the most likely hit-trials found, the page indices corresponding to the current maximum

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:32:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2940

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 58, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2011

= 3 Fig. 9. The u memory with 

contains seven pages. Three pointers are

used to identify the previous iteration, the current iteration, and the optimum

iteration in the current decoding. The page shadowed is in used and not free.

Only the blank pages can be allocated. For (a), pages indexed by 1, 4, and 6 are

allocated for the first backtracking. After the trial is finished, page indexed by

6 stores the hard decision bits of the optimum iteration. Since the page is better

than page indexed by 3 when comparing the Hamming distance, page indexed

by 3 is swapped out for the next trial as well as pages index by 1 and 4, as shown

in (b).

Hamming distance will be fetched from the controller and invalidated by the MMU to form the new allocated page indices. Fig. 9(a) and Fig. 9(b) illustrate how the memory is managed for this case.

D. Trial Node Selection Unit

For each CPM in the parity-check matrix, there may be zero Fig. 10. The architecture for trial node selection unit.

or multiple (no less than one) candidate VNs. In other words, each word of the tag memory consists of all 0-bits or multiple 1-bit and remaining 0-bits. Before each trial, a candidate VN is located by searching for the 1-bit in the tag memory.

logic gates. For example, for a 4-input priority encoder with

input

, output

,

,

,

and

.

Since the number of candidate VNs

is much smaller

than the cardinality of the set of all VNs , a linear search

VI. IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS

method requiring to

clock cycles test all the bits in the tag Based on the proposed architecture, we implemented two

memory is extremely inefficient. We developed a parallel search backtracking modules, one that realizes only the first back-

scheme instead that reduces the time complexity from

to tracking algorithm and the other that realizes the double

.

backtracking. The backtracking module is interfaced to a re-

Fig. 10 shows a trial node selection unit (TNSU) which sup- configurable QC-LDPC decoder that can decode any QC-LDPC

ports CPM size of up to

. The controller generates read code that has up to 24 block columns and up to 96 CPMs with

and write address for the tag memory. The tag information are

. The input LLR, the extrinsic message, and the

fetched from tag memory and passed to the TNSU as the input updated LLR are of 6-bit, 6-bit, and 8-bit, respectively. The

signals (tag[95: 0]). The TNSU has two functionalities. First, it designs are synthesized targeting a TSMC 0.18 CMOS

identities whether the corresponding 96 VNs of the tag memory ASIC cell library using the Synopsys design tools and flow.

word contains candidate VNs. If the signal /all_zero is low, the The realized reconfigurable decoder and the two backtracking

accessed memory word contains 0-bits only, which means no modules achieve an operating frequency of 200 MHz and 400

candidate VNs are found. Thus, the controller will generate the Mhz, respectively. Thus, there is no penalty in clock rate by

read address for the next row. Second, the TNSU select con- integrating the backtracking module with the reconfigurable

vert the tag information containing multiple 1-bits to a modified decoder. The critical path of the reconfigurable decoder exists

tag information (

in Fig. 10) with only one 1-bit, in the QSN. The critical paths of both two backtracking mod-

i.e., only one candidate VN is selected. The modified tag in- ules exist in the controller component.

formation will be performed an exclusive-or operation with the The backtracking module realizing the first backtracking only

associated tag memory word to update its content, thus the pre- and the backtracking module realizing double backtracking al-

vious accessed candidate VN will not be tested for a new trial. gorithm require 7.5 K and 10.3 K of equivalent NAND2 gates

For example, suppose the contents of a 8-bit tag memory word respectively. If only the first backtracking is implemented, only

are

, then the output vector three pages of memory and two pages of tag memory are re-

should be

. Update the modified tag quired. Since each page contains twenty-four 96-bit words, the

information is generated, the tag memory word is updated by memory requirement to implement only the first backtracking

.

is

. As shown in Section V-C, an im-

To realize these functions with reduced pipeline stages, we plementation of double backtracking algorithm requires

employ a divide-and-conquer strategy, as shown in Fig. 10. The pages of memory and pages of tag memory. Our imple-

8-bit or 12-bit one detector in Fig. 10 can be realized with 8-bit mentation uses

, thus the memory requirement for double

or 12-bit OR-gate. The priority encoder is designed with simple backtracking is

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:32:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: HARDWARE IMPLEMENTATION OF A BACKTRACKING-BASED RECONFIGURABLE DECODER

2941

TABLE IV ASIC IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS FOR THREE DECODERS (THIS WORK): THE CONVENTIONAL DECODER IMPLEMENTING THE ORIGINAL DECODING ONLY, THE DECODER IMPLEMENTING THE FIRST BACKTRACKING ONLY, AND THE DECODER IMPLEMENTING THE DOUBLE BACKTRACKING. THE DESIGN RESULTS OF THE
RELATED WORK ARE ALSO LISTED. THE RESULTS OF OUR WORK IS BASED ON SYNTHESIS, WHILE THE RESULTS OF OTHERS ARE BASED ON LAYOUT

Fig. 11. Block error performance for 802.16e standard code with code length Fig. 12. Block error performance for 802.11n standard code with code length

2304 when backtracking is applied.

1944 when backtracking is applied.

We integrate the two backtracking modules with the re-

clock cycles to complete one iteration. Thus, if

configurable decoder with optimum state storage as shown the average number of iterations is and if takes clock

in Section V-B. Table IV shows the postsynthesis results of cycles to load the intrinsic messages, the throughput would be

the conventional decoder realizing the original decoding, the

decoder realizing the first backtracking only, and the decoder

realizing double backtracking. We also present the implemen-

tation results of three decoders that were recently published For example, for the (2304, 1152) code in the mobile WiMAX

for comparison. The difference in terms of memory usage and standard, the throughput would be 344 Mbps at five iterations.

logic gates is mainly caused by the choices of quantization We evaluate the code performance of the 802.16e standard

and parallelism. The results clearly demonstrate that the area code with code length 2304 and 802.11n standard code with

overhead (measured in terms of gates) of backtracking module code length 1944, and show their block error performance in

is not very significant—it is about 5% if only one backtracking Figs. 11 and 12, respectively. For each simulation point, we col-

is implemented and about 7% if the second backtracking lect 500 block errors. The simulation parameters are (

is also implemented. The additional memory requirements ,

,

,

). No latency constraints

for the backtracking implementation is also not very signifi- are applied for the decoder. Based on the simulation, the first

cant—about 13% and 46% for the first and double backtracking backtracking algorithm lowers the error floor by 0.5 to 1.5 order

respectively.

of magnitudes, while the second backtracking algorithm further

Furthermore, it is important to note that the backtracking lowers the error floor by another 0.5 order of magnitudes. For

module does not change the time (measured in clock cycles) some codes, e.g., rate-5/6 code in the 802.16e standard, the im-

for a single iteration. This means, there is no throughput provement of double backtracking algorithm is within half the

penalty if the backtracking is not invoked. It requires exactly order of magnitude, however the curve also approach the limit

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:32:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2942

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 58, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2011

of undetected block error rate. Thus, for errors resulted by trapping sets, the backtracking algorithm is exceptionally useful.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
We described the design and implementation of a hardwarebased backtracking scheme to detect and break trapping sets at runtime to improve the error floor performance of QC-LDPC codes at very low bit error rates. The main advantage of our approach is that it is not customized to one specific code. So the same hardware decoder can be used to lower the error floor of many codes instead of building a customized decoder for each code. This is accomplished by creating a self-contained backtracking module that can be plugged to any generic reconfigurable iterative decoder for QC-LDPC codes. Because of the optimized techniques to reduce the complexity and latency of the backtracking algorithm, we demonstrated that the additional area and latency overhead is small, especially for the first backtracking. Also, there is no impact on the throughput of the decoder if the backtracking is not invoked, since the backtracking module is implemented at a much higher clock rate than the decoder.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[2] D. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[3] Y. Tai, “Error control coding for MLC flash memories,” in Proc. Flash Memory Summit, Santa Clara, CA, Aug. 2010 [Online]. Available: http://www.flashmemorysummit.com/
[4] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[5] The Landsat Program, National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) [Online]. Available: http://landsat.gsfc.nasa.gov/
[6] Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic, “An efficient 10 GBase-T ethernet LDPC decoder design with low error floors,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 843–855, Apr. 2010.
[7] Y. Han and W. Ryan, “Low-floor decoders for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1663–1673, 2009.
[8] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam, and M. Wainwright, “Lowering LDPC error floors by postprocessing,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf., 2008, pp. 1–6.
[9] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam, and M. Wainwright, “Design of LDPC decoders for improved low error rate performance: Quantization and algorithm choices,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 8, no. 11, Nov. 2009.
[10] J. Kang, L. Zhang, Z. Ding, and S. Lin, “A two-stage iterative decoding of LDPC codes for lowering error floors,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., Nov. 2008, pp. 1–4.
[11] J. Kang, Q. Huang, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “An iterative decoding algorithm with backtracking to lower the error floors of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 64–73, Jan. 2011.
[12] K. Gunnam, G. Choi, M. Yeary, and M. Atiquzzaman, “VLSI architectures for layered decoding for irregular LDPC codes of WiMax,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC’07), pp. 4542–4547.
[13] T. Brack, M. Alles, F. Kienle, and N. Wehn, “A synthesizable IP core for WIMAX 802.16E LDPC code decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Pers., Indoor, Mobile Radio Commun., Sep. 2006, pp. 1–5.
[14] Y. Sun, M. Karkooti, and J. Cavallaro, “VLSI decoder architecture for high throughput, variable block-size and multi-rate LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., May 2007, pp. 2104–2107.
[15] A. Blanksby and C. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.
[16] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. Kschischang, “Power reduction techniques for LDPC decoders,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, no. 8, pp. 1835–1845, 2008.

[17] T. Mohsenin, D. Truong, and B. Baas, “A low-complexity messagepassing algorithm for reduced routing congestion in LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 1048–1061, May 2010.
[18] X. Chen, J. Kang, S. Lin, and V. Akella, “Memory system optimization for FPGA-based implementation of quasi-cyclic LDPC lodes decoders,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 98–111, Jan. 2011.
[19] Y. Chen and K. Parhi, “Overlapped message passing for quasi-cyclic low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 1106–1113, Jun. 2004.
[20] Y. Dai, Z. Yan, and N. Chen, “Optimal overlapped message passing decoding of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 565–578, May 2008.
[21] M. Mansour and N. Shanbhag, “High-throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 11, pp. 976–996, 2003.
[22] M. Mansour, “A turbo-decoding message-passing algorithm for sparse parity-check matrix codes,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 4376–4392, Nov. 2006.
[23] D. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst., 2004, pp. 107–112.
[24] Z. Wang and Z. Cui, “A memory efficient partially parallel decoder architecture for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 483–488, Apr. 2007.
[25] M. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May 1999.
[26] M. Mansour and N. Shanbhag, “A 640-Mb/s 2048-bit programmable LDPC decoder chip,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 684–698, 2006.
[27] M. Karkooti, P. Radosavljevic, and J. Cavallaro, “Configurable LDPC decoder architectures for regular and irregular codes,” J. Signal Process. Syst., vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 73–88, 2008.
[28] D. Bao, B. Xiang, R. Shen, A. Pan, Y. Chen, and X. Y. Zeng, “Programmable architecture for flexi-mode QC-LDPC decoder supporting wireless LAN/MAN applications and beyond,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 125–138, Jan. 2010.
[29] X. Chen, S. Lin, and V. Akella, “QSN-A simple circular shift network for reconfigurable quasi-cyclic LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 1549–7747, Oct. 2010.
[30] X.-Y. Shih, C.-Z. Zhan, C.-H. Lin, and A.-Y. Wu, “An 8.29 mm 52 mW multi-mode LDPC decoder design for mobile WiMAX system in 0.13 mm CMOS process,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 672–683, 2008.
[31] C. Liu, S. Yen, C. Chen, H. Chang, C. Lee, Y. Hsu, and S. Jou, “An LDPC decoder chip based on self-routing network for IEEE 802.16 e applications,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, no. 3, p. 684, 2008.
Xiaoheng Chen received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical engineering from Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China, in 2005 and 2007, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering from the University of California, Davis, in 2011.
He is currently with Microsoft, Redmond, WA as a software engineer. His research interests include computer architecture and parallel computing, embedded systems, cloud computing, reconfigurable computing, FPGA, and error control coding.
Jingyu Kang received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electronic engineering from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 2002 and 2005, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering from the University of California, Davis, in 2009.
He is currently with Augusta Technology USA, Inc., Santa Clara, CA, as a System Engineer. His research interests include error control coding and signal processing for data storage and communication systems.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:32:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: HARDWARE IMPLEMENTATION OF A BACKTRACKING-BASED RECONFIGURABLE DECODER

2943

Shu Lin (S’62–M’65–SM’78–F’80–LF’00) received the B.S.E.E. degree from the National Taiwan University, Taipei, in 1959, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Rice University, Houston, TX, in 1964 and 1965, respectively.
In 1965, he joined the Faculty of the University of Hawaii, Honolulu, as an Assistant Professor of Electrical Engineering. He became an Associate Professor in 1969 and a Professor in 1973. In 1986, he joined Texas A&M University, College Station, as the Irma Runyon Chair Professor of Electrical Engineering. In 1987, he returned to the University of Hawaii. From 1978 to 1979, he was a Visiting Scientist at the IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, where he worked on error control protocols for data communication systems. He spent the academic year of 1996–1997 as a Visiting Professor at the Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany. He retired from University of Hawaii in 1999 and he is currently an Adjunct Professor at University of California, Davis. He has published numerous technical papers in IEEE Transactions and other refereed journals. He is the author of An Introduction to Error-Correcting Codes (Englewood Cliff, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1970). He also coauthored (with D. J. Costello) Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1st ed., 1982, 2nd ed., 2004), and (with T. Kasami, T. Fujiwara, and M. Fossorier) Trellises and Trellis-Based Decoding Algorithms, (Boston, MA: Kluwer, 1998). His current research areas include algebraic coding theory, coded modulation, error control systems, and satellite communications. He has served as the principal investigator on 36 research grants. Dr. Lin is a Member of the IEEE Information Theory Society and the Communication Society. He served as the Associate Editor for Algebraic Coding Theory for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY from 1976 to 1978, the Program Co-Chair of the IEEE International Symposium of Information Theory held in Kobe, Japan, in June 1988, and a Co-Chair of the IEEE Information Theory Workshop held in Chengdu, China, October 2006. He was the President of the IEEE Information Theory Society in 1991. In 1996, he was a recipient of the Alexander von Humboldt Research Prize for U.S. Senior Scientists, a recipient of the IEEE Third-Millennium Medal, 2000, and a recipient of the IEEE Communications Society 2007 Stephen O. Rice Prize in the Field of Communication Theory.

Venkatesh Akella received the Ph.D. degree in computer science from the University of Utah, Salt Lake City.
He is a Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of California, Davis. His current research encompasses computer architecture and embedded systems.
He is a member of ACM.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:32:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

