IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 5, NO. 8, DECEMBER 2011

1563

Joint Decoding of LDPC Codes and Finite-State Channels Via Linear-Programming
Byung-Hak Kim, Student Member, IEEE, and Henry D. Pfister, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper considers the joint-decoding problem for finite-state channels (FSCs) and low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. In the first part, the linear-programming (LP) decoder for binary linear codes is extended to perform joint-decoding of binary-input FSCs. In particular, we provide a rigorous definition of LP joint-decoding pseudo-codewords (JD-PCWs) that enables evaluation of the pairwise error probability between codewords and JD-PCWs in AWGN. This leads naturally to a provable upper bound on decoder failure probability. If the channel is a finite-state intersymbol interference channel, then the joint LP decoder also has the maximum-likelihood (ML) certificate property and all integer-valued solutions are codewords. In this case, the performance loss relative to ML decoding can be explained completely by fractional-valued JD-PCWs. After deriving these results, we discovered some elements were equivalent to earlier work by Flanagan on linear-programming receivers. In the second part, we develop an efficient iterative solver for the joint LP decoder discussed in the first part. In particular, we extend the approach of iterative approximate LP decoding, proposed by Vontobel and Koetter and analyzed by Burshtein, to this problem. By taking advantage of the dual-domain structure of the joint-decoding LP, we obtain a convergent iterative algorithm for joint LP decoding whose structure is similar to BCJR-based turbo equalization (TE). The result is a joint iterative decoder whose per-iteration complexity is similar to that of TE but whose performance is similar to that of joint LP decoding. The main advantage of this decoder is that it appears to provide the predictability and superior performance of joint LP decoding with the computational complexity of TE. One expected application is coding for magnetic storage where the required block-error rate is extremely low and system performance is difficult to verify by simulation.
Index Terms—BCJR algorithm, finite-state channels, joint-decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, linear-programming (LP) decoding, turbo equalization.
I. INTRODUCTION
A. Motivation and Problem Statement
I TERATIVE decoding of error-correcting codes, while introduced by Gallager in his 1960 Ph.D. thesis, was largely forgotten until the 1993 discovery of turbo codes by Berrou et al.
Manuscript received January 26, 2011; revised May 15, 2011, July 20, 2011; accepted July 29, 2011. Date of publication August 22, 2011; date of current version November 18, 2011. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant 0747470. The material in this paper was presented in part at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), Austin, TX, June 2010 and the IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), Kyoto, Japan, June 2011. The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it for publication was Prof. Riccardo Raheli.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843 USA (e-mail: bhkim@tamu. edu; hpfister@tamu.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JSTSP.2011.2165525

Since then, message-passing iterative decoding has been a very

popular decoding algorithm in research and practice. In 1995,

the turbo decoding of a finite-state channel (FSC) and a convolu-

tional code (instead of two convolutional codes) was introduced

by Douillard et al. as turbo equalization (TE) and this enabled

the joint-decoding of the channel and the code by iterating be-

tween these two decoders [1]. Before this, one typically sepa-

rated channel decoding (i.e., estimating the channel inputs from

the channel outputs) from the decoding of the error-correcting

code (i.e., estimating the transmitted codeword from estimates

of the channel inputs) [2], [3]. This breakthrough received im-

mediate interest from the magnetic recording community, and

TE was applied to magnetic recording channels by a variety of

authors (e.g., [4]–[7]). TE was later combined with turbo codes

and also extended to low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes

(and called joint iterative decoding) by constructing one large

graph representing the constraints of both the channel and the

code (e.g., [8] and [9]).

In the magnetic storage industry, error correction based

on Reed–Solomon codes with hard-decision decoding has

prevailed for the last 25 years. Recently, LDPC codes have

attracted a lot of attention and some hard-disk drives (HDDs)

have started using iterative decoding (e.g., [10]–[12]). Despite

progress in the area of reduced-complexity detection and

decoding algorithms, there has been some resistance to the

deployment of TE structures (with iterative detectors/decoders)

in magnetic recording systems because of error floors and the

difficulty of accurately predicting performance at very low error

rates. Furthermore, some of the spectacular gains of iterative

coding schemes have been observed only in simulations with

block-error rates above . The challenge of predicting the

onset of error floors and the performance at very low error rates,

such as those that constitute the operating point of HDDs (the

current requirement of an overall block error rate of

,

remains an open problem. The presence of error floors and the

lack of analytical tools to predict performance at very low error

rates are current impediments to the application of iterative

coding schemes in magnetic recording systems.

In the last five years, linear programming (LP) decoding has

been a popular topic in coding theory and has given new in-

sight into the analysis of iterative decoding algorithms and their

modes of failure [13]–[15]. In particular, it has been observed

that LP decoding sometimes performs better than iterative (e.g.,

sum-product) decoding in the error-floor region. We believe this

stems from the fact that the LP decoder always converges to

a well-defined LP optimum point and either detects decoding

failure or outputs an ML codeword. For both decoders, frac-

tional vectors, known as pseudo-codewords (PCWs), play an

important role in the performance characterization of these de-

coders [14], [16]. This is in contrast to classical coding theory

1932-4553/$26.00 © 2011 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:32:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1564

IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 5, NO. 8, DECEMBER 2011

where the performance of most decoding algorithms (e.g., max- Let be the set whose elements are the sets of indices involved

imum-likelihood (ML) decoding) is completely characterized in each parity check, or

by the set of codewords.

While TE-based joint iterative decoding provides good

performance close to capacity, it typically has some trouble

reaching the low error rates required by magnetic recording and Then, we can define the set of codewords to be

optical communication. To combat this, we extend LP decoding

to perform joint-decoding of a binary-input FSC and an outer

LDPC code. During the review process of our conference paper

on this topic [17], we discovered that this LP formulation is

mathematically equivalent to Flanagan’s general formulation of linear-programming receivers [18], [19]. Since our main focus was different than Flanagan’s, our main results and extensions differ somewhat from his.
Our main motivation is that critical storage applications (e.g., HDDs) require block error rates that are too low to be easily verifiable by simulation. For these applications, an efficient iterative solver for the joint-decoding LP would have favorable properties: error floors predictable by pseudo-codeword

The codeword polytope is the convex hull of . This polytope

can be quite complicated to describe though, so instead one con-

structs a simpler polytope using local constraints. Each parity-

check

defines a local constraint equivalent to the extreme

points of a polytope in

.

Definition 1: The local codeword polytope

associ-

ated with a parity check is the convex hull of the bit sequences

that satisfy the check. It is given explicitly by

analysis and convergence based on a well-defined optimization

problem. Therefore, we introduce a novel iterative solver for

the joint LP decoding problem whose per-iteration complexity

(e.g., memory and time) is similar to that of TE but whose

performance appears to be superior at high SNR [17], [20].

We use the notation

to denote the simpler polytope

B. Notation

corresponding to the intersection of local check constraints; the formal definition follows.

Throughout the paper we borrow notation from [14]. Let

Definition 2: The relaxed polytope

is the intersection

and

be sets of indices for the of the LCPs over all checks and

variable and parity-check nodes of a binary linear code. A vari-

able node

is connected to the set

of neighboring

parity-check nodes. Abusing notation, we also let

be the

neighboring variable nodes of a parity-check node

when

it is clear from the context. For the trellis associated with a FSC,

we let

index the set of trellis edges associated

with one trellis section, be the set of possible states, and be

the set of noiseless output symbols. For each edge1,

,

in the length- trellis, the functions

, and

The LP decoder and its ML certificate property is character-

ized by the following theorem.

Theorem 3 ([13]): Consider consecutive uses of a sym-

metric channel

. If a uniform random code-

word is transmitted and

is received, then the

LP decoder outputs

given by

map this edge to its respective time index, initial

state, final state, input bit, and noiseless output symbol. Finally,

the set of edges in the trellis section associated with time is

defined to be

.

which is the ML solution if is integral (i.e.,

).

C. Background: LP Decoding and Finite-State Channels

In [13], [14], Feldman et al. introduced a linear-program-

ming (LP) decoder for binary linear codes, and applied it specif-

ically to both LDPC and turbo codes. It is based on solving an

LP relaxation of an integer program that is equivalent to max-

imum-likelihood (ML) decoding. For long codes and/or low

SNR, the performance of LP decoding appears to be slightly

inferior to belief-propagation decoding. Unlike the iterative de-

coder, however, the LP decoder either detects a failure or outputs

a codeword which is guaranteed to be the ML codeword.

Let

be the length- binary linear code defined

by a parity-check matrix and

be a codeword.

From simple LP-based arguments, one can see that LP de-

coder may also output nonintegral solutions.

Definition 4: An LP decoding pseudo-codeword of a code

defined by the parity-check matrix is any nonintegral vertex

of the relaxed (fundamental) polytope

.

We also define the finite-state channel, which can be seen

as a model for communication systems with memory where

each output depends only on the current input and the previous

channel state instead of the entire past.

Definition 5: A finite-state channel (FSC) defines a proba-

bilistic mapping from a sequence of inputs to a sequence of out-

puts. Each output

depends only on the current input

and the previous channel state

instead of the

1In this paper, e is used to denote a trellis edge while e denotes the universal entire history of inputs and channel states. Mathematically, we

constant that satisfies ln e = 1.

define

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:32:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KIM AND PFISTER: JOINT DECODING OF LDPC CODES AND FINITE-STATE CHANNELS VIA LINEAR-PROGRAMMING

1565

II. JOINT LP DECODER

Feldman et al. introduced the LP decoder for binary linear

codes in [13] and [14]. It is based on an LP relaxation of an

integer program that is equivalent to ML decoding. Later, this

method was extended to codes over larger alphabets [23] and to

the simplified decoding of intersymbol interference (ISI) [24].

In particular, this section describes an extension of the LP de-

Fig. 1. State diagrams for noiseless dicode channel without (left) and with pre- coder to the joint-decoding of binary-input FSCs and defines LP

coding (right). The edges are labeled by the input/output pair.

joint-decoding pseudo-codewords (JD-PCWs) [17]. This exten-

sion is natural because Feldman’s LP formulation of a trellis

for all , and use the shorthand notation and

decoder is general enough to allow optimal (Viterbi style) decoding of FSCs, and the constraints associated with the outer LDPC code can be included in the same LP. This type of exten-

sion has been considered as a challenging open problem in prior

works [13], [25] and was first given by Flanagan [18], [19], but

was discovered independently by us and reported in [17]. In par-

ticular, Flanagan showed that any communication system which

admits a sum-product (SP) receiver also admits a corresponding

linear-programming (LP) receiver. Since Flanagan’s approach

where the notation denotes the subvector

.

An important subclass of FSCs is the set of finite-state in-

tersymbol interference channels which includes all determin-

istic finite-state mappings of the inputs corrupted by memory-

less noise.

Definition 6: A finite-state intersymbol interference channel

is more general, it is also somewhat more complicated. Still, the resulting LPs are mathematically equivalent though. One benefit of restricting our attention to FSCs is that our description of the LP is based on finding a path through a trellis, which is somewhat more natural for the joint-decoding problem.
These LP decoders provide a natural definition of PCWs for joint-decoding, and they allow new insight into the joint-de-

(FSISIC) is a FSC whose next state is a deterministic function coding problem. Joint-decoding pseudo-codewords (JD-PCWs)

of the current state and input . Mathematically, this are defined and the decoder error-rate is upper bounded by a

implies that

if otherwise.

union bound sum over JD-PCWs. This leads naturally to a provable upper bound (e.g., a union bound) on the probability of LP decoding failure as a sum over all codewords and JD-PCWs. Moreover, we can show that all integer solutions are indeed

codewords and that this joint LP decoder also has an ML certifi-

Though our derivations are general, we use the following

FSISIC examples throughout the paper to illustrate concepts and

perform simulations.

Definition 7: The dicode channel (DIC) is a binary-input

FSISIC with an impulse response of

and addi-

tive Gaussian noise [21]. If the input bits are differentially en-

coded prior to transmission, then the resulting channel is called

the precoded dicode channel (pDIC) [21]. The state diagrams

of these two channels are shown in Fig. 1. For the trellis associ-

ated with a DIC and pDIC, we let

and

. Also, the class-II Partial Response (PR2)

channel is a binary-input FSISIC with an impulse response of

and additive Gaussian noise [21], [22].

cate property. Therefore, all decoder failures can be explained by (fractional) JD-PCWs. It is worth noting that this property is not guaranteed by other convex relaxations of the same problem (e.g., see Wadayama’s approach based on quadratic programming [25]).
Our primary motivation is the prediction of the error rate for joint-decoding at high SNR. The basic idea is to run simulations at low SNR and keep track of all observed codeword and pseudo-codeword errors. An estimate of the error rate at high SNR is computed using a truncated union bound formed by summing over all observed error patterns at low SNR. Computing this bound is complicated by the fact that the loss of channel symmetry implies that the dominant PCWs may depend on the transmitted sequence. Still, this technique provides

D. Outline of the Paper

a new tool to analyze the error rate of joint decoders for FSCs and low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. Thus, novel pre-

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In diction results are given in Section IV.

Section II, we introduce the joint LP decoder, define joint-decoding pseudo-codewords (JD-PCWs), and describe the appropriate generalized Euclidean distance for this problem. Then, we discuss the decoder performance analysis using the union bound (via pairwise error probability) over JD-PCWs. Section III is devoted to developing the iterative solver for the joint LP decoder, i.e., iterative joint LP decoder and its

A. Joint LP Decoding Derivation

Now, we describe the joint LP decoder in terms of the trellis

of the FSC and the checks in the binary linear code 2. Let be

the length of the code and

be the received

sequence. The trellis consists of

vertices (i.e., one

for each state and time) and a set of at most

edges (i.e.,

proof of convergence. Finally, Section IV presents the decoder 2It is straightforward to extend this joint LP decoder to non-binary linear

simulation results and Section V gives some conclusions.

codes based on [23].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:32:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1566

IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 5, NO. 8, DECEMBER 2011

one edge for each input-labeled state transition and time). The LP formulation requires one indicator variable for each edge
, and we denote that variable by . So, is equal to 1 if the candidate path goes through the edge in . Likewise, the LP decoder requires one cost variable for each edge and we associate the branch metric with the edge given by
if if
First, we define the trellis polytope formally as follows. Definition 8: The trellis polytope enforces the flow conser-
vation constraints for the channel decoder. The flow constraint for state at time is given by

Theorem 13: The LP joint decoder computes
(1)
and outputs a joint ML edge-path if is integral. Proof: Let be the set of valid input/state sequence pairs.
For a given , the ML edge-path decoder finds the most likely path, through the channel trellis, whose input sequence is a codeword. Mathematically, it computes

Using this, the trellis polytope is given by

for any

From simple flow-based arguments, it is known that the ML edge path on trellis can be found by solving a minimum-cost LP applied to the trellis polytope .
Theorem 9 ([13, p. 94]): Finding the ML edge-path through a weighted trellis is equivalent to solving the minimum-cost flow LP

where ties are resolved in a systematic manner and has the

extra term

for the initial state probability. By re-

laxing into

, we obtain the desired result.

Corollary 14: For a FSISIC3, the LP joint decoder outputs a

joint ML codeword if is integral.

Proof: The joint ML decoder for codewords computes

and the optimum must be integral (i.e.,

) un-

less there are ties.

The indicator variables are used to define the LP and the

code constraints are introduced by defining an auxiliary variable

for each code bit.

Definition 10: Let the code-space projection be the map-

ping from to the input vector

defined by

with

For the trellis polytope

is the set of vectors whose

projection lies inside the relaxed codeword polytope

.

Definition 11: The trellis-wise relaxed polytope

for

is given by

The polytope

has integral vertices which are in one-

to-one correspondence with the set of trelliswise codewords.

Definition 12: The set of trellis-wise codewords for is

defined by

where follows from Definition 6 and holds because each input sequence defines a unique edge-path. Therefore, the LP joint-decoder outputs an ML codeword if is integral.
Remark 15: If the channel is not a FSISIC (e.g., if it is a finite-state fading channel), then integer valued solutions of the LP joint-decoder are ML edge-paths but not necessarily ML codewords. This occurs because the joint LP decoder does not sum the probability of the multiple edge-paths associated with the same codeword (e.g., when multiple distinct edge-paths are associated with the same input labels). Instead, it simply gives the probability of the most-likely edge path associated that codeword.
B. Joint LP Decoding Pseudo-Codewords
Pseudo-codewords have been observed and given names by a number of authors (e.g., [28]–[30]), but the simplest general definition was provided by Feldman et al. in the context of LP de-

Finally, the joint LP decoder and its ML certificate property

3In fact, this holds more generally for the restricted class of FSCs used in [26], which are now called unifilar FSCs because they generalize the unifilar Markov

are characterized by the following theorem.

sources defined in [27].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:32:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KIM AND PFISTER: JOINT DECODING OF LDPC CODES AND FINITE-STATE CHANNELS VIA LINEAR-PROGRAMMING

1567

and to analyze the performance of the proposed joint LP decoder. Toward this end, let us consider the pairwise error event between a SSCW and a JD-SSPCW first.
Theorem 20: A necessary and sufficient condition for the pairwise decoding error between a SSCW and a JD-SSPCW
is
(2)

Fig. 2. Illustration of joint LP decoder outputs for the single parity-check code SPC(3,2) over DIC (starts in zero state). By ordering the trellis edges appropriately, joint LP decoder converges to either a TCW (0 1 0 0;0 0 0 1;.0 0 1 0) (top
Q P H dashed blue path) or a JD-TPCW (0 1 0 0;0 0.5.5;.5 0.5 0) (bottom dashed red
paths). Using to project them into ( ), we obtain the corresponding SCW (1,1,0) and JD-SPCW (1,.5,0).

coding of parity-check codes [14]. One nice property of the LP

decoder is that it always returns either an integral codeword or a

fractional pseudo-codeword. Vontobel and Koetter have shown

that a very similar set of pseudo-codewords also affect mes-

sage-passing decoders, and that they are essentially fractional

codewords that cannot be distinguished from codewords using

only local constraints [16]. The joint-decoding pseudo-code-

word (JD-PCW), defined below, can be used to characterize

code performance at low error rates.

Definition 16: If

for all , then the output of the

LP joint decoder is a trellis-wise codeword (TCW). Otherwise,

for some and the solution is called a joint-de-

coding trellis-wise pseudo-codeword (JD-TPCW); in this case,

the decoder outputs “failure” (see Fig. 2 for an example of this

definition).

Definition 17: For any TCW , the projection

is called a symbol-wise codeword (SCW). Likewise, for any

JD-TPCW , the projection

is called a joint-de-

coding symbolwise pseudo-codeword (JD-SPCW) (see Fig. 2

for a graphical depiction of this definition).

Remark 18: For FSISICs, the LP joint decoder has the ML

certificate property; if the decoder outputs a SCW, then it is

guaranteed to be the ML codeword (see Corollary 14).

Definition 19: If is a JD-TPCW, then

with

where

and

are the LP variables for and

, respectively.

Proof: By definition, the joint LP decoder (1) prefers

over if and only if (2) holds.

For the moment, let be the SSCW of FSISIC to an

AWGN channel whose output sequence is

, where

is an independent and identically distributed

(i.i.d.) Gaussian sequence with mean 0 and variance . Then,

the joint LP decoder can be simplified as stated in the following

theorem.

Theorem 21: Let be the output of a FSISIC with zero-mean

AWGN whose variance is per output. Then, the joint LP

decoder is equivalent to

Proof: For each edge , the output

with mean

and variance ,

the joint LP decoder computes

is Gaussian so we have
. Therefore,

We will show that each pairwise probability has a simple

closed-form expression that depends only on a generalized

squared Euclidean distance

and the noise variance

. One might notice that this result is very similar to the

pairwise error probability derived in [31]. The main difference

is the trellis-based approach that allows one to obtain this result

for FSCs. Therefore, the next definition and theorem can be

seen as a generalization of [31].

Definition 22: Let be a SSCW and a JD-SSPCW. Then

the generalized squared Euclidean distance between and

can be defined in terms of their trellis-wise descriptions by

is called a joint-decoding symbol-wise signal-space pseudocodeword (JD-SSPCW). Likewise, if is a TCW, then is called a symbol-wise signal-space codeword (SSCW).

where

C. Union Bound for Joint LP Decoding

Theorem 23: The pairwise error probability between a SSCW

Now that we have defined the relevant pseudo-codewords, we and a JD-SSPCW is

consider how much a particular pseudo-codeword affects per-

formance; the idea is to quantify pairwise error probabilities. In

fact, we will use the insights gained in the previous section to

obtain a union bound on the decoder’s word-error probability where

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:32:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1568

IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 5, NO. 8, DECEMBER 2011

Proof: The pairwise error probability

that the

LP joint-decoder will choose the pseudo-codeword over can

be written as

TABLE I PRIMAL PROBLEM (PROBLEM-P)

where follows from the fact that

has a

Gaussian distribution with mean

and variance We argue that, by taking advantage of the special dual-domain

, and follows from Definition 22.

structure of the joint LP problem and replacing minima in

The performance degradation of LP decoding relative to ML the formulation with soft-minima, we can obtain an efficient

decoding can be explained by pseudo-codewords and their contri- method that solves the joint LP. While there are many ways

bution to the error rate, which depends on

. Indeed, by to iteratively solve the joint LP, our main goal was to derive

defining

as the number of codewords and JD-PCWs at one as the natural analogue of turbo equalization (TE). This

distance from and as the set of generalized Euclidean distances, we can write the union bound on word error rate (WER) as

should lead to an efficient method for joint LP decoding whose performance is similar to that of joint LP and whose per-iteration complexity similar to that of TE. Indeed, the solution we provide is a fast, iterative, and provably convergent form of

(3) TE whose update rules are tightly connected to BCJR-based TE. This demonstrates that an iterative joint LP solver with a

Of course, we need the set of JD-TPCWs to compute with the Theorem 23. There are two complications with this approach. One is that, like the original problem [13], no general method is known yet for computing the generalized Euclidean distance spectrum efficiently. Another is, unlike original problem, the constraint polytope may not be symmetric under

similar computational complexity as TE is feasible (see Remark 27). In practice, the complexity reduction of this iterative decoder comes at the expense of some performance loss, when compared to the joint LP decoder, due to convergence issues (discussed in Section III-B).
Previously, a number of authors have attempted to reverse engineer an objective function targeted by turbo decoding (and

codeword exchange. Therefore the decoder performance may TE by association) in order to discuss its convergence and

not be symmetric under codeword exchange. Hence, the decoder optimality [39]–[41]. For example, [39] uses a duality link be-

performance may depend on the transmitted codeword. In this tween two optimality formulations of TE: one based on Bethe

case, the pseudo-codewords will also depend on the transmitted free energy optimization and the other based on constrained

sequence.

ML estimation. This results of this section establish a new

connection between iterative decoding and optimization for

III. ITERATIVE SOLVER FOR THE JOINT LP DECODER

the joint-decoding problem that can also be extended to turbo

In the past, the primary value of linear programming (LP) decoding.

decoding was as an analytical tool that allowed one to better understand iterative decoding and its modes of failure. This A. Iterative Joint LP Decoding Derivation

is because LP decoding based on standard LP solvers is quite impractical and has a superlinear complexity in the block length. This motivated several authors to propose low-complexity algorithms for LP decoding of LDPC codes in the last five years (e.g., [25], [32]–[37]). Many of these have their roots in the iterative Gauss–Seidel approach proposed by Vontobel and Koetter for approximate LP decoding [32]. This approach was also analyzed further by Burshtein [36]. Smoothed Lagrangian relaxation methods have also been proposed to solve intractable optimal inference and estimation for more general graphs (e.g., [38]).
In this section, we consider the natural extension of [32], [36] to the joint-decoding LP formulation developed in Section II.

In Section II, a joint LP decoder is presented as an LDPC-code constrained shortest-path problem on the channel trellis. In this section, we develop the iterative solver for the joint-decoding LP. There are few key steps in deriving iterative solution for the joint LP decoding problem. For the first step, given by the primal problem (Problem-P) in Table I, we reformulate the original LP (1) in Theorem 13 using only equality constraints involving the indicator variables4 and
4The valid patterns E fB  N (j) j jBj is eveng for each parity-check j 2 J allow us to define the indicator variables w (for j 2 J and B 2 E )
which equal 1 if the codeword satisfies parity-check j using configuration
B2E .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:32:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KIM AND PFISTER: JOINT DECODING OF LDPC CODES AND FINITE-STATE CHANNELS VIA LINEAR-PROGRAMMING

1569

TABLE III DUAL PROBLEM SECOND FORMULATION (PROBLEM-D2)

Fig. 3. Illustration of primal variables g and w defined for Problem-P and dual

N = 3 variables n and m defined for Problem-D1 on the same example given by Fig. 2:

SPC(3,2) with DIC for

.

TABLE II DUAL PROBLEM FIRST FORMULATION (PROBLEM-D1)

N = 3 0! 0 Fig. 4. Illustration of Viterbi updates in Problem-D2 on the same example

given by Fig. 2: DIC for

with forward n and backward n .

Lemma 24: Problem-D1 is equivalent to Problem-D2. Proof: By rewriting the inequality constraint in
Problem-D1 as

we obtain the recursive upper bound for

as

. The second step, given by the first formulation of the dual

problem (Problem-D1) in Table II, follows from standard

convex analysis (e.g., see ([42, p. 224]). Strong duality holds

because the primal problem is feasible and bounded. Therefore,

the Lagrangian dual of Problem-P is equivalent to Problem-D1 and the minimum of Problem-P is equal to the maximum of

...

Problem-D1. From now on, we consider Problem-D1, where

the code and trellis constraints separate into two terms in the

objective function. See Fig. 3 for a diagram of the variables

involved. The third step, given by the second formulation of the dual
problem (Problem-D2) in Table III, observes that forward/ backward recursions can be used to perform the optimization

This upper bound

is achieved by the

forward Viterbi update in Problem-D2 for

.

Again, by expressing the same constraint as

over and remove one of the dual variable vectors. This

splitting is enabled by imposing the trellis flow normalization

constraint in Problem-P only at one time instant

. This we get a recursive upper bound for

. Similar reasoning

detail gives different ways to write the same LP and is an shows this upper bound

is achieved by the back-

important part of obtaining update equations similar to those ward Viterbi update in Problem-D2 for

.

of TE.

See Fig. 4 for a graphical depiction of this.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:32:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1570

IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 5, NO. 8, DECEMBER 2011

= 2 Fig. 5. Illustration of Algorithm 1 steps for i on the same example given by Fig. 2: outer loop update (left) and inner loop update (right).

TABLE IV SOFTENED DUAL PROBLEM (PROBLEM-DS)

Lemma 25: Consider the KKT equations associated with performing the minimization in (4) only over the variables
. These equations have a unique solution given by

for

where

Proof: See Appendix A. Lemma 26: Equations (5) and (6) are equivalent to the BCJRbased forward and backward recursion given by (7)–(9).

Proof: By letting,

and

, we obtain the de-

The fourth step, given by the softened dual problem (Problem-DS) in Table IV, is formulated by replacing the minimum operator in Problem-D2 with the soft-minimum operation

sired result by normalization. Now, we have all the pieces to complete the algorithm. As
the last step, we combine the results of Lemma 25 and 26 to obtain the iterative solver for the joint-decoding LP, which is summarized by the iterative joint LP decoding in Algorithm 1

(see Fig. 5 for a graphical depiction).

Remark 27: While Algorithm 1 always has a bit-node up-

This smooth approximation converges to the minimum function as increases [32]. Since the soft-minimum function is used in two different ways, we use different constants, and , for the code and trellis terms. The smoothness of

date rule different from standard belief propagation (BP), we

note that setting

in the inner loop gives the exact BP

check-node update and setting

in the outer loop gives

the exact BCJR channel update. In fact, one surprising result of

this work is that such a small change to the BCJR-based TE up-

Problem-DS allows one to to take derivative of (4) (giving the date provides an iterative solver for the LP whose per-iteration

Karush–Kuhn–Tucker (KKT) equations, derived in Lemma 25), complexity similar to TE. It is also possible to prove the con-

and represent (5) and (6) using BCJR-like forward/backward vergence of a slightly modified iterative solver that is based on

recursions (given by Lemma 26).

a less efficient update schedule.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:32:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KIM AND PFISTER: JOINT DECODING OF LDPC CODES AND FINITE-STATE CHANNELS VIA LINEAR-PROGRAMMING

1571

Algorithm 1 Iterative Joint Linear-Programming Decoding

• Step 1. Set

and initialize

for

.

• Step 2. Update Outer Loop: For ,

— (i) Compute bit-to-trellis message

TABLE V SOFTENED PRIMAL PROBLEM (PROBLEM-PS)

where

— (ii) Compute forward/backward trellis messages (7)

(8)

where

for all

— (iii) Compute trellis-to-bit message

. (9)

• Step 3. Update Inner Loop for

rounds: For ,

— (i) Compute bit-to-check msg for

— (ii) Compute check-to-bit msg for (10)
where (11)

solution to Problem-P can be obtained whose value is arbitrarily

close to the optimal value of Problem-P.

The modified update rule for Algorithm 1 consists of cycli-

cally, for each

, computing the quantity (via

step 2 of Algorithm 1) and then updating for all

(based on step 3 of Algorithm 1). The drawback of this approach

is that one BCJR update is required for each bit update, rather

than for bit updates. This modification allows us to interpret

Algorithm 1 as a Gauss–Seidel-type algorithm. We believe that,

at the expense of a longer argument, the convergence proof can

be extended to a decoder which uses windowed BCJR updates

(e.g., see [43]) to achieve convergence guarantees with much

lower complexity. Regardless, the next few lemmas and theo-

rems can be seen as a natural generalization of [32], [36] to the

joint-decoding problem.

Lemma 28: Assume that all the rows of have Hamming

weight at least 3. Then, the modified Algorithm 1 converges to

the maximum of the Problem-DS.

Proof: See Appendix B.

Next, we introduce the softened primal problem (Problem-PS)

in Table V, using the definitions

and

. Using standard convex analysis (e.g., see

([42, p. 254, Ex. 5.5]), one can show that Problem-PS is the

Lagrangian dual of Problem-DS and that the minimum of

Problem-PS is equal to the maximum of Problem-DS. In

particular, Problem-PS can be seen as a maximum-entropy reg-

ularization of Problem-DS that was derived by smoothing dual

problem given by Problem-D2. Thus, Algorithm 1 is dually-re-

lated to an interior-point method for solving the LP relaxation

of joint ML decoding on trellis-wise polytope using the entropy

function (for in the standard simplex)

• Step 4. Compute hard decisions and stopping rule

(12)

— (i) For

,

if otherwise

as a barrier function (e.g., see ([38, p. 126]) for the polytope. Remark 29: By taking sufficiently large and , the
primal LP of joint LP decoder in Problem-P, emerges as the

— (ii) If satisfies all parity checks or the maximum outer iteration number, , is reached, stop and output . Otherwise increment and go to Step 2.

“zero temperature” limit of the approximate LP relaxations given by Problem-PS [32], [38]. Also, Problem-PS can be seen as a convex free-energy minimization problem [38].
Next, we develop a relaxation bound, given by Lemma 30

B. Convergence Analysis
This section considers the convergence properties of Algorithm 1. Although simulations have not shown any convergence problems with Algorithm 1 in its current form, our proof re-

and Lemma 31 to quantify the performance loss of Algorithm 1 (when it converges) in relation to the joint LP decoder.
Lemma 30: Let be the minimum value of Problem-P and be the minimum value of Problem-PS. Then, one finds that

quires a modified update schedule that is less computationally

efficient. Following Vontobel’s approach in [32], which is based on general properties of Gauss–Seidel-type algorithms where

for convex minimization, we show that the modified version

Algorithm 1 is guaranteed to converge. Moreover, a feasible

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:32:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1572

IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 5, NO. 8, DECEMBER 2011

and

Proof: See Appendix C.

Lemma 31: For any

, sufficiently many iterations

of the modified Algorithm 1 produces a feasible solution for

Problem-DS that satisfies the KKT conditions within . If

, then one can construct a solution

for

Problem-PS that is feasible and whose value satisfies

where

Proof: Proof follows from careful modification of the ar-

guments in ([36, pp. 4840–4841]) and the details can be found

in [44].

Lastly, we obtain the desired conclusion, which is stated as

Theorem 32.

Theorem 32: For any

, sufficiently many iterations

of the modified Algorithm 1 produces a feasible solution for

Problem-DS that satisfies the KKT conditions within . If ,

then one can construct a solution

for Problem-P that is

feasible and whose value satisfies

where

Proof: Combining results of Lemma 28, Lemma 30, and

Lemma 31, we obtain the desired error bound.

Remark 33: The modified (i.e., cyclic schedule) Algorithm 1

is guaranteed to converge to a solution whose value can be made

arbitrarily close to . Therefore, the joint iterative LP decoder

provides an approximate solution to Problem-P whose value

is governed by the upper bound in Theorem 32. Algorithm 1

can be further modified to be of Gauss–Southwell type so that

the complexity analysis in [36] can be extended to this case.

Still, the analysis in [36], although a valid upper bound, does

not capture the true complexity of decoding because one must

choose

to guarantee that the iterative LP solver

finds the true minimum. Therefore, the exact convergence

rate and complexity analysis of Algorithm 1 is left for future

study. In general, the convergence rate of coordinate-descent

methods (e.g., Gauss–Seidel and Gauss–Southwell type algo-

rithms) for convex problems without strict convexity is an open

problem [45].

IV. ERROR RATE PREDICTION AND VALIDATION
In this section, we validate the proposed joint-decoding solution and discuss some implementation issues. Then, we present simulation results and compare with other approaches.

In particular, we compare the performance of the joint LP

decoder and joint iterative LP decoder with the joint iterative

message-passing decoder on two finite-state intersymbol in-

terference channels (FSISCs) described in Definition 7. For

preliminary studies, we use a (3, 5)-regular binary LDPC

code on the precoded dicode channel (pDIC) with length 155

and 455. For a more practical scenario, we also consider a

(3, 27)-regular binary LDPC code with length 4923 and rate

8/9 on the class-II Partial Response (PR2) channel used as a

partial-response target for perpendicular magnetic recording.

All parity-check matrices were chosen randomly except that

double-edges and four-cycles were avoided. Since the perfor-

mance depends on the transmitted codeword, the WER results

were obtained for a few chosen codewords of fixed weight. The

weight was chosen to be roughly half the block length, giving

weights 74, 226, and 2462 respectively.

The performance of the three algorithms was assessed based

on the following implementation details.

Joint LP Decoder: Joint LP decoding is performed in

the dual domain because this is much faster than the primal

domain when using MATLAB. Due to the slow speed of LP

solver, simulations were completed up to a WER of roughly

on the three different nonzero LDPC codes with block

lengths 155 and 455 each. To extrapolate the error rates to

high SNR (well beyond the limits of our simulation), we

use a simulation-based semi-analytic method based on the

truncated union bound (3), as discussed in Section II. The

idea is to run a simulation at low SNR and keep track of

all observed codeword and pseudo-codeword (PCW) errors

and a truncated union bound is computed by summing over

all observed errors. The truncated union bound is obtained

by computing the generalized Euclidean distances associated

with all decoding errors that occurred at some low SNR points

(e.g., WER of roughly than ) until we observe a stationary

generalized Euclidean distance spectrum. It is quite easy, in

fact, to store these error events in a list which is finally

pruned to avoid overcounting. Of course, low SNR allows the

decoder to discover PCWs more rapidly than high SNR and

it is well-known that the truncated bound should give a good

estimate at high SNR if all dominant joint decoding PCWs

have been found (e.g., [46], [47]). One nontrivial open question

is the feasibility and effectiveness of enumerating error events

for long codes. In particular, we do not address how many

instances must be simulated to have high confidence that all

the important error events are found so there are no surprises

at high SNR.

Joint Iterative LP Decoder: Joint iterative decoding is

performed based on the Algorithm 1 on all three LDPC codes

of different lengths. For block lengths 155 and 455, we chose

the codeword which shows the worst performance for the

joint LP decoder experiments. We used a simple scheduling

update scheme: variables are updated according to Algorithm

1 with cyclically with

inner loop iterations for each

outer iteration. The maximum number of outer iterations is

, so the total iteration count,

, is at most

200. The choice of parameters are

and

on the LDPC codes with block lengths 155 and 455. For the

LDPC code with length 4923, is reduced to 10. To prevent

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:32:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KIM AND PFISTER: JOINT DECODING OF LDPC CODES AND FINITE-STATE CHANNELS VIA LINEAR-PROGRAMMING

1573

N = 155 N = 450 Fig. 6. Comparisons between the joint LP decoding, joint iterative LP decoding, and joint iterative message-passing (MP) decoding on the pDIC with AWGN for

random (3,5) regular LDPC codes of length

(left) and

(right). The joint LP decoding experiments were repeated for three different nonzero

codewords and depicted in three different curves. The dashed curves are computed using the union bound in (3) based on JD-PCWs observed at 3.46 dB (left)
2.6 dB (right). Note that SNR is defined as channel output power divided by  .

possible underflow or overflow, a few expressions must be lengths. To make a fair comparison with the Joint Iterative LP

implemented carefully. When

Decoder, the same maximum iteration count and the same code-

words are used.

A. Results

a well-behaved approximation of (10) and (11) is given by

Fig. 6 compares the results of all three decoders and the error-

rate estimate given by the union bound method discussed in

Section II. The solid lines represent the simulation curves while

the dashed lines represent a truncated union bound for three dif-

ferent nonzero codewords. Surprisingly, we find that joint LP

decoder outperforms joint iterative message passing decoder by

about 0.5 dB at WER of . We also observe that joint it-

erative LP decoder loses about 0.1 dB at low SNR. This may

where

is the usual sign function. Also, (9) should be be caused by using finite values for and . At high SNR,

implemented using

however, this gap disappears and the curve converges towards

the error rate predicted for joint LP decoding. This shows that

joint LP decoding outperforms belief-propagation decoding for

short length code at moderate SNR with the predictability of LP

decoding. Of course, this can be achieved with a computational

complexity similar to turbo equalization.

One complication that must be discussed is the dependence

on the transmitted codeword. Computing the bound is compli-

cated by the fact that the loss of channel symmetry implies that

the dominant PCWs may depend on the transmitted sequence.

It is known that long LDPC codes with joint iterative decoding

experience a concentration phenomenon [43] whereby the error

probability of a randomly chosen codeword is very close, with

high probability, to the average error probability over all code-

words. This effect starts to appear even at the short block lengths

used in this example. More research is required to understand

this effect at moderate block lengths and to verify the same ef-

fect for joint LP decoding.

Fig. 7 compares the joint iterative LP decoder and joint itera-

where

and

. tive message-passing decoder in a practical scenario. Again, we

Joint Iterative Message-Passing Decoder: Joint iterative find that the joint iterative LP decoder provides gains over the

message decoding is performed based on the state-based algo- joint iterative message-passing decoder at high SNR. The slope

rithm described in [43] on all three LDPC codes of different difference between the curves also suggests that the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:32:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1574

IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 5, NO. 8, DECEMBER 2011

The solution to (13) can be obtained by solving the KKT equa-

tions. For

, we take the first derivative with respect to

and set it to zero; this yields

(14)

By defining

as

Fig. 7. Comparisons between the joint iterative LP decoding, joint iterative MP

decoding and soft-output Viterbi algorithm (SOVA)-based TE decoding (taken

N = 4923 from [22]) on the PR2 channel with AWGN for random (3,27) regular LDPC

codes of length

. Note that SNR is defined as channel output power

divided by  .

performance gains of joint iterative LP decoder will increase with SNR. This shows that joint iterative LP decoding can provide performance gains at high SNR with a computational complexity similar to that of turbo equalization.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we consider the problem of linear-programming (LP) decoding of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes and finite-state channels (FSCs). First, we present an LP formulation of joint-decoding for LDPC codes on FSCs that offers decoding performance improvements over joint iterative message-passing decoding at moderate SNR. Then, joint-decoding pseudo-codewords (JD-PCWs) are defined and the decoder error rate is upper bounded by a union bound over JD-PCWs that is evaluated for deterministic ISI channels with AWGN. Next, we propose a simulation-based semi-analytic method for estimating the error rate of LDPC codes on finite-state intersymbol interference channel (FSISIC) at high SNR using only simulations at low SNR. Finally, we present a novel iterative solver for the joint LP decoding problem. This greatly reduces the computational complexity of the joint LP solver by exploiting the LP dual problem structure. Its main advantage is that it combines the predictability of LP decoding with a computational complexity similar to turbo equalization (TE) and provides performance gains over TE in the error-floor region.

(15)

where sired result.

we can rewrite (14) to obtain the de-

B. Proof of Lemma 28
To characterize the convergence of the iterative joint LP decoder, we consider the modification of Algorithm 1 with cyclic updates. The analysis follows [32] and uses the proposition about convergence of block coordinate descent methods from ([48, p. 247]).
Proposition 34: Consider the problem

where

and each is a

closed convex subset of . The vector is partitioned

so

with

. Suppose that is

continuously differentiable and convex on and that, for every

and every

, the problem

APPENDIX

A. Proof of Lemma 25

Restricting the minimization in (4) to the variables has a unique minimum. Now, consider the sequence

gives

defined by

(13) for

. Then, every limit point of this sequence min-

imizes over .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:32:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KIM AND PFISTER: JOINT DECODING OF LDPC CODES AND FINITE-STATE CHANNELS VIA LINEAR-PROGRAMMING

1575

By using Proposition 34, we will show that the modified Al- where

gorithm 1 converges. Define

and

is the entropy defined by (12). Rewrite this gives

Let us consider cyclic coordinate decent algorithm which mini-

mizes cyclically with respect to the coordinate variable. Thus,

is changed first, then and so forth through . Then

(4)–(6) are equivalent to for each

with proper as

(17)
The last inequality is due to nonnegativity of entropy. Using Jensen’s inequality, we obtain

(18) and
(19) By substituting (18) and (19) to (17), we have
(20)
Combining (16) and (20) gives the result.

REFERENCES

Using the properties of log-sum-exp functions (e.g., see [42, p.

72]), one can verify that is continuously differentiable and

convex. The minimum over for all

is uniquely ob-

tained because of the unique KKT solution in Lemma 25. There-

fore, we can apply the Proposition 34 to achieve the desired con-

vergence result under the modified update schedule. It is worth

mentioning that the Hamming weight condition prevents degen-

eracy of Problem-DS based on the fact that, otherwise, some

pairs of bits must always be equal.

C. Proof of Lemma 30
Denote the optimum solution of Problem-P by and and the optimum solution of Problem-PS by and . Since and
are the optimal with respect to the Problem-P, we have

(16)

On the other hand, and are the optimal with respect to the Problem-PS, we have

[1] C. Douillard, M. Jézéquel, C. Berrou, A. Picart, P. Didier, and A. Glavieux, “Iterative correction of intersymbol interference: Turbo equalization,” Eur. Trans. Telecomm., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 507–511, Sep.–Oct. 1995.
[2] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Mass. Inst. of Technol., Cambridge, MA, 1960.
[3] R. R. Müller and W. H. Gerstacker, “On the capacity loss due to separation of detection and decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1769–1778, Aug. 2004.
[4] W. E. Ryan, “Performance of high rate turbo codes on a PR4-equalized magnetic recording channel,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Atlanta, GA, Jun. 1998, pp. 947–951.
[5] L. L. McPheters, S. W. McLaughlin, and E. C. Hirsch, “Turbo codes for PR4 and EPR4 magnetic recording,” in Proc. Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst. Comput., Pacific Grove, CA, Nov. 1998.
[6] M. Öberg and P. H. Siegel, “Performance analysis of turbo-equalized dicode partial-response channel,” in Proc. 36th Annual Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput.., Monticello, IL, Sep. 1998, pp. 230–239.
[7] M. Tüchler, R. Koetter, and A. Singer, “Turbo equalization: Principles and new results,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 754–767, May 2002.
[8] B. M. Kurkoski, P. H. Siegel, and J. K. Wolf, “Joint message-passing decoding of LDPC codes and partial-response channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1410–1422, June 2002.
[9] G. Ferrari, G. Colavolpe, and R. Raheli, Detection Algorithms for Wireless Communications, with Applications to Wired and Storage Systems. New York: Wiley, 2004.
[10] A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, T. Mittelholzer, and M. Fossorier, “Capacity-approaching codes: Can they be applied to the magnetic recording channel?,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 122–130, Feb. 2004.
[11] A. Anastasopoulos, K. Chugg, G. Colavolpe, G. Ferrari, and R. Raheli, “Iterative detection for channels with memory,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 95, no. 6, pp. 1272–1294, Jun. 2007.
[12] A. Kavcˇic´ and A. Patapoutian, “The read channel,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 96, no. 11, pp. 1761–1774, Nov. 2008.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:32:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1576

IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 5, NO. 8, DECEMBER 2011

[13] J. Feldman, “Decoding error-correcting codes via linear programming,” Ph.D. dissertation, Mass. Inst. of Technol., Cambridge, MA, 2003.
[14] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. R. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 954–972, Mar. 2005.
[15] [Online]. Available: http://www.PseudoCodewords.info [16] P. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Graph-cover decoding and finite-length
analysis of message-passing iterative decoding of LDPC codes,” Dec. 2005 [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/cs/0512078 [17] B.-H. Kim and H. D. Pfister, “On the joint decoding of LDPC codes and finite-state channels via linear programming,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Austin, TX, June 2010, pp. 754–758. [18] M. F. Flanagan, “Linear-programming receivers,” in Proc. 47th Annual Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Monticello, IL, Sep. 2008, pp. 279–285. [19] M. F. Flanagan, “A unified framework for linear-programming based communication receivers,” [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/0902.0892, accepted for publication [20] B.-H. Kim and H. D. Pfister, “An iterative joint linear-programming decoding of LDPC codes and finite-state channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Jun. 2011, pp. 1–6. [21] K. A. S. Immink, P. H. Siegel, and J. K. Wolf, “Codes for digital recorders,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 44, no. 6, pp. 2260–2299, Oct. 1998. [22] S. Jeon, X. Hu, L. Sun, and B. Kumar, “Performance evaluation of partial response targets for perpendicular recording using field programmable gate arrays,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 2259–2261, Jun. 2007. [23] M. F. Flanagan, V. Skachek, E. Byrne, and M. Greferath, “Linearprogramming decoding of nonbinary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 4134–4154, Sep. 2009. [24] M. H. Taghavi and P. H. Siegel, “Graph-based decoding in the presence of ISI,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 2188–2202, Apr. 2011. [25] T. Wadayama, “Interior point decoding for linear vector channels based on convex optimization,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 4905–4921, Oct. 2010. [26] J. Ziv, “Universal decoding for finite-state channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 453–460, Jul. 1985. [27] R. Ash, Information Theory. New York: Dover, 1990. [28] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Linköping Univ., Linköping, Sweden, 1996, S-581 83. [29] C. Di, D. Proietti, E. Telatar, T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Finitelength analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002. [30] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 42nd Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, and Comput., Oct. 2003. [31] G. D. Forney, Jr., R. Koetter, F. R. Kschischang, and A. Reznik, “On the effective weights of pseudocodewords for codes defined on graphs with cycles,” in Codes, Systems and Graphical Models, ser. IMA Volumes Series, B. Marcus and J. Rosenthal, Eds. New York: Springer, 2001, vol. 123, pp. 101–112. [32] P. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Towards low-complexity linear-programming decoding,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Rel. Topics, Munich, Germany, Apr. 2006. [33] P. Vontobel, “Interior-point algorithms for linear-programming decoding,” in Proc. 3rd Annu. Workshop Inf. Theory and its Appl., San Diego, CA, Feb. 2008. [34] M. Taghavi and P. Siegel, “Adaptive methods for linear programming decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 5396–5410, Dec. 2008. [35] T. Wadayama, “An LP decoding algorithm based on primal path-following interior point method,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Seoul, Korea, Jun. 2009, pp. 389–393. [36] D. Burshtein, “Iterative approximate linear programming decoding of LDPC codes with linear complexity,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 4835–4859, Nov. 2009.

[37] M. Punekar and M. F. Flanagan, “Low complexity linear programming decoding of nonbinary linear codes,” in Proc. 48th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput.., Monticello, IL, Sep.. 2010.
[38] J. K. Johnson, “Convex relaxation methods for graphical models: Lagrangian and maximum entropy approaches,” Ph.D. dissertation, Mass. Inst. of Technol., Cambridge, MA, 2008.
[39] P. Regalia and J. Walsh, “Optimality and duality of the turbo decoder,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 95, no. 6, pp. 1362–1377, Jun. 2007.
[40] F. Alberge, “Iterative decoding as Dykstra’s algorithm with alternate i-projection and reverse i-projection,” in Proc. Eur. Signal Process. Conf., Lausanne, Switzerland, 2008.
[41] J. Walsh and P. Regalia, “Belief propagation, Dykstra’s algorithm, and iterated information projections,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 8, pp. 4114–4128, Aug. 2010.
[42] S. Boyd and L. Vandenberghe, Convex Optimization. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2004.
[43] A. Kavcˇic´, X. Ma, and M. Mitzenmacher, “Binary intersymbol interference channels: Gallager codes, density evolution and code performance bounds,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 7, pp. 1636–1652, Jul. 2003.
[44] B.-H. Kim, “Joint equalization and decoding via convex optimization,” Ph.D. dissertation, Texas A&M Univ., College Station, TX.
[45] Z. Q. Luo and P. Tseng, “On the convergence of the coordinate descent method for convex differentiable minimization,” J. Optim. Theory Applicat., vol. 72, no. 1, pp. 7–35, Jan. 1992.
[46] X. Hu, Z. Li, V. Kumar, and R. Barndt, “Error floor estimation of long LDPC codes on magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 46, no. 6, pp. 1836–1839, Jun. 2010.
[47] P. Lee, L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, B. Nikolic, and M. Wainwright, “Error floors in LDPC codes: Fast simulation, bounds and hardware emulation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Toronto, ON, Canada, Jul. 2008, pp. 444–448.
[48] D. Bertsekas, Nonlinear Programming. Belmont, MA: Athena Scientific, 1995.
Byung-Hak Kim (S’09) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical engineering from Korea University, Seoul, Korea, in 2000 and 2002, respectively. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering at Texas A&M University, College Station.
During the summer of 2007, he interned at Qualcomm, Inc, San Diego, CA. His current research interests include information theory and channel coding with applications in wireless communications, data storage, and statistical inference.
Henry D. Pfister (S’99–M’03–SM’09) received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of California, San Diego, in 2003.
He joined the faculty of the School of Engineering at Texas A&M University, College Station, in 2006. Prior to that, he spent two years in R&D at Qualcomm, Inc, San Diego. and one year as a post-doc at EPFL.
Dr. Pfister received the NSF Career Award in 2008 and was a coauthor of the 2007 IEEE COMSOC best paper in Signal Processing and Coding for Data Storage. His current research interests include information theory, channel coding, and iterative decoding with applications in wireless communications and data storage.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:32:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

