IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

2045

Deep Learning Aided LLR Correction Improves the Performance of Iterative MIMO Receivers
Jue Chen , Tsang-Yi Wang , Member, IEEE, Jwo-Yuh Wu , Member, IEEE, Chih-Peng Li , Fellow, IEEE, Soon Xin Ng , Senior Member, IEEE, Robert G. Maunder , Senior Member, IEEE, and Lajos Hanzo , Life Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—A Deep Learning (DL) aided Logarithmic Likelihood Ratio (LLR) correction method is proposed for improving the performance of Multiple-Input Multiple-Output (MIMO) receivers, where it is typical to adopt reduced-complexity algorithms for avoiding the excessive complexity of optimal full-search algorithms. These sub-optimal techniques typically express the probabilities of the detected bits using LLRs that often have values that are not consistent with their true reliability, either expressing too much confidence or not enough confidence in the value of the corresponding bits, leading to performance degradation. To circumvent this problem, a Deep Neural Network (DNN) is trained for detecting and correcting both over-confident and under-confident LLRs. We demonstrate that the complexity of employing the DL-aided technique is relatively low compared to the popular reducedcomplexity receiver detector techniques since it only depends on a small number of real-valued inputs. Furthermore, the proposed approach is applicable to a wild variety of iterative receivers as demonstrated in the context of an iterative detection and decoding aided MIMO system, which uses a low-complexity Smart Ordering and Candidate Adding (SOCA) scheme for MIMO detection and Low-Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes for channel coding. We adopt Extrinsic Information Transfer (EXIT) charts for quantifying the Mutual Information (MI) and show that our DL method significantly improves the BLock Error Rate (BLER). Explicitly, we demonstrate that about 0.9 dB gain can be achieved at a BLER of 10−3 by employing the proposed DL-aided LLR correction method,
Manuscript received 2 January 2023; revised 17 May 2023 and 21 July 2023; accepted 31 August 2023. Date of publication 11 September 2023; date of current version 13 February 2024. The work of Tsang-Yi Wang was supported by NSTC under Grant 111-2221-E-110-019. The work of Jwo-Yuh Wu was supported in part by the National Science and Technology Council (NSTC) of Taiwan under Grant MOST111-2221-E-A49-067-MY3, and in part by Higher Education Sprout Project of National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University and Ministry of Education (MOE), Taiwan. The work of Lajos Hanzo was supported in part by Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council Projects under Grants EP/W016605/1, EP/X01228X/1 and EP/Y026721/1, and in part by European Research Council’s Advanced Fellow Grant QuantCom under Grant 789028. The review of this article was coordinated by Prof. G. Olmo. (Corresponding authors: Lajos Hanzo; Jue Chen; Soon Xin Ng; Robert G. Maunder.)
Jue Chen, Soon Xin Ng, Robert G. Maunder, and Lajos Hanzo are with the School of Electronics and Computer Science, University of Southampton, SO17 1BJ Southampton, U.K. (e-mail: jc7m17@soton.ac.uk; sxn@ecs.soton.ac.uk; rm@ecs.soton.ac.uk; lh@ecs.soton.ac.uk).
Tsang-Yi Wang is with the Institute of Communications Engineering, National Sun Yat-sen University, Kaohsiung 804, Taiwan (e-mail: tcwang@mail. nsysu.edu.tw).
Jwo-Yuh Wu is with the Institute of Communications Engineering, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan (e-mail: jywu @cc.nctu.edu.tw).
Chih-Peng Li is with the Institute of Communications Engineering, National Sun Yat-sen University, Kaohsiung 804, Taiwan, and also with the Department of Engineering and Technologies, National Science and Technology Council, Taipei 10622, Taiwan (e-mail: cpli@faculty.nsysu.edu.tw).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVT.2023.3312029

at the modest cost of increasing the complexity by 16% compared to a benchmarker dispensing with LLR correction.
Index Terms—DL, LLR, MIMO, iterative detection and decoding, LDPC codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
S TATE-OF-THE-ART wireless receivers rely on soft decision decoding, wherein soft information is used to express not only what the most likely value of each bit is, but also how likely it is. This soft information is typically represented using Logarithmic Likelihood Ratios (LLRs) processed by in probabilistic detection [1], [2]. However, in some practical systems, these LLRs may not accurately express true confidence in the values of the bits, owing to deficiencies in channel estimation or the adoption of reduced-complexity algorithms. This may lead to inaccurate LLRs being passed from the detector into a sensitive decoder, such as the offset min-sum Low-Density Parity Check (LDPC) decoder [3], which can result in performance loss [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9]. Xu et al. [7] demonstrate for a tree-search algorithm-based Multiple-Input Multiple-Output (MIMO) detector that the LLRs may become less self-consistent, with some LLRs being over-confident and some LLRs being under-confident, owing to the use of a reduced-complexity Sphere Decoder (SD) technique. In this treatise, we mitigate this problem.
To elaborate, we reduce the performance degradation caused by inconsistent LLRs using a low-complexity DL technique. More specifically, a Deep Neural Network (DNN) [10], [11] is trained to learn the relationship between the inconsistent LLRs and the true LLR values, which may be then applied for correcting the LLRs. More specifically, the mapping function is learned during an offline learning process as a function of the channel SNR per bit (Eb/N0), of the iteration index, and of the raw LLRs. During the training data processing, we employ a novel statistical method to avoid running complex Maximum-Likelihood (ML) MIMO detection algorithms. We demonstrate that the technique proposed is eminently suitable for a low-complexity MIMO system detector exchanging LLRs with an LDPC decoder. The iterative exchange of extrinsic LLRs between the MIMO detector and LDPC decoder has been shown to achieve beneficial performance gain over non-iterative receivers [12], [13]. While the full-search-based ML algorithm [14], [15], [16] achieves optimal MIMO detection, its complexity is excessive for a

0018-9545 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:21:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2046

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

high number of antennas or high-order modulation schemes. To address this challenge, many reduced-complexity non-linear MIMO detectors have been proposed, which aim to select subsets of the detection candidates to be used in the numerator and denominator of the LLR calculation algorithm [7] of (11). This includes the Smart Ordering and Candidate Adding (SOCA) scheme of [17], which is particularly suited to practical implementations using parallel processing and low latency hardware implementation [18]. While the selection of subsets of the detection candidates to use the numerator and denominator of the LLR calculation algorithm can significantly reduce the complexity, this is at the cost of reducing the self-consistency of the LLRs. In this article, we propose a DL-aided scheme for correcting the self-consistency of the LLRs and therefore improving the performance of the iterative MIMO detection. Our technique is suitable for any reduced-complexity iterative MIMO detector and we demonstrate it for the case of using SOCA detection. Here, a tree structure is used for representing all possible candidates explored by an ML detector, but rather than traversing all tree nodes, the SOCA algorithm reduces the complexity by pruning the number of candidates considered during the MIMO detection. However, the natural consequence of this is that the self-consistency of the LLRs proposed by the SOCA detector is degraded, which can cause performance degradation.
We benchmark the proposed DL technique against a LookUp Table (LUT) based method for LLR correction as proposed in [4], [7]. This LUT-aided LLR correction scheme takes raw LLRs as its input and quantizes them to the nearest value in the LUT, which then provides the corresponding corrected LLR values. Here, different LUTs may be used depending on the values of the system parameters, such as the index of the iteration between detection and decoding, or the Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR), which again must be quantified to the nearest represented value. However, having multiple LUTs for the LLRs and SNRs limits the practical feasibility of this scheme. Furthermore, a large amount of memory may be required to store the LUTs.
We also consider an alternative benchmarker, namely the Fastconvergence Sparsely connected detection Network (FS-Net) proposed by Nguyen et al. [19], [20] to find highly likely candidates for signal detection at low complexity. FS-Net represents the only DL technique available in the literature, which may be combined with a traditional MIMO detector for iterative detection and decoding. More specifically, FS-Net is a DL technique that has been shown to offer good performance in traditional hard-decision MIMO detection, which outputs the estimated IQ signals directly. In this work, we build a benchmarker by combining the FS-Net with a SOCA algorithm by consulting an iterative detection and decoding scheme. In this FS-Net-aided SOCA-LDPC benchmarker, we use the FS-Net to search for the most likely estimated signal candidate. Then, during the SOCA tree search, the candidates with higher costs than the most likely candidate may be pruned from the search. However, in contrast to the DL technique proposed for correcting the SOCA LLRs, our results show that the FS-Net is unable to improve the decoding performance of the reduced-complexity SOCA MIMO detector.
The main contribution of this work is that we propose a DL-aided LLR correction technique, which can be employed in different scenarios, where the LLRs are not self-consistent,

TABLE I CONTRASTING OUR CONTRIBUTION TO THE STATE-OF-THE-ART

such as when a reduced-complexity MIMO detector is used.

We proposed the use of the histogram statistic based method

for generating the training data, in order to train the DNN.

Furthermore, we show that the training is based on a small

number of input parameters to obtain improved performance

gains with lower memory requirements compared to a LUT

based benchmarker. Owing to the use of a small number of

input parameters, we demonstrate that the training is simple

and robust. Here, we explicitly contrast our contributions to the

statre-Wofe-thcoe-nacretiivne TthaeblfierIstaDndL-daeitdaeildtLheLmR

below: correction

technique,

which has a simple structure, hence it is easy to build and

r

train. We propose

a

novel

histogram-based

statistical

method

for generating training data, which avoids the requirement

for using a full-search-based ML MIMO detector, which

significantly reduces the complexity of the training phase.

Furthermore, we demonstrate that our DL technique can be

trained offline, which reduced the complexity compared to

reinforcement learning. We show that once the DNN is

well-trained, it can be employed for different use cases.

Furthermore, an additional benefit of offline training is the

r

reduction of the memory required to store the trained DNN. We demonstrate that the proposed DL LLR correction

technique may be applied in different iterative receiver

schemes, which suffer from performance degradation

caused by low-complexity algorithms, which generate ap-

r

proximate LLRs. Furthermore, we demonstrate

the

application of our

DL-

aided LLR correction technique in a particular SOCA-

LDPC system. We employ a Mutual Information (MI)

analysis-based technique for characterizing the self-

consistency of the iteratively exchanged LLRs and use this

to demonstrate that our proposed DL-aided LLR correc-

tion indeed improves the self-consistency of the iteratively

exchanged LLRs in a quantifiable manner, and this leads

to a BLER vs. SNR improvement of about 0.9 dB at

the cost of only increasing the complexity by 16%. This

is comparable to that of the LUT-aided LLR correction

benchmarker, which can achieve about 0.7 dB gain at the

cost of increasing the complexity by about 20%. However,

the benchmarker has a much higher memory requirement

than the proposed approach. We show that the FS-Net-

aided benchmarker has the lowest complexity but at the

cost of significantly degraded performance.

The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II

introduces our novel technique for DL-aided LLR correction,

including a discussion of training data generation and DNN

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:21:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: DEEP LEARNING AIDED LLR CORRECTION IMPROVES THE PERFORMANCE OF ITERATIVE MIMO RECEIVERS

2047

Fig. 1. (a) Schematic of the proposed DL-aided LLR correction in an iterative receiver scheme. (b) Schematic of generating training data for the proposed DL-aided LLR correction scheme.

training. Furthermore, our MI analysis shows that the proposed DL-aided LLR correction improves the self-consistency of the corrected LLRs. Following this, Section III demonstrates the application of the DL-aided LLR correction in a specific SOCALDPC system. The equations of the complexity derived for the proposed scheme and for the benchmarkers are formulated in Section IV. Following this, Bit Error Rate (BER), BLock Error Rate (BLER), and complexity comparison simulation results are presented in Section V. Finally, we offer our conclusions in Section VI.
II. DNN FOR DEEP LEARNING
In this section, we introduce a DNN for our DL technique in the context of improving the self-consistency of LLRs produced by low-complexity detectors. We discuss how offline processing may be used for training a DNN, and how the DNN may be applied at run time for improving the self-consistency of LLRs. Section II-A describes how the training data may be generated, while Section II-B introduces our DNN for this DL application.
A. Training Data Generation
Fig. 1(a) portrays our turbo detection aided scheme, wherein a reduced-complexity inner decoder iteratively exchanges LLRs with an outer decoder. Our novel scheme introduces a DL and an LLR clipping function for improving the self-consistency of

the LLRs provided by the reduced-complexity inner decoder. A
binary vector a, comprising K bits are encoded by an outer encoder in order to obtain the encoded bit vector b, which
comprises E > K bits. Then, the order of the bits in the encoded
vector b is rearranged by the turbo interleaver Π, in order to obtain the bit vector c, which also comprises E bits. This is entered
into an inner encoder in order to construct the transmitted signal
vector s, comprising F number of symbols. The symbols of the vector s are then transmitted through the channel of Fig. 1(a), in order to obtain the received signal vector r, which also comprises
F symbols. This is detected using a reduced-complexity inner decoder in order to obtain the extrinsic LLR vector c˜e, which pertains to the bit vector c and hence comprises E number of LLRs. Next, the values of the extrinsic LLRs in the vector c˜e are
clipped to Lmax by the clipping function to obtain the extrinsic LLR vector c˜ e. These clipped extrinsic LLRs of c˜ e are input
to the DL scheme to obtain the vector of E corrected extrinsic LLRs c¯e. The order of LLRs in the vector of c¯e is rearranged by the de-interleaver Π−1 in order to obtain the vector of E a priori LLRs b˜a, which are then passed to the outer decoder of Fig. 1(a). The vector of E extrinsic LLRs b˜e output by the outer decoder are in turn interleaved by the interleaver Π to obtain the vector of E a priori LLRs c˜a, which are then clipped to obtain the vector c˜ a. Having now completed the first iteration, the second
iteration may be performed, in which the reduced-complexity
inner decoder accesses both the received signal vector r and the a priori LLR vector c˜ a, as its inputs. The process is repeated until

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:21:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2048

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

TABLE II DEFINITION OF PARAMETERS IN AN EXAMPLE SCHEME, WHICH COMPRISES AN
LDPC DECODER AND A LOW COMPLEXITY MIMO SOCA DETECTOR

the affordable number of iterations is completed, whereupon the estimated binary vector aˆ, comprising K bits is output by the outer decoder of Fig. 1(a).
Fig. 1(b) illustrates the signal flow of generating training data for the proposed DL-aided LLR correction scheme. As shown by the dashed lines in Fig. 1(b), it differs from Fig. 1(a), because it replaces the DL scheme by a block counting and correcting the LLRs, which requires a priori knowledge of the encoded bit vector c. This is reasonable in this offline training environment, but naturally it is impossible in a realistic system in a real deployment.
As described in Section I, the use of a reduced-complexity inner decoder namely a SOCA may lead to relatively poor selfconsistency for the extrinsic LLRs in the vector c˜ e, compared to the LLRs produced by a full-complexity ML decoder. Hence, the objective of the proposed DL technique of Fig. 1(a) is to replace these LLRs by a vector of corrected extrinsic LLRs c¯e having improved self-consistency. Here, the self-consistency of the raw extrinsic LLR vector c˜ e may be quantified by its Mutual Information (MI). In particular, we may adopt two different techniques for measuring MI. The true measured MI of the raw extrinsic LLR vector c˜ e may be quantified by the histogrambased method of [21], which makes a comparison with the bit vector c. By contrast, the claimed MI of the raw extrinsic LLR vector c˜ e may be quantified by the averaging method, which does not consider the bit vector c. Instead, intuitively trusts the LLRs by assuming that the high-magnitude LLRs resultant a high MI, even though sometimes the values or signs of the LLRs may be inaccurate. In our solution, the measured value is calculated using the histogram-based method by considering the corresponding bit sequence of the LLRs, which represents the true MI. In cases where the claimed MI obtained by the averaging method differs from the true measured MI obtained by the histogram-based method, we can deduce that the LLRs are not self-consistent.
Fig. 2 plots the quality of the extrinsic LLRs c˜ e output by the SOCA detector for the case of an example scheme, where it is concatenated with an LDPC decoder. The parameters of this scheme are captured in Table II and are further elaborated on in Section III. More explicitly, Fig. 2 characterizes the

Fig. 2. Quality of the extrinsic LLRs c˜ e qualified by claimed MI using the

averaging method and measured MI obtained using the histogram method,

for a SOCA-LDPC scheme having Nt = 4 transmit antennas, Nr = 4 receive

antennas, K

= 1024 information bits, a coding rate of R =

1 2

,

M

=

[8

1

1

1],

K = [8 8 8 8], ILDPC=20 iterations inside the LDPC decoding, I = 3 iterations

between SOCA detector and LDPC decoder and 16-QAM modulation for

communication over Rayleigh fading channel.

self-consistency of the raw extrinsic LLRs c˜ e as a function of channel SNR per bit (Eb/N0), after performing I = 3 iterations between the LDPC decoder and SOCA detector. Here, the solid lines characterize the MI of the raw extrinsic LLRs c˜ e, which are obtained using the averaging method of [22]. Furthermore,
the dashed lines represent the measured MI of the raw extrinsic LLRs c˜ e, which are obtained using the histogram based method of [21]. Here, the match between the claimed MIs and measured
MIs in the case of the LLR is self-consistent, where a smaller gap
between the claimed MIs and measured MIs represents improved self-consistency between the raw extrinsic LLRs c˜ e. Fig. 2 characterizes the claimed and measured MIs when employing clipping for different clipping values Lmax. Explicitly, clipping mitigates the LLRs that have unwarranted high values, which
express over-confidence, as mentioned before. As shown in
the figure, the scheme that does not use clipping suffers from
the substantial discrepancy between the claimed and measured
MIs, because the LLRs are not self-consistent. By contrast, the
introduction of clipping can be seen to significantly improve the self-consistency of the raw extrinsic LLRs c˜ e, although some discrepancy remains, which is mitigated by DL as discussed in Section II. Here, the results show that the clipping value Lmax should be chosen carefully since a low clipping value Lmax may make the LLRs insufficiently confident, while a high clipping value Lmax may retain those LLRs that are over-confident. As shown in Fig. 2, Lmax = 6 is a good choice for improving the self-consistency of the raw extrinsic LLRs c˜ e, like with [4].
Fig. 3 characterizes the MIs for different M1 values in the conventional SOCA-LDPC scheme. It may be observed that the solid lines and the dashed lines converge as the Eb/N0 is increased, indicating that the extrinsic LLRs c˜e become selfconsistent at high Eb/N0 values, but suffer from inconsistency at low Eb/N0 values. As the number of extended tree nodes M1 is increased, the complexity of the SOCA detector is increased and
hence a higher LLR self-consistency is achieved. But as shown

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:21:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: DEEP LEARNING AIDED LLR CORRECTION IMPROVES THE PERFORMANCE OF ITERATIVE MIMO RECEIVERS

2049

Fig. 3. Quality of the extrinsic LLRs c˜ e qualified by claimed MI using the

averaging method and measured MI obtained using the histogram method,

for a SOCA-LDPC scheme having Nt = 4 transmit antennas, Nr = 4 receive

antennas, K

= 1024 information bits, a coding rate of R =

1 2

,

an

LLR

clipping

level of Lmax = 6, M = [M1 1 1 1], K = [M1 M1 M1 M1], ILDPC=20

iterations inside the LDPC decoding, I = 3 iterations between SOCA detector

and LDPC decoder, and 16-QAM modulation for communication over Rayleigh

fading channel.

in Fig. 3, when M1 is low, large MI discrepancies are observed between the claimed and measured MI, which indicates that the extrinsic LLRs c˜ e are not self-consistent. These discrepancies
may be explained by the large fraction of signal candidates that
are not considered in the LLR calculation of the low-complexity
SOCA detector when M1 is small. This leads to sub-optimal LLR values. This degrades the performance of a conventional
SOCA-LDPC scheme, which deinterleaves the extrinsic LLRs c˜ e and directly passes the resultant a priori LLRs b˜a to the outer
decoder without employing LLR correction. In order to correct the inconsistent extrinsic LLRs c˜ e provided
by a reduced-complexity inner decoder, a DNN may be trained
to find the relationship between the raw value of the extrinsic LLRs c˜ e and the optimal values of corrected extrinsic LLRs c¯e.
More specifically, supervised learning may be employed using a
large amount of training data, comprising pairs of the raw values of the extrinsic LLRs c˜ e with the optimal values of the corrected extrinsic LLRs c¯e. Hence, it is necessary to generate training data based on corrected extrinsic LLRs c¯e before building a DNN.
Fig. 4 shows the flow of generating the corrected extrinsic LLRs c¯e for the DL training data, which was generated by analyzing the raw values of the extrinsic LLRs c˜ e with the aid of the correct bit sequence c, representing the function of the ‘Count/correct‘ block of Fig. 1(b). Naturally, the correct bit sequence c is not
known in the real system, but in our offline process of generating training data, the correct bit sequence c may be assumed as
a prior knowledge. In the first step of the flow of generating the training data, each extrinsic LLR in the training vector c˜ e is matched to its corresponding bit in the sequence c, and when
the corresponding bit has the value 0, the LLR is placed into the sequence c˜0e. Otherwise, it is placed into the sequence c˜1e. Following this, the mean of the LLRs in c˜0e is calculated, which is used for calculating the variance σ02 of the LLRs in c˜0e. Likewise, the mean of the LLRs in c˜1e is calculated and used for calculating

the variance σ12 of the LLRs in c˜1e. As shown in Fig. 4, these two variances of c˜0e and c˜1e are used for calculating a bin width β, which will be used to perform histogram analysis. This is
achieved by using the following equation:

β=1 2

3.49

σ02

×

−1
(V0) 3

+

3.49

σ12

×

(V1)

−1 3

.

(1)

where (1) is adopted from the technique of [23] for automatically

choosing the appropriate bin width of a histogram for Gaussian

distribution data. Here, β is the width of each histogram bin, V0 is the number of elements in c˜0e, and V1 is the number of elements in c˜1e.
Following this, the range spanning from the smallest value to the largest value among the extrinsic LLRs of c˜ e separated into

a certain number of bins, each having a width of β. Next, the
number of LLRs V0t and V1t in each of c˜0e and c˜1e corresponding to the bin having each index ∈ [1, T ] is counted, in order to obtain

a pair of histograms, as shown in Fig. 4. Following this, we may

quantify the probability of a 0-valued bit corresponding to an

LLR

value

in

the

tth

bin

as

P0t

=

. V0t
V0

Similarly,

the

probability

of a 1-valued bit corresponding to an LLR value in the tth bin is

given

by

P1t

=

. V1t
V1

Then,

the

optimal

value

for

an

LLR

falling

into the tth bin may be calculated as

Lt = ln

P0t P1t

.

(2)

A LUT may be used to store both a raw LLR value and the

corresponding corrected LLR for each bin. More specifically,

the LUT comprises two rows, where the first row contains T

raw LLR values, which are taken from the middle value of each

bin. By contrast, the second row contains the corresponding

corrected LLR value for each bin, obtained using (2). Following

this, linear interpolation may be used for selecting a corrected LLR value of c¯e for each of the raw LLRs in c˜ e. Then, the sequences of raw extrinsic LLRs c˜ e and the corrected extrinsic
LLRs c¯e may be employed for training the DNN. In order to

train the DNN more accurately, the process may be repeated

over the number of frames denoted using the notation O. In this
way, O frames bit sequence c are simulated to obtain O frames raw extrinsic LLRs c˜ e and O frames corrected extrinsic LLRs c¯e. The training of a DNN is discussed in the next section.

B. DNN for Deep Learning
In this section, we introduce the DNN proposed for LLR correction. In Section II-B1, the training phase of the DL is introduced. Furthermore, Section II-B2 introduces the method proposed for correcting the raw extrinsic LLRs c˜ e.
1) Offline Training: In this work, a DNN is trained using the generated training data discussed in Section II-A, which characterizes the relationship between the raw extrinsic LLRs c˜ e and the corresponding corrected extrinsic LLRs c¯e. Fig. 5 shows a typical fully connected neural network having L = 5 layers, including an input layer having three input elements, three hidden layers each having six neurons, and an output layer having a single output element. In this DNN, (L − 1) non-linear transformations are performed to map the input

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:21:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2050

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

Fig. 4. Flow of generating DNN training data, comprising pairs of raw values for the extrinsic LLRs c˜ e and the optimal values of the corrected extrinsic LLRs c¯e.

Fig. 5. Fully connected neural network with three inputs, three hidden layers, and one output.

x1 = [Eb/N0 iinner−outer c˜ie]T to the output yL according to yL = Φ(x; Δ) = f L−1 . . . f 1 x1; Δ1 ; . . . ; ΔL−1 . (3)

Here, the function f l(·) of the lth layer is expressed as

f l xl; Δl = αl W lxl + θl ,

(4)

where αl represents a Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) activation function for the lth layer. We employ dl to represent the number of nodes in the lth layer. Here, we have Δl {W l; θl}, whose W l ∈ Rdl×dl−1 is the weight-matrix, x ∈ Rdl×1 is the input of the lth layer and θl ∈ Rdl×1 is the bias vector. Furthermore, Δ
contains all weight matrices and bias vectors for all layers.
During the offline training phase, the input of the DNN in-
cludes three parameters of the system, namely Eb/N0, the index of the iteration iinner−outer being performed between the inner and outer decoder, as well as the raw extrinsic LLRs c˜ie being corrected. In this way, the DNN is trained with independent input
vectors, given by:

xi1 = [Eb/N0 iinner−outer c˜ie]T .

(5)

Each raw extrinsic LLR c˜ie has an index ∈ [1, E × O], because there are E bits of LLR in one frame and in order to obtain a well-
trained DNN, we generate training data comprising O number of LLR vectors c˜ e. We merge these O vectors into a single vector and then marry each of the LLRs c˜ie(∈ [1, E × O]) with the corresponding Eb/N0 and the iteration index iinner−outer, in order to generate each input vector. The DL can flexibly apply
different corrections to the raw LLRs across a range of Eb/N0 and iinner−outer values, owing to the use of different Eb/N0 and iinner−outer values for training the DNN during the offline training phase. The weights and biases of the DL are obtained

by minimizing the following Mean-Squared Error (MSE) based loss function

Loss(M)

=

E

×

O

×

U

1 × ISOCA−LDPC

E×O×U ×ISOCA−LDPC

×

|c¯ie − Φ (xi; Δ)|2 . (6)

i=1

Here, c¯ie represents the corrected extrinsic LLRs corresponding to the raw extrinsic LLR c˜ie, as calculated during the training data generation phase using Fig. 4. Moreover, U is the number

of different Eb/N0 values considered and ISOCA−LDPC is the number of iterations calculated between SOCA detection and

LDPC decoding. A batch of inputs obtained using (5) is fed to the DNN, in order to obtain the output yL = Φ(x; Δ), which

represents the corrected LLR estimate. The DNN is trained by minimizing the MSE loss function of (6), where c¯ie represents the true value that the LLR should adopt as obtained using the

histogram statistic based method introduced in Section II-A.

2) Online LLR Correction: During online LLR correction,

the DNN’s (L − 1) weight matrices and (L − 1) bias vectors

stored during the offline training are employed to correct the raw extrinsic LLRs c˜ e. We consider the training phase required

for the proposed scheme to be practical, since it only relies

on O = 500 frames, each comprising 1000 LLRs, in order to

complete the training for each combination of our 10 selected

Eb/N0 values and 3 iteration indices. More specifically, the training is completed by merging the O frames into a matrix,

where each row comprises the pairing of an input LLR value

and the desired corrected output LLR value. We use 15 epochs

during the training, which takes about 10 to 20 minutes. We

repeated the training three times for each of the three different

M1 values that are considered in this article. During the training
phase, the Eb/N0 and the iteration index are set at the input of the DNN according to xi1 = [Eb/N0 iinner−outer c˜ie]T . Furthermore, in accordance with the training phase, the ‘ReLU’

activation function [20] is employed, and the corrected extrinsic LLR c¯ei is formulated as

L−1
Φ(xi; M ) = max 0, W lxli + θl ,
l=1

i = 1, . . . , E.

(7)

The complexity of utilizing the trained DNN to correct the LLRs may be expressed as follows [24]

L

CDL =

2 dl−1 + 1 × dl.

(8)

l=2

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:21:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: DEEP LEARNING AIDED LLR CORRECTION IMPROVES THE PERFORMANCE OF ITERATIVE MIMO RECEIVERS

2051

the iteratively exchanged LLRs. Furthermore, the transmitter, channel model and receiver of LDPC-coded MIMO system are detailed in Sections III-A, III-B and III-C, respectively.

Fig. 6. Quality of the extrinsic LLRs c¯e qualified by claimed MI using the

averaging method and measured MI obtained using the histogram method,

for a SOCA-LDPC scheme having Nt = 4 transmit antennas, Nr = 4 receive

antennas, K

= 1024 information bits, a coding rate of R =

1 2

,

an

LLR

clipping

level of Lmax = 6, M = [M1 1 1 1], K = [M1 M1 M1 M1], ILDPC = 20

iterations inside the LDPC decoding, I = 3 iterations between SOCA detector

and LDPC decoder, and 16-QAM modulation for communication over Rayleigh

fading channel.

A. Transmitter
As shown in Fig. 7, the input of the proposed transmitter is a random binary vector a having a length K , which is encoded by an LDPC encoder, in order to obtain the binary vector b comprising E > K number of bits. The resultant coding rate is R = K /E. The order of the encoded bits in the vector b is randomly rearranged by the interleaver Π in order to obtain the bit vector c, whose bits are QAM modulated and distributed among the Nt number of transmit antennas. Here, G = 2ωary QAM modulation is employed, i.e. ω bits are transmitted
per QAM symbol. More specifically, each antenna transmits a sequence comprising F = E/(ωNt) QAM symbols, over a series of F time instants. The signal transmitted in each time instant is represented by the vector s = [s1, . . . , sNt ]T , where each component of s is a QAM symbol having an average power Es.

As shown in (8), the complexity associated with employing the trained DNN depends both on the number of layers and the number of neurons employed in each layer, which in turn depend on the number of input elements. Typically, the more input elements, the more layers, and neurons are required, where the size of a DNN is usually selected by simulations [20]. Hence, an advantage of our proposed scheme is that the input vector comprises only three elements, which are not influenced by the choice of the specific inner decoder.
Fig. 6 characterizes the MI of the corrected extrinsic LLRs c¯e using the proposed DL-aided LLR correction approach in a particular iterative SOCA-LDPC scheme. The same parameters are used in this figure as in Fig. 3. Again, the solid lines represent the claimed MI values and the dashed lines represent the measured MI values. As seen from Fig. 6, the discrepancies between the claimed and measured MI values of the corrected extrinsic LLRs c¯e are much smaller compared to those associated with the raw extrinsic LLRs c˜ e in Fig. 3. In particular, when M1 is small, the discrepancy reduction is particularly significant. The discrepancy reduction indicates that the corrected extrinsic LLRs c¯e have become more self-consistent, owing to the adoption of the proposed DL-aided LLR correction scheme. As a result, the a priori LLRs ˜ba of the LDPC decoder become more self-consistent than the a priori LLRs ˜ba of the conventional SOCA-LDPC scheme, leading to improved performance, as it will be characterized in Section V. The MI analysis presented here demonstrates that our proposed DL-aided LLR correction approach successfully corrects the inconsistent LLRs.
III. SYSTEM MODEL
In this section, we introduce a specific example of the serially concatenated iterative receiver of Fig. 7, which employs a reduced-complexity MIMO detector to show that the proposed DL technique is beneficial for improving the self-consistency of

B. Channel Model
We assume that Nr receive antennas are employed. The symbol vector s of each time instant is transmitted through a (Nr × Nt) MIMO channel, hence the received signals may be represented as

r = Hs + n.

(9)

We assume an uncorrelated narrow-band Rayleigh fading channel, where H ∈ CNr×Nt . Here, n ∈ CNr×1 is a zero-mean
complex Gaussian distributed random noise vector, where each
element has a variance of N0. The SNR at each receive antenna is given by Es/N0, which may be expressed as the SNR per bit of Eb/N0 = Es/(N0 · R · ω).

C. Receiver
In this section, we detail the proposed receiver. We commence by describing the iteratively exchanged extrinsic LLRs between an LDPC decoder and a reduced-complexity MIMO detector in Section III-C1. Here, the MIMO detector adopts the SOCA algorithm. Following this, we detail the operations of the reduced-complexity SOCA detector in Section III-C2.
1) Iterative Detection and Decoding: For the receiver, we assume perfect channel estimation. The received signals are processed by the SOCA detector applied to the a priori LLRs c˜a provided by the LDPC decoder, in order to obtain the extrinsic LLRs c˜e. In the first iteration, the a priori LLR vector c˜a is initialized with zero-valued LLRs. Following SOCA detection, the extrinsic LLRs c˜e are clipped in order to improve the system performance [25], [26], [27]. More specifically, the extrinsic LLRs having a magnitude of |c˜e| > Lmax are set to ±Lmax in order to obtain the extrinsic LLRs c˜ e. Owing to the reduced-complexity of the SOCA detector, the raw extrinsic LLRs c˜ e may suffer from a lack of self-consistency, as discussed in Section II-A. In order to address this, we pass

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:21:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2052

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

Fig. 7. Schematic of the proposed DL-aided LLR correction LDPC-coded MIMO system.

the raw extrinsic LLRs c˜ e to the trained DNN to obtain the

corrected extrinsic LLRs c¯e. During the DL-aided correction of

each raw extrinsic LLR in the sequence c˜ e, the inputs of the

trained

DNN

are

the

SNR

per

bit

Eb N0

,

the

index

of

the

current

iteration iSOCA−LDPC and the corresponding LLR gleaned from

the sequence of all raw extrinsic LLRs c˜ e, as shown (5). The

DL technique employs the weight matrices W l, bias vectors

θl, and activation function αl trained during the offline training

process, where l = 1, . . . , L − 1 is the index of each layer in

the DNN.

The order of the corrected extrinsic LLRs c¯e is rearranged

by a de-interleaver employing the same interleaving pattern as

the transmitters’ interleaver, in order to create the a priori LLRs b˜a. These LLRs in b˜a are processed by the LDPC decoder in order to obtain the extrinsic LLRs b˜e is discussed in [28]. Correspondingly, the order of the extrinsic LLRs b˜e are rearranged by

a corresponding interleaver in order to obtain the a priori LLRs c˜a, which are clipped as discussed above, in order to obtain the a priori LLRs c˜ a for the SOCA detector.

2) SOCA Detection: In each time instant, the task of the

SOCA detector is to derive extrinsic LLRs pertaining to the

transmitted signal s, based on the channel is input information (H, N0), on the received signals r and on the a priori LLRs c˜ a.

More specifically, the SOCA detector has to find a list of the

most likely candidates of transmitted signals s, and then map

these onto values for the encoded bits c, in order to calculate the extrinsic LLRs c˜e. Then A Posteriori LLRs c˜p(cˆi) pertaining to
each bit in the sequence c may be calculated as

c˜p(cˆi)

ln

P (cˆi = 0|r) P (cˆi = 1|r)

,

(10)

where i = 1, . . . , ω × Nt. More specifically, in each time instant, there are ω × Nt extrinsic LLRs c˜e(cˆi), i = 1, . . . , ω × Nt, which may be obtained by detecting the transmitted signal r. Furthermore, the extrinsic LLRs c˜e(cˆi), i = 1, . . . , ω × Nt obtained from each of the F time instances may be concatenated in order to obtain the extrinsic LLR vector c˜e as the output of
the SOCA detector.
After the application of Bayes’ rules and the max-log approximation [29], the corresponding extrinsic LLRs c˜e(cˆi) pertaining

to the ith bits cˆi may be calculated as c˜e(cˆi) = c˜p(cˆi) − c˜ a(cˆi)

= min
sˆ∈Xi1

r − Hsˆ N0

2

−

1 2

ω×Nt
(2cˆi

−

1)

×

c˜

a(cˆi)

i=1

− min
sˆ∈Xi0

r − Hsˆ N0

2

−

1 2

ω×Nt
(2cˆi

−

1)

×

c˜ a(cˆi)

i=1

− c˜ a(cˆi),

(11)

where c˜ a(cˆi) is the corresponding a priori LLR. Moreover, Xi1 denotes the set that includes all encoded bit sequence candidates cˆ, in which the corresponding bit cˆi adopts a value of 1. Similarly, Xi0 denotes the set that comprises all encoded bit sequence candidates, in which the corresponding cˆi adopts a value of 0. Furthermore, the candidate signal vector sˆ having a length of Nt is the hypothetical signal corresponding to cˆ according to a specific bit to constellation mapping.
In order to calculate the extrinsic LLRs c˜e, the sets X 1 and X 0 should be explored, as shown in (11). When using
a high number of antennas Nt and/or a modulation scheme having a number of constellation points G, the cardinality N = GNt of the superset of X 1 and X 0 is very large. Hence,
the traditional Maximum A Posteriori (MAP) algorithm suffers
from excessive complexity, since it considers all candidates of the encoded bits cˆ, when calculating the extrinsic LLRs c˜e(cˆi), i = 1, . . . , ω × Nt. In order to reduce the complexity, the SOCA algorithm [17] considers only subsets of X 1 and X 0 when considering each of the encoded bits in cˆ. More
specifically, these subsets are designed to comprise the most
likely candidate and its counter-hypothesis, which are found
using a tree search. Fig. 8 presents a simple example of a SOCA tree search for the case of Nt = 2 transmit antennas, using QPSK modulation, which has G = 4 constellation points. While this toy example has only N = GNt = 42 = 16 candidates, the modernist case using for example Nt = 4 transmit antennas and G = 16-QAM has N = 164 = 65 536 candidates, leading to
much higher complexity and motivating the SOCA algorithm.
In the tree search, each tree layer considers the signal trans-
mitted by a particular one of the transmit antennas. However,
we have the freedom to order the transmit antennas as we

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:21:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: DEEP LEARNING AIDED LLR CORRECTION IMPROVES THE PERFORMANCE OF ITERATIVE MIMO RECEIVERS

2053

Fig. 8. Example of SOCA tree search with Nt = 2 and employing QPSK modulation.

please, when constructing the tree. Furthermore, the number of child nodes derived from each parent node is given by the modulation order G and hence the total number of child nodes in the nth, n ∈ [1, Nt] layer is equal to Gn. Furthermore, each child node in the tree corresponds to a binary code word, according to the specific constellation points that it represents, as shown in Fig. 8. In the SOCA algorithm, there are only Mn ≤ G child nodes derived from each parent node, which will be extended in the nth layer, where the particular set that is extended is selected according to the node metrics ψ quantified by the squared Euclidean distance [17]. In the case where we have Mn = G for all layers, the SOCA algorithm becomes identical to the ML algorithm, which traverses all possible nodes in the tree. In the example of Fig. 8, we adopt M1 = 3 and hence only the 3 child nodes having the smallest node metrics are extended from the root node, with the remaining child nodes being pruned. Once 3 nodes in the first layer have been traversed, these extended child nodes are then traversed as parent nodes in the second layer. Note that the pruned child nodes in the first layer will not be traversed as parent nodes in the second layer. The example of Fig. 8 adopts M2 = 2 and hence the 2 child nodes of each parent node having the smallest metrics are extended in the second layer, with all other child nodes being pruned. Furthermore, when traversing all layers besides the first layer, the SOCA algorithm additionally extends the counter-hypothesis of the child node having the lowest node metric across the layer. For example, the child node in the second layer of Fig. 8 identified as having the lowest node metric is associated with the codeword ‘0 0‘, which has the counter-hypotheses of ‘0 1‘ and ‘1 0‘. Hence the child nodes corresponding to these codewords and extending from the same parent node as the child nodes having the lowest metrics are also extended in Fig. 8. As an additional constraint, Kn child nodes having lower node metrics in the nth layer will survive, while the child nodes having high node metrics are pruned. The example of Fig. 8 adopts K1 = ∞ and hence all surviving child nodes are retained in the first layer. Furthermore, our example in Fig. 8 adopts K2 = 6 and hence some of the child nodes identified for extension are pruned. Owing to this complexity reduction mechanism, the counter-hypothesis may

not be extended for some layers and hence Xi1 or Xi0 may be empty in some cases, leading to ±∞ valued LLRs from (11).
In these cases, we clip the corresponding LLRs to Lmax. In the case of Fig. 8, the K2 = 6 surviving child nodes are associated
with the corresponding candidates:

⎛

⎞

first layer 0 0 0 0 0 1

X

=

first layer second layer

⎝⎜⎜00

0 1

0 1

1 0

1 1

1 1

⎠⎟⎟,

(12)

second layer 0 0 1 0 0 0

Reduced-complexity detection may be achieved by reordering the spatial streams arriving from the transmit antennas according to the SNR [4]. In this case, the Smart Ordered QR Decomposition (SOQRD) technique of [17] is an attractive method for reordering spatial streams. More specifically, if the layer of the tree emanating from the root node corresponds to a spatial stream having a high effective SNR, then a complexity reduction may be attained. To elaborate further, it may be assumed that the spatial streams having the highest SNR will rarely suffer demodulation errors and so we may reduce the number of child nodes that are explored in this layer and prune a significant portion of the tree at an early stage in the algorithm, hence reducing its complexity. Let us consider the example where the first layer of the tree search in Fig. 8 corresponds to the spatial stream transmitted from the second transmit antenna. Correspondingly, in this case, the second layer of the tree search corresponds to the spatial stream transmitted from the first transmit antenna. In this case, the candidates obtained would be ordered according to

⎛

⎞

second layer 0 1 1 0 1 1

X

=

second layer first layer

⎜⎜⎝00

0 0

1 0

0 0

0 0

01⎟⎠⎟.

(13)

first layer 0 0 0 1 1 1

Furthermore, the authors of [30] have proven that performance vs. complexity trade-off can be achieved by using Minimum Mean Square Error (MMSE) based pre-processing, which takes the noise in the received signal into account. This may be

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:21:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2054

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

achieved using the QR decomposition (QRD) of the extended

channel matrix H =

H σI Nt

, where σ2 = NtN0/Es.

By employing the MMSE-SOQRD in the SOCA tree search,

the input-output relationship of (9) becomes

rˆ = Hˆ s˜ + nˆ ,

(14)

The SOCA detection algorithm comprises two parts, namely the tree search and the LLR calculation. In the first part, the complexity of tree search is incurred when calculating the node metric. More specifically, the complexity associated with the g th path in the (n + 1)th (n ∈ [0, Nt − 1]) layer in (15) may be expressed as

where the inputs of the SOQRD are H and K1, and the outputs

are Q,

Hˆ 0Nr ×Nt

and P . Here, P is a permutation matrix, which

represents the reordering of the spatial stream as they are mapped

to the layers of the tree. Furthermore, these outputs of the

SOQRD are employed to transform the input-output relationship

of (9) to (14), where rˆ = Q(1 : Nr, 1 : Nt)H × r, s˜ = P s.

In addition to the MMSE pre-processing of the received signal

r, the tree search of the SOCA detection benefits from the

a priori LLRs provided by the LDPC decoder, enabling itera-

tive detection and decoding. More specifically, when extending

the g th (g ∈ [1, G]) child node in the (n + 1)th layer from the

gth ∈ [1, G] parent node in the nth layer, the node metric may

be calculated as

2

ψng,+g1 = ψng + rˆn+1 −

hˆ n+1,v s˜vg

1

1≤v≤n+1

8(n+1)+3

ω
−
i=1

exp ((1 − 1 + exp

cˆi)c˜ a(cˆi)) (c˜ a(cˆi))

−σ2

s˜vg
5

2
,

(15)

7ω

where, n ∈ [0, Nt − 1] and ψ0g = 0 in the case of the root node. Note that (15) is annotated with the associated complexity
matrix, which will be discussed in Section IV.
The node metrics quantified by the squared Euclidean distance
of (15) are employed in the SOCA tree search to evaluate the child nodes in each layer and to obtain the candidate set X for the encoded bits cˆ, including the most likely candidate and
its counter-hypothesis, as discussed above. Following this, the extrinsic LLR vector c˜e can be calculated using (11) according to
the inputs of the SOCA detector, namely the channel information (H, N0), the received signal r and the a priori LLR vector c˜a provided by the LDPC decoder. Furthermore, the corrected extrinsic LLR vector c¯e is obtained according to the online LLR
correction discussed in Section II-B2.

IV. COMPLEXITY ANALYSIS
In this section, we quantify the complexity of the MIMO detector for the case of SOCA detection without DL-aided LLR correction and for the case, where the DL-aided LLR correction is employed. The LDPC complexity is not considered here, because we employ the same LDPC decoder in all schemes.
The complexity of each part in the SOCA detector algorithm may be quantified by the number of additions, multiplications, divisions, and exponential calculations performed. Here, each complex-valued multiplication may be represented by four realvalued multiplications and two real-valued additions. Moreover, each complex addition may be considered to comprise two realvalued additions.

Cn+1 = 8n + 7ω + 17,

(16)

where ω is the number of bits per symbol. The complexity of the second part of the SOCA detection,
which calculates an extrinsic LLR using (11), may be expressed as

CLLR = KNt × (6NrNt + 6Nr + ωNt + 1) , (17)

where KNt is the number of surviving nodes in the final layer of the tree search.
Based on the results of (16) and (17), the overall complexity of performing SOCA detection for a conventional SOCA-LDPC scheme, which does not employ our DL technique for correcting the LLRs may be calculated as

COS =

2ω

×

C1

+

K1

×

(2ω+1 − 2

K1

−

1)

+ K2 × 2ω × C2 + K2 × (2ω − 1)

+ K2 × (K2 + 2ω − 1) 2
...

+ Kn+1 × 2ω × Cn+1 + Kn+1 × (2ω − 1)

+ Kn+1 × (Kn+1 + 2ω − 1) 2
...

+ KNt × 2ω × CNt + KNt × (2ω − 1)

+ KNt × (KNt + 2ω − 1) 2

+

CLLR

×

K R

.

×

K 2ω R

(18)

Here, each row of (18) apart from the last one corresponds to the calculation complexity incurred in each tree layer, while the last row corresponds to the complexity of calculating the LLRs.
Furthermore, the complexity incurred in each iteration when employing DL-aided SOCA detection may be obtained as the sum of the complexity of employing the SOCA detection from (18) and the complexity of employing the DL from (8), which is expressed as:

CDL−SOCA = COS + CDL.

(19)

By way of comparison, the complexity associated with employing the FS-Net-aided scheme proposed in [20] may be

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:21:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: DEEP LEARNING AIDED LLR CORRECTION IMPROVES THE PERFORMANCE OF ITERATIVE MIMO RECEIVERS

2055

TABLE III AVERAGE NUMBER OF OPERATIONS OF DIFFERENT SCHEMES WHEN
Eb/N0 = 10 DB (IN MILLIONS)

expressed as

CFS−Net = 2Nt (4Nr − 1) + 4Nt2 (2Nt − 1) + LF 8Nr2 + 10Nr , (20)
where LF is the number of layers in the FS-Net, which is set to 2 in this article.
Hence, the overall complexity of employing the FS-Net SOCA scheme in this work is given by

CFS−Net−SOCA = COS + CFS−Net.

(21)

Table III characterizes the complexity of the four schemes for the case of M1 = 4, M1 = 8 and M1 = 16, respectively. In all cases, it may be seen that doubling the value of M1 roughly doubles the associated complexity. Note that, the addition of the
DL-aided and LUT-aided LLR correction does not significantly
increase the complexity of the associated schemes compared to the conventional SOCA-LDPC scheme, regardless of M1 value.
When M1 = 4, employing DL-aided LLR correction increases the complexity by about 16%, while the complexity increase associated with the LUT-aided LLR correction is about 20%. However, LUT-aided LLR correction has the additional cost of requiring LUTs for all the different numbers of iterations and different Eb/N0 to be stored, which necessitates a large amount of memory. By contrast, the DL-aided LLR
correction scheme only requires the storage of a small number
of weight matrices and bias vectors. When the LUT stores the LLR corrections for each Eb/N0 value in the range of {8, 8.5, 9, . . . , 12} dB, as well as in the number of iterations in the set {1, 2, 3} between the SOCA detector and LDPC decoder, a total of 47 920 bytes of memory is required. By contrast, the
DL-aided LLR correction scheme requires only 920 bytes of
memory to store the trained weight matrices and bias vectors for the case where M1 = 4. While the FS-Net-aided SOCA-LDPC scheme benefits from a reduced SOCA tree complexity, there
is some extra complexity incurred by the FS-Net computation.
Hence, the FS-Net-aided SOCA-LDPC scheme has a slightly
high complexity than the conventional SOCA-LDPC scheme, which is about 3%.
In the case of M1 = 8, the complexity of the proposed DLaided LLR correction assisted SOCA-LDPC scheme is about 8% higher than that of the conventional SOCA-LDPC scheme, and
it requires 920 bytes of memory for storing the trained weight
matrices and bias vectors. By contrast, the LUT-aided LLR
correction assisted SOCA-LDPC scheme requires 35 744 bytes of memory to store the LUTs in the case of M1 = 8. The reduced memory compared to M1 = 4 is a benefit of only requiring Eb/N0 values in a smaller set of {8, 8.5, 9, . . . , 10.5} dB. The

complexity of the LUT-aided LLR correction assisted SOCALDPC scheme is about 10% higher than that of the conventional SOCA-LDPC scheme. Then, in the case of M1 = 8, the complexity of the FS-Net-aided SOCA-LDPC scheme is about 1% lower than that of the conventional SOCA-LDPC scheme.
In the case of M1 = 16, the complexity of the proposed DL-aided LLR correction SOCA-LDPC is about 4% higher than that of the conventional SOCA-LDPC scheme and it has the additional requirement of 920 bytes of memory, as discussed above. By contrast, the LUT-aided LLR correction SOCALDPC scheme requires 29 600 bytes of memory to store the LUTs for each Eb/N0 value in the set of {8, 8.5, 9, . . . , 10} dB, as well as in the number of iterations in the set {1, 2, 3}. The complexity of the LUT-aided scheme is about 6% higher compared to the conventional SOCA-LDPC scheme. As seen in Table III, the complexity of the FS-Net-aided SOCA-LDPC scheme is about 7% lower than that of the conventional SOCA-LDPC scheme when M1 = 16, but the performance is degraded by about 1.2 dB at BLER of 10−3.
V. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, we characterized both the performance and complexity of the proposed DL-aided LLR correction assisted SOCA-LDPC scheme and compared it to various benchmarkers. The density (dl, l = 2, 3, 4) of each hidden layer in the neural network of the proposed scheme and the optimal number of iterations to use between the SOCA detector and the LDPC decoder will be selected according to the simulation results. Here, we employ the 3GPP 5G NR LDPC code, which we decode using the log-sum-product algorithm. Moreover, we will compare the decoding performance of the four different iterative detection and decoding schemes described in Section III-C. More specifically, the proposed DL-aided LLR correction SOCA-LDPC scheme employs the trained DNN to correct the raw extrinsic LLRs c˜ e, as described in Section II. Furthermore, there are three benchmarkers, the first of which is a conventional SOCA-LDPC scheme dispensing with LLR correction. The second benchmarker is the LUT-aided LLR correction assisted SOCA-LDPC scheme, which corrects the raw extrinsic LLRs c˜ e using LUTs that are generated using Fig. 4. Finally, the third benchmarker is the FS-Net-aided SOCA-LDPC scheme, which has been described in Section I. The use of FS-Net for MIMO detection to estimate the most likely candidate of transmitted MIMO signals was proposed in [19], [20]. We augment this work by combining it with a SOCA detector, in which we may directly delete all tree nodes in each layer of the SOCA tree search having higher node metrics than that of the most likely candidate identified by FS-Net. Hence, the number of surviving tree nodes in the nth, 1 ≤ n ≤ Nt layer of the tree may be lower than Kn in the FS-Net-aided SOCA-LDPC scheme.
Throughout this section, we adopt Nr = 4 receive antennas, Nt = 4 transmit antennas, K = 1024 information bits, a coding rate of R = 1/2, an LLR clipping level of Lmax = 6, ILDPC = 20 iterations inside the LDPC decoder, and 16-QAM for communication over uncorrelated narrow-band Rayleigh fading channels. Here, the number of inner iterations in the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:21:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2056

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

Fig. 9. LDPC EXIT functions, for the case of Nt = 4 transmit antennas, Nr = 4 receive antennas, K = 1024 information bits, a coding rate of R = 1/2, an
LLR clipping level of Lmax = 6, M = [4, 1, 1, 1], K = [4 4 4 4] and 16-QAM
modulation for communication over Rayleigh fading channel.

Fig. 10. BER performance of the proposed DL-aided LLR correction SOCALDPC scheme having various densities (dl, l = 2, 3, 4) in each of 3 hidden layers, for the case of Nt = 4 transmit antennas, Nr = 4 receive antennas, K = 1024 information bits, a coding rate of R = 1/2, an LLR clipping level of Lmax = 6, M = [4, 1, 1, 1], K = [4 4 4 4], ILDPC = 20 iterations inside the LDPC decoding, I = 3 iterations between the SOCA detector and the LDPC
decoder, and 16-QAM modulation for communication over Rayleigh fading
channel.

LDPC decoder can be determined with the aid of Fig. 9. Here, an EXIT chart is a graphical representation used for analyzing the iterative decoding process, specifically focusing on the exchange of extrinsic information between the inner and the outer decoder in a concatenated coding scheme [31]. Since the extrinsic LLRs produced by the inner decoder become the a priori LLRs of the outer decoder and vice versa, it is conventional to swap over the axes of the outer decoder, so that the a priori information is plotted on the same axis as the inner decoder’s extrinsic information and vice versa. Explicitly, Fig. 9 is produced by generating b˜a artificially and then measure the MI of b˜e. The details of generating the LDPC decoder’s EXIT function are similar to the processing introduced in [32], [33]. Fig. 9 shows that upon increasing the number of LDPC inner iterations ILDPC, the LDPC EXIT function moves downwards, which results in improved decoding performance. Furthermore, diminishing returns are attained beyond ILDPC = 20, which proves that the choice of ILDPC = 20 is reasonable.
Fig. 10 characterizes the BER performance of the proposed DL-aided LLR correction SOCA-LDPC scheme, when employing different numbers dl, (l = 2, 3, 4) of neural nodes in each hidden layer. Moreover, the parameters for the SOCA tree search are set as M = [4 1 1 1] and K = [4 4 4 4], which indicate that in the first layer, the M1 = 4 child nodes of the root node are extended and all K1 = 4 child nodes are retained. Then for other layers, Mn = 1, (n = 2, 3, 4) child node of each parent node is extended and Kn = 4 child nodes are retained after the corresponding counter-hypotheses have been introduced in each layer. In Fig. 10, I = 3 iterations are performed between the SOCA detector and the LDPC decoder. As characterized in (8), the complexity of the DL algorithm is influenced by the number of layers L and the density dl(l = 1, . . . , L) of each layer in the DNN. The performance of the DL may be affected by these

two parameters, where it is typically expected that a higher
performance is achieved when the density and the number of
layers is increased. Therefore, the performance vs. complexity
trade-off may be investigated when using different numbers of layers L and different densities in each layer. As shown in
Fig. 10, increasing the number of hidden layers and the density
of each hidden layer may improve the performance, as expected.
However, diminishing returns may be observed when having more than 9 hidden layers and more than dl = 3 neuron nodes in each hidden layer. In the case of L − 2 = 9 hidden layers and dl = 3 neuron nodes in each hidden layer, each LLR correction requires a total of 210 addition and multiplication operations. By contrast, when using L − 2 = 3 hidden layers and dl = 6 neuron nodes in each hidden layer, the total number of addition
and multiplication operations for each LLR correction amounts
to 211. Both of these cases have very similar complexity, but we observe that having dl = 6 for each hidden layer and L − 2 = 3 hidden layers is associated with slightly better performance.
Given this performance vs. complexity trade-off, we select a density of dl = 6 for each of the L − 2 = 3 hidden layers throughout the following investigations.
Fig. 11(a) characterizes the BER performance of the proposed
DL-aided LLR correction SOCA-LDPC scheme and compares it to that of the three benchmarkers, for the case of using M = [4 1 1 1] and K = [4 4 4 4] during the SOCA tree search in all schemes. Note that, in the FS-Net-aided SOCA-LDPC scheme,
the actual number of the surviving tree nodes may be smaller than Kn, 1 ≤ n ≤ Nt, as mentioned above. As detailed in Section II, the selection of a low M1 value leads to less self-consistent raw extrinsic LLRs c˜ e at the output of the SOCA detector, which may degrade the decoding performance. As these inconsistent raw extrinsic LLRs c˜ e are exchanged between the SOCA detector and LDPC decoder, the decoding performance can actually
degrade in each successive iteration, as demonstrated by the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:21:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: DEEP LEARNING AIDED LLR CORRECTION IMPROVES THE PERFORMANCE OF ITERATIVE MIMO RECEIVERS

2057

Fig. 11. BER performance of the proposed DL-aided LLR correction

SOCA-LDPC scheme and the various benchmarkers, for the case of Nt = 4

transmit antennas, Nt = 4 receive antennas, K = 1024 information bits, a

coding rate

of R

=

1 2

,

an

LLR

clipping level

of Lmax

=

6, M

=

[M1, 1, 1, 1],

K = [M1 M1 M1 M1], ILDPC = 20 iterations inside the LDPC decoding,

and 16-QAM modulation for communication over Rayleigh fading channel.

(a) M1 = 4. (b) M1 = 8. (c) M1 = 16.

BER performance of the conventional SOCA-LDPC scheme in Fig. 11(a). More specifically, the performance degradation observed for the SOCA detector may be attributed to its use of complexity-reducing mechanisms, such as the early termination of the tree search [34]. As a result, the SOCA detector may generate sub-optimal extrinsic LLRs c˜ e, which do not satisfy the

self-consistency condition [7] that channel decoders rely upon for maximising their performance [4]. As shown in Fig. 3, the self-consistency of the raw extrinsic LLRs c˜ e may be improved by increasing the value of the SOCA detector’s M1 parameter, leading to the elimination of performance degradation in successive iterations, as shown in Fig. 11(c). However, the proposed DL-aided LLR correction eliminates the performance degradation caused by the inconsistent LLRs, accordingly, the BER performance improves after each successive iteration, as shown in Fig. 11(a). Furthermore, the LUT-aided LLR correction assisted SOCA-LDPC scheme can also be seen to eliminate performance degradation. However, the decoding performance of the FS-Net-aided SOCA-LDPC scheme shows about 0.5 dB BER degradation compared to the conventional SOCA-LDPC scheme. This may be attributed to the FS-Net failing to correctly identify the most likely decoding candidate and the SOCA detector being unable to remedy this owing to its reduced-complexity. Furthermore, the FS-Net-aided benchmarker does not benefit from any LLR correction.
Fig. 11(b) characterizes the BER performance of the four schemes, for the case of using M = [8 1 1 1] and K = [8 8 8 8] during the SOCA tree search. When M1 is increased to M1 = 8, more candidates are considered during the SOCA tree to search and when calculating the LLRs, this requests in improved selfconsistency. As a result, the performance of the conventional SOCA-LDPC scheme observed after deleterious iterations between the SOCA detector and the LDPC decoder may be eliminated. However, no significant performance gains are achieved after successive iterations of the conventional SOCA-LDPC scheme and a performance gap of about 0.15 dB may be observed in Fig. 11(b), relative to the proposed DL-aided LLR correction assisted SOCA-LDPC scheme and to the LUT-aided benchmarker. To elaborate further, the DL-aided LLR correction assisted SOCA-LDPC scheme and the LUT-aided benchmarker can achieve performance gains in successive iterations between the SOCA detector and the LDPC decoder, as a benefit of using the corrected extrinsic LLRs c¯e. In the case of M1 = 8, the FS-Net-aided SOCA-LDPC benchmarker still has worse performance than the conventional SOCA-LDPC scheme, where a performance gap can be observed in Fig. 11(b).
Fig. 11(c) shows the BER performance of the four schemes, for the case of using M = [16 1 1 1] and K = [16 16 16 16] during the SOCA tree search. When employing M1 = 16, the performance gain offered by the proposed DL-aided LLR correction assisted SOCA-LDPC scheme is about 0.25 dB when employing three iterations instead of one at a BER of 10−5. While the conventional SOCA-LDPC scheme achieves some iteration gains in the case of M1 = 16, only limited gains of less than 0.1 dB are attained after the second iteration. The LUT-aided LLR correction scheme can be seen to offer a similar iteration gain to the conventional SOCA-LDPC scheme. As shown in Fig. 11(c), the FS-Net-aided SOCA-LDPC scheme still offers no BER performance BER improvement upon employing iterations between the SOCA detector and LDPC decoder for a larger M1. In fact, it suffers from about 1.6 dB performance loss compared to the proposed DL-aided LLR correction assisted SOCA-LDPC scheme.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:21:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2058

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

Fig. 12. BLER performance of the conventional SOCA-LDPC employing the

various number of iterations between the SOCA detector and LDPC decoder,

for the case of Nt = 4 transmit antennas, Nr = 4 receive antennas, K = 1024

information

bits,

a

coding

rate

of

R

=

1 2

,

an

LLR

clipping

level

of

Lmax

=

6

and Eb/N0 = 10, K = [M1 M1 M1 M1], ILDPC = 20 iteration inside the

LDPC decoding, and 16-QAM modulation for communication over uncorrelated

narrow-band Rayleigh fading channels.

In contrast to the BER performance, the BLER performance of the conventional SOCA-LDPC scheme does improve in successive iterations between the SOCA detector and the LDPC decoder for both small and large M1 values, as shown Fig. 12. This demonstrates that while the prevalence of block errors is reduced upon increasing the number of decoding iterations, the number of bit errors within those erroneous blocks increases in successive iterations. This phenomenon may be attributed to the LDPC decoder’s convergence towards an incorrect solution in the case of these erroneous blocks, with successive iterations increasingly deviating from the original block. Significant iteration gains may be observed in Fig. 12 up to 3 iterations. However, diminishing returns are observed beyond 3 iterations. Given the trade-off between the performance and complexity, we offer I = 3 iterations in the following investigation for all the schemes considered.
Fig. 13(a) characterizes the BLER performance of the four schemes for the case of M = [4 1 1 1] and K = [4 4 4 4]. It may be observed that the proposed DL-aided LLR correction assisted SOCA-LDPC scheme offers a 0.9 dB performance gain at a BLER of 10−3, compared to the conventional SOCA-LDPC scheme. This BLER vs. SNR gain may be attributed to the proposed DL-aided LLR correction of the extrinsic LLRs c¯e. By way of comparison, the LUT-aided LLR correction scheme offers about 0.7 dB of gain at a BLER of 10−3, compared to the conventional SOCA-LDPC scheme. Here, the proposed DL-aided LLR correction scheme achieves 0.2 dB better performance than the LUT-aided LLR correction scheme because of deviations from the ideal correction factor during the linear interpolation between the values stored in the LUT. Although linear interpolation is employed in the training data generation of the DL-aided LLR correction scheme, the relationship between the raw extrinsic LLRs c˜ e and the corrected extrinsic LLRs c¯e are learned in the DNN. This allows the near-ideal correction

Fig. 13. BLER performance of the proposed DL-aided LLR correction SOCA-

LDPC scheme and the various benchmarkers, for the case of Nt = 4 transmit

antennas, Nr = 4 receive antennas, K = 1024 information bits, a coding rate

of

R

=

1 2

,

an

LLR

clipping

level

of

Lmax

=

6,

M

=

[M1, 1, 1, 1],

K

=

[M1 M1 M1 M1], ILDPC = 20 iterations inside the LDPC decoding, I = 3

iterations between the SOCA detector and the LDPC decoder, and 16-QAM

modulation for communication over Rayleigh fading channel. (a) M1 = 4.

(b) M1 = 8. (c) M1 = 16.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:21:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: DEEP LEARNING AIDED LLR CORRECTION IMPROVES THE PERFORMANCE OF ITERATIVE MIMO RECEIVERS

2059

of each raw extrinsic LLR c˜ e during the operation of the proposed DL-aided LLR correction SOCA-LDPC scheme. The FS-Net-aided SOCA-LDPC scheme suffers from a performance degradation of about 0.4 dB at a BLER of 10−3 compared to the conventional SOCA-LDPC scheme.
Fig. 13(b) characterizes the BLER performance of the four schemes for the case of M = [8 1 1 1] and K = [8 8 8 8]. The proposed DL-aided LLR correction assisted SOCA-LDPC scheme can be seen to offer about 0.6 dB gain compared to the conventional SOCA-LDPC scheme at a BLER of 10−3, while the LUT-aided LLR correction assisted SOCA-LDPC scheme offers about 0.55 dB gain. Fig. 13(b) shows that the performance degradation of the FS-Net-aided SOCA-LDPC scheme becomes more pronounced at M1 = 8, compared to M1 = 4. This may be attributed to having high node metrics compared to the most likely candidate and being deleted in the SOCA tree search when M1 = 8. More specifically, when more leaf nodes are deleted in the SOCA tree search, fewer candidates are available for the LLR calculation, which degrades the FS-Net-aided scheme’s ability to generate self-consistent LLR values. As seen in Fig. 13(a), 13(b), and Table III, the proposed DL-aided scheme offers about 0.9 dB gain compared to the conventional SOCA scheme when M1 = 4, at the cost of a complexity increase of around 16%. This may be compared to the observation that increasing M1 in the conventional SOCA scheme to 8 offers around 1.3 dB of gain compared to the conventional SOCA scheme using M1 = 4, at the cost of roughly doubling its complexity. Furthermore, from a practical hardware implementation perspective, in order to improve the performance of the conventional SOCA detector by changing the M1 parameter, an entirely new SOCA detector implementation would be required, which represents a substantial design effort compared to training the proposed DL scheme.
Fig. 13(c) characterizes the BLER performance of the four schemes for the case of M = [16 1 1 1] and K = [16 16 16 16]. When M1 = 16, the proposed DL-aided and LUT-aided LLR correction assisted SOCA-LDPC schemes to offer gains of about 0.4 and 0.25 dB, respectively, compared to the conventional SOCA-LDPC scheme at a BLER of 10−3. As the M1 value is increased to 16, more candidates are considered for calculating the LLRs, and hence more self-consistent raw extrinsic LLRs c˜ e are produced, As a result, the LLR correction has a lower influence when M1 = 16. This may also be demonstrated by comparing the gaps between the claimed and measured MI values in Figs. 3 and 6. In the absence of LLR correction, Fig. 3 shows that as the value of M1 is increased, the gap between the claimed and measured MI values becomes small, which represents an improved self-consistency of the LLRs. Fig. 6 shows that in the presence of LLR correction, the gap is also reduced as the value of M1 is increased, but much less dramatically than in Fig. 3. Hence, LLR correction has less benefit, when the value of M1 is high. As shown in Fig. 13(c), the FS-Net-aided SOCA-LDPC scheme still suffers from a performance degradation compared to the conventional SOCA-LDPC scheme, when M1 = 16.

VI. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
A DL-aided LLR correction scheme was proposed, which is capable of correcting any inconsistency in the LLRs that are generated by reduced-complexity decoders in an iterative receiver. We have presented MI results, which show that the proposed DL-aided LLR correction significantly improves the self-consistency of the LLRs. The proposed technique is characterized in the context of an iterative SOCA-LDPC scheme, which is compared to three benchmarkers. The first benchmarker is provided by a conventional SOCA-LDPC scheme, which does not employ any LLR correction. The second benchmarker is a LUTaided LLR correction assisted SOCA-LDPC scheme, which uses LUTs to correct the LLR values. The final benchmarker is provided by a FS-Net-aided SOCA-LDPC scheme, which employs the FS-Net of [20] to estimate the most likely candidate during signal detection using a trained DNN. More specifically, we adopt the most likely candidate identified by the FS-Net in order to prune the SOCA tree and reduce the complexity.
We have presented both BER and BLER results, which demonstrate that improved performance is attained by adopting the proposed DL-aided LLR correction and by the LUTaided LLR correction assisted SOCA-LDPC schemes. The corrected extrinsic LLRs c¯e are shown to significantly improve the decoding performance using both the proposed DL-aided LLR correction scheme and the LUT-aided LLR correction scheme. In the case, where the low complexity SOCA detector is parameterized by M1 = 4, the proposed DL-aided LLR correction assisted SOCA-LDPC scheme achieves about 0.9 dB gain over the conventional SOCA-LDPC scheme, at the cost of 16% increased complexity. When the complexity of the SOCA detector is increased using M1 = 8 and M1 = 16, the proposed DL-aided LLR correction assisted SOCA-LDPC scheme achieves about 0.5 dB and 0.4 dB of gain, at the cost of increasing the complexity by 8% and by 4%, respectively. The results show that the proposed DL-aided LLR correction assisted SOCA-LDPC scheme always outperforms the LUT-aided SOCA-LDPC LLR correction assisted scheme. Furthermore, the memory requirement of the proposed DL-aided LLR correction SOCA-LDPC scheme is about 97% lower than that of the LUTaided LLR correction assisted SOCA-LDPC scheme, which requires excessive memory to store its LUTs. The complexity of the FS-Net-aided SOCA-LDPC benchmarker is about 1% and 7% lower than that of the conventional SOCA-LDPC scheme for M1 = 8 and M1 = 16, respectively. However, our results show that the FS-Net-aided scheme suffers from significant BER and BLER performance degradation compared to the conventional SOCA-LDPC scheme. In future work, the proposed DL-aided LLR correction scheme may be combined with a softinput and soft-output DNN network, as a replacement for the SOCA detector.
REFERENCES
[1] H. He, C.-K. Wen, S. Jin, and G. Y. Li, “Model-driven deep learning for MIMO detection,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 68, pp. 1702–1715, 2020.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:21:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2060

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

[2] Z. B. K. Egilmez, L. Xiang, R. G. Maunder, and L. Hanzo, “A soft-input soft-output polar decoding algorithm for turbo-detection in MIMO-aided 5G new radio,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 71, no. 6, pp. 6454–6468, Jun. 2022.
[3] X. Wu, Y. Song, M. Jiang, and C. Zhao, “Adaptive-normalized/offset min-sum algorithm,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 667–669, Jul. 2010.
[4] C. Studer and H. Bölcskei, “Soft-input soft-output single tree-search sphere decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 4827–4842, Oct. 2010.
[5] L. Szczecinski, “Correction of mismatched L-values in BICM receivers,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 11, pp. 3198–3208, Nov. 2012.
[6] S. Ning, “Improving resistive RAM hard and soft decision correctable BERs by using improved-LLR and reset-check-reverse-flag concatenating LDPC code,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II: Exp. Briefs, vol. 67, no. 10, pp. 2164–2168, Oct. 2020.
[7] C. Xu, X. Zuo, S. X. Ng, R. G. Maunder, and L. Hanzo, “Reducedcomplexity soft-decision multiple-symbol differential sphere detection,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 63, no. 9, pp. 3275–3289, Sep. 2015.
[8] F. Alberge, “On some properties of the mutual information between extrinsics with application to iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 63, no. 5, pp. 1541–1553, May 2015.
[9] J. Tan, Y. Xiao, C. Wu, and W. Tang, “Accurate log-likelihood ratio calculation for vector perturbation precoding,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 70, no. 6, pp. 6272–6276, Jun. 2021.
[10] Z. Qin, H. Ye, G. Y. Li, and B.-H. F. Juang, “Deep learning in physical layer communications,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 93–99, Feb. 2019.
[11] L. Liu, L. Cai, L. Ma, and G. Qiao, “Channel state information prediction for adaptive underwater acoustic downlink OFDMA system: Deep neural networks based approach,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 70, no. 9, pp. 9063–9076, Sep. 2021.
[12] J. Dai, K. Niu, and J. Lin, “Iterative Gaussian-approximated message passing receiver for MIMO-SCMA system,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 753–765, Jun. 2019.
[13] K. Takeuchi and S. Horio, “Iterative multiuser detection and decoding with spatially coupled interleaving,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 619–622, Dec. 2013.
[14] M. Torlak and G. Xu, “Maximum likelihood detection of co-channel communication signals exploiting the spatio-temporal diversity,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Rec. 30th Asilomar Conf. Signals Syst. Comput., 1996, pp. 728–732.
[15] L. Xiao et al., “Efficient compressive sensing detectors for generalized spatial modulation systems,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 66, no. 2, pp. 1284–1298, Feb. 2017.
[16] L. Dai, X. Gao, X. Su, S. Han, C.-L. I, and Z. Wang, “Low-complexity softoutput signal detection based on Gauss–Seidel method for uplink multiuser large-scale MIMO systems,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 64, no. 10, pp. 4839–4845, Oct. 2015.
[17] D. L. Milliner, E. Zimmermann, J. R. Barry, and G. Fettweis, “A fixedcomplexity smart candidate adding algorithm for soft-output MIMO detection,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 1016–1025, Dec. 2009.

[18] D. L. Milliner, Low-Complexity List Detection Algorithms for the MultipleInput Multiple-Output Channel. Atlanta, GA, USA: Georgia Inst. Technol., 2009.
[19] N. T. Nguyen and K. Lee, “Deep learning-aided tabu search detection for large MIMO systems,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 4262–4275, Jun. 2020.
[20] N. T. Nguyen, K. Lee, and H. Dai, “Application of deep learning to sphere decoding for large MIMO systems,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 20, no. 10, pp. 6787–6803, Oct. 2021.
[21] A. Movahed, M. C. Reed, N. Aboutorab, and S. E. Tajbakhsh, “EXIT chart analysis of turbo compressed sensing using message passing dequantization,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 64, no. 24, pp. 6600–6612, Dec. 2016.
[22] Z. Kong, S. Yang, Z. Cai, and D. Guan, “A clustering-ensemble approach based on average mutual information,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Netw. Sens. Control, 2008, pp. 1692–1695.
[23] D. W. SCOTT, “On optimal and data-based histograms,” Biometrika, vol. 66, no. 3, pp. 605–610, 1979, doi: 10.1093/biomet/66.3.605.
[24] M. Mohammadkarimi, M. Mehrabi, M. Ardakani, and Y. Jing, “Deep learning-based sphere decoding,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 18, no. 9, pp. 4368–4378, Sep. 2019.
[25] S. Roger, A. Gonzalez, V. Almenar, and G. Matz, “An efficient fixedcomplexity sphere decoder with quantized soft outputs,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 16, no. 11, pp. 1828–1831, Nov. 2012.
[26] G. Papa, D. Ciuonzo, G. Romano, and P. Salvo Rossi, “A dominance-based soft-input soft-output MIMO detector with near-optimal performance,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 12, pp. 4320–4335, Dec. 2014.
[27] R. H. Gohary and T. J. Willink, “On LLR clipping in BICM-IDD noncoherent MIMO communications,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 650–652, Jun. 2011.
[28] S. Papaharalabos and F. Lazarakis, “Approximated Box-Plus decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 12, pp. 2074–2077, Dec. 2015.
[29] B. Hochwald and S. ten Brink, “Achieving near-capacity on a multipleantenna channel,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 389–399, Mar. 2003.
[30] E. Zimmermann and G. Fettweis, “Unbiased MMSE tree search detection for multiple antenna systems,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Wireless Pers. Multimedia Commun., 2006, pp. 17–20.
[31] M. El-Hajjar and L. Hanzo, “EXIT charts for system design and analysis,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 127–153, First Quarter 2014.
[32] J. Chen et al., “LDPC coded compressive sensing for joint source-channel coding in wireless sensor networks,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 72, no. 2, pp. 2145–2160, Feb. 2023.
[33] J. Chen et al., “Tree-search techniques for joint iterative compressive sensing and LDPC decoding in wireless sensor networks,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 434–451, Jan. 2023.
[34] C. Studer, A. Burg, and H. Bolcskei, “Soft-output sphere decoding: Algorithms and vlsi implementation,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 290–300, Feb. 2008.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:21:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

