IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014
1119
NAND Flash Memory/ReRAM Hybrid Unified
Solid-State-Storage Architecture
Shuhei Tanakamaru, Student Member, IEEE, Masafumi Doi, Student Member, IEEE, and
Ken Takeuchi, Member, IEEE
Abstract—The proposed unified solid-state storage (USSS) with
hybrid NAND flash memory/ReRAM provides high system-level
data protection. In the conventional storage system, the hierar-
chical storage architecture (Server/Disk array/SSD/NAND flash
memory) has duplicated functions. USSS solves this structural
problem of the conventional enterprise-storage systems. The
proposed unified storage controller integrates the duplicated func-
tions (error corrections and redundancies). Five highly reliable
techniques are presented; reverse-mirroring (RM), shift-mir-
roring (SM), error-reduction synthesis (ERS), page-RAID, and
error-masking (EM). SM is a modified technique from RM with
no ReRAM buffer. These technologies utilize error-patterns
asymmetries of the NAND flash memory and fast, page-rewritable
and high endurance ReRAM. RM, SM and EM are the mirroring
techniques to reduce bit-errors of the NAND flash memory by
intelligently allocating the write address and comparing the data
in the primary/mirrored NAND flash memories, respectively.
The page-RAID generates the block-parity in each block and
EM records the error-location during read. Without mirroring,
the acceptable raw BER of the NAND flash memory (ABER)
increases by 4.4×. Moreover, when RM, ERS, page-RAID, and
EM are applied, the ABER increases by 32×. This corresponds
to an increase of the endurance or the data-retention time of the
NAND flash memory by 4.2 or 34×.
Index
Terms—Big-data,
NAND
flash
memory,
reliability,
ReRAM, storage.
I. INTRODUCTION
B
IG-DATA enterprise storage is escalating demand for
solid-state drives (SSDs), because of SSD’s high speed,
low power and small form factor. A conventional storage
system has three basic levels of hierarchy as shown in Fig. 1:
servers, disk arrays and storage devices (NAND flash memory
based SSDs or hard-disk drives (HDDs)). The SSD-based ar-
chitecture is constructed by substituting HDDs for SSDs from
the ordinary storage architecture. Error-correcting codes (ECC)
and redundancy provide reliability. In addition to reliability,
the stripe and mirror everything (S.A.M.E.) has been proposed
Manuscript received May 13, 2013; revised August 07, 2013; accepted
September 07, 2013. Date of publication November 21, 2013; date of current
version March 25, 2014. This work was supported in part by CREST/JST. This
paper was recommended by Associate Editor M. M. Khellah.
S. Tanakamaru is with the Department of Electrical, Electronic, and Com-
munication Engineering, Chuo University, Tokyo 112-8551, Japan, and the De-
partment of Electrical Engineering and Information Systems, Graduate School
of Engineering, University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan (e-mail: tanaka-
maru@takeuchi-lab.org).
M. Doi is with the Department of Electrical, Electronic, and Communication
Engineering, Chuo University, Tokyo 112-8551, Japan (e-mail: doi@takeuchi-
lab.org).
K. Takeuchi is with the Department of Electrical, Electronic, and Com-
munication Engineering, Chuo University, Tokyo 112-8551, Japan (e-mail:
takeuchi@takeuchi-lab.org).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2013.2285891
Fig. 1. Conventional storage system.
for performance [1], in which redundant arrays of independent
disks (RAID)-1 (mirroring) is applied to disk arrays. In the
S.A.M.E., big-data tends to become copied among different
layers. Since the controllers at each level are optimized inde-
pendently of each other, the resulting system has inefficient
duplications and overhead. Moreover, the conventional storage
system is optimized for HDDs, not for SSDs nor NAND flash
memories. It is indispensable to explore the storage architecture
which fits the best for the NAND flash memory based system.
Therefore, this paper proposes a NAND flash memory/ReRAM
hybrid unified solid-state storage architecture [2].
NAND flash memories are widely used as a storage device
of SSDs, SD cards, USB memories and so on. In 2013, the
technology node of the advanced NAND flash memories has
reached to 19 nm [3], [4]. The aggressive scaling results in
the appearance of various reliability problems such as cell-to-
cell interference and random telegraph noise [5]–[8]. Therefore,
careful system managements are becoming much important for
reliability, especially in the enterprise storages. By exploiting
the distinctive error characteristics of NAND flash memories,
the SSD reliability can be improved [9], [10]. However, since
servers and disk arrays in the conventional storage system does
not obtain the physical information from the NAND flash mem-
ories, it is impossible to achieve utmost reliability. The proposed
unified solid-state storage (USSS) realizes the system-reliability
optimization by considering the error characteristics of NAND
flash memories.
1549-8328 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:42:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
1120
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014
On the other hand, a resistive random access memory
(ReRAM) is attracting much attention as a storage-class
memory (SCM) because of its high speed, low energy, high
endurance, and non-volatile capabilities [11]–[13]. SCMs are
expected to improve the storage performance by eliminating
the performance gap between a DRAM and a NAND flash
memory. A 32 Gbit ReRAM in 24 nm technology presented
in [12] has proven its scalability. What is more, ReRAM is
expected to further scale down to 16 nm [13]. Also, the high
endurance of up to 10 write cycles has been demonstrated [13],
[14]. However, there is a tradeoff between the capacity and the
performance. 25 ns read-access time was reported in 8 Mbit
capacity [11] whereas the 32 Gbit ReRAM demonstrated 1.5
s
read-access time [12]. To obtain the maximum performance of
the ReRAM, the capacity becomes limited. Hence, an ReRAM
and NAND flash memory hybrid SSD architecture has been
previously proposed to eliminate the data fragmentation for
high performance [15], [16]. In this work, the ReRAM also
improves memory-system reliability.
The conventional RAID scheme is proposed for enhancing
both the performance and the reliability of the HDD array [17].
The parity data is placed on certain parity disks or all over the
disk array. Thus, the user data is protected by replacing the
crashed disk with a new disk. In the conventional HDD based
storage array, the fatal failure of the HDD occurs in a disk unit
due to the mechanical destruction of the magnetic disk or head.
Thus, the conventional RAID controllers support a disk-level
redundancy technique. On the other hand in NAND flash mem-
ories, which are used for SSDs and the proposed USSS, the
failure is caused by page errors because the error happens in
the unit of the bit-cell. As a result, there is no disk or chip-
unit failure in the proposed USSS. Page-level highly reliable
techniques are needed. Therefore, the proposed schemes in this
paper are conceptually and completely different from the con-
ventional high-reliability techniques.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, the architec-
tures of the USSS and the proposed unified storage controller are
explained. Then, mirroring techniques, the reverse-mirroring
(RM) and the shift-mirroring (SM) are introduced in Section III.
The error-reduction synthesis (ERS) is described in Section IV,
which is also a mirroring technique. The page-RAID and the
error-masking (EM) are proposed in Sections V and VI, respec-
tively. The overall reliability improvement with the RM, the
ERS, the page-RAID, and the EM is discussed in Section VII.
Finally, conclusions are given in Section VIII.
II. ARCHITECTURE OF UNIFIED SOLID-STATE STORAGE (USSS)
Fig. 2 depicts the concept of the proposed unified solid-state
storage (USSS) architecture. Although the SM is a compatible
technique with the RM, the RM is adopted thanks to the higher
BER reduction. The unified storage controller integrates all
ECCs and redundancy functions. The storage consists of pri-
mary and mirrored storages based on NAND flash memories.
Because of the limited capacity, ReRAM is utilized for storage
of the memory system’s mirroring information, parity and
error record to utilize ReRAM’s non-volatility, speed, page
re-writability, and high endurance. Fig. 3 shows the architec-
ture of the USSS. All of the highly reliable techniques are put
Fig. 2. Proposed unified solid-state storage (USSS) architecture.
together in the unified storage controller. First, the data from
the host is encoded by the ECC encoder. Next, the page-RAID
sequencer generates parity-bits based on XOR calculation.
Then, the data is written to both the primary and the mirrored
NAND flash memories by the reverse-mirroring unit. During
read, data from the primary and the mirrored NAND flash mem-
ories is transferred to the error-reduction synthesizer. Next, the
error-location information is transferred from the ECC decoder
to the error-masking unit, which keeps a record of the previous
error-location information, and then the corrected data is read
out. To evaluate the reliability improvement, the acceptable raw
bit-error rate (ABER) of NAND flash memories is defined to
realize the BER after ECC below 10
. The ABER improves
by 12
with the RM and the ERS. ABER improvements of
1.45 and 3
are also realized by the page-RAID and the EM,
respectively. As a result, the overall ABER is improved by
32
by combining all of the techniques. Fig. 4 depicts the pho-
tograph of the measured storage where all of the measurement
results in this paper are obtained. Fig. 5 shows the experiment
setup. Currently, no ReRAM is in the commercial production.
Thus, the function of the ReRAM used in this paper is emulated
in the DRAM of the host PC. The proposed techniques are
implemented as software, issuing the read/write request to the
storage controller. Then the storage controller issues read/write
command to the NAND flash memory and transfers the results
to the PC.
III. REVERSE-MIRRORING (RM)
A. Reverse-Mirroring (RM)
The data allocation to the
states of the NAND flash
memory is shown in Fig. 6 [18]. In 2 bit/cell NAND flash
memory, the multi-page cell architecture is applied to en-
hance the read/write performance [19]. Two logical pages
(lower/upper pages) are assigned to one word-line. The mea-
sured program-disturb and data-retention error characteristics
in 2Xnm NAND flash memory are shown in Fig. 7. “2Xnm”
denotes that the design rule of the NAND flash memory is
in the range of 20 nm to 30 nm. The page number 0 is the
source-line side and the page number 255 is the bit-line side.
In the program-disturb, the measured BER in the upper page is
smaller than that in the lower page (Fig. 7(a)). This is because
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:42:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
TANAKAMARU et al.: NAND FLASH MEMORY/RERAM HYBRID UNIFIED SOLID-STATE-STORAGE ARCHITECTURE
1121
Fig. 3. Architecture of the unified storage controller.
Fig. 4. Photograph of the measured storage.
Fig. 5. Experiment setup.
Fig. 6. Data allocation to the
states of NAND flash memory. [18]
the program-disturb error is the largest in the second
level state “01” of the measured NAND flash memory which
corresponds to the lower page errors. On the other hand, in
data-retention, the measured BER in the smaller page number
Fig. 7. (a) Program-disturb BER vs. page number. (b) Data-retention BER vs.
page number.
(cells close to the source-line) is lower than that in the larger
page number (Fig. 7(b)).
The programming method of the RM is explained in Fig. 8.
The key idea of the RM is that the data stored in a higher BER
cell of the primary NAND flash memory is stored in a lower
BER cell of the mirrored NAND flash memory. To minimize er-
rors for both the program-disturb and the data-retention, the RM
unit modifies the write address of both lower/upper pages and
page number for the mirrored NAND flash memory. The BER
within the primary and mirrored data pair is minimized. For
example, the data is allocated in Lower Page /Upper Page
,
Upper Page /Lower Page
of primary/mirrored NAND flash
memory, respectively. Thus, the order of the programming data
is reversed in terms of the page number in a block. Since NAND
flash memory operation is limited to writing in ascending order
from Page to avoid the cell-to-cell interference [20], ReRAM
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:42:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
1122
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014
Fig. 8. Programming method of the reverse-mirroring (RM).
Fig. 9. (a) The programming sequence of the RM as a unit of a block. (b) The
programming flow of the RM with 2 pages.
temporarily stores the re-ordered write data, and then the mir-
rored NAND flash memory is written. ReRAM is also used as a
non-volatile buffer to tolerate sudden power outage.
The write performance is discussed in Fig. 9. Fig. 9(a) shows
the worst case workload when the data is continuously trans-
ferred in a macroscopic view. First,
is written to both the
primary NAND flash memory
and the ReRAM simul-
taneously. The write access time of the ReRAM is shorter than
the NAND flash memory by more than 2 orders of magnitude.
Thus, writing to the ReRAM completes much faster than that to
the NAND flash memory. After
is filled with
to
is programmed to the primary NAND flash
memory
and the ReRAM. Then,
is read from
the ReRAM after
is written to the ReRAM. After that,
is programmed to the mirrored NAND flash memory.
The RM is achieved by continuing this procedure. Fig. 9(b) de-
picts the program flow of 2 pages. The latency penalty is one
write/read to/from the ReRAM per 1 page programming, which
is negligibly small compared with the write access time of the
NAND flash memory. Note that the original mirroring scheme
supports the simultaneous write to the primary and mirrored
NAND flash memories. Thus the simultaneous write in the RM
is also acceptable.
The measurement results are shown in Figs. 10–11. During
read, either the primary or mirrored NAND flash memory can
be selected, based on whichever is expected to have fewer er-
rors. Conventional mirroring schemes read data only from the
primary storage or both the primary and mirrored storage with
interleaving. When the data is read from both the primary and
mirrored storage, the read throughput increases by 2 times. The
read performance of the RM is the same or half compared with
the conventional mirroring schemes which read only from the
primary or both the primary and mirrored storage, respectively.
When the program-disturb error is dominant, the BERs of upper
pages are lower than those of lower pages. Hence, the data is
only read from the upper pages of both the primary and the mir-
rored NAND flash memories. According to the measurement
result in Fig. 10, the worst program-disturb BER of a page de-
creases by 69% with the RM. To eliminate the variation among
blocks, the data is only read from a certain block in the NAND
flash memory as primary data. Then, the read data is copied
and reversed as mirrored data. After that, the primary and mir-
rored read data is compared. Considering that the errors are fi-
nally eliminated by the error correction, the worst BER domi-
nates the total reliability of the storage. Thus, the worst BERs
should be suppressed. On the other hand, when the data-reten-
tion error is dominant, the data-retention BER is lower in the
younger page number. Thus, the RM controller reads the first
half of data in a block from the primary NAND flash memory
and the second half from the mirrored NAND flash memory. As
shown in Fig. 11, the worst data-retention BER is reduced up
to 41% with the RM. Whether the program-disturb error or the
data-retention error is dominant is determined by counting the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:42:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
TANAKAMARU et al.: NAND FLASH MEMORY/RERAM HYBRID UNIFIED SOLID-STATE-STORAGE ARCHITECTURE
1123
Fig. 10. Measured program-disturb BER improvement during the program-
disturb error dominant condition by the RM.
Fig. 11. Measured program-disturb BER improvement during the data-reten-
tion error dominant condition by the RM.
number of “1”-data [10]. Therefore, the proposed RM chooses
the optimal read method according to the dominant error mode.
B. Shift-Mirroring (SM)
The RM scheme significantly improves the reliability of the
storage system. However, SCMs such as ReRAMs are needed
for the buffer of the data. Thus, another technique with no
buffer is proposed: shift-mirroring (SM). Although the BER
improvement is not well as the RM, the SM can be applied to
the existing commercial storage system. The concept of the SM
is shown in Fig. 12 which realizes the semi-optimum data allot-
ment. As discussed in Section III A, the lower/upper pages and
large/small numbered pages should be paired to enhance the
reliability. For example,
is programmed to
and
of the primary and mirrored NAND flash memories,
respectively. As a result, the lower and upper pages are paired,
as well as the large and small numbered pages. Fig. 13 shows
the flow of the SM. When
is programmed to
in
the primary NAND flash memory,
is also programmed
to
in the mirrored NAND flash memory. Here,
is
defined as the shift number. Then,
is programmed to
and
in the primary and mirrored NAND flash
memories, respectively. After that,
is programmed
to
and
in the primary and
mirrored NAND flash memories, respectively. Programming
to both primary and mirrored NAND flash memories is a com-
pletely simultaneous operation, similarly to the conventional
mirroring scheme. Thus, there is no performance overhead in
the SM scheme. 255- pages (
to
) in
of the mirrored NAND flash memory are skipped. However,
compared with the capacity of the NAND flash memory over
64 Gbit, the skipped capacity is negligibly small. Similarly,
Fig. 12. Concept of the shift-mirroring (SM).
Fig. 13. Programming flow of the SM.
to
in the last block of the primary NAND
flash memory are also skipped.
As for read, the page with fewer errors are selected from ei-
ther the primary or mirrored NAND flash memory, similar to
the RM. Thus the read performance is the same as the RM. The
selection of the pages is optimized for each . Measured depen-
dence of the worst-case BER on the shift number
is depicted
in Fig. 14. To minimize both the program-disturb and data-re-
tention BER, should be around 128, according to the measured
results. Fig. 15 shows the dependence of the measured BER on
the data number in a block when
. The SM improves the
program-disturb BER by 57% (Fig. 15(a)), whereas the data-re-
tention error is reduced by 41% (Fig. 15(b)). The improvement
of the program-disturb BER by the SM is less than that by the
RM. The reason is expressed in Fig. 16. In the actual NAND
flash memory, 2 lower and 2 upper pages are allocated to one
WL due to the even-odd BL scheme [20]. The first 4 pages are
the lower pages. After that, 2 upper and 2 lower pages are as-
signed alternately as shown in Fig. 16. As a result, at least 2
lower pages (high BER pages) are paired, regardless of .
The worst program-disturb BER is serrated as
changes
(Fig. 14(a)). When
, the worst program-disturb
BER is minimum. The other conditions show less BER im-
provement. Fig. 17 shows the program-disturb BER when
. Since many lower pages are paired,
the improvement of the worst BER is small. Fig. 18 shows 4
patterns of the SM with all of
. Fig. 18(a) represents
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:42:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
1124
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014
Fig. 14. Measured worst BER when (a) the program-disturb error or (b) the
data-retention error is dominant.
Fig. 15. Measured program disturb BER improvement by the SM when
(a) during the program-disturb error dominant condition and (b) the data-
retention error dominant condition.
the example of the SM with
. The data
stored in the lower pages of the primary NAND flash memory
is also stored in the lower pages of the mirrored NAND flash
memory. Similarly, when
and
and 0, respectively), 1 of 2 lower pages in a WL is paired
Fig. 16. Compulsory pairing of the lower page, resulting in the less BER im-
provement of the SM than the RM.
Fig. 17. Measured program-disturb BER with the SM when
.
as shown in Figs. 18(b) and (d), respectively. On the other
hand, when
, data is appropriately
mirrored to lower and upper pages (Fig. 18(c)). Hence,
should
satisfy
to obtain maximum program-disturb BER
improvement.
As for the data-retention error, when
to 144 (except
and 142), the improvement by the SM is the same as by
the RM as shown in Fig. 14(b). A slightly larger improvement
(1%) was observed when
and 142, which is considered
as a measurement error. Fig. 19 explains why the data-retention
error is minimized when
is around 128 by comparing the re-
sults of the SM when
and 189. Since the data-retention
BER has an increasing trend with page number, the data-reten-
tion BER cannot be minimized by selecting not in the range of
110 to 144.
In summary, the merit of the SM is that it does not need SCM
buffer. On the other hand, the RM realizes the higher relia-
bility compared with the SM with negligibly small performance
penalty. From the reliability point of view, the RM is adopted in
this paper.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:42:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
TANAKAMARU et al.: NAND FLASH MEMORY/RERAM HYBRID UNIFIED SOLID-STATE-STORAGE ARCHITECTURE
1125
Fig. 18. Data assignment of the SM when (a)
, (b)
, (c)
, and (d)
.
Fig. 19. Measured data-retention BER with the SM when
and 189.
IV. ERROR-REDUCTION SYNTHESIS (ERS)
A. Controlling Sequence of ERS
Measurements of the program-disturb error show that in the
lower page,
errors dominate with no observable
errors as depicted in Fig. 20. The error asymmetries are ob-
served in [9]. Also in the upper page,
errors occur more
than
errors. Fig. 21 presents the algorithm of the ERS.
During write with the RM, the lower page data in the primary
NAND flash memory is stored in the upper page of the mirrored
NAND flash memory, which means that the dominant error di-
rections (
or
error) in the primary and the mirrored
NAND flash memories are opposite. In order to reduce bit errors
and maintain RM compatibility, the write data to the mirrored
NAND flash memory should be bit-flipped (Fig. 21(a)). Since
bit-flipping is realized by a simple logic, write performance is
not degraded by the ERS scheme. During read, the data in the
mirrored NAND flash memory is flipped back (Fig. 21(b)). As
a result, the error directions in both the primary and the mir-
rored NAND flash memories are virtually the same. After that,
the data in the primary and the mirrored NAND flash memories
are compared. If both data from the primary and the mirrored
NAND flash memories are the same, the data is directly output.
If mismatch, the ERS outputs “1” or “0” when the lower or the
upper page of the primary NAND flash memory is selected,
respectively. Based on the trend of the error directions in the
upper/lower pages, the mismatch can be corrected in most cases.
The error-reduction decision table in the case that
error
is dominant is shown in Table I. This table shows the summary
of the ERS algorithm. The false decision may also occur, but
rarely, as this would require a simultaneous bit error in both the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:42:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
1126
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014
Fig. 20. Measured error asymmetry of the program-disturb error.
Fig. 21. (a) Write flow of the ERS. (b) Read flow of the ERS.
primary and the mirrored NAND flash memories. If the BER of
the NAND flash memory is 1%, the probability that errors occur
in both the primary and the mirrored NAND flash memories is
0.01%, which is negligibly small. As a result, with the RM and
the ERS, the measured BER decreases by 91.5%, which corre-
sponds to a
ABER improvement as
shown in Fig. 22. The primary and mirrored data are read out in-
dependently from different NAND flash memory chips. Then,
the data from the primary and mirrored NAND flash memory
are compared. Note that the read performance is as same as the
RM scheme since the simple read scheme of ERS is not a per-
formance overhead.
B. Effect of Bit-Flipping
The data cannot be recovered correctly without bit-flipping
the data to the mirrored NAND flash memory. To demonstrate
Fig. 22. Measured dependence of the program-disturb BER on the page
number.
Fig. 23. Measured error asymmetry of the data-retention error.
this, the error-reduction strategy without bit-flipping is shown
in Table II. If the data to the mirrored NAND flash memory
is not bit-flipped, the major error direction is opposite in the
primary and the mirrored NAND flash memories. For example,
and
error are dominant in the primary and the
mirrored NAND flash memories, respectively. The same data
pattern; “0” in the primary and “1” in the mirrored NAND flash
memories occurs even if the original data is different. Thus, the
data cannot be recovered because it is impossible to distinguish
the original data. Therefore, bit-flipping is essential to combine
the ERS with the RM.
C. ERS in the Data-Retention Error Dominant Condition
Fig. 23 shows the measured error asymmetry of 2Xnm
NAND flash memory in the data-retention error dominant
condition. Immediately after programming,
error is
dominant in lower pages as described in Fig. 20. This is be-
cause the
of the memory cell increases by cell-to-cell
interference. As a result, only
error occurs due to
the errors in the second
state (“01”). As time goes by,
the
of the memory cell decreases because electrons are
ejected from the floating-gate by stress-induced leakage current
(SILC). As a result, the data-retention error increases while
the program-disturb error recovers during the data-retention
[21]. Thus, the dominant error mode in lower pages changes
from
to
. Similarly, in upper pages,
error
becomes dominant during the data-retention. Hence, the ERS
is still effective in the data-retention error dominant condition.
Similarly to the RM, the dominant error mode is determined
by counting the number of “1”s [10]. Then, the decision of the
data is adaptively executed according to the error mode.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:42:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
TANAKAMARU et al.: NAND FLASH MEMORY/RERAM HYBRID UNIFIED SOLID-STATE-STORAGE ARCHITECTURE
1127
Fig. 24. Measured (a) program-disturb BER and (b) data-retention BER improvements by the RM and the ERS of 2Xnm NAND flash memory. Measured (c)
program-disturb BER and (d) data-retention BER improvements by the RM and the ERS of 1Xnm NAND flash memory.
TABLE I
ERROR-REDUCTION DECISION TABLE
TABLE II
ERROR-REDUCTION DECISION TABLE WITHOUT BIT-FLIPPING
D. Measurement Results of RM and ERS
Fig. 24 shows the measurement results of the RM and the
ERS in 2X (Figs. 24(a) and (b)) and 1Xnm (Figs. 24(c) and (d))
NAND flash memories. Immediately after writing, program-
disturb error is dominant. Figs. 24(a) and (c) provide the im-
provement of the program-disturb BER. By the RM without the
ERS, the program-disturb BER is reduced by 69% and 45% in
2X and 1Xnm NAND flash memories, respectively. Moreover,
the RM with the ERS achieves 91% and 85% BER reductions
in 2X and 1Xnm NAND flash memories, respectively. After the
data-retention, the RM without the ERS improves the data-re-
tention BER by 41% and 14% in 2X and 1Xnm NAND flash
memories, respectively as shown in Figs. 24(b) and (d). From
the measurement results, the RM with the ERS can further im-
prove the data-retention BER up to 56% and 30% in 2Xnm and
1Xnm NAND flash memories, respectively.
Fig. 25. Algorithm of the page-RAID.
V. PAGE-RAID
A. Overview of Page-RAID
The algorithm of the page-RAID is explained in Fig. 25. The
page-failure protection is realized without performance degrada-
tion; the data is protected in the bit-line direction in addition to
the conventional ECC, which corrects the data in the word-line
direction. The block-parity is calculated by XOR-ing the data in
a NAND string and storing the result in the ReRAM. Only one
parity page is needed per NAND flash memory chip, because the
unified storage controller programs blocks in round-robin with
the page-level logical/physical address translation. As the first
step in this programming scheme, the data is programmed from
to
, After that,
is pro-
grammed from
to
. The physical programming
orderisfixedintheNANDflashmemorychips.
If there is an ECC failure, the victim page can be recovered by
calculating XOR of the other existing pages in the NAND flash
memory block. The block-parity in the ReRAM is updated every
time when a page is written in a NAND flash memory block. Re-
peated parity updating is feasible because high endurance, page
over-write is available in the ReRAM. When the NAND flash
memory block is almost full, the block-parity data is transferred
from the ReRAM to the last page of the NAND flash memory
block.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:42:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
1128
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014
B. Performance Evaluation
The effect on the system performance according to the choice
of the memory (MLC NAND flash memory, SLC NAND flash
memory, and ReRAM) as the parity buffer is discussed in this
subsection. Table III shows the representative performance pa-
rameters of MLC, SLC NAND flash memories, and ReRAM
[15]. The write latency of the MLC NAND is the average of the
lower-page latency (400
s) and the upper-page latency (2800
s). The operation flow of the proposed page-RAID is shown in
Fig. 26. First, the block-parity data is read from the parity buffer
to write the new page data and update the parity data. Then, the
block-parity is recalculated by XOR-ing the new page data and
the old parity data. After that, the user data is programmed to the
MLC NAND flash memory storage. Finally, the block-parity is
written to the parity buffer. The write-access time
is represented as follows:
(1)
Here
, and
are the read latency of the parity
buffer, the write latency of the storage, and the write latency
of the parity buffer, respectively.
and
are the
number of I/O pins for the parity buffer and storage, respec-
tively.
and
are the frequencies of I/O of the parity
buffer and storage, respectively. Each term in (1) represents
the parity-read time, the user-data write time, and the parity-
write time. The time penalty of creating a new block-parity with
XOR-ing the data is negligibly small and it is not included in
(1). Note that the write-access time of the conventional storage
without the page-RAID
can be derived from
the second term in (1) as follows:
(2)
The write-access times of “the conventional storage without
the page-RAID” and “the USSS with the page-RAID” in
(1) and (2) are shown in Fig. 27. The read and write laten-
cies of the ReRAM are set to 1
s. Various parity buffers
(MLC NAND flash memory, SLC NAND flash memory, and
ReRAM) are evaluated. As for the MLC NAND flash memory
parity buffer, the write-access time almost doubles because
2
writes to MLC NAND flash memory are needed for user
data and block-parity. As the higher performance memories
(SLC NAND flash memory and ReRAM) are used as the
parity buffer, the performance penalty is minimized. Thanks to
the lowest read/write latency of the ReRAM, the page-RAID
achieves high reliability with negligibly small write-access
time increase (1%). In this assumption, the garbage-collection
(GC) is not considered, which leads to an optimistic results
for the NAND flash memory parity buffers. During GC, first,
valid pages are buffered. Then, a block is erased and the valid
pages are copied. As a result, once an GC is triggered, the
write-access time increases by over 100 ms due to the erasure
and the page-copy operation. On the other hand, as for the
ReRAM parity buffer, no GC is required at any time because
Fig. 26. Flow of the page-RAID.
Fig. 27. Performance estimation of the page-RAID.
TABLE III
PERFORMANCE PARAMETERS OF NAND FLASH MEMORY AND RERAM [15]
the parity-data size is constant (same as the page size of the
NAND flash memory) and the ReRAM accepts overwriting.
The recovery time is discussed below. When an ECC failure
is detected, the page-RAID scheme goes into the recovery
mode. First, all of the existing
pages are read out
to calculate XOR. This takes roughly
.
The calculation time of XOR is excluded due to the negligibly
small operation time. After that, a whole block including the
recovered data is copied to another block in
.
As a result, the total wait time in the recovery mode is around
. From the parameters in
Table III, the total wait time is 431 ms.
C. Required Parity Buffer Ratio to Storage
During
one-block
NAND
flash
memory
write,
the
block-parity in ReRAM is overwritten
.
is the number of pages in a block. Considering NAND flash
memory’s endurance (4000 cycles), the required ReRAM
endurance can be roughly calculated as
cycles, which can be realized by using program verification and
optimizing the program pulse shapes [13], [14]. In this subsec-
tion, the required parity-buffer capacity is calculated based on
Table IV. The capacity of the storage and the parity buffer are
(bit) and
(bit), respectively.
is the required parity-buffer
ratio to storage, which is the vertical axis of Fig. 28. When the
total write data to the storage is
(bit),
(bit) data is written to the parity buffer as the block-parity. This
is because the last page in a NAND flash memory block is used
to store the block-parity data. Therefore,
pages
in a block are used for storing the user data. As the capacity
and the total write-data size are determined, the write/erase
cycle can be calculated from dividing the total write-data size
by the capacity. The write/erase cycle of the storage is
,
whereas that of the parity buffer is
.
The acceptable write/erase cycle of the storage and the parity
buffer are defined as
and
, respectively. Not
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:42:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
TANAKAMARU et al.: NAND FLASH MEMORY/RERAM HYBRID UNIFIED SOLID-STATE-STORAGE ARCHITECTURE
1129
Fig. 28. Required parity buffer ratio to the storage.
Fig. 29. BER after ECC with and without the page-RAID.
TABLE IV
CALCULATION TABLE TO EVALUATE THE PARITY BUFFER SIZE FOR THE
PAGE-RAID
to wear out the parity buffer before the storage reaches its
write/erase cycle limit, the following inequality should hold.
(3)
The dependence of the required parity-buffer ratio to storage on
the acceptable write/erase cycle of the parity buffer which is de-
rived from (3) is depicted in Fig. 28. The acceptable write/erase
cycle of MLC NAND flash memory, SLC NAND flash memory,
and ReRAM are 4000,
, and
, respectively. When both
the storage and the parity buffer consist of the MLC NAND
flash memory, the required parity buffer capacity is almost the
same as the storage capacity. When ReRAM is used as the parity
buffer, the required parity buffer capacity is less than 0.1% of the
storage capacity. Moreover, 100
less capacity than the SLC
NAND flash memory is needed in the ReRAM parity buffer.
When the storage capacity is 1 TByte, the 420 Mbytes ReRAM
is needed as the parity-buffer.
D. Acceptable BER Improvement
The acceptable BER improvement by the page-RAID is eval-
uated. Bose-Chaudhuri-Hocquenghem (BCH) error-correcting
code (ECC) which corrects up to
(bit) random errors is widely
used for the NAND flash memory storage. The BCH ECC failure
rate
ofdecodingisrepresentedasfollows:
(4)
Here
is the code length of the ECC and RBER is the
raw BER of the NAND flash memory. As for the conventional
schemewithoutthepage-RAID,theapproximateBERafterECC
iscalculatedas
dividedbytheuserdatasize
in the ECC codeword
[22].
(5)
In addition to the ECC, the page-RAID can correct one ECC
failure per NAND flash memory block. Then, the BER after ECC
with the page-RAID
is calculated similarly to
(5) as follows:
(6)
Inthe numerator of (6),
and
mean that “all of the page-data in a block is cor-
rectable by the ECC” and “one page-data within
is not
correctable by the ECC,” respectively. The latter term repre-
sents the correction by the page-RAID. Then, the sum is sub-
tracted from 1. As a result, the numerator in (6) represents the
block-failure rate of a NAND flash memory block with the ECC
and the page-RAID. After that, to calculate the improved BER
with the page-RAID, the block-failure rate is divided by the total
user data ina block.Fig.29 illustrates the dependence of the BER
after BCH ECC withand withoutthe page-RAID (
and
) on the raw BER of NAND flash memory.
The conventional BCH ECC corrects 40 bit per 1 KByte code-
word. Since the market requirement of the BER after ECC is
,theABERimprovesby45%withthepage-RAID.
VI. ERROR-MASKING (EM)
A. Algorithm of Error-Masking (EM)
Over time, memory cell
decreases, and once an error
occurs, it is irrecoverable. If the error location, or the error ad-
dress during the read is obtained, the errors can be eliminated in
the next read by recording the error location to a table. Fig. 30
shows the flow of the EM. The EM consists of error-recording
and error-masking sequences. In error-recording sequence, the
error address is extracted by comparing the data before and after
ECC. The error-location table is created as follows. First, all
“0” vector which has the same length as the write data size
(ex. page size) is prepared. After that, the corresponding error
address is marked as “1” in the error-location table and then
stored to the ReRAM with compression. In the error-masking
sequence, errors are masked by comparing the read-data and the
pre-recorded error-location table. After masking the errors, the
data is decoded by the ECC decoder and transferred to the host.
The latencies of the error-recording and error-masking se-
quences are discussed below. In the error-recording sequence
or error-masking sequence, writing or reading to/from ReRAM
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:42:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
1130
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014
Fig. 30. Error-recording and error-masking sequences.
is added to the conventional read flow. The compression and
decompression times are sufficiently short. As a result, the per-
formance penalty is the read/write latency of the ReRAM di-
vided by the read latency of the NAND flash memory which is
(3
s/85
s)
%, according to Table III.
B. Compression of Error-Location Table
Since the BER is below a few percent, the number of
error flag “1”s in the error-location table is small. Thus, the
error-location table can be efficiently compressed by run-length
encoding (RLE) before the error-location table is stored in the
ReRAM. The physical NAND flash memory address corre-
sponds to the physical ReRAM address to further save the write
data to the ReRAM. In the RLE, the number of “0” is counted
and converted to a binary expression. The page-size and the
corresponding initial error-location table size can be
bit.
Any number of “0”s in the error-location table can be expressed
in
bits. The calculation of the compressed error-location
table size ratio to the user data
is derived below.
represents the overhead of the error-location table to the user
data.
(7)
Here
is the BER of the NAND flash memory.
There is another method to record the error-location: to
record the error-address itself without compression. Suppose
the NAND flash memory chip capacity is
bit.
bits are
needed to express one error-address. As a result, the error-ad-
dress table size ratio to the user data
is expressed as
below.
(8)
and
are illustrated in Fig. 31. The page size is 8
KByte
and the chip capacity is 128 Gbit
.
Obviously from (7) and (8), it is more efficient to create the
error-location table with RLE since
is always larger than
.
For example, when the BER of NAND flash memory is 1%, the
error-location table is compressed to 16%. Note that the com-
pression of the error-location table can be realized by a simple
logic since the operation is only counting the number of “0”s
and converting it to a binary expression. Therefore, there is a
negligibly small performance penalty due to the compression.
C. Measurement Results
Fig. 32 shows the measured BER improvement by the EM
when the data-retention error is dominant. To emulate the
ReRAM, the error-location table is stored in a DRAM of the
host PC. The error-recording sequence is followed by the
Fig. 31. Comparison between
and
.
Fig. 32. Measured BER improvement by the EM in the data-retention error
dominant condition.
error-masking sequence. After the errors are masked, the BER
of the NAND flash memory decreases by 67%, corresponding
to a 3
ABER improvement.
The EM can also be applied to the program-disturb error dom-
inant condition. In the case of the program-disturb error, the
unified storage controller has the correct raw data because of
just after writing, differently from the data-retention error case.
Therefore, in principle any errors can be masked by creating the
error-location table and comparing the read-data with the pro-
gramming-data. However, the actual device measurement im-
plies that the program-disturb error even increases after the pro-
gramming. Thus, two scenarios of the EM are examined below.
The dependence of the BER of the NAND flash memory on the
time after programming is shown in Fig. 33. After a few seconds
after the programming, the BER of the NAND flash memory in-
creases by about 20%. It can be attributed to the diffusion of the
trapped charge. Within 30 s, the program-disturb error is dom-
inant. The first scenario is described in Fig. 33(a). When the
error-location table is created immediately after the program-
ming, the BER improves by 60% with the EM. On the other
hand, as shown in Fig. 33(b), when the error-location table is
created and the error-masking is executed 10 s and 20 s after
programming, respectively, the BER decreases by 66%. This
also corresponds to a 3
ABER improvement, similar to the
data-retention error dominant case. The system and the appli-
cation should be optimized to allow holding the programming
data for 10s to create the error-location table.
VII. OVERALL RELIABILITY IMPROVEMENT
The overall ABER improvement is shown in Fig. 34. First,
the ABER of the conventional scheme which consists of 40 bit
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:42:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
TANAKAMARU et al.: NAND FLASH MEMORY/RERAM HYBRID UNIFIED SOLID-STATE-STORAGE ARCHITECTURE
1131
Fig. 33. Measured BER improvement by the EM in the program-disturb error
dominant condition. The error-masking sequences are executed (a) 10 s and (b)
20 s after the programming.
Fig. 34. Overall ABER improvement.
correction per 1-KByte codeword BCH ECC is 0.13%. This is
calculated by finding the RBER when
becomes
in (5). With the page-RAID and the EM, the ABER im-
proves by 1.45 and 3 , respectively. As a result, the ABER is
enhanced up to 4.4
by the proposed techniques without mir-
roring. On the other hand, the ABER of the conventional mir-
roring scheme (ECC
Mirroring) is calculated with
in (6). This is because if
in the page-RAID, the
block-parity is the same as the user data, which represents the
mirroring scheme. The ABER further improves with the RM
and the ERS by 2.6
or 12
when the data-retention or the pro-
gram-disturb error is dominant, respectively. Consequently, the
overall ABER with all of the proposed four techniques including
mirroring increases by 6.2
or 32
when the data-retention or
the program-disturb error is dominant, respectively.
Figs. 35 and 36 evaluates these reliability improvements with
the objective of data-retention time and the acceptable write/
erase (W/E) cycles. Fig. 35 shows the dependence of the data-re-
tention BER on the data-retention time when the W/E cycle is
2.5 k and 5 k cycles. The ABER of the conventional and the
proposed methods for the data-retention error dominant condi-
tion is 0.21% and 1.3%, respectively. Therefore, the acceptable
data-retention time increases by 34 . On the other hand, as-
suming the same data-retention time, the W/E cycle improves
by 2
from 2.5 k to 5 k cycles. Fig. 36 shows the dependence of
the program-disturb BER on W/E cycle. When the program-dis-
turb error is dominant, the ABER is improved from 0.21% to
Fig. 35. Acceptable W/E cycles and the data-retention time improvements in
the data-retention error dominant condition.
Fig. 36. Acceptable W/E cycles improvement in the program-disturb error
dominant condition.
TABLE V
SUMMARY OF THIS WORK
6.7%. Consequently, the acceptable W/E cycles improves by
4.2
. The results above are summarized in Table V.
VIII. CONCLUSION
This paper proposes the unified solid-state storage (USSS) ar-
chitecture with four techniques, the reverse mirroring (RM), the
error reduction synthesis (ERS), the page-RAID and the error
masking (EM) schemes. Additionally, the shift-mirroring (SM)
is proposedwith no paritybuffer whichrealizes roughlythe same
effect as the RM. The proposed USSS adopts the RM due to the
higher BER improvement. The proposed architecture mitigates
the penalty of the duplicated error correction and redundancies
in the conventional storage system. Moreover, the conventional
storage system is optimized for or extended from the HDD-based
system. The proposed USSS is purely optimized for NAND flash
memories and therefore the reliability can be maximized. The
acceptable bit error rate (ABER) is improved up to 4.4
by ap-
plying the page-RAID and the EM without any mirroring tech-
niques. Additionally, all of the proposed techniques including
mirroring (RM and ERS) improve the ABER by 32
compared
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:42:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
1132
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 61, NO. 4, APRIL 2014
with the conventional mirroring scheme. This result corresponds
to 2
higher write/erase endurance or 34
longer data-reten-
tion time when the data-retention error is dominant. The ABER
of NAND flash memories is improved to 6.7% with the USSS,
assuming 40 bitcorrection per 1 KByte ECC.Inthe program-dis-
turb error dominant condition, the ABER is improved by 6.2 ,
corresponding to 4.2
W/E cycle improvement. The proposed
techniques can also be applied with other ECC schemes such as
asymmetriccoding[9]andLDPCcodes[10].
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The
authors
appreciate
T.
O.
Iwasaki,
K.
Johguchi,
S. Hachiya, and K. Miyaji for their support.
REFERENCES
[1] Oracle and RAID Usage. [Online]. Available: http://www.dba-oracle.
com/oracle_tips_raid_usage.htm
[2] S. Tanakamaru, M. Doi, and K. Takeuchi, “Unified solid-state-storage
architecture with NAND flash memory and ReRAM that tolerates 32x
higher BER for big-data applications,” in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits
Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers, 2013, pp. 226–227.
[3] M. Shibata et al., “A 19 nm 112.8 mm2 64 Gb multi-level flash memory
with 400 Mb/s/pin 1.8 V toggle mode interface,” in IEEE Int. Solid-
State Circuits Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers, 2012, pp. 422–423.
[4] Y. Li et al., “128 Gb 3 b/cell NAND flash memory in 19 nm technology
with 18 MB/s write rate and 400 Mb/s toggle mode,” in IEEE Int. Solid-
State Circuits Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers, 2012, pp. 436–437.
[5] J. D. Lee, S. H. Hur, and J. D. Choi, “Effects of floating-gate interfer-
ence on NAND flash memory cell operation,” IEEE Electron Device
Lett., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 264–266, May 2002.
[6] M. Park et al., “Direct field effect of neighboring cell transistor on
cell-to-cell interference of NAND flash cell arrays,” IEEE Electron De-
vice Lett., vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 174–177, Feb. 2009.
[7] C. M. Compagnoni, A. S. Spinelli, S. Beltrami, M. Bonanomi, and A.
Visconti, “Cycling effect on the random telegraph noise instabilities of
NOR and NAND flash arrays,” IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 29,
no. 8, pp. 941–943, Aug. 2008.
[8] S.-M. Joe et al., “Threshold voltage fluctuation by random telegraph
noise in floating gate NAND flash memory string,” IEEE Trans. Elec-
tron Devices, vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 67–73, Jan. 2011.
[9] S. Tanakamaru, C. Hung, and K. Takeuchi, “Highly reliable and low
power SSD using asymmetric coding and stripe bitline-pattern elimi-
nation programming,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 47, no. 1, pp.
85–96, Jan. 2012.
[10] S. Tanakamaru, Y. Yanagihara, and K. Takeuchi, “Over-10x-extended-
lifetime 76%-reduced-error solid-state drives (SSDs) with error-pre-
diction LDPC architecture and error-recovery scheme,” in IEEE Int.
Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers, 2012, pp. 424–425.
[11] A. Kawahara et al., “An 8 Mb multi-layered cross-point ReRAM macro
with 443 MB/s write throughput,” in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits
Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers, 2012, pp. 432–433.
[12] T.-Y. Li et al., “A 130.7 mm 2-layer 32 Gb ReRAM memory device in
24 nm technology,” in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig. Tech.
Papers, 2013, pp. 210–211.
[13] A. Kawahara et al., “Filament scaling forming technique and
level-verify-write scheme with endurance over 10 cycles in ReRAM,”
in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers, 2013, pp.
220–221.
[14] K. Higuchi, T. O. Iwasaki, and K. Takeuchi, “Investigation of verify-
programming methods to achieve 10 million cycles for 50 nm HfO
ReRAM,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Memory Workshop, 2012, pp. 119–122.
[15] H. Fujii, K. Miyaji, K. Johguchi, K. Higuchi, C. Sun, and K. Takeuchi,
“x11 performance increase, x6.9 endurance enhancement, 93% energy
reduction of 3D TSV-integrated hybrid ReRAM/MLC NAND SSDs
by data fragmentation suppression,” in IEEE Symp. VLIS Circuits Dig.,
2012, pp. 134–135.
[16] C. Sun, K. Miyaji, K. Johguchi, and K. Takeuchi, “x8 high
write-throughput, 84% write-energy saving, x6.5 extended life-
time hybrid ReRAM/MLC NAND SSD with cold data eviction
algorithm,” in Proc. IEEE Non-Volatile Memory Technology Symp.,
2012, pp. 87–88.
[17] D. A. Patterson, G. Gibson, and R. H. Katz, “A case for redundant
arrays of inexpensive disks (RAID),” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Conf.,
1988, pp. 109–116.
[18] C. Lee et al., “A 32 Gb MLC NAND-flash memory with
-en-
durance-enhancing schemes in 32 nm CMOS,” in IEEE Int. Solid-State
Circuits Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers, 2010, pp. 446–447.
[19] K. Takeuchi, T. Tanaka, and T. Tanzawa, “A multi-page cell architec-
ture for high-speed programming multi-level NAND flash memories,”
in IEEE Symp. VLIS Circuits Dig., 1997, pp. 67–68.
[20] K.-T. Park, M. Kang, D. Kim, S. Hwang, Y.-T. Lee, C. Kim, and K.
Kim, “A zeroing cell-to-cell interference page architecture with tem-
porary LSB storing program scheme for sub-40 nm MLC NAND flash
memories and beyond,” in IEEE Symp. VLSI Circuits Dig., 2007, pp.
188–189.
[21] S. Tanakamaru, M. Doi, and K. Takeuchi, “Error-prediction analyses in
1X, 2X and 3Xnm NAND flash memories for system-level reliability
improvement of solid-state drives (SSDs),” in Proc. IEEE Int. Relia-
bility Physics Symp., 2013, pp. 3B.3.1–3B.3.6.
[22] N. Mielke et al., “Bit error rate in NAND flash memories,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Reliability Physics Symp., 2008, pp. 9–19.
Shuhei Tanakamaru (S’09) received the B.E. and
M.E. degrees in engineering from the University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, in 2009 and 2011, respectively,
where he is currently working toward the Ph.D. de-
gree.
He has been engaged in a research on the
low-power DRAM, SRAM, and highly reliable
solid-state drive (SSD).
Masafumi Doi (S’13) received the B.E. degree from
the Chuo University, Tokyo, Japan, in 2013, where
he is currently working toward the M.S. degree.
He has been engaged in a research on the reliability
of NAND flash memory.
Ken Takeuchi (M’01) is currently a Professor
at the Department of Electrical, Electronic, and
Communication Engineering, Faculty of Science
and Engineering of Chuo University. He is now
working on the database storage system for big-data
application, VLSI circuit design, signal processing
and device such as the emerging non-volatile
memories, 3D-integrated SSDs, low-power 3D-LSI
circuits and ultra low-voltage SRAMs. He received
the B.S. and M.S. degrees in applied physics and
the Ph.D. degree in electric engineering from the
University of Tokyo, Japan, in 1991, 1993, and 2006, respectively. In 2003,
he also received the M.B.A. degree from Stanford University. Since he joined
Toshiba in 1993, he had been leading Toshiba’s NAND flash memory circuit
design for fourteen years. He was an Associate Professor at the Department
of Electrical Engineering and Information Systems, Graduate School of
Engineering of the University of Tokyo from 2007 until 2012. In 2012, he
joined Chuo University. He designed six world’s highest density NAND flash
memory products such as 0.7 m 16Mbit, 0.4 m 64Mbit, 0.25 m 256Mbit,
0.16 m 1Gbit, 0.13 m 2Gbit and 56nm 8Gbit NAND flash memories. He
holds 215 patents worldwide including 115 U.S. patents. Especially, with his
invention, “multipage cell architecture”, presented at the Symposium on VLSI
Circuits in 1997, he successfully commercialized the world’s first multi-level
cell NAND flash memory in 2001. He has authored numerous technical papers,
one of which won the Takuo Sugano Award for Outstanding Paper at ISSCC
2007. He has served on the program committee member of IEEE International
Solid-State Circuits Conference (ISSCC), Asian Solid-State Circuits Confer-
ence (A-SSCC), International Memory Workshop (IMW) and Non-Volatile
Memory Technology Symposium (NVMTS). He served as a tutorial speaker at
ISSCC 2008, SSD forum organizer at ISSCC 2009, 3D-LSI forum organizer
at ISSCC 2010, Ultra-low voltage LSI forum organizer at ISSCC 2011 and
Robust VLSI System forum organizer at ISSCC 2012.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:42:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
