2023 25th International Conference on Digital Signal Processing and its Applications (DSPA) | 979-8-3503-3723-5/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/DSPA57594.2023.10113447

An Approach to Routes Enumeration in QC LDPC Base Matrices

Aleksei Kharin, Konstantin Zavertkin, Sergei Ganin Sphera Lab Limited Liability Company Ryazan, Russia
kharin.a.v@tor.rsreu.ru, zavertkin.k.n@tor.rsreu.ru, ganin.s.v@tor.rsreu.ru

Abstract—This paper presents an approach to routes enumeration in QC LDPC base matrices. The approach is based on a tree search and allows to enumerate routes of arbitrary length in base matrices with circulants weight more than one. Equivalent cycles elimination mechanism and balanced cycle detection technique are included. Proposed approach also allows to build EMDspectre for base matrices.
Keywords—Communication systems, Quasi-Cyclic codes, LowDensity Parity-Check codes, error correction codes, cycles, EMDspectre.
I. INTRODUCTION
One of the well-known classes of structured low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes is based on protographs [1]. Such codes are constructed by lifting a smaller Tanner graph, called the base graph, into a lifted graph. When using circulant permutations in the lifting process, the resultant code is called quasi-cyclic (QC).
Many QC LDPC codes construction methods are based on the idea of base graph lifting. Lifting coefficients are selected to exclude cycles of certain length or properties. This is possible due to a connection between routes in a base graph and cycles in the lifted graph. The connection is described with the equation from [2]. So, to start the construction of a QC LDPC codes it’s first necessary to obtain a list of routes from its base graph.
A set of different algorithms were proposed to enumerate routes in base graphs [3]–[5]. In our previous works [6], [7] an approach based on short cycles conjunction was proposed. This approach works well for cycles of length no longer than 10 and base graphs with no parallel edges. In case of cycles of length over 10 the number of possible short cycles combinations grows extremely fast. Also, combinations that can not be described as a pair of short cycles appear (Figure 1). Furthermore, even more possible combinations of cycles should be considered if there are parallel edges in a base graph. So, a new algorithm is required to work with longer cycles and more complex base graphs.
In this paper we propose a new approach that solves the above problems and allows to enumerate cycles of arbitrary length in base graphs of any structure. The approach is based on a tree search method and allows to enumerate routes, exclude equivalent cycles and detect balanced cycles.
This work was supported by Russian Science Foundation under Grant 2229-20140.

Figure 1. Example of structures that can not be described as a pair of short cycles: a) of length 12, b) with parallel edges

The paper is organized as follows: the next section provides common definitions and notations used in this paper. In Section III, the proposed enumeration algorithm is presented. Results obtained with the proposed algorithm are presented in Section IV. Section V concludes the paper.

II. DEFINITIONS AND NOTATIONS

Let Gb{Vb ∪ Cb, Eb} denote a base bipartite graph of an (n, k) QC LDPC code of rate R = k/n, which consists of the set of nb = n/z variable nodes Vb = {v0, v1, ..., vnb−1}, the set of mb ≥ (n − k)/z check nodes Cb = {c0, c1, ..., cmb−1} and the set of l edges Eb = {e0, e1, ..., el}. Where z is called a lifting factor. An LDPC code is said to be quasi-cyclic if it can be presented by a (nb, mb) base matrix where each element represents a z x z circulant permutation matrix. The parity-check matrix H of a k/n rate QC LDPC code of length n = z · nb can be represented by:

 P0,0

 P1,0

H =  

...

P0,1

...

P0,nb−1 

P1,1

...

P1,nb−1 

...

...

...

 (1)  

Pmb−1,0 Pmb−1,1 . . . Pmb−1,nb−1)

where Pi,j =

wi,j t=1

I(sit,j )

represents

a

sum

of

square

z

x

z

circulant permutation matrices I(sti,j) whose nonzero elements

in each row are cyclically shifted to the right by sit,j for wi,j >

0 and Pi,j is a square zero matrix for wi,j = 0.

The base weight matrix of a QC LDPC code can be

represented by:

 w0,0

 w1,0

Wb

=

 



...

w0,1

...

w0,nb−1 

w1,1 . . . w1,nb−1 

...

...

...

 (2)  

wmb−1,0 wmb−1,1 . . . wmb−1,nb−1

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:16:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 2. Nodes and edges definitions a) and connection list b) for the example matrix

where wi,j ≥ 0 is called a circulant’s weight and represents a number of circulant permutation matrices in Pi,j.
The set of nodes Vb in the base graph corresponds to the columns of Wb. The set of nodes Cb in the base graph corresponds to the rows of Wb. Each wi,j defines number of edges between Vi variable node and Cj check node. Total number of edges is equal to l = i,j wi,j.
We define a route r of length g as a sequence of edges
r = {e0, e1, ..., eg−1} that starts and ends at the same variable node vi where ej ≠ ej+1 for j ∈ [0, g − 1].

III. ROUTES ENUMERATION ALGORITHM

A. Algorithm basics

The core idea of the proposed method is based on [5] and

tree building and is extended to work with base graphs that

contain parallel edges. We construct a tree for any variable

node of the base graph. This tree represents all possible routes

that start from the node. Depth of the tree is half of the desired

routes length. Than each branch of the tree is compared with

all the others to check if they end with the same node. Those

branches that end with the same node define a route. A set of

limitations is applied as not every pair of branches leads to a

route.

For example, to find routes of length g = 6 that start from

node v0 in the base graph Gb defined by the following base

weight matrix

Wb =

1 1

1 1

1 2

(3)

we numerate nodes and edges (Figure 2 and then build a tree (Figure 3).
It can be seen, that only branches that start through different edges from the root node can form a route. We define parts of tree that grow from different edges as sub-trees. And further for every variable node we do not build a single tree but instead we build a set of sub-trees. We combine branches of different sub-trees to build routes. For example, we build route r = {e0, e2, e3, e6, e5, e1} from the first branch of sub-tree 0 and the third branch of sub-tree 1.
From the sub-trees for the v0 node we find all the routes that go through the node. That is not the full list of routes

Figure 3. Tree representation for node v0

that exist in the base graph. There are routes that do not go through the v0 node. To find them we delete connections to the v0 node

Wb′ =

0 0

1 1

1 2

(4)

and build sub-trees for the v1 node. For base graph without parallel edges at least two variable
and two check nodes are necessary for route to exist. If there are parallel edges in the base graph then just a pair of variablecheck nodes can have routes in it. That is why we perform the route searching procedure even for the last column of the weight base matrix

Wb′′ =

0 0

0 0

1 2

(5)

that corresponds to the v2 node and build the following sub-trees (Figure 5). We can see that a route r = {e5, e6, e5, e6, e5, e6} of length 6 can be found in this case.
The whole process of routes searching can be summarized as follows. We build sub-trees for the v0 node of the base graph and search for routes. Then we delete connections of the v0 node, build sub-trees for the v1node and search for routes. We continue doing this for all the variable nodes in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:16:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 4. Tree storage structure

Figure 5. Tree representation for node v2 with deleted connections for nodes v0 and v1
the base graph until we reach the last one. Final set of subtrees is build for the vnb node with connection for all the other node being deleted. After the search for routes in the final subtrees is finished we have the full list of routes that exist in the base graph.
Further we will discuss implementation details of the routes searching procedure.
B. Tree construction
To build a tree we first construct a list of connection for the base graph Gb. The list consists of nb + mb elements that correspond to the nodes of the graph. Each element stores information about a number of connection the node have to other nodes. Each connection is defined as an edge number and a node number. The connection list for the example matrix (3) is presented in Figure 2.
Starting the sub-trees construction process we define the number of sub-trees as the number of connections for the first node. Two connections for the v0 node (Figure 2) lead to two sub-trees construction (Figure 3). Further each sub-tree is constructed based on a recursive approach.

Storing sub-trees in a classic way as a set of nodes that link to parent nodes is not optimal for the task. First, because too many branches must be compared to see if they can form a route. For long routes and for base matrices with large column weights number of branches in a single sub-tree can be extremely large (hundreds of thousands). And to compare each branch of such a sub-tree with each branch of another sub-tree to see if they end with the same node will take a huge amount of time. Second, when we find a couple of branches from different sub-trees that end with the same node we must recreate the half-routes for the branches. To do so we have to go to the root of the sub-tree to get a list of edges that the half-route goes through. It is not a very fast process. Taking into account the possible number of branches this necessity to recreate the half-route over and over again will have a huge influence on the computational complexity of the algorithm.
To solve the described problems we store sub-trees in a different way (Figure 4). The idea is to store half-route descriptions associated to the nodes they lead to. In sub-trees only nodes of one type can exist at certain level. As we start building trees from a variable node then root nodes of subtrees are check nodes. Only variable nodes can exist at odd levels of sub-trees. While at even levels only check nodes are achievable. Also number of nodes is finite and is known before we start building sub-trees. So for every level of a sub-tree we store nodes that can be achieved at this level.
For every node at a certain level of a sub-tree we store a set of half-routes that lead to this node. Trade-off between speed and memory consumption is possible here. We can represent each half-route as a set of edge numbers. Each edge is defined by its number that requires at least 2 bytes to store (if there are less that 16384 edges in the graph). Or we can represent a half-route as a set of ”turns” starting from the root vertex. Number of possible ”turns” from each vertex is defined by its weight and in modern codes can not be over 256. So only 1 byte is enough to store each element of the half-route. But in this case we have to go through the half-route to obtain its real values. Getting a two time advantage in memory leads to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:16:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE I. Minimal and maximal EMD valued for the CCSDS R = 1/2 code
Cycle 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 Min EMD 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Max EMD 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30

Figure 6. Routes storage

a significant set back in computation complexity. Two half-routes form a route if they end in the same node.
But if the node in both half-routes is reached through the same edge then they can not form a route. The first condition does not need to be checked as we store half-routes in association with end nodes and can combine only half-routes that end in the same node. The second condition can be eliminated in a similar way. We divide the list of half-routes for each node based on the edge the node is reached through. This allows us to combine only those half-routes that form a route and to exclude any condition checks in the process.
The proposed sub-tree storage structure provides an efficient way to construct routes from half-routes. The next question is how to store the routes.

C. Routes representation
The way we store routes is dictated by the way how we plan to use them in further. As it was mentioned earlier routes are transformed into cycles in a lifted graph. Transformation rule for a route r = {e0, e1, ..., eg−1} of length g is described by the equation [2]:

g−1

(−1)ksk = 0 mod z,

(6)

k=0

where si is a lifting coefficient value associated with the edge ei. So, we do not need to store a route itself but only the equation it defines. In this case we are not interested in the order of the route elements. We only need to know the sign with which the element is included in the equation. Based in these assumptions we use the following approach to routes storing (Figure 6). We divide all the edges into positive ones and negative ones. Each set is sorted in ascending order. Sorting allows us to implement some cross-route checks.
If there is a similar edge in positive and negative sets then it can be excluded from the routes. The route becomes of a shorter length. It can be shown, that this route exists in the graph. So, it was already found and is stored with the routes of that length. And we do not need to store it and count it in further operations.
If a set of positive edges is equal to the set of negative ones then we have a balances cycle. It can not be eliminated by lifting coefficients adjustment. Presence of such cycles is very important for further code construction. So it is good to detect them as early as possible.

Also tree-based route search method can detect identical routes through different pairs of half-branches. With the proposed routes storage approach it is easy to detect such routes and exclude copies.
IV. RESULTS
Current implementation of the proposed routes enumeration algorithm can be used in two different ways. First, it allows to obtain a list of routes for any QC LDPC code through analysis of its base matrix. Second, it can build routes EMD-spectre for base matrices of QC LDPC codes.
With the proposed method we were able to get list of routes with length up to 20 for a wide range of codes. EMD-spectres were also calculated. Table I presents minimal and maximal EMD values for cycle of length up to 20 for the CCSDS R = 1/2 QC LDPC code [8].
V. CONCLUSION
The proposed algorithm allows to enumerate routes in base graphs of QC LDPC codes. It works with graphs with any number of parallel edges. The length of enumerated routes is only limited by computation time or memory consumption. The results provided by the algorithm may be further used in different code construction techniques. In future work we plan to adopt the algorithm to cycle enumeration in already lifted graphs. This will allow to obtain cycles distribution and EMD-spectre of constructed codes.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Thorpe, Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from protograph IPN Progr. Rep. 42-154, Aug. 2003, JPL.
[2] M. P. C. Fossorier. Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.
[3] M. Diouf, D. Declercq, M. Fossorier, S. Ouya and B. Vasic, ”Improved PEG construction of large girth QC-LDPC codes,” 2016 9th Int. Symp. on Turbo Codes and Iterative Inf. Processing (ISTC), Brest, 2016, pp. 146-150.
[4] M. H. Tadayon, A. Tasdighi, M. Battaglioni, M. Baldi, and F. Chiaraluce, “Efficient Search of Compact QC-LDPC and SC-LDPC Convolutional Codes With Large Girth,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 1156–1159, Jun. 2018.
[5] I. E. Bocharova, B. D. Kudryashov and R. Johannesson, ”Searching for Binary and Nonbinary Block and Convolutional LDPC Codes,” in IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 163-183, Jan. 2016.
[6] Kharin A.V., Zavertkin K.N. Ovinnikov A.A. ”Detecting Cycles of Length 8 in the Tanner Graph of a QC-LDPC Code Based on Protograph Analysis”, Probl. Inf. Transm., vol. 56, pp. 173–184, 2020.
[7] Kharin, A.V, Zavertkin K.N, Ovinnikov A.A. ”Detecting Cycles of Length 10 in the Tanner Graph of a QC-LDPC Code Based on Protograph Analysis”, Probl. Inf. Transm., vol. 56, pp. 317–331, 2020.
[8] Low Density Parity Check Codes for Use in Near-Earth and Deep Space Applications Experimental Specification Issue 1. CCSDS 131.1–0-1, August 2006.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:16:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

