2023 IEEE International Reliability Physics Symposium (IRPS) | 978-1-6654-5672-2/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/IRPS48203.2023.10118280

Reliability of 3D NAND Flash for Future Storage Systems (Invited)

Akira Goda
Micron Memory Japan Tokyo, Japan
agoda@micron.com

Kishore Kumar Muchherla
Micron Technology Inc San Jose, United States of America
kmuchherla@micron.com

Peter Feeley
Micron Technology Inc Boise, United States of America
pfeeley@micron.com

Abstract—The 3D NAND Flash technologies have been successful, having realized the high density, high performance and highly reliable storage systems. With the continuous technology scaling, significant challenges and opportunities are expected in the future. SLC NAND technology plays a critical role for the high performance systems. The increased block size with further layer stacking requires innovative solutions to realize enhanced system performance and cost scaling. For the bits per cell (BPC) scaling beyond QLC, the reduction of the total cost of ownership (TCO) at the system level is the key. In this paper, we review and discuss the challenges and opportunities of 3D NAND reliability from the storage system perspectives.

II. BLOCK SIZE SCALING
As shown in Fig.1, NAND array is divided into multiple planes. Each plane is divided into multiple blocks. Each block involves word lines and SGDs that determine the total number of individually addressable pages. NAND can support write and read operations across multiple planes in parallel. In Fig.1, a multi-plane read operation can access 4 pages of data (1 page from each plane) within a single read command. System prefers more planes/Tb density for higher performance [3], [4]. Plane parallelism is represented in planes per Tb density (planes/Tb).

Index Terms—Block size scaling, Block by deck, Beyond QLC, Cyclic buffer, Over-provisioning, QLC adoption, SLC cache, Total cost of ownership.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Over the last few decades, NAND Flash technology has evolved into a reliable high performance storage technology. Vertical stacking of wordlines, tier pitch scaling, stack height scaling and CMOS scaling have increased physical density [1], [2]. Larger Bits Per Cell (BPC) achieved larger logical density per cell and reduced cost/GB. Smaller BPC supported faster speeds and greater endurance/reliability for buffer and high endurance/reliability storage applications. By supporting a wide range of BPC from SLC to QLC, NAND technology has been able to offer diverse choice of cost, performance, endurance, and reliability options. Increasing host bandwidths and emerging applications (Internet of Things, social platforms, Big Data, 5G) have further increased the requirements.
As BPC increases and NAND technology scales, meeting the application and usage requirements and yet achieve the continuous node to node cost reduction goals require sustained innovations at component and system level. Understanding the application eco-system, reliability and performance requirements and trade-offs is necessary to co-optimize NAND and system.
In this paper, we will discuss key challenges created by NAND scaling, various opportunities created by the storage application trends and desired areas of innovations for future storage systems. We will provide the vertically integrated perspectives for the future technology scaling and storage system solutions.

Figure 1. Orgnaization of NAND die
A block is the minimum granularity of an erase operation. The block size is determined by: (1) number of wordlines, (2) number of SGDs, (3) bits per cell, and (4) page size (e.g., 16 KiB). Stacking wordlines is one of the commonly employed array scaling techniques on 3D NAND. Stacking more wordlines grows the array density in the vertical direction, reduces the array footprint (x, y dimensions), and reduces the cost per GB. However, an undesirable by-product of stacking more wordlines is the larger block size.
One of the key consequences from the large block size is the reduction of the number of blocks per plane. As shown in Fig.2, with a given size of plane, the larger block size leads to the reduction of the number of blocks per plane.
The loss of the number of blocks has several undesirable effects in system cost and performance such as spare block penalty and worse write amplification.

978-1-6654-56A7u2t-h2o/2ri3z/e$d3l1ic.0e0ns©ed20u2s3e IliEmEitEed to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:18:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10C.1-1

in Fig.4 case-1, “fixed” block stripes translate to increasing percentage of total blocks and worsen the cost penalty. Larger number of “fixed” blocks is typically desired by the system for data segregation to reduce write amplification (to be discussed later), improve performance, latency, and endurance.

Figure 2. Impact of block size on number of blocks/plane
While the fixed plane size is assumed for the simplicity in this paper, it should be noted that the actual plane size and the resultant blocks/plane have other complex dynamics dictated by the array scaling and CMOS scaling 3D NAND [1], [5].

A. Impact of blocks/plane on spare block overhead
To improve the system performance, systems write and read the data from different dice in parallel. Combination of plane parallelism at die level and die parallelism at drive level improves the overall system performance. NAND erase granularity is at block level. To improve the firmware efficiency, systems manage the data at block stripe level [6]. As shown in Fig.3, a block is picked from different planes and dice to form a group of blocks called block stripe (also referred as super block). Number of block stripes is typically equal to the number of blocks/plane.

Figure 4. Spare blocks on top of user density
Fig.5 depicts the % spare block penalty at different user density blocks/plane for different combination of “fixed” and “variable” block stripes. As blocks/plane falls below 200, spare block penalty is observed to take off.

Figure 3. Concept of block stripe

On top of the block stripes necessary to accommodate user density, system firmware needs extra block stripes to perform internal maintenance activity such as: (1) tracking logical to physical mapping, (2) storing firmware data (e.g., counters, logs), (3) write threads to segregate different flavors of data and (4) over-provisioning to reduce garbage collection [7]. These extra block stripes are accomplished by adding extra blocks to the NAND called as spare blocks. Since these spare blocks are not counted towards user density, they manifest as cost adders.
As shown in Fig.4, a portion of these spare block stripes can be categorized as “fixed” block stripes whose allocation is independent of block size. The other portion of the spare blocks can be called as “variable” block stripes whose allocation scales with block size. At fewer blocks/plane shown

Figure 5. % Spare block overhead at 1 logical block per physical block
A technology that can allow system to implement multiple logical blocks from a physical block can multiply the number of block stripes and reduce the spare block penalty.
B. Impact of blocks/plane on write amplification On NAND flash, erase is done at block level and
programming is done at page level. Host data invalidation is typically random in nature and may be smaller than NAND page size. This leads to islands of valid data in each block stripe. Valid data in a block stripe needs to be relocated to a different location before erasing a block stripe (garbage collection8 [7], [8]. As a result, the total amount of user data

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:18:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10C.1-2

written to the NAND is larger than host data. The ratio of data written on NAND to data written by host is called Write Amplification (WA).
To reduce the WA, block stripe with least amount of valid data is typically picked for garbage collection. Fewer blocks/plane at larger block size (e.g., case-1 in Fig.4) translates to fewer block stripes and larger block stripe size. When the host invalidates a sequential chunk of data, the invalidation percentage is smaller on a larger block stripe when compared to smaller block stripe. Lesser invalidation percentage translates to larger amount of data that needs to be relocated and causes an increase in WA. Larger WA increases endurance requirements and degrades performance.

Figure 7. % Spare block savings using BBD

C. Opportunity: Block by deck
Ability to support multiple logical blocks on each physical block can strike a middle ground in between technology and system preferences. Implementing logical block at deck level (Block by Deck or BBD) can be one such means [9]. BBD is taken as reference in this paper. If each deck can be erased and programmed independent of other deck, system firmware can implement a block stripe using a deck instead of physical block. In Fig.6, for the same number of physical blocks/planes, building a block stripe at deck level (case-2) has 2x block stripes when compared to building a block stripe at physical block level (case-1).

Fig.8 depicts the WA behavior for a typical Client SSD and mobile workloads at different blocks/plane. More blocks/plane translate to smaller block stripe and smaller WA. It is common to expect 10%-20% WA difference in between 200 blocks/plane and 500 blocks/plane. Smaller logical block size achieved using BBD can also achieve a smaller zone size in Zoned Namespace (ZNS) architecture [10], [11].

Figure 8. Write amplification for different blocks/plane

Figure 6. Block by deck depiction (2 decks per physical block)
Realizing more block stripes translates to lesser percentage constituted by “fixed” spare block stripes. Fig.7 depicts the % spare block savings achieved by implementing 2 logical blocks per physical block when compared to 1 logical block per physical block.
As the blocks/plane trend towards lesser than 200 blocks/plane, BBD can provide tangible cost reduction and enable system designs with a greater number of “fixed” blocks. The savings are expected to increase as the number of decks per physical block increases.

D. Block By Deck challenges
As shown in Fig.9, although decks are separated by dummy wordlines, they are electrically connected by a string. As each deck is erased and programmed independent of another deck, erase and program operations in one deck induces disturb on the other deck. Program verify and read operations on one deck require pass voltage to be applied across all decks. As a result, program verifies and reads in one deck cause read disturb in other deck.

Figure 9. Two logical blocks (top and bottom decks) in a physical block

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:18:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10C.1-3

In Fig.10, assume the top deck is written with media files (“cold” data, less frequently overwritten) and bottom deck is written with system metadata (“hot” data, more frequently overwritten). Top deck with cold and larger valid data percentage is less likely to be garbage collected. Bottom deck is more likely to be garbage collected when hot data is invalidated in future. As the system firmware repeatedly erases, programs and reads the bottom deck, various forms of disturb are induced on top deck. In this case, the bottom deck is the aggressor deck and the top deck is the victim deck.

B. Opportunity: Reliability buffer for QLC Datacenter
On Replacement Gate (RG) QLC, data is programmed in 2 passes [14]. As shown in Fig.11, 1st pass constitutes coarsely programmed data which is unreadable.

Figure 11. 16-16 coarse-fine programming in QLC

Figure 10. Disturb accumulation on victim deck
Victim decks need periodic refreshing when the various forms of disturb accumulated across multiple aggressor programerase cycles (P/E cycles) exceeds an acceptable threshold. Periodic refreshes increase WA. As the number of wordlines per block increases, the number of program verifies on the aggressor deck for each P/E cycle also increases. The read disturb impact on the victim deck for each aggressor deck P/E cycle also increases.

2nd pass constitutes finely programmed data which is readable. Buffering of 1st pass data in a readable format is necessary until 2nd pass is completed. 1st pass coarse data may be buffered either outside the NAND (e.g., SRAM, DRAM, NOR) or in the NAND (e.g., SLC, MLC, TLC). Coarse data buffering on the NAND consumes blocks which either adds cost or eats away into the user data over-provisioning (OP). As an example, Fig.12 depicts the % SLC buffer penalty expressed in terms of QLC user density blocks.

E. Block size summary
Blocks/plane is influenced by block size scaling and planes/Tb scaling. If block size increases at a faster rate than planes/Tb reduction, blocks/plane reduces. Fewer blocks/plane has undesirable by-products such as increased cost from spare blocks, increased write amplification and a larger zone size. Block by deck strategy can mitigate these undesirable byproducts. Innovations in mitigating program, erase, program verify and read disturb can enable block by deck and mitigate the victim deck refresh rates. At system level, data management algorithms can minimize the aggressor-victim scenarios.
III. ULTRA-HIGH ENDURANCE SLC
A. Traditional SLC buffer usage models
Historically, NAND Flash storage used blocks in SLC mode for 2 primary applications: (1) Performance and staging buffer in Client and Mobile products, and (2) System tables and firmware data structures in Client, Mobile and Datacenter products [12], [13].
If SLC blocks are reserved for performance buffer, the buffer size is typically determined by the host burst length and SLC endurance. Table block allocation is typically determined by table size and frequency at which tables are dumped to NAND. In both cases, legacy SLC endurance capability has been successful in meeting the requirements.

Figure 12. % SLC buffer penalty at different QLC and SLC P/E cycles
In this example, SLC buffer penalty translates to OP reduction, increase in WA, hurts random write performance, and reduces random drive writes per day (RDWPD). Increasing SLC endurance can mitigate the buffer penalty. Alternative schemes that can deliver larger total bytes written (TBW) per block can reduce the buffer penalty further. If buffer is implemented outside NAND (e.g., SRAM, DRAM), reducing the number of unreadable coarse pages is useful.
C. Opportunity: Cyclic buffer for shorter playback time
Surveillance applications record telemetry data (e.g., data from radar, lidar, ultra-sonic, cameras) in real time incessantly. Whenever there is an event, only the last N seconds or minutes of telemetry data preceding an event is stored for future analysis (playback interval). Few examples include home and industrial real time monitoring security systems and black box for robo-taxi usage model. The ratio of total bytes written

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:18:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10C.1-4

(TBW) to user density could be extremely high in these applications.
There are 6 levels of driving automation ranging from Level-0 (fully manual) to Level-5 (fully autonomous). Fig.13 depicts the black box application in robo-taxi that uses Level5. In Level-5 automation [15], there is no human presence and interaction during the vehicle operation. Whenever special events such as an accident occurs, the state of the vehicle operation and surroundings preceding the event (playback interval) needs to be stored for determination of the root cause. To capture this information, the host (car operating system) collects the telemetry data from sensors in real time and sends it to the storage device [16]. The storage device writes this data to a cyclic buffer. Data older than the playback interval is invalidated on a First-In-First-Out (FIFO) basis. As shown in Fig.15, whenever there is an event, the host sends a trigger to the storage device to capture a snapshot of the last N seconds preceding the trigger. Minimum user density required for the cyclic buffer size is dependent on write speed and playback interval. TBW given in (1) is the total amount of data written to the drive in it’s life time.

Total Bytes Written (TBW) = write speed * active hours per

day * useful life in days

(1)

Historically, SLC mode provided the largest TBW per GB density when compared to MLC/TLC modes. However, the current SLC endurance capability may not meet the endurance requirements of future robo-taxi usage models. If the cyclic buffer at minimum density size can’t meet the endurance targets, systems usually add over-provisioning at the expense of increased cost/GB. If the snpashots are stored outside the cyclic buffer, the relaxed retention requirements of the cyclic buffer can be traded off for improved endurance. Schemes that maximize cost per TBW within the performance and power envelope are critical for cyclic buffer applications.
D. Ultra-high endurance SLC summary
New usage models have recently emerged that are endurance limited. Component and system solutions that can increase TBW per GB density can reduce the overprovisioning penalty and the overall cost. These applications come with unique workload characteristics that can be leveraged to maximize TBW/GB. Additionally, ultra-high endurance SLC could open the doors to following applications: (1) DRAM alternative to scratch pad memory (2) Front end buffer to a slower storage medium and (3) intermediate storage tier in between DRAM and NAND.

Figure 13. Cyclic buffer for L5 self-driving robo-taxi
Ratio of TBW to user density gives the endurance requirement of cyclic buffer. Smaller playback duration translates to smaller user density. Writing larger TBW over smaller user density results in larger endurance requirements. Fig.14 depcits the minimum density and endurance requirements for different playback intervals at 1GB/sec write speed for 24 hours/day, 7 days/week and 5 years usage model.

IV. TRANSITIONING FROM TLC TO QLC
A. Increasing QLC adoption for lower cost
The primary advantage of QLC over TLC is lower cost per GB. Drawbacks are slower write/read performance, larger energy per bit, smaller endurance and poorer read latency distributions (called quality of service, QoS).
Even with these performance and reliability limitations, new host architectures and customer applications with robust product requirements have enabled QLC to replace some of the TLC segments. For example, idle time in Client SSD and mobile usage models allow SLC caching to deliver faster host write performance and hide slower SLC to QLC data transfers during the idle time. Storage and read intensive data center segments do not need TLC-like endurance and performance. QLC is adopted in these segments due to smaller cost per GB despite poorer performance and energy per bit. Newer host architectures such as Zoned Namespace that eliminate garbage collection reduces the QLC endurance requirements [10], [11].
QLC adoption can be increased by improving the key metrics vital to storage system applications and developing supporting technology solutions. As NAND scales in future, meeting the reliability, endurance, and performance requirements without diminishing the QLC cost advantage over TLC will be another increasing focus.

Figure 14. Endurance requirements by playback time (Seconds)

B. Retention
Table-I depicts examples of the retention requirements for different usage segments. Different applications experience different operating conditions resulting in different specifications.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:18:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10C.1-5

TABLE I. Segment
Client Datacenter Mobile
Mobile (Reflow)

EXAMPLE RETENTION REQUIREMENTS

Beginning of life retention 3 years 30C 5 years 40C 3 years 40C
1x-5x reflow

End of life retention
1-year 30C 3 months 40C 6 months 55C, 1-year 40C N/A

Beginning of Life (BOL) retention is usually more stringent than End of Life (EOL) because customers may write the data and either store or transport the storage devices in uncontrolled temperatures for extensive duration of time. Data centers operate in well controlled temperatures resulting in less stringent retention requirements after installed in a server. Mobile and automotive devices are subjected to reflow as data is written to the storage device, mounted, and soldered to PCBs subjecting to extreme high temperatures over shorter intervals of time.
Fig.15 depicts the system management of data retention. NAND incurs retention loss both during power-off and poweron. Power-off retention needs to be met by the component. Power-on retention can be managed by the system data integrity scans. Data is periodically scanned during the poweron time to check if a codeword has enough reliability margins to sustain power-off time spec and the power-on time until the next scan is performed. If the reliability margin is insufficient, data is refreshed [17]. During the power-on time, NAND reliability margins are also affected by other stresses such as read disturb. Budgeting lesser margin for power-on time can result in frequent data refreshes. Higher operating temperature during the power-on time worsens the refresh rate.

C. Endurance
Although WA friendly architectures such as ZNS can reduce the endurance requirements, adoption of these architectures can be limited by the changes necessary to the software stack. Ability to support larger DWPD and accommodate randomness in host data are desired on legacy architectures. For data center usages. where the slower performance and larger energy per bit tend to be tolerated, but sensitive to the random data traffic, increasing random DWPD is desirable.
D. Trigger rates
QLC storage systems use low-density parity-check code (LDPC) for error correction. As shown in Fig.16, LDPC has 2 levels of error correction: (1) Hard decode limit which uses hard bit data for error correction, and (2) Soft decode limit which uses hard and soft bit data for error correction. Raw Bit Error Rate (RBER) can increase due to either sigma widening or Vt shifts. Different sources of RBER are: (1) time, temperature, read disturb, cross-temperature and other forms of stress (2) coupling from neighboring pages and (3) miscalibration of read voltages.

Figure 16. Error correction capability and Error handling

Figure 15. Retention requirements of a storage system
Increasing BOL retention capability can enable customers to store/transport the systems written with data in unregulated temperatures for extended duration of time (e.g., archiving). Larger retention margins can enable larger power-on operating temperature reducing the cooling costs in data centers. Improving the retention margins can increase the power-on retention budget and reduce the refresh/scan traffic.

Host data have a wide range of characteristics such as read to write ratio and retention time before the data are invalidated. As a result, codewords experience different degree of Vt shifts and sigma widening resulting in different Raw Bit Error Rate (RBER). Codewords whose RBER is less than the hard decode limit are corrected in real time. Codewords whose RBER exceeds the hard decode limit will trigger error handling (EH). EH is undesirable to the system as it affects performance and QoS.
QLC has more Vt states and experiences larger time-0 RBER when compared to TLC. As NAND scales in tier count, tier pitch and cell volume, QLC needs more margins to meet the reliability requirements. With the cell scaling, RBER at time-0 and RBER sensitivity to time, temperature, reads and other stresses also worsen. While adding more ECC spare bytes can improve both soft and hard correction capability, it can erode into QLC cost differentiation over TLC.
Reliability features that can reduce the post-stress RBER alleviates the soft correction requirements and reduce the ECC spare byte requirements. Longer latency for such reliability features is typically acceptable for post-stress cases such as drives returning from extended power-off conditions which are relatively infrequent in the field. Longer latency is not acceptable during the normal operation of the drive for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:18:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10C.1-6

performance and QoS reasons. Program algorithms that reduce RBER are helpful to maintain healthy trigger rates without excessively depending on ECC spare bytes. E. Burst cache for Client SSD
Client SSD workloads are characterized by burst of write traffic interlaced by idle time. Fig.17 depicts SLC caching used in client SSDs to deliver faster write performance.
Figure 17. SLC caching in Client SSDs

F. Transitioning from TLC to QLC summary
Datacenter storage and read intensive segments are adopting QLC for cost reasons despite slower performance and energy per bit compared to TLC. Reducing programming time and ONFI transfers will help write performance and energy per bit. Adding more ECC spare bytes to address the NAND scaling erodes the QLC cost savings. Reliability features that can lower the post-stress RBER can reduce the ECC spare byte overhead. Smarter program algorithms reducing the RBER post programming and read algorithms with lesser read disturb will help the trigger rates to be less dependent on ECC spare bytes.
Increasing QLC endurance and mitigating the coarse data buffer size is valuable to datacenter applications where workloads are characterized by random write traffic. Technology that can support a larger burst cache for given block allocation is a desired for client and mobile applications.

During idle time, SLC cache is reclaimed by moving the data to TLC/QLC blocks. The reclaimed SLC cache is readily made available for host write requests in future. Thus, SLC caching may shield the host writes from slower TLC/QLC writes. If the host burst size exceeds the SLC cache size, TLC/QLC writes are seen in the foreground hurting the write performance. The speed and size of cache are equally important.
Compared to TLC (3 bpc), QLC products (4 bpc) need 33% more SLC cache blocks. QLC either needs more blocks to maintain same cache size or take a hit on available cache size. Technology solutions that can deliver a larger burst size without sacrificing the performance and TBW/GB is strongly desirable on QLC Client SSDs. As an example, MLC mode can achieve 2x cache size when compared to SLC mode. Fig.18 depicts the % QLC overhead to support different cache sizes on a 512GB drive. Replacing SLC cache with MLC cache can support a larger SLC cache size and minimize the slower QLC writes in the foreground.

V. BEYOND QLC A. Introduction to PLC
Over the generations, NAND flash storage has increased the bits per cell to increase bit density and reduce the cost per GB [2]. Recently, beyond QLC technologies have been attracting interests [18], [19].
Figure 19. Bits per cell (BPC) scaling for (a) cost and number of Vt states, and (b) number of electrons per Vt state

Figure 18. % cache block (SLC/MLC) overhead relative to user density blocks (TLC/QLC)

While increasing bits per cell offers larger logical density per cell (hence lower cost/GB), more Vt states introduces several undesirable by-products:
(1) Limited Vt margin translates to the reduced reliability margins, smaller endurance and retention capability and potentially more ECC spare byte overhead.
(2) Tighter Vt placement and more verify levels translate to slower program characteristics and larger energy consumption.
(3) More Vt states translate to longer read latency. (4) Insufficient retention margins trigger more power-on
refreshes and adds P/E cycles. With the continuous increase of BPC scaling, the cost reduction effect saturates while the technical challenges steeply increase (represented as 1/BPC and number of Vt states, respectively in Fig.19 (a)). Also, the number of electrons per Vt state which the cell needs to deal with decreases (Fig. 19(b)).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:18:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10C.1-7

These performance and reliability downsides trickle down sensitive to write speeds can impose a floor on MB/s per Watt

as increased operating costs, potentially diminishing the gain floor that influences die/plane parallelism and programming

from the raw NAND bit cost reduction.

speeds.

B. PLC challenge
Limited retention capability translates to smaller power-on retention budget leading to frequent refreshes and P/E cycle overhead. Smaller power-off retention could limit the applications. A new retention paradigm is necessary to improve PLC retention without hurting the cost savings.

D. Low cost datacenter storage
Fig.21 depicts the storage hierarchy in a datacenter. Top of the hierarchy is characterized by faster, smaller, volatile and expensive memory. Bottom of the hierarchy is characterized by slower, larger, non-volatile and cost-efficient storage media.

C. Understanding total cost of ownership (TCO)
Total Cost of Ownership (TCO) can be classified into 2 components: acquisition cost and operation cost. Operation cost includes density per rack, power infrastructure, cooling cost, power bill and drive replacements [20]. Fig.20 depicts cost advantages and disadvantages of PLC w.r.t QLC from total cost of ownership viewpoint. PLC offers 25% larger bit density when compared to QLC. However, extra ECC spare bytes, latches in the page buffer, more planes/Tb for targeted performance goals compared to QLC (a form of cost adder), buffer size for any reliability buffers, and ASIC hardware are needed to support PLC. All of them can be the cost adders at drive level. At the usage end, PLC operational costs can be higher than QLC systems due to a few factors: (1) smaller endurance can translate to more drive replacements and (2) larger energy per bit translates to larger power infrastructure related costs, larger power consumption and higher cooling costs.

Figure 21. Memory hierarchy
90% of the cloud storage bits use hard drives. As shown in Table II, SSDs tend to be more expensive in acquisition cost, but is lower in the operational cost. With smaller operating costs and better year to year cost reduction, SSDs can rival the total cost of ownership of hard drives [21].

TABLE II.

TCO COMPARISON IN BETWEEN SSD AND HARD DRIVES

Metric

SSD

Hard drive

Acquisition Cost/GB
IOPS/TB (performance) pJ/bit (power, cooling costs) Lifetime (replacements) Rack density (real estate)

Better Better Better Better

Better

Figure 20. PLC total cost relative to QLC
To be a viable solution for the cost reduction, PLC needs to demonstrate enough Total Cost of Ownership (TCO) benefit including drive acquisition and operation. Different storage tiers and applications could have different weightage for each TCO component. For example, archiving with power turned off needs lesser endurance requirements, but larger retention capability. Archiving with power turned on can get away with smaller retention capability, but may require frequent refreshes incuring endurance and power penalty. Applications characterized by frequent writes (drive writes per day) can consume more energy due to write traffic. Applications

IOPS/TB are not scaling with density on hard drives. At comparable total cost of ownership and superior performance, SSDs could solve the hard drive’s IOPS/TB scaling challenge. The choice in between PLC and QLC is influenced by the TCO sensitivity to energy, performance, endurance and reliability, which are usage model dependant.
E. PLC as QLC Client SSD alternative
For client SSD and mobile applications, although slower PLC performance could be hidden by SLC cache, PLC needs to meet the power-off retention and endurance requirements. Drives are also exposed to slower PLC performance when the host burst length exceeds the SLC cache size.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:18:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10C.1-8

F. Beyond QLC summary
3D NAND is capable to place more than 16 Vt states (beyond QLC). The challenges of the “beyond QLC” technology adoption are the retention capability and TCO. As a direct alternative to QLC Client SSDs, PLC needs to match QLC reliability and endurance requirements. Retention is typically the limiting factor for PLC. Improving retention capability with minimal cost savings erosion can meet both stringent retention requirements as well as improve PLC endurance. For lower cost/GB datacenter storage applications, there could be an opportunity to tolerate lower performance, endurance and reliability from traditional SSD requirements. Beyond QLC is an attractive solution for the bit cost scaling. The technology and product adoption requires sufficient TCO advantages considering the cost during the usages.
VI. CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
Future NAND storage systems need to address scaling challenges to safeguard the cost/GB and overcome stringent requirements posed by future opportunities to increase the NAND based system utilization in the storage market. TableIII summarizes the scaling challenges and potential NAND solutions. Table-IV summarizes the future opportunities and the innovation that can intercept these opportunities.

TABLE III. Scaling challenge
Larger block size
Larger tier count, reducing tier pitch

NAND SCALING CHALLENGES AND SOLUTION SPACE

System impact

NAND solutions

Block overhead, performance/endurance impact due to WA, larger zone size
Diminishing reliability margins, eroding QLC cost savings w.r.t TLC

Multiple logical blocks per physical block (e.g., Block by Deck)
Post stress RBER reduction techniques, Programming algo. for RBER reduction and smarter read commands for better trigger rates. .

TABLE IV. FUTURE OPPORTUNITIES AND NAND SOLUTIONS

Market segment Surveillance with smaller playback interval Low-cost datacenter storage
QLC datacenter
QLC Client SSD

System desire
Larger TBW per density
IOPS/TB, smaller or comparable TCO with hard drive Larger Random DWPD, reduced tPROG, reduced energy per bit Larger burst cache without compromising burst performance.

Solution space
Increase SLC endurance
Retention paradigm to enable 4+ BPC Minimize data buffer, increase QLC endurance, program time reduction Caching at larger Bits per cell

In the 3D NAND, while the cost and density scaling will continue by the technology scaling, various reliability and performance challenges arise. The vertically integrated solution between the NAND technology, the system architecture and algorithms will be very critical to realize the highly reliable and high performance storage systems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support and guidance of Dan Hubbard, Dave Ebsen, Suresh Rajgopal and Mark Helm.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Heineck and J. Liu, "3D NAND Flash Status and Trends," 2022 IEEE International Memory Workshop (IMW), Dresden, Germany, 2022, pp. 1-4, doi: 10.1109/IMW52921.2022.9779282.
[2] A. Goda, “3-D NAND Technology Achievements and Future Scaling Perspectives,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 67, no. 4, pp. 1373– 1381, 2020, doi: 10.1109/TED.2020.2968079.
[3] Y. Hu, H. Jiang, D. Feng, L. Tian, H. Luo and C. Ren, "Exploring and Exploiting the Multilevel Parallelism Inside SSDs for Improved Performance and Endurance," in IEEE Transactions on Computers, vol. 62, no. 6, pp. 1141-1155, June 2013, doi: 10.1109/TC.2012.60.
[4] S. -y. Park, E. Seo, J. -Y. Shin, S. Maeng and J. Lee, "Exploiting Internal Parallelism of Flash-based SSDs," in IEEE Computer Architecture Letters, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 9-12, Jan. 2010, doi: 10.1109/L-CA.2010.3.
[5] T. Tanaka et al., “A 768Gb 3b/cell 3D-floating-gate NAND flash memory,” Dig. Tech. Pap. - IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf., vol. 59, pp. 142–144, 2016, doi: 10.1109/ISSCC.2016.7417947.
[6] Micron. 2016. TN-29-28: Memory Management in NAND Flash Arrays Overview. (2016).
[7] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, R. Haas, I. Iliadis, and R. Pletka, “Write amplification analysis in flash-based solid state drives,” Proc. SYSTOR 2009: The Israeli Experimental Systems Conference, May 2009.
[8] X. Luojie and B. M. Kurkoski, "An improved analytic expression for write amplification in NAND flash," 2012 International Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications (ICNC), Maui, HI, USA, 2012, pp. 497-501, doi: 10.1109/ICCNC.2012.6167472.
[9] A. Khakifirooz et al., “A 1Tb 4b/Cell 144-Tier Floating-Gate 3D-NAND Flash Memory with 40MB/s Program Throughput and 13.8Gb/mm2 Bit Density,” Dig. Tech. Pap. - IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf., vol. 64, pp. 424–426, 2021, doi: 10.1109/ISSCC42613.2021.9365777.
[10] W. Chung, “Benefits of ZNS in Datacenter Storage Systems”, Flash memory summit, 2019.
[11] B. Matias, “From Open-Channel SSDs to Zoned Namespaces”, USENIX VAULT, 2019.
[12] D. Sharma, “System Design for mainstream TLC SSD,” in the Flash Memory Summit, Santa Clara, CA, USA, August 2014, pp. 1–20.
[13] A. I. Alsalibi, S. Mittal, M. A. Al-Betar, and P. B. Sumari, “A Survey of Techniques for Architecting SLC/MLC/TLC Hybrid Flash Memory– based SSDs,” Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience, vol. 30, no. 13, p. e4420, 2018, e4420 cpe.4420.
[14] T. Pekny et al., "A 1-Tb Density 4b/Cell 3D-NAND Flash on 176-Tier Technology with 4-Independent Planes for Read using CMOS-Underthe-Array," 2022 IEEE International Solid- State Circuits Conference (ISSCC), San Francisco, CA, USA, 2022, pp. 1-3, doi: 10.1109/ISSCC42614.2022.9731691.
[15] D. Kim, R. R. L. Mendoza, K. F. R. Chua, M. A. A. Chavez, R. S. Concepcion and R. R. P. Vicerra, "A Systematic Analysis on the Trends and Challenges in Autonomous Vehicles and the Proposed Solutions for Level 5 Automation," 2021 IEEE 13th International Conference on Humanoid, Nanotechnology, Information Technology, Communication and Control, Environment, and Management (HNICEM), Manila, Philippines, 2021, pp. 1-6, doi: 10.1109/HNICEM54116.2021.9731982.
[16] J. Zhao, B. Liang, and Q. Chen, “The key technology toward the selfdriving car,” International Journal of Intelligent Unmanned Systems,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:18:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10C.1-9

vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 2-20, Oct. 2017. Accessed on: Sep. 18, 2021. [Online]. Available doi: 10.1108/IJIUS-08-2017-0008 [17] M. Seif et al., "Refresh frequency reduction of data stored in SSDs based on A-timer and timestamps," 2017 22nd IEEE European Test Symposium (ETS), Limassol, Cyprus, 2017, pp. 1-6, doi: 10.1109/ETS.2017.7968233. [18] P. Kalavade, "4 bits/cell 96 Layer Floating Gate 3D NAND with CMOS under Array Technology and SSDs," 2020 IEEE International Memory Workshop (IMW), Dresden, Germany, 2020, pp. 1-4, doi: 10.1109/IMW48823.2020.9108135. [19] T. Sanuki et al., "Cryogenic Operation of 3-D Flash Memory for Storage Performance Improvement and Bit Cost Scaling," in IEEE Journal on Exploratory Solid-State Computational Devices and Circuits, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 159-167, Dec. 2021, doi: 10.1109/JXCDC.2021.3123783. [20] Y. Cui, C. Ingalz, T. Gao and A. Heydari, "Total cost of ownership model for data center technology evaluation," 2017 16th IEEE Intersociety Conference on Thermal and Thermomechanical Phenomena in Electronic Systems (ITherm), Orlando, FL, USA, 2017, pp. 936-942, doi: 10.1109/ITHERM.2017.7992587. [21] S. Liang et al., "An Empirical Study of Quad-Level Cell (QLC) NAND Flash SSDs for Big Data Applications," 2019 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), Los Angeles, CA, USA, 2019, pp. 3676-3685, doi: 10.1109/BigData47090.2019.9006406.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:18:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10C.1-10

