2023 16th International Conference on Advanced Technologies, Systems and Services in Telecommunications (TELSIKS) | 979-8-3503-4702-9/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/TELSIKS57806.2023.10316146

On the Serial Concatenation of LDPC Codes

Fedor Ivanov, Aleksey Kuvshinov

Abstract—Concatenated codes are effectively used in different approaches of error-correcting theory. We suggest new concatenated code construction that is composed of outer LDPC code and a particular designed inner LDPC code. Special optimization procedure was developed to obtain inner code with specific error-correcting characteristics. We apply the decoder of woven codes to this construction, while reducing the complexity of decoding procedure compared to a classic decoder of LDPC code. Furthermore, we improve the performance of our scheme with puncturing the code symbols. The resulting concatenated construction outperforms low-rate LDPC from the 5G standard. Besides this, we demonstrate the performance of code with a special parity-check matrix consisting of parity-check matrices of inner and outer codes from our suggested construction.
Keywords—error correcting codes, concatenated codes, LDPC, error reducing codes, low-rate codes, optimization of codes.
I. PREPARE YOUR FINAL PAPER
Nowadays the error reduction in transmission over noisy channel has become an important part of the development of all information systems. We combined two efficient errorcorrecting methods, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes and concatenated codes (CC) and applied additional coding theory techniques to enhance the performance of the resulting construction.
LDPC codes were introduced by R. W. Gallager in [1] along with some decoding methods of such codes in 1962. Active analysis of LDPC codes began only after MacKay’s publication [2] in the late 1990s.
Nowadays the most popular way to construct LDPC is based on the expanding of a small core matrix, or protograph, by replacing each non-zero position with a circulant. The protograph can be found by appliance density evolution or exhaustive search [3]. After application some expanding algorithm like ACE [4] to protograph the parity-check matrix of LDPC code is obtained.
The idea of combining two or more codes to get an efficient error-correcting instrument was suggested by Forney in [5]. There are two basic methods to construct concatenated codes: serial and parallel concatenation.
To date, the most important and actual challenge is to choose corresponding component codes of concatenated construction. There are several researches that utilize modern codes such as LDPC, polar or convolutional codes for this role. Belief propagation (BP) decoder is usually chosen to observe

soft output of polar decoder in such papers. In work [6] authors apply outer LDPC and inner polar codes as the code components. But usage of BP decoder leads to poor errorcorrecting performance of the whole construction in this case.
In this paper we consider a new efficient concatenated code construction based on two LDPC codes jointly optimized to each other. We suggest serial concatenated construction with permutation between code components. Our approach differs from previous results in the application of inner LDPC code: it improves the communication channel for outer decoder, rather than tries to decode the received word. For this reason, we propose an optimization algorithm that improves error reducing characteristics of inner LPDC and, therefore, the performance of concatenated code with fixed outer LDPC code. Accordingly, inner LDPC code is utilized for error reducing and outer for error correction. We started to explore such method in our previous paper devoted to concatenated codes [7]. In this paper we continue research of such construction and improve its performance using some methods. More precisely, we fix inner error reducing LDPC code and apply optimization algorithm to outer LDPC. Furthermore, the performance of our construction with puncturing the parity-check symbols of outer code is also demonstrated. Moreover, we examine the parity-check matrix consisting of inner and outer codes’ parity-check matrices and decode such code by BP decoder of LDPC. We also compare the complexity of the concatenated decoder and the BPdecoder applied to classic LDPC and LDPC with the proposed composite parity-check matrix. Finally, we demonstrate simulation results to compare the performance of our scheme and LDPC codes from the 5G standard.
II. CODE CONSTRUCTION
The proposed concatenated code consists of inner ( , = ) error-reducing LDPC code and outer errorcorrecting ( = , ) LDPC code. Let us denote permutation between these codes by P. Inner LDPC code improves transmission on bit level, decreasing bit error level for outer decoder. First we propose encoding and decoding procedures of our construction.
A. Encoding Process
The structure of encoding process of suggested concatenated code is shown in Fig. 1.

Fedor Ivanov and Aleksey Kuvshinov are with the Laboratory of the Internet of Things and Cyber-physical Systems, National Research University Higher School of Economics, Tallinskaya, st. 34, 123458 Moscow, Russia (emails: fivanov@hse.ru, akuvshinov@hse.ru).

979-8-3503-4702-9/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE

228

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:47:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 1. The scheme of the encoder of the concatenated code.
The encoding algorithm of new concatenated code construction is as follows:

1. The information vector = ( , … , ) is selected to be
transmitted. 2. Information vector is encoded using outer ( = , )
LDPC code. 3. The permutation of length is applied to the outer
codeword: ( ). 4. Permuted ( ) codeword of outer code is encoded by
inner ( , = ) error reducing LDPC code.

The depicted code construction is representative of serial concatenated codes with added permutation. The idea of permutation between inner and outer codes is inherited from parallel concatenated codes. Overall, this encoder is the same as the encoding algorithm of woven codes, suggested by S. Host et al in [8] for convolutional codes. A random interleaver is applied in our construction to randomize the input of the inner LDPC encoder. In this case, the errors at the outer decoder input are independent and uniformly distributed.

B. Decoding

In this section we describe the decoding algorithm of the

concatenated code and evaluate the complexity of the

proposed scheme. We adopted the design of decoder from the

work [9] devoted to woven codes. Such concatenated decoder

is iterative and has important advantage applied by us: inner

and outer components of this decoder use soft-input soft-

output decoders. The output of the decoder can be utilized on

the next iteration of the decoding algorithm in this way.

We designate the decoder of outer code as

and

as the inner decoder. We denote = ( ), ( ), … , ( ) as

the vector of log-likelihood ratios (LLRs): ( ) ≜

ln

"#$% "#$%

= 0'( ) = 1'( )

received

from

the

channel.

The

input

of

the

decoder, the output vectors of inner decoder and outer decoder

are designated as , +, ,- respectively. The inverse permutation between codes are denoted by . . Each iteration

of our concatenated decoder is as follows:

1. Generate the inner decoder’s input by concatenation of two vectors: = / 0 ,-| 2,
information symbols are placed on the left side of the concatenated vector and parity-check symbols- on the right side. ,- represents the extrinsic of outer code from the previous iteration, this is just a null vector on the first

iteration. 2. Apply inner decoder to
information symbol:

and calculate the LLRs per

+=

( ) 3 ,-

3. Apply outer decoder to + and, if this is not the last iteration, calculate the LLRs per code symbol:

,- = (

( . ( +)) 3 +)

An important advantage of such a concatenated decoder is a noticeable reduction in complexity when using LDPC codes as inner and outer codes in concatenation. The complexity of the classic BP decoder is equal to 4 ∙ 67 , where 4 – number of iterations of BP and 3 the length of the LDPC code. By comparison, the complexity 8 of CC-decoding for the proposed combination of two LDPC is as follows:

8 = 9 ∙ (4 ∙ 67 0 4 ∙ 67 ),
where 9 3 number of iterations of woven-like decoder, 4 , 4 3 number of BP iterations of inner and outer LDPC decoders respectively, , 3 the lengths of the inner and outer LDPC components of the code respectively.
The overall reduction in complexity is obtained until the condition that the overall number of BP iterations is hold and explained by the division of complexity between component codes with a smaller code length.
The gain from using such a decoder for different CC lengths compared to LDPC is shown in Table I.

TABLE I GAIN FROM USING WOVEN-LIKE DECODER COMPARED TO BP

Code parameters

Gain, %

(8000,2000), Ri=1/3, Ro=3/4

35

(8000,2000), Ri=1/2, Ro=1/2

25

(4000,1000), Ri=1/3, Ro=3/4

36

(4000,1000), Ri=1/2, Ro=1/2

27

III. OPTIMIZATION ALGORITHM
We propose particular error reducing inner LDPC code applied to concatenated code. Optimization algorithm that changes protograph of the inner LDPC code was suggested in [7] and is briefly described in this section. After expansion the parity-check matrix of error reducing LDPC code is obtained. We also apply this algorithm to the outer code of our construction, which we did not implement in [7], and the performance of the whole construction is improved due to this as well.
A. Optimization Algorithm for Inner Code
The target of the optimization algorithm described in this section is searching protograph of inner LDPC code with the lowest possible signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) where the target frame error rate (FER) value is achieved.
Detailed description of proposed algorithm can be found in [7]. Herein we present bird-view description.
Suggested iterative optimization algorithm flips some randomly chosen positions in the protograph of inner LDPC

229

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:47:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

code at each iteration. After that, this core matrix is expanded to a full parity check matrix of inner code. The performance of the concatenated code consisting of new inner LDPC code with this modified parity-check matrix and fixed outer LDPC code is checked in AWGN channel. Finally, algorithm compares the current SNR (on which target FER is obtained) with the one from the previous best result. If this value is lower, the current protograph is memorized as the current best core matrix of inner code for next iteration. The outer code is chosen and fixed at the beginning of the process. In order to prevent the convergence to local minimums the number of flipping positions at one iteration increases during optimization algorithm.
Inner error reducing LDPC code improves the superchannel of our scheme in terms of bit error rate (BER). The FER characteristic of such code is very poor on about full SNR range. This code decreases a number of bit errors, improving the superchannel and, therefore, the outer LDPC code is able to decode the received information.
B. Optimization of outer LDPC code
One of the main differences between results obtained in [7] and this paper is applying the optimization algorithm not only to the inner LDPC code but to the outer error correcting code as well. In this case we fix earlier optimized inner LDPC code and start the similar optimization process of outer LDPC code with the same target error probability of the whole concatenated code. The comparison of the performance of the concatenated code with length N=8840 and rate R≈1/4 on three stages is presented in Fig. 2: concatenated code before optimization (this is just the raw concatenation of LDPC codes from the 5G standard with the corresponding rates), concatenated code after optimization of inner code, concatenated code after optimization of inner and outer codes.

matrix of new LDPC code respectively. The rest part of the concatenated matrix is filled with zeros.
We present a comparison of the performance of this construction decoded by classic BP decoder, concatenated code decoded by woven-like decoder and LDPC from the 5G standard with the same length and code rate in Fig. 3.
Fig. 3. Simulation results for N=8840 and R≈1/4.
As we can see, the LDPC code with the proposed matrix starts to outperform LDPC from the 5G standard on Eb/No above 0.4 dB. The important feature, which we can observe, is that the characteristic of new code has no error floor like 5G LDPC has. At the same time, concatenated code decoded by woven-like decoder has better performance and steeper slope of FER characteristic than code with concatenated paritycheck matrix on Eb/No above 0.15 dB. The complexity of its concatenated decoder calculated using formula in section II is 35% less than the BP decoder with the same number of iterations.
V. SIMULATION RESULTS Let us show simulation results demonstrating the
effectiveness of our methods in this section. The simulation setup that we used is as follows:

Fig. 2. Three stages of optimization of the concatenated construction.
It can be noticed that the resulting gap between the initial construction and the optimized one is approximately 1.2 dB.
IV. CONCATENATED CODE AS LDPC Let us suggest another method of application of the results
of concatenation and optimization processes. We can concatenate matrices of inner optimized LDPC code and outer LDPC code from our construction and consider this code as a whole using the BP decoder of LDPC. The parity-check matrices of outer code and inner code are used directly from our concatenated code and located at the top and bottom of the

• AWGN channel, BPSK modulation • 50 iterations of BP algorithm; 5 iterations for concatenated
code iterative decoder and 5 BP iterations of inner and outer LDPC decoders. Therefore, the summary number of BP iterations for the whole concatenated code is 50. • ACE algorithm is applied as an outer code lifting method and lifting algorithm from [10] serves for inner code.
We perform simulation for initial proposed concatenated code and concatenated code with puncturing some code symbols of outer code. (The procedure of puncturing consists in setting LLRs from some pattern to zero at the receiver. We use a puncturing similar to that suggested in the 5G standard).
The properties of concatenated codes which we use are as follows:
• N=4420, R≈1/4, Rinner≈0.29, Router≈0.85 • N=4320 with 100 punctured symbols, R=0.28, Rinner≈0.30,
Router≈0.92 • N=4350, R≈1/2, Rinner≈0.67, Router≈0.76

230

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:47:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

We consider the performance of 5G NR LDPC codes with lengths N=5120 and N=4000 to compare our methods with existing solution. These LDPC codes have rates R=1/4 and R=1/2 respectively and BP-50 decoder.
The simulation results for LDPC and proposed concatenated codes are presented in Fig. 4.

transmission channel for outer decoder. Optimization algorithm was also applied to protograph of outer code, which made it possible to develop the characteristics of our construction. The decoding algorithm of woven-like codes was used as the decoder of our construction. Proposed concatenated construction has flexible, adaptive structure, and the suggested codes are examples of nested codes. The simulation results demonstrate that the error correcting properties of proposed concatenated codes are comparable to 5G LDPC codes, while the concatenated decoder has less complexity. Moreover, we demonstrated a method of constructing LDPC code from a matrices of initial outer code of our construction and optimized inner code. The performance of such code outperforms LDPC from the 5G standard as well, but this method has a greater decoding complexity compared to concatenated decoder.

Fig. 4. Simulation results for R=1/2 and R≈1/4.
As it can be found, the proposed construction with R=1/4 without puncturing outperforms the LDPC code from the 5G standard on Eb/No above 0.9 dB, while CC with outer puncturing demonstrates the same performance as 5G LDPC before Eb/No of 0.6 dB and after that the error probability of CC with puncturing is lower than the FER of 5G LDPC. Moreover, the suggested concatenated codes have a sharp slope of error correcting characteristic and have no error floor unlike LDPC.
In the case of R=1/2, the error correcting properties of CC coincide with LDPC. But the complexity of concatenated decoding is noticeably less.
VI. CONCLUSION
Our study is devoted to concatenated code construction based on LDPC codes. Each of this code, being a component of such construction, plays a particular role in the whole concatenated system. Outer LDPC is error-correcting code, while the inner LDPC code becomes error-reducing code after special optimization process. This process finds a new protograph reaching target FER on the lowest possible SNR. In this case, inner code of concatenated construction improves

REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes”, IRE Transactions on information theory, 1962, Vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21—28.
[2] MacKay D. J., “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices”, IEEE transactions on Information Theory. 1999. Vol. 45, no. 2. P. 399–431.
[3] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding”, IEEE Transactions on information theory, 2001, Vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599— 618.
[4] T. Tian et al., “Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPC code construction”, IEEE Transactions on Communications, 2004, Vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1242—1247.
[5] G. D. Forney, Jr., “Concatenated Codes”, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1966.
[6] Abbas S. M. et al., “Concatenated LDPC-polar codes decoding through belief propagation”, 2017 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS). – IEEE, 2017. – pp. 1-4.
[7] F. Ivanov and A. Kuvshinov, "On the woven-like concatenation of LDPC codes," 2022 IEEE International Multi-Conference on Engineering, Computer and Information Sciences (SIBIRCON), Yekaterinburg, Russian Federation, 2022, pp. 190-194.
[8] S. Höst (Host), R. Johannesson and V. V. Zyablov, "A first encounter with binary woven convolutional codes", Proc. 4th Int. Symp. Communication Theory and Applications, pp. 13-18, 1997-July.
[9] Kreshchuk A., Zhilin I., Zyablov V., “On the Performance of Block Woven Codes Constructions with Row-Wise Permutations”, International Castle Meeting on Coding Theory and Applications. – Springer, Cham, 2017. – С. 217-227.
[10] J.-F.Cheng and Robert J. McEliece, “Some High-Rate Near Capacity Codecs for the Gaussian Channel”, Allerton Conference on Communications, Control and Computing, 1996.

231
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:47:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

