3264

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2023

LDPC Level Prediction Toward Read Performance of High-Density Flash Memories
Yajuan Du , Yuan Gao, Siyi Huang , and Qiao Li , Member, IEEE

Abstract—High-density NAND flash memories have been prevailing in storage systems to achieve large capacities for explosive data. However, they suffer from more severe reliability degradation due to the narrowed margins between threshold voltage states. Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have been widely applied in high-density flash memories to ensure data reliability. Due to the increased number of cell states, more read voltages are required in reading a flash page correctly. This induces more soft levels to read pages with high-bit error rates in LDPC decoding. Read latency is significantly increased in high-density flash memories. To enhance the read performance of high-density flash memories, this article proposes PreLDPC, an LDPC-level prediction approach with fine-grained LDPC reading. The key idea of PreLDPC is to predict the final read level during the early read iteration, thus, avoiding unnecessary read-retry latency. From a preliminary study, we observe that after decoding in the first two iterations, the ratio of cells that lie in the error-prone area (i.e., adjacent area of two cell states) can be obtained. The ratio is closely related to the final read level for a successful decoding. By exploiting this observation, PreLDPC directly uses the predicted read level for LDPC reading, which could eliminate the excessive number of read retries. Furthermore, by exploiting the benefit of fine-grained LDPC reading, this article further divides the existing integer level (called i-level, e.g., level-1 and level-2) into a finer decimal level (called d-level, e.g., level-1.25 and level-1.5), and proposes a fine-grained read method. By combining the prediction method and fine-grained method together, PreLDPC can first estimate the i-level and then perform the read-retry iteration with d-levels to eliminate unnecessary read latency as much as possible. From experimental results of realworld workloads on Disksim with SSD extensions, it is verified that PreLDPC can effectively reduce read latency in high-density flash memories.
Index Terms—Cell state ratio, error-prone area, highdensity flash memory, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, performance optimization.
Manuscript received 20 August 2022; revised 24 November 2022; accepted 27 December 2022. Date of publication 30 January 2023; date of current version 20 September 2023. This work was supported in part by the Shenzhen Fundamental Research Program under Grant JCYJ20210324122406017, and in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62202396. This article was recommended by Associate Editor A. Shrivastava. (Corresponding author: Qiao Li.)
Yajuan Du is with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan 430070, China, and also with the Shenzhen Research Institute, Wuhan University of Technology, Shenzhen 518000, China.
Yuan Gao and Siyi Huang are with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan 430070, China.
Qiao Li is with the School of Informatics, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China (e-mail: qiaoli045@gmail.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCAD.2023.3238845

I. INTRODUCTION
W ITH the requirement of large-capacity storage systems, flash memories with high storage density have been widely deployed in large-scale data centers, e.g., triple-level per cell (TLC) flash and quad-level per cell (QLC) flash [1], [2], [3], [4]. However, the degraded data reliability has become a critical concern due to the narrowed threshold voltage state margins [5], [6], [7].
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [8], [9], as a kind of error correction codes (ECCs), are widely used in flash memories to ensure data reliability [10], [11], [12], [13]. LDPC codes provide a high error correction capability by applying multiple read voltages, i.e., soft reading levels [14], [15]. However, more sensing levels would induce long read latency, which directly increases flash read response time [16]. What is more, as the raw bit error rate (RBER) of data is unknown in advance, reads with LDPC codes (called LDPC read in this article) adopt a read-retry manner to gradually increase the number of read voltages, i.e., the read level [14]. LDPC read would first begin by sensing with the smallest number of read voltages (this number is decided by LDPC read level). Then, sensed data would be transferred from flash to the controller to finish the decoding. When the decoding fails, a high read level with more read voltages would be applied to perform the next read-retry iteration. Finally, the reads would finish until a successful decoding happens [17]. LDPC reads onto data with high RBERs would cause a much higher read latency due to this iterative read-retry process, which frequently happens in high-density flash memories and deteriorates flash read performance.
To reduce the excessive read-retry steps, we propose an LDPC level prediction approach to quickly find the final read level through accurate prediction, named as PreLDPC. The prediction is based on our observation regarding the relationship between the error cell distribution and the final LDPC level for a successful read. We perform a preliminary study on the cell distributions within the adjacent area of states after applying two read voltages. Cells that lie between these two read voltages are called error-prone cells. We observe that the ratio of error-prone cells in all cells of a page is proportionally related to the final read level. By exploiting this observation, we design a reading level prediction method to obtain the final read level in advance. Thus, unnecessary read-retries can be avoided. This would be more beneficial for high-level successful reads on data with high RBERs.

1937-4151 c 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:48:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DU et al.: LDPC LEVEL PREDICTION TOWARD READ PERFORMANCE OF HIGH-DENSITY FLASH MEMORIES

3265

Meanwhile, in order to further reduce the latency caused by the large number of read voltages, we design a fine-grained LDPC reading method in PreLDPC. By dividing the original integer read (called i-level, e.g., level-1 and level-2) into several decimal levels (called d-levels, e.g., level-1.25 and level-1.5), LDPC reading can be performed in a smaller step, i.e., only one extra read voltage would be added when jumping to the next iteration. Thus, the latency would be further reduced in existing read-retry steps with two or more extra read voltages in upper pages. From our preliminary study, applying d-levels may succeed in advance with a high probability. As there are less read-retry iterations, the fine-grained method would be more effective for lower successful read levels on low RBER data.
By combining the prediction and fine-grained method together, PreLDPC would first estimate the i-level and then continue the read-retry iterations with finer d-levels. Thus, the advantage of both methods can be fully utilized. Comprehensive experiments are performed on Disksim with SSD extensions [18] with real-world workloads. From the experimental results, it is verified that the PreLDPC method can reduce 30% read latency on average compared with existing works [14].
The contributions of this article are listed as follows. 1) We perform a preliminary study to observe the relation-
ship between the cell ratio in error-prone area and the final LDPC read level in high-density flash memories. 2) By exploiting the observation, we design an LDPC read level prediction method for high-density flash memories to reach the successful read level more quickly and avoid unnecessary read latency. 3) To reduce the number of extra read voltages in readretry step that also cause unnecessary latency, we further design a fine-grained reading method to split one integer read level (i-level) into several decimal levels (d-levels). 4) We evaluate the proposed PreLDPC method in Disksim with SSD extensions by using real-world workloads. Experimental results show that PreLDPC can effectively decrease the read latency of high-density flash memories. The remainder of this article is organized as follows. We present the background of LDPC read in high-density flash memories and motivation for this work in Section II. Section III describes details of two designs in our proposed PreLDPC. The evaluation experiments and results are shown and discussed in Section IV. Related works and conclusion of this article are presented in Section V and Section VI, respectively.
II. BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
This section first presents the basics of high-density flash memory and LDPC reading process. Then, the read latency problem caused by more read voltages in high-density flash memory is presented to motivate our work.
A. High-Density Flash Memories
High-density flash memory represents data with electrons kept in flash cells by floating-gate transistors or charge

Fig. 1. Cell organization and read process of high-density flash memories.
traps [19], [20]. Flash cells are organized into word-lines and bit-lines [21] and can be programmed into multiple threshold voltage states to represent data values with different bit levels, as shown in Fig. 1. For instance, each cell in threelevel cell (TLC) flash memory stores a 3-bit value and can be programmed to one of eight threshold voltage states. Highdensity flash memory often refers to multiple-level cell (MLC) flash, TLC flash, and quad-level cell (QLC) flash. The bits of all cells in a wordline form several pages. For example, TLC flash cell bits form an upper page, a middle page, and a lower page [22]. Page is the smallest unit for read and write.
The write operation would program data into threshold voltage states, in the incremental step pulse programming or one-shot programming manner [23]. During the process of LDPC reading, high-density flash memories involve more read voltage states. Data would be first sensed by applying read voltages, and then transferred to the memory controller to perform decoding. Once the decoding fails, another sensing iteration would happen and the read level would be increased until the successful decoding.
High-density flash memories are more prone to errors, such as programming/read interference errors, retention errors, process variation errors among cells, layers, and chips [24], [25], [26], [27], [28], [29]. Once the threshold voltage in one cell drifts into adjacent states due to these error sources, bit errors would occur [30], [31], [32]. With the increase of cell density in flash memories, the margins between two adjacent states become narrow, resulting in higher RBERs [33], [34], [35], [36]. As the number of program/erase (P/E) cycles in flash memory increases, the oxide layer of the flash cells becomes thinner, and flash cells become more prone to programming and read interference errors [37]. In this case, data stored in flash memories suffer from higher RBERs.
In the actual use of flash memory, there is a maximum limit on the number of P/E cycles in flash memory, beyond which the error correction capability of flash memory cannot guarantee the data reliability. At the same time, as the retention time increases, the cells are more likely to leak electron, which also increase the RBERs of data. There is a strong correlation between the RBER of the data and the retention time. To correct the errors due to retention time, the data will be read and written again after data correcting at regular intervals.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:48:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3266

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2023

There are many factors that affect the data RBER, but flash memory with the same architecture and similar production process generally conforms to a similar error model, that is, the expression of RBER with P/E cycle and retention time [38], as shown in (1). In the equation, PER and t represent the P/E cycles of blocks and retention time of data, respectively. The other parameters depend on the specific flash types, and our settings refer to existing work [38] and would be presented in Section IV in details
log(RBER) = (α · PER + β) · log(t) + γ · PER + δ. (1)

B. LDPC Reading Process

LDPC reading uses a read-retry manner [39] and mainly includes three steps: flash sensing, data transferring, and LDPC decoding [40], [41], as shown in Fig. 1. During flash sensing, read voltages would be applied on flash wordlines to sense the cell states in one page. The number of read voltages is closely related to read latency and LDPC decoding success probability, i.e., the error correction capability [42]. Read voltages are often placed into the area between two adjacent states [37], [43]. We refer to the number of read voltages in each adjacent area as read level. In the existing method, as all read levels are integers, we also call them to be read i-level. As there are multiple adjacent areas in high-density flash memories for one-page reading, one flash sensing with a given read level would involve several sensing times that depend on flash types.
When page data are sensed, they would be transferred to LDPC decoder in the flash controller. Once decoding succeeds, data would be sent to the host. When LDPC decoding fails, another progressive read-retry step would begin from flash sensing with a higher read level. The latency in the progressive LDPC read process can be modeled as (2). The total latency Ttotal is the sum of multiple read steps. In the ith step, the latency includes latencies involved in flash sensing, data transferring, and LDPC decoding. Tsensing represents the sensing latency to apply one read voltage. The number of read voltages is represented as Nrief in the ith step. Ttiransfer refers to the transferring latency for one read step. Tdecoding represents the latency of LDPC decoding

L

Ttotal =

Tsensing · Nrief + Ttiransfer + Tdecoding .

(2)

i=1

C. Read Latency Problem
In order to study the behaviors of LDPC codes in highdensity flash memories, we perform a preliminary experiment to collect read latency of TLC flash. By analyzing the read process in different page types, the number of read voltages can be obtained. The sensing latency for one read voltage is set as 14 μs. Ttiransfer is computed according to the amount of transferred data.
The LDPC read latencies (i.e., read with a given read level) are shown in Fig. 2, which are computed according to (2). The histograms show the number of read voltages in the highest page of different flash types. For example, the highest page in TLC requires four different read voltages for reading as shown

Fig. 2. Read latency of high-density flash memories with different read levels.
Fig. 3. Example of LDPC read d-level. In TLC flash, i-level 2 is divided into four d-levels of d-level 1.25, d-level 1.5, d-level 1.75, and i-level 2. In each d-level, only one extra read voltage is applied based on the last d-level. For example, d-level 1.25 only uses the read voltage of V1.25 together with four read voltages in i-level 1, while d-level 1.5 would add one extra read voltage V1.5 based on the read voltages involved in d-level 1.25.
in Fig. 3, and the total number of read voltages is 28 in read i-level 7. The lines in Fig. 2 present the read latency for these pages. We can observe that, with the increase of LDPC read level, the number of read voltages and the read latency are sharply increased. The read voltage number can reach up to 56, and the read latencies for QLC flash and TLC flash are much higher than that of MLC flash. These results indicate that there exist heavy read latency overheads to achieve the high error correction capability with the existing LDPC reading method.
From the above observation, we can see that the read latency problem is more severe in higher-density flash memories. This motivates us to design a new LDPC read method to achieve a successful read level more efficiently.
III. PROPOSED PRELDPC METHOD This section first presents the fine-grained LDPC reading and LDPC read level prediction. Then, we introduce PreLDPC, by combining these two designs.
A. Fine-Grained LDPC Reading This section first presents the definition of LDPC d-level.
Then, we present the motivation to propose the fine-grained LDPC d-level reading. At last, the design to apply d-levels into LDPC decoding is presented.
1) Definition of LDPC d-Level Read: As one read i-level often involves several read voltages in adjacent areas of flash states, we consider to split it into several smaller levels, with which a progressive read only increases one extra read voltage. We call these smaller levels to be decimal levels and shortened to be read d-levels. Thus, LDPC read with one i-level can be expanded into read-retry steps with several d-levels.
Fig. 3 shows an example of d-level for upper pages in TLC flash. In the existing LDPC reading method, if LDPC decoding with i-level 1 that applies four read voltages (represented

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:48:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DU et al.: LDPC LEVEL PREDICTION TOWARD READ PERFORMANCE OF HIGH-DENSITY FLASH MEMORIES
TABLE I LATENCY RESULTS AND SUCCESS RATES OF LDPC READ D-LEVELS

3267

Fig. 4. Definition of error-prone area. The blue dotted lines indicate read voltages applied in the first sensing while the green dotted lines indicate read voltages in the second sensing. The error-prone area is defined as the area between read voltages of two sensings and is denoted by red dots.

as the black solid lines) fails, the number of read voltages will be increased to 8 by applying i-level 2. We introduce three dlevels between i-level 1 and i-level 2, named as d-level 1.25, d-level 1.5, and d-level 1.75, respectively. Applying the d-level 1.25 to read flash only involves one extra voltage denoted by V1.25 in addition to all threshold voltages in i-level 1. Considering the asymmetric interstate errors [44], the extra voltage would be preferentially added to the region between P6 and P7 with a high RBER to achieve a higher read success rate. Similarly, applying d-level 1.5 to read flash would add one extra read voltage denoted by V1.5 compared with the read voltages already used in d-level 1.25. In summary, applying d-levels would only add one extra read voltage based on the last d-level, instead of adding multiple read voltages between each pair of adjacent voltage states.
2) Preliminary Study on Using d-Levels in LDPC Read: In order to investigate the potential of d-levels on read performance improvement, this section studies the latency of using d-levels on LDPC reading. The latency and number of read reference voltages in each d-level for i-levels 1–4 are shown in Table I. We set the code rate as 0.94 for LDPC decoding. We use MATLAB to simulate three groups of RBER ranges by setting several noises, which can reflect the behaviors of read d-levels under different flash lifetime situations. The latency is calculated according to (2). The low RBER range would simulate flash memory in early lifetime while the middle and high-RBER range could reflect the circumstance that flash is in its middle lifetime and late lifetime, respectively. The latency data are calculated according to (2). In addition to the latency, we also collect the LDPC decoding success rates of applying d-levels. We choose 600 pages from three groups (200 pages for each) that can be successfully decoded under i-level 2, i-level 3, and i-level 4, respectively. Thus, the success rates are 100% when applying these three i-levels but less than 100% for d-levels in Table I.
From the success rate results, we can find that applying LDPC d-levels could have a high probability of read success in advance compared with applying the high i-level. As applying a higher i-level would take more latency than applying d-levels, unnecessary latency to read data could be saved for successful read with d-levels. This observation could be exploited to design a fine-grained LDPC reading method.

3) Fine-Grained LDPC Reading Method: Based on the above analysis, we design a fine-grained LDPC reading method to exploit d-levels for high-density flash memory to reduce the read latency.
The fine-grained LDPC reading method changes the increasing granularity of read level based on the original progressive method. Differently, the fine-grained method applies d-levels into the iterative process when read-retry is needed. For example, for upper pages of TLC, the original progressive reading method first senses in each of the four state adjacent areas, i.e., adds one read i-level in each read-retry step before transferring and decoding once. If decoding fails, one more read i-level of sensing, transferring, and decoding is then applied based on the last round until the read is successful or the maximum number of read i-level is reached. The fine-grained LDPC reading method would sense once in one state adjacent area, i.e., adding 0.25 read d-level in each read-retry step, and immediately transfer and decode data. If the decoding fails, read voltage in the next state adjacent region would be extra applied to invoke the read with 0.5 read d-level.
Similarly, for upper pages of MLC flash, as there are only two state adjacent areas, adding one extra read voltage in each d-level would increase 0.5 read level for each read-retry iteration. For upper pages of QLC flash in which there are eight state adjacent areas, adding one extra read voltage in the next d-level would increase the 0.125 read level for each readretry iteration. As more read-retry iterations would be involved when the success read level is high, the benefit of the finegrained LDPC reading method on reducing the read latency is more obvious for lower success read levels, which would be shown in the experimental results in Section IV. Thus, only applying the fine-grained method is not enough to improve read performance of high-density flash memory.
B. LDPC Read Level Prediction
We first introduce the definition of an error-prone area, and then the motivational experiment and results about the error-prone cell ratio characteristics are illustrated. At last, by exploiting the error-pone cell ratio characteristic, the read-level prediction method is presented.
1) Definition of Error-Prone Area: During LDPC reading process with the first i-level and the second i-level, two read voltages are often applied into the adjacent area of two states sequentially, with one inside the left state and the other inside the right state, as shown in Fig. 4. The involved voltages are denoted as 1st sensing and 2nd sensing, respectively. We define error-prone area to be the areas between two read voltages in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:48:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3268

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2023
TABLE II CORRESPONDENCE TABLE

Fig. 5. Cell ratio characteristics. (a) Cell ratio under i-levels. (b) Cell ratio under d-levels.
the two i-level reading. As there are several adjacent states in high-density flash memory, there would be multiple errorprone areas, as shown in the example of TLC flash in Fig. 4. Similarly, we define flash cells with threshold voltages that lie in the error-prone area to be error-prone cells.
2) Characteristics of Error-Prone Cell Ratio: The relationship between the number of error-prone flash cells and the final level with a read success is investigated with a motivational experiment. We simulate 5000 upper pages with the size of 4 kB for TLC flash. By adding the Gaussian noise to the page cells, RBERs are introduced to the data stored in flash pages. After applying LDPC codes, data would be successfully decoded with certain read levels. Fig. 5 shows the relationship between the error-prone cell ratio and the final read i-levels that result in read success. Error-prone cells, here, refer to cells that lie in the error-prone area between voltage states P6 and P7. The ratio data in the left y-axis represent the average error-prone cell ratio in each 4-kB data page. The dark blue pixels represent the higher the possibility of error-prone cells that are successfully read in each i-level. Thus, the sum of possibility pixel values in each row equals to 100%.
In Fig. 5(a), we apply existing coarse-grained LDPC reading, in which only 7 i-levels could be used. From the figure, we can see that the final read i-level is closely related to the ratio of error-prone cells. When ratio of error-prone cells is high, the success reading i-level of the data is also high. In Fig. 5(b), we apply the fine-grained method introduced above, in which both d-levels and i-levels are used. It can be seen that the relationship between the final read d-level and the ratio of error-prone cells is not as strong as that of d-level. Therefore, we will predict the final reading i-level of the data by using the

cell in error-prone areas, to eliminate the unnecessary decoding steps in the read process.
3) Read Level Prediction: By exploiting the error-prone cell ratio characteristics, we can predict the final LDPC read i-level for success read in high-density flash memories. Our prediction method involves two stages of error-prone cell ratio computation and read i-level prediction.
In the first stage, in order to obtain the error-prone cell ratio, we need to count the number of cells in the error-prone area. During reading operation of flash memory, the value stored by each cell is indicated by which read voltage area the cell is in. As shown in Fig. 3, cells in the area of V1 and V1.25, V1 and V1.5, V1 and V1.75, and V1 and V2, which represent the number of cells in the error-prone area, can be determined after reading with the corresponding two levels. Comparing the number of cells of the error-prone area with the size of the entire page, we can obtain the cell ratio of the error-prone area.
In the second stage, in order to obtain the predicted read i-level based on the ratio information, we use a correspondence table (corr-table) between the predicted reading i-level and the number of error-prone cells. The corr-table is stored in flash memory and has seven entries, each of which keeps the correspondence between ratio ranges and read i-level. Table II shows an example of TLC flash memory with an 8-kB page size. A certain amount of data are required to establish the corr-table. In this experiment, 7000 page reads are collected to collect the data for the corr-table. In practice, the corr-table could be different among different flash chip types. The table should be developed for each flash type by characterization on one or several samples of a batch.
We take the second row of Table II as an example. The number of error-prone cells is in the range of (120, 136), i.e., the error-prone cells account for 1.46%–1.66% of the data page. We collect the final i-levels that introduce read success for these 7000 page reads. Among them, i-level 2 is the one that takes the highest ratio, reaching 35%, while the ratios of other i-levels are only 3%–23%. Therefore, level 2 is the predicted i-level for pages with the number of error-prone cells in this range.
The predicted read i-level is obtained by computing the ratio of error-prone cells and looking up the corr-table, and the data is read with the predicted reading i-level. The predicted read i-level is the exact read level for. However, the predicted read i-level could still be lower or higher than the required read level. When the predicted read i-level is lower,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:48:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DU et al.: LDPC LEVEL PREDICTION TOWARD READ PERFORMANCE OF HIGH-DENSITY FLASH MEMORIES

3269

Fig. 6. Architecture overview of PreLDPC. PreLDPC contains two modules, the fine-grained LDPC read method and LDPC read i-level prediction.
reading with the predicted read i-level will fail. In this case, the traditional method of gradually increasing the read i-level is used to continue reading based on the predicted read i-level, until the read is successful or the read level reaches the maximum. When the predicted read i-level exceeds the required read level, reading with the predicted reading i-level will succeed. Although the exceeded read i-level increases the sensing latency in the reading process, we eliminate the trying steps from low-level LDPC read. Therefore, the total latency could still be lower than the strategy of aggressive adding from the lowest level without prediction. In summary, the prediction method would be more beneficial on reducing read latency on data that requires high-success read levels.
C. Design of PreLDPC
As we explained above, the fine-grained LDPC reading method has the characteristics of saving unnecessary decoding capabilities and is more suitable for data with low read levels. The read-level prediction method is characterized by skipping unnecessary decoding steps in the read process and is more suitable for data with high read levels. Therefore, to handle various situations, we combine these two methods in our proposed prediction-based fine-grained LDPC reading method, PreLDPC to fully utilize both benefits. Briefly, PreLDPC would decide the read-retry iteration more smartly. As shown in Fig. 6, PreLDPC mainly includes five stages. The detailed reading process is illustrated as follows and in Algorithm 1.
1) In the initial read-retry iteration stage, PreLDPC tries to read with i-level 1 and the next d-level. The read finishes

Algorithm 1: Workflow of PreLDPC

1: start read

2: hard read with i-level 1

3: if read success then

4: return READ SUCCESS

5: else

6: LDPC read with the next d-level

7: if read success then

8: return READ SUCCESS

9: else

10: compute error-prone cell ratio

11: look up predicted i-level in corr-table

12: LDPC read with the predicted read i-level

13:

if read success then

14:

return READ SUCCESS

15:

else

16:

while read level < max level do

17:

set read level to the next fine-grained d-level

18:

LDPC read with read level

19:

if read success then

20:

return READ SUCCESS

21:

end if

22:

end while

23:

return READ FAILURE

24:

end if

25: end if

26: end if

if the read succeeds. Otherwise, it would proceed with the second stage, as shown in lines 1–8 in Algorithm 1. 2) In the 2–4 stages that use the prediction method, the number of error-prone area cells is collected. As the page size is fixed and known, the cell ratio would be computed. By looking up the corr-table, the read i-level can be predicted. By applying the predicted read i-level, another read-retry iteration is invoked. If this iteration still fails, PreLDPC would go to the last stage. These stages correspond to lines 10–14 in Algorithm 1. 3) In the final stage, PreLDPC would proceed with a finegrained LDPC reading method. Based on the read i-level used in the last stage, the next d-level would be applied. For example, for i-level 4 in the predicted stage of TLC upper pages, the d-level 4.25 would be chosen to stage another read-retry iteration, then the read level would be set to d-level 4.5, d-level 4.75, i-level 5, d-level 5.25, and so on, until a successful read. This stage corresponds to lines 16–23 in Algorithm 1. PreLDPC combines the advantages of the prediction and fine-grained reading method. On one hand, when the level of a success read is high, PreLDPC can make use of the read level prediction method to quickly jump to the corresponding read i-level, which can reduce unnecessary read-retry latency. On the other hand, based on the i-level obtained in the prediction method, PreLDPC can use the fine-grained LDPC reading method to further proceed the read-retry iteration with a finer step, which only involves a lower read latency. Therefore, the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:48:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3270

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2023

PreLDPC method can combine the advantages of these two methods to further reduce read latency.

TABLE III MODEL PARAMETERS

D. Overhead Analysis
The overhead of PreLDPC includes the calculation of the ratio of error-prone cells and the storage of corr-table.
First, to calculate the ratio of error-prone cells, we only need to count the cells that reside between two read voltages applied. Taking Fig. 4 as an example, suppose we need to count the error-prone cells between P6 and P7. As LDPC soft decoding will use different LLR values for different voltage regions after applying soft sensing, we count the number of the LLR value that represents the region between V1 and V1.25. No extra operations are needed to count the error-prone cells. Therefore, the overhead for calculating the ratio of error-prone cells is negligible.
Second, the corr-table is loaded into the DRAM in the flash controller, as shown in Fig. 6. For a specific flash chip, the page size is constant, and, thus, we can only store the number of error-prone cells. In this case, the stored information are integer numbers to indicate seven ranges, where each range corresponds to one predicted i-level. As shown in Table II, the maximal number is 196, which needs one byte to store one number. The total space required is 7 bytes. For other types of flash memories, the number of error-prone cells might be larger. The space overhead would still be within 10 bytes, considering the size of ECC codewords.

TABLE IV STATISTICS OF WORKLOADS

IV. EVALUATION
This section first presents the experimental setup to evaluate the proposed PreLDPC method. Then, the results of decoding failure probability of applying LDPC d-levels reading are shown to represent their error correction capabilities. Consequently, the read d-level distributions for five workloads and the probability distribution of predicted read i-level are presented. At last, the evaluation results on read latency are shown for varied data retention and P/E cycles.
A. Experimental Setup
In order to evaluate the proposed PreLDPC method, our experiment contains two parts: high-density flash memory simulation and LDPC decoding simulation. We use Disksim with SSD extensions [18] to simulate a 64-GB 3-D TLC flash. The flash is configured with 32 stack layers and has four channels, with four chips per channel and four planes per chip. Each plane have 342 blocks. The page size is 8 kB and there are 384 pages for each block. The configurations of read latency are the same as Section II. We set the block erase time to be 4 ms. In order to study the sensitivity of PreLDPC, we set two initial retention settings of one week and one month, and three P/E cycles of 1000, 2000, and 4000. The parameters of error models in (1) are set as Table III [38]. Five workloads are chosen from MSR [45], [46], as shown in Table IV.
We use MATLAB to simulate LDPC codes under 0.94 code rate. Multiple groups of noise data are generated and decoded with the belief propagation decoding algorithm under LDPC i-levels and d-levels. The decoding failure probability results

Fig. 7. Decoding failure probability of LDPC codes with d-levels.
are collected to evaluate the decoding capability of different LDPC levels, as shown in Fig. 7.
We implement five methods listed as follows. 1) Baseline is the existing progressive LDPC read method
with seven read i-levels, which was proposed in [14] and widely adopted in [44], [47], and [48]. 2) Fine-grained is the first design of PreLDPC that only applies the fine-grained LDPC reading method. 3) Prediction is the second design of PreLDPC that only applies the LDPC read i-level prediction. 4) PreLDPC is the proposed PreLDPC method that combines the proposed two designs, i.e., the combination of the i-level prediction method and the fine-grained method. 5) Ideal is the ideal case that the final read level is known in advance.
B. Results of Decoding Failure Probability
The LDPC decoding capability results are shown in Fig. 7. The y-axis represents decoding failure probability by applying the corresponding read levels to read data with RBERs in x-axis. Results of i-levels are denoted with solid lines while that of d-levels with dotted lines. In order to achieve readability, we hide the high d-levels results. From the results, it can be seen that error correction capability of d-levels are between

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:48:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DU et al.: LDPC LEVEL PREDICTION TOWARD READ PERFORMANCE OF HIGH-DENSITY FLASH MEMORIES

3271

(a)
Fig. 9. Probability distribution of predicted read level.

(b)
Fig. 8. Read level distributions in five workloads. (a) Read level distributions under one-week retention. (b) Read level distributions under one-month retention.
two adjacent LDPC read i-levels. Meanwhile, the capability of d-levels are gradually increased along with its value size, i.e., the number of extra read voltages. For example, the capability of d-levels 2.25, 2.5, and 2.75 are among that of i-levels from 2 to 3. And the capability of these d-levels gradually increases from 2.25 to 2.5 and further to 2.75.
The above results show that applying d-levels could reach to an early read success instead of applying a higher i-level in a progressive way. This also corresponds with the success rate results in Table I. As d-levels would generate less extra latency than applying the next i-level, these results verify that the fine-grained method could reduce the unnecessary latency of coarse-grained i-levels.
C. Read Level Distributions
Fig. 8 shows the distributions of read levels in the final read success in five workloads when the retention time is set as a week and a month, respectively, and P/E cycle of both are set as 2000. Although we set the initial retention time and P/E cycle as a fixed value for each experiment, they would change after data updates and block erasure. Thus, RBERs would also be changed and there would exist various read d-levels. These results show that the fine-grained decoding method could be used for read success. We will further show the read latency reduction to show the benefits of the fine-grained LDPC reading.

Fig. 9 shows the probability distribution of predicted read i-level when read levels of the data are levels of i-level 3, i-level 4, and i-level 5, respectively. From the graph, the predicted read i-level has a high probability to be the exact final read level (50%–70%). At the same time, there is a relatively small probability (10%–20%) that the difference between the predicted read i-level and the final read level is one i-level. If the predicted read i-level is one level lower than the correct read level, only 1–4 fine-grained LDPC readings are required to reach the correct read level, and if the predicted reading i-level is one level higher than the correct read level, the read would directly succeed with the predicted read i-level, with some extra decoding ability. In both cases, the LDPC read level prediction method would introduce benefits, where the probability is over 90% after prediction.
D. Read Latency Results
Experimental results of flash read latency reduction for four methods compared with Baseline are shown in Fig. 10. Flash read latency is the total latency involved in flash sensing, data transferring, and LDPC decoding. The experiments set P/E as 1000, 2000, and 4000 and retention time is a week and a month.
The blue bars in Fig. 10 show the read latency reduction of the fine-grained LDPC reading method in different traces and the average situations by changing the retention time and P/E cycles, respectively, over current progressive LDPC reading scheme. Compared with Baseline, the fine-grained LDPC reading method can reduce the read latency by 7% on average when P/E cycle is 2000 and retention time is a week. That is because in this case most of the data does not need strong decoding capability, and using multiple d-levels could achieve read success with LDPC coding with low latencies. The fine-grained LDPC reading method with d-levels reduces unnecessary sensing latency. From the results, it can be seen that the fine-grained LDPC reading method can reduce much read latency with small P/E cycles and short retention time, but the improvement decreases with P/E cycles and retention time, because of the increased retrying steps in fine-grained reading.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:48:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3272

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2023

Fig. 10. Read latency results for varied P/E cycles and retention. All these latency reduction results are normalized to Baseline. (a) Read latency results with 1000 P/E cycles under one week (left) and one month (right) retention, respectively. (b) Read latency results with 2000 P/E cycles under one week (left) and one month (right) retention, respectively. (c) Read latency results with 4000 P/E cycles under one week (left) and one month (right) retention, respectively.

The green bars in Fig. 10 show the read latency reduction of the LDPC read level prediction method in different traces and average situations. Compared with Baseline, LDPC read level prediction method gains great improvement in reducing read latency by 25% on average when P/E cycle is 4000 and retention time is one month. This is because the predicted i-level can avoid unnecessary transferring and decoding latency in progressive decoding process. We also observe that the latency reduction in LDPC read level prediction method is negative when P/E cycle is 2000 and retention is one week. When P/E and retention are small with a low read level, LDPC read level

prediction method has no advantage because the predicted ilevel is close to i-level 1. When the predicted i-level is not Level 1, the latency might increase, which affects the latency reduction benefit of LDPC read level prediction method. Thus, LDPC read level prediction method would be probably inefficient for data pages that require the lower d-levels than i-level 2. From the results, we can see that the advantage of the LDPC read level prediction method is obvious when the P/E cycle is large and retention time is long, which is complementary with the advantage of the fine-grained LDPC reading method.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:48:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DU et al.: LDPC LEVEL PREDICTION TOWARD READ PERFORMANCE OF HIGH-DENSITY FLASH MEMORIES

3273

The orange bars in Fig. 10 show the read latency reduction of the PreLDPC method in different traces and average situations. Compared with Baseline, the PreLDPC method presents the largest read latency reduction by 30% on average when P/E cycle is 4000 and retention time is a month. Even in early period of flash memory with 1000 P/E cycle and oneweek retention, there still exists 3% improvement. That is because the PreLDPC method combines the prediction method and fine-grained method to achieve more read latency reduction in different cases of bit errors. Compared to the separate designs, the performance of PreLDPC is the closest to Ideal. These results verify the effectiveness of the proposed PreLDPC method.
V. RELATED WORKS
Many works proposed to reduce read latency by optimizing read voltage placement and LDPC decoding process. Zhao et al. [14] proposed a progressive LDPC reading method to optimize read latency. Zhang et al. [49] proposed a retention error-aware LDPC decoding scheme to improve read performance. Du et al. [47], [48] designed a Latency-aware LDPC reading method and a multigranularity LDPC reading method to improve read performance. Wu et al. [50] proposed to exploit the error modes to increase LLR information accuracy to enhance the decoding performance and reduce read latency. Li et al. [44] exploited three asymmetric error characteristics of flash memory and proposed three asymmetric sensing level placement schemes to reduce sensing numbers as well as read latency.
VI. CONCLUSION
In order to reduce LDPC read latency on high-density flash memories, PreLDPC is proposed to predict the read levels and performs further reads in a fine-granularity manner once the predicted level fails. By exploiting the error-prone cell ratio characteristics and LDPC decoding characteristics, the two designs of read-level prediction and fine-grained LDPC reading are illustrated. Experimental results on Disksim with SSD extensions have verified the effectiveness of PreLDPC in enhancing read performance of high-density flash memories.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable feedback.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Siau, K.-H. Kim, and S. Lee, “13.5 a 512Gb 3-bit/cell 3D flash memory on 128-Wordline-layer with 132MB/s write performance featuring circuit-under-array technology,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC), 2019, pp. 218–220.
[2] C. Kim et al., “A 512-gb 3-b/cell 64-stacked WL 3-D-NAND flash memory,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 124–133, Jan. 2018.
[3] D. Kang, M. Kim, and S. Jeon, “13.4 a 512gb 3-bit/cell 3D 6thgeneration V-NAND flash memory with 82MB/s write throughput and 1.2gb/s interface,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC), 2019, pp. 216–218.
[4] S. Lee, C. Kim, and M. Kim, “A 1Tb 4b/cell 64-stacked-WL 3D NAND flash memory with 12MB/s program throughput,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC), 2018, pp. 340–342.

[5] M. Huang, Z. Liu, L. Qiao, Y. Wang, and Z. Shao, “An endurance-aware metadata allocation strategy for MLC NAND flash memory storage systems,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 691–694, Apr. 2016.
[6] Q. Xiong et al., “Characterizing 3D floating gate NAND flash: Observations, Analyses, and implications,” ACM Trans. Storage, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 1–31, 2018.
[7] W. Liu et al., “Modeling of threshold voltage distribution in 3D NAND flash memory,” in Proc. Design Autom. Test Europe Conf. Exhibit. (DATE), 2021, pp. 1729–1732.
[8] D. J. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[9] M. Zhang, F. Wu, Y. Du, W. Liu, and C. Xie, “Pair-bit errors aware LDPC decoding in MLC NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput.Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 38, no. 12, pp. 2312–2320, Dec. 2019. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/TCAD.2018. 2878132
[10] R.-S. Liu, M.-Y. Chuang, C.-L. Yang, C.-H. Li, K.-C. Ho, and H.-P. Li, “EC-cache: Exploiting error locality to optimize LDPC in NAND flash-based SSDs,” in Proc. ACM Design Autom. Conf. (DAC), 2014, pp. 1–6.
[11] K. C. Ho, P. C. Fang, H. P. Li, C. Wang, and H. C. Chang, “A 45nm 6b/cell charge-trapping flash memory using LDPC-based ECC and driftimmune soft-sensing engine,” in IEEE Int. Solid-state Circuits Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers, 2013, pp. 222–223.
[12] Y. Cai, E. F. Haratsch, O. Mutlu, and K. Mai, “Error patterns in MLC NAND flash memory: Measurement, characterization, and analysis,” in Proc. IEEE DATE, 2012, pp. 521–526.
[13] Q. Li, L. Shi, C. Gao, Y. Di, and C. J. Xue, “Access characteristic guided read and write cost regulation for performance improvement on flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 67, no. 12, pp. 1663–1676, Dec. 2018.
[14] K. Zhao, W. Zhao, H. Sun, X. Zhang, N. Zheng, and T. Zhang, “LDPCin-SSD: Making advanced error correction codes work effectively in solid state drives,” presented at the 11th USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol. (FAST), 2013, pp. 243–256.
[15] J. Wang et al., “Enhanced precision through multiple reads for LDPC decoding in flash memories,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 880–891, May 2014.
[16] G. Dong, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “On the use of soft-decision errorcorrection codes in nand flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 429–439, Feb. 2011.
[17] T. Kim and J. Park, “Logistic regression for LDPC decoding failure prediction,” in Proc. IEEE 18th Annu. Consum. Commun. Netw. Conf. (CCNC), 2021, pp. 1–6.
[18] J. S. Bucy, J. Schindler, S. Schlosser, and G. Ganger. “The DiskSim Simulation Environment (v4.0).” 2008. Accessed: Nov. 2018. [Online]. Available: http://www.pdl.cmu.edu/DiskSim/
[19] A. Silvagni, “3D NAND flash based on planar cells,” Computers, vol. 6, p. 28, Oct. 2017.
[20] R. Micheloni, L. Crippa, C. Zambelli, and P. Olivo, “Architectural and integration options for 3D NAND flash memories,” Computers, vol. 6, no. 3, p. 27, 2017.
[21] M. Jia, Y. Kong, X. Zhan, M. Zhang, F. Wu, and J. Chen, “Optimal program-read schemes towards highly reliable open block operations in 3D charge-trap NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput.Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 41, no. 11, pp. 4797–4807, Nov. 2022.
[22] C. Gao, L. Shi, K. Wu, C. J. Xue, and H. M. Sha, “Exploit asymmetric error rates of cell states to improve the performance of flash memory storage systems,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Design, 2014, pp. 202–207.
[23] C. Gao, X. Xin, Y. Lu, Y. Zhang, J. Yang, and J. Shu, “ParaBit: Processing parallel bitwise operations in NAND flash memory based SSDs,” in Proc. 54th Annu. IEEE/ACM Int. Symp. Microarchitect. (MICRO), 2021, pp. 59–70.
[24] Y. Cai, S. Ghose, E. F. Haratsch, Y. Luo, and O. Mutlu, “Error characterization, mitigation, and recovery in flash-memory-based solid-state drives,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 105, no. 9, pp. 1666–1704, Sep. 2017.
[25] Y. Cai, Y. Luo, S. Ghose, E. F. Haratsch, K. Mai, and O. Mutlu. “Read Disturb Errors in MLC NAND Flash Memory.” 2018. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1805.03283
[26] V. Taranalli, “Error characterization, channel modeling and coding for flash memories,” Ph.D. dissertation, Elect. Eng., Univ. California, San Diego, San Diego, CA, USA, 2017.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:48:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3274

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2023

[27] N. Papandreou, T. Parnell, H. Pozidis, T. Mittelholzer, and A. Walls, “Enhancing the reliability of MLC NAND flash memory systems by read channel optimization,” ACM Trans. Design Autom. Electron. Syst., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 1–24, 2015.
[28] T. Takahashi, S. Yamazaki, and K. Takeuchi, “Data-retention time prediction of long-term archive SSD with flexible-nLC NAND flash,” in Proc. Rel. Phys. Symp., 2016, pp. 1–8.
[29] Y. Pan, H. Zhang, R. Yu, Z. Lu, H. Zhang, and Z. Liu, “LightWarner: Predicting failure of 3D NAND flash memory using reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Comput., early access, Jun. 17, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TC.2022.3184270.
[30] T.-C. Yu, C.-H. Wu, and Y.-Q. Liao, “CRRC: Coordinating retention errors, read disturb errors and Huffman coding on TLC NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., early access, May 26, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2022.3177812.
[31] M. Ye, Q. Li, C. Gao, S. Deng, T.-W. Kuo, and C. J. Xue, “Stop unnecessary refreshing: Extending 3D NAND flash lifetime with ORBER,” CCF Trans. High Perform. Comput., vol. 4, pp. 281–301, Jun. 2022.
[32] W. Liu, F. Wu, S. Meng, X. Chen, and C. Xie, “Error generation for 3D NAND flash memory,” in Proc. Design Autom. Test Europe Conf. Exhibit. (DATE), 2022, pp. 56–59.
[33] L. Qiao, S. Liang, Y. Di, Y. Du, and E. Sha, “Exploiting process variation for read performance improvement on LDPC based flash memory storage systems,” in Proc. IEEE 35th Int. Conf. Comput. Design (ICCD), 2017, pp. 681–684.
[34] M. C. Yang, Y. H. Chang, C. W. Tsao, and P. C. Huang, “New ERA: New efficient reliability-aware wear leveling for endurance enhancement of flash storage devices,” in Proc. 50th ACM/EDAC/IEEE Design Autom. Conf. (DAC), 2013, pp. 1–8.
[35] D. Wei, L. Deng, L. Qiao, Z. Peng, and X. Peng, “PEVA: A page endurance variance aware strategy for the lifetime extension of NAND flash,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 1749–1760, May 2016.
[36] L. Shi, Y. Di, M. Zhao, C. J. Xue, K. Wu, and H. M. Sha, “Exploiting process variation for write performance improvement on NAND flash memory storage systems,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 334–337, Jan. 2016.
[37] A. Spessot, A. Calderoni, P. Fantini, A. S. Spinelli, and A. Marmiroli, “Variability effects on the VT distribution of nanoscale NAND flash memories,” in Proc. Rel. Phys. Symp., 2010, pp. 1–9.
[38] Y. Luo, S. Ghose, Y. Cai, E. F. Haratsch, and O. Mutlu, “Improving 3D NAND flash memory lifetime by tolerating early retention loss and process variation,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Meas. Model. Comput. Syst., 2018, pp. 106–106.
[39] J. Cui, Z. Zeng, J. Huang, W. Yuan, and L. T. Yang, “Improving 3D NAND SSD read performance by parallelizing read-retry,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., early access, Jul. 14, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TCAD.2022.3191256.
[40] A. Marelli and R. Micheloni, BCH and LDPC Error Correction Codes for NAND Flash Memories. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2016.
[41] G. Dong, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “Enabling NAND flash memory use soft-decision error correction codes at minimal read latency overhead,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 2412–2421, Sep. 2013.
[42] X. Chen, H. Li, J. Qu, and A. Razi, “Boosting belief propagation for LDPC codes with deep convolutional neural network predictors,” in Proc. IEEE 18th Annu. Consum. Commun. Netw. Conf. (CCNC), 2021, pp. 1–6.
[43] C. A. Aslam, L. G. Yong, and K. Cai, “Retention-aware beliefpropagation decoding for NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 64, no. 6, pp. 725–729, Jun. 2017.
[44] Q. Li, L. Shi, Y. Cui, and C. J. Xue, “Exploiting asymmetric errors for LDPC decoding optimization on 3D NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 475–488, Apr. 2020.
[45] “MSR Cambridge Traces.” Accessed: Feb. 12, 2023. [Online]. Available: http://iotta.snia.org/traces/388
[46] “Storage-UMASS Trace Repository.” Accessed: Feb. 12, 2023. [Online]. Available: http://traces.cs.umass.edu/index.php/Storage/Storage
[47] Y. Du, D. Zou, Q. Li, L. Shi, H. Jin, and C. J. Xue, “LaLDPC: Latencyaware LDPC for read performance improvement of solid state drives,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Massive Storage Syst. Technol. (MSST), 2017, pp. 1–6.

[48] Y. Du, Y. Zhou, M. Zhang, W. Liu, and S. Xiong, “Adapting layer RBERs variations of 3D flash memories via multi-granularity progressive LDPC reading,” in Proc. 56th Annu. Design Autom. Conf., 2019, p. 37.
[49] M. Zhang, F. Wu, X. He, P. Huang, S. Wang, and C. Xie, “REAL: A retention error aware LDPC decoding scheme to improve NAND flash read performance,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Mass Storage Syst. Technol. (MSST), 2016, pp. 1–13.
[50] F. Wu et al., “Using error modes aware LDPC to improve decoding performance of 3D TLC NAND flash,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 909–921, Apr. 2020.
Yajuan Du received the joint Ph.D. degrees from the City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, and the Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
She is currently an Associate Professor with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Wuhan University of Technology. Her research interest focuses on optimizing access performance, data reliability and persistency of flash memories, and nonvolatile memories.
Yuan Gao received the M.S. degree from the Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, China.
His research interest focuses on error correction codes (ECC) and read performance of high-density flash memories.
Siyi Huang is currently pursuing the master’s degree with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, China.
Her research interest focuses on error correction codes and data reliability of flash memories.
Qiao Li (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree from the Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, in 2021.
She is currently an Associate Professor with the School of Informatics, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China. Her research interests include NAND flash memory, storage systems, and computer architecture.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:48:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

