3224

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2023

High-Precision Short-Term Lifetime Prediction in TLC 3-D NAND Flash Memory as Hot-Data Storage
Xiaotong Fang , Meng Zhang , Yifan Guo, Fei Chen, Binglu Chen, Xuepeng Zhan , Jixuan Wu , Member, IEEE, Fei Wu , Member, IEEE, and Jiezhi Chen , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—3-D NAND flash memory is the ubiquitous nonvolatile memory (NVM) on the market because of its large storage capacities, high reliability, and low bit cost. The reliability characteristics of 3-D NAND flash memory, however, are considerably different from those of 2-D NAND flash memory due to the peculiar architectures. In this article, read disturb (RD) at various program/erase (P/E) stages is thoroughly explored. To adjust the low-density parity check (LDPC) codes dynamically and extend the lifetime of 3-D NAND flash memory, short-term lifetime prediction models of RD and endurance are proposed based on in-depth studies on the correlations of fail bit count (FBC) at various lifetime stages, and their accuracy is tested experimentally. A new short-term warning system (STWS) is proposed to extend the lifetime of 3-D NAND-based storages. It consists of the error-bits’ prediction module (EBPM) and the self-adjustable LDPC codes module (SLDPC), where EBPM predicts FBC periodically and SLDPC preallocates LDPC codes for future use based on the result of EBPM. The experimental result shows that our prediction models have high reliability, and STWS can effectively prolong the lifetime of NAND flash. The findings of this study provide fundamental insights into FBC degradation in 3-D NAND flash, as well as a simple and practical method for building 3-D NAND-based storage with high reliability.
Index Terms—3-D triple-level cell (TLC) NAND flash, endurance, lifetime, low-density parity check (LDPC), read disturb (RD), reliability.
Manuscript received 13 August 2022; revised 31 October 2022 and 29 December 2022; accepted 26 January 2023. Date of publication 30 January 2023; date of current version 20 September 2023. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62034006, Grant 91964105, Grant 61874068, and Grant 62102156; in part by the Natural Science Foundation of Shandong Province under Grant ZR2020JQ28 and Grant ZR2020KF016; and in part by the Program of Qilu Young Scholars of Shandong University. This article was recommended by Associate Editor A. Aminifar. (Corresponding authors: Jiezhi Chen; Meng Zhang.)
Xiaotong Fang, Yifan Guo, Fei Chen, Binglu Chen, Xuepeng Zhan, Jixuan Wu, and Jiezhi Chen are with the School of Information Science and Engineering, Shandong University, Qingdao 266237, China (e-mail: zhanxuepeng@sdu.edu.cn; jixuanwu@sdu.edu.cn; chen.jiezhi@sdu.edu.cn).
Meng Zhang is with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail: zgmeng@hust.edu.cn).
Fei Wu is with the Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail: wufei@hust.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCAD.2023.3240932

I. INTRODUCTION
A S CIVILIZATION moves into the era of big data, the market demand for high-capacity and high-throughput memories is exploding. Because of their ultrafast read and write speeds, low power consumption, high reliability, and high storage density, solid-state drives (SSDs) are increasingly becoming the mainstream storage devices.
As a data storage device, SSD has two key components: 1) SSD controller and 2) flash memory array. Typically, the memory array in SSD is NAND flash. Many algorithms in SSD controller serve the flash memory array, such as flash translation layer (FTL), so the optimization work on NAND flash memory is important to the development of SSD.
Commonly, there are error bits in NAND flash inevitably, and the low-density parity check (LDPC) code is introduced in NAND flash to correct the error bits in data. Nowadays, several works propose dynamic LDPC codes to save storage space for user data in the early stage of endurance and extend the lifetime of NAND flash. But it requires a clear prediction of NAND flash memory reliability degradation trends. Previous lifetime prediction models are generally based on machine learning techniques that require additional on-chip training and large amounts of data. Many parameters are also needed as inputs, such as operating time, voltage threshold (Vth), etc., which increases the overhead of dynamic LDPC codes.
In this article, we test the read disturb (RD) degradation in different endurance by using an FPGA-based NAND flash test platform (NplusT), the relationships of fail bit count (FBC) between different read times and P/E cycles in 3-D triplelevel cell (TLC) charge-trap (CT) NAND flash memory have been studied in detail. The same linear relationships are found between FBC in the early stages of operations and FBC in the middle and late stages of operations in different blocks. Based on the above relationships, we summarize FBC-related formulations for the chip with few blocks, and variables in the formulations are only FBC and the number of target operations. Then, prediction models are built to periodically predict the short-term performance of hot-data storages. Based on the above models, we propose a scheme of short-term warning system (STWS) to optimize the performance of 3-D TLC CT NAND flash memory. It can extend the lifetime of NAND flash by periodically predicting FBC and preallocating LDPC codes. Experimental result shows that, in 99.16% and 97.63% samples, there is only 10% accuracy loss for the RD and endurance

1937-4151 c 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:49:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FANG et al.: HIGH-PRECISION SHORT-TERM LIFETIME PREDICTION IN TLC 3-D NAND FLASH MEMORY

3225

prediction models. The comparison of STWS and static LDPC codes confirm that STWS can save space for user data in the early stages of lifetime and prolong lifetime of NAND flash.
The main contributions of this article are as follows. 1) The features of RD and endurance in 3-D TLC CT
NAND flash memory chips are investigated by focusing on the correlations of FBC at various stages of RD and endurance. Moreover, the changes in these correlations along with read duration and P/E cycle are studied. 2) For better dynamic adjustments of LDPC codes to extend the lifetime of 3-D NAND-based storages, we first present 3-D CT NAND flash memory lifetime prediction models. Experimental result shows that, in 99.16% and 97.63% samples, there is only 10% accuracy loss for the RD and endurance prediction models. 3) We propose a new STWS consists of an error-bits’ prediction module (EBPM) and a self-adjustable LDPC codes module (SLDPC). The appropriate LDPC codes that are preallocated in SLDPC can be triggered automatically and periodically for encoding and decoding using the predicted error bits generated in EBPM. The remainder of this article is organized as follows. Section II introduces the related work. Section III presents the background. Section IV describes the experiment setup, the measured result, the process of the short-term and longterm prediction model building, and their accuracy. Section V shows the scheme of STWS, its benefits, and overhead. Finally, Section VI concludes this work.
II. RELATED WORK
There are prior works to study dynamic LDPC codes and lifetime prediction methods for 3-D NAND flash memory.
Chen et al. [1] built a neural network model to predict the rest lifetime of NAND flash memory by analyzing the variation in program time and erase time, which is accurate in some types of flash memory. Kim and Kwak [2] used the difference in invalid pages during the last erase operation to evaluate the elapsed time of the block and applied it to the embedded system. Li et al. [3] estimated the growth rate of raw bit error rate (RBER) by the quotient of RBER of the page, the access time at the last test, and the counterpart at the next test. In this way, the lifetime of the page can be predicted and the pages with more error bits can be detected. Ma et al. [4] compared four well-known machine learning techniques and then used the support vector machine (SVM) technique to construct a model with a prediction accuracy of 95%. Then, they considered the similarity among blocks, classified the blocks by RBER, constructed different prediction models, and assigned cold-data and hot-data to different types of blocks according to the prediction result of the model [5]. Wei et al. [6] proposed a model for lifetime prediction using the random forest algorithm by combining the experimental data of retention 200 days. Kojima et al. [7] and Takahashi et al. [8] proposed an approach called “flex-nLC” and extended the data retention (DR) time by dropping some error-prone program states. Abe et al. [9] first built a model using machine learning to predict the decoding failure rate of error-correcting code

(ECC) before the chips were shipped and to detect errors that cannot be corrected by ECC aftermarket. Tanakamaru et al. proposed an error-prediction LDPC (EP-LDPC) scheme for multilevel cell (MLC) flash memory using a prerecorded table. If the predicted result exceeds the error correction capability of the LDPC codes, the error-recovery (ER) mechanism is enabled to keep the number of error bits within the error correction capability of the LDPC codes [10], [11], [12]. Later, the application of TLC NAND flash became widespread. Tokutomi et al. [13] improved their previous work by taking the effects of program interference, DR, and floatinggate (FG) capacitive coupling into account. They proposed the advanced error-prediction low-density parity-check (AEPLDPC) scheme for TLC with a higher accuracy. Wu et al. [14] found that unbalanced error bits among pages in 3-D NAND flash due to different shift ratios of different program states. These error modes are used to optimize the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) information in LDPC codes to improve decoding efficiency [15]. Wang et al. [16] divided P/E cycles into the early stages and the late stages, and allocated ECC codes with different code rates according to the period the blocks are in to improve the life of NAND flash. Zhang et al. [17] proposed a flash memory endurance grade prediction scheme based on the SVM algorithm and designed a high parallel test platform and low time-consuming endurance prediction model based on FPGA.
By analyzing these works, it becomes clear that the majority of them are focused on the lifetime forecast of DR and P/E cycles, which is commonly referred to as cold data, but studies on the effects of RD deterioration, which is a major concern in hot-data storage, are scarce. A straightforward yet effective solution could be more easily implemented in a realworld SSD system. Aside from this, most works on LDPC codes optimizations focus on soft decision methods based on specific reliability properties. The optimization approaches to LDPC hard decision should receive greater attention, as they aim to provide general-purpose solutions to increase the LDPC capacity with high decoding speed.
III. BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
In this section, we first present the background on NAND flash memory, including its development process and array architecture. Then, the background of LDPC codes and the algorithm used in this article is introduced. Finally, the motivation for the construction of lifetime prediction models and STWS is given.
A. NAND Flash
Cell size has been dropping at a rapid rate every year since the advent of NAND flash memory, resulting in smaller storage volumes and increasingly severe cell-to-cell interference. Manufacturers begin to investigate 3-D NAND architectures in quest of improved space efficiency and storage density when cell size shrinkage stagnated in recent years, preventing further expansion of 2-D NAND [18], [19], [20].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:49:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3226

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2023

(a)

(b)

Fig. 1. Schematic of (a) array architecture of 3-D NAND flash memory and (b) structure of the cell and mechanism of LCM in 3-D TLC CT NAND flash memory.

In 2007, bit-cost scalable (BiCS) technology with a multistacked memory array was realized [21]. Then, in 2009, Terabit cell array transistor (TCAT) technology with a vertical NAND flash memory cell array was proposed [22]. After mass production of 3-D NAND, the areal density has increased from 0.96 to 14.8 Gb/mm2, word line (WL) stacking has increased from 24 to 176 layers, and the number of bits stored in each cell has increased to [hexa-level cell (HLC), 6-bit/cell] [23], [24], [25], [26], [27], [28]. In NAND flash memory, the number of charges stored in a cell determines the voltage threshold (Vth), which finally affects the data stored. Generally, based on the way to storage charges, 3-D NAND flash can be divided into two types: FG and CT. FG NAND flash stores charges in separate polysilicon conduction strips where the charges can move freely, while CT NAND stores the charges in defects of the nitride material, where the charges trapped by the defects cannot move freely. In the 2-D NAND era, most flash memories used FG structure while CT technology is adopted as the mainstream in most 3-D NAND. In this article, we focus on 3-D TLC CT NAND flash.
Fig. 1 depicts the structure of 3-D TLC CT NAND memory. Cells in a NAND string share the same storage layer, and there is a transistor at both sides of the NAND string, controlling whether the NAND string is selected or not. Failure mechanisms in 3-D NAND flash memory are substantially more complex than in 2-D NAND due to the stacked architecture and common storage layer. The overall charge loss in 2-D NAND was separated into the sum of detrapping, trap-assisted tunneling (TAT), and interface trap recovery by Lee et al. [29]. Woo et al. [30] categorized failure processes in 3-D NAND into four categories: 1) detrapping; 2) TAT; 3) vertical redistribution (VR); and 4) lateral charge migration (LCM). LCM is a critical failure mechanism in 3-D TLC CT NAND flash memory. The charges can migrate from the target cell to the space regions between neighbor WLs due to the common memory layer. P/E operations on NAND flash cause flaws in the CT layer, increasing the likelihood of LCM and making the FBC after P/E cycles unpredictable. Moreover, studies show that LCM might be the main mechanism of abnormal RD [31]. This means that predicting the lifetime of 3-D TLC CT NAND flash memory faces more challenges.

B. Low-Density Parity Check Codes
Early NAND flash memory has a small storage capacity and requires the low decoding capability for ECC, so Bose– Chaudhuri–Hocquenghem (BCH) codes are always used for error correction. However, as NAND flash storage capacity grows and storage array architectures change, traditional BCH codes can no longer to correct the increasing number of error bits in NAND flash memory. Traditional NAND flash uses static ECC where the size of the user data and ECC parities are fixed throughout the whole lifetime of NAND flash, and its error correction capability remains constant. However, static ECC causes a waste of decoding capacity in the early stages and cannot meet the user data requirements for decoding capacity in the late stages. Therefore, the concept of dynamic ECC has been proposed in recent years [32], [33]. For dynamic ECC, in the early stages of NAND flash lifetime, fewer ECC parities are used so that more user data can be stored on one page. In the late stages of NAND flash lifetime, the proportion of ECC parities is increased to improve its decoding capability and correct more error bits.
LDPC codes were first proposed in the 1960s, and a feasible LDPC decoding algorithm was proposed around 1995 by MacKay and Neal [34]. Since then, LDPC codes have been developed rapidly. Nowadays, LDPC codes have made breakthroughs in all aspects and are widely used in communication, storage, and other related fields. They have become the mainstream ECC as their advantages, such as error correction performance close to the Shannon limit, good compatibility, simple decoding algorithm principle, and easy industrial implementation.
LDPC codes are the linear grouping codes with few elements of the check matrix H being “1” and most elements being “0.” The matrix is used for encoding and decoding. When encoded, the generated matrix G satisfies: G ∗ HT = 0, encoded code word: r = m ∗ G. When decoded, the H matrix can be converted to a Tanner graph [35]. Its rows and columns correspond to the parity check equation. There are two LDPC decoding methods: 1) hard decision decoding and 2) soft decision decoding. In hard decision decoding, the information received by the decoder is the actual value of the bits. While in soft decision decoding, the message received by the decoder is the probability value associated with the occurrence of a particular bit [36]. The soft and hard decision have their own advantages in 3-D NAND flash memory. The hard decision only requires a hard read voltage (Vread) to obtain the information needed for decoding. Whereas soft decision requires some additional read operations to send some fine-grained offset voltages at its left and right sides, called soft Vread. Because of the impact of numerous RD, the read delay of the hard decision is shorter than that of the soft decision, and the effect of the hard decision on the charges stored in the cell is weaker than that of the soft decision. The soft decision with precise LLR values, on the other hand, is better than the hard decision in terms of decoding capability.
After a long period of research, several LDPC decoding algorithms have been derived. For example, bit-reversal decoding and weighted bit-reversal decoding algorithms, the sum-product algorithm (SPA), and the Min-Sum algorithm.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:49:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FANG et al.: HIGH-PRECISION SHORT-TERM LIFETIME PREDICTION IN TLC 3-D NAND FLASH MEMORY

3227

Considering the decoding performance and the complexity of hardware circuit implementation, the Min-Sum algorithm is commonly used as the decoding algorithm in current work [37].
The Min-Sum decoding algorithm is an approximate SPA decoding algorithm with reduced complexity. It reduces the complexity by mutual passing of probabilistic information between check nodes (CNs) and variable nodes (VNs) for decoding. The input of the Min-sum decoding algorithm is not the bits in data, but the value of the LLR corresponding to that bits, and the accuracy of the LLR value directly affects the decoding efficiency and error correction capability. LLR indicates the probability that the received bit is “1” or “0.” The absolute value of the LLR value indicates how likely it is to be “0” or “1,” and the positive or negative sign of the LLR value indicates whether the received bit is more likely to be “0” (positive) or “1” (negative). During the decoding process, the LLR passed from CN to VN is calculated based on the initial LLR to update the LLR value of VN. Then, the new LLR value is remapped into bit data, which is stopped if any one of two conditions is satisfied: 1) r ∗HT = 0, where r is the received code word and 2) the number of iterations reaches the maximum.
C. Motivation
The era of big data puts more demands on the storage capacity of NAND flash memory, and increasing the storage density of NAND might be a good solution, but larger storage densities have more error bits and shorter lifetime. Therefore, both lifetime prediction and LDPC codes optimization are of great importance for the development of NAND flash memory.
For dynamic LDPC codes, a simple and accurate lifetime prediction model makes it possible to adjust the code word in a more timely manner, reducing wasted space and effectively extending the lifetime. There has been a lot of works on the lifetime prediction of MLC NAND flash. But due to the mix of failure mechanisms, the initial characteristics of 3-D TLC CT NAND flash memory chips vary from different manufacturers. It makes it different from MLC and makes it difficult to build an accurate and efficient model for all kinds of chips. Furthermore, there is evidence that classic Arrhenius formula lifetime prediction models for 3-D NAND flash are not always accurate [38], [39]. In addition, on the system level, traditional SSD consists of flash chips from different dies. So the ECC needs to consider the one with the worst performance, to some extent, this results in a waste of ECC’s decoding power and the lifetime of other good performing chips [40]. Both of these reasons can cause premature recycling of the NAND during actual use, reducing SSDs’ usage time.
Most of the current lifetime prediction models are based on machine learning and built on the basis of a large amount of data. Moreover, although variations do exist in different blocks, chips of the same structure show similar properties generally, and FBC growth across different blocks of the same chip is also similar [41]. To clarify more degradation patterns embodied in FBC and propose a reliable and simple prediction method, we test a large amount of RD and endurance-related

TABLE I EXPERIMENT PARAMETERS
data and perform a series of analytical comparisons. Then, we explore the construction of targeted lifetime prediction models with a small number of blocks. We try to construct a parameter-unique lifetime prediction model for a certain chip in a simple way by the initial characteristics of several blocks in the chip. Based on the prediction result of this model, the LDPC codes to be used can be dynamically adjusted, which greatly prolongs the lifetime of NAND flash.
IV. EXPERIMENT SETUP AND RESULT The test process and outcomes, as well as long- and short-term prediction models and the accuracy loss of their predicting result, are discussed in this session. In this article, the raw NAND flash memory chip is characterized in a commercial platform NplusT with the I/O interface rate of up to 1.6 GT/s, 1-ns edge placement, and 20-ns resolution response time detection. Table I shows the properties of the characterized chip, a typical 3-D TLC CT NAND flash memory with BiCS architecture. Algorithm 1 depicts the steps in the experiment we perform to characterize FBC for hot-data on 3-D TLC CT NAND flash and build lifetime prediction models. By performing read operations on 3-D NAND flash blocks in different endurance, we analyze the variation of FBC with the number of operations and the relationships between FBC in the early stages of operations and that in the middle and late stages of operations. We notice that, though the initial FBC varies from block to block, there is a similarity in the relationships between FBC in different endurances. As a result, we believe that FBC in the early stages of operations and that in the middle and late stages of operations are linked. On the one side, with a focus on RD, we investigate the relationships between FBC in the early stages of RD and that in the middle and late stages of RD by keeping the endurance constant. On the other side, with a focus on endurance, we investigate the relationships among FBC in the low endurance and that in the middle and high endurance at the same read times. We find the FBC has approximately linear relationships for three cases: 1) FBC of the 100th reading (FBC1r00) and the other kth reading (FBCkr ), where k = i ∗ 1000, i = 1, 2, 3, . . . , 8, 9, 10; 2) FBC after 10 P/E cycles (FBC1p0) and the other after n P/E cycles (FBCpn), where n = i ∗ 200, i = 1, 2, 3, . . . , 28, 29, 30; and 3) FBC in adjacent endurance gear.
A. Test Result of RD In Fig. 2, the fluctuation of FBC with increasing read times
is depicted. We can observe that various blocks with the same

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:49:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3228

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2023

Algorithm 1: Process of Experiment

1 Definitions:

2 Pn: the number of erase/program cycles;

3 Rn: the number of read times;

4 Pmax: the max number of erase/program cycles;

5 Rmax: the max number of read times;

6 Process:

7 for Pn = 1 to Pmax do

8 Execute erase/program operation;

9 if Pn == 10 or Pn%200 == 0 then

10

for Rn = 1 to Rmax do

11

Execute sequential read operation;

12

if Rn%100 == 0 then

13

Execute read dump operation;

(a)

14

end

15

end

16

end

17 end

(b)

Fig. 3. Linear relationships between FBC at kth reading and (a) 100th reading and (b) (k-1000)th reading and their fitted lines. The linearity is much more obvious between adjacent RD gears.

Fig. 2. Different initial characteristics and the same growth trend with read times of FBC in different blocks after 1000 and 6000 P/E cycles.
read times and endurance have different FBC, which grow with P/E cycles. As a result, building a prediction model with set parameters for all blocks is difficult. However, the trend of FBC with increasing read times is comparable in Fig. 2, implying that there may be some underlying correlations between FBC in the early stages of RD and that in the late stages of RD [42]. As a result, we investigate the associations between FBC in the early stages of RD and that in the middle and late stages of RD in the same endurance.
By taking FBCr100 as the horizontal axis and FBCkr as the vertical axis, we find that there exist linear relationships between FBC in the early stages of RD and that in the middle and late stages of RD. Besides, FBCs in the adjacent endurance gear are also found to have similar relationships. The relationships between FBCr100 and FBCr1000, FBC5r000, and FBC1r0 000 and their fitted lines are shown in Fig. 3(a). The relationships between FBCr1000 and FBCr2000, FBCr4000 and FBCr5000, and FBC9r000 and FBC1r0 000 are shown in Fig. 3(b). In Fig. 3(a), we can see that the slope of these linear relationships increases with more read times. Especially, in the early stage of read cycles, the linearity is more better. To further clarify this phenomenon, we analyze more relationships between FBC and FBCr100.
Based on the phenomenon in Fig. 3(a), we approximate that the FBC within 10 000 read times can be obtained from

FBC1r00 after calculation. The formulation for the calculation can be expressed as follows:

FBCkr = S(k) ∗ FBCr100 + I(k)

(1)

where k denotes the kth reading, and S(k) and I(k) are the function of the variable k.
Then, we extract the above values of S(k) and I(k) separately and analyze their variations with the read times. We fit 18 linear relationships from the 200th reading to the 10 000th reading and find that the slopes and intercepts of the lines have a certain pattern with the read times. Based on these relationships, we fit the formulations for both S(k) and I(k) with k as the variable.
We can see that the values of S(k) and I(k) are strongly correlated to the read times, wherein the exponential relationships can be adopted with the following approximate equation:

2

S(k) = ai ∗ exp(kbi)

(2)

i=1

2

I(k) = ci ∗ exp(kdi)

(3)

i=1

where a1, a2, b1, b2, c1, c2, d1, and d2 are constants related to the operating environment and type of the chip [43]. To deter-
mine the values of these parameters, users need to perform the
experiments shown in Algorithm 1 on several blocks in a chip. First, we need to fit the linear relationships between FBC1r00 and FBCRr n (n is a multiple of 1000); then, the intercepts and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:49:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FANG et al.: HIGH-PRECISION SHORT-TERM LIFETIME PREDICTION IN TLC 3-D NAND FLASH MEMORY

3229

(a)

(b)

Fig. 4. Value variations of (a) slope S(k) and (b) intercept I(k) in (1) with read times and their fitted curves. Notice that S(k) and I(k) strongly correlate to the read times.

Fig. 5. Different initial characteristics and the same growth trend with P/E cycles of FBC in different blocks at 1000th and 10 000th reading.

slopes of these linear relationships can be extracted; finally, the correlations between these values and read times can be achieved, as shown in Fig. 4.
Thus, when k > 100, (1) can also be expressed as

2

2

FBCrk = ai ∗ exp(kbi) ∗ FBCr100 + ci ∗ exp(kdi). (4)

i=1

i=1

According to (4), a long-term prediction model of RD can be built. This formulation can predict the FBC of any read times after the 100th reading, only needing to know FBC1r00. From Fig. 3(b), we can see that the linear relationships between adjacent gears are fits better than the linear relationships between FBC in the early stages of RD and that in the middle and late stages of RD. So the accuracy of short-term prediction may be higher than that of long-term prediction. To make it more suitable for short-term prediction, we try some deformations of (4). The changed prediction formulation is as follows:

2

FBCkr2 = FBCkr1 +

aibi ∗ exp(k1bi) ∗ FBCr100

i=1

2

+ cidi ∗ exp(k1di) ∗ (k2 − k1) (5)

i=1

where k2 > k1 > 100. According to (5), a short-term prediction model of RD can be built. we can use FBC1r00 and known FBCkr1 to get FBCkr2 even without knowing how many P/E cycles the block has suffered. The input to this model is FBC1r00 obtained from the 100th reading, the FBCrk1 obtained from the k1th reading that we have currently measured, and the target read times k2. The output of both of the models is the FBC of the target k2th reading in the same endurance with FBCr100 and FBCrk1 . Generally, RD is much more serious in 3-D NAND flash memory, which could limit the read times in actual applications. Therefore, on the one side, the proposed approach can be adopted to predict FBC; on the other side, when dealing with read-intensive tasks requiring more than 10 000 read times, we can move data to new blocks when the FBC exceeds the ECC ability or move data to the DRAM unit.

B. Test Result of P/E

Following the method for building the RD prediction model,

we similarly treat the FBC in different endurances. Unlike

RD, P/E cycles cause permanent damage to the physical cells,

increasing the influence of eventual failure mechanisms and

perhaps widening the characteristic difference in late life.

Fig. 5 depicts the relationships between FBC and endurance

in different blocks at various read times. We can observe that

the FBC grows rapidly in high endurance relative to the RD

curve, which can make predicting the trend of the P/E cycles

more difficult [43].

Except for the variations mentioned above, the increasing

trend of FBC in endurance is similar to that of RD. For

endurance, FBC increases gradually with P/E cycles, and a

large number of read times will increase the number of FBC.

The relationships between FBC after 1000, 3000, and 6000

P/E cycles and after 10 P/E cycles are shown in Fig. 6(a). And the relationships between FBC1r00 and FBCrRn are shown in Fig. 6(b), where n is a multiple of 1000. For endurance, we

find that the linear relationship between FBC of endurance is

similar to and FBCpn

that of RD by as the vertical

using FBC1p0 as axis. But unlike

the RD,

horizontal axis these points in

P/E start to diverge at the end of the fitted line, as the spec of

the chip is 3000 P/E cycles.

Similarly, there is still a relationship as follows:

FBCnp = H(n) ∗ FBCp10 + P(n)

(6)

where n denotes the n P/E cycles, and H(n) and P(n) is the function of the variable n. The values of H(n) and P(n) are related to the number of P/E cycles, so we treat them similarly to RD.
For the P/E prediction, we fit a total of 30 lines from 200 P/E cycles to 6000 P/E cycles. The trends of H(n) and P(n) with the growth of P/E cycles are shown in Fig. 7.
The results of the fitting of H(n) and P(n) are as follows:

4

H(n) = ai ∗ exp(nbi)

(7)

i=3

4

P(n) = ci ∗ exp(ndi).

(8)

i=3

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:49:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3230

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2023

(a)

(b)

(a)
Fig. 8. Cumulative distributions of accuracy loss in short-term and longterm prediction models for (a) RD and (b) endurance. Notice that short-term prediction models have higher accuracies than long-term prediction models.

(b)
Fig. 6. Linear relationships between FBC after n P/E cycles and after (a) 10 P/E cycles and (b) (n -1000) P/E cycles and their fitted lines. The linearity is much more obvious between adjacent endurance gears.

where n2 > n1 > 100 and a3, a4, b3, b4, c3, c4, d3, and d4 are

also constants related to the usage environment and type of the

chip. Similarly, which are different from the counterpart in (5),

we also need to perform the experiments shown in Algorithm 1

on several blocks in a chip, fit the linear relationships between FBCp10 and FBCPpn , where n is a multiple of 200, and extract the intercepts and slopes of these linear relationships, then fit

them to the P/E cycles as shown in Fig. 7.

With FBCnp1 we can

ap(nr1ed0d)iF,cBtwCteh1pe0cFainBn Cplornpe2wdbiceytnadFnuByraCnnunpc2me.abcIectroiorsfdiwrneogardttihongntshoetoibnktgnaiotnwheadnt

after n1 P/E cycles. The result given by (10) is also the FBC of

the same corresponding number of reading for n2 P/E cycles.

That is, if you provide an FBC curve in certain endurance, the

model can give you an FBC curve in target endurance.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 7. Value variations of (a) slope H(n) and (b) intercept P(n) in (6) with P/E cycle and their fitted curves. Notice that H(n) and P(n) are strongly correlated to the read times.

Combining (7) and (8), the long-term prediction formulation of endurance can be expressed as

4

4

FBCnp = ai ∗ exp(nbi) ∗ FBCp10 + ci ∗ exp(ndi). (9)

i=3

i=3

According to (9), we can obtain FBC after any number of P/E cycles as long as we know FBC1p0. For the same reason, we perform the same transformation to (9) with reference to (5).

The short-term endurance prediction formulation is as follows:

4

FBCpn2 = FBCpn1 +

aibi ∗ exp(n1bi) ∗ FBCp10

i=3

4

+ cidi ∗ exp(n1di) ∗ (n2 − n1) (10)

i=3

C. Prediction Accuracy
We conduct prediction experiments on various blocks of 3-D TLC CT NAND flash memory to verify the correctness of the proposed model. The test device, methodology, and frequencies are all consistent with those in Section IV, and all prediction experiments are based on blocks on the same chip. For RD and endurance, we utilize the prediction steps of 100 and 200, respectively. Both RD and endurance exceed the spec, with RD reaching a maximum of 10 000 times and endurance reaching a maximum of 6000 P/E cycles. We use both of these models to forecast the experimental data in order to compare long-term and short-term predictions.
The cumulative distributions of prediction errors for RD and endurance from long-term and short-term prediction models are shown in Fig. 8(a) and (b), respectively. The accuracy calculation formulation used in the diagrams is as follows:

Accuracy loss = FBCpredicted − FBCtested .

(11)

FBCtested

It can be found that most of the short-term prediction samples have an accuracy loss of 10% or less, while long-term prediction has an accuracy loss of 10% or less in only 60%– 70% of the total samples. For long-term prediction, most of the samples have a prediction accuracy loss of 30% or less, both for RD and endurance, which is not accurate enough. In other words, in 99.16% and 97.63% samples, there is only

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:49:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FANG et al.: HIGH-PRECISION SHORT-TERM LIFETIME PREDICTION IN TLC 3-D NAND FLASH MEMORY

3231

(a)

(b)
Fig. 9. Operation flows of (a) EBPM and (b) SLDPC. Before the use of NAND flash, several blocks in a chip are sacrificed to determine the parameters in EBPM, and during the use of NAND flash, STWS is activated periodically, and the user decides the periodic value.

10% accuracy loss for the RD and endurance prediction models, which is much higher than that of the long-term prediction model. Furthermore, the experimental result shows that shortterm prediction models for both RD and endurance are still reliable when the operating gears exceed the chip’s spec.
Despite the fact that short-term prediction requires an additional input parameter, we believe the short-term prediction models in this article perform better in terms of accuracy and feasibility. So, in the next section, we will employ EBPM’s short-term prediction method.
V. SHORT-TERM WARNING SYSTEM
In this session, the mechanism, benefits, and overhead of STWS are presented.
We believe it could be utilized to enhance the error correction capability of LDPC codes and lengthen the lifetime of NAND flash memory by combining the methodology and features of the endurance prediction models in Section IV. Thus, we propose STWS for hot-data storage in 3-D TLC CT NAND flash memory.
Fig. 9 depicts the STWS method. EBPM and SLDPC are the two key modules in STWS. During the use of NAND flash, STWS is activated periodically. The periodic value is decided by the user. In this article, we denote it by step. After STWS

starts, the first module to run is EBPM, whose function is to predict FBC after step P/E cycles based on the currently known FBC and pass it to SLDPC. Then, SLDPC will choose the most suitable LDPC codes for future encoding and decoding according to the value passed from EBPM.
A. Error Bits’ Prediction Module
Based on (5) and (10) for short-term prediction in Section IV, we propose EBPM for hot-data in NAND flash, which is a module for periodic prediction of FBC. The process of EBPM is shown in Fig. 10(a). During NAND flash usage, FBC after 10 P/E cycles is recorded as a necessary variable for the function. During the subsequent use of the NAND flash, when the value of P/E cycles n1 is an integer multiple of step, EBPM will also be activated. Then, the FBC will be recorded at this time to predict the FBC after n2 P/E cycles, where n2 = n1 + step. FBC is calculated by comparing the information before and after decoding, and the object is a block.
The input of EBPM is the target P/E cycles n2, FBC after 10 P/E cycles, and FBC after n1 P/E cycles, the output of EBPM is the FBC after n2 P/E cycles. At the end of EBPM, the predicted FBC will be passed to the SLDPC module. In addition, the layer-to-layer difference can be estimated as the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:49:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3232

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2023

Fig. 10. In LDPC codes with four code rates, the decoding capacity is from

low to high: LDPC code1, LDPC code2, LDPC code3, and LDPC code4.

(a)

variation factor to correct the prediction accuracy, such as adding the variations to estimate the worst case, and thus we can predict the possible degradation beforehand.

B. Self-Adjustable LDPC
During the usage of the NAND flash, SLDPC can determine the code rate of the LDPC codes used for encoding and decoding in the next P/E cycle based on the value passed from EBPM.
The process of SLDPC is shown in Fig. 9(b). The input to SLDPC is the output of EBPM: FBC after n2 P/E cycles. After receiving the FBC from EBPM, SLDPC compares the received value with the upper limit of the decoding capability of the four prestored LDPC codes. Then, SLDPC can decide which LDPC codes to use for encoding and decoding in the next program process based on the comparison result. The system is then encoded and decoded using this set of LDPC codes until the next step number of P/E cycles, STWS is reactivated, and then a new round of prediction and comparison will be performed. SLDPC will issue a warning to the system if the outcome of the comparison indicates that even the LDPC codes with the strongest decoding capability may not be able to correct erroneous bits in the future. The granularity of setting different code rates is a block. And a logic page will be written to dummy to ensure the data alignment when there is not enough space left to write a complete code word.
It is worth noting that, before using the chip, we will need to conduct some reliability tests to determine the parameters of the short-term lifetime prediction formulation. As they may vary depending on the chip usage environment and type, we should ensure that the prediction model is appropriate for the current test environment.
C. Benefits
STWS provides three benefits: 1) increased user data storage space due to the use of high code rate LDPC codes early in the lifetime; 2) increased NAND flash lifetime due to the use of low code rate LDPC codes late in the lifetime; and 3) enhanced decoding speed and reduced impacts of decoding on stored data due to the use of hard decision LDPC codes.
To investigate the benefits of STWS, we use LDPC codes with code rates of 0.9499, 0.8935, 0.8380, and 0.7823, respectively, and set the upper limit of decoding iterations to 30. The ratio of user information and parities for the LDPC codes used

(b)

Fig. 11. Variations of (a) average number of iterations and (b) decode success rate of the four LDPC codes with FBC growth. Notice that the LDPC codes with a lower rate have a stronger decoding capability.

in this work is shown in Fig. 10. In communication, the code rate is calculated as follows:

code rate = length of the user data .

(12)

length of the code word

As illustrated in Fig. 11(a), the warning limit C of this LDPC codes’ decoding capacity is the highest FBC at which the average number of iterations required for decoding at this code rate does not exceed 20. In the process of hard decision decoding, we assign “-7” to the bit identified as “1” in the obtained data and “7” to the bit identified as “0,” both “-7” and “7” are empirical values. Considering the probabilistic decoding characteristics of LDPC codes, we use 1 KB as the length of a code word to characterize the decoding ability of the above LDPC codes. we collect the mean value of the number of iterations to decoding successfully and the success rate with FBC during the simulated decoding process.
The decoding capability of the LDPC codes for the four code rates is shown in Fig. 11. We can see that when the FBC reaches a certain value, its probability of successful decoding decreases rapidly, and accordingly, the average number of iterations required for successful decoding increases rapidly. Besides, we can also see that the lower the code rate, the larger the number of error-correctable FBC, and the higher the success rate of successful decoding. However, a lower code rate means more parities, and less storage space for user data, so traditional static LDPC codes are often designed to balance error correction capability with storage space.
To compare the decoding ability of SLDPC and static LDPC, we assume that the static LDPC codes use code3 with a code rate of 83.80%, and STWS dynamically uses the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:49:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FANG et al.: HIGH-PRECISION SHORT-TERM LIFETIME PREDICTION IN TLC 3-D NAND FLASH MEMORY

3233

takes time to compare FBC passed from EBPM and warning

limit C, which is a small overhead. To ensure that the data is

aligned and there are no parities that exceed the length of the

page, we write the encoded data to the page by a code word.

When there is not enough space left to write one more code

word, the remaining space will be filled with 0. Assuming that

the user data contained in a code word is fixed at 1 kB, its

parity increases as the code rate decreases. For SLDPC, in the

early stage of 3-D NAND flash lifetime of LDPC codes with

a high code rate of 94.99%, a page can store 17 code words.

While in the late stage of the lifetime of LDPC codes with a

low code rate of 78.23%, a page can store 14 code words. For

static LDPC codes, LDPC codes with a code rate of 83.8%

Fig. 12. Variations of LDPC code3 and STWS average number of iterations with the growth of FBC. In low endurance, STWS can save storage space
for user data, and in high endurance, STWS can extend the lifetime of NAND
flash.

is used for the whole lifetime of the 3-D flash memory, and a page can store 15 code words. In other words, compared to static LDPC codes, SLDPC codes save 2 kB of storage space for user data in the early stage of NAND flash lifetime, and

four LDPC codes shown in Fig. 10. We compare the average iteration number of the two schemes required for decoding, the result is shown in Fig. 12. When the FBC is from 0 to 40 per kB, we use two sets of LDPC codes with higher code rate. From Fig. 10, we can know that compared to LDPC code3, the two sets of LDPC codes at this time provide more storage space for user data, while the number of required iterations does not increase significantly. When the FBC reaches 50 to

increase the endurance of flash memory by about 60% at the cost of 1 kB of user data space in the late stage of NAND flash lifetime.
In conclusion, STWS requires a little storage space and a certain amount of run time, but it can save more storage space for user data in the early stages and greatly prolong the lifetime of NAND flash, especially if it builds prediction models by using little data compared to machine learning.

100 per KB, which is in the late stages of the SSD’s lifetime, the LDPC code3 and preallocated LDPC codes have the same decoding capability. However, when the FBC exceeds 100 per kB, LDPC code3 will no longer be able to correct errors, and the block will be marked as bad, while STWS can still correct errors, until the FBC exceeds 150 per kB. Moreover, by taking the previous work [44] as an example, 96 error bits (per code word) correspond to the FBC at ∼32k P/E cycles and 155 error bits (per code word) correspond to the FBC at ∼35k P/E cycles. In this case, as the predicted FBC approaches 96, we change LDPC from code3 to code4 (Fig. 12), then the lifetime can be extended with 3k more P/E cycles. Nevertheless, the proposed STWS method provides accurate FBC prediction and can shed light on the system design to assure the reliability and safety of the stored data.

VI. CONCLUSION
In this article, we test the FBC after different operation times on an FPGA-based platform, with RD reaching a maximum of 10 000 times and endurance reaching a maximum of 6000 P/E cycles. According to the experimental result, we analyze the RD and endurance characteristics of 3-D TLC CT NAND flash memory as hot storages, especially the relationships between the FBC in the early stages of operations and that in the middle and late stages of operations. Linear relationships are found between the FBC in the early stages of operations and in the middle and late stages of operations and FBC in adjacent operations gear. Then, based on the above relationships, reliable short-term prediction models for hot-data storage are introduced. In 99.16% and 97.63% samples, there is only 10%

accuracy loss for the RD and endurance prediction models.

D. Overhead Analysis
For EBPM, first, about five blocks in the chip are needed to perform experiments as shown in Algorithm 1 for the prediction model’s construction, while the machine learning technique in the previous work uses 1200 blocks [5], which is 240 times more than ours and could be an unbearable burden in actual applications; second, FBC is recorded and calculated

Finally, STWS is proposed. SLDPC in STWS dynamically selects LDPC codes based on the predicted FBC in EBPM. It increases the number of error bits that can be corrected by LDPC in the late stages of the SSD’s lifetime and expands the space for storing user data in the early stages of the SSD’s lifetime. The cost is a tiny amount of the calculation time for FBC and storage space for LDPC codes.

periodically, which requires extra time for the calculation and

delivery of FBC. It takes about 0.39 s to construct the lifetime

REFERENCES

prediction model based on FBC, while previous machine learning work required an average model training time of 3.77 s [5]. But compared to the current widely used machine learning technology, these are small costs.
For SLDPC, extra storage space and time are needed for the storage and adjustment of LDPC codes. SLDPC needs to prestore three more LDPC codes than static LDPC codes, but in the application, they occupy very little space. Besides, it also

[1] Z. Chen, Y. Pan, M. Gong, H. Zhang, M. Zhang, and Z. Liu, “A NAND flash endurance prediction scheme with FPGA-based memory controller system,” in Proc. 32nd IEEE Int. Syst. Chip Conf. (SOCC), 2019, pp. 68–73.
[2] S. H. Kim and J. W. Kwak, “Prediction of elapsed time based wear Leveling for NAND flash memory in embedded systems,” Int. J. Appl. Eng. Res., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 578–585, 2016.
[3] N. Li, Q. Xie, Y. Wang, X. Liu, H. Liu, and W. Yi, “A page lifetimeaware scrubbing scheme for improving reliability of flash-based SSD,” IEICE Electron. Exp., vol. 14, no. 22, 2017, Art. no. 20170831.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:49:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3234

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2023

[4] R. Ma, F. Wu, M. Zhang, Z. Lu, J. Wan, and C. Xie, “RBER-aware lifetime prediction scheme for 3D-TLC NAND flash memory,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 44696–44708, 2019.
[5] R. Ma et al., “BlockHammer: Improving flash reliability by exploiting process variation aware proactive failure prediction,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 39, no. 12, pp. 4563–4574, Dec. 2020.
[6] D. Wei, L. Qiao, M. Hao, H. Feng, and X. Peng, “Reliability prediction model of NAND flash memory based on random forest algorithm,” Microelectron. Rel., vols. 100–101, Sep. 2019, Art. no. 113371.
[7] D. Kojima, T. Nakamura, and K. Takeuchi, “Error correction for readhot data in 3D-TLC NAND flash by read-disturb modeled artificial neural network coupled LDPC ECC,” in Proc. Silicon Nanoelectronics Workshop (SNW), 2019, pp. 1–2.
[8] T. Takahashi, S. Yamazaki, and K. Takeuchi, “Data-retention time prediction of long-term archive SSD with flexible-nLC NAND flash,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Rel. Phys. Symp. (IRPS), 2016, pp. 6C-5-1–6C-5-6.
[9] M. Abe, T. Nakamura, and K. Takeuchi, “Pre-shipment dataretention/read-disturb lifetime prediction & aftermarket cell error detection & correction by neural network for 3D-TLC NAND flash memory,” in Proc. Symp. VLSI Technol., 2019, pp. T216–T217.
[10] S. Tanakamaru, Y. Yanagihara, and K. Takeuchi, “Over-10×-extendedlifetime 76%-reduced-error solid-state drives (SSDs) with errorprediction LDPC architecture and error-recovery scheme,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf., 2012, pp. 424–426.
[11] S. Tanakamaru, M. Doi, and K. Takeuchi, “Error-prediction analyses in 1X, 2X and 3Xnm NAND flash memories for system-level reliability improvement of solid-state drives (SSDs),” in Proc. IEEE Int. Rel. Phys. Symp. (IRPS), 2013, pp. 3B.3.1–3B.3.6.
[12] S. Tanakamaru, Y. Yanagihara, and K. Takeuchi, “Error-prediction LDPC and error-recovery schemes for highly reliable solid-state drives (SSDs),” IEEE J. Solid-State circuits, vol. 48, no. 11, pp. 2920–2933, Nov. 2013.
[13] T. Tokutomi, S. Tanakamaru, T. O. Iwasaki, and K. Takeuchi, “Advanced error prediction LDPC for high-speed reliable TLC NAND-based SSDs,” in Proc. IEEE 6th Int. Memory Workshop (IMW), 2014, pp. 1–4.
[14] F. Wu et al., “Using error modes aware LDPC to improve decoding performance of 3-D TLC NAND flash,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 909–921, Apr. 2020.
[15] M. Zhang et al., “BeLDPC: Bit errors aware adaptive rate LDPC codes for 3D TLC NAND flash memory,” in Proc. Design, Autom. Test Europe Conf. Exhibit. (DATE), 2020, pp. 302–305.
[16] S. Wang et al., “Lifetime adaptive ECC in NAND flash page management,” in Proc. Design, Autom. Test Europe Conf. Exhibit. (DATE), 2017, pp. 1253–1556.
[17] H. Zhang, J. Wang, Z. Chen, Y. Pan, Z. Lu, and Z. Liu, “An SVM-based NAND flash endurance prediction method,” Micromachines, vol. 12, no. 7, p. 746, 2021.
[18] H. Kim, S.-J. Ahn, Y. G. Shin, K. Lee, and E. Jung, “Evolution of NAND flash memory: From 2D to 3D as a storage market leader,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Memory Workshop (IMW), 2017, pp. 1–4.
[19] S. Raghunathan, “3D-NAND reliability: Review of key mechanisms and mitigations,” in Proc. 4th IEEE Electron Devices Technol. Manuf. Conf. (EDTM), 2020, pp. 1–4.
[20] N. Righetti and G. Puzzilli, “2D vs 3D NAND technology: Reliability benchmark,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Integr. Rel. Workshop (IIRW), 2017, pp. 1–6.
[21] H. Tanaka et al., “Bit cost scalable technology with punch and plug process for ultra high density flash memory,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. VLSI Technol., 2007, pp. 14–15.
[22] J. Jang et al., “Vertical cell array using TCAT (Terabit Cell Array Transistor) technology for ultra high density NAND flash memory,” in Proc. Symp. VLSI Technol., 2009, pp. 192–193.
[23] A. Goda, “3-D NAND technology achievements and future scaling perspectives,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 67, no. 4, pp. 1373–1381, Apr. 2020.
[24] T. Ghilardi, “3D-NAND cell challenges to enable high density and high-performance devices,” in Proc. 5th IEEE Electron Devices Technol. Manuf. Conf. (EDTM), 2021, pp. 1–3.
[25] S. Bennett and J. Sullivan, “NAND flash memory and its place in IoT,” in Proc. 32nd Irish Signals Syst. Conf. (ISSC), 2021, pp. 1–6.
[26] W. Cho et al., “7.3 A 1-Tb, 4b/cell, 176-stacked-WL 3D-NAND flash memory with improved read latency and a 14.8 Gb/mm2 density,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC), vol. 65, 2022, pp. 134–135.

[27] T. Pekny et al., “A 1-Tb density 4b/cell 3D-NAND flash on 176-tier technology with 4-independent planes for read using CMOS-under-thearray,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC), vol. 65, 2022, pp. 1–3.
[28] Y. Aiba et al., “Cryogenic operation of 3D flash memory for new applications and bit cost scaling with 6-bit per cell (HLC) and beyond,” in Proc. 5th IEEE Electron Devices Technol. Manuf. Conf. (EDTM), 2021, pp. 1–3.
[29] K. Lee, M. Kang, Y. Hwang, and H. Shin, “Accurate lifetime estimation of sub-20-nm NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 63, no. 2, pp. 659–667, Feb. 2016.
[30] C. Woo et al., “Modeling of charge failure mechanisms during the short term retention depending on program/erase cycle counts in 3-D NAND flash memories,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Rel. Phys. Symp. (IRPS), 2020, pp. 1–6.
[31] F. Wang et al., “Lateral charge migration induced abnormal read disturb in 3D charge-trapping NAND flash memory,” Appl. Phys. Exp., vol. 13, no. 5, 2020, Art. no. 54002.
[32] T.-H. Chen, Y.-Y. Hsiao, Y.-T. Hsing, and C.-W. Wu, “An adaptive-rate error correction scheme for NAND flash memory,” in Proc. 27th IEEE VLSI Test Symp., 2009, pp. 53–58.
[33] J. Peng, Q. Wang, X. Fu, and Z. Huo, “Dynamic LLR scheme based on EM algorithm for LDPC decoding in NAND flash memory,” IEICE Electron. Exp., vol. 14, no. 18, 2017, Art. no. 20170820.
[34] D. J. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, p. 1645, 1996.
[35] G. Dong, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “On the use of soft-decision errorcorrection codes in NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 429–439, Feb. 2011.
[36] R. Jose and A. Pe, “Analysis of hard decision and soft decision decoding algorithms of LDPC codes in AWGN,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Adv. Comput. Conf. (IACC), 2015, pp. 430–435.
[37] M. Jia, Y. Kong, X. Zhan, M. Zhang, F. Wu, and J. Chen, “Optimal program-read schemes towards highly reliable open block operations in 3D charge-trap NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 41, no. 11, pp. 4797–4807, Nov. 2022.
[38] S. Kim, K. Lee, C. Woo, Y. Hwang, and H. Shin, “Analysis of failure mechanisms during the long-term retention operation in 3-D NAND flash memories,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 67, no. 12, pp. 5472–5478, Dec. 2020.
[39] M. Zhang, F. Wu, Q. Yu, W. Liu, Y. Wang, and C. Xie, “Exploiting error characteristic to optimize read voltage for 3-D NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 67, no. 12, pp. 5490–5496, Dec. 2020.
[40] R. Motwani and C. Ong, “Design of LDPC coding schemes for exploitation of bit error rate diversity across dies in NAND flash memory,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Netw. Commun. (ICNC), 2013, pp. 950–954.
[41] W. Liu et al., “Characterization summary of performance, reliability, and threshold voltage distribution of 3D charge-trap NAND flash memory,” ACM Trans. Storage, vol. 18, no. 2, p. 16, Mar. 2022. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3491230
[42] N. R. Mielke, R. E. Frickey, I. Kalastirsky, M. Quan, D. Ustinov, and V. J. Vasudevan, “Reliability of solid-state drives based on NAND flash memory,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 105, no. 9, pp. 1725–1750, Sep. 2017.
[43] X. Fang et al., “Impacts of operation intervals on program disturb in 3D charge-trapping triple-level-cell (TLC) NAND flash memory,” in Proc. 5th IEEE Electron Devices Technol. Manuf. Conf. (EDTM), 2021, pp. 1–3.
[44] F. Wu et al., “Characterizing 3D charge trap NAND flash: Observations, analyses and applications,” in Proc. IEEE 36th Int. Conf. Comput. Design (ICCD), 2018, pp. 381–388.
Xiaotong Fang is currently pursuing the master’s degree with the School of Information Science and Engineering, Shandong University, Qingdao, China.
Her current research interests include nonvolatile memory (NVM) reliability and NVM storage systems.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:49:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FANG et al.: HIGH-PRECISION SHORT-TERM LIFETIME PREDICTION IN TLC 3-D NAND FLASH MEMORY

3235

Meng Zhang received the Ph.D. degree in computer science and technology from the Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST), Wuhan, China, in 2019.
He is currently an Associate Professor with the School of Computer Science and Technology, HUST. His current research interests include nonvolatile memory, data storage reliability, and error correction codes.

Xuepeng Zhan received the bachelor’s degree and the Ph.D. degree in microelectronics and solid-state electronics from the College of Electronic Science and Engineering, Jilin University, Changchun, China, in 2012 and 2017, respectively.
He was a Postdoctoral Fellow with Shandong University, Qingdao, China, and Liverpool John Moores University, Liverpool, U.K. He is currently working as an Associate Research Fellow with the School of Information Science and Engineering, Shandong University. His research interests focus on femtosecond laser processing and microelectronic device characterization.

Yifan Guo received the master’s degree from the School of Information Science and Engineering, Shandong University, Qingdao, China, in 2020.
His current research interests include nonvolatile memory (NVM) reliability, NVM storage systems, and error correction codes.

Jixuan Wu (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees from Shandong University, Qingdao, China, in 2014 and 2019, respectively.
She is currently a Researcher with Shandong University, working on new nanodevices for inmemory computing and device reliability. She was a Postdoctoral Fellow with the University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, from 2019 to 2022.

Fei Chen is currently pursuing the master’s degree with the School of Information Science and Engineering, Shandong University, Qingdao China.
His current research interests include nonvolatile memory (NVM) reliability and NVM storage systems.

Fei Wu (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical automation from the Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, China, in 1997 and 2000, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in computer science from the Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST), Wuhan, in 2005.
She is currently a Professor with the Information Storage Lab, Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, HUST. Her research interests include the computer architecture, nonvolatile memory, embedded systems, and intelligent storage.

Binglu Chen is currently pursuing the master’s degree in electronic science and technology with Shandong University, Qingdao, China.
Her current research interests include reliability of nonvolatile memory (NVM), low-density parity check codes, and NVM storage systems.

Jiezhi Chen (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree from the Department of Informatics and Electronics, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, in 2009.
He joined the Research and Development Center, Toshiba Corporation, Tokyo, in 2010. He is currently a Professor with the School of Information Science and Engineering, Shandong University, Qingdao, China. He has published many articles in journals and conference proceedings and acted as a reviewer of several international journals. His work has been the leading author or the corresponding author many times in VLSI Symposium and IEEE International Electron Device Meeting (IEEE IEDM) since 2008. His research interests include flash memory, emerging nonvolatile memories, nanoscale transistors, and computing-in-memory architectures, with the main focus on reliability physics and optimization strategies. Prof. Chen also serves as a Technical Program Committee (TPC) Member for IEDM in 2022 and 2023, and a TPC Member of the IEEE International Reliability Physics Symposium since 2019 and the IEEE International Memory Workshop since 2020.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:49:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

