2023 XVIII International Symposium Problems of Redundancy in Information and Control Systems (REDUNDANCY) | 979-8-3503-8152-8/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/Redundancy59964.2023.10330192

2023 REDUNDANCY

About the Joint Correcting of Error Bursts and Independent Errors Using LDPC Codes

Alina Veresova HSE University St. Petersburg, Russia amveresova@gmail.com

Andrei Ovchinnikov HSE University
St. Petersburg, Russia a.ovchinnikov@hse.ru

Abstract—This article discusses the application of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes for error correction, with a focus on the joint correction of both grouped and independent errors in communication and data storage systems. The error correction capabilities of LDPC codes with different constructions were estimated when correcting single error bursts and independent errors. Experiments showed that correcting even a single independent error significantly reduces the correctable burst length. A specialized sliding window list decoder designed for joint correction of burst and independent errors was introduced. It uses a single burst correction decoder with certain events and list decoding for independent single errors. The problem of reducing the list size was addressed based on the majority logic principle. However, reducing the list size increases the decoding error probability. Estimates of decoding error probabilities when simultaneously correcting burst and independent single errors are provided, considering burst lengths beyond the code correcting capability. Different strategies for selecting the number of blocks in the block-permutation construction of LDPC codes for burstonly and joint burst-independent error decoding are analyzed. Experiments show that for a fixed code length and rate, the code with three stripes of blocks provides better performance in this case.
Index Terms—LDPC codes, error bursts, list decoder, joint decoding
I. INTRODUCTION
Correcting errors in the transmission and storage information systems is one of the most important tasks of coding theory. In many data transmission systems, the noise in the channel is heterogeneous, that is, it has a different level of intensity during the transmission time, and the intensity change does not occur at every moment of time, but rather rarely. Such noise changes are often described by channel states: each state is characterized by its own noise level (the probability of a symbol transmission error in this state). Most often, noise level changes are divided into two classes—“good” and “bad” channel states. Since in such models, the probability of an error at the current moment depends on what state the channel was in at the previous time (or several previous ones), they say that the channel has memory. Finding a channel in a “bad” state (with a high probability of error) leads to the formation of error bursts, whereas a “good” state (with a low probability of error) is characterized by rare independent errors [1].
Classical coding theory considers the correction of independent errors. One of the best known classes of codes for

correcting independent errors today are Low-Density ParityCheck codes (LDPC codes) [2]. Modern standards use blockpermutation constructions of LDPC codes. There are significantly fewer studies devoted to fixing error bursts. Nevertheless, there are works analyzing the use of block-permutation low-density codes for this task [3]. At the same time, in reality, error grouping is combined with independent errors. Very few papers have been devoted to the analysis of the correcting capability of codes when correcting jointly bursts and independent errors. In [4] the burst correction is provided by concatenated scheme with inner LDPC code. In [5] the construction of LDPC code is considered for specific error model when the error burst is always placed in the beginning of the word. In [6] the correction of multiple phased bursts is considered. In [7] the construction of cyclic code is proposed for single burst correction. In [8] the codes for phased erasure bursts are constructed. In all considered papers standard LDPC decoders for independent errors correction are used for burst decoding, and the burst correction is provided by tuning the construction of LDPC code or by using the concatenated scheme. Besides, joint burst and independent errors are not considered.
In our paper the maximal correctable burst length is analyzed in presence of independent errors for different LDPC constructions, as well as for random linear code, for short lenghts. Joint bursts and independent errors correction is considered based on single burst correction decoder.
The article is structured as follows. Section II discusses the concept of the correcting capability of codes and evaluates it. Section III describes a decoder for correcting error bursts. Modification of the decoder for joint correction of bursts and independent errors is presented in Section IV. In Section V, the simulation results are presented.
II. CORRECTING CAPABILITY OF THE CODE
The correcting capability of the code is a qualitative parameter characterizing the amount of errors which the code can correct within this parameter in any combination. Often, the code can also correct some errors beyond the correcting ability, but not all of it. The correcting capability can be described, for example, as the maximum number of independent errors to be corrected or the maximum length of the corrected bursts. With small code parameters, the correcting capability can be

979-8-3503-8152-8/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE

122

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:47:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2023 REDUNDANCY

estimated using a table called the standard array. This table is

a set of disjoint sets (rows) called cosets. An error vector can

be selected from each coset, which will be considered to be

corrected by this code. The list of all such vectors is called

the leaders of cosets. Thus, if two vectors described by some

identical parameter (for example, having the same weight) are

in the same coset, then the code cannot correct all of error

vectors with this parameter.

This article discusses linear codes defined by their generator

or parity-check matrix. A subclass of linear codes are codes

with a low density of parity checks, in which the parity-check

matrix contains a small number of non-zero elements. Modern

low-density codes are usually based on a block-permutation

construction. Such a construction is a matrix of the following

form:

C11 C12 . . . C1ρ

C21 C22 . . . C2ρ

H=  

...

...

...

...

,  

(1)

Cγ1 Cγ2 . . . Cγρ

where Cij is a cyclic permutation block of size m × m. Such a design allows you to set a regular low-density code. Another way to build LDPC code is the PEG (Progressive Edge Growth) construction [9]. The essence of the PEG-code construction procedure is to maximize the girth (the length of minimum cycle) of the corresponding Tanner graph. To build the code in this way, it is necessary to set the weight distribution of the symbol and check nodes of the graph.
For linear code, the correcting capability when correcting single error bursts can be determined with polynomial complexity [10]. It is known that for a block-permutation construction without adding zero blocks, the length of the corrected burst cannot be greater than m − 1, where m is the block size. This means that when correcting error bursts, block-permutation constructions consisting of a small number of blocks should be considered, unlike codes used in telecommunication standards.
Let us evaluate the ability of the codes to simultaneously correct bursts and independent errors. Consider the following error model. We assume the transmission of length n binary codeword. In the channel b consequent positions (burst) of the codeword are corrupted with probability p, the beginning of burst is uniformly distributed over n positions. Besides, we assume that no more than t positions which are not in burst may be corrupted in independent manner. In this paper the error correcting capability of the code is considered as the pair (bmax, tmax) such that any error vector containing single error burst of length b ≤ bmax and t ≤ tmax independent errors may be correctly decoded.
For estimation of error correcting capability, we first determine the minimum distance d0 of the code, which characterizes the maximum number of independent errors corrected by the code tmax = ⌊(d0 −1)/2⌋, as well as the maximum length of the corrected burst bmax. Next, we will reduce the value of the length b of the burst and determine the corresponding

value of t. For the experiments consider the codes which are instances of the following ensembles:
• Code A: Random block-permutation matrix with parameters γ = 3, ρ = 4, m = 11, this gives the (44, 13)-code with d0 = 10, tmax = 4 and bmax = 10;
• Code B: PEG construction providing the (50, 20)-code with d0 = 8, tmax = 3 and bmax = 11;
• Code C: (50, 20)-code determined by a random paritycheck matrix with a density 0.5, d0 = 9, tmax = 4 and bmax = 12.
The results of the evaluation of the correcting ability of these codes are presented in the Tables I–III, where b is the length of the error burst, t is the number of independent errors corrected by the code, in addition to one burst of size b.
TABLE I CORRECTING CAPABILITY OF THE CODE A (BLOCK-PERMUTATION CONSTRUCTION)
b 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 t 0 0011122234
TABLE II CORRECTING CAPABILITY OF THE CODE B (PEG CONSTRUCTION)
b 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 t 0 0 0011111223
TABLE III CORRECTING CAPABILITY OF THE CODE C (RANDOM)
b 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 t 0 0 0 0001112234
As you can see, the ability to correct even one independent error outside the burst leads to a noticeable reduction in the length of the corrected burst.
III. ERROR BURSTS CORRECTION
Few decoders are known to correct grouping errors in general, and even more so in combination with independent errors. The Reed-Solomon codes are considered the classic encoding method for joint correction of bursts and independent errors [11]. However, the methods of decoding them are more complex than decoding low-density codes. This article discusses the use of LDPC codes.
For joint decoding of grouped and independent errors when using low-density codes, traditional decoders can be used, since these decoders may be insensitive to grouping errors, however, when forming a single sufficiently long burst, their performance is significantly reduced (the probability of decoding error increases). One of the few decoders that takes into account error grouping and can be used to correct bursts and independent errors together is the Eckford decoder for the Gilbert-Elliott channel [12]. However, this decoder requires knowledge of the Gilbert-Elliott channel parameters, and also

979-8-3503-8152-8/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE

123

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:47:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2023 REDUNDANCY

shows poor results for rare but long bursts, and is more adapted for frequent changes of channel states.
In the article [3], a decoder for correcting single bursts is proposed, computationally efficient for block-permutation codes when correcting bursts within the correcting capability.
The decoder is based on a combination of two decoding procedures: firstly, the syndrome is analyzed taking into account the design of a low-density parity-check matrix with the allocation of reliable and impossible events. For low-density codes with burst lengths within the correcting capability this procedure is highly prone to rapidly result in either successful decoding or failure. Generally, this procedure can create ambiguity when deciding the next step. In this scenario, decoding continues through directional iteration, and its complexity significantly rises as the parity-check matrix density increases. However, it remains insignificant for a low-density matrix and relatively short bursts.
Denote as H[i . . . j] the submatrix of parity-check matrix H consisting of columns from i-th to j-th. Let [aˆ, flag] = decode_burst(y, A, S) be the procedure trying to decode the vector y by syndrome S using parity-check matrix A (this procedure is described in [3]), i.e. to find the solution of equation eAT = S, then aˆ = y + e. For the considered case y and A are parts of received word and the parity-check matrix within the window. In practice, the window size is significantly less than the number of rows in A so the solution of eAT = S is either unique or absent. The value of flag is “success” if the solution is found and “failure” otherwise. Based on these considerations the single-burst decoding algorithm may be described as follows.
Algorithm 1. Single burst decoding Input: parity-check matrix H, received word y, window size b.
1: Compute syndrome S = yHT. 2: For window start position i = 0 . . . n − b: 3: Hb,i ← H[i . . . i + b − 1]. 4: yb,i ← y[i . . . i + b − 1]. 5: [aˆ, flag] = decode_burst(yb,i, Hb,i, S). 6: If flag = “success”, return aˆ. 7: Return “failure”.
The described decoder guarantees the correction of all error bursts within the correcting capability of the code, as well as a significant number of bursts beyond it. The window size b should be set to bmax to correct all bursts within burst correction capability of the code. The value of b may be set larger to try to correct above the correction capability, however this may lead to decoding error. The decoder is windowed and fundamentally relies on the assumption that errors outside the burst do not exist.
IV. MODIFICATION OF THE DECODER FOR JOINT CORRECTION OF BURSTS AND INDEPENDENT ERRORS
Let’s consider a list modification of the decoder described in the previous section, similar to the approaches used in the Chase decoder [13] or in decoding by information sets with

covering polynomials [14]. In channels with error bursts and independent errors, the probability of independent errors in the “good” condition is relatively small. We will consider channels in which a single burst occurs during the transmission of a codeword and rare independent errors beyond it. Then we will build the decoder as follows: we will form the decoder input as a list L obtained on the basis of the received word, in which an attempt is made to correct an independent error outside the burst using a set of coverage vectors. After that, the generated list is fed to the input of the single burst decoder, which also outputs a list of decoded words or failures. We will assume that decoding is successful if there is only one (correct) codeword in the decoder output list, and the remaining decoding attempts resulted in failures.

Algorithm 2. Single burst and independent errors decoding

Input: parity-check matrix H, received word y, window size b.

1: For window start position i = 0 . . . n − b: 2: Form the covering set L for positions outside the

window.

3: Hb,i ← H[i . . . i + b − 1].

4: For each ℓ ∈ L:

5:

yˆ = y + ℓ.

6:

Compute syndrome S = yˆHT.

7:

yb,i ← y[i . . . i + b − 1].

8:

[aˆ, flag] = decode_burst(yb,i, Hb,i, S).

9:

If flag = “success”, return aˆ.

10: Return “failure”.

The elements of L should cover the errors outside the burst.

For example, if the current window is on the positions from 0

to b − 1 then for single error correction (t = 1) the list should

contain n − b vectors with one non-zero element on positions

b . . . n − 1. Correction the larger number of errors will lead to

correspondent list size growth.

It should be noted that in general, when decoding, the

location of the burst is unknown to us, except in certain

specific systems, such as those featuring phased bursts, a

common occurrence in data storage systems. When decoding a

burst, the decoder attempts to decode for all possible locations

of the bursts. If the window is incorrectly positioned, decoding

attempt quickly leads to failure.

Thus, we will assume that the complexity of decoding is

mainly determined by the size of the list. The size of the list in

general is L =

t i=0

Cni G ,

where

t

is

the

estimated

maximum

number of errors, nG = n − b is the number of positions of

the received word outside the burst length b. As the number of

errors t increases, the value of L increases rapidly. To preserve

the polynomial complexity of decoding, if possible, a smaller

list size should be chosen, but this may lead to an increase in

the decoding error probability.

On the other hand, as noted earlier, errors are rare in

“good” condition, and the correcting ability of codes with

simultaneous correction of grouped and independent errors in

any case does not allow to obtain large values of t without a

sharp decrease in the value of b.

979-8-3503-8152-8/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE

124

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:47:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2023 REDUNDANCY

100

100

random

max(f)

Decoding error probability

Decoding Error Probability

10-1

10-1

5

10

15

20

25

30

List size L

5

10

15

20

25

30

List size L

Fig. 1. The dependence of the decoding error probability on the size of the Fig. 2. The dependence of the decoding error probability on the size of the

list for b = 10 and t = 1.

list for b = 7 and t = 1.

Let’s explore the options for reducing the size of a list of coverage vectors. As a straightforward approach, we will choose the desired list size L, smaller than n−b for t = 1, and we will form a list of L randomly selected positions outside the error burst. It can be assumed that this will increase the probability of error.
To achieve reduction, it is noteworthy that in the correction of independent errors within discrete channels using lowdensity parity-check code decoders, the vector f = yHT, computed in decimal arithmetic, serves as an indirect indicator of the reliability of the received symbols. Based on this fact, consider the following heuristic approach: for a given list size, we will choose L of the maximum values of the vector f and use the corresponding positions to build a list of coverage vectors.
Fig.1 illustrates the relationship between the decoding error probability and the size of the coverage vector list when randomly selecting vectors and applying the approach based on vector f for Code A (a block-permutation code) described in Section II. One burst of length 10 and one independent error are considered. Fig.2 demonstrates a similar dependency when decoding a burst of length 7 with one error, corresponding to the error correction capability of this code.
As seen from the above results, the probability of error when using the vector f decreases slightly. This can be explained by the fact that errors’ positions inside the burst change the syndrome, causing the values of the vector f to lose their significance. Nevertheless, some effect from this procedure is still present; however, the probability of error increases significantly when reducing the list size (exceeding 10−2 for the example considered).
V. ERROR PROBABILITY ESTIMATION
Let’s evaluate the probability of a decoding error while simultaneously correcting bursts and independent errors [15].
Consider the block-permutation code described in Section II. Let’s define the error model as follows. The starting position of the burst will be chosen uniformly from within the interval [0, n − b], and within the burst, there will be an

100

Decoding error probability

10-1

10-2

10-3
10-4 0

t = 0, unknown t = 1, unknown t = 1, known t = 1, BF

5

10

15

20

25

Burst size b

Fig. 3. Dependence of the decoding error probability on the burst length.

error probability p = 0.5. Outside the burst, t ≤ 1 errors will be randomly placed. We approach the formation of a list of coverage vectors as an exhaustive search through all possible positions. During the decoding the decoder’s window size is selected equal to burst length.
Fig.3 illustrates the dependency of the decoding error probability on the burst size, considering t = 0 and t = 1 for an unknown burst position, as well as t = 1 for a known one; the bit-flip (BF) decoding result is also presented for t = 1.
With a known burst location, it can be treated as an erasure, thereby doubling the correcting capability, as seen in the figure. It’s worth noting that with an unknown burst position for both t = 0 and t = 1, the proposed decoding method corrects all error vectors within the correcting capability, as well as many beyond it.
Let’s address the problem of determining the parameters of a block-permutation construction for correcting error bursts, as well as bursts and independent errors combined, with the given code parameters. We’ll keep the code length and rate fixed while aiming to maximize the burst length that can be corrected. As mentioned above, a small number of blocks should be selected. Let’s choose the following parameters:

979-8-3503-8152-8/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE

125

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:47:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2023 REDUNDANCY

100

Decoding error probability

10-2

Code D, t = 0

Code E, t = 0

Code F, t = 0

Code D, t = 1

Code E, t = 1

10-4

Code F, t = 1

10-6 0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Burst size b

Fig. 4. Dependence of the decoding error probability on the burst length.

• Code D: γ = 2, ρ = 4, m = 23 with bmax = 21; • Code E: γ = 3, ρ = 6, m = 17 with bmax = 16; • Code F: γ = 4, ρ = 8, m = 13 with bmax = 12.
Such parameters specify a set of codes with a length of approximately 100 and a coderate of 0.5. The Fig.4 shows the dependence of the decoding error probability on the burst size for t = 0 and t = 1 with unknown burst position.
In the case of burst correction, Code D yields the best results, exhibiting the lowest decoding probability even when the correcting capability is exceeded. However, when attempting to correct at least one additional error outside the burst, this code shows the highest probability of error, while Code E leads to some deterioration but still performs noticeably better than other codes. Therefore, for single burst correction, the best results are obtained using γ = 2, while to correct one error located outside a burst, it is preferable to use the code with γ = 3.
VI. CONCLUSION
The article discusses the joint decoding of error bursts and independent errors. An evaluation of the error correcting capability of specific low-density codes for this decoding scenario is conducted. The study indicates that the size of the correctable burst significantly diminishes when at least one independent error occurs outside the burst. The modification of the burst decoder for joint decoding of bursts and independent errors is described, and the simulation results are presented as the probability of decoding error when using the

described method. It is shown that the decoder can correct all
error vectors within the code corecting capability and many
beyond it. The problem of choosing the parameters for a code
construction for joint decoding is considered.
The article was prepared within the framework of the Basic
Research Program at HSE University, Internet of Things and
Cyber-Physical Systems Laboratory, St. Petersburg School of
Physics, Mathematics, and Computer Science.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Blokh, O. Popov, and V. Turin, Error source models in digital information channels. Moscow: Communication Publ, 1971.
[2] R. G. Gallager, Information Theory and Reliable Communication. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1968.
[3] A. Ovchinnikov, A. Veresova, and A. Fominykh, “Decoding of linear codes for single error bursts correction based on the determination of certain events,” Information and Control Systems, no. 6, pp. 41–52, Dec. 2022.
[4] N. Xie, T. Zhang, and E. F. Haratsch, “Improving Burst Error Tolerance of LDPC-Centric Coding Systems in Read Channel,” IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 933–941, Mar. 2010.
[5] M. Yang, Z. Pan, and I. B. Djordjevic, “FPGA-based burst-error performance analysis and optimization of regular and irregular SD-LDPC codes for 50G-PON and beyond,” Optics Express, vol. 31, no. 6, p. 10936, Mar. 2023.
[6] L. Song, Q. Huang, and Z. Wang, “Construction of Multiple-BurstCorrection Codes in Transform Domain and Its Relation to LDPC Codes,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 40– 54, Jan. 2020.
[7] S. Vafi, “Cyclic Low Density Parity Check Codes With the Optimum Burst Error Correcting Capability,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 192 065– 192 072, 2020.
[8] X. Xiao, B. Vasic, S. Lin, J. Li, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes With Parity-Check Matrices of Column Weight Two or More for Correcting Phased Bursts of Erasures,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 69, no. 5, pp. 2812–2823, May 2021.
[9] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D.-M. Arnold, “Progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” in GLOBECOM’01. IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference (Cat. No. 01CH37270), vol. 2. IEEE, 2001, pp. 995–1001.
[10] E. Krouk and A. Ovchinnikov, “Exact Burst-Correction Capability of Gilbert Codes,” Information and Control Systems, no. 1, pp. 80–87, Jan. 2016.
[11] A. M. Veresova and A. A. Ovchinnikov, “Comparison of the probability of Reed – Solomon and LDPC codes decoding error in the Gilbert – Elliott channel,” in 2022 Wave Electronics and its Application in Information and Telecommunication Systems (WECONF), St. Petersburg, Russia, Jun. 2022, pp. 1–4.
[12] A. Eckford, F. Kschischang, and S. Pasupathy, “Analysis of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes for the Gilbert–Elliott Channel,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 51, no. 11, pp. 3872–3889, Nov. 2005.
[13] D. Chase, “Class of algorithms for decoding block codes with channel measurement information,” IEEE Transactions on Information theory, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 170–182, 1972.
[14] E. A. Krouk, “Decoding complexity bound for linear block codes,” Problemy Peredachi Informatsii, vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 103–107, 1989.
[15] F. MacWilliams and N. Sloane, The Theory of Error-Correcting Codes. North-Holland publishing company, 1983, vol. 16.

979-8-3503-8152-8/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE

126

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:47:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

