Implementation of Decoders for LDPC Block
Codes and LDPC Convolutional
Codes Based on GPUs
Yue Zhao and Francis C.M. Lau, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—In this paper, efficient LDPC block-code decoders/simulators which run on graphics processing units (GPUs) are proposed.
We also implement the decoder for the LDPC convolutional code (LDPCCC). The LDPCCC is derived from a predesigned quasi-cyclic
LDPC block code with good error performance. Compared to the decoder based on the randomly constructed LDPCCC code, the
complexity of the proposed LDPCCC decoder is reduced due to the periodicity of the derived LDPCCC and the properties of the quasi-
cyclic structure. In our proposed decoder architecture,  ( is a multiple of a warp) codewords are decoded together, and hence, the
messages of  codewords are also processed together. Since all the  codewords share the same Tanner graph, messages of the 
distinct codewords corresponding to the same edge can be grouped into one package and stored linearly. By optimizing the data
structures of the messages used in the decoding process, both the read and write processes can be performed in a highly parallel
manner by the GPUs. In addition, a thread hierarchy minimizing the divergence of the threads is deployed, and it can maximize the
efficiency of the parallel execution. With the use of a large number of cores in the GPU to perform the simple computations
simultaneously, our GPU-based LDPC decoder can obtain hundreds of times speedup compared with a serial CPU-based simulator
and over 40 times speedup compared with an eight-thread CPU-based simulator.
Index Terms—LDPC, LDPC convolutional code, CUDA, graphics processing unit (GPU), OpenMP, parallel computing, LDPC
decoder, LDPCCC decoder
Ç
1
INTRODUCTION
L
OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes were invented by
Gallager [1] but had been ignored for years until
Mackay rediscovered them [2]. They have attracted much
attention recently because they can achieve excellent error
correcting performance based on the belief propagation
(BP) decoding algorithm.
However, the BP decoding algorithm requires intensive
computations. For applications like optical communication
[3], [4], which requires BERs down to 1015, using CPU-
based programs to simulate the LDPC decoder is imprac-
tical. Fortunately, the decoding algorithm possesses a high-
data-parallelism feature, i.e., the data used in the decoding
process are manipulated in a very similar manner and can
be processed separately from one another. Thus, practical
decoders with low latency and high throughput can be
implemented with dedicated hardware such as field-
programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) or application-specific
integrated circuits (ASICs) [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11],
[12]. However, high-performance FPGAs and ASICs are
very expensive and are nonaffordable by most researchers.
Such hardware solutions also cost a long time to develop.
In addition, the hardware control and interconnection
frame are always associated with a specific LDPC code. If
one parameter of an LDPC code/decoder changes, the
corresponding hardware design has to be changed accord-
ingly, rendering the hardware-based solutions nonflexible
and nonscalable.
Recently, graphics processing units (GPUs) used to
process graphics only have been applied to support general
purpose computations [13]. In fact, GPUs are highly parallel
structures with many processing units. They support
floating point arithmetics and can hence conduct computa-
tions with the same precision as CPUs. GPUs are particu-
larly efficient in carrying out the same operations to a large
amount of (different) data. Compared with modern CPUs,
GPUs can also provide much higher data parallelism and
bandwidth. Consequently, GPUs can provide a cheap,
flexible, and efficient solution of simulating an LDPC
decoder. Potentially, the simulation time can be reduced
from months to weeks or days when GPUs, instead of CPUs,
are used. In addition, the GPU programming codes can be
reused without much modification should more advanced
GPUs be produced by manufacturers.
In [14], [15], a compressed parity-check matrix has been
proposed to store the indices of the passing messages in a
cyclic or quasi-cyclic LDPC code. Further, the matrix is
stored in the constant cache memory on the GPU for fast
access. The messages are stored in a compressed manner
such that the global memory can be accessed in a coalesced
way frequently. However, the coalesced memory access
occurs only during the data-read process and is not always
guaranteed due to a lack of data alignment. In [13], [16],
[17], the sum-product LDPC decoder and the min-sum
decoder have been implemented with GPUs. Moreover, by
combining 16 fixed-point 8-bit data to form one 128-bit
data, the LDPC decoder in [13] decodes 16 codewords
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PARALLEL AND DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS,
VOL. 25,
NO. 3,
MARCH 2014
663
. The authors are with the Department of Electronic and Information
Engineering, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hunghom, Kowloon,
Hong Kong.
Manuscript received 26 July 2012; revised 24 Jan. 2013; accepted 4 Feb. 2013;
published online 22 Feb. 2013.
Recommended for acceptance by S. Ranka.
For information on obtaining reprints of this article, please send e-mail to:
tpds@computer.org, and reference IEEECS Log Number TPDS-2012-07-0675.
Digital Object Identifier no. 10.1109/TPDS.2013.52.
1045-9219/14/$31.00  2014 IEEE
Published by the IEEE Computer Society
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:42:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
simultaneously and achieves a high throughput. Although
the method in [13] allows coalesced memory access in
either the read or write process, coalesced memory access in
both the read and write processes is yet to be achieved.
Furthermore, the LDPC convolutional codes (LDPCCCs),
first proposed in [18], have been shown to achieve a better
error performance than the LDPC block-code counterpart of
similar decoding complexity. There are many features of
LDPCCC that make it suitable for real applications. First,
the LDPCCC inherits the structure of the convolutional
code, which allows continuous encoding and decoding of
variable-length codes. Thus, the transmission of codewords
with varying code length is possible. Second, the LDPCCC
adopts a pipelined decoding architecture—in the iterative
decoding procedure, each iteration is processed by a
separate processor and the procedure can be performed in
parallel. So a high-throughput decoder architecture is
possible. In [19], [20], the concepts and realization of highly
parallelized decoder architectures have been presented and
discussed. To the author’s best knowledge, there is not any
GPU-based implementation of the LDPCCC decoder yet.
The reason may lie in the complexity structure of the
LDPCCC compared to the LDPC block code, particularly
the random time-varying LDPCCC.
As will be discussed in this paper, an LDPCCC derived
from a well-designed QC-LDPC code possesses not only the
good BER performance, but also the regular structure that
results in many advantages in practical implementations.
Due to the structure inherited from the QC-LDPC code, the
LDPCCC decoder enables an efficient and compact memory
storage of the messages with a simple address controller.
In this paper, we develop flexible and highly parallel
GPU-based decoders for the LDPC codes. We improve the
efficiency by making 1) the threads of a warp follow the
same execution path (except when deciding whether a bit is
a “0” or a “1”) and 2) the memory accessed by a warp be of
a certain size and be aligned. The results show that the
decoders based on the GPUs achieve remarkable speedup
improvement—more than 100 times faster than the serial
CPU-based decoder.
We also develop a GPU-based decoder for the LDPC
convolutional codes. We propose a decoder architecture for
LDPCCC derived from QC-LDPC block code. By taking
advantage of the homogeneous operations of the pipeline
processors, we compress the index information of different
processors into one lookup table. Combined with an
efficient thread layout, the decoder is optimized in terms
of thread execution and memory access. Simulation results
show that compared with the serial CPU-based decoder, the
GPU-based one can achieve as many as 200 times speedup.
The GPU-based decoder, moreover, outperforms a quad-
core CPU-based decoder by almost 40 times in terms of
simulation time.
2
REVIEW OF LDPC CODES AND LDPC
CONVOLUTIONAL CODES
2.1
Structure of LDPC Codes and QC-LDPC Codes
A binary ðN; KÞ LDPC code is a linear block code specified by
a sparse M  N parity-check matrix H, where M ¼ N  K.
The code rate of such an LDPC code is R  K=N ¼ 1  M=N.
The equality holds when H is full rank.
The H matrix contains mostly 0s and relatively a small
number of 1s. Such a sparsity structure is the key
characteristic that guarantees good performance of LDPC
codes. A regular LDPC code is a linear block code with H
containing a constant number wc of 1s in each column and
a constant number wr of 1s in each row. Moreover, wr and
wc satisfy the equation wr ¼ wc  N
M . Otherwise, the code is
defined as an irregular LDPC code.
A bipartite graph called Tanner graph [21] can be used
to represent the codes and to visualize the message-
passing algorithm. In the Appendix, which can be found
on the Computer Society Digital Library at http://
doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/TPDS.2013.52, Fig. 6
shows the underlying Tanner graph of the H in (6). The N
upper nodes are called the message nodes or the variable
nodes, and the M nodes in the lower part of Fig. 6 are
called the check nodes. An edge in the Tanner graph
represents the adjacency of the variable node i and the
check node j. It corresponds to a nonzero ði; jÞth entry in
the H matrix.
QC-LDPC codes form a subclass of LDPC codes with the
parity-check matrix consisting of circulant permutation
matrices [22], [23]. The parity-check matrix of a regular
ðJ; LÞ QC-LDPC code is represented by
H ¼
Pa1;1
Pa1;2
  
Pa1;L
Pa2;1
Pa2;2
  
Pa2;L
..
.
  
  
..
.
PaJ;1
PaJ;2
  
PaJ;L
2
664
3
775;
ð1Þ
where J denotes the number of block rows, L is the number
of block columns, P is the identity matrix of size p  p, and
Paj;l (1  j  J; 1  l  L) is a circulant matrix formed by
shifting the columns of P cyclically to the right aj;l times
with aj;ls being nonnegative integers less than p. The code
rate R of H is lower bounded by R  1  J=L. If one or
more of the submatrix(matrices) is/are substituted by the
zero matrix rendering nonuniform distributions of the
check-node degrees or variable-node degrees, the QC-LDPC
code becomes an irregular code.
2.2
Belief Propagation Decoding Algorithm for
LPDC Codes
LDPC codes are most commonly decoded using the BP
algorithm [24], [25]. Referring to the Tanner graph shown in
Fig. 6 in the Appendix, available in the online supplemental
material, the variable nodes and the check nodes exchange
soft messages iteratively based on the connections and
according to a two-phase schedule.
Given a binary (N, K) LDPC code with a parity-check
matrix H, we define C as the set of binary codewords c that
satisfy the equation cHT ¼ 0. At the transmitter side, a
binary codeword c ¼ ðc0; c1; . . . ; cN1Þ is mapped into the
sequence x ¼ ðx0; x1; . . . ; xN1Þ according to xn ¼ 1  2cn.
We assume that x is then transmitted over an additive
white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel and the received
signal vector is then given by y ¼ ðy0; y1; . . . ; yN1Þ ¼ x þ g,
where g ¼ ðg0; g1; . . . ; gN1Þ consists of independent Gaus-
sian random variables with zero mean and variance
2 ¼ N0=2.
Let n be the initial log-likelihood ratio (LLR) that the
variable node n is a “0” to that it is a “1”, i.e.,
664
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PARALLEL AND DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS,
VOL. 25,
NO. 3,
MARCH 2014
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:42:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
n ¼ ln Prðcn ¼ 0 j ynÞ
Prðcn ¼ 1 j ynÞ


:
ð2Þ
Initially, n is calculated by n ¼ ð4=N0Þ  yn ¼ 2yn
2
[26].
Define N ðmÞ as the set of variable nodes that participate in
check node m and MðnÞ as the set of check nodes connected
to variable node n. At iteration l, let ðlÞ
mn be the LLR
messages passed from variable node n to check node m; ðlÞ
mn
be the LLR messages passed from check node m to variable
node n; and ðlÞ
n be the a posteriori LLR of variable node n.
Then, the standard BP algorithm can be described in
Algorithm 1 in the Appendix, available in the online
supplemental material, [2], [27].
Note that the decoding algorithm consists of four main
procedures: initialization, horizontal step, vertical step, and
making hard decisions. For each of these procedures,
multiple threads can be used in executing the computations
in parallel, and all the threads will follow the same
instructions with no divergence occurring, except when
making hard decisions.
2.3
Structure of LDPC Convolutional Codes
A (time-varying) semi-infinite LDPC convolutional code
can be represented by its parity check matrix in (3).
H½0;1¼
H0ð0Þ
H1ð1Þ
H0ð1Þ
..
.
..
.
..
.
Hms ðmsÞ
Hms1ðmsÞ

H0ðmsÞ
Hms ðmsþ1Þ
Hms1ðmsþ1Þ

H0ðmsþ1Þ
..
.
..
.
Hms ðtÞ
Hms1ðtÞ

H0ðtÞ
..
.
..
.
..
.
2
666666666666664
3
777777777777775
;
ð3Þ
where ms is referred to as the syndrome former memory of
the parity-check matrix. Besides, the submatrices HiðtÞ; i ¼
0; 1; . . . ; ms, are binary ðc  bÞ  c matrices given by
HiðtÞ ¼
hð1;1Þ
i
ðtÞ
  
hð1;cÞ
i
ðtÞ
...
..
.
...
..
.
..
.
..
.
hðcb;1Þ
i
ðtÞ
  
hðcb;cÞ
i
ðtÞ
2
66664
3
77775
:
If HiðtÞ are full rank for all time instant t, the matrix H in (3)
defines a rate R ¼ b=c convolutional code ignoring the
irregularity at the beginning.
Definition 1. An LDPC convolutional code is called a regular
ðms; J; KÞ-LDPC convolutional code if the parity-check
matrix H½0;1 has exactly K ones in each row and J ones in
each column starting from the ðms  ðc  bÞ þ 1Þth row and
ðms  c þ 1Þth column.
Definition 2. An ðms; J; KÞ-LDPC convolutional code is
periodic with period T if HiðtÞ; i 2 ZZþ is periodic, i.e.,
HiðtÞ ¼ Hiðt þ TÞ; 8i; t.
A code sequence v½0;1 ¼ ½v0; v1; . . . ; v1 is “valid” if it
satisfies the equation
v½0;1HT
½0;1 ¼ 0;
ð3Þ
where vi ¼ ðvð1Þ
i ; vð2Þ
i ; . . . ; vðcÞ
i Þ and HT
½0;1 is the syndrome-
former (transposed parity-check) matrix of H½0;1.
2.4
Deriving LDPC Convolutional Codes from QC-
LDPC Block Codes
There are several methods to construct LDPC convolutional
codes from LDPC block codes. One method is to derive
time-varying LDPCCC by unwrapping randomly con-
structed LDPC block codes [18] and another is by unwrap-
ping the QC-LDPC codes [28], [29]. We consider a
construction method by unwrapping a class of QC-LDPC
block code. Details of the method are shown in the
Appendix, available in the online supplemental material.
Example 1. Consider a QC-LDPC code with four block rows
and 24 block columns, i.e., J ¼ 4 and L ¼ 24. It is first
divided into 4  4 equally sized subblocks,1 i.e.,  ¼ 4.
Then, the parity-check matrix of LDPCCC is derived. The
construction process is shown in Fig. 1.
2.5
Decoding Algorithm for LDPCCC
In H½0;1, two different variable nodes connected to the
same check node cannot be distant from each other more
than ms time units. This allows a decoding window that
operates on a fixed number of nodes at one time. Since any
two variable nodes that are at least ms þ 1 units apart can
be decoded independently, parallel implementation is
feasible. The LDPCCC can, therefore, be decoded with
pipelined BP decoding algorithm [18]. Specifically, for a
maximum iteration number of I, I independent processors
will be employed working on different variable nodes
corresponding to different time. In each processor, the
variable nodes and the check nodes exchange soft messages
iteratively based on the connections and according to a
two-phase schedule.
Fig. 2 shows a decoder on the Tanner graph. It is based
on the LDPCCC structure shown in Example 1. The code
has a rate of R ¼ 5=6 and a syndrome former memory of
ms ¼ 3. We refer the c incoming variable nodes (bits) as a
frame. Note that every c bits form a frame and every ms þ 1
frames are involved in the same constraints. The I
processors can operate concurrently. At every iteration,
every processor first updates the ðc  bÞ neighboring check
nodes of the c variable nodes that just come into this
processor. Then, every processor will update the c variables
which are leaving this processor.
The computations of the check-node updating and
variable-node updating are based on the standard
BP algorithm Suppose v½0;1 ¼ ½v0; v1; . . . ; v1, where vt ¼
ðvð1Þ
t ; vð2Þ
t ; . . . ; vðcÞ
t Þ is the tth transmitted codeword. Then,
the codeword v½0;1 is mapped into the sequence
x½0;1 ¼ ½x0; x1; . . . ; x1
according to xt ¼ ðxð1Þ
t ; xð2Þ
t ; . . . ; xðcÞ
t Þ and xðjÞ
t
¼ 1  2vðjÞ
t
(j ¼ 1; 2; . . . ; c). Assuming an AWGN channel, the received
signal y½0;1 ¼ ½y0; y1; . . . ; y1 is further given by
yt ¼

yð1Þ
t ; yð2Þ
t ; . . . ; yðcÞ
t

;
ZHAO AND LAU: IMPLEMENTATION OF DECODERS FOR LDPC BLOCK CODES AND LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES BASED ON GPUS
665
1. Here, we use subblock to denote the ðpJ=Þ  ðpL=Þ matrix as to
distinguish it with the submatrix within it, i.e., the p  p matrix.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:42:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
where yðjÞ
t
¼ xðjÞ
t
þ gðjÞ
t
and gðjÞ
t
is an AWGN with zero mean
and variance 2 ¼ N0=2.
Using the same notation as in Section 2.2, the pipelined
BP decoding algorithm applying to LDPCCC is illustrated
in Algorithm 2 in the Appendix, available in the online
supplemental material. Same as the LDPC decoding
algorithm, the LDPCCC decoding algorithm consists of
four main procedures: initialization, horizontal step, ver-
tical step, and making hard decisions. Moreover, for each
of these procedures, multiple threads can be used in
executing the computations in parallel and all the threads
will follow the same instructions with no divergence
occurring, except when making hard decisions.
3
IMPLEMENTATION OF DECODERS FOR LDPC
CODES AND LDPCCCs
3.1
GPU-Based LDPC Decoder
(Please refer to the Appendix, available in the online
supplemental material, for a brief description of graphics
processing unit and CUDA programming.) We implement
our decoders using the standard BP decoding algorithm.
According to the CUDA programming model, the granu-
larity of a thread execution and a coalesced memory access
is a warp. Full efficiency is realized when all threads in a
warp take the same execution path and the coalesced
memory access requirement is satisfied. Thus, we propose
to decode  codewords simultaneously, where  is an
integer multiple of a warp (i.e., multiple of 32). For each
decoding cycle,  codewords will be input, decoded, and
output together and in parallel.
Recall that an LDPC code can be represented by its
parity-check matrix or a Tanner graph. A nonzero element
in the parity-check matrix corresponds to an edge in the
Tanner graph.
In the LDPC decoder, messages are bound to the edges
in the Tanner graph (or the 1s in the parity-check matrix H).
So we store the messages according to the positions of 1s.
Besides, the channel messages corresponding to the variable
nodes are required. To reuse the notation, we denote
the data structure storing the messages between the
variable nodes and the check nodes as H while the data
structure storing the channel messages as V. The difficulty
of the CUDA memory arrangement lies on the fact that for
practical LDPC codes with good performance, the positions
of the 1s are scattered in the parity-check matrix.
First, in the BP decoding procedure, although there are
two kinds of messages, namely, the variable-to-check
messages and the check-to-variable messages, at every step
of the iteration, only one kind of message is needed to be
666
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PARALLEL AND DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS,
VOL. 25,
NO. 3,
MARCH 2014
Fig. 2. Continuous decoding of LDPC convolutional code with I processors. Each circle denotes a group of c variable nodes and each square
denotes a group of ðc  bÞ check nodes. Each edge represents the connection between the c variable node and the ðc  bÞ check nodes.
Fig. 1. Illustration of constructing an LPDCCC from a QC-LDPC block code.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:42:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
stored, i.e., after the check-node updating step, only the
check-to-variable messages s are stored in the H and after
the variable-node updating step, only the variable-to-check
messages s are stored in the H. Second, in our new
decoder architecture,  ( is a multiple of a warp)
codewords are decoded together and hence the messages
of  codewords are also processed together. We number the
distinct codewords as 0; 1; . . . ;   1 and we use the same
notations for the messages as before, i.e., mnðÞ is the
message from variable node n to check node m correspond-
ing to the th codeword and mnðÞ is the message from
check node m to variable node n corresponding to the th
codeword. Since all the  codewords messages share the
same Tanner graph, messages of the  distinct codewords
corresponding to the same edge can be grouped into one
package and stored linearly. Let pmn denote the package
corresponding to the edge connecting variable node n and
check node m. Then, in package pmn, mnð0Þ; mnð1Þ; . . . ;
mnð  1Þ or mnð0Þ; mnð1Þ; . . . ; mnð  1Þ are stored
contiguously. This is shown in Fig. 8 in the Appendix,
available in the online supplemental material. Different
packages pmns are aligned linearly according to their
corresponding positions in the parity-check matrix—row-
by-row, and left to right for each row. That implies the
messages associated with one check node are stored
contiguously.
Remark. To be consistent with the use of memory locations
in computer programming, all the indices of the data
structures in this paper starts from 0.
The advantage of this arrangement is obvious. Since 
is a multiple of 32, the memory segment for every package
is naturally aligned when the data type belongs to one of
the required data types (i.e., with word size of 1-, 2-, 4-, or
8-byte). In addition, the structure of the parity-check
matrix H is shared by the  codewords. As these  data
elements are processed together, they can be accessed by 
contiguous threads and hence the global memory is
always accessed in a coalesced way. We also ensure that
the threads within a warp always follow the same
execution path with no divergence occurring (except when
making hard decisions on the received bits). Then, both
the memory access and the thread execution are optimal
and efficient.
We also need to store the details of the parity-check
matrix. Two lookup tables denoted by LUTc and LUTv will
be kept. LUTc is used in the check-node updating process
and LUTv is used in the variable-node updating process.
The two tables store the indices of the data accessed in the
two updating processes and both are 2D. The first
dimension is to distinguish different check nodes, i.e.,
LUTc½m is associated with the mth check node or the mth
row. Each LUTc½m records the indices of the messages
related to the mth check node. The two lookup tables are
shared by all  codewords. An example is illustrated in the
Appendix, available in the online supplemental material.
The LUTc and LUTv lookup tables are stored in the constant
or texture memory in the CUDA device so as to be cached to
reduce the access time.
A separate thread is assigned to process each check node
or each variable node in the updating kernel. Hence, 
threads can be assigned to process the data of  codewords
simultaneously. So, a 2D thread hierarchy is launched. The
first dimension is for identifying the different codewords,
while the second dimension is for processing different
check nodes or variable nodes. The thread layout is
illustrated in Fig. 3. For each thread block, we allocate 
threads in the threadIdx.x dimension,2 and BLy threads in
the threadIdx.y dimension. Each thread block contains
BLy   threads, which should be within the thread block
size limit (1,024 for the current device). The total number of
thread blocks is determined by the number of check nodes
M or the number of variable nodes N. We denote BLy in
the check-node updating kernel as BLy;cnu and the one in
the variable-node updating kernel as BLy;vnu. Then, the
numbers of thread blocks are given by dM=BLy;cnue and
dN=BLy;vnue, respectively. In Fig. 3, the threads marked by
the vertical rectangular are processing the same codeword.
(See the Appendix, available in the online supplemental
material, on the selection of the size of the thread block.)
3.2
GPU-Based LDPCCC Decoder
The decoding algorithm and the pipelined LDPCCC
decoder architecture have been introduced in Section 2.5.
The LDPCCCs studied in our work are derived from QC-
LDPC codes as described in Section 2.4. So our LDPCCC
decoder is confined to the LDPCCCs with the parity-check
matrix H½0;1 of this kind of structure.
3.2.1 Data Structure
The LDPC convolutional codes are decoded continuously.
We will thus refer to an LDPCC code sequence v½0;1 ¼
½v0; v1; . . . ; v1 as a code stream and vi, i ¼ 0; 1; . . . ; 1 as a
ZHAO AND LAU: IMPLEMENTATION OF DECODERS FOR LDPC BLOCK CODES AND LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES BASED ON GPUS
667
Fig. 3. Two-dimensional thread layout of the check-node/variable-node
updating kernel.
2. In CUDA, threads are linear in the threadIdx.x dimension.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:42:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
code frame or variable frame. A code stream is constrained
with the parity-check matrix H½0;1 by
v½0;1HT
½0;1 ¼ 0:
The parity-check matrix of the LDPCCC is shown in Fig. 4.
It is seen that the check nodes are grouped into layers. Each
variable-node frame is connected to ms þ 1 (4 here) check
layers in the parity-check matrix. Let c denote the size of vi,
i ¼ 0; 1; . . . ; 1 and c  b denote the size of each check layer.
Thus, the code rate is b=c.
We will use the same notations as in Section 2.4. The
LDPCCC is derived from a ðJ; LÞ QC-LDPC base code HQC
which has J  L submatrices and the size of each
submatrix is p  p. HQC is first divided into    sub-
blocks3 ( ¼ 4 in Fig. 4) and each subblock contains several
submatrices. We have c ¼ L=  p and c  b ¼ J=  p.
Referring to Section 2.4, we denote the unwrapped parity-
check matrix of the QC-LDPC code as
Hbase ¼
HL
QC
HU
QC
"
#
:
The H½0;1 of the derived LDPCCC is a repetition of Hbase.
Denoting the number of edges in Hbase by E, we have
E ¼ J  L  p.
In designing the LDPCCC decoder, the first thing to
consider is the amount of memory required to store the
messages. Like the LDPC decoder, we store the messages
according to the edges in the parity-check matrix. Let I
denote the number of iterations in the LDPCCC decoding.
Then I processors are required in the pipelined decoder.
Although the parity-check matrix of the LDPCCC is semi-
infinite, the decoder only needs to allocate memory for I
processors. Hence, the total size of the memory required
for storing the messages passing between the variable
nodes and check nodes is I  E units. And the total size
of
the
memory
required
for
storing
these
channel
messages is I  c.
Next, we will describe the hierarchical data structure for
the LDPCCC decoder memory space. To reuse the notation,
we use H to denote the memory space for the messages on
the edges and V to denote the memory space for the
channel messages. Referring to Fig. 5, the H is a multi-
dimensional array with two hierarchies. First, we divide the
entire memory space into I groups corresponding to the I
processors, and we use the first hierarchy of H as the data
structure for each group. That is, H½i, i ¼ 0; 1; . . . ; I  1
denote the data structure for the I processors, respectively.
Second, recall that the parity-check matrix in Fig. 4 is
derived from Hbase which is divided into 16 nonzero
subblocks and each subblock has a size of ðpJ=Þ 
ðpL=Þ. Thus, in each group, H½i is also divided into 16
subblocks, denoted by the second hierarchy of H, namely,
H½i½j, where j ¼ 0; 1; . . . ; 15. Every H½i½j stores the
messages associated with one subblock. On the other hand,
the memory for the channel messages is simpler: V½i, i ¼
0; 1; . . . ; I  ðms þ 1Þ  1 will be allocated. Finally, to opti-
mize the thread execution and memory access,  LDPC
convolutional code streams are decoded simultaneously,
where  is a multiple of a warp. Thus, every  data are
combined into one package and take up one memory unit.
An LDPCCC decoder uses the BP algorithm to update
the check nodes and variable nodes. The BP decoding
procedures are based on the parity-check matrix H½0;1.
With the data structure to store the messages, the decoder
also needs the structure information of H½0;1 for under-
standing the connections between the check nodes and the
variable nodes. This information can be used to calculate
the index of the data being accessed during the updating.
Due to the periodic property of the constructed LDPCCC,
the structure of Hbase is shared by all the processors. We
label the 16 subblocks in Hbase with the numbers 0; 1; . . . ; 15.
In addition, in the decoder, the I check-node layers or I
variable-node frames being updated simultaneously in the
I processors are separated by an interval of ms þ 1. Since
H½0;1 also has a period of T ¼ ms þ 1, at any time slot, the
I processors require the same structure information in
updating the check nodes or the variable nodes, as seen in
Fig. 4. The lookup tables used in check-node updating and
668
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PARALLEL AND DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS,
VOL. 25,
NO. 3,
MARCH 2014
Fig. 4. The periodic structure of the parity-check matrix of the LDPCCCs.
Fig. 5. Illustration of the procedures of an LPDCCC decoder. The
horizontal line denotes the updating of the row. The vertical line denotes
the updating of a column.
3. Note that a “subblock” is different from a “submatrix”.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:42:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
variable-node updating are denoted as LUTc and LUTv,
respectively. The two lookup tables will then store the
labels of the subblocks in Hbase that are involved in the
updating process. Besides, another lookup table LUTsub
will be used to store the “shift numbers”4 of the
submatrices in each subblock.
Example 2. The LUTc and LUTv for the LDPCCC in Fig. 4
are
LUTc ¼
1
2
3
0
6
7
4
5
11
8
9
10
12
13
14
15
2
664
3
775;
ð4Þ
and
LUTv ¼
0
4
8
12
5
9
13
1
10
14
2
6
15
3
7
11
2
664
3
775:
ð5Þ
3.2.2 Decoding Procedures
Based on the discussion in Section 2.5, the detailed
decoding procedures are shown in the Appendix, available
in the online supplemental material.
3.2.3 Parallel Thread Hierarchy
As described in Section 3.2.1, the memory associated with
each entry in the H matrix is a message package containing
 messages from  code streams. So there is a straightfor-
ward mapping between the thread hierarchy and the data
structure. In the check-node-updating kernel (or variable-
updating-kernel), a 2D thread hierarchy of size I  ðc  bÞ 
 (or I  c  ) is launched, where ðc  bÞ (or c) is mapped to
the total number of check nodes (or variable nodes) being
updated in I processors. The size of one of the dimensions
(i.e., ) is mapped to the number of code streams. Like in
LDPC decoder,  will be configured as the threadIdx.x
dimension and ðc  bÞ (or c) will be the threadIdx.y
dimension in the CUDA thread hierarchy. The  threads
in the threadIdx.x dimension is contiguous and will access
the  data in each message package for coalesced access.
3.3
CPU-Based LDPC and LDPCCC Decoders
We implement both the serial CPU-based LDPC decoder
and LDPCCC decoder using the C language. As CPUs with
multiple cores are very common nowadays, we further
implement a multithread CPU-based LDPCCC decoder
using OpenMP. OpenMP [30] is a portable, scalable
programming interface for shared-memory parallel com-
puters. It can be used to explicitly direct multithreaded,
shared memory parallelism. A straightforward application
of the OpenMP is to paralyze the intensive loop-based code
with the #pragma omp parallel for directive. Then, the
executing threads will be automatically allocated to
different cores on a multicore CPU.
The horizontal step and the vertical step in Algorithm 2
involve intensive computing. On a single-core CPU, the
updating of the different nodes are processed with a serial
for loop. Since the updating of different nodes can be
performed independent of one another, it is ideal to
parallelize the for loop with the #pragma omp parallel for
directive in the OpenMP execution on a multicore CPU.
Hence, in our implementation, we issue multiple threads to
both the updating of the check nodes (11) and the updating
of the variable nodes (12) in the multithread CPU-based
LDPCCC decoder.
4
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
4.1
The Experimental Environment
The CPU being used is an Intel Xeon containing four cores.
Moreover, it can handle up to eight threads at a time. The
serial CPU-based decoders are developed using C and the
multithreaded CPU-based LDPCCC decoder is developed
using OpenMP. Note that for the serial CPU-based
decoders, only one of the four cores in the CPU will be
utilized. The GPU used in this paper is a GTX460 containing
336 cores and the GPU-based decoders are developed using
CUDA C. Furthermore, in our simulations, 32 codewords
are decoded simultaneously in the GPU decoders, i.e.,
 ¼ 32. Details of the CPU and GPU used in our simulations
are presented in Table 1.
Table 2 shows the characteristics of the QC-LDPC codes
under test. For Code A to code D, J ¼ 4 and L ¼ 24,
thus giving the same code rate of ð24  4Þ=24 ¼ 5=6. These
codes are further used to derived regular LDPCCCs. To
avoid confusion, we denote the derived LDPCCCs as Codes
A0 to D0. It can be readily shown that the (3, 4, 24)-LDPCCCs
A0 to D0 have the same code rate of 5/6.
Remark. Note that although QC-LDPC codes are adopted
in the simulation, the new GPU-based LDPC decoder is
able to decode other LDPC codes like randomly-
constructed regular or irregular codes.
ZHAO AND LAU: IMPLEMENTATION OF DECODERS FOR LDPC BLOCK CODES AND LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES BASED ON GPUS
669
TABLE 1
Simulation Environments
4. For a QC-LDPC base matrix, the information is the “shift number” of
each p  p submatrix (1 represents the all-zero matrix, 0 represents the
identity matrix, l represents cyclically right-shifting the identity matrix l
times).
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:42:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
4.2
The Decoding Time Comparison
To optimize the speed and to minimize the data transfer
between the CPU (host) and the GPU (device), we generate
and process the data, including the codeword and the
AWGN noise, directly on the GPU. After hard decisions
have been made on the received bits, the number of error
bits are counted at the GPU using a “reduce program.”
Subsequently, the number is transferred to the CPU. Since
the data transfer occurs only at the end of the iterative
decoding process, the transfer time (overhead) is very small
(less than 2 percent) compared with time spent in the whole
decoding process.
In the following, we fix the number of decoding
iterations and the simulation terminates after 100 block/
frame errors are received. By recording the total number of
blocks/frames decoded and the total time taken,5 we can
compute the average time taken to decode one block/frame.
4.2.1 LDPC Decoders
The GPU-based decoder and the serial CPU-based decoder
are tested with 30 iterations at a Eb=N0 of 3.2 dB. Table 3
shows the number of transmitted codewords and the
simulation times for different codes.
We consider the average time for decoding one code-
word for the serial CPU-based decoder, i.e., tCPU. We
observe that tCPU increases from Code A to Code D due to
an increasing number of edges in the codeword. Further, we
consider the average time for decoding one codeword for
the GPU-based decoder, i.e., tGPU. Similar to the serial CPU-
based decoder, tGPU increases from Code A to Code D.
Finally, we compare the simulation times of the serial
CPU-based decoder and the GPU-based decoders by taking
the ratio tCPU=tGPU. The results in Table 3 indicate that the
GPU-based decoder accomplishes speedup improvements
from 148 times to 162 times compared with the serial CPU-
based decoder.
4.2.2 LDPCCC Decoders
We decode the LDPC convolutional codes A0 to D0 at a
Eb=N0 of 3.1 dB with I ¼ 20. First, we show the average
decoding times for Code A0 and Code C0 when different
numbers of threads are used in the CPU-based decoders.
The results are shown in Table 4. The serial CPU-based
decoder corresponds to the case with a single thread. We
observe that the decoding time is approximately inversely
proportional to the number of threads used—up to four
threads. However, the time does not improve much when
the number of threads increases to six or eight. The reason is
as follows: The CPU being used has four cores, which can
execute up to four tasks in fully parallel. Hence, compared
with using a single thread, there is an almost four times
improvement when four threads are used. As the number of
threads increases beyond four, however, the tasks of the
threads will be scheduled. But a maximum of four threads
can be executed on the four processors at the same time.
Consequently, further time improvement is small when
more than four threads are used.
Next, we compare the decoding times of the LDPCCC
decoders when GPU-based and CPU-based decoders are
used to decode Code A0 to Code D0. For the CPU-based
decoders, we consider the cases where a single thread and
eight threads are used, respectively. Table 5 shows the
results. As explained above, limited by the number of cores
(four only) in the CPU, the CPU-based decoder can only
improve the speed by about 4 times even when the number
of threads increases from one to eight. We also observe that
compared with the serial CPU-based decoder, the GPU-
based LDPCCC decoder can achieve 170 to 200 times
speedup improvement. Compared with the eight-thread
CPU-based decoder, the GPU-based LDPCCC decoder can
also accomplish 39 to 46 times speedup improvement.
5
CONCLUSION
In this paper, efficient decoders for LDPC codes and LDPC
convolutional codes based on the GPU parallel architecture
are implemented. By using efficient data structure and
thread layout, the thread divergence is minimized and the
memory can be accessed in a coalesced way. All decoders
are flexible and scalable. First, they can decode different
670
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PARALLEL AND DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS,
VOL. 25,
NO. 3,
MARCH 2014
TABLE 2
Parity-Check Matrices of the QC-LDPC Codes Used in the
LDPC Decoder
They are also used to derive the LDPCCCs A0 to D0.
5. In the case of the GPU-based decoders, the total time taken includes
the GPU computation time, the time spent in transferring data between the
CPU and GPU, and so on. However, as explained above, the GPU
computation time dominates the total time while the overhead is very small.
TABLE 3
Decoding Time for the GPU-Based LDPC Decoder and the
Serial CPU-Based Decoder at Eb=N0 ¼ 3:2 dB
Thirty iterations are used. C represents the total number of decoded
codewords, T denotes the total simulation time, and t is the average
simulation time per codeword.
TABLE 4
Average LDPCCC Decoding Time (ms) per Code Frame
for the Quad-Core CPU-Based Decoder When Different
Numbers of Threads are Used
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:42:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
codes by changing the parameters. Hence, the programs
need very little modification. Second, they should be run on
the latest or even future generations of GPUs which possess
more hardware resources. For example, if there are more
cores/memory in the GPU, we can readily decode more
codes, say  ¼ 64 codes as compared with  ¼ 32 codes
used in this paper, at the same time. These are actually
advantages of GPU parallel architecture compared to other
parallel solutions including FPGA or VLSI. We will report
our results in the future when we have the opportunity to
run our proposed mechanism in other GPU families.
Compared with the traditional serial CPU-based deco-
ders, results show that the proposed GPU-based decoders
can achieve 100 to 200 speedup. The actual time
depends on the particular codes being simulated. When
compared with the eight-thread CPU-based decoder, the
GPU-based decoder can also accomplish 39 to 46 times
speedup improvement. Thus, the simulation time can be
reduced from months to weeks or days when a GPU-based
decoder is used. In summary, our results show that the
proposed GPU-based LDPC/LDPCCC decoder has obvious
advantages in the decoding time compared with CPU-
based decoders.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The work described in this paper was substantially
supported by a grant from the Research Grants Council of
the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China
(Project No. PolyU 519011E).
REFERENCES
[1]
R.G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. MIT Press, Sept.
1963.
[2]
D. MacKay, “Good Error-Correcting Codes Based on Very Sparse
Matrices,” IEEE Trans. Information Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399-
431, Mar. 1999.
[3]
I. Djordjevic, M. Cvijetic, L. Xu, and T. Wang, “Using LDPC-
Coded Modulation and Coherent Detection for Ultra Highspeed
Optical Transmission,” J. Lightwave Technology, vol. 25, no. 11,
pp. 3619-3625, Nov. 2007.
[4]
Y. Miyata, K. Sugihara, W. Matsumoto, K. Onohara, T. Sugihara,
K. Kubo, H. Yoshida, and T. Mizuochi, “A Triple-Concatenated
FEC Using Soft-Decision Decoding for 100 Gb/s Optical Trans-
mission,” Proc. Optical Fiber Comm., Collocated Nat’l Fiber Optic
Engineers Conf., (OFC/NFOEC ’10), pp. 1-3, 2010.
[5]
Y. Chen and D. Hocevar, “A FPGA and ASIC Implementation of
Rate 1/2, 8088-b Irregular Low Density Parity Check Decoder,”
Proc. IEEE Global Telecomm. Conf. (GLOBECOM ’03), vol. 1,
pp. 113-117, 2003.
[6]
I.B. Djordjevic, M. Arabaci, and L.L. Minkov, “Next Generation
FEC for High-Capacity Communication in Optical Transport
Networks,” J. Lightwave Technology, vol. 27, no. 16, pp. 3518-3530,
Aug. 2009.
[7]
B. Levine, R.R. Taylor, and H. Schmit, “Implementation of Near
Shannon Limit Error-Correcting Codes Using Reconfigurable
Hardware,” Proc. IEEE Symp. Field-Programmable Custom Comput-
ing Machines, 2000.
[8]
A. Pusane, A. Feltstrom, A. Sridharan, M. Lentmaier, K.
Zigangirov, and D. Costello, “Implementation Aspects of LDPC
Convolutional Codes,” IEEE Trans. Comm., vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 1060-
1069, July 2008.
[9]
S. Bates, Z. Chen, L. Gunthorpe, A. Pusane, K. Zigangirov, and D.
Costello, “A Low-Cost Serial Decoder Architecture for Low-
Density Parity-Check Convolutional Codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits
and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 1967-1976, Aug.
2008.
[10] Z. Chen, S. Bates, and W. Krzymien, “High Throughput Parallel
Decoder Design for LDPC Convolutional Codes,” Proc. Fourth
IEEE Int’l Conf. Circuits and Systems for Comm. (ICCSC ’08), pp. 35-
39, May 2008.
[11] R. Swamy, S. Bates, and T. Brandon, “Architectures for ASIC
Implementations of Low-Density Parity-Check Convolutional
Encoders and Decoders,” Proc. IEEE Int’l Symp. Circuits and
Systems (ISCAS ’05), pp. 4513-4516, 2005.
[12] C.W. Sham, X. Chen, F.C.M. Lau, Y. Zhao, and W.M. Tam, “A
2.0 Gb/s Throughput Decoder for QC-LDPC Convolutional
Codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers,
vol. 60, no. 7, pp. 1857-1869, July 2013.
[13] G. Falcao, V. Silva, and L. Sousa, “How GPUs Can Outperform
ASICs for Fast LDPC Decoding,” Proc. 23rd Int’l Conf. Super-
computing, pp. 390-399, 2009.
[14] H. Ji, J. Cho, and W. Sung, “Massively Parallel Implementation of
Cyclic LDPC Codes on a General Purpose Graphics Processing
Unit,” Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Processing Systems (SiPS ’09),
pp. 285-290, 2009.
[15] H. Ji, J. Cho, and W. Sung, “Memory Access Optimized
Implementation of Cyclic and Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes on a
GPGPU,” J. Signal Processing Systems, vol. 3, pp. 1-11, 2010.
[16] G. Falcao, L. Sousa, and V. Silva, “Massive Parallel LDPC
Decoding on GPU,” Proc. 13th ACM SIGPLAN Symp. Principles
and Practice of Parallel Programming, pp. 83-90, 2008.
[17] G. Falcao, L. Sousa, and V. Silva, “Massively LDPC Decoding on
Multicore Architectures,” IEEE Trans. Parallel and Distributed
Systems, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 309-322, Feb. 2011.
[18] A.J. Felstrom and K. Zigangirov, “Time-Varying Periodic Con-
volutional Codes with Low-Density Parity-Check Matrix,” IEEE
Trans. Information Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181-2191, Sept. 1999.
[19] M. Tavares, E. Matus, S. Kunze, and G. Fettweis, “A Dual-Core
Programmable Decoder for LDPC Convolutional Codes,” Proc.
IEEE Int’l Symp. Circuits and Systems (ISCAS ’08), pp. 532-535, May
2008.
[20] E. Matus, M. Tavares, M. Bimberg, and G. Fettweis, “Towards a
GBit/s Programmable Decoder for LDPC Convolutional Codes,”
Proc. IEEE Int’l Symp. Circuits and Systems (ISCAS ’07), pp. 1657-
1660, May 2007.
[21] R. Tanner, “A Recursive Approach to Low Complexity Codes,”
IEEE Trans. Information Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533-547, Sept.
1981.
ZHAO AND LAU: IMPLEMENTATION OF DECODERS FOR LDPC BLOCK CODES AND LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES BASED ON GPUS
671
TABLE 5
Decoding Time for the GPU-Based LDPCCC Decoder and the CPU-Based Decoders at Eb=N0 ¼ 3:1 dB
I ¼ 20 processors are used. C represents the total number of decoded frames, T denotes the total simulation time, and t is the average simulation
time per frame. CPU  1 and CPU  8 denote the use of one thread and eight threads, respectively, in the CPU-based decoder.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:42:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[22] M. Fossorier, “Quasicyclic Low-Density Parity-Check Codes from
Circulant Permutation Matrices,” IEEE Trans. Information Theory,
vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788-1793, Aug. 2004.
[23] W.M. Tam, F.C.M. Lau, and C.K. Tse, “A Class of QC-LDPC
Codes with Low Encoding Complexity and Good Error Perfor-
mance,” IEEE Comm. Letters, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 169-171, Feb. 2010.
[24] T. Richardson, M. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of
Capacity-Approaching Irregular Low-Density Parity-Check
Codes,” IEEE Trans. Information Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619-
637, Feb. 2001.
[25] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Efficient Encoding of Low-
Density Parity-Check Codes,” IEEE Trans. Information Theory,
vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 638-656, Feb. 2001.
[26] X. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, D. Arnold, and A. Dholakia, “Efficient
Implementations of the Sum-Product Algorithm for Decoding
LDPC Codes,” Proc. IEEE Global Telecomm. Conf. (GLOBECOM ’01),
vol. 2, pp. 1036-1036E, 2001.
[27] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. Fossorier, and X. Hu,
“Reduced-Complexity Decoding of LDPC Codes,” IEEE Trans.
Comm., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288-1299, Aug. 2005.
[28] R. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. Fuja, and D. Costello,
“LDPC Block and Convolutional Codes Based on Circulant
Matrices,” IEEE Trans. Information Theory, vol. 50, no. 12,
pp. 2966-2984, Dec. 2004.
[29] A.E. Pusane, R. Smarandache, P.O. Vontobel, and D.J. Costello,
“On Deriving Good LDPC Convolutional Codes from QC-LDPC
Block Codes,” Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory (ISIT ’07),
pp. 1221-1225, 2007.
[30] R. Chandra, Parallel Programming in OpenMP. Morgan Kaufmann,
2001.
[31] M. Lentmaier, D.G.M. Mitchell, G.P. Fettweis, and D.J. Costello,
“Asymptotically Regular LDPC Codes with Linear Distance
Growth and Thresholds Close to Capacity,” Proc. Information
Theory and Applications Workshop (ITA ’10), pp. 1-8, 2010.
[32] C. Nvidia, “Compute Unified Device Architecture Programming
Guide Version 4.0,” technical report, NVIDIA Corporation, 2011.
[33] W. Nvidia, N.
Generation,
and C.
Compute,
“Whitepaper
Nvidia’s
Next
Generation
CUDA
Compute
Architecture,”
ReVision, pp. 1-22, 2009.
[34] F. Kschischang, B. Frey, and H. Loeliger, “Factor Graphs and the
Sum-Product Algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Information Theory, vol. 47,
no. 2, pp. 498-519, Feb. 2001.
Yue Zhao received the BE degree in information
engineering from Shanghai Jiaotong University,
China, in 2009. He was a postgraduate student
and research assistant at the Hong Kong
Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, from 2009
to 2012, where he was working on algorithms
and implementations for the LDPC decoding. He
is currently working at the Qualcomm Research
Center, Beijing, China.
Francis C.M. Lau (M’93-SM’03) received the
BEng (Hons) degree in electrical and electronic
engineering and the PhD degree from King’s
College London, University of London, United
Kingdom, in 1989 and 1993, respectively. He is
a professor and associate head at the Depart-
ment of Electronic and Information Engineering,
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong
Kong. He is the coauthor of Chaos-Based Digital
Communication Systems (Heidelberg: Springer-
Verlag, 2003) and Digital Communications with Chaos: Multiple Access
Techniques and Performance Evaluation (Oxford: Elsevier, 2007). He is
also a coholder of three US patents and one pending US patent. He has
published more than 230 papers. His main research interests include
channel coding, cooperative networks, wireless sensor networks, chaos-
based digital communications, applications of complex-network the-
ories, and wireless communications. He served as an associate editor
for IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II in 2004-2005 and
IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I in 2006-2007. He was also
an associate editor of Dynamics of Continuous, Discrete and Impulsive
Systems, Series B from 2004 to 2007, a coguest editor of Circuits,
Systems and Signal Processing for the special issue “Applications of
Chaos in Communications” in 2005, and an associate editor for IEICE
Transactions (Special Section on Recent Progress in Nonlinear Theory
and Its Applications) in 2011. He has been a guest associate editor of
International Journal and Bifurcation and Chaos since 2010 and an
associate editor of IEEE Circuits and Systems Magazine since 2012. He
is also a fellow of IET and a senior member of IEEE.
. For more information on this or any other computing topic,
please visit our Digital Library at www.computer.org/publications/dlib.
672
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PARALLEL AND DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS,
VOL. 25,
NO. 3,
MARCH 2014
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:42:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
