2014 2nd International Conference on Devices, Circuits and Systems (ICDCS)

1

Error Recognition and Correction Enhanced

Decoding of Hybrid Codes for Memory Application

S.Baskar Dept. of Electronics and Communication Engineering
Angel College of engineering and technology, Coimbatore, India.
Connectbaskar@gmail.com

Abstract: As technology scales, Multiple Cell Upsets (MCUs) become more common and affect a larger number of cells. In order to protect memories against MCUs as well as SEUs is to make use of advanced Error detecting and correcting codes that can correct more than one error per word. A sub-group of the low-density parity checks (LDPC) codes, which be-longs to the family of the Majority logic decoding has been recently proposed for memory application and Difference set codes are one example of these codes which contributes for error detection and correction.ML decodable Codes are suitable for memory applications due to their capability to correct a large number of errors. In this paper, the proposed scheme for fault-detection and correction method significantly makes area overhead minimal and to reduce the decoding time through DC codes than the existing technique and it gives promising option for memory applications. HDL implementation and synthesis results are included, showing that the proposed techniques can be efficiently implemented.
Index Terms— Difference set codes, error correction codes, majority logic decoding, memory, multiple cell upsets (MCUs).
I. INTRODUCTION
RADIATION-INDUCED soft errors are a major issue for Memory reliability. To prevent soft errors from causing data corruption, memories are typically protected with error correction codes (ECCs). The most commonly used codes can correct one error and detect two errors per memory word and are known as single-error- correction double-error- detection (SEC-DED) codes. Their main advantages are that they require few additional bits per word and that the decoding process is simple. A SEC-DED code enforces a minimum distance of four between any two coded words By having a distance of four any word that suffers a double error would be in the worst case at a distance of two from any valid coded word. Therefore, it cannot be mistaken for a single error and miscorrected. The same approach is used for codes that can correct two errors; in this case, Double Error Correction Triple Error-Detection (DEC-TED) codes are used. However, this increases the decoder complexity substantially. In a hierarchical approach that combines a Hamming code and a Bose–Chaudhuri–Hocquenghem code was proposed to minimize the Latency. The use of Euclidean geometry (EG) codes has also been considered for memory protection The particular EG codes studied are one-step majority logic decodable and therefore, the decoders can be implemented

with low cost. Other codes that are one-step majority logic decodable are difference-set (DS)[1] codes. Their use for memory protection has also been studied recently showing that the properties of the codes can be exploited t o r educe the decoding time significantly. The combination of a simple decoder and a reduced decoding time makes DS codes an attractive option for memory protection. Among the ECC codes that meet the requirements of higher error correction capability and low decoding complexity, cyclic block codes have been identified as good candidates, due to their property of being majority logic (ML) decodable. A sub-group of the low-density parity check (LDPC) codes, which be-longs to the family of the ML decodable codes, has been re-searched in. In this paper, we will focus on one specific type of LDPC codes, namely the difference-set cyclic codes (DSCCs), which is widely used in the Japanese teletext system or FM multiplex broadcasting systems.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II gives an overview of existing ML decoding solutions; Section III presents the Existing ML difference-set cyclic codes algorithm; Section IV Proposed two dimensional Two dimensional modulo sum algorithm Section V the results obtained for the different versions in respect to effectiveness, performance, and area and power consumption. Finally, Section V discusses conclusions and gives an outlook onto future work.
II. PROFILE ABOUT ML DECODING
Figure .1. Memory system schematic with MLD.

978-1-4799-1356-5/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:45:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2014 2nd International Conference on Devices, Circuits and Systems (ICDCS)

2

MLD is based on a number of parity check equations which are orthogonal to each other, so that, at each iteration, each code-word bit only participates in one parity check equation, except the very first bit which contributes to all equations. For this reason, the majority result of these parity check equations decide the correctness of the current bit under decoding. A generic schematic of a memory system is depicted in Figure.1. for the usage of an ML decoder. In this method initially, the data words are encoded and then stored in the memory the resulting sums are then forwarded to the majority gate for evaluating its correctness. If the number of 1’s received in is greater than the number of 0’s, which would mean that the current bit under decoding is wrong, and a signal to correct it would be triggered. Otherwise, the bit under decoding would be correct and no extra operations would be needed on it and it increases decoder However, they require a large decoding time that impacts memory performance In order to improve the decoder performance, alternative de-signs may be used. One possibility is to add a fault detector by calculating the syndrome, so that only faulty codeword’s are decoded. Since most of the codeword’s will be error-free, no further correction will be needed, and therefore performance will not be affected. Although the implementation of an SFD reduces the average latency of the decoding process, it also adds complexity to the design (As shown in Figure. 2). The SFD is an XOR matrix that calculates the syndrome based on the parity check matrix. Each parity bit results in a syndrome equation. Therefore, the complexity of the syndrome calculator increases with the size of the code.

Figure.3.Memory system schematic of an MLDD.
In all above methods though they are efficient in many attributes, there are some drawbacks present, its due to adding extra bit for parity check equations which in turn gives extra overhead to the entire process. Those methods made use of two dimensional parity check equations for error detection and ML decoders for error correction and this makes a big impact on the performance of the system, depending on the size of the code. This explores the idea of using two dimensional Two dimensional modulo sum for error detection in order to reduce extra overhead and to improve the performance of the system and for codeword construction I made use of traditional hybrid LDPC technique. And the corresponding DSCC lengths are described in Table.1.
TABLE.1 .DSCC LENGTHS.

III. EXISTING ALGORITHM OF MLDD

Figure .2. Memory system schematic of an ML decoder with SFD
In order to reduce the size ML decoder that improves the designs presented before. Starting from the original design of the ML decoder introduced in ML detector/decoder (MLDD) has been implemented using the difference-set cyclic codes (DSCCs) this code is part of the LDPC codes (As shown in Figure.3.)

Figure.4. Flowchart of the DC two dimensional parity flow

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:45:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2014 2nd International Conference on Devices, Circuits and Systems (ICDCS)

3

Earlier for the code construction it is noted that a generator matrix for a code with parity-check matrix H can be found by performing Gauss-Jordan elimination on H to obtain it in the form
H = [PT |In-k] Where P is a (n − k) × k binary matrix and In− k is the size n − k identity matrix. The generator matrix is then
G= [ Ik |P] The matrix H is called a parity-check matrix. Each row of H corresponds to a parity-check equation and each column of H corresponds to a bit in the codeword.
Initialize H, G Initialize P, I If (H=PT |In-k) then H<=valid
Else
H<=invalid
End if If (G=Ik |P) then G<=valid
Else
G<=invalid
End if Initialize c_w=m*g If (code=valid) Then c*Ht terms to zero else C*Ht terms to be error Algorithm.1.code construction and parity check equations.

along with data segments. All the received segments (Sr) are added using ones complemented arithmetic to get the sum. Then the sum (Ss) has to be complemented, if the result is zero, the received data is accepted; otherwise rejected. (As shown in Algorithm.2.)
Initialize H, G Initialize P, I If (H=PT |I) then
H<=valid
Else
H<=invalid
End if If (G=I |P) then
G<=valid
Else
G<=invalid
End if Initialize c=m*g If (code=valid) Then c*Ht terms to zero else C*Ht terms to be error End if Data segmentation For: 1: N do Segment the N St (N) <=s1(m) mod 2 addition s2 (m) Invert the Two dimensional modulo sum St(N) Sr(N)<= s1(m) mod 2 addition s2 (m)

Thus for a binary code with m parity-check constraints and length n codeword’s the parity-check matrix is an m× n binary matrix (refer Figure.4.). In matrix form a string C= [c1 c2 c3 c4 c5 c6] is a valid codeword for the code with parity-check matrix H if and only if it satisfies the matrix equation CHt = 0.based on parity binary bits are appended with codeword before transmission (As shown in Algorithm.1.)
This process is repeated until all of the parity-check equations are satisfied, or until some maximum number of decoder iterations has passed and the decoder gives up. The ML decoding decoder can be immediately terminated whenever a valid codeword has been found by paritycheck equations if all of the Two dimensional modulo sum equations are satisfied.
IV.PROPOSED TWO DIMENSIONAL MODULO SUM (MODIFIED BENES NETWORK)
The data N is divided into k segments each of m bits. The segments (St) are added using ones complemented arithmetic to get the sum and corresponding output is complemented to get the Two dimensional modulo sum, and then segmented Two dimensional modulo sum is sent

Algorithm.2.code construction and two dimensional two dimensional modulo sum equations.
The ML decoding algorithm is a hard-decision messagepassing algorithm for LDPC codes. A binary (hard) decision about each received bit is made by the detector and this is passed to the decoder. For the ML decoding algorithm the messages passed along the Tanner graph edges are also binary: a bit node sends a message declaring if it is a one or a zero, and each check node sends a message to each connected bit node, declaring what value the bit is based on the information available to the check node.[3] The check node determines that its Two dimensional modulo sum equation is satisfied if the modulo-2 sum of the incoming bit values is zero. If the majority of the messages received by a bit node are different from its received value the bit node changes (flips) its current value.
These algorithms are really important due to their simple implementation. Their binary structure, binary memories and limited wiring, makes them remarkable in hardware implementation especially in the situations where only hard-decision values are available at the receiver. Gallager's algorithm A (GA) is, for instance, a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:45:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2014 2nd International Conference on Devices, Circuits and Systems (ICDCS)

4

hard-decision decoder in the set of Majority Based algorithms with Alphabet A = (-1, 1) In addition, the outgoing message of a check node is the product of its extrinsic incoming messages. The MBw algorithms are studied in depth in, by the use of density evolution another example of hard-decision algorithms is ML decoding algorithm. In this algorithm a flipping function is defined that counts the number of unsatisfied syndrome bits (check nodes) in which each variable node participates. Each variable node has a binary buffer to store a hard decision value; the content of this buffer will be flipped if the corresponding output of the flipping function is more than a certain threshold.[2] Decoding continues until all check node equations are satisfied or until maximum number of iterations is reached. Maximum Likelihood estimation (MLE) is an important tool in determining the actual probabilities of the assumed model of communication. In reality, a communication channel can be quite complex and a model becomes necessary to simplify calculations at decoder side. The model should closely approximate the complex communication channel. There exist a myriad of standard statistical models that can be employed for this task; Gaussian, Binomial, Exponential, Geometric, Poisson, etc., A standard communication model is chosen based on empirical data. Each model mentioned above has unique parameter that characterizes them. Suppose a binomial model is chosen (based on observation of data) for the error events over a particular channel, it is essential to determine the probability (p) of the binomial model. If a Gaussian model (normal distribution) is chosen for a particular channel
then estimating (mean) and (variance) are necessary so that they can be applied while computing the conditional probability of p(y received | x sent) Similarly estimating lambda is a necessity for a Poisson distribution model. Maximum likelihood estimation is a method to determine these unknown parameters associated with the corresponding chosen models of the communication channel. (As shown in Algorithm.3)
For i=1 to m do St=Sr End for Repeat For i=1 to m do If (St=Sr) then All the values known Finished else (St≠Sr) Er belongs to Ss Flip Er corresponds to Ss Finished End if End for
Algorithm.3.ML decoding
P(y received| x send) = (1-p) n-d.pd

Where d=the hamming distance between the received and the sent codeword’s.
n= number of bit sent. p= error probability of the BSC. 1-p = reliability of BSC.

A. Memory

V.RESULTS

The memory read access delay of the plain MLD is directly Dependent on the code size, i.e., a code with length 72 needs 72 cycles, etc. Then, two extra cycles need to be added for I/O. On the other hand, the memory read access delay of the proposed MLDD is only dependent on the word error rate (WER). If there are more errors, then more words need to be fully decoded. In all the above methods they made use of two dimensional parity equations it increase the memory through extra overhead due to the addition of redundant bit (parity).[4] It explores the idea of two dimensional Two dimensional modulo sum which in turn reduce the memory consumption of the device. Redundancy has been reduced through this algorithm (As shown in Figure.5 and Figure.6)

Figure .5. Two dimensional parity flow.
Figure .6. Two dimensional modulo sum.
B. Area
The previous subsection showed that the performance of the Proposed design MLDD is much faster than the plain MLD version, but slightly lower than the design with syndrome calculator (SFD).As mentioned several times,[5] this is compensated with a clear savings in area.
The conclusions on the area results are given as follows. • The MLD design requires little area compared with the Other two designs. However, as shown before, the performance results are not very good. • The SFD version, which had the best performance, needs More area than the MLD does, ranging from 25.40% to 294.94% depending on. Notice that the increment of Area grows quicker than does.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:45:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2014 2nd International Conference on Devices, Circuits and Systems (ICDCS)

5

• The MLDD version has a very similar performance to SFD, However it requires a much lower area overhead, ranging From 10.16% to 0.43%.
In all the methods they used two dimensional parity check equations and increase the occupancy of gate it has to be declined through two dimensional Two dimensional modulo sum algorithmic flow In order to save the area. These conclusions can be extrapolated to power. The over-head introduced by MLDD is very small, contrary to the SFD case.

Figure .7. One dimensional modulo sum.

An important final comment is that the area overhead of the MLDD actually decreases with respect to the plain MLD version through two dimensional modulo sum algorithm. For large values of, both areas are practically the same.[6] The reason for this is that the error detector in the MLDD has been designed to be independent of the size code the opposite situation occurs, with the SFD technique, which uses syndrome calculation to perform error detection: its complexity grows quickly when the code size increases.
TABLE.II DELAY RESULTS OF THE DEVICE
Timing Summary of existing algorithm Minimum period: 2.309ns (Maximum Frequency: 433.088MHz) Minimum input arrival time before clock: No path found Maximum output required time after clock: 5.693ns Maximum combinational path delay: 10.381ns As it is shown in the above results(Tabel.1,Table2.) due to the addition of redundant bit it increase the area and memory It has to be overcome by two dimensional Two dimensional modulo sum.[7,8] C. Power
The power consumption of the existing method has in turn enhance the on-chip power due to high increase in static power, it has to be overcome by two dimensional modulo sum.(As shown in Figure.7 and Figure.8).[9]

Figure .8. Two dimensional modulo sum.
VI.CONCLUSION
In this paper, an algorithmic scheme has been presented which uses effectively helps to correct errors caused by Multiple Cell Upsets (MCUs) as well as SEU in memories. The localization of the errors in an MCU has to analyze by placing data in the memory, thus providing additional error correction capabilities. Modified algorithmic methodology helps to correct burst errors than the existing method. Additionally, It helps to accelerate the decoding and effectively reduced the area and memory occupied by the present MLDD, than the previously proposed algorithms for DS codes. It has been applied to the scheme presented. Thus the results show that the method is also effective in reducing the decoding time, area, memory and delay when MCUs are present. The proposed scheme has been validated by simulation using a large number of error combinations and implemented to evaluate its cost in terms of circuit area and speed.
VII.ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author would like to thank Caliber Embedded Technologies India Pvt Ltd for their Valuable support.www.calibertech.net
REFERENCES
[1]. I. S. Reed, “A class of multiple-error-correcting codes and the decoding Scheme,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. IT-4, pp. 38–49, 1954
[2]. J. L. Massey, Threshold Decoding. Cambridge, MA: M IT Press, 1963.
[3]. E. J. Weldon Jr., “Difference-set cyclic codes,” Bell System Tech. J.,vol. 45, pp. 1045–1055, 1966
[4]. C. W. Slay man, “Cache and memory error detection, correction, and reduction techniques for terrestrial servers

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:45:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2014 2nd International Conference on Devices, Circuits and Systems (ICDCS)

6

and workstations,” IEEE Trans. Device Mater. Reliabil. , vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 397–404, Sep. 2005 [5]. H. Naeimi and A. DeHon, “Fault secure encoder and decoder for NanoMemory applications,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr.(VLSI) Syst. , vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 473–486, Apr. 2009 [6]. G.Torrens,B.Alorda,S.Barceló,J.L.Rosselló,S.A.Bota,andJSe gura, “Design hardening of nanometre SRAMs through transistor width modulation and multi- combination,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 280– 284, Apr. 2010 [7]. E. Ibe, H. Taniguchi, Y. Yahagi, K. Shimbo, and T. Toba, “Impact of scaling on neutron-induced soft error rate in SRAMs from a 250 nm to a22nmdesignrule,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 1527–1538, Jul. 2010. [8]. S. Liu, P. Rev iriego, and J. A. Maestro, “Efficient Majority logic fault detection with difference-set codes f or memory applications,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst. , vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 148–156, Jan. 2012. [9]. Multiple Cell Upset Correction in Memories Using Difference Set Codes by Pedro Reverie, Member, IEEE, Mark F. Flanagan, Senior Member, IEEE, Shih-Fu Liu, and Juan Antonio Maestro, Member, IEEE, Jun 2012

BIOGRAPHY

S.Baskar completed his Master of

engineering in VLSI Design from

S.N.S

College

of

Technology,Coimbatore, India. He

also worked in Ramakrishna College

of engineering and technology as

aTechnical Trainer and Dell

portables as a hardware Engineer for

more than 2 years. He obtained his

Bachelor of engineering in E.C.E from S.N.S college of

Technology, Coimbatore, India in 2009. He has published

various papers in National, International conferences and

International Journal. His areas of interest are on

Networking, Memory design, Coding theories, FPGA

architecture design, Error detection and correction

methodologies.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:45:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

