Optimal Communication Scheduling for Iterative Decoding of Irregular Codes

Hrishikesh Sharma TCS Innovation Labs Tata Consultancy Services Ltd. Email: hrishikesh.sharma@tcs.com

S. Sivasubramanian Department of Mathematics Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay Email: krishnan@math.iitb.ac.in

S. Patkar Department of Electrical Engineering Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay
Email: patkar@ee.iitb.ac.in

Abstract—Many important and newer classes of errorcorrection codes, such as LDPC, expander, repeat-accumulate or polar codes have a bipartite graph representation of their computation. Decoders for such codes are practically implemented using iterative decoding over such bipartite graphs. The iterative decoding progresses as per various communication schedules between the nodes on both sides of the graph. The schedules are designed to be optimal typically in the latency or the throughput of decoding process. Designing optimal schedules for irregular or partial regular codes, which have found way in communication standards such as DVB-S2 and WiMAX, is a challenging problem. In our work, we have tried to design VLSI decoding schemes having optimal communication schedule for such codes. We employed edge-coloring based greedy approach for communication scheduling during the decoding process for such codes. The communication throughput of such decoder systems is provably optimal. As such, it is well-known that the irregular-graph based codes can asymptotically achieve the Shannon limit on erasure channels. Hence we are hopeful that irregular graphs will be used in many other practical error correction systems in future, for which usage of such optimal communication scheduling will lead to efficient design of decoders.
Index Terms—Iterative Decoding, Tanner Graph, Edge Coloring.
I. INTRODUCTION
M OST of the recent research on error-correction codes have focused on graph codes having a Tanner graph representation. Tanner graphs are bipartite graphs in which nodes on one side represent the code symbols, and nodes on other side represent constraints on various subsets of such symbols. Some such classes of recent codes are LDPC, irregular repeat-accumulate, expander and polar codes [1].
Algebraic construction of codes has been a popular practice in the area of coding theory. Using one such construction, bipartite graphs having good useful properties such as lower girth can be constructed. Most of the decoder designs reported in past have also used regular bipartite graphs [2]. The symmetries and regularity of graph is exploited to make the partitioning and scheduling of system design easier. However, [3] established that irregular LDPC codes can achieve Shannon capacity on BEC channels. The result was later extended to other channel models. Since then, there has been enough
978-1-4799-2361-8/14/$31.00 c 2014 IEEE

research on design of irregular, or partially-regular LDPC codes. In fact, the codes used in a digital transmission standard deployed world-wide, WiMax (IEEE 802.16), use partially irregular graphs [4], as does video broadcast standard DVB-S2 [5]. An extension proposed to IEEE 802.11 also uses LDPC codes [6].
Though there have been other decoding algorithms designed for various objectives [7], [8], iterative decoding of coded stream of symbols, based on bipartite graph representation, has been the most popular decoding schedule, due to its simplicity [9]. In iterative scheduling, some or all nodes of one side of the bipartite graph do their respective computation, pass on the output to the nodes on the other side, after which the some or all nodes of the other side of the graph perform their computation. This iteration repeats till the code is decoded, or maximum no. of iterations (stopping criterion) is over. The scheduling of communication in iterative decoding is an important problem, since it affects the rate of convergence of the iterative decoding process. Many schedules such as flooding and shuffle scheduling have been designed for this purpose [10]. The convergence rate impacts the throughput, and hence most efficient decoder designs have targeted throughput as the optimization objective. Some designs have also targeted latency as their optimization objective, such as [8].
The bi-adjacency matrix of Tanner graph representations is popularly known as the parity-check matrix in the coding theory community. The parity-check matrix of codes used in WiMax IEEE 802.16e use partially irregular graphs in the sense that various blocks of their parity check matrix, H, are regular, but all such blocks put together make the overall matrix irregular. Expecting more such structures to be deployed in future [11], [12], one of the interesting problems then to be solved is concrete scheduling of iterative parallel computation having abstract flooding schedule (defined later) over an unbalanced, irregular bipartite graph, with the objective of minimizing the schedule length (latency), per iteration. In this paper, we present a graph-theoretic solution to this optimization problem. In fact, we have used graph theory and combinatorics in many efficient VLSI system designs [13], [14].
This paper extends our earlier work on regular codes

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:46:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

that is presented in [15]. Among other related works, [16] addresses optimized design of a decoder architecture for irregular codes, but employes architectural elements specific to GPUs in the design. [17] also considers optimized design for irregular (LDPC) codes, but focuses on optimization of taskto-processor mapping instead. [6] focuses on doing optimized design to specific configurations of codes defined in 802.11e standard. [18], [19] focus on presenting a specific class of irregular LDPC codes that have efficient hardware design, while our work is applies to general class of irregular codes.
In the remaining paper, we start with presenting the problem model in next section, which leads to the definition of the problem in section III. A concise but more formal characterization of problem is presented in section IV, after which we present the detailed proofs involved in our solution in section V. We then briefly discuss about a generalization in section VI, before concluding the paper.
II. PROBLEM MODEL
As mentioned earlier, the codes of interest are represented using a bipartite graph representation called Tanner graph. A Tanner graph is simply a connected bipartite graph, as shown in Fig. 1. For our work, it is assumed to be unbalanced, and irregular. A practical Tanner graph always has cycles of some girth, though this property is irrelevant to the optimization problem being considered. The computations are scheduled on individual vertices of this graph in some order. The input data for each computation scheduled on a vertex is taken from the edges incident on the vertex. The output data arising out of computation is sent out on each edge incident on the vertex. From a vertex point of view, the data communicated by neighbor vertices as its inputs arrives on all incident edges, and similarly the output data is sent out on the same set of all incident edges of the vertex, after computations on the vertex. The minimum necessary-to-satisfy precedence conditions for such scheduling of computation over the bipartite graph is that the computation over vertices on one side of graph be scheduled and completed first, before computation over vertices on the other side of graph can be scheduled. Such class of schedules are generally known as flooding schedules [10]. Also imperative from this is the point that at any point of time, data can flow in only one direction over a particular edge.
Fig. 1: An Example Irregular Tanner Graph

Since we are interested in VLSI design, we assume that the entire schedule that we intend to derive is clock-synchronous, which includes the computation as well as communication aspects. This implies that the overall schedule, including the parallel parts of it, can be clearly laid down as a partial order. Further, we assume that the computation takes multiple clock cycles, and so does communication, as is practically always true. For ease of explanation, we initially assume assume that all computations scheduled in whichever way over vertices on either side of bipartite graph take identical number of clock cycles, within their group. Across the two groups/parts, the number of cycles taken can differ. Similarly, we assume that during communication of data traffic from one side of graph to the other, identical number of cycles are taken in each direction of communication, though these numbers may be different for either direction. All these assumptions are practically true for most iterative decoding computations. For an irregular bipartite graph, each vertex computation has to operate upon different number of inputs before producing the output, and hence can practically take different amount of clock cycles. However, classical techniques in parallel computing, such as barrier synchronization, can be taken to coerce all sub-computations in each epoch of time to take same number of clock cycles, as is shown in [20].
III. PROBLEM DEFINITION
For the problem model outlined above, the constrained schedule optimization problem can be laid down as follows. We focus on optimally scheduling the communication phases during each iteration only, for reasons discussed later in this section. Any practical irregular Tanner graph is expected to have vertices of order of 104, and the minimum vertex degree (δmin) of order of 102. The optimization objective is the lowest number of clock cycles taken to complete the communication of all outputs of computations scheduled on vertices on one side of bipartite graph, to vertices on the other side.
In any practical design, storage elements are present at both the inputs and outputs of each type of node, and we assume that. The commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS) available VLSI block memory is mostly constrained to a two-port restriction, and we assume this to be true. This gives rise to the two constraints on communication scheduling over this network: the destination vertex to which some data is to be communicated, can store exactly 2 data items (serve only 2 edges) at a time (during a clock cycle). The second constraint is the similar constraint on various source vertices, that supply data for communication.
A third constraint is obvious one: that flooding schedule has to be obeyed at an abstract level. That is, vertices on one side of the bipartite graph compute in parallel first, transfer the output to vertices on the other side of the graph, before these vertices do their computation in parallel, and transfer back the output data to first set of vertices. The sequence repeats, albeit with different data values being computed and communicated in each iteration. Since we focus on optimizing

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:46:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

individual communication phases, we can ignore this global constraint.
The two things that are abstracted out from the problem model is the nature of computations done on each vertex, as well as the nature of data (constant data, or variable quantized data etc). We disregard the computations, since optimizing them is mostly a concern of system micro-architecture design.

IV. AN ILP FORMULATION OF THE PROBLEM
An mixed integer-linear program formulation of an optimization problem, referenced later, is as follows. Let the given problem graph model be a directed bipartite graph BG(S, D, E), having edge set E. All of its edges have orientation from S to D. The idea is to obtain a decomposition of edge set of the graph ϕ, i.e. BG ≡ {ϕ1, ϕ2, . . . , ϕL}, satisfying certain constraints and minimizing an objective function. The constraints that we impose are quite different from constraints imposed on classical variations of graph partitioning problem. Let the edge set in a particular subgraph, ϕi be denoted by Eϕi . Impose any order on this set of subgraphs, to make it a sequence. Each block of partition is then supposed to be scheduled in one machine cycle. An Integer Linear Program formulation of the above problem having four constraints, is based on definitions of following two variables.
For the formulation, we introduce a 1/0 boolean variable s(j, k), which represents scheduling of an edge in a particular cycle. The variable is set to 1 if jth edge gets scheduled in kth cycle, or to 0 otherwise.
We also introduce two boolean constants. The first constant, I(j, d) represents the incidence of an edge on a destination node. Given a specification graph, I(j, d) is 1 if d is the head of edge j, or 0 otherwise. The second constant, I (j, s) represents the incidence of an edge on a source node. The constant is 1 if s is the tail of edge j, or 0 otherwise.
The optimization problem may now be defined as follows. Given a directed bipartite graph BG(S, D), having edge set E, in which direction of all edges is from partition block S to D,

minimize The cost of edge decomposition of the graph, ϕ, ≡
{ϕ1, ϕ2, . . . , ϕL}, as measured by its size L subject to

L
∀ j : s(j, t) = 1
t=1

(each edge is scheduled once)

partition)

(each edge belongs to one block of

∀ l, d : I(j, d)·s(j, l) ≤ 2
j
(each destination node d can schedule only upto 2 edges in a cycle l)

∀ l, s : I (j, s)·s(j, l) ≤ 2
j
(each source node s can schedule only upto 2 edges in a cycle l)
The problem can also be transformed into formal scheduling theory problem, in terms of jobs, machines, scheduling constraints and optimization objective. Since that formulation is not used in this paper, interested readers can find that formulation in [20].
Certain works, which are close to the problem we are trying to tackle, were found in the areas of super-computing, and surprisingly, satellite communication. All the corresponding problems, reported again in [20], had same optimization objective: to minimize the communication time, in terms of certain units (time slots/cycles) etc. The corresponding problems all have NP-hard formulation, and hence only lead to approximate solutions. We provide a better, exact solution next.
V. SOLUTION
We exactly solve the problem now by optimally decomposing an irregular bipartite graph into 2-matchings. 2-matchings are defined in the next section. In order to model possible practicalities, we first developed a mixed-ILP model. However, it turns out that polytope corresponding to the problem’s linear constraints form a integral polyhedron. The optimal decomposition is achieved by performing minimal edge-coloring of an arbitrary bipartite graph. Before we discuss more details, the concept of B-matchings needs to be introduced.
A. B-matchings
B-matchings are well-investigated in combinatorial optimization, in context of network flow problems [21]. A popular extremal case of B-matchings, where edge capacities are ∞ and each edge has unit flow, leads to the following definition.
Definition 1. A B-matching in a graph is the maximum-sized subgraph such that the degree of each vertex is at most B. Further specialization of this definition for bipartite graphs is straightforward.
We now prove that a decomposition of an irregular bipartite graph into 2-matchings can be used to optimally schedule the graph, as per the scheduling constraints.
Theorem 1. If a bipartite graph can be decomposed into 2matchings, then the decomposition satisfies all the constraints of the ILP formulation of the graph decomposition problem, described in section IV.
Proof: Because of the fact that we decompose the graph into matching, each edge participates in exactly one matching. Hence it gets scheduled exactly once, whenever that matching is scheduled (constraint 1).
Also, because of decomposition into matching, each edge belongs to exactly one partition of the edge set (constraint 2).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:46:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Each block of the edge set partition being a 2-matching, by the very definition of 2-matchings, upto 2 edges are incident on each node of the graph (constraints 3 and 4).
This theorem thus lays the direction in which the solution must be found.
B. Optimal Edge-coloring of a Bipartite Graph
An edge coloring of a graph is an assignment of “colors” to the edges of the graph so that no two adjacent edges have the same color. A proper edge coloring with k colors is called a (proper) k-edge-coloring. We will represent the edgechromatic index of a graph BG with χ(BG). The relation of edge-coloring with matchings is provided by the following theorem.
Theorem 2. (Minimal) Edge coloring of a graph leads to (minimal) decomposition of the graph into disjoint 1matchings, and vice-versa.
Proof: By definition of edge coloring, two edges incident on the same node cannot have the same color. Hence, if we pick one color, and construct the set of of edges that have this color in an edge-colored graph, no two edges in this set will be incident on the same node. But such a set of edges, per color, is what is defined as a matching. Since each such edge subset is characterized by one color, and each edge in the overall set of colored edges can have exactly one color, no edge ever participates in more than one such grouping of edges. Hence, such matchings are disjoint. Since we try to use minimal number of colors, we are also decomposing the graph simultaneously into minimal number of disjoint matchings at the same time.
The converse of this statement can be proved in similar straightforward way.
The problem of finding minimum number of colors to edgecolor a simple graph is known to be NP-complete. However, for bipartite graphs, it is straightforward to prove that the edgechromatic index is equal to ∆max (χ(BG) = ∆max), where ∆max is the maximum degree of some node in the bipartite graph BG.
Correspondingly, many polynomial-time algorithms exist [22], which can create an edge-coloring with these many colors. One can look at various surveys of such algorithms for details. The computational complexities of these algorithms differ, with the minimum being O(E log D) currently [22], where E is the number of edges and D is the maximum degree of any node in the graph.

Once we have a minimal edge-coloring available for some bipartite graph, forming 2-matching is simple. Since edgecoloring decomposes the graph into edge-disjoint subgraphs, we simply take union of two such subgraphs (represented by two different colors), and form a 2-matching. Thus, we will have overall ∆max/2 2-matchings at the end of such unions. Again, it is straightforward to prove that this is exactly the minimum number of 2-matchings that can exist in any bipartite graph.
Algorithm 1 Algorithm to Partition Edge Set of Bipartite Graph into 2-matchings
Perform an Edge coloring of input bipartite graph using any known algorithm. for all Remaining colors in the set of colors used in coloring do
Pick any two colors Group all edges having either of these two colors into another 2-matching Remove the edges from the input graph Remove the colors from the set of colors used in coloring end for
The algorithm corresponding to above procedure is described in algorithm 1.
D. Implementation and Results
The algorithm evolved is an exact algorithm, and is provably right. Hence we used it directly for our decoder design work, without requiring any simulations for establishing its effectiveness. We implemented a simple python utility which uses an algorithm suggested by Alon [23]. For illustration, we use sample irregular bipartite graph illustrated in Fig. 1. The output of the utility is its scheduled version, which is shown in Fig. 2. The RTL models of the decoder, upon simulation, did not throw up any stall cycles during communication, as is expected from our conflict-free scheduling.

C. Using Edge-coloring to construct 2-matchings in a Bipartite Graph
We earlier proved in theorem 1 that a decomposition of a bipartite graph into 2-matchings can be used to optimally schedule an irregular bipartite graph, as per the scheduling constraints. Further by the equivalence defined in theorem 2, we can conclude that an edge-coloring should also be able to optimally schedule an irregular bipartite graph. This is done by employing edge-coloring to construct 2-matchings.

Fig. 2: A Scheduled version of the Unscheduled Graph in Fig. 1
VI. EDGE-COLORING APPROACH TO GENERALIZATION OF KARMARKAR’S PRIMITIVES
Using the same approach, we solved another related problem that deals with optimizing communication in a system

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:46:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

again represented by a bipartite graph. The said bipartite graph is a balanced, regular bipartite graph, used in design of decoder in [15]. In that design, we had used two scheduling constructs called the perfect access pattern and perfect access sequence by Karmarkar [24]. These constructs are conflict-free memory access primitives, and an attempt was made to generalize these constructs while preserving the conflict-freedom property. The details of generalization can be found in [20].
VII. CONCLUSION
We have come up with a new algorithm to partition an irregular bipartite graph into 2-matchings. Such graphs arise in context of many important and newer classes of errorcorrection codes, such as LDPC, expander, IRA or polar codes. In fact, the algorithm can be straightaway extended to protograph codes as well. The decoding of such codes using iterative methods entails edge-partitioning of the graph, for scheduling purposes. Our partitioning and scheduling method targets to minimize the communication latency for the flooding schedule of an iteration, towards a VLSI implementation. The method employs edge-coloring based greedy approach for generation of partition. The communication throughput of such decoder systems is provably optimal.
One of the possible generalization and future work is to extend the problem model to incorporate shuffle scheduling [10]. Shuffle scheduling leads to faster convergence of the iterative computation, in which subsets of vertices on either side participate in communication in every iteration. These subsets are generally different in every iteration. Same optimization objective, with modified constraints, can be used to formulate the scheduling problem. Another possible generalization is to partition each vertex’s edge set independently; which is a NPhard problem. Such partitioning could be of help in VLSI designs such as in [17], where irregular sized graph partitions are mapped onto processors which need to be load-balanced.
Irregular-graph based codes can asymptotically achieve the Shannon limit on erasure channels, which is a desirable property. They have also found their way into communication standards such as DVB-S2 and IEEE 802.16. Hence usage of our partitioning and scheduling method, having optimal communication scheduling, can potentially lead to efficient design of corresponding decoders.
REFERENCES
[1] T. Hoholdt and J. Justensen, “Graph Codes with Reed-Solomon Component Codes,” International Symposium on Information Theory, pp. 2022–2026, 2006.
[2] V. Guruswami, “Iterative Decoding of Low-Density Parity Check Codes,” in Bulletin of the European Association for Theoretical Computer Science, 2006.

[3] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, “Improved Low-density Parity-check Codes using Irregular Graphs,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 585–598, 2001.
[4] K. Gunnam, G. Choi, M. Yeary, and M. Atiquzzaman, “VLSI Architectures for Layered Decoding for Irregular LDPC Codes of WiMax,” in IEEE International Conference on Communications, 2007, pp. 4542 –4547.
[5] EN 302 307: Second generation framing structure, channel coding and modulation systems for Broadcasting, Interactive Services, News Gathering and other broadband satellite applications, ETSI, April 2005.
[6] M. Karkooti, P. Radosavljevic, and J. Cavallaro, “Configurable, High Throughput, Irregular LDPC Decoder Architecture: Tradeoff Analysis and Implementation,” in International Conference on Application-specific Systems, Architectures and Processors, 2006.
[7] E. Sharon, S. Litsyn, and J. Goldberger, “Convergence Analysis of Serial Message-Passing Schedules for LDPC Decoding,” in International Symposium on Turbo Codes Related Topics, 2006, pp. 1–6.
[8] D. Blackmer, F. Schwaner, and A. Abedi, “Non Iterative Decoding of Low Density Parity Check Codes Using Artificial Neural Networks,” in International Conference on Wireless Networks, 2011, pp. 355–359.
[9] J. Li, Y. Guo, and M.-H. Lee, “Iterative decoding algorithm in the Turbo, LDPC, Polar codes,” in IEEE International Conference on Communication Technology, 2010, pp. 1453–1456.
[10] F. Guilloud, “Generic Architecture for LDPC Codes Decoding,” Ph.D. dissertation, ENST Paris, 2004.
[11] J. Rosenthal and A. Sutton, “Design of Irregular Graphs for Erasure Decoding,” in International Symposium on the Mathematical Theory of Networks and Systems, 2008.
[12] Z. Wang, VLSI. Intech Publishers, 2010. [13] H. Sharma and S. Patkar, “A Design Methodology for Folded, Pipelined
Architectures in VLSI Applications using Projective Space Lattices,” In Press, Elsevier Journal of Microprocessors and Microsystems, 2014. [14] S. Choudhary, H. Sharma, and S. Patkar, “Optimal Folding of Data Flow Graphs based on Projective Geometry,” In Press, World Scientific Journal of Discrete Mathematics, Algorithms and Applications, 2013. [15] H. Sharma, S. Das, R. R. Raut, and S. Patkar, “High Throughput Memory-efficient VLSI Designs for Structured LDPC Decoding,” in International Conference on Pervasive and Embedded Computing and Communication Systems, 2011. [16] T. Chiu, H. Kuo, and B. Lai, “A Highly Parallel Design for Irregular LDPC Decoding on GPGPUs,” in Asia-Pacific Signal Information Processing Association Annual Summit and Conference, 2012. [17] S. Yazdi, C.-H. Huang, and L. Dolecek, “Optimal Design of a Gallager B Noisy Decoder for Irregular LDPC Codes,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 16, no. 12, pp. 2052–2055, 2012. [18] F. Kienle, T. Brack, and N. Wehn, “Design of irregular LDPC Codes for flexible Encoder and Decoder Hardware Realization,” in International Conference on Software in Telecommunications and Computer Networks, 2006, pp. 296–300. [19] K. Zhang, X. Huang, and Z. Wang, “High-throughput Layered Decoder implementation for Quasi-cyclic LDPC Codes,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, pp. 985–994, 2009. [20] H. Sharma, “Exploration of Projective Geometry-based New Communication Methods for Many-core VLSI Systems,” Ph.D. dissertation, Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay, India, 2012. [21] B. Korte and J. Vygen, Combinatorial Optimization: Theory and Algorithms. Springer Verlag, 2009. [22] R. Cole, K. Ost, and S. Schirra, “Edge-Coloring Bipartite Multigraphs in O(ElogD) Time,” Combinatorica, vol. 21, pp. 5–12, 2001. [23] N. Alon, “A simple algorithm for edge-coloring bipartite multigraphs,” ACM Journal on Inf. Process. Lett., vol. 85, no. 6, pp. 301–302, Mar. 2003. [24] N. Karmarkar, “A new Parallel Architecture for Sparse Matrix Computation based on Finite Projective Geometries,” in ACM/IEEE Conference on Supercomputing. ACM, 1991, pp. 358–369.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:46:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

