An Improved Puncturing Method for
Rate-compatible LDPC Codes
Kuntal Deka, A. Rajesh and P. K. Bora
Department of Electronics and Electrical Engineering,
Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati – 781039, India.
E-mail: {kuntal, rajesha, prabin}@iitg.ernet.in
Abstract—This paper presents an improvement of a
puncturing technique for rate-compatible low density par-
ity check (LDPC) codes originally proposed by Asvadi and
Banihashemi. In the original technique, the puncturing
bits are selected by progressively reducing the search
space according to a certain sequence of criteria. The last
criterion is based on the ACE (approximate cycle extrinsic
message degree) values of the short cycles present in the
Tanner graph of the code. In this paper, we propose to
substitute the last criterion with one which is based on the
absorbing sets of the code. Simulation results show that
this scheme improves the performance compared to the
original and some other scheme available in the literature.
Index Terms—Low density parity check (LDPC) codes,
rate-compatible, cycles, ACE, EMD, trapping sets, absorb-
ing sets, fully absorbing sets.
I. INTRODUCTION
In wireless communication systems with fading, the
channel condition varies frequently with time. In such
situations, adhering to a fix-rate code results in un-
necessary consumption of power without producing
any useful improvement in performance. Whenever the
channel improves, the data should be transmitted with
less number of parity bits. Rate-compatible (RC) error
correcting codes become useful in such situations. An
RC code family is a set of codes with different rates
where a higher-rate code is embedded into the lower-
rate codes. This, in turn, enables the coding system to
conveniently adapt to the varying channel conditions.
RC codes can be obtained by various schemes like
puncturing, extending or a hybrid of puncturing and
extending. However, over the years, puncturing has
been preferably used for devising RC schemes. In the
puncturing scheme, first a low rate code known as
mother code is considered and then various carefully
selected bits are punctured to obtain higher-rate codes.
The punctured parity bits in a lower rate form a subset of
punctured parity bits of a higher rate code. The challenge
in designing such puncturing patterns is to guarantee
good performance for diverse rates.
Low density density parity check (LDPC) codes [1]
are one of the most popular modern graph based error
control codes. The LDPC codes have sparse parity check
matrices and approach capacity when decoded by less-
complex iterative decoding algorithms. However, like
other iterative codes such as turbo codes, LDPC codes
suffer from the error floor problem. The Bit Error
Rate (BER) and the Frame Error Rate (FER) curves
for such codes show a sudden decrease in the slope
that occurs at moderate to high signal-to-noise ratios
(SNR). This flattening of the error curves stands as
a limiting factor for the successful implementation of
several LDPC codes in practical systems.
The error floor problem of LDPC codes is caused by
some peculiar substructures of the parity check matrix.
Depending upon the channel and the way of analysis,
different authors have come up with different names
for these substructures. For the binary erasure channel
(BEC), the cause of error floor is ascribed to the stopping
sets [2]. For the other channels like the binary symmetric
channel (BSC) and the additive white Gaussian noise
(AWGN) channel, the concept of stopping set is replaced
by that of the trapping set (TS) [3]. Zhang et al. [4] have
come up with the notion of a subset of the trapping
sets known as absorbing sets (ASs). The absorbing sets
are properly combinatoric in nature and found to be the
most detrimental. It is well known that these detrimental
subgraphs contain one or more small cycles. A large
number of construction methods have been proposed so
far to eliminate harmful small cycles. Hu et al. proposed
the progressive edge-growth (PEG) construction method
which maximizes the local girth at the variable nodes
(VNs) on an edge by edge basis [5]. Tian et al. [6] have
shown that all the cycles of the same length are not
equally harmful. It is emphasized that the connectivity
of the cycles is also crucial besides the length for the
error-floor performance. To quantify the connectivity of
a cycle, the authors have proposed the notion of EMD
978-1-4799-2361-8/14/$31.00 c⃝2014 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:45:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
(Extrinsic Message Degree). An approximate measure
of EMD, i.e., ACE (Approximate Cycle EMD) is also
devised in order to easily compute the EMD of a cycle.
RC puncturing schemes have been studied extensively
for finite-length LDPC codes [7, 8, 9, 10]. In [7], the
authors proposed grouping and sorting algorithms to
select the puncturing bits. The grouping algorithm par-
titions the VNs into various groups. Then, within each
group, the order for puncturing pattern is determined
with the help of the sorting algorithm. In [8], the authors
have used a scheme with the objective of keeping the
punctured bits far apart from each other in the Tanner
graph. In [9], the authors have fixed the order of the
puncturing bits by evaluating a cost function based on
different criteria. They have also proposed a stopping
set check algorithm to ensure that the punctured bits do
not form stopping sets. Asvadi and Banihashemi [10]
have considered the criterion of the ACE values of the
small cycles in addition to some other criteria similar
to those of [9]. However, for some codes, specifically
the regular ones having no degree-2 VNs, the ACE is
often not equal to the EMD and hence does not reflect
the detrimental effect of the cycles correctly. In such
situations, the ASs truly correspond to the performance
of the codes in the high SNR region. In this paper, we
propose an improved version of the algorithm in [10],
by considering the criterion of AS instead of ACE.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section
II provides some definitions to be used in the remaining
part of the paper. In Section III, the basic steps of the
algorithm in [10] are outlined followed by the proposed
puncturing scheme. Section IV presents simulation re-
sults and Section V concludes the paper.
II. PRELIMINARIES
In this section we review some basic concepts re-
quired for further analysis. Section II-A will give a brief
overview of the concepts related to EMD (Extrinsic
Message Degree), ACE and ACE score spectrum. In
Section II-B, we give the definition of a TS and an AS.
Section II-C discusses some concepts and notations used
in the study of RC LDPC codes.
A. EMD, ACE and ACE Score Spectrum
In order to measure the connectivity of the cycles,
Tian et al. [6] have coined the concept of EMD as
discussed below.
Definition 1: EMD (Extrinsic Message Degree):
Let the set of VNs present in a cycle 𝐶be 𝑉𝐶. Then
the EMD of 𝐶is the total number of check nodes (CNs)
which are singly connected to 𝑉𝐶.
For example, consider the cycles shown in Figure 1.
The number of singly connected CNs to the VNs in the
cycle shown in Figure 1(a) is 4. Hence, the EMD of this
cycle is 4. On the other hand, the EMD of the cycle in
Figure 1(b) is 2.
(a) EMD=4, ACE=4
(b) EMD=2, ACE=4
Fig. 1: Two cycles of length 8
If the EMD of a cycle is low, the cycle will be highly
isolated from the rest of the Tanner graph. In that case, if
all the messages flowing inside the cycle are erroneous,
then the other correct messages in the rest of the graph
will not be able to communicate properly because of the
scarcity of external connections. So, the lower the EMD,
the more is the harmfulness of the cycle.
To calculate the EMD of a cycle 𝐶, we have to exam-
ine the subgraph induced by 𝑉𝐶. However, if we assume
that no VNs in 𝑉𝐶share common CN outside 𝐶, then
EMD can be easily calculated by merely considering the
degrees of the VNs in 𝑉𝐶. This approximate cycle EMD
is explained in the following.
Definition 2: ACE
(Approximate
Cycle
Extrinsic
Message Degree):
The ACE of a cycle 𝐶2𝑖of length 2𝑖is given by
ACE (𝐶2𝑖) =
𝑖
∑
𝑘=1
(𝑑𝑣𝑘−2)
(1)
where 𝑑𝑣𝑘is the degree of the VN 𝑣𝑘and the summation
is over all the VNs in the cycle.
For illustration, consider again the cycle shown in
Figure 1. The ACE of both the cycles is 4. It should
be noted that, although, ACE is used as a substitute for
EMD, sometimes, they may not be equal. For example,
the EMD of the cycle in Figure 1(b) is 2 whereas its
ACE is 4.
For the finite length LDPC codes, the short cycles
with low ACE degrade the performance of the iterative
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:45:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
decoders. In order to quantify the vulnerability of a
particular VN involved in short cycles with low ACE,
the authors [10], have coined the concept of ACE score
spectrum as defined below.
Definition 3: The ACE score spectrum S𝑣
𝜂max (𝑙max)
lists the number of cycles of length up to 𝑙max
with ACE values less than or equal to 𝜂max where
the VN 𝑣participates. It is given by 𝑙max/2-tuple
(
𝑆𝑣
𝜂max (2) , 𝑆𝑣
𝜂max (4) , ⋅⋅⋅, 𝑆𝑣
𝜂max (𝑙max)
)
,
where
𝑆𝑣
𝜂max (𝑙) denotes the number of cycles containing 𝑣
with length 𝑙and the maximum ACE value of 𝜂max.
The vulnerabilities of two VNs to channel noise can
be compared using ACE score spectrum. It is well
known that the shorter cycles, in general, are more
harmful. Thus, more importance should be given to the
components of the ACE score spectrum corresponding
to the shorter cycles. A VN 𝑣1 can be considered less
vulnerable to noise than another VN 𝑣2 if
𝑆𝑣1
𝜂max (2) < 𝑆𝑣2
𝜂max (2)
or
∃2 < 𝑙⩽𝑙max : 𝑆𝑣1
𝜂max (𝑙) < 𝑆𝑣2
𝜂max (𝑙) and
𝑆𝑣1
𝜂max (𝑙′) = 𝑆𝑣2
𝜂max (𝑙′) ∀𝑙′ < 𝑙
(2)
B. Trapping Set (TS) and Absorbing Set (AS)
The definition of a TS is given below.
Definition 4: An (𝑎, 𝑏) trapping set is a set 𝑆of ‘𝑎’
VNs which induces a subgraph with ‘𝑏’ odd-degree CNs
and an arbitrary number of even-degree CNs [11].
In
Figure
2,
a
(5, 1)
TS
from
(96, 48)
code
(96.33.964) available at [12] is shown. As obvious
from Figure 2, the CNs in the TS induced subgraph
can be divided into two groups: even-degree and odd-
degree CNs. If all the bits or VNs in the subgraph are
detected incorrectly then the even-degree CNs will be
mis-satisfied and the odd-degree CNs will be unsatisfied.
During the decoding process, the mis-satisfied CNs will
56
38
2
10
25
31
34
35
39
45
12
18
91
Fig. 2: A (5,1) trapping set
send wrong-signed messages and the unsatisfied CNs
will send correct-signed messages towards the VN side.
So, if the number of unsatisfied CNs (𝑏) is very small
compared to the number of mis-satisfied CNs, then a
large number of incorrect messages will be flowing
within the TS-induced subgraph. In that case, the de-
coder will never be able to come out of the incorrect
state even if the number of iterations is increased. In
this way, if 𝑎and 𝑏are small and all the VNs of the TS
are detected incorrectly, then it is almost impossible for
the iterative decoder to correct the decoding decisions.
The definitions of an absorbing set and a fully ab-
sorbing set are given below.
Definition 5: An (𝑎, 𝑏) trapping set 𝑆is called an
absorbing set (AS) if all the VNs in 𝑆are connected
to strictly more number of even degree CNs than odd-
degree CNs. An absorbing set 𝑆is called a fully
absorbing set (FAS) if all the other VNs not present in
𝑆are connected to strictly less number of odd-degree
CNS than any other CNs in the Tanner graph.
The (5,1) TS shown in Figure 2 is an example of AS.
To identify whether it is an FAS or not, the rest of the
Tanner graph has to be examined.
The absorbing sets are the subset of the trapping sets
and the most detrimental.
All the TSs of an LDPC code are not equally detri-
mental. For any two TSs with one parameter fixed, the
TS with a smaller value of the other parameter is more
detrimental [13]. But for any two general TSs, (𝑎1, 𝑏1)
and (𝑎2, 𝑏2) with 𝑎1 < 𝑎2 and 𝑏1 > 𝑏2, it is difficult to
pick the more harmful one. In the following, we outline
the method of comparison of the detrimental effects of
TSs for an AWGN channel presented in [14].
Let 𝑇be an (𝑎, 𝑏) TS and 𝐸𝑙
𝑇denote the event that
all the VNs of 𝑇are in error after 𝑙𝑡ℎiteration. Now
the joint probability 𝑃
(
𝐸𝐿
𝑇, 𝐸𝐿−1
𝑇
, . . . , 𝐸0
𝑇
)
for some
𝐿, can be used as a measure of harmfulness of the TS
𝑇. Different TSs can be compared by comparing their
corresponding 𝑃
(
𝐸𝐿
𝑇, 𝐸𝐿−1
𝑇
, . . . , 𝐸0
𝑇
)
values.
C. Some concepts related to rate-compatible LDPC
codes
In iterative decoding, a punctured VN is said to
recover if it receives a non-zero message from at least
one neighboring CN. On the other hand, a CN is said
to recover if all the messages from the neighboring
VNs are non-zero. The concept of recoverability can be
visualized through a graph known as recovery tree [7].
The recovery tree of a node is the shallowest tree rooted
at that node so that all the leaf nodes are unpunctured
VNs. The recovery tree has two more constraints: (1)
The children of all the CNs are included in the tree and
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:45:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
(2) the children of only the punctured VNs are included.
Figure 3 shows a recovery tree of CN, 𝑐for a (3,4)-
regular LDPC code.
CN
Punctured VN
Unpunctured VN
𝑐1
𝑐
Fig. 3: Recovery tree of the CN ‘𝑐’ for a (3,4) regular
code
We, now, briefly outline the various terminologies and
definitions used in [10].
∙The number of unpunctured VNs in a recovery tree
of a CN 𝑐is denoted by 𝑈(𝑐).
For example, in Figure 3, 𝑈(𝑐) = 24.
A punctured neighboring VN of a CN 𝑐with a
large 𝑈(𝑐), will have large probability of being
erroneously recovered [7]. Therefore, one should
consider the neighboring VNs of those CNs with
the minimum 𝑈(𝑐) for puncturing.
∙The total number of unpunctured VNs in the re-
covery trees of all the neighboring CNs of a VN 𝑣
is denoted by 𝐾(𝑣). Thus,
𝐾(𝑣) =
∑
𝑐∈𝑁(𝑣)
𝑈(𝑐)
where 𝑁(⋅) denotes the neighborhood.
Out of different candidate VNs, one should select
that VN with the minimum 𝐾(𝑣).
∙The number of punctured neighbors of a CN 𝑐is
denoted by 𝐹(𝑐). Thus
𝐹(𝑐) = ∣𝑁(𝑐) ∩𝑃∣
where 𝑃is the set of all punctured VNs.
For example, in Figure 3, 𝐹(𝑐1) = 2.
Suppose a CN 𝑐is connected to a large number
of punctured VNs. That CN will be able to send a
non-zero message to a punctured neighboring VN
only after all the other punctured neighboring VNs
are recovered. It can happen only after a certain
number of iterations as there is a large number
of neighboring VNs of 𝑐which are punctured.
Therefore, one should consider the neighboring
VNs of those CNs with the minimum 𝐹(𝑐) for
puncturing.
∙The border 𝐵(𝑣) of a VN 𝑣, is defined as the
set of all VNs which are connected to any of the
neighboring CNs of 𝑣.
∙The number of all the punctured VNs at the border
of a unpunctured VN 𝑣is denoted by 𝐻(𝑣). Thus,
𝐻(𝑣) = ∣𝐵(𝑣) ∩𝑃∣
A VN 𝑣with a smaller value of 𝐻(𝑣), will get
more number of reliable messages from the neigh-
borhood. Therefore, one should select that VN 𝑣
for puncturing having the minimum 𝐻(𝑣).
III. PROPOSED METHOD OF PUNCTURING
We propose an algorithm to select the puncturing bits
using a criterion based on the ASs of the code. This
algorithm is an improved version of the ACE-based
algorithm proposed in [10]. In the following, we review
the basic steps of that algorithm.
The authors, in [10], have considered a sequence of
criteria to progressively reduce the search space for
the selection of the puncturing positions. The process
of selecting a bit for puncturing is briefly summarized
below.
1) First, form a list Ψ
′ of the CNs having minimum
𝐹(𝑐) over all the CNs in the Tanner graph. Then,
form a smaller list Ψ of the CNs having minimum
𝑈(𝑐) over all the CNs in Ψ
′.
2) Select the list consisting of the neighboring VNs of
the CNs in Ψ which are not punctured yet as the
list of candidate VNs. Denote this list by Γ.
3) Retain only those VNs in Γ with minimum 𝐻(𝑣). If
there is only one such VN, select the corresponding
bit for puncturing and stop.
4) Retain those VNs in Γ which have minimum num-
ber of neighboring CNs. If there is only one such
VN, select the corresponding bit for puncturing and
stop.
5) Retain the VNs in Γ with minimum 𝐾(𝑣). If Γ
contains only one VN, select the corresponding bit
for puncturing and stop.
6) Compute the ACE score spectrum for all the VNs
in Γ. Select the least vulnerable VN in Γ using (2)
for puncturing and stop. If there is more than one
such VNs, select one of them randomly.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:45:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
The above process is repeated until the required
number of puncturing bits are selected.
Step (6) above considers a criterion based on the
ACE values of the short cycles. The motivation behind
this step can be explained as follows. Suppose, a VN
involved in a large number of short cycles with small
ACE values is punctured. Then the VN will be vulnera-
ble during the iterative decoding process because some
false messages may propagate and grow within the short
cycles. Therefore, the authors in [10] have proposed to
select the least vulnerable VN for puncturing. However,
the problem with this criterion is that in many situations,
the ACE of a cycle is not equal to the EMD and
in that case, the algorithm may end up with selecting
bits involved in more harmful subgraphs. This situation
occurs frequently in regular LDPC codes where there is
no degree-2 VN. For example, for the cycle in Figure
1(a) the ACE and the EMD are equal whereas, for the
one in Figure 1(b), they are not. Although the ACE of
both the cycles is the same, they are not equally harmful.
The cycle shown in Figure 1(a), with ACE not equal to
the EMD, is more harmful as it contains two sub-cycles
of smaller lengths. In such situations, ACE cannot reflect
the detrimental effect of the subgraph. We propose to
consider a criterion based on AS which is discussed in
the following.
Let 𝐴1, 𝐴2, . . . , 𝐴𝑀be the classes of dominant ASs
arranged in the decreasing order of their detrimental
effects. The detrimental effect of a AS or TS can be
evaluated by the technique proposed in [14] which has
been briefly outlined in Section II-B. Consider the list
of candidate VNs (Γ), for puncturing after the step (5)
above. The subsequent steps of the proposed scheme are
as follows.
6) a) For all 𝑣∈Γ, obtain the sets 𝐴𝑣
1, 𝐴𝑣
2, . . . , 𝐴𝑣
𝑀,
where 𝐴𝑣
𝑖is the set of ASs of class 𝐴𝑖containing
𝑣.
b) Set the current class of ASs (𝐴𝑐) to 𝐴1.
c) Retain only those VNs 𝑣in Γ for which ∣𝐴𝑣
𝑐∣is
minimum over all 𝑣∈Γ.
d) If ∣Γ∣= 1, select the VN in Γ as the puncturing
bit and stop.
e) If all the classes of ASs are examined, then select
the puncturing bit randomly from Γ and stop.
f) Set the next detrimental class of ASs as 𝐴𝑐and
go to the step 6(c).
It should be noted that the computational complexity
of finding the dominant ASs of a code is more than that
of finding the cycles. However, the dominant ASs are
found out only for the mother code and hence, it is an
one-time task. Therefore, the proposed AS-based criteria
will not computationally overburden the algorithm.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
We consider a (3,6) regular code with 𝑛= 1024, 𝑚=
512 as the mother code, where 𝑛and 𝑚respectively,
are the numbers of columns and rows of the parity
check matrix. This code has been considered in several
recent papers in the context of designing RC codes
[7, 10]. However, as this code is randomly constructed,
its properties and performance may vary with different
instances of constructions. The particular code we con-
structed for our simulation has girth 6 and rate, 𝑟= 0.5.
The codewords are binary-phase-shift-keying modulated
and transmitted over an AWGN channel. For the sum-
product decoding [15] algorithm, the maximum number
of iterations is set to 50.
TABLE I: Number of dominant fully absorbing sets of
𝑛= 1024, 𝑚= 512 regular (3,6) code obtained by the
method of [16]
Class
Number of FAS
(4,2)
4
(5,3)
101
(6,2)
6
(6,4)
1439
(7,3)
102
(8,2)
3
(8,4)
2306
(9,3)
123
(10,2)
7
(10,4)
3638
(11,3)
165
(12,2)
7
(12,4)
6248
As the FASs are the most detrimental ASs we consider
only the FASs for selecting the puncturing bits. We find
all the dominant FASs using the method proposed in
[16]. The number of different classes of FASs are shown
in Table I. The classes of dominant FASs are arranged
in the decreasing order of their detrimental effects as
(6,2), (7,3), (5,3), (8,4), (8,2), (10,2), (6,4), (9,3), (4,2),
(10,4), (12,2), (11,3) and (12,4).
The required number of bits to be punctured to get
𝑟= 0.6 code from the mother code of 𝑟= 0.5 is
⌊1024 × (0.6 −0.5) /0.6⌋= 170. These bits are se-
lected according to the proposed scheme and we obtain
a 𝑟= 0.6 code. The required number of bits to be
punctured to get 𝑟= 0.7 code from the mother code
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:45:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
10
−8
10
−7
10
−6
10
−5
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
Eb/N0 (dB)
BER
 
 
Proposed Scheme
Scheme of [10]
Mother code
Scheme of [7]
r=0.6
r=0.5
r=0.7
Fig. 4: BER performances of the rate-compatible codes
obtained from 𝑛= 1024, 𝑚= 512, (3,6) regular code
of rate 0.5
of 𝑟= 0.5 is ⌊1024 × (0.7 −0.5) /0.6⌋= 292. In RC
codes, all the bits which are punctured in a lower rate
code should be punctured in a higher rate code also.
Hence, the remaining number of punctured bits to be
selected are 292 −170 = 122. After identifying these
bits we obtain a 𝑟= 0.7 code. The BER performances of
the codes obtained by the proposed technique are shown
in Figure 4. For the comparison purpose, we plot the
BER curves for the methods proposed in [7] and [10].
It can be observed that the proposed technique yields
better results specifically in the high SNR region.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we proposed a scheme to select the
puncturing bits for RC LDPC codes. This scheme selects
those bits which are involved in less number of domi-
nant absorbing sets. Simulation results are shown for a
commonly-studied code which confirmed the improve-
ment in the error rate performances for various rates in
the high SNR region. Future works include studying the
performance of the proposed puncturing scheme for the
irregular codes.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes.
Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. Telatar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke,
“Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on
the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Transactions on Information
Theory,, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570 –1579, June 2002.
[3] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Annu.
Allerton Conf. Communications, Control, and Computing, 2003.
[4] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam, and M. Wain-
wright, “Lowering LDPC Error Floors by Postprocessing,”
in IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, 2008. IEEE
GLOBECOM 2008., 30 2008-Dec. 4 2008, pp. 1 –6.
[5] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. Arnold, “Regular and irregular
progressive edge-growth tanner graphs,” IEEE Transactions on
Information Theory,, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386 –398, Jan. 2005.
[6] T. Tian, C. Jones, J. Villasenor, and R. Wesel, “Selective
avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPC code construction,” IEEE
Transactions on Communications,, vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1242 –
1247, Aug. 2004.
[7] J. Ha, J. Kim, D. Klinc, and S. McLaughlin, “Rate-compatible
punctured low-density parity-check codes with short block
lengths,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory,, vol. 52,
no. 2, pp. 728–738, 2006.
[8] B. Vellambi and F. Fekri, “Finite-length rate-compatible LDPC
codes: a novel puncturing scheme ,” IEEE Transactions on
Communications,, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 297–301, 2009.
[9] H. Y. Park, J. W. Kang, K. S. Kim, and K.-C. Whang, “Efficient
Puncturing Method for Rate-Compatible Low-Density Parity-
Check Codes,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications,,
vol. 6, no. 11, pp. 3914–3919, 2007.
[10] R. Asvadi and A. Banihashemi, “A Rate-Compatible Puncturing
Scheme for Finite-Length LDPC Codes,” IEEE Communications
Letters,, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 147–150, 2013.
[11] Y. Han and W. Ryan, “Low-floor decoders for LDPC codes,”
IEEE Transactions on Communications,, vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1663
–1673, June 2009.
[12] D. Mackay, Encyclopedia of Sparse Graph Codes, [Online]
http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.
[13] C. Schlegel and S. Zhang, “On the Dynamics of the Error Floor
Behavior in (Regular) LDPC Codes,” IEEE Transactions on
Information Theory,, vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 3248 –3264, Jul. 2010.
[14] K. Deka, A. Rajesh, and P. Bora, “Comparison of the Detri-
mental Effects of Trapping Sets in LDPC Codes,” in 2011 IEEE
International Conference on Communications (ICC),, June 2011.
[15] F. Kschischang, B. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and
the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Transactions on Information
Theory,, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498 –519, Feb 2001.
[16] K. Deka, A. Rajesh, and P. Bora, “An Improved Technique
to Find the Trapping Sets of the Irregular LDPC Codes,” in
National Conference on Communications (NCC), 2013, pp. 1–5.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:45:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
