SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY - AUGUST 2010.

1

LDPC Codes from Latin Squares Free of Small Trapping Sets
Dung Viet Nguyen, Shashi Kiran Chilappagari, Member, IEEE, Michael W. Marcellin, Fellow, IEEE, and Bane Vasi´c, Senior Member, IEEE

arXiv:1008.4177v2 [cs.IT] 23 Aug 2011

Abstract—This paper is concerned with the construction of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes with low error floors. Two main contributions are made. First, a new class of structured LDPC codes is introduced. The parity check matrices of these codes are arrays of permutation matrices which are obtained from Latin squares and form a finite field under some matrix operations. Second, a method to construct LDPC codes with low error floors on the binary symmetric channel (BSC) is presented. Codes are constructed so that their Tanner graphs are free of certain small trapping sets. These trapping sets are selected from the Trapping Set Ontology for the Gallager A/B decoder. They are selected based on their relative harmfulness for a given decoding algorithm. We evaluate the relative harmfulness of different trapping sets for the sum product algorithm (SPA) by using the topological relations among them and by analyzing the decoding failures on one trapping set in the presence or absence of other trapping sets.
Index Terms—Trapping sets, structured low-density paritycheck codes, algebraic construction, Latin squares.
I. INTRODUCTION
D ESPITE the fact that numerous results on construction of LDPC codes [1] have been published in the past few years, this research topic remains contemporary in the field of coding theory. Researchers have focused on two main problems: (i) deriving new classes of structured codes and (ii) constructing codes with low error floor performance.
To be efficiently encodable and decodable, the parity check matrix of an LDPC code must be structured (hence the term structured code). The construction of structured LDPC codes relies on algebraic or combinatorial objects. In many cases, the parity check matrix of a structured LDPC code can be represented as an array of permutation matrices. If the permutation matrices are circulant permutation matrices then the code is quasi-cylic (QC). Most researchers have focused on QC codes as these codes result in low encoding and decoding complexity. The encoding of these codes can be efficiently implemented using shift registers with linear complexity [2],
D. V. Nguyen, M. W. Marcellin, and B. Vasi´c are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, 85719 USA (e-mail: {nguyendv,marcellin,vasic}@ece.arizona.edu).
S. K. Chilappagari was with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, 85719 USA. He is now with Marvell Semiconductor Inc., Santa Clara, CA 95054 USA (email: shashickiran@gmail.com).
Manuscript received October 24, 2018. This work is funded by NSF under the grants IHCS-0725403, CCF-0634969, CCF-0830245. The material in this paper is to be presented in part at the Information Theory Workshop (ITW2010). The work of S. K. Chilappagari was performed when he was with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson.

while the decoding can be parallelized by exploiting the block structure of the parity check matrices [3], [4].
It is well-known that in order to achieve a reasonably good performance under iterative message passing decoding algorithms, the Tanner graph of an LDPC code must not contain cycles of length four. Numerous methods to form a parity check matrix such that its corresponding Tanner graph does not contain four cycles have been proposed. These methods ensure that any two rows (columns) of a parity check matrix have 1’s in at most one common position. This constraint on parity check matrices is referred to in [5] as the row-column (RC) constraint.
Algebraic methods of constructing QC LDPC codes usually exploit a one to one correspondence between an element of an algebraic structure, such as a group or a Galois field, and a circulant. This one to one correspondence translates the problem of constructing a parity check matrix into the problem of constructing a matrix of elements from the algebraic structure. The RC constraint is converted to a simpler constraint on the second matrix. Notable work on algebraic constructions of LDPC codes includes (but is not limited to) [5]–[9] with methods in [5] and [9] being the most relevant to the structured codes proposed in this paper.
Combinatorial constructions of LDPC codes evolved from balanced incomplete block designs (BIBDs) [10]. In these constructions, a parity check matrix is obtained from a pointblock incidence matrix of a BIBD: points represent paritycheck equations while blocks represent bits of a linear block code. The RC constraint is satisfied by setting the parameters of the BIBD so that no two blocks contain the same pair of points. The first class of combinatorially constructed LDPC codes was introduced by Kou, Lin and Fossorier in [11]. These codes are closely related to finite-geometry codes, a well studied class of codes which is used in conjunction with one-step or multiple step majority logic decoding. Other combinatorial methods of constructing LDPC codes were studied in great detail and summarized by Vasic and Milenkovic in [12].
In this paper, we give a new class of structured LDPC codes. The parity check matrices of these codes are arrays of permutation matrices which are obtained from Latin squares. These q × q matrices form a Galois field GF(q) under some matrix operations (introduced later in this paper). Hence, our codes are different from the codes proposed by Lan et al. [5], which utilize a one to one correspondence between a (q − 1) × (q − 1) circulant permutation matrix and an element of the multiplicative group of GF(q). The new class of codes contains array LDPC codes [9] when q is a prime,

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY - AUGUST 2010.

2

but includes higher rate codes than shortened array LDPC codes [13], [14], when the Tanner graphs are required to satisfy certain constraints. The description of the new class is not only concise and general but also makes the RC constraint trivial to satisfy. Above all, our permutation matrices are more general than circulants as the circulant property for our codes holds on indices understood as elements of GF(q). More specifically, the permutation matrix corresponding to αt ∈ GF(q) sends the indices (0, 1, α, . . . , αq−2) to (0+αt, 1+αt, α+αt, . . . , αq−2 +αt). This new class of codes serves as a basis for a method of constructing codes with low error floor performance, which we shall now explain.
By now, it is well established that the error floor phenomenon, an abrupt degradation in the error rate performance of LDPC codes in the high signal-to-noise-ratio (SNR) region, is due to the presence of certain structures in the Tanner graph that lead to decoder failures [15]. For iterative decoding, these structures are known as trapping sets (see [16] for a list of references).
To construct LDPC codes with provably low error floors, it is essential to understand the failure mechanism of the decoders in the high SNR region as well as to fully characterize trapping sets. These prerequisites had been met for decoders on the binary erasure channel (BEC), in which case trapping sets are known under the notion of stopping sets [17]. For the BEC, the definition of stopping sets is fully combinatorial and the code construction strategy is simply to maximize the size of the smallest stopping set. Such a level of understanding has not been gained for other channels of interest.
On other channels, such as the BSC or the additive white Gaussian noise channel (AWGNC), knowledge on trapping sets is far from complete due to the complex nature of iterative decoding algorithms, such as the SPA. As a result, code performance is typically improved by increasing the girth of the Tanner graph [14], [18], [19]. The basis for these approaches is mostly constituted in two facts. First, a linear increase in the girth results in an exponential increase of the minimum distance if the code has column weight dv ≥ 3 [20]. Second, trapping sets containing shortest cycles in the Tanner graph are eliminated when the girth is increased. In addition, several recent results can be used to justify the construction of a code with a large girth: the error correction capability under the bit flipping algorithms was shown to grow exponentially with the girth for codes with column weight dv ≥ 5 [21]; the minimum pseudo-codeword weight on the BSC for linear program decoding was also shown to increase exponentially with the girth [22]. It is worth noting here that the minimum stopping set size also grows exponentially with the girth for codes with column weight dv ≥ 3 [23].
Nevertheless, for finite length codes, large girth comes with large penalty in code rate. In most cases, at a desirable code rate, the girth can not be made large enough for the Tanner graph to be free of the most harmful trapping sets that mainly contribute to decoding failures in the error floor region. These trapping sets dictate the size of the smallest error patterns uncorrectable by the decoder and hence also dictate the slope of the frame error rate (FER) curve [16]. To preserve the rate while lowering error floor, a code must be optimized not

by simply increasing the girth but rather by more surgically avoiding the most harmful trapping sets.
In this paper, LDPC codes are constructed so that they are free of small harmful trapping sets. We focus our attention on regular column-weight-three codes as these codes allow very low decoding complexity but exhibit very high error floor if they are not designed properly. A key element in the construction of a code free of trapping sets is the choice of forbidden subgraphs in the Tanner graph, since this choice greatly affects the error performance as well as the code rate. This choice is well determined if the Gallager A/B algorithm is used on the BSC since the necessary and sufficient conditions for a code to guarantee the correction of a given number of errors are known [24], [25]. However, for the SPA on the BSC and on the AWGNC, the choice of forbidden subgraphs is not clear due to the lack of a combinatorial characterization of trapping sets for these channels. In a series of papers [26]– [28] we used the notion of instantons to predict the error floors as well study the phenomenon from a statistical mechanics perspective. In [29] we showed how the family of instanton based techniques can be used to estimate and reduce error floors for different decoders operating on a variety of channels. Unfortunately, instanton search is computationally prohibitive for construction of moderate length codes, and in this paper we propose another, simpler, method.
In the absence of a complete understanding of trapping sets for the SPA, the choice of forbidden subgraphs may be derived based on the understanding of trapping sets for simpler decoding algorithms as well as on intuition gained from experimental results. This is the approach we take in this paper. A basis for removing harmful trapping sets for the SPA is the observation by Chilappagari et al. [29] that the decoding failures for various decoding algorithms and channels are closely related and that subgraphs responsible for these failures share some common underlying topological structures. These structures are either trapping sets for iterative decoding algorithms on the BSC or larger subgraphs containing these trapping sets.
The method consists of three main steps. First, we develop a database of trapping sets for the Gallager A/B algorithm on the BSC. This database, which is called the Trapping Set Ontology (TSO)1, contains subgraphs that are responsible for failures of the Gallager A/B decoder and also specifies the topological relations among them. Second, based on the TSO, we determine the relative harmfulness of different subgraphs for the SPA on the BSC by analyzing failures of the decoder on one subgraph in the presence or absence of other topologically related subgraphs. This analysis is performed repeatedly on a number of “test” Tanner graphs, which are intentionally constructed to either contain or be free of specific subgraphs. The relative harmfulness of a subgraph is evaluated based on its effect on the guaranteed correction capability of a code. Finally, a code is constructed so that its Tanner graph is free of the most harmful subgraphs.
It can be seen that our construction attempts to optimize a
1This database of trapping sets was partially presented in [30] and is available online at [31]

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY - AUGUST 2010.

3

code for the SPA on the BSC. Due to much higher complexity, similar analysis on the AWGNC is difficult. However, experimental results show that codes constructed for the BSC also perform very well on the AWGNC. It should be noted that in [32], extensive computer simulation and hardware emulation suggest that absorbing sets mainly contribute to error floors of codes under the SPA on the AWGNC. Since absorbing sets are combinatorially similar to trapping sets for the Gallager A/B decoder, our newly constructed codes are also free of some (and probably the most harmful) absorbing sets and hence understandably possess good error performance on the AWGNC. Although absorbing sets were invented in research that dealt with the AWGNC, their unproven harmfulness prohibit an explicit strategy to construct codes for the AWGNC. As a result, optimizing codes for the BSC in order to obtain good performance on the AWGNC remains a reasonable approach.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we provide background related to LDPC codes and the necessary preliminaries for the description of the new codes. In Section III, we propose a new class of codes based on Latin squares obtained from the additive group of a Galois field. Relations of the new codes with existing codes in the literature can be found discussed in Appendices B and C. We continue with the presentation of our Trapping Set Ontology for the Gallager A/B decoder in Section IV. Analytical construction of a code free of trapping sets is difficult and hence we resort to an efficient search of the Tanner graph for certain subgraphs. We briefly discuss these search techniques in Section V, with more details are given in Appendix A. In Section VI, we describe in general the construction of a code free of certain trapping sets. We present the constructions of codes for the Gallager A/B algorithm and the SPA on the BSC in Sections VII and VIII. In Section IX, we show the performance of several codes on the AWGNC and then conclude the paper.
II. PRELIMINARIES
In this section, we introduce the definitions and notation used throughout the paper.
A. LDPC Codes
Let C denote an (n, k) LDPC code over the binary field GF(2). C is defined by the null space of H, an m × n parity check matrix of C. H is the bi-adjacency matrix of G, a Tanner graph representation of C. G is a bipartite graph with two sets of nodes: n variable (bit) nodes V = {1, 2, . . . , n} and m check nodes C = {1, 2, . . . , m}. A vector y = (y1, y2, . . . , yn) is a codeword if and only if yHT = 0, where HT is the transpose of H. The support of y, denoted as supp(y), is defined as the set of all variable nodes (bits) v ∈ V such that yv = 0. A dv-left-regular LDPC code has a Tanner graph G in which all variable nodes have degree dv. Similarly, a dc-right-regular LDPC code has a Tanner graph G in which all check nodes have degree dc. A (dv, dc) regular LDPC code is dv-left-regular and dc-right-regular. Such a code has rate R ≥ 1 − dv/dc [1]. The degree of a variable node (check node, resp.) is also referred to as the left degree (right degree, resp.) or the column weight (row weight, resp.). The

length of the shortest cycle in the Tanner graph G is called the girth g of G.

B. Permutation Matrices from Latin Squares
A permutation matrix is a square binary matrix that has exactly one entry 1 in each row and each column and 0’s elsewhere. Our codes make use of permutation matrices that do not have 1’s in common positions. These sets of permutation matrices can be obtained conveniently from Latin squares.
A Latin square of size q (or order q) is a q × q array in which each cell contains a single symbol from a q-set S, such that each symbol occurs exactly once in each row and exactly once in each column. A Latin square of size q is equivalent to the Cayley table of a quasigroup Q on q elements (see [33, pp. 135–152] for details).
For mathematical convenience, we use elements of Q to index the rows and columns of Latin squares and permutation matrices. Let L = [li,j]i,j∈Q denote a Latin square defined on the Cayley table of a quasigroup (Q, ⊕) of order q. We define f , an injective map from Q to Mat(q, q, GF(2)), where Mat(q, q, GF(2)) is the set of matrices of size q×q over GF(2), as follows:

such that:

f : Q → Mat(q, q, GF(2)) α → f (α) = [mi,j ]i,j∈Q

mi,j =

1 0

if li,j = α if li,j = α

.

According to this definition, a permutation matrix corresponding to the element α ∈ Q is obtained by replacing the entries of L which are equal to α by 1 and all other entries of L by 0. It follows from the above definition that the images of elements of Q under f give a set of q permutation matrices that
do not have 1’s in common positions. This definition naturally associates a permutation matrix to an element α ∈ Q and
simplifies the derivation of parity check matrices that satisfy
the RC constraint, as will be demonstrated in the next section.

Example 1: Let Q be a quasigroup of order 4 with the following Cayley table:

⊕0123 0 0123 1 1032 2 2310 3 3201

The Latin square obtained from the Cayley table of Q is:

0 1 2 3

L

=

 



1 2

0 3

3 1

2 0

 

.



3201

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY - AUGUST 2010.

4

The injective map f sends elements of Q to four permuta-

tion matrices:

1 0 0 0

0 1 0 0

f (0)

=

0

 

0

1 0

0 0

0 1

 

,

f

(1)

=

 





1 0

0 0

0 1

0 0

 

,



0010

0001

0 0 1 0

0 0 0 1

f (2)

=

0

 

1

0 0

0 0

1 0

 

,

f

(3)

=

 





0 0

0 1

1 0

0 0

 

.



0100

1000

C. LDPC Codes as Arrays of Permutation Matrices

The definition of an LDPC code whose parity check matrix is an array of permutation matrices is now straightforward. Let W = [wi,j]1≤i≤µ,1≤j≤η be an µ × η matrix over a quasigroup Q, i.e.,

 w1,1 w1,2 · · · w1,η 

 w2,1 w2,2 · · · w2,η 

W =  

...

...

...

...

.  

(1)

wµ,1 wµ,2 · · · wµ,η

With some abuse of notation, let H = f (W) = [f (wi,j)] be an array of permutation matrices, obtained by replacing elements of W with their images under f , i.e.,

 f (w1,1) f (w1,2) · · · f (w1,η) 

 f (w2,1) f (w2,2) · · · f (w2,η) 

H=  

...

...

...

...

.  

(2)

f (wµ,1) f (wµ,2) · · · f (wµ,η)

Then H is a binary matrix of size µq × ηq. The null space of H gives an LDPC code C of length ηq. The column weight and row weight of C are dv = µ and dc = η, respectively.
We remark that different permutations of rows and columns of the Latin square L result in different sets of permutation
matrices. These sets of permutation matrices result in different permutations of H in (2). Since permuting rows and columns of H only leads to the relabeling of the variable nodes and
check nodes of the corresponding Tanner graph, different permutations of rows and columns of the Latin square L result
in the same code. Therefore, a code is completely specified by a quasigroup Q along with a matrix over Q.

III. STRUCTURED LDPC CODES FROM GALOIS FIELDS OF PERMUTATION MATRICES
The codes in this section are obtained when Q is the additive group of a Galois field. When Q is the multiplicative group of a Galois field, the codes proposed in [5] are obtained. We discuss this class of codes in Appendix C. The codes in this section also contain array LDPC codes [9] when the Galois field is a prime field, as shown in Appendix B.

A. Galois Fields of Permutation Matrices
Consider a Galois field GF(q), where q = pϑ, ϑ ∈ Z and p is prime. Let α be a primitive element of GF(q). The powers of α, α−∞ 0, α0 = 1, α, α2, . . . , αq−2, give all q

elements of GF(q) and αq−1 = 1. Let L = [li,j]i,j∈Q denote a Latin square defined by the Cayley table of (Q, ⊕) where Q = {0, 1, α, . . . , αq−2} and ⊕ is the subtractive operation of

GF(q), i.e., li,j = i − j. Although the rows and columns of L

can be indexed arbitrarily, for simplicity we assume that they

are indexed from top to bottom and left to right with increasing

powers of α. Let M = {M−∞, M0, M1, . . . , Mq−2} be the set of images of elements of Q under f , i.e., Mt = [m(i,tj)]i,j∈Q = f (αt). It is easy to see that M−∞ = I, the q×q identity matrix. To show that M forms a field isomorphic to GF(q) under

the matrix operations defined below, we give the following

propositions. Proposition 1: For all t1, t2 ∈ Z, f (αt1 + αt2 ) = Mt1 Mt2 . Proof: Let Ξ = [ξi,j ]i,j∈Q = Mt1 Mt2 then

ξi,j =

mi(,tr1)mr(t,j2).

r

Since Mt1 and Mt2 are permutation matrices, Ξ is a permu-

tation matrix. Assume that ξi,j = 1. Then there exists r ∈ Q such that mi(,tr1) = mr(t,j2) = 1. This indicates that i − r = αt1 and r − j = αt2 . Adding, i − j = αt1 + αt2 and hence

Ξ

= Mt1 Mt2 = Corollary 1:

f (αt1 + αt2 ). Mtp = I, ∀t.

Proposition 2: For all t ≥ 0, Mt+1 = P MtQ, where P is

a q × q permutation matrix given as

 1 0 0 ··· 0 0 

 0 0 0 ··· 0 1 

 

0

1

0

···

0

0

 

P

= 

0

0

1

···

0

0

, 

(3)

  

...

...

...

...

...

...

  

0 0 0 ··· 1 0

and Q = P T, the transpose of P . Proof: Consider two matrices Mt = f (αt) and Mt+1 =
f (αt+1) for some t ≥ 0. Assume that mi(,tj) = 1, then li,j = i − j = αt. Consequently, lαi,αj = α(i − j) = αt+1 and mα(ti+,α1j) = 1. Therefore, we can obtain Mt+1 from Mt by performing the following two operations:
• Cyclic permutation of the last q − 1 rows of Mt, and • Cyclic permutation of the last q − 1 columns of the
resulting matrix.
It is now clear that Mt+1 = P MtQ. Define the addition and the multiplication on M as:

Mt1 Mt1

Mt2 = Mt1 Mt2 , Mt2 = P t2 Mt1 Qt2
= P t1 Mt2 Qt1

then M together with and form a field isomorphic to
GF(q). Remark: Assume that the rows and columns of L are in-
dexed arbitrarily. Let (αi1 , αi2 , . . . , αiq ) be indices of the rows of L from top to bottom and let (αj1 , αj2 , . . . , αjq ) be indices
of the columns of L from left to right. Proposition 2 holds
if P and Q are chosen so that the indices of the rows (from
top to bottom) and the columns (from left to right) of P LQ are (αi1+1, αi2+1, . . . , αiq+1) and (αj1+1, αj2+1, . . . , αjq+1),

respectively.

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY - AUGUST 2010.

5

B. LDPC Codes from Galois Fields of Permutation Matrices
Define W and H as in (1) and (2), where (Q, ⊕) is the set {0, 1, α, . . . , αq−2} together with the subtractive operation of GF(q). The following theorem gives a necessary and sufficient condition on W, such that the Tanner graph corresponding to H has girth at least 6.
Theorem 1 (Cross-addition Constraint): The Tanner graph corresponding to H contains no cycle of length four iff wi1,j1 + wi2,j2 = wi1,j2 +wi2,j1 for any 1 ≤ i1, i2 ≤ µ; 1 ≤ j1, j2 ≤ η; i1 = i2; j1 = j2.
Proof: The Tanner graph corresponding to H contains at least one cycle of length four if and only if there exist two rows of H that have 1’s in at least two common positions. Treat H as a matrix over R and let Ξ = HH . Then Ξ is a matrix over R. H contains two rows that have 1’s in at least two common positions if and only if Ξ contains at least one non-diagonal component > 1. Since H is an array of matrices, Ξ is also an array of matrices. Also, f (αt) is a permutation matrix, so its transpose is its inverse and is f (−αt) (by Proposition 1). Therefore, Ξ = [ξi1,i2 ]1≤i1=i2≤µ where
η
ξi1,i2 = f (wi1,r)f (−wi2,r).
r=1
Since f (wi1,r)f (−wi2,r) ∈ M, ξi1,i2 contains an element > 1 if and only if there exist j1 = j2 such that :
f (wi1,j1 )f (−wi2,j1 ) = f (wi1,j2 )f (−wi2,j2 )
⇔ wi1,j1 − wi2,j1 = wi1,j2 − wi2,j2
⇔ wi1,j1 + wi2,j2 = wi1,j2 + wi2,j1

It can be seen that the construction of an LDPC code with girth at least 6 from a Galois field of permutation matrices reduces to finding a matrix W that satisfies the cross-addition constraint.
Example 2: It can be noticed that a Latin square obtained from the Cayley table of the multiplicative group of GF(q) satisfies the cross-addition constraint. The cross-addition constraint is still satisfied if a row and a column of all zero are appended to such a Latin square. Therefore, one form of W that satisfies the cross-addition constraint is given by

 0 0 0 ··· 0 

 0 1 α · · · αq−2 

W

 =

0

α

α2 · · ·

1

 .

(4)

  

...

...

... . . .

...

  

0 αq−2 1 · · · αq−3

Let H = f (W). From Proposition 2, it follows that H has the following structure:

 I I I ··· I 

 I M0 M1 · · · Mq−2 

 H=

I

M1

M2 · · ·

M0

 ,

(5)

  

...

...

... . . .

...

  

I Mq−2 M0 · · · Mq−3

where Mt = P tM0Qt and I is the q × q identity matrix. H is an array of permutation matrices from M and is a q2 × q2

matrix over GF(q) with both row and column weights q. Since

W satisfies the cross-addition constraint, the Tanner graph

corresponding to H contains no cycle of length 4.

For any pair (γ, ρ) of positive integers with 1 ≤ γ, ρ ≤ q,

let H be a γ × ρ subarray of H. Then H is a γq × ρq matrix

over GF(2) which is also free of cycles of length 4. H has

constant column weight dv = γ and row weight dc = ρ. The null space of H gives a regular structured LDPC code C of

length ρq. It can be shown that the rank of H is qγ − γ + 1,

and

hence

C

has

rate

R

=

q−γ q

+

γ−1 q2

.

C. Remarks

For any parity check matrix H which is an array of
permutation matrices, we can permute the rows and columns to obtain H such that the topmost and leftmost permutation matrices of H are identity matrices. The matrix H is the image of a matrix W under f , where entries on the first row and first column of W are 0 ∈ GF(q). Therefore, in the rest of the paper, we only consider matrices W of which elements on
the first row and on the first column are zeros. For simplicity, we denote U as the submatrix of W such that

W=

0 0

0 U

(6)

and then write H = f (W) = f¯(U).
It can be seen that the notion of Latin squares provides a
general and elegant description for a wide variety of struc-
tured LDPC codes whose parity check matrices are arrays of
permutation matrices. For the codes described in this section,
the permutation matrices are more general than circulant
permutation matrices as the circulant property for our codes holds on indices understood as elements of GF(q). Specifically, the permutation matrix corresponding to αt sends the indices (0, 1, α, . . . , αq−2) to (0 + αt, 1 + αt, α + αt, . . . , αq−2 + αt).
In Appendix B, we show that the class of codes described
in this section includes array LDPC codes [9]. In particular, let q be a prime then an array LDPC code is a subarray Harr of the binary matrix Harr that is obtained by permuting rows and columns of H in (5) in a certain way. Note that similar to H in (5), Harr is also a q ×q array of permutation matrices. In [13], [14], a method is given to construct a shortened array LDPC
code of large girth by selecting certain blocks of columns of Harr to form the parity check matrix. Assume that Ha(sr)r is such a parity check matrix then Ha(sr)r is a subarray of Harr and is also a subarray of Harr. This approach utilizes the fact that the Tanner graph representation of Harr is free of four cycles and hence the Tanner graph representation of Ha(sr)r is also free of four cycles. However, starting from on a predefined matrix Harr is not a good solution in terms of code rate. This is because the fact that Ha(sr)r is a subarray of Harr can also be understood as a constraint on Ha(sr)r and therefore one might expect this constraint to reduce the code rate. The description
of the codes proposed in this section along with the cross-
addition constraint allow the construction of a parity check
matrix in which the above-mentioned constraint is eliminated.
This method of construction will be presented in Section VI-A.
Since the constraint is eliminated, the construction usually

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY - AUGUST 2010.

6

results in codes with higher rates than these of shortened array codes. In this paper, we use this construction method TSO (presented in the next section) to obtain codes with low error floors.
IV. TRAPPING SET ONTOLOGY
In this section, we describe our database of trapping sets known as the Trapping Set Ontology. This database will be used as a guideline for the construction of codes free of small trapping sets to be presented in subsequent sections. We start with a brief discussion of trapping sets and related objects.
A. Trapping Sets
A trapping set for an iterative decoding algorithm is defined as a non-empty set of variable nodes in a Tanner graph G that are not eventually corrected by the decoder [15]. A set of variable nodes T is called an (a, b) trapping set if it contains a variable nodes and the subgraph induced by these variable nodes has b odd degree check nodes.
For transmission over the BEC, trapping sets are characterized combinatorially and are known as stopping sets [17]. For transmission over the AWGNC, no explicit combinatorial characterization of trapping sets has been found. In the case of the BSC, when decoding with the Gallager A/B algorithm, or the bit flipping (serial or parallel) algorithms, then trapping sets are partially characterized under the notion of fixed sets. By partially, we mean that these combinatorial objects form a subclass of trapping sets, but not all trapping sets are fixed sets. Fixed sets have been studied extensively in a series of conference papers [16], [21], [24], [34]. They have been proven to be the cause of error floor in the decoding of LDPC codes under the Gallager A/B algorithm and the bit flipping algorithms. For the sake of completeness, we give the definition of a fixed set as well as the necessary and sufficient conditions for a set of variable nodes to form a fixed set.
Consider an iterative decoder on the BSC. Assume the transmission of an all-zero codeword2. With this assumption, a variable node is correct if it is 0 and corrupt if it is 1. Let y = (y1, y2, . . . , yn) be the input to the decoder and let xl = (x1l , xl2, . . . , xln) be the output vector at the lth iteration. Let F(y) denote the set of variable nodes that are not eventually correct.
Definition 1: For transmission over the BSC, y is a fixed point of the decoding algorithm if supp(y) = supp(xl) for all l. If F(y) = ∅ and y is a fixed point, then F(y) = supp(y) is a fixed set. A fixed set (trapping set) is an elementary fixed set (trapping set) if all check nodes in its induced subgraph have degree one or two3. Otherwise, it is a non-elementary fixed set (trapping set).
Theorem 2 ( [21]): Let C be an LDPC code with dv-leftregular Tanner graph G. Let T be a set consisting of variable nodes with induced subgraph I. Let the check nodes in I be
2The all-zero-codeword assumption can be applied if the channel is output symmetric and the decoding algorithms satisfied certain symmetry conditions (see Definition 1 and Lemma 1 in [35]). The Gallager A/B algorithm, the bit flipping algorithms and the SPA all satisfy these symmetry conditions.
3This classification was given in [36].

partitioned into two disjoint subsets; O consisting of check

nodes with odd degree and E consisting of check nodes

with even degree. Then T is a fixed set for the bit flipping

algorithms (serial or parallel) iff : (a) Every variable node in

I has at least

dv 2

neighbors in E and (b) No

dv 2

+ 1 check

nodes of O share a neighbor outside I.

Note that Theorem 2 only states the conditions for the bit

flipping algorithms. However, it is not difficult to show that

these conditions also apply for the Gallager A/B algorithm.

Although it has been rigorously proven only that fixed sets

are trapping sets for the Gallager A/B algorithm and the bit

flipping algorithms on the BSC, it has been widely recognized

in the literature that the subgraphs of these combinatorial

objects greatly contribute to the error floor for various iterative

decoding algorithms and channels. The instanton analysis

performed by Chilappagari et al. in [29] suggests that the

decoding failures for various decoding algorithms and chan-

nels are closely related and subgraphs responsible for these

failures share some common underlying topological structures.

These structures are either trapping sets for iterative decoding

algorithms on the BSC, of which fixed sets form a subset,

or larger subgraphs containing these trapping sets. Dolecek et

al. in [37] defined the notion of absorbing sets, which is very

similar to the notion of fixed sets. By hardware emulation, they

found that absorbing sets are the main cause of error floors

for the SPA on the AWGNC. Various trapping sets identified

by simulation (for example those in [38], [39]) are also fixed

sets.

From these observations, it is expected that an LDPC code

will have low error floor performance if the corresponding

Tanner graph does not contain subgraphs induced by fixed

sets. However, it is impossible to construct an LDPC code

whose Tanner graph is free of all fixed sets when the length

of the code is finite. It is also well-known that imposing

constraints on a Tanner graph reduces the rate of a code.

Clearly, only subgraphs of some fixed sets can be avoided

in the code construction. These need to be chosen carefully in

order to obtain the best possible error floor performance while

maximizing the code rate.

Before one can attempt to determine the fixed sets to forbid

in the Tanner graph of a code, there are two important issues

that need to be addressed. First, a complete list of non-

isomorphic fixed sets (up to a proper size) for a given set

of code parameters (e.g., column weight and row weight)

is needed. This is because the notion of an (a, b) fixed set

(trapping set) is not sufficient. Given a pair of positive integers

(a, b), there are possibly many fixed sets which induce non-

isomorphic subgraphs containing a variable nodes and b odd

degree check nodes. Second, the topological relations among

subgraphs induced by fixed sets needs to be explored. The

importance of these relations is threefold. First, the subgraph

induced by a fixed set may be contained in the subgraph

induced by another fixed set. In such case the absence of

one subgraph yields to the absence of the other. Second,

these relations help reduce the complexity of the search for

subgraphs in a Tanner graph. Finally, these relations reduce

the complexity of the analysis to determine the harmfulness

of subgraphs.

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY - AUGUST 2010.

7

In the next subsection, we present our database of fixed sets for regular column-weight-three LDPC codes with emphasis on the topological relations among them. For the sake of simplicity, we drop the term fixed sets and refer to these objects by the general term trapping sets.

B. Trapping Set Ontology of Column-Weight-Three Codes for
the Gallager A/B Algorithm on the BSC
1) Graphical representation: The induced subgraph of a
trapping set (or any set of variable nodes) is a bipartite
graph. In the Tanner graph (bipartite graph) representation
of a trapping set, we use to represent variable nodes,
to represent odd degree check nodes and to represent
even degree check nodes. There exists an alternate graphical
representation of trapping sets which allows their topological
relations to be established more conveniently. This graphical
representation is based on the incidence structure of lines and
points. In combinatorial mathematics, an incidence structure is a triple (P, L , I ) where P is a set of “points”, L is a set of “lines” and I ⊆ P × L is the incidence relation. The elements of I are called flags. If (p, l ) ∈ I , we say that point p “lies on” line l . In this lines and points (henceforth line-point) representation of trapping sets, variable
nodes correspond to lines and check nodes correspond to
points. A point is shaded black if it has an odd number of lines passing through it, otherwise it is shaded white. An (a, b) trapping set is thus an incidence structure with a lines and b black shaded points. To differentiate among (a, b) trapping sets that have non-isomorphic induced subgraphs when necessary, we index (a, b) trapping sets in an arbitrary order and assign the notation (a, b){i} to the (a, b) trapping set with index i.
Depending on the context, a trapping set can be understood
as a set of variable nodes in a given code with a specified
induced subgraph or it can be understood as a specific sub-
graph independent of a code. To differentiate between these two cases, we use the letter T to denote a set of variable nodes in a code and use the letter T to denote a type of trapping set which corresponds to a specific subgraph. If the induced subgraph of a set of variable nodes T in the Tanner graph of a code C is isomorphic to the subgraph of T then we say that T is a T trapping set or that T is a trapping set of type T . C is said to contain T trapping set(s).
Example 3: The (5, 3){1} trapping set T1 is a union of a six cycle and an eight cycle, sharing two variable nodes. The Tanner graph representation of T1 is shown in Fig. 1(a). The set of odd degree check nodes is {c7, c8, c9}. These check nodes are represented by black shaded squares. In the linepoint representation of T1 which is shown in Fig. 1(b), c7, c8 and c9 are represented by black shaded points. These points are the only points that lie on a single line. The five variable nodes v1, v2, . . . , v5 are represented by black shaded circles in Fig. 1(a). They correspond to the five lines in Fig. 1(b). As
an example, the column-weight-three MacKay random code
of length 4095 [40] has 19617 sets of variable nodes whose induced subgraphs are isomorphic to the subgraph of T1. These sets of variable nodes are (5, 3){1} trapping sets.
Remark: To avoid confusion between the graphical repre-
sentations of trapping sets, we note that the Tanner graph rep-

(a)

(b)

Fig. 1. Graphical representation of the (5, 3){1} trapping set: (a) Tanner graph representation, (b) Line-point representation.

resentation of a trapping set always contains or . The line-
point representation never contains or . In the remainder
of this paper, we only use the line-point representation.
2) Topological relation: The following definition gives the
topological relations among trapping sets. Definition 2: A trapping set T2 is a successor of a trapping
set T1 if there exists a proper subset of variable nodes of T2 that induce a subgraph isomorphic to the induced subgraph of T1. If T2 is a successor of T1 then T1 is a parent of T2. Furthermore, T2 is a direct successor of T1 if it does not have a parent T3 which is a successor of T1.
The topological relation between T1 and T2 is solely dictated by the topological properties of their subgraphs. In the Tanner graph of a code C, the presence of a trapping set T1 does not indicate the presence of a trapping set T2. If T1 is indeed a subset of a trapping set T2 in the Tanner graph of C then we say that T1 generates T2, otherwise we say that T1 does not generate T2.
3) Family tree of trapping sets: Theorem 2 implies that every trapping set T contains at least a cycle. To show this, assume that T is a trapping set that does not contain a cycle then the induced subgraph of T is a tree. Take any variable node as the root of the tree then the variable nodes which
are neighboring to the leaf nodes with largest depth have only
one check node with degree greater than 1. Therefore these
variable nodes have no less odd degree check nodes than even degree check nodes. This indicates that T is not a trapping set, which is a contradiction. Consequently, all trapping sets
can be obtained by adjoining variable nodes to cycles. Note
that any cycle is a trapping set for regular column-weight-three
codes.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 2. Obtaining (5, 3) trapping sets by adding a line to the (4, 4) trapping set: (a) the (5, 3){1} trapping set and (b) the (5, 3){2} trapping set.

We now explain how larger trapping sets can be obtained
by adjoining variable nodes to smaller trapping sets. We begin with the simplest example: the evolution of (5, 3) trapping sets from the (4, 4) trapping set for regular-column-weight three codes. We know that compared to the (4, 4) trapping set,

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY - AUGUST 2010.

8

which is an eight cycle, a (5, 3) trapping set has one additional variable node. Therefore, if a (5, 3) trapping set is a successor of the (4, 4) trapping set, then its line-point representation can be obtained by adding one additional line to the line-point representation of the (4, 4) trapping set. Since it is required that the addition of the new line preserves the variable node degree (or number of points lying on a line), there must be exactly three points lying on the new line. Therefore, we can consider the process of adding a new line as the merging of at least one point on the new line with certain points in the line-point representation of the (4, 4) trapping set. We use
to denote points on the line that are to be merged with points in the line-point representation of the parent trapping set. The merging is demonstrated in Fig. 2 and is explained as follows. If a black shaded point is merged with a point then they become a single white shaded point. Similarly, if a white shaded point is merged with a point then the result is a single black shaded point. Recall that there must be exactly three black shaded points in the line-point representation of a trapping set. In addition, every line must pass through at least two white shaded points. The only way to satisfy these two conditions is to merge two points of the new line with two black shaded points of the (4, 4) trapping set. There are two distinct ways to select two black shaded points, resulting in two different (5, 3) trapping sets.
The evolution of a trapping set for regular-column-weight three codes from its parent can now be described in a more general setting. Since every trapping set of interest is a direct successor of some trapping sets, it is sufficient to only consider the evolution of direct successors. Consider an (a, b) trapping set T1. Since T1 has a variable nodes, its line-point representation contains a lines. Each line has 3 points lying on it, with at most one point shaded black. There are b black shaded points, each has an odd number of lines passing through it. The linepoint representation of an (a + u, b + z) trapping set T2 can be obtained by adding u lines to the line-point representation of T1. These u new lines (and the points on them) form an incidence structure and since T2 is a direct successor of T1, this incidence structure is connected4. For simplicity, let us only consider elementary trapping sets. Then it can be shown that the incidence structure formed by the new u lines can only be one of those listed in Fig. 3. A successor trapping set T2 is obtained by pairwisely merging the points with certain points of T1. We remark that non-elementary successors can be obtained in a very similar process with small additional complexity.
4) Example: Let us consider regular column-weight-three LDPC codes. For simplicity, we only consider codes of girth g = 8 and elementary trapping sets, although this example can be generalized to include codes of other girths and nonelementary trapping sets.
• With the evolution of the (5, 3){2} trapping set presented above, we show the family tree of (a, b) trapping sets originating from the (5, 3){2} trapping set with a ≤ 8 and b > 0 in Fig. 5.

(a) (b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

(i)

Fig. 3. Possible incidence structures formed by u new lines for elementary trapping sets.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 4. Obtaining larger a trapping set by adding lines to a smaller one.

• By selecting two black shaded nodes in Fig. 6(a) and merging them with two nodes in Fig. 3(c), a (6, 4) trapping set can be obtained. Two distinct ways to select
black shaded nodes result in two different trapping sets: the (6, 4){1} trapping set shown in Fig. 7(a) and the (6, 4){2} trapping set shown in Fig. 6(b). The merging is demonstrated in Fig. 4(a) and (b). The family tree of (a, b) trapping sets originating from the (6, 4){1} trapping set with a ≤ 8 and b > 0 is illustrated in Fig. 7. • In the same manner, other direct successors of the (4, 4) trapping set can be generated. Those (a, b) trapping sets with a ≤ 8 and b > 0 are shown in Fig. 6. For a more complete list of trapping sets from the TSO, the interested
readers are referred to [31].
Remarks: A trapping set may originate from different parents. For example, the (6, 4){2} trapping set is not only a direct successor of the (4, 4) trapping set but also a direct successor of the (5, 5) trapping set. The evolution of the (6, 4){2} trapping set from the (5, 5) trapping set is demonstrated in Fig. 4(c).
5) Codewords: Let y be a codeword of C and let T = supp(y). It is clear that T is an (a, 0) trapping set where a = |supp(y)|. Conversely, C contains codewords of Ham-

(a) (5, 3){2} (b) (6, 2){1} (c) (7, 1){1} (d) (8, 2){1}

(e) (7, 3){1}

(f) (8, 2){2}

(g) (8, 4){1}

4Each incidence structure corresponds to a bipartite graph. An incidence Fig. 5. The (5, 3){1} trapping set and its successors of size less than 8 in

structure is connected if the corresponding bipartite graph is connected

girth 8 LDPC codes.

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY - AUGUST 2010.

9

(a) (4, 4)

(b) (6, 4){2} (c) (7, 5){1} (d) (7, 5){2}

(a) (6, 0){1}

(e) (8, 6){1}

(f) (8, 6){2}

(g) (8, 6){3}

Fig. 6. The (4, 4) trapping set and its direct successors of size less than 8 in girth 8 LDPC codes (excluding the (5, 3){1} and (6, 4){1} trapping sets shown in Fig. 1(b) and 7(a), respectively).

(d) (10, 0){1}

(b) (8, 0){1} (e) (10, 0){2}

(c) (8, 0){2} (f) (10, 0){3}

(a) (6, 4){1}

(b) (7, 3){2}

(c) (8, 2){3}

(g) (10, 0){4}

(h) (10, 0){5}

(i) (10, 0){6}

Fig. 8. All (a, 0) trapping sets where a ≤ 10 in girth 8 LDPC codes.

(d) (7, 3){3}

(e) (8, 2){4}

(f) (8, 2){5}

(g) (8, 4){2}

(h) (8, 4){3}

(i) (8, 4){4}

Fig. 7. The (6, 4){1} trapping set and its successors of size less than 8 in girth 8 LDPC codes.

ming weight a if the Tanner graph of C contains (a, 0) trapping sets. It is also clear that C has dmin as its minimum distance if and only if (i) the Tanner graph of C contains no (a, 0) trapping set where a < dmin and (ii) the Tanner graph of C contains at least one (dmin, 0) trapping set. For regular column-weight-three codes, an (a, 0) trapping set is a direct successor of an (a − 1, 3) trapping set. Consequently, the linepoint representation of an (a, 0) trapping set is obtained by pairwisely merging three black shaded nodes in the line-point representation of an (a − 1, 3) trapping set with three nodes in Fig. 3(a). The line-point representations of all possible (a, 0) trapping sets where a ≤ 10 of girth 8 codes are shown in Fig. 8.
V. SEARCHING FOR SUBGRAPHS IN A TANNER GRAPH
In this section, we briefly describe the main idea behind our techniques of searching for elementary trapping sets from the TSO in the Tanner graph of a regular column-weightthree LDPC code. An efficient search of the Tanner graph for trapping sets relies on the topological relations among trapping sets defined in the TSO and/or carefully analyzing their induced subgraphs. Trapping sets are searched for in a way similar to how they have evolved in the TSO. A bigger trapping set can be found in a Tanner graph by expanding a smaller trapping set. More precisely, given a trapping set T1 of

type T1 in the Tanner graph of a code C, our techniques search for a set of variable nodes such that the union of this set with T1 form a trapping set T2 of type T2, where T2 is a successor of T1. Our techniques are sufficient to efficiently search for a large number of trapping sets in the TSO, especially for those to be avoided in the code constructions that we will present in subsequent sections. They can be easily expanded to search for other trapping sets as well. Details on the implementation of these techniques are given in Appendix A.
It is necessary to mention existing methods of searching for trapping sets in the Tanner graph of a code. It is well-known that this problem is NP hard [41], [42]. Previous work on this problem includes exhaustive [43], [44] and non-exhaustive approaches [45], [46]. The main drawback of existing exhaustive approaches is high complexity. Consequently, constraints must be imposed on trapping sets and on the Tanner graph in which trapping sets are searched for. For example, the method in [43] can only search for (a, b) trapping sets with b ≤ 2 in a Tanner graph with less than 500 variable nodes. The complexity is much lower for non-exhaustive approaches. However, these approaches can not guarantee that all trapping sets are enumerated, and hence are not suitable for the purpose of this paper.
VI. CONSTRUCTION OF CODES FREE OF SMALL TRAPPING SETS
Let us begin this section by summarizing the paper up until this point. We have given the description for a general class of LDPC codes whose parity check matrices are arrays of permutation matrices obtained from Latin squares. We have also presented our database of trapping sets of regular columnweight-three codes for the Gallager A/B algorithm on the BSC. Subgraphs of these trapping sets are identified by many researchers as the main cause of error floor for various iterative

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY - AUGUST 2010.

10

decoding algorithms and channels. Methods of searching for these subgraphs in the Tanner graph of a code have also been presented. We therefore have all theoretical tools necessary to proceed to code construction.
In this section, we give a general method to construct regular LDPC codes free of a given collection of trapping sets. More precisely, codes are constructed so that their Tanner graphs are free of a given collection of subgraphs from the TSO. Therefore, in this context, an (a, b){i} trapping set should be understood as a specific subgraph and not as a set of noneventually correct variable nodes. It is important to note that our method of constructing codes free of small trapping sets can be applied to any class of codes, and not just the new class of codes proposed in this paper. For example, the progressive edge growth (PEG) method [47] can be modified to construct a random code whose Tanner graph is free of certain subgraphs. Similarly, the method of progressively constructing a Tanner graph described below can be applied to construct any code whose parity check matrix is an array of permutation matrices. However, we restrict ourselves to construct codes defined in Section III in this paper, for the sole purpose of demonstrating the excellent behavior of this newly proposed class of codes.
We organize our discussion by considering two separate problems: determining a collection of forbidden subgraphs, i.e., which subgraphs that should be avoided in the Tanner graph and (ii) constructing a Tanner graph which is free of a given collection of subgraphs. Let us begin with the second problem.
A. Construction of a Code by Progressively Building the Tanner Graph
We give a progressive construction of a (dv, dc) regular LDPC code whose parity check matrix is an array of permutation matrices. Our construction algorithm is inspired by the PEG algorithm [47] and the method in [13]. Let C be a (γ, ρ) regular LDPC code whose parity check matrix H = f (W) is an array of permutation matrices. The condition that a Tanner graph is free of a given collection of subgraphs can be understood as a set of constraints imposing on such Tanner graph. Assume that the Tanner graph G corresponding to H is required to satisfy a set of constraints. Let τ denote this set of constraints.
The construction is based on a check and select-or-disregard procedure. The Tanner graph of the code is built in ρ stages, where ρ is the row weight of H (ρ is the number of columns of W). Usually, ρ is not pre-specified, and a code is constructed to have the rate as high as possible. Determining the exact rate is beyond the scope of this paper. At each stage, a set of |Q| new variable nodes are introduced that are initially not connected to the check nodes of the Tanner graph. Blocks of edges are then added to connect the new variable nodes and the check nodes. Each block of edges corresponds to a permutation matrix and hence corresponds to an element of Q. An element of Q may be chosen randomly, or it may be chosen in a predetermined order. After a block of edges is tentatively added, the Tanner graph is checked for condition τ . If the condition τ is violated, then that block of edges is removed

and replaced by a different block. The algorithm proceeds until no block of edges can be added without violating condition τ . Details of the construction is given in Algorithm 1. For mathematical convenience, we append a symbol ψ to the quasi group Q and define f (ψ) = Z, the all zero matrix of dimension |Q| × |Q|. Also let Ψ be a γ × 1 matrix whose all elements are ψ, where γ is the column weight of the code to be constructed.
Algorithm 1 Progressively Building the Tanner Graph W ← γ × 1 all zero matrix; ρ ← 1 while wγ,ρ = ψ do W ← W Ψ ; S ← Q; i ← 1; ρ ← ρ + 1; while S = ∅ & i ≤ γ do wi,ρ ← ξ ∈ S; if f (W) satisfies τ then i ← i + 1; end if S ← S\{ξ}; end while end while ρ ← ρ − 1; Delete the last column of W;
The complexity of the algorithm grows exponentially with the column weight. The speed of practical implementation of the algorithm also depends strongly on how the condition τ is checked on a Tanner graph. However, for small column weights, say 3 or 4, and small to moderate code lengths, the algorithm is well handled by state-of-the art computers. For example, with the searching techniques described in Section V, the construction of a (1111, 808) code which has girth 8, minimum distance at least 10 and which contains no (5, 3){2} trapping set takes less than 2 minutes on a 2.4 GHz computer.
Remarks:
• It is worth mentioning an alternative approach in which a subgraph is described by a system of linear equations. Elements of a given matrix W are particular values of variables of these systems of equations. The Tanner graph corresponding to f (W) contains the given subgraph if and only if elements of W form a proper solution of at least one of these linear systems of equations. For array LDPC codes, equations governing cycles and several small subgraphs have been derived in [14] and [37]. However, the problem of finding W such that its elements do not form a proper solution of any of these systems of equations is notoriously difficult.
• The above code construction can be alternatively described as a process of progressively constructing an incidence structure. The construction begins with an incidence structure consisting of points with no lines. Blocks of parallel lines are then added based on a check and select-or disregard procedure, similar as in [12] and [13].
B. Determining the Collection of Forbidden Subgraphs
Now we give a general rationale for deciding which trapping sets should be forbidden in the Tanner graph of a code. As

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY - AUGUST 2010.

11

previously mentioned, these trapping sets are chosen from the TSO. It is clear that if a parent trapping set is not present in a Tanner graph, then neither are its successors. Since the size of a parent trapping set is always smaller than the size of its successors, a code should be constructed so that it contains as few small parent trapping sets as possible. However, forbidding smaller trapping sets usually imposes stricter constraints on the Tanner graph, resulting in a large rate penalty. This trade off between the rate and the choice of forbidden trapping sets is also a trade off between the rate and the error floor performance. While an explicit formulation of this trade off is difficult, a good choice of forbidden trapping sets requires the analysis of decoder failures to reveal the relative harmfulness of trapping sets. It has been pointed out that for the BSC, the slope of the frame error rate (FER) curve in the error floor region depends on the size the smallest error patterns uncorrectable by the decoder [16]. We therefore introduce the notion of the relative harmfulness of trapping sets in a general setting as follows.
Assume that under a given decoding algorithm, a code is capable of correcting any error pattern of weight ϑ but fail to correct some error patterns of weight ϑ + 1. If the failures of the decoders on error patterns of weight ϑ + 1 are due to the presence of (a1, b1) trapping sets of type T1 then T1 is the most harmful trapping set. Let us now assume that a code is constructed so that it does not contain T1 trapping sets and is capable of correcting any error pattern of weight ϑ + 1. If the presence of (a2, b2) trapping sets of type T2 leads to decoding failure on some error patterns of weight ϑ + 2 then T2 is the second most harmful trapping sets. The relative harmfulness of other trapping sets are also determined in this manner.
Example 4: Let us consider a regular column-weight-three LDPC code of girth 8 on the BSC and assume the Gallager A/B decoding algorithm. Since such a code can correct any error pattern of weight two, we want to find subgraphs whose presence leads to decoding failure on some error patterns of weight three. Since a code can not correct three error if its Tanner graph either contain (5, 3){2} trapping sets or contain (8, 0){1} trapping sets, the most harmful trapping sets are the (5, 3){2} trapping set and the (8, 0){1} trapping set.
To further explain the importance of the notion of relative harmfulness, let us slightly detour from our discussion and revisit the notion of a trapping set. A trapping set is defined as a set of variable nodes that are not eventually correct. Because trapping sets are defined in this way, it is indeed possible, in some cases, to identify some small trapping sets in a code by simulation, assuming the availability of a fast software/hardware emulator. Unfortunately, trapping sets identified in this manner generally have little significance for code construction. This is because the dynamic of an iterative decoder (except the Gallager A/B decoder on the BSC) is usually very complex and the mechanism by which the decoder fails into a trapping set is difficult to analyze and is not well understood. In many cases, the subgraphs induced by sets of non-eventually correct variable nodes are not the most harmful ones. For example, the (6, 4) trapping sets shown in Fig. 6(b) and 7(a) were identified in [37] to be among the most dominant trapping sets. However, our analysis which will be

presented in Section VIII indicates that they are not the most harmful ones. Although avoiding subgraphs induced by sets of non-eventually correct variable nodes might lead to a lower error floor, the code rate may be excessively reduced. A better solution is to increase the slope of the FER curve with the fewest possible constraints on the Tanner graph. This can only be done by avoiding the most harmful trapping sets.
Nevertheless, except for the case of the Gallager A/B algorithm on the BSC in which the relative harmfulness of a trapping set is determined by its critical number, determining the relative harmfulness of trapping sets in general is a difficult problem. The original concept of harmfulness of a trapping set can be found in early work on LDPC codes as well as importance sampling methods to analyze error floors. MacKay and Postol [39] were the first to discover that certain “near codewords” are to be blamed for the high error floor in the Margulis code on the AWGNC. Richardson [15] reproduced their results and developed a computation technique to predict the performance of a given LDPC code in the error floor domain. He characterized the troublesome noise configurations leading to the error floor using trapping sets and described a technique (of a Monte-Carlo importance sampling type) to evaluate the error rate associated with a particular class of trapping sets. Cole et al. [48] further developed the importance sampling based method to analyze error floors of moderate length LDPC codes and we used instantons to predict the error floors [26]–[28].
The main idea of our method is to determine the relative harmfulness of trapping sets from the TSO for the SPA on the BSC. It relies on the topological relationship among these trapping sets and will be presented in Section VIII. Before presenting this method, we describe the construction of codes for the Gallager A/B algorithm on the BSC in the next section.
VII. LDPC CODES FOR THE GALLAGER A/B ALGORITHM ON THE BSC
The error correction capability of regular column-weightthree LDPC codes has been studied in [24], [25], [49] and can be summarized as follows.
• A column-weight-three LDPC code with Tanner graph of girth g cannot correct all g/2 errors.
• A column-weight-three LDPC code with Tanner graph of girth g ≥ 10 can always correct g/2 − 1 errors.
• A column-weight-three LDPC code with Tanner graph of girth g = 6 can correct any two errors if and only if the Tanner graph does not contain a codeword of weight four.
• A column-weight-three LDPC code with Tanner graph of girth g = 8 can correct any three errors if and only if (i) the Tanner graph does not contain (5, 3){2} trapping sets and (ii) the Tanner graph does not contain (8, 0){1} trapping sets.
The above conditions completely determine the set of constraints τ to be imposed on the Tanner graph of a code to achieve a given error floor performance. The necessary and sufficient conditions to correct three errors were derived in [49]. These conditions require that the Tanner graph of the code has girth g = 8, and does not contain (5, 3) and (8, 0)

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY - AUGUST 2010.

12

C1

10−2

Tanner

Frame Error Rate (FER)

10−3

10−4

10−5

10−6

10−7

10−180−3

10−2 Cross over probability ( )

Fig. 9. Frame error rate performance of the Tanner code and code C1 under the Gallager A algorithm on the BSC with maximum 50 iterations.

trapping set. It is obvious that the (5, 3) is indeed the (5, 3){2}.

The (8, 0) trapping set should be understood as the (8, 0){1}

since it can be shown easily that the critical number of the

(8, 0){2} is four. In the following example, we present the

construction of a code which can correct three errors.

Example 5 (Codes that can correct 3 errors): The Tanner

code of length 155 [6] is a (3, 5) regular LDPC code. This

code contains (5, 3){2} trapping sets and hence can not correct

three errors under the Gallager A/B algorithm on the BSC. Let

q = 31 and α be a primitive element of GF(q). Let C1 be an LDPC code defined by the parity check matrix H = f¯(U1)

where

U1 =

1 α16

α5 α4

α15 α24

α23 α12

.

C1 is a (155, 64) LDPC code with girth g = 8 and minimum distance dmin = 12. The Tanner graph of C1 contains no (5, 3){2} trapping sets. Therefore, C1 is capable of correcting any three error pattern under the Gallager A/B algorithm on the BSC. The FER performance of C1 under the Gallager A/B algorithm over the BSC is shown in Fig. 9. The FER
performance of the Tanner code is also shown for comparison.
We end this section with a remark on the harmfulness of
two trapping sets with the same critical number. If two types of trapping sets T1 and T2 have the same critical number ϑ, then the one with the larger number of inducing set of size ϑ is more harmful. An inducing set of a trapping set is a set of
variable nodes such that if these variable nodes are initially in
error then the decoder will fail on the trapping set (see [30]
for a more detailed discussion).

notion of relative harmfulness in Section VI-B, we approach
this problem as follows.
Let us consider an LDPC code C and assume that C can correct any error patterns of weight ϑ under the SPA on the BSC. We are interested in determining the trapping sets whose
presence leads to decoding failure on error patterns of weight ϑ + 1. To simplify this problem, we only focus on initial error patterns of weight ϑ + 1 that surely lead to decoding failures of the Gallager A/B algorithms on the BSC. The basis for this
simplification is as follows. Since it is well-known that the
SPA algorithm has a superior performance in both the waterfall
and error floor regions compared to that of the Gallager A/B
algorithm, we surmise that an error pattern correctable by the
Gallager A/B algorithm is correctable with high probability
by the SPA algorithm, although this fact remains unproven. The initial error patterns of weight ϑ + 1 that are surely uncorrectable by the Gallager A/B algorithm can be easily
derived from the TSO.
Assume the transmission of an all zero codeword and let y
be the received vector input to the decoder. Also assume that supp(y) = T1, a trapping set of type T1 from the TSO with ϑ + 1 variable nodes. In other words, all the ϑ + 1 initially corrupt variable nodes belong to the trapping set T1. This error pattern results in a decoding failure of the Gallager A/B
algorithm and hence is an initial error pattern of interest. As
the decoder operates by passing messages along edges of the
Tanner graph, the decoding outcome depends heavily on the
immediate neighborhood of the subgraph induced by variable nodes in T1. In many cases, a decoding failure will occur if T1 generates a trapping set T2 of type T2, where T2 is a successor of T1. In such cases, the presence of T2 in a code make it incapable of correcting any error pattern of size ϑ + 1 and hence T2 is a harmful trapping set.
To evaluate the harmfulness of the T2 trapping set, all initial error patterns that consist of variable nodes of a T1 trapping set must be considered. Let T be the set of all trapping sets of type T1. Partition T into two disjoint sets T1 and T2 such that a trapping set in T1 generates at least one T2 trapping set while a trapping set in T2 does not generate any T2 trapping set. For each trapping set Ti ∈ T , perform decoding on the input vector yi where supp(yi) = Ti, at a cross over probability of the channel. Let Ts be the set of trapping sets Ti ∈ T such that decoding is successful upon error pattern yi. Define χ1( ) and χ2( ), the rate of successful decoding for trapping sets in T1 and T2 at the cross over probability of the channel, as follows

χ1(

)

=

|T1 ∩ Ts| |T1|

(7)

χ2(

)

=

|T2 ∩ Ts| |T2|

(8)

VIII. LDPC CODES FOR THE SPA ON THE BSC
In this section, we present the construction of regular column-weight-three codes for the SPA on the BSC. The main element of the construction is the determination of the set of most harmful trapping sets. Following the discussion of the

The harmfulness of T2 trapping sets of C is evaluated by comparing χ1( ) and χ2( ) for a wide range of . The larger the difference χ2( )−χ1( ), the more harmful T2 trapping sets are. The harmfulness of T2 trapping sets is also compared with the harmfulness of other successor trapping sets of T1, which
is determined in the same fashion. Once the most harmful

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY - AUGUST 2010.

13

code has minimum distance dmin = 8 and hence is unable to correct all weight-four error patterns. Clearly, the first step
towards the guaranteed correction of four errors is to eliminate the (6, 0){1}, (8, 0){1} and the (8, 0){2} trapping sets, which
are the low weight codewords. We therefore construct a code with minimum distance dmin ≥ 10. Let q = 53 and α be a primitive element of GF(q) and let τ specify that the Tanner graph of a code has girth g = 8 and contain no (6, 0){1}, (8, 0){1} and (8, 0){2} trapping sets. Using the method of
construction described in Section VI-A, we obtain a regular column-weight-three code C2 with parity check matrix H2 = f¯(U2) where

U2 =

1 α

α2 α3

α4 α5

α6 α8

α7 α10

α11 α13

α12 α9

α14 α38

α27 α51

.

Fig. 10. Hierarchy of trapping sets originating from the (4, 4) trapping set for regular column-weight-three codes of girth 8.
trapping sets have been determined, a code is constructed so that it does not contain these trapping sets.
We note that this characterization of relative harmfulness, although heuristic, plays a critical role in the construction of good high rate codes as no explicit quantification of harmfulness of trapping sets is known. This characterization of harmfulness also helps a code designer to determine more or less the exact subgraphs that are responsible for a certain type of decoding failure. It is therefore superior to searching for trapping sets by simulation.
We continue our discussion with three case studies in which we evaluate (i) the relative harmfulness of the (6, 2){1} and (8, 2) trapping sets, (ii) the relative harmfulness the (5, 3){2} trapping set and (iii) the relative harmfulness of the (7, 3), (9, 3) and (10, 2) trapping sets. For a better illustration of the relationship among these trapping sets, a hierarchy of trapping sets originating from the (4, 4) trapping set is shown in Fig. 10. For the first case, we present a detailed analysis. For the other two cases, we only give the results of the analysis. The analysis to be presented is a step towards the guaranteed correction of four, five and six errors under the SPA on the BSC. For simplicity, we assume that codes have girth g = 8 in all examples, although the method of construction can be applied to girth 6 codes to likely result in higher rate codes.
A. The Harmfulness of the (6, 2){1} and (8, 2) Trapping Sets Since we consider codes with girth g = 8, let us start with
an existing code of such girth. Consider the (530, 373) integer lattice code (or shortened array code [14]) given in [13]. This

C2 is a (530, 373) code. Similar to the above integer lattice code, C2 has column weight 3, row weight 10 and rate R = 0.7.
The Tanner graph of C2 contains 17066 (4, 4) trapping sets. We partition the collection of (4, 4) trapping sets into nine disjoint sets T1, T2, . . . , T9 based on whether a (4, 4) trapping set generate (5, 3){2}, (6, 2){1}, (8, 2) or (10, 0)
trapping sets. Note that, for simplicity, we do not differentiate among different (8, 2) and (10, 0) trapping sets in this analysis,
although a more detailed treatment may reveal some difference
in the harmfulness of those trapping sets. The classification and sizes of different sets of (4, 4) trapping sets are shown in
Table I.

TABLE I DISJOINT SETS OF (4, 4) TRAPPING SETS IN THE LDPC CODE C2 . A INDICATES THAT THE (4, 4) TRAPPING SETS IN Ti GENERATE AT LEAST
ONE CORRESPONDING TRAPPING SET.

Sets Ti
T1 T2 T3 T4 T5 T6 T7 T8 T9

Trapping Sets Generated by Ti (5, 3){2} (6, 2){1} (8, 2) (10, 0)
Total

Total
4982 53 424 7314 371 1855 106 1007 954 17066

To evaluate the harmfulness of the (5, 3){2}, (6, 2){1}, (8, 2) and (10, 0) trapping sets, we perform decoding on all input vectors yi where supp(yi) = Ti, a (4, 4) trapping set of C2. The result is as follows. For the trapping sets in T1, T1, T2 and T7, the decoder successfully decodes all input vectors yi at all the 250 values of that have been considered, i.e. χ1( ) = χ2( ) = χ3( ) = χ7( ) = 100% ∀ . For the trapping sets in T4, T5, T6, T8 and T9, the rate of successful decoding is shown in form of histogram in Fig. 11. As an example of
how to interpret the result, consider the trapping sets in T6. It can be seen that there are about 160 values (65%) of at
which decoding is succesful for all input vectors yi. For about 90 values (30%) of , decoding is succesful for approximately
nine out of ten input vectors yi.

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY - AUGUST 2010.

14

250 i=4
i=5 200
i=6 i=8 150 i=9
100

Number of values of

50

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Succes sful decoding rate χi( ) (%)

Fig. 11. The rate of successful decoding for different sets of (4, 4) trapping sets in code C2

The following facts can be observed:
• The (4, 4) trapping sets in T1, T2 and T3 do not generate either (6, 2){1} or (8, 2) trapping sets. The rate of
successful decoding is 100% for all tested values of .
• The (4, 4) trapping sets in T4, T5 and T6 generate at least one (8, 2) trapping set. Decoding is not always successful,
but the rate of successful decoding is more than 90% for
all tested values of .
• The (4, 4) trapping sets in T8 generate at least one (6, 2){1} trapping set. The rate of successful decoding χ8( ) is significantly lower in general compared to type χ4( ), χ5( ) and χ6( ).
• The (4, 4) trapping sets in T9 generate at least one (6, 2){1} and one (8, 2) trapping set. The rate of successful decoding χ9( ) is lowest in general.
• The (4, 4) trapping sets in T6 generate at least one (5, 3){2} trapping set while the ones in T4 do not. In general, χ6( ) < χ4( ).
• The (4, 4) trapping sets in T5 generate at least one (10, 0) trapping set while the ones in T4 do not. In general, χ5( ) > χ4( ).
• The (4, 4) trapping sets in T7 generate at least one (10, 0) trapping set while the ones in T6 do not. χ7( ) = 100% for all tested values of .
The above observations strongly suggest that both (6, 2){1} and (8, 2) trapping sets are harmful. However, the harmfulness of the (6, 2){1} trapping set is much more evident than the harmfulness of the (8, 2) trapping set. Besides, it is interesting to notice that χ7( ) = 100% for all tested values of . All (4, 4) trapping sets in T7 generate at least one (8, 2) trapping set, one (5, 3){2} trapping set and one (10, 0) trapping set. In this case, the presence of (10, 0) trapping sets seem to “help” decoding. This “positive” effect of (10, 0) trapping sets can also be seen when comparing χ5( ) and χ4( ). Finally, by comparing χ6( ) and χ4( ), it is suggestive that the (5, 3){2} trapping sets have some negative effect on decoding if the
(4, 4) trapping set generate (8, 2) and (10, 0) trapping sets.

To further verify our prediction on the harmfulness of the

(6, 2){1} and (8, 2) trapping sets, we construct another code

with the same parameters as those of C2. We denote this code by C3. The Tanner graph of C3 has stronger constraints than the Tanner graph of C2 as it contains neither (6, 2){1} nor (10, 0) trapping sets. Since (10, 0) trapping sets are not presented, C3
has minimum distance at least 12. Let C3 be defined by the parity check matrix H3 = f¯(U3)
where

U3 =

1 α30

α2 α16

α4 α

α15 α19

α17 α7

α26 α34

α31 α3

α33 α8

α36 α22

.

The Tanner graph of C3 contains 16483 (4, 4) trapping sets, which can be partitioned into four disjoint sets as shown in Table II.

TABLE II TYPES OF (4, 4) TRAPPING SETS IN THE (530, 373) LDPC CODE C3

Sets Ti
T1 T2 T3 T4

Trapping Sets Generated by Ti

(5, 3){2}

(8, 2)

Total

Total
6890 795 6890 1908 16483

We again perform decoding on all input vectors yi where supp(yi) = Ti, a (4, 4) trapping set of C3. The rate of successful decoding for trapping sets in T3 and T4 is shown in form of histogram in Fig. 12. For trapping sets in T1 and T2, decoding is always successful.
It can be seen that the results are consistent with the previ-
ously obtained results. Decoding is always successful for the (4, 4) trapping sets which generate neither (6, 2){1} nor (8, 2) trapping sets. Besides, χ3( ) > χ4( ) in general since the (4, 4) trapping sets in T3 do not generate (5, 3){2} trapping sets. These results validate our prediction on the harmfulness of successors of the (4, 4) trapping set. We have repeated the

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY - AUGUST 2010.

15

250

100

i =3

i =4

10−1

200

10−2

150

10−3

Frame Error Rate (FER)

Number of values of

100

10−4

50

0 90

95

100

Succes sful decoding rate χi( ) (%)

10−5 C3

10−6

C2

PEG Code

Lattice Code

10−7

10−2

10−1

Cross over probability ( )

Fig. 12. The rate of successful decoding for different sets of (4, 4) trapping Fig. 13. Frame error rate performance of codes in Example 6 under the SPA

sets in code C3

on the BSC.

experiment for a collection of codes whose Tanner graphs do not contain either (6, 2){1} or (8, 2) trapping sets. The

consistency of the results led us to the following conjecture.

Conjecture 1: A regular column-weight-three code of girth g = 8 can correct any error pattern of weight 4 consisting of

variable nodes of an eight cycle under the SPA on the BSC if its Tanner graph contain neither (6, 2) nor (8, 2) trapping sets.

We remark that this conjecture only gives a sufficient

condition. A code may correct any error pattern of weight 4 even if its Tanner graph contains (8, 2){2} trapping sets. For

example, consider the Tanner code of length 155. The Tanner graph of this code does not contain (6, 2){1} trapping set, but it contains (8, 2){2} trapping sets. However, decoding is always successful for all the (4, 4) trapping sets at any value

of . It might be possible to find a better sufficient condition

by taking into account bigger trapping sets, but such analysis

appears to be difficult. Example 6: The FER performance of C2, C3 and the
(530, 373) integer lattice code under the SPA with 100 itera-

tions on the BSC is shown in Fig. 13. For comparison, Fig. 13 also shows the FER performance of a (530, 373) LDPC code

constructed using the PEG algorithm [47]. This PEG code has
girth g = 6 and minimum distance dmin = 6. Clearly, C3 whose Tanner graph is free (6, 2) trapping sets, has the best performance. Although the Tanner graph of C2 contains some (8, 2) trapping sets, it still outperforms the PEG code. The

integer lattice code has the worst performance although it has
girth g = 8. Example 7: Let q = 34 and let C4 be defined by the parity
check matrix H4 = f¯(U5) where

U4 =

α2 α55

α6 α12

α9 α28

α31 α46

α33 α78

α39 α37

α57 α61

α60 α76

α67 α44

.

C4 is a (810, 569) code with column weight 3, row weight 10 and rate R = 0.7. The Tanner graph of C4 has girth g = 8 and does not contain either (6, 2) or (8, 2) trapping sets. The

Frame Error Rate (FER)

100

C4

10−1

PEG Code

10−2

10−3

10−4

10−5

10−6

10−7

101−80−3

10−2

10−1

Cross over probability ( )

Fig. 14. Frame error rate performance of codes in Example 7 under the SPA on the BSC.

FER performance of C4 under the SPA with 100 iterations on the BSC is shown in Fig. 14. For comparison, Fig. 14 also shows the FER performance of a (810, 567) PEG constructed code. This code has girth g = 8. It can be seen that C4 has a lower floor than the PEG code.
B. The Harmfulness the (5, 3){2} Trapping Set
Assuming the guaranteed correction of four errors, we are now interested in finding trapping sets whose presence leads to decoding failure on some error patterns of weight five. There are two trapping sets with five variable nodes from the TSO that can be present in the Tanner graph of a regular columnweight-three LDPC code with girth g = 8: the (5, 3){2} trapping set and the (5, 5) trapping set. The result of our

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY - AUGUST 2010.

16

100 C5

10−1

(3150, 2520) QC Code

10−2

10−3

10−2 C6 PEG Code
10−3
10−4

Frame Error Rate (FER) Frame Error Rate (FER)

10−4 10−5 10−6

10−5 10−6

101−70−3

10−2

10−1

Cross over probability ( )

10−7

10−2

Cross over probability ( )

Fig. 15. Frame error rate performance of codes in Example 8 under the SPA Fig. 16. Frame error rate performance of codes in Example 9 under the SPA

on the BSC.

on the BSC.

analysis indicates that (5, 3){2} trapping sets are the most harmful and should be forbidden in the Tanner graph of a code.
Example 8: Let q = 211 and let C5 be defined by the parity check matrix H5 = f¯(U5) where U5 is shown in (9). C5 is a (3165, 2554) code with column weight 3, row weight 15 and rate R = 0.8. The Tanner graph of C5 has girth g = 8 and does not contain either (5, 3){2} or (8, 2) trapping sets. The FER performance of C5 under the SPA with 100 iterations on the BSC is shown in Fig. 15. For comparison, Fig. 15 also shows the FER performance of a (3150, 2520) regular QC LDPC code constructed using array masking proposed in [5]. The parity check matrix of this code is a 10 × 50 array of 63 × 63 circulants or zero matrices, which has column weight 3 and row weight 15. This code has girth g = 8. It can be seen that C4 has a lower error floor than the code constructed using array masking.
C. The Harmfulness of (7, 3), (9, 3) and (10, 2) Trapping Sets
With the above results, we now consider codes free of (5, 3){2} and (8, 2) trapping sets and aim for the guaranteed correction of six errors. To guarantee the correction of six errors, codes must have minimum distances dmin ≥ 14. In other words, their Tanner graphs should be free of (a, 0) trapping sets ∀a ≤ 12. Similar to the previous discussions, we analyze error patterns of weight six, focusing on those consisting of variable nodes of a trapping set. There are three trapping sets of size 6 from the TSO that can be present in the Tanner graph of a regular column-weight-three LDPC code with girth g = 8: the (6, 6) trapping set, (6, 4){1} trapping set and the (6, 4){2} trapping set. The results of our analysis and experiments suggest that the following trapping sets are harmful (in a decreased order of harmfulness):
• The (7, 3){2} trapping set and the (7, 3){3} trapping set. • The (10, 2) trapping sets which are successors of the
(9, 3) trapping sets below.

• The (9, 3) trapping sets which are successors of the (8, 4){2}, (8, 4){3} and (8, 4){4} trapping sets (see Fig. 10 for an illustration of the relationship among these
trapping sets).
Example 9: Let q = 199 and let C6 be defined by the parity check matrix H6 = f¯(U6) where U6 is shown in (10). C6 is a (2388, 1793) code with column weight 3, row weight 12 and rate R = 0.75. The Tanner graph of C6 has girth g = 8 and does not contain either (5, 3){2} or (7, 3) trapping sets and neither does it contain (10, 2) trapping sets that are generated by either (8, 4){2}, (8, 4){3} or (8, 4){4} trapping sets. The FER performance of C6 under the SPA with 100 iterations on the BSC is shown in Fig. 16. For comparison, Fig. 16 also shows the FER performance of a (3150, 2518) PEG code. This code has girth g = 8. It can be seen that C6 has a lower error floor than the PEG code.
Example 10: Let q = 337 and let C7 be defined by a parity check matrix H7 = f¯(U7) where U7 is shown in (11). C7 is a (4381, 3372) code with column weight 3, row weight 13 and rate R = 0.77. The Tanner graph of C7 has girth g = 8 and does contain either (5, 3){2} or (7, 3) trapping sets and neither does it contain (9, 3) trapping sets that are generated by either (8, 4){2}, (8, 4){3} or (8, 4){4} trapping sets. The FER performance of C7 under the SPA with 100 iterations on the BSC is shown in Fig. 17. For comparison, Fig. 17 also shows the FER performance of a (4381, 3370) PEG code. This code has girth g = 8. It can be seen that C7 has a lower error floor than that of the PEG code.
It is worth mentioning that the error rate performance of
existing structured regular column-weight-three codes in the
literature is at best comparable with the error rate performance
of PEG constructed codes. All of our structured codes pre-
sented in this paper outperform PEG constructed codes and
hence they are candidates for the best known high rate short
length regular column-weight-three LDPC codes.

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY - AUGUST 2010.

17

10−3 C7 PEG Code
10−4

100 C5

10−1

(3150, 2520) QC Code

10−2

Frame Error Rate (FER) Frame Error Rate (FER)

10−5

10−3 10−4

10−6

10−5 10−6

10−7

10−2

Cross over probability ( )

10−7

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

Eb/N0 (dB)

Fig. 17. Frame error rate performance of codes in Example 10 under the Fig. 18. Frame error rate performance of codes in Example 8 under the SPA

SPA on the BSC.

on the AWGNC.

IX. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
Although the codes presented in this paper are optimized for the BSC, they also have excellent performance on the AWGNC. As a demonstration, we show the FER performance of the code C5 from Example 8 under the SPA on the AWGNC in Fig. 18. Recall that the Tanner graph of C5 has girth g = 8 and does not contain (5, 3){2} and (8, 2) trapping sets and that the (3150, 2520) regular QC LDPC code was constructed using array masking proposed in [5]. It can be seen that although C5 was constructed for the BSC, it outperforms the other code, which was constructed for the AWGNC.
We have introduced a new class of structured LDPC codes with a wide range of rates and lengths. More importantly, we have proposed a method to construct codes whose Tanner graphs are free of small trapping sets. These trapping sets are selected based on their relative harmfulness for the decoding algorithms. We have also presented the constructions of regular column-weight-three codes. These codes have excellent performance on both the BSC and the AWGNC, although they were only optimized for the BSC. To the best of our knowledge, these codes outperform the best known short length structured LDPC codes. Our future work includes extending the TSO to include irregular codes and column-weight-four codes as well as the constructions of column-weight-four codes and irregular LDPC codes with low error floor.

APPENDIX A IMPLEMENTATION OF TECHNIQUES OF SEARCHING FOR
TRAPPING SETS
A. Subroutines
We assume that the following simple subroutines are used in our search algorithms.
• Y = RowIntersectIndex(X1, X2, ϑ). Let X1 and X2 be matrices. Y is a matrix of two columns. If (i1, i2) is a row of Y then the i1th row of X1 and the i2th row of X2 share ϑ common entries.
• Y = OddDegreeChecks(H, X). Let H be the parity check matrix corresponding to a Tanner graph G of an LDPC code. Let X be a matrix with each row of X giving a set of variable nodes. Assume that all the subgraphs induced by variable nodes in rows of X have the same number of odd degree check nodes. Y is a matrix with the same number of rows as X. Elements of the ith row of Y are odd degree check nodes in the subgraph induced by the variable nodes in the ith row of X.
• Y = TotalChecksOfDegreeK(H, X, ϑ). Let H be the parity check matrix corresponding to a Tanner graph G. Let X be a matrix whose elements are variable nodes in G. Y is a one-column matrix with the same number of rows as X. The element in the ith row

U5 =

α8 α23 α47 α54 α55 α67 α78 α90 α108 α169 α177 α187 α192 α193 α61 α189 α190 α171 α170 α132 α182 α128 α71 α117 α129 α10 α160 α64

.

U6 =

α12 α15 α28 α34 α37 α57 α75 α85 α111 α157 α166 α163 α175 α60 α25 α118 α167 α156 α142 α30 α155 α31

.

U7 =

α18 α88 α112 α142 α157 α186 α196 α197 α228 α246 α288 α316 α25 α73 α155 α287 α328 α151 α75 α324 α148 α248 α62 α70

.

(9) (10) (11)

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY - AUGUST 2010.

18

of Y is the number of check nodes with degree ϑ in the subgraph induced by the variable nodes in the ith row of X. • Y = IsTrappingSet(H, X). Let H be the parity check matrix corresponding to a Tanner graph G. Let X be a matrix whose elements are variable nodes in G. Y is a one-column matrix with the same number of rows as X. The element in the ith row of Y is 1 if the variable nodes in the ith row of X form a trapping set and is 0 otherwise.
The above subroutines can be implemented using simple
sparse matrix operations and hence are of low complexity.

B. Searching for Cycles of Length ϑ

Since every trapping set contains at least one cycle, the search for trapping sets always starts with finding cycles in the Tanner graph. All cycles of length ϑ that contain variable node v can be found by performing the following steps.
1) Construct the tree of depth ϑ/2 − 1, taking v as the root using the breadth-first search algorithm [50]. Let N1, N2, . . . , Ndv be sets of leaf nodes of depth ϑ/2 − 1 such that all the nodes in Ni are descendants of the ith neighbor of v. It can be shown that |Ni| ≤ (dv − 1)t1 (dc − 1)t2 where

t1

=

ϑ 4

−

3 2

,

t2

=

t1

+1

if

ϑ/2

is

odd

t1

=

t2

=

ϑ 4

−

1

if

ϑ/2

is

even.

2) For every pair of nodes oi ∈ Ni, oj ∈ Nj and i = j, determine if they share a common neighbor. If so then a cycle of length ϑ has been found. If oi and oj are check nodes then the cycle is induced by the variable nodes that are ancestors of oi and oj and their common neighbor. If oi and oj are variable nodes then the cycle is induced by oi and oj as well as the variable nodes that are ancestors of oi and oj. The maximum number of possible pairs oi, oj is i=j dv(dv − 1)|Ni||Nj|.
The two steps described above are executed for every variable node. To further simplify the search, after all the cycles containing v are found, v can be marked so that it is no longer included in Step 1 of the search at other variable nodes. The complexity of searching for cycles is polynomial in the degree of the variable nodes and check nodes but increases only linearly in the code length. Note that our search algorithm not only counts the number of cycles but also records the variable nodes that each cycle contains. For this reason, existing efficient algorithms to count number of cycles in a bipartite graph (for example those proposed in [51], [52]) can not be applied directly.
Example 11: To illustrate the search algorithm, we list the number of cycles in some popular codes, as well as the runtimes of the algorithm on a 2.6 GHz computer in Table III.

TABLE III NUMBER OF CYCLES OF SEVERAL LDPC CODES AND RUN-TIME OF THE
CYCLE SEARCHING ALGORITHM ON A 2.6 GHZ COMPUTER

Codes

Tanner Margulis MacKay

n (dv, dc) Number of 6-cycles Number of 8-cycles Number of 10-cycles Run-time (Seconds)

155 (3,6)
0 465 3720 0.007

2168 (3,6)
0 1320 11088 0.23

4095 (3,17) 5183 121238 3038421 28.79

C. Searching for (a + 1, b − 1) Trapping Sets Generated by (a, b) Trapping Sets
Let T1 be an (a, b) trapping set, T2 be an (a + 1, b − 1) trapping set and let T1 be a parent of T2. Further, let T1 be a trapping set of type T1 in the Tanner graph of a code C and assume that T1 generates a trapping set T2 of type T2. As discussed in Section IV, T2 is obtained by adjoining one variable node to T1. The line-point representation of T2 is obtained by merging two black shaded nodes in the linepoint representation of T1 with two nodes in Fig. 3(b). Therefore, to search for T2, it is sufficient to search for a variable node that is connected to two odd degree check nodes
in the subgraph induced by variable nodes in T1. Let X be a matrix whose each row contains variable nodes
of a T1 trapping set in the Tanner graph G. H is the parity check matrix which defines C. All T2 trapping sets can be found by performing the following steps.
1) Find all odd degree check nodes of all T1 trapping sets: Y1 = OddDegreeChecks(H, X).
2) Form X1, a one-column matrix with n rows where the element in the ith row is variable node i.
3) Form a matrix Y2 whose ith row gives all check nodes neighboring to the variable node i: Y2 = OddDegreeChecks(H, X1).
4) Find all pairs (i, j) such that the ith row of Y1 and the jth row of Y2 share 2 common entries. Y3 = RowIntersectIndex(Y1, Y2, 2).
5) If (i, j) is the lth row of Y3, adjoin variable node j to the ith row of X to form the lth row of Y4.
6) Determine the number of degree one check nodes in
the subgraph induced by variable nodes in each row of Y4 and eliminate the rows of Y4 that do not have b − 1 degree one check nodes. The matrix Y obtained has each row contain variable nodes that induce a T2 trapping set in the Tanner graph of the code. Y = Y4(TotalChecksOfDegreeK(H, Y4, 1)== b − 1).
D. Searching for (a + 2, b) Trapping Sets Generated by (a, b)
Trapping Sets
Let T1 be an (a, b) trapping set, T2 be an (a + 2, b) trapping set and let T1 be a parent of T2. Further, let T1 be a trapping set of type T1 in the Tanner graph of a code C and assume that T1 generates a trapping set T2 of type T2. Consider two variable nodes that share a check node. As discussed in Section IV, T2 is obtained by adjoining these two variable nodes to T1. The line-point representation of T2 is obtained by merging two black shaded nodes in the line-point representation of T1

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY - AUGUST 2010.

19

with two nodes in Fig. 3(c). Therefore, to search for T2, it is sufficient to search for a pair of variable nodes that share a common neighboring check node and each node is connected to one odd degree check node in the subgraph induced by variable nodes in T1.
The search for (a + 2, b) trapping sets is very similar to the search for (a + 1, b − 1) trapping sets described in the previous subsection. In particular, the following modifications should be made:
• In Step 2, X1 is a two column matrix, each row contains a pair of variable nodes that share a common neighboring check node.
• In Step 3, the ith row of Y2 gives all degree one check nodes in the subgraph induced by variable nodes in the ith row of X1.
• In Step 5, variable nodes in the jth row of X1 are adjoined to the ith row of X.
• In Step 6, b − 1 is replaced by b.
Since Step 4 does not take into account the case in which two check nodes of a new variable node are merged with two odd degree check node of T1, the subroutine IsTrappingSet is used afterward to eliminate rows of Y that do not contain variable nodes that form a trapping set.
E. Remarks
The above search procedures may not differentiate among different (a, b) trapping sets. For example, all (5, 3){1} and (5, 3){2} trapping sets are found if they are searched for as trapping sets generated by the (4, 4) trapping sets. Similarly, all (7, 3){2} and (7, 3){3} are found as trapping sets generated by the (6, 4){1} trapping sets. If searching for a specific type of trapping set is required, then it is necessary to further analyze the induced subgraph. For example, notice that the (5, 3){1} trapping set is a union of a 6-cycle and an 8-cycle, sharing two variable nodes while the (5, 3){1} trapping set is a union of two 8-cycle, sharing three variable nodes. Therefore, to search for all (5, 3){2} trapping sets from a list of (4, 4) trapping sets, one would find all pairs of (4, 4) trapping sets that share three variable nodes, using the RowIntersectIndex subroutine. The union of each pair of (4, 4) trapping sets is then a set of five variable nodes. Each set of variable nodes forms a (5, 3){2} trapping set if its induced subgraph contains three degree one check nodes. Similarly, all (7, 3){2} can be found by noticing that they are unions of two (6, 4){1} trapping sets, sharing five variable nodes.
Example 12: We end this section by giving the statistics of small trapping sets present in the random MacKay code of length 4095 along with the running times of the algorithms. These are given in Table IV. Note that the numbers of six, eight and ten cycles present in the Tanner graph of this code are given in Table III. All the searches were performed in a 2.6 GHz computer.
APPENDIX B RELATIONS TO ARRAY LDPC CODES
We show that the class of codes described in Section III contains array LDPC codes when the Galois field is a

TABLE IV NUMBER OF SMALL TRAPPING SETS IN MACKAY RANDOM CODE OF
LENGTH 4095

Trapping Sets

Total Run-time (Seconds)

(5, 3){1} (5, 3){2} (6, 2){1} (7, 1){1} (6, 4){1} (7, 3){2} and (7, 3){3}

19617 3259 167
2 299636 56309

0.59 12.18 0.16 0.05 55.78 4.21

prime field. The parity check matrix of an array LDPC code described by Fan in [9] is a γ × ρ subarray of the matrix Harr of the form

I I

I ···

I



I J

J2 ···

J q−1 

Harr

 =
 


I ...

J2 ...

J4

···

J 2(q−1)

  , (12)

...

...

...

  

I J q−1 J 2(q−1) · · · J (q−1)(q−1)

where q is an odd prime and J is a q × q circulant matrix. We now show that Harr can be obtained by permuting rows and columns of H in (5), hence array LDPC codes are contained
in the new class of LDPC codes proposed in this paper.
Let q be an odd prime. Since the additive group of GF(q) is cyclic, we can write GF(q) = {β−∞ = 0, β0 = 1, β1, . . . , βq−2}, where βi+1 = βi + 1 for 0 ≤ i ≤ q − 3 and β−∞ = βq−2 + 1. Permute rows and columns of L to obtain Lβ, a Latin square that has (β−∞, β0, β1, . . . , βq−2) as indices of rows from top to bottom and columns from left to
right. It can be shown that there exists a permutation matrix O such that Lβ = OLO. Replace L by Lβ and let Mβ be the sets of images of GF(q) under f . It can be seen that:
• Mβ is the set of circulant permutation matrices of size q × q.
• f (β−∞) = I, the q × q identity matrix. • Proposition 1, 2 and Theorem 1 still holds when αt is
replaced with βt and P is replaced with Pβ = OP O .
Finally, permute rows and columns of W in 4 to obtain Wβ = OWO . Then Wβ has the form:

0 0

0 ··· 0 

0 1

Wβ

 =
 


0 ...

β1 ...

β1 · · · βq−2 

β12

···

β1βq−2

 ,

...

...

...

  

0 βq−2 βq−2β1 · · · βq2−2

and hence f (Wβ) = Harr, with J = f (β0) = f (1).

APPENDIX C QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES FROM CYCLIC GROUPS OF
PERMUTATION MATRICES
In [5], Lan et. al give the construction of a class of QC LDPC codes based on the multiplicative groups of Galois fields. We briefly describe this class of codes, but with the formulation introduced in this paper.
Consider the Galois field GF(q), where q is a power of a prime. Let L = [li,j]i,j∈Q denote a Latin square defined

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY - AUGUST 2010.

20

by the Cayley table of (Q, ⊕) where Q = {1, α, . . . , αq−2} and ⊕ is the multiplicative operation of GF(q), i.e., li,j = i × j. Let M = {M0, M1, . . . , Mq−2} be the set of images of elements of Q under f . We give the following statements without proofs:
• M0 = I is the (q − 1) × (q − 1) identity matrix. • f (αt1 αt2 ) = f (αt1 )f (αt2 ). • M is the cyclic group of permutation matrices of size
(q − 1) × (q − 1) under ordinary matrix multiplication.
Define W and H as in (1) and (2), where (Q, ⊕) is the multiplicative group of GF(q). The following theorem gives the necessary and sufficient condition on W, such that the Tanner graph corresponding to H has girth at least 6. We omit the proof since it is very similar to the proof of Theorem 1.
Theorem 3 (Cross-multiplication Constraint): The Tanner graph corresponding to H contains no cycle of length four iff wi1,j1 wi2,j2 = wi1,j2 wi2,j1 for any 1 ≤ i1, i2 ≤ µ; 1 ≤ j1, j2 ≤ η; i1 = i2; j1 = j2.
For any pair (γ, ρ) of positive integers with 1 ≤ γ, ρ ≤ q, let H be a γ × ρ subarray of H. Then H is a γq × ρq matrix over GF(2) which is also free of cycles of length 4. H has constant column weight dv = γ and row weight dc = ρ. The null space of H gives a regular structured LDPC code C of length ρq with rate at least R = (ρ − γ)/ρ [1].
Remarks: We can adjoint the zero element of GF(q) to the set Q to obtain Q = Q ∩ {0} and define f (0) = Z, the all zero matrix of size (q − 1) × (q − 1). Theorem 3 still holds for W defined on Q . In this case, the cross-multiplication constraint is equivalent to the α-multiplied row constraints given in [5]. It is almost obvious that Latin squares obtained from the Cayley table of the additive group of GF(q) satisfy the cross-multiplication constraint. This concept is used in [53]
to obtain a class of QC LDPC codes on Latin squares.

APPENDIX D
MINIMUM DISTANCE OF CODE CONSTRUCTED FROM G F (2ϑ )

The structured LDPC codes proposed in this paper include codes of length 2ϑ, which allow hardware implementation to
be further simplified. Unfortunately, the minimum distances of
these codes are upper bounded by 8.
Theorem 4: Let C be an LDPC code defined in Section III with γ = 3. If q = 2ϑ where ϑ ∈ N, ϑ > 1 then the minimum distance of C is at most 8.
Proof: Let H be the parity check matrix of C, where C is an LDPC code defined in Section III with q = 2ϑ. We know that H = f (W), where W is a matrix over GF(q). Let W be a matrix formed by any two columns of W . WLOG assume
that

 αt1 W =  αt2
αt3

αt4  αt5  . αt6

Let i1 = ξ ∈ GF(q) and let

j1 = ξ + αt1 , j5 = ξ + αt2 , j9 = ξ + αt3 , i5 = ξ + αt1 + αt4 , i6 = ξ + αt2 + αt5 , i7 = ξ + αt3 + αt6 ,

j2 = ξ + αt2 + αt4 + αt5 , j3 = ξ + αt3 + αt4 + αt6 , j6 = ξ + αt1 + αt4 + αt5 , j8 = ξ + αt3 + αt5 + αt6 , j11 = ξ + αt1 + αt4 + αt6 , j12 = ξ + αt2 + αt5 + αt6 ,

i2 = ξ + αt1 + αt2 + αt4 + αt5 , i3 = ξ + αt1 + αt3 + αt4 + αt6 , i4 = ξ + αt2 + αt3 + αt5 + αt6 , j7 = ξ + αt1 + αt2 + αt3 + αt4 + αt6 , j10 = ξ + αt1 + αt2 + αt3 + αt4 + αt5 , i8 = ξ + αt1 + αt2 + αt3 + αt4 + αt5 + αt6 .

Then the following equations hold since αt + αt = 0 ∀αt ∈ GF(q)

i1 − j1 = αt1 , i2 − j2 = αt1 , i3 − j3 = αt1 , i4 − j4 = αt1 , i5 − j1 = αt4 , i5 − j6 = αt5 , i5 − j11 = αt6 , i6 − j2 = αt4

i1 − j5 = αt2 , i2 − j6 = αt2 , i3 − j7 = αt2 , i4 − j8 = αt2 , i6 − j5 = αt5 , i6 − j12 = αt6 , i7 − j3 = αt4 , i7 − j8 = αt5

i1 − j9 = αt3 , i2 − j10 = αt3 , i3 − j11 = αt3 , i4 − j12 = αt3 , i7 − j9 = αt6 , i8 − j4 = αt4 , i8 − j7 = αt5 , i8 − j10 = αt6 .

Recall that f (αt) is a permutation matrix whose rows and

columns are indexed using elements of GF(q), and that its entries mi(,tj) = 1 if and only if i − j = αt. Since the above equations hold, there exist eight variable nodes in the Tanner

graph corresponding to f (W ) with line-point representation

shown in Fig. 8(b). In other words, the Tanner graph of C

contains the (8, 0){1} weight-eight codewords.

Clearly, the Tanner graph of C contains trapping sets that

are parents of the (8, 0){1} codeword, i.e., it contains the

(7, 3){2} and (6, 4){1} trapping sets shown in Fig. 7(a) and

7(b) and eight cycles. Consequently, the Tanner graph of C

has girth at most 8. From the proof of Theorem 4, it can be

seen that the number of (8, 0){1} codewords of C is lower

bounded by

ρ 2

2ϑ−2,

where

ρ

is

the

row

weight

of

C.

We

also note that for all the column-weight-three codes of girth

g = 8 that we have constructed from GF(2ϑ), this lower bound

gives the exact number of (8, 0){1} codewords. Moreover, we

found no (8, 0){2} codewords (the line-point representation of

the (8, 0){2} codeword is shown in Fig. 8(c)) in these codes.

Therefore, the total number of weight-eight codewords in these

codes is

ρ 2

2ϑ−2.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press, 1963.
[2] Z. Li, L. Chen, L. Zeng, S. Lin, and W. Fong, “Efficient encoding of quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun, vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 71–81, Jan. 2006.
[3] C.-H. Liu, C.-C. Lin, S.-W. Yen, C.-L. Chen, H.-C. Chang, C.-Y. Lee, Y.-S. Hsu, and S.-J. Jou, “Design of a multimode QC-LDPC decoder based on shift-routing network,” IEEE Trans. Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs, vol. 56, no. 9, pp. 734–738, Sept. 2009.

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY - AUGUST 2010.

21

[4] Z. Cui, Z. Wang, and Y. Liu, “High-throughput layered LDPC decoding architecture,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 582–587, Apr. 2009.
[5] L. Lan, L. Zeng, Y. Tai, L. Chen, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Construction of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for AWGN and binary erasure channels: a finite field approach,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 2429–2458, Jul. 2007.
[6] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, and T. Fuja, “A class of group-structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. ISTA, 2001.
[7] I. Djurdjevic, J. Xu, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, and S. Lin, “A class of lowdensity parity-check codes constructed based on Reed-Solomon codes with two information symbols,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 317–319, Jul. 2003.
[8] L. Chen, J. Xu, I. Djurdjevic, and S. Lin, “Near-Shannon-limit quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 1038–1042, Jul. 2004.
[9] J. L. Fan, “Array codes as low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related topics, Sept. 2000, pp. 543–546.
[10] T. Beth, D. Jungnickel, and H. Lenz, Design theory. New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press, 1986.
[11] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: a rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711 –2736, Nov. 2001.
[12] B. Vasic and O. Milenkovic, “Combinatorial constructions of lowdensity parity-check codes for iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1156–1176, Jun. 2004.
[13] B. Vasic, K. Pedagani, and M. Ivkovic, “High-rate girth-eight lowdensity parity-check codes on rectangular integer lattices,” IEEE Trans. Commun, vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1248–1252, Aug. 2004.
[14] O. Milenkovic, N. Kashyap, and D. Leyba, “Shortened array codes of large girth,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 3707–3722, Aug. 2006.
[15] T. J. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Annual Allerton Conf. on Commun., Control and Computing, Sept. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[16] M. Ivkovic, S. Chilappagari, and B. Vasic, “Trapping sets in low-density parity-check codes by using Tanner graph covers,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 3763–3768, Aug. 2008.
[17] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. Telatar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Finitelength analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[18] Y. Wang, J. Yedidia, and S. Draper, “Construction of high-girth QCLDPC codes,” in Proc. 5th Int. Symp. on Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Sept. 2008, pp. 180–185.
[19] S. Kim, J.-S. No, H. Chung, and D.-J. Shin, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes with girth larger than 12,” IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 2885–2891, Aug. 2007.
[20] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.
[21] S. K. Chilappagari, D. V. Nguyen, B. V. Vasic, and M. W. Marcellin, “On trapping sets and guaranteed error correction capability of LDPC codes and GLDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 1600–1611, Apr. 2010.
[22] C. Kelley and D. Sridhara, “Pseudocodewords of Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 4013–4038, Nov. 2007.
[23] A. Orlitsky, R. Urbanke, K. Viswanathan, and J. Zhang, “Stopping sets and the girth of Tanner graphs,” in IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, 2002, p. 2.
[24] S. Chilappagari and B. Vasic, “Error-correction capability of columnweight-three LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 2055–2061, May 2009.
[25] S. K. Chilappagari, D. V. Nguyen, B. V. Vasic, and M. W. Marcellin, “Error correction capability of column-weight-three LDPC codes under the Gallager A algorithm - Part II,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 6, pp. 2626–2639, Jun. 2010.
[26] M. G. Stepanov, V. Chernyak, M. Chertkov, and B. Vasic, “Diagnosis of weaknesses in modern error correction codes: A physics approach,” Physical Review Letters, no. 22, pp. 228 701–228 704, Nov.
[27] V. Chernyak, M. Chertkov, M. G. Stepanov, and B. Vasic, “Error correction on a tree: an instanton approach,” Physics Review Letter, vol. 93, no. 19, pp. 198 702–198 705, Nov. 2004.
[28] V. Chernyak, M. Chertkov, M. Stepanov, and B. Vasic, “Instanton method of post-error-correction analytical evaluation,” in Proc. IEEE Info. Theory Workshop, San Antonio, TX, Oct. 2004, pp. 220–224.

[29] S. K. Chilappagari, M. Chertkov, M. G. Stepanov, and B. Vasic, “Instanton-based techniques for analysis and reduction of error floors of LDPC codes,” IEEE JSAC on Capacity Approaching Codes, vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 855–865, Aug. 2009.
[30] B. Vasic, S. Chilappagari, D. Nguyen, and S. Planjery, “Trapping set ontology,” in Proc. 47th Annual Allerton Conf. on Commun., Control and Computing, Sept. 2009, pp. 1–7.
[31] “Trapping set ontology.” [Online]. Available: http://www.ece.arizona. edu/∼vasiclab/Projects/CodingTheory/TrappingSetOntology.html
[32] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic, “Analysis of absorbing sets for array-based LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Conf. on Commun., Galsgow, Scotland, June 2007, pp. 6261–6268.
[33] C. J. Colbourn and J. H. Dinitz, Handbook of combinatorial designs, second edition (Discrete mathematics and its applications). Chapman & Hall/CRC, 2006.
[34] S. K. Chilappagari, S. Sankaranarayanan, and B. Vasic, “Error floors of LDPC codes on the binary symmetric channel,” in Proc. Int. Conf. on Commun., vol. 3, 2006, pp. 1089–1094.
[35] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[36] O. Milenkovic, E. Soljanin, and P. Whiting, “Asymptotic spectra of trapping sets in regular and irregular LDPC code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 39–55, Jan. 2007.
[37] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic, “Analysis of absorbing sets and fully absorbing sets of array-based LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 181–201, Jan. 2010.
[38] Y. Zhang and W. Ryan, “Toward low LDPC-code floors: a case study,” IEEE Tran. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1566–1573, Jun. 2009.
[39] D. J. C. MacKay and M. J. Postol, “Weaknesses of Margulis and Ramanujan–Margulis low-density parity-check codes,” in Proceedings of MFCSIT2002, Galway, ser. Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 74. Elsevier, 2003.
[40] “Mackay random code.” [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy. cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html#l136
[41] K. Krishnan and P. Shankar, “Computing the stopping distance of a Tanner graph is NP-hard,” IEEE Tran. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 2278–2280, Jun. 2007.
[42] A. McGregor and O. Milenkovic, “On the hardness of approximating stopping and trapping sets,” IEEE Tran. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 1640–1650, Apr. 2010.
[43] C.-C. Wang, S. Kulkarni, and H. Poor, “Finding all error-prone substructures in LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 1976–1999, May 2009.
[44] G. B. Kyung and C.-C. Wang, “Exhaustive search for small fully absorbing sets and the corresponding low error-floor decoder,” in IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jun. 2010, pp. 739–743.
[45] M. Hirotomo, Y. Konishi, and M. Morii, “Approximate examination of trapping sets of LDPC codes using the probabilistic algorithm,” in Int. Symp. Inf. Theory and Its Appl., Dec. 2008, pp. 1–6.
[46] S. Abu-Surra, D. DeClercq, D. Divsalar, and W. Ryan, “Trapping set enumerators for specific LDPC codes,” in Inf. Theory and Appl. Workshop, Jan. 2010, pp. 1–5.
[47] X. Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[48] C. Cole, S. Wilson, E. Hall, and T. Giallorenzi, “Analysis and design of moderate length regular LDPC codes with low error floors,” in Proc. 40th Annual Conference on Information Sciences and Systems, March 2006, pp. 823–828.
[49] S. Chilappagari, A. Krishnan, and B. Vasic, “LDPC codes which can correct three errors under iterative decoding,” in IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, 5-9 2008, pp. 406–410.
[50] D. E. Knuth, The art of computer programming, volume 2 (3rd ed.): seminumerical algorithms. Boston, MA, USA: Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc., 1997.
[51] T. Halford and K. Chugg, “An algorithm for counting short cycles in bipartite graphs,” IEEE Tran. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 287–292, Jan. 2006.
[52] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “A message-passing algorithm for counting short cycles in a graph,” CoRR, vol. abs/1004.3966, 2010.
[53] L. Zhang, Q. Huang, S. Lin, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, and I. F. Blake, “Quasicyclic LDPC codes on Latin squares and the ranks of their parity-check matrices,” in Inf. Theory and Appl. Workshop, Feb. 2010.

