2702

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 7, JULY 2005

TABLE V NUMBERS OF COSETS OF WEIGHT 6

Nonuniform Error Correction Using Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
Hossein Pishro-Nik, Student Member, IEEE, Nazanin Rahnavard, Student Member, IEEE, and
Faramarz Fekri, Senior Member, IEEE

TABLE VI NUMBERS OF COSETS OF WEIGHT 7

Abstract—This correspondence introduces a framework to design and analyze low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes over nonuniform channels. We study LDPC codes for channels with nonuniform noise distributions, rate-adaptive coding, and unequal error protection. First, we propose a technique to design LDPC codes for volume holographic memory (VHM) systems for which the noise distribution is nonuniform. We show that the proposed coding scheme has an easy design procedure and results in efficient codes for holographic memories. An important property of the proposed technique is the design of the codes that have a low error floor and low variable node degrees, while maintaining performance close to the Shannon limit. We then show that punctured LDPC codes can be studied as a special case of our design methodology for nonuniform channels. Finally, we propose a method to generate LDPC codes that can provide unequal error protection in addition to having a good overall performance. Moreover, the highly protected bits can be decoded without requiring the entire word to be decoded.
Index Terms—Bipartite graphs, error floor, iterative decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, nonuniform channels, punctured codes, unequal error protection.

TABLE VII NUMBERS OF COSETS OF WEIGHT 8
weightdistribution is uniquely determined. In the tables, # lists the numbers of cosets for these weights. For cosets of weights 4; 5; 6; 7; 8; the weight distributions are written using parameters s, t, and the numbers of cosets with a given weight distribution are listed in Tables III–VII, respectively. We remark that the unique coset of weight 11 is the shadow of C46 (see, e.g., [4] and [9] for the definition of the shadow).
REFERENCES
[1] E. F. Assmus Jr. and V. Pless, “On the covering radius of extremal selfdual codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-29, no. 3, pp. 359–363, May 1983.
[2] D. J. Bergstrand, “New uniqueness proofs for the (5, 8, 24), (5, 6, 12) and related Steiner systems,” J. Combin. Theory Ser. A, vol. 33, pp. 247–272, 1982.
[3] P. Delsarte, “Four fundamental parameters of a code and their combinatorial significance,” Inf. Control, vol. 23, pp. 407–438, 1973.
[4] M. Harada, A. Munemasa, and V. D. Tonchev, “A characterization of designs related to an extremal doubly-even self-dual code of length 48,” Ann. Comb., to be published.
[5] M. Harada and M. Ozeki, “Extremal self-dual codes with the smallest covering radius,” Discr. Math., vol. 215, pp. 271–281, 2000.
[6] S. K. Houghten, C. W. H. Lam, L. H. Thiel, and J. A. Parker, “The extended quadratic residue code is the only (48; 24; 12) self-dual doublyeven code,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 53–59, Jan. 2003.
[7] F. J. MacWilliams and N. J. A. Sloane, The Theory of Error-Correcting Codes. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North-Holland, 1977.
[8] C. L. Mallows and N. J. A. Sloane, “An upper bound for self-dual codes,” Inf. Control, vol. 22, pp. 188–200, 1973.
[9] E. M. Rains, “Shadow bounds for self-dual codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 134–139, Jan. 1998.

I. INTRODUCTION

In this correspondence, we study three closely related applications of

low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes: coding for nonuniform chan-

nels, rate-compatible coding using punctured codes, and unequal error

protection. In the first application, we concentrate on the design and

analysis of LDPC codes over nonuniform channels. Specifically, we

focus on volume holographic memory (VHM) systems that can be

modeled as a set of parallel channels as in Fig. 1. In [1], [2] we have

already shown that using proper LDPC codes instead of conventional

coding schemes can result in more than a 50% increase in the storage

capacity of these systems. In the second application, we investigate

punctured LDPC codes and show that they can be considered as a spe-

cial case of our model for nonuniform channels. Finally, we study un-

equal error protection using LDPC codes.

First, we investigate the design of LDPC codes over a set of parallel

subchannels. Consider Fig. 1, where we transmit bits over several bi-

nary-input output-symmetric channels. For simplicity, we may assume

that the channels are independent. One trivial approach is to design a

separate error-correcting code for each of the channels. Here, we are

interested in designing only one LDPC code as shown in Fig. 1. Sup-

pose we use a code of length n. We transmit any codeword over the set

of

channels

such

that

(j ) n

bits

in

any

codeword

are

transmitted

over

the jth channel. Let pj

=

n n

. Assume 0 < pj for j

= 1; . . . ; kr .

Let zj be the random variable that is equal to the log-likelihood ratio

(LLR) of a received bit from the jth channel. Then, if the bits that are

transmitted over the different channels are chosen randomly from the

Manuscript received May 9, 2003; revised January 22, 2005. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCF-0430964 and the Air Force Office of Scientific Research under Grant F49620-02-1-0053 (Kent Miller).
The authors are with the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia 30332-0250 USA (e-mail: hossein@ece.gatech.edu; nazanin@ece.gatech.edu; fekri@ece.gatech.edu).
Communicated by R. Koetter, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2005.850230

0018-9448/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:16:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 7, JULY 2005

2703

Specifically, suppose we send data in the forms of frames of length n

over a network. These n bits include the redundant bits due to the error-

correcting code. Moreover, suppose a very small fraction of the data in a frame (the header bits), consisting of (n) bits, is very important to

us. Let us call them important bits. We need a coding scheme with the

following properties. First, the important bits must have a considerably

smaller error rate than the rest of the bits in the codeword. Second, for

a given code rate, the average BER of the code must be acceptable. In

Fig. 1. Several parallel channels.

other words, we want to minimize the price that we may have to pay for the unequal error protection. Thus, we would like the UEP code to

n bits in a codeword, the set of parallel channels can be modeled as a

single channel having the LLR that has the distribution

k

PZ (z) = pjPZ (z):

(1)

j=1

have overall performance close to the best ordinary codes for the same rate and block length. Third, we want to be able to decode the header data without decoding the whole frame. Our goal in Section IV is to show that we can satisfy the above requirements with LDPC codes. The good performance of LDPC codes makes them good candidates for the problem described above.

Therefore, good degree distributions for LDPC codes can be found by
the methods described in [3] and [4] for the corresponding PZ (z).
The first goal of this correspondence is to show that for certain practical problems, we can employ an improved method that provides some advantages over the above method. We consider VHM systems and show that they can be modeled as a set of parallel channels as in Fig. 1. Then, we introduce the ensemble of graphs that are used over parallel channels. We present the asymptotic analysis of the performance of the corresponding codes. We then discuss the design methodology for practical systems and we present some results for VHM systems. Relevant

Throughout the correspondence we assume the following termi-

nology. By a graph we mean a simple graph, i.e., a graph with no loops

(edges joining a vertex to itself) and no multiple edges (several edges

joining the same two vertices). Let A be a subset of the vertices in the

2 graph g. Then N (A) =
g. More generally, for j

N

1(A) ,N

js(hAo)wiss

the the

set set

of of

neighbors of vertices in g

A in from

which there is path of length j to a vertex in A. Let D be a subgraph

of g such that its vertex set is A. We say D is induced by A if D

contains all edges of g that join two vertices in A. For a square matrix

M , r(M ) denotes the spectral radius of M . In other words,

work regarding the application of LDPC codes for parallel channels can be found in [5].

fj j g r(M) = max  :  is an eigenvalue of M :

Second, we consider the construction of rate-compatible LDPC codes via puncturing, one of the most common methods used to construct rate-compatible codes. In this method, in order to change the rate of a code to a higher rate, we puncture (delete) a subset of

Similar to [4], for a random variable X with distribution FX we define

f g f g Pe(FX) = Pr X < 0

+

1 Pr

X

=0

:

2

the codeword bits. Puncturing has been studied for convolutional and

turbo codes [6]–[8]. The near Shannon limit performance of LDPC codes [4], [9], [10] motivates us to construct rate-adaptive LDPC codes. Previous work on finding puncturing patterns for LDPC codes

II. NONUNIFORM ERROR CORRECTION A. VHM Systems

is given in [11] where it is shown that punctured LDPC codes exhibit Some practical applications may benefit from the use of nonuniform

desirable properties. First, the performance of a good LDPC code is error protection. For example, in holographic data storage, information

maintained for a wide range of rates (as defined in Section III, we is recorded and retrieved in the form of two-dimensional data pages

define the performance as the ratio of the code rate to the channel (i.e., two-dimensional patterns of bits). The bits in a page are subject

capacity for small enough bit-error rates (BERs)). Second, there is to different sources of noise and interference (such as inter-page inter-

no theoretical limitation on the number of rates or the values of rates ference (IPI), limited diffraction, aberration, misalignment error, and

we can generate. In Section III, we present some results on punctured nonuniform erasure [16]). The noise distribution at any point in the

codes and show that a randomly punctured LDPC code usually has a page is obtained by the superposition of these noise sources. We assume

good performance. We show that a punctured code can be modeled that the noise is Gaussian and the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) decreases

as a code that is used over two parallel channels as Fig. 1. In this as we move from the center to the corner of the page [16]. Typically,

model, punctured bits are transmitted over the second channel that has the raw BER might vary by two or three orders of magnitude over a

a zero capacity. Thus, our proposed density evolution formulas for the page. The common approach to solve the nonuniform error protection

parallel channels can be used to find optimum puncturing patterns for problem is to use an interleaver followed by a Reed–Solomon (RS)

the LDPC codes.

code [16]. It has been shown through simulations that LDPC codes op-

Third, we consider a closely related problem of unequal error pro- timized for nonuniform channels, result in an increase in the storage

tection (UEP). Some previous works on UEP codes can be found in capacity of a typical holographic data storage by more than 50% com-

[12]–[15]. In Section IV, we will be concerned with a possibly uni- pared to the approach using an interleaver and an RS code [1], [2]. In

form channel; however, we would like to impose intentional nonuni- this section, we discuss the design methodology for the LDPC codes

form BERs for different sets of bits. In other words, we would like to that are used in the VHM systems. However, note that this design proce-

protect some bits more than others. In particular, we are interested in dure is also applicable to other systems such as rate-compatible codes,

unequal error correction for data frames. A transfer frame consists of orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) systems and mul-

a header, a body, and a trailer. We usually want a smaller error prob- tilevel coding.

ability for the header information, which contains important routing

2 Consider a VHM page of N N pixels. Each pixel is subject to

information such as the destination address and the frame number. It noise with a probability density that is dependent on the pixel location

is also desirable to be able to read the header data without decoding in the page. Generally, pixels at the corner of a data page have higher

the whole frame. This prevents all intermediary routers from having to probability of error than those at the center of the page. We divide this

decode the entire frame.

page into kr regions in which pixels are subject to almost the same

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:16:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2704

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 7, JULY 2005

noise power. Let the regions be R1; R2; . . . ; Rk . All the bits in a page
are written or read simultaneously. Thus, this page can be modeled as kr parallel binary input channels as in Fig. 1.

B. Ensemble g(3; )

There are several ways to define the ensembles of LDPC codes suit-

able for nonuniform channels. We introduced such an ensemble in [1]

but in this correspondence we use a slightly simpler ensemble. Again,

suppose we use a code of length n, and we transmit each codeword over the set of channels such that n(j) bits from every codeword are trans-
mitted through the jth channel. Let (x1; x2; . . . ; xn) be a codeword.
Let also W (j) be the set of bits in the codeword that are transmitted over
j j j 1 j the jth channel (type j bits). Thus, we have W (j) = n(j), where
denotes the cardinality of the set. For example, in the VHM system,
f 2 g W (j) is the set of bits in the jth region (i.e., W (j) = : xi xi Rj ).
Now we define the ensemble g(3; ) of bipartite graphs for nonuni-
form error protection. Let E be the set of edges in the graph and let E(j) be the set of edges that are incident with a variable node of type j. Also, let Ei(j) be the set of the edges that are adjacent to the variable
nodes of type j and degree i. We define

( ) (j) x =

0 (ij) xi 1

(2)

where

jj jj = (ij)

Ei(j) E (j )

:

(3)

f g Let 3 = ( ) (j) x : j = 1; . . . ; kr . Let also (x) = 0 ixi 1,
where i is the fraction of edges connected to a check node of degree i
[4]. We define the ensemble g(3; ) as the ensemble of bipartite graphs with the degree distributions given by 3 and . In other words, in the ensemble g(3; ), variable nodes corresponding to bits of different types
may have different degree distributions. In fact, we propose to design
codes with the prior knowledge of which bits are transmitted over each
channel. Our aim in this correspondence is to show that this method
has some advantages in certain applications.

C. Asymptotic Analysis
Similar to [4], we can find the density evolution formulas for the
ensemble g(3; ). Let us define

where I is the indicator function and

00(FZ)(x) = 1 0 FZ0

0 ln tanh

x
2

Note

that

FZ

01(FZ)(x) = FZ

ln tanh

x
2

in (8) will be the corresponding

:
distribution

for

(9)
Pl001 .

Let c(j) be the capacity of the jth binary channel in Fig. 1 and sup-

pose that we use a randomly chosen LDPC code from the ensemble
g(3; ). Using (5)–(7) we can prove the following lemma.

1 Lemma 1: Suppose c(j) < 1 for j = 1; . . . ; kr and kr < . Then, 2 f g for any i; j 1; 2; . . . ; kr we have ll!im1 ( ) Pe Pl(j) = 0 if and only
if ll!im1 Pe(Pl(i)) = 0. Proof: (Sketch) Using (5) and the assumption c(j) < 1, we
conclude that to have ll!im1 Pe(Pl(j)) = 0, the density Ql should
converge to a Delta function at infinity. This means that for any
i 2 f1; 2; . . . ; gkr , we must have

ll!im1 ( ) Pe Pl(i) = 0:

Using Lemma 1 and (5)–(7) we can optimize the degree distribu-
tion of the code for the given channels. It seems that the design of good
codes from the ensemble g(3; ) is more difficult than the design of the
ordinary irregular LDPC codes because of the larger number of param-
eters involved in the optimization. However, we will show that finding a good degree distribution for a set of parallel channels is simpler than
the optimization of ordinary LDPC codes. The reason is that we can
use simpler ensembles such as semiregular ensembles (which will be defined later). In fact, the simplicity of design is one advantage of using
the ensemble g(3; ).
Most of the results for ordinary LDPC codes such as the concentration theorem, the cycle-free convergence, the stability condition of [3]
and [4], and the Gaussian approximation of [17] can also be generalized
for the ensemble g(3; ). The Gaussian approximation formulas for ensemble g(3; ) are given in the Appendix. Here we give the stability
condition for this ensemble. Other generalizations are straightforward. For simplicity, we derive the stability condition when all the channels in
Fig. 1 are binary erasure channels (BECs) with different erasure prob-
abilities. Let j be the erasure probability of the jth channel. Note that for this case, the system of parallel channels is equivalent to a BEC
with the erasure probability

j j = q(j)

E (j ) :

j jE

(4)

k

=

pj j

j=1

(10)

2 Let mv(lc);(j) denote the message that is sent from a variable node
v of type j (i.e., v W (j)) to its incident check node c at the lth iteration of the message passing algorithm. Let also mc(lv) denote the

message that the check node c sends to its incident variable node. Let

rPels(jp)eacntidveQlyl.dLeentoatelstohePdl0ebnesittihees

of random density of

variables mv(lc);(j) the message that

and mc(lv) , is sent on

a randomly chosen edge (from the variable node to the check node) at

the lth iteration. Then, it can be shown that the formulas for the density

evolution can be written as

where pj

=

n n

. However, as we mentioned before, it is better to work

with the set of parallel channels instead of the derived single channel.

Let x(lj) be the fraction of erasure messages emitted from the variable

nodes of type j in the lth iteration. Then the density evolution formulas

are

0 0 = (1 (1 0 )) x(lj)

x(0j) (j)



yl 1

k

yl =

q (j ) x(l j )

j=1

= 
 ( ) Pl(j)
0 = Pl

P0(j)

(j) Ql

q (j ) Pl(j )

(5)

= x(0j) j ;

for j = 1; 2; . . . ; kr:

(11)

(6) Let Xl be

Ql = 001  0 Pl001

(7)

x(l 1)


 where denotes convolution and 0 is defined in [4] in the following
way. If Z is a random variable with the distribution FZ , then 0(FZ) is

Xl =

1x(l2) 1

:

(12)

defined as [4]

1

0(FZ )(s; x) = 0 ( I(s=0) 0 FZ )(x) + 0 ( I(s=1) 1 FZ )(x) (8)

x(lk )

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:16:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 7, JULY 2005

2705

Then, the stability condition for the ensemble g(3; ) can be stated as Another advantage is simpler design. It is worth noting that in ordi-

follows.

nary LDPC codes, regular ensembles usually do not have thresholds

Theorem 1: Let j < 1 for j = 1; . . . ; kr and M 2 be a kr kr
matrix whose element in the jth row and the ith column is

ji

=

0(j

)

(0)0

(1)q(i)

x(j 0

)

:

Then, we have the following conditions.

• If r(M) > 1, then there exists a strictly positive constant  =

(3; ; X0) such that for all l 2 and for j = 1; . . . ; kr, we

•

Ihfavre(Mx(l)j

) >
< 1,

. then

there

exists

a

strictly

positive

constant



=

 j

(=3;1;;.X. .0;)krsu, cthhenthlal!tim1if

x(j) l
x(j) l


=0

 for for j

some
= 1; .

l
..

2
; kr

.

and for

Proof: By expanding the density evolution formula into the

close to the Shannon limit. Thus, in ordinary LDPC codes in order to approach channel capacity we need to use highly irregular codes.
However, in the ensemble g(3; ) part of the required irregularity is
achieved by channel nonuniformity. In fact, we will show in Section V that we can approach the channel capacity by using semiregular codes (codes in which bits that are transmitted through the same channel correspond to variable nodes with the same degrees). This will simplify the degree optimization significantly.
Finally, for short codes, we can get better performance by using the
ensemble g(3; ) because more information is available in the code design. Note that ensemble g(3; ) is a generalization of the ordinary ensembles of LDPC codes. In fact, by choosing all (j)(x) equiva-
lent we obtain an ordinary ensemble of LDPC codes. Thus, in all cir-

Taylor series at zero and neglecting high order terms, we get

Xl = M X 0l 1:

(13)

If kXlk
kl!im1 M

is
k

sufficiently small, then
= 0. This is equivalent

we have
to r(M)

l<l!im11.XTlhe=re0stifoafntdheopnrlyooiff

is similar to the proof of the stability condition in [4].

cumstances, the performance of the codes obtained from the ensemble
g(3; ) is at least as good as the codes obtained from ordinary ensem-
bles.
III. RATE-COMPATIBLE LDPC CODES In this section, we are concerned with punctured codes over binary-

We finally give an upper bound for the rate of the codes from the
ensemble g(3; ) with the maximum likelihood (ML) decoding. This
bound is valid for the iterative decoding as well. It is similar to the
bound given in [18]. Let 'i be the fraction of check nodes of degree i.
Let us define 8(x) = i 'ixi. By a simple observation, we can find
the following upper bound on the capacity of the LDPC codes over the
BEC. The proof is similar to the one presented in [18] on the bound for
uniform channels.

Theorem 2: Consider kr parallel binary erasure subchannels as in
Fig. 1 with erasure probabilities 1; 2; . . . ; k . Then for an arbitrarily
small error probability we must have

1

0

R



1

0


8(1

0

0)

(14)

= where 0

k j =1

q  (j) j

and

q(j)

and



are

given

by

(4)

and

(10).

D. Advantages of the Ensemble g(3; )

Here we briefly explain the advantages of using the ensemble
g(3; ). These advantages are further explained and verified using

input output-symmetric memoryless (BIOSM) channels. We restrict
ourselves to normalized channels [10]. A normalized channel is de-
fined as the channel obtained by concatenation of a BIOSM channel
with log-likelihood mappings. The normalization of a channel is a loss-
less process because the set of log likelihoods is a sufficient statistic for
decoding. Thus, we say two channels C1 and C2 are equivalent if their
normalized channels are the same. We represent the capacities of the
channels by c1 and c2, respectively. We first prove the following lemma
that is useful for modeling of punctured codes.

Lemma 2: A normalized BIOSM channel has zero capacity if and
only if the received LLR is equal to zero with probability one.
Proof: Let X and Y be the random variables representing the
input and output of a BIOSM channel, respectively. We define the
random variable U in the following way. We let the input to the
channel be X = 1. If y is the output of the channel, then

U

=

log

prfX = 1jY prfX = 01jY

= yg = yg

;

when the channel input is

X

=

1:

(15)

Then the capacity of the normalized channel is given by [10]

simulations in Section V. Note that in our model, we know which subsets of bits are transmitted through each channel. The important
fact about the ensemble g(3; ) is that we use this information in
the code design. Note that in ordinary ensembles of LDPC codes, we do not use this information in the code design, instead we use the average density of the LLRs of channels for each bit. This extra
information results in several advantages of the ensemble g(3; ) over
the ordinary ensembles. The first advantage is that we can use lower values for variable nodes in the degree distribution. In other words, we
can obtain sparser codes using the ensemble g(3; ) having the same
performance of ordinary LDPC codes. This results in faster decoding and more efficient implementation.
In ordinary LDPC codes ensembles, in order to approach the channel capacity we need to have a high number of degree-two variable nodes in

c = 1 0 E[log2(1 + e0U)jX = 1]:

(16)

Thus, if we have

U E

=0 [log2

with
(1 +

per0oUba)b] i=lity1.oInfew, tehaesnsucm=e

0. Moreover, if c = 0, p(u) is the probability

density function of U , we have

+1
1 = log2(1 + e0u)p(u)du log2(1 + e0u)p(u)du
01
= prfU = 0g

+

[log2(1 + e0u) 0 log2(1 + eu)e0u]p(u)du (17)

1 (0;+ )

the graph [19]. Thus capacity-approaching LDPC codes usually suffer
from the error floor problem. However, in the ensemble g(3; ), since
we use more information in the code design, we can have codes with a
low number or even no degree-two variable nodes that still have thresh-

where we used
caonndc[lluodge2(p1rf+U

ep=0(uu0))g=0=elo1ug.p2((01u+)

[e4u].)eS0inuc]e

we have
< 0 for

prfU = u 2 (0;

0g  1 1), we

olds close to the Shannon limit. This is particularly very important in data storage systems such as holographic memories because a very low error probability is required.

We would like to design rate-adaptive LDPC codes that use the same
encoder and decoder for all rates. Let = fr1; r2; . . . ; rsg be the
set of different rates that are needed. Let rp be the rate of the parent

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:16:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2706

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 7, JULY 2005

Fig. 2. A model that describes puncturing over a binary channel.

code (i.e., the lowest rate in ). We consider the following scheme.
We design an optimized LDPC code of rate rp = k=n where k and n
are the lengths of information blocks and the codewords, respectively.
To generate a code with a new rate, we find an optimum puncturing
of a subset of bits in the codeword and send the punctured codeword
to the receiver. It is assumed that the decoder knows the positions of
the punctured bits in the codeword. At the beginning of the iterative
decoding, we need to compute LLRs in the decoder. The LLRs for the
punctured bits are set to zero.
Let us define the performance of a rate-compatible code over a
channel as rc where c is the channel capacity and r is the maximum rate
of the code for which the error probability is less than a required value.
When we consider asymptotic behavior of codes, r is the maximum
rate for which an arbitrarily small error probability is achievable. Now
consider a time-varying binary-input output-symmetric channel [4]
which can be described by its transmission conditional probability
j 2 P (y x; ) where   ;  [ min max] is time variant. For example,
for binary-input additive white Gaussian noise (BIAWGN) channels,
 can be the variance of the noise. Let c() be the capacity of this channel. We may assume that c() is a decreasing function of . We design an optimal LDPC code for the rate rp that is used when  = max. Now, suppose the channel quality improves. In other words, the value of the parameter  is reduced to a value less than max. By puncturing, we increase the code rate from rp to r() such
that the error probability still becomes less than the required value. If

rp c(max)

>

r() c()

Therefore, we have a performance loss due to puncturing, if and only
if ceq() > c(max). Let z denote the LLR of the received bits and $(z; ) be the density of z when the all-zero codeword is sent. Then
by the following theorem, we identify the channels for which the code performance does not change due to random puncturing. For example, as a special case of the following theorem, we conclude that for a BEC
in which  is chosen to be the erasure probability, a random puncturing
results in no performance loss. In fact, the performance of the randomly punctured code is the same for all rates. It is important to note that for other types of channels, we usually have some performance degradation because of puncturing. Therefore, we need to optimize the puncturing pattern for these types of channels.
0 Theorem 3: Let $(z; ) = ()(z) + (1 ())f (z) specify a
normalized channel in which  is an increasing function of  such that
2 for all  [ min; max], we have

0  ()  (max)  1 0 rp and

+1 01 f(z)dz = 1:

Then, the average performance of any binary block code does not change by random puncturing if we choose the puncturing fraction
p() properly. Moreover, the class of channels defined by $(z; ) is
the only class of normalized BIOSM channels having this property.
Proof: First we prove the following lemma,
Lemma 3: The performance of an arbitrary block code with an arbitrary decoder does not change by random puncturing in the scheme
of Fig. 2 if and only if there exists a puncturing fraction function p()
2  such that for all  [min; max], we have ceq() c(max).
Proof: Suppose the error probability of all decoders in Fig. 2 stays the same for any random puncturing. Then, the probability density function of the input of the decoders must remain unchanged
 by puncturing. This implies that Ceq C ( max). Moreover, suppose
there exists a puncturing fraction function p() such that for all
2   [ min; max] we have Ceq() C ( max). Then if we perform
random puncturing according to p(), we have

r() c()

=

1r0p c 10(p)

=

rp c(max

)

:

(19)

Therefore, the performance of the code stays the same.

then we would have a performance loss due to puncturing. Our goal is

Proof of Theorem 3: Suppose the assumptions of the theorem

0 to minimize the performance loss by finding a good puncturing pattern. hold for $(z; ) = ()(z) + (1 ())f(z). We choose

To investigate the performance of punctured LDPC codes, we con-

sider the model depicted in Fig. 2. In this model, it is assumed that the unpunctured bits are transmitted through the channel and the punctured bits are transmitted through a virtual channel with a zero capacity. In

0 0 p()

=

(max) () 1 ()

:

(20)

fact, by Lemma 2, a normalized BIOSM channel with zero capacity is
equivalent to a BEC with erasure probability one. Let p be the fraction of punctured bits and define req() to be the code rate of the overall channel in Fig. 2. In other words, req() is the code rate if we con-

   0 It is clear that we have 0 p() (max) 1 rp. The LLR
corresponding to Ceq() is equal to

sider both punctured and unpunctured bits. With this definition, it is
clear that req() = rp. Note that Ceq = Ceq() is the channel that consists of two subchannels C1 and C2 with capacities c() and zero, respectively. Therefore, a fraction p of bits are transmitted through C2 and the rest of the bits are transmitted through C1. Let ceq() be the capacity of Ceq(). In Fig. 2, we have

0 ceq() = (1 p)c();

r()

=

(1

rp
0

p)

:

(18)

0 0 0 0 (1

p())$(z; ) + p()(z) 1

(max) () 1 ()

2 0 ()(z) + (1 ())f(z)

0 = (max)(z) + (1 (max))f(z)

= $(z; max):

(21)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:16:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 7, JULY 2005

2707

 This is the same as the LLR for C(max). Therefore, we have
Ceq() C(max). By Lemma 3, we conclude that the performance

Let ppe = q(2) = jEjEj j . Using the Appendix we define

of the codes on this channel does not change by random puncturing.

Now suppose we have a time-varying channel that is defined by

$(z; ) such that the performance of codes stays the same by random

puncturing. By Lemma 3, we
we conclude that $(z; )(1 0

have Ceq()  C(max). Therefore,
p())+ p()(z) = $(z; max): This

results in

h(1)
i

(s;

r)

=



s + (i 0 1)

j 01

j

2 1 0 (1 0 r)(j01)

(27)

$(z;

)

=

$(z;
10

) max p()

0

p1(0)p((z)) :

(22)

 0 Let pm be the maximum possible fraction of punctured bits. It is clear
that pm 1 rp. Let us define (max) = pm and

h(2)
i

(s;

r)

=



(i 0 1)

j 01

j

2 1 0 (1 0 r)(j01)

(28)

()

=

(max
10

) 0 p()
p()

;

f

(z)

=

$(z;

max) 0 (max)(z) 1 0 (max)

:

(23)

h(s; r) = (1 0 ppe)

(1)
i

h(1)
i

(s;

r)

i

+ ppe

(2)
i

h(2)
i

(s;

r):

(29)

i

Since p() is decreasing
we conclude that  is an

in  and 0
increasing

 p()
function


of

(max)  and 0

 

10
()

rp,

Then we have

(max)  1 0 rp. Moreover, we have

rl = h(s; rl01)

(30)

$(z; ) = ()(z) + (1 0 ())f(z) and

+1
f(z)dz = 1:
01

It is shown in [10] that if we optimize an LDPC code for a sym-

metric channel, the code usually has good performance on other types

of symmetric channels for which the code is not optimized. This prop-

erty of LDPC codes can be used to explain the good performance of

punctured LDPC codes by examining Fig. 2 as follows. The figure im-

plies that the puncturing process can be considered as a change in the

channel instead of the change in the code rate. Therefore, although the
LDPC code is optimized for the channel with the parameter  = max (or p = 0) we expect that it also performs well for other values of  for which p > 0 (note that Ceq is a symmetric channel). However, we can

optimize the puncturing pattern to further improve the performance.

Considering Fig. 2, we can find the density evolution formulas for a

punctured LDPC code over a BIOSM channel using the density evolu-
tion formulas for the ensemble g(3; ). Then, using these formulas, we

obtain good puncturing distributions for LDPC codes. If the channel is

subject to Gaussian noise we can also apply the Gaussian approxima-

tion method. We now show that by applying the Gaussian approxima-

tion formulas of the Appendix we get the same result as [11].

Let mu(l) denote the mean of the messages from check nodes to

variable nodes in the lth iteration. Let also m0 =

2


where  is the

variance of C1 in Fig. 2. We define

(1)
i

to

be

the

fraction

of

unpunc-

tured variable nodes of degree i among all the unpunctured variable

nodes in the graph. Define

(2)
i

for

the

punctured

variable

nodes

sim-

ilarly. If the puncturing fraction is p, we have

0 i = (1

) + p p (1)

(2)

i

i

(24)

i=

= (1)
i

(2)
i

=

1:

(25)

i

i

i

f g Our goal is to find

(2)
i

i>1 such that the performance of the code

is optimized. We have

where s
pendix,

r=l(sm) 00!and0ri0f

a=nd(1on0lypipfer)>(sh)(+s;prp)ef.oAr salsltarte2d

in the Ap-
(0; 1). We

now set up a linear program to optimize the puncturing pattern. Let us
0 define i = (1 ppe)(i1) and i = ppe(i2). Here we maximize p for
the given . Thus, we have the following optimization problem:

m;ax

p

=

jEj
n

i

i i

(31)

with the constraints

h(s; r) =

i

h(1)
i

(s;

r)

+

i

h(2)
i

(s;

r)

<

r;

i

i

0 < r < 1 (32)

i + i = i:

(33)

After finding the optimum values of i and i, we can find pi (the fraction of the variable nodes of degree i that should be punctured) by
the following equations:

Ppe = i;

i

(2)
i

=

i ppe



= (2)
i

i 

kk

pi = p

(2)
i:

(34)

i

We note that this is the same as the result in [11].

IV. UNEQUAL ERROR PROTECTION USING LDPC CODES

= (ij)

i
k

(j)

i

k

(j) k

;

j = 1; 2:

We now consider a problem closely related to code design for the (26) nonuniform channels. We will be concerned with uniform channels;
however, we would like to impose intentional nonuniformity at the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:16:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2708

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 7, JULY 2005

BERs of different sets of bits. In other words, we would like to pro-

j j Let A be the set of important variable nodes and A = (n). We

tect some bits more than others. In particular, we are interested in un-

equal error correction for data frames. A transfer frame consists of a

header and a body. The header length is usually small compared to the

body. In fact, it has usually logarithmic length with respect to the frame

length [20]. Thus, if (n) is the header length, it is reasonable to as-

sume nl!im1

(n) n

=

0. We usually want a

very small error probability

for the header information.

Suppose we want to transmit a block of k bits over a BIOSM channel.
0 We also want to use at most n k redundant bits. Let (n) be the

number of important bits that require higher protection. One approach

is to use two different block codes, one for the important bits and the

other for the rest of the bits. However, it is more interesting to design

only one block code that provides unequal error protection. More im-

portantly, using two different LDPC codes is not efficient for the fol-
lowing reason. Since (n) is usually a very small number, we have to

use a short-length code for the important bits. However, as we know

LDPC codes do not perform well for short lengths. Therefore, to get a

good BER we must use a very-low-rate code which is inefficient. Thus,

we need to use a different type of code for the important bits. On the

other hand, it is not clear that using only one LDPC code and imposing

the unequal error protection on the code would result in an efficient

propose a scheme based on the degree distributions of the vertices in
the sets N 0(A) = A; N (A); N 2(A); . . . ; N h(A), where h is a constant. Note that N j (A) consists of variable nodes if j is even. Otherwise, N j (A) consists of check nodes. As explained in [21], from the
point of view of variable nodes, it is best to have high degrees. On the
contrary, for check nodes, it is best to have low degrees. In fact, our
scheme is based on the above fact. Let gn(; ) be the ensemble of
irregular graphs introduced in [4] and [22]. That is the ensemble of bi-
partite graphs having degree distribution (; ) and length n. We define gn(; ; h; dv; dc) as the ensemble of bipartite graphs for which the degree of each vertex in N j(A) for j = 0; 1; . . . ; h is equal to dv if j is even. Otherwise, it is equal to dc. The degree distribution of the vertices in the rest of the graph is determined by  and  similar to the ensemble gn(; ). Note that for simplicity we assume that the degrees of all the variable nodes in the sets N 0(A) = A; N (A); N 2(A); . . . ; N h(A)
are the same and the degrees of all the check nodes in these sets are
the same. We could have also assigned an irregular degree distribu-
tion to the vertices in N j (A). In general, a graph from the ensemble gn(; ; h; dv; dc) is similar to a graph from the ensemble gn(; ) having the extra condition that the vertices of A and their neighborhood of depth h must have certain degree distributions.

coding scheme. In fact, our aim in this section is to study this.

A. Perfect Protection

Suppose we transmit binary bits over a binary channel with capacity

c() where  is the parameter of the channel. We want to use a block

code of rate R that performs unequal error protection. Let PE (C; ) be the average error rate of the code C when the channel parameter is

equal to . Let also
C C bits. Let R be the

PE (C; ) be the average
class of codes of type

error rate of
and rate R.

the important For example,

C LDPCR is the class of LDPC codes of rate R. C class of unequal error protection codes of type

We and

define
rate R

; R
that

as the satisfy

2 C the following property. For any C
PE (C; ) < .

; R

if

c()

>

,

then

we

have

C Definition 1:

We say that an unequal error protection scheme

; R

perfectly protects the important bits if for

C C  and  PE (C

0a;ny)

code C in R, PE(C; ).

there

exists

a

acnoydepoCsi0tivine

numbers 

; R

such

and that

Intuitively, perfect protection implies an unequal error protection

without paying any price. In other words, even if the channel capacity
c() becomes arbitrary close to zero, we are able to get arbitrarily small

error probability for the important bits without loosing anything with

respect to other bits. It can be seen that for asymptotically good codes,

perfect protection is possible

only

when

nl!im1

(n) n

=

0; otherwise,

we

violate the fundamental theorem of Shannon capacity. This assumption

 is reasonable for applications such as data frames where (n) n.

B. An Unequal Error Protection Scheme
Now we propose a scheme for unequal error protection using LDPC codes. Conventional LDPC codes provide almost equal error protection. Although high-degree variable nodes have lower error probabilities in irregular LDPC codes, the difference between the error rates of the variable nodes of different degrees is not considerable (usually, less than one order of magnitude). Moreover, this difference reduces when the channel becomes worse. Note that it is usually difficult, if not impossible, to find good unequal error protection LDPC codes by searching for different degree distributions. This is because we have to choose the degree distribution to be extremely irregular (i.e., we have

Theorem 4:
fined by gn(;

If
;

nhl!i;md1v ; d(ncn))

= 0, then the ensemble of the satisfies the perfect protection

codes deproperty.

 cgIthn(ne(os)tah;>mer)ewor,afowtrreadetaseh,saRfCvo,ertshPauencEryhe(Cptehoxa0si;tsittPisv)Eae<(cnCoud0m.e; bCe)0rsinPganEn(d(C;;

and any code C in ; h; dv; dc) having ). Furthermore, if

Proof: For simplicity, we prove the theorem for the BEC. The

extension to other channels is immediate. Let  be the erasure proba-
0 bility. Thus, c() = 1 . Suppose we are given positive numbers

foarnsdufficainedntalydleagrgreeend0i,stthriebuentisoenmpbalier

(; ) gn (;

of
;

rate R. We show that h; dv; dc) satisfies the

requirements of the theorem. Define

h

B = N j(A):

(35)

j =0

j j  Since B
the average

max(dv ;
fraction of

dc)h(n)

we

have

nl!im1

jBj
n

erasure messages which are

= 0. passed

Let xl
in the

be
lth

iteration of the iterative decoding on a graph g in gn(; ). Let also

! 1 C nlytl0hbietetrhaeti,aoivnfewroaefgptehifcerkaitcaetrivoaetnrivtoeexf deferraocsmoudrgien0gmateorsnasnaagdgeosrmawp, hwhiicgthh0

are passed in the
in n (; ). As
high probability,

its neighborhood of depth d does not contain any vertices from the set

!  ! 1 cBno0,nNfcwoolruewadhnleaeyvtthecIaoPtbnyeEsltt(ahCnet0s;dxu.lb)TgasrhaunpsP;h,nEbo0yf(Cga0r;gthu)am..tTeisnhtiesnrdesufimocreiedl,arfboytrotshtuhefofivsceeiretiinnctel[ys3i]ln,arwBgee,

as shown in Fig. 3. Let tl be the probability that the value of a variable node in A, the set of important bits, is unknown after the lth iteration.

Note that with high probability the graph I is cycle free. Thus, using

 the similar 0 0 satisfies tl

arguments as
z = 0[1 (1

in

[3] and
zl01)d

0[212]d],

we conclude where

that

for

l

h, tl

z0 = 

0 0 zl = z0[1 (1 zl01)d 01]d 01:

(36)

 Using (36), we see that for any 0  < 1 we can always choose

the
PE

(pCa0r;am)et<ers.

h,

dv ,

and

dc

such

that

th

<

. Hence, we have

to choose very high degrees for the important bits), which is usually Theorem 4 does not guarantee that the proposed scheme is efficient

harmful if we cannot have a large enough code length.

for short-length codes. However, it gives some ideas how to design

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:16:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 7, JULY 2005

2709

A stopping set S is defined in [23] as a subset of variable nodes

(1) 1 such that
shown in

all neighbors [24] and [25]

tohfatSifare2c0onne<cted

to S at least twice. It is (2 is the fraction of the

edges connected to the variable nodes of degree two), then the min-

imum distance and the size of the minimum stopping set in the ex-

purgated ensemble increase linearly with respect to the code length.

Here, a constant fraction of the codes in the ensemble with low min-

(1) 1 imum
hand,

isftop2pi0ng

set size are removed in > , these quantities

the are

expurgation. On the sublinear with high

other prob-

(1) 1 ability.
LDPC

Until codes

now, over

all the

tBheECdi,sscaotvisefryedc2ap0 acity>-achi[e2v6i]n.gTsheeqrueefonrcee,sfoorf

achieving the capacity, we should have a small minimum distance [24].

This implies that capacity-achieving codes have the error floor effect.

Fig. 3. Illustration of the subgraph I.

10 Ienrrfoarcflt,ocoarpaact iatyB-aEpRproofachi0ng7

codes of practical or higher. On the

lengths usually have an other hand, if the min-

imum distance is linear, the error-floor effect is reduced substantially.

short-length codes. Our simulations suggest that the scheme also results Although we do not have a rigorous proof for this, simulations show

in good performance for short-length codes.

the superiority of these codes in terms of the error-floor effect over the

codes with sublinear minimum distance. Thus, in our designs we al-

C. Decoding of Highly Protected Bits

As we mentioned previously, it is desirable in some applications that

we can decode the important bits without having to decode the entire

received word. This is particularly interesting in network applications

where the header has to be protected more than the rest of the bits and

extracted in routers. Here, we show that this is possible using the pro-

posed unequal error-protection LDPC (UELDPC) codes. The key point

is that by the proof of Theorem 4, we conclude that only h iterations

are sufficient to obtain a small enough error probability for the impor-

tant bits. Note that we only need the messages sent to the important

bits at the hth iteration (note that h is an even number). Thus, for the

decoding we only need the subgraph I in Fig. 3.

To decode the important bits we perform the following procedure.

( ) ( ) iFnirsNt,ht0he1

variable nodes in N h A . These messages

A
are

send messages to the simply the LLRs of

check nodes the variable

( ) ( ) ninodNesh0b1aseAd

on the observation of send messages to the

( ) messages are computed based on

tvthhaeericamhbaelenssnnaeogld.eesTshfirenonmN, thhNe0hc20hAe1ckA. Tn.ohdWeesees

( ) = continue until the messages to N 0 A A are computed. Thus, we

j ( )j need to compute E I messages for decoding the important bits

j ( )j ( E I is the number of the edges of the graph I). Note that the

number of messages that must be computed for decoding the entire
j j 2 2 block is equal to E l, where l is the total number of iterations in j j the message-passing algorithm and E is the total number of edges

in the Tanner graph of the code. Let T and T be the amount of

time required for decoding the important bits and the whole block,

respectively. Then we have

T T

=

jE(I)j jEj 2 2l

!

0;

as n ! 1:

(37)

In fact, T = 2((n)) = o(n) but T = 2(n). Therefore, we

conclude that the important bits can be decoded in a much shorter time

than the time required for decoding the entire block.

ways use the expurgated ensembles with linear minimum distance and linear minimum stopping set size. Now, we discuss the code design for the nonuniform error correction. For simplicity, we first consider the BEC. The VHM systems in which we have BIAWGN channels will be discussed afterwards.
1) BEC: Consider the case that all the channels in Fig. 1 are BECs having different erasure probabilities. Let j be the erasure probability of the jth channel. Here, we compare the performance of ordinary ir-
(3 ) regular LDPC codes and the codes from the ensemble g ;  selecting
each column of H with probability erased bits.
= 4 As an example, consider the case that the number of channels kr
and
= 1 1 : ; 2 = :25; = 5 3 : ; 4 = :95 (38)

where  is a constant. Suppose we use half-rate LDPC codes of length
104 in which 2500 bits are transmitted over each channel. Note that the

whole system can be modeled as a BEC with the erasure probability
= 45  : . As a first approach, we consider the performance of the op-

timized half-rate LDPC codes for the erasure channel in [27]. We also

(3 ) design (1) 1 leviate

cthoedeesrruosrinflgoothreperonbselemmblweegreq;uireatshfaotllo2w0s.

In

our
<

design to al. For design

simplicity, we choose the degree distribution to be semiregular. By a

semiregular degree distribution we mean a degree distribution in which

the variable nodes of the same type (variable nodes corresponding to

bits that are transmitted through the same subchannel) have the same

degree. We also require that the degree distribution of the check nodes

be concentrated at two consecutive values. It is observed that this lim-

itation does not result in considerable performance loss. However, it

makes the optimization simpler [10] and [4]. We denote the ensemble
( ) of semiregular codes by g D;  where D = fdj : j = 1; . . . ; krg

and dj is the degree of the variable nodes of type j. Thus, for the above

example, a semiregular degree distribution consists of at most four dis-

tinct degrees for the variable nodes. It may sound that the semiregu-

larity is too restrictive and the performance of the resulting codes would

V. PRACTICAL CODE DESIGN AND SIMULATION RESULTS
A. Practical Code Design for Nonuniform Channels
Let us consider the problem of designing efficient LDPC codes from
(3 ) the ensemble g ;  for the VHM systems. It is known that long LDPC
codes can have performance close to the Shannon limit. The use of long LPDC codes is possible in the VHM systems because the whole
10 10 nmoet0mp1or2erasyerpenatdgaeensiiresarrbreolaerdflfooorrostrhtoaertVeldeHassMitmfsuoylrtsaBtneEmeRosus,swhlyieg. ShreeiqnructeihraeBnEthRats0toh1fe2l.ecsosdtehdano

be much worse than the fully optimized codes. However, this is not the

= 10 case. For the length n

4, the best half-rate ordinary irregular code

that we found in [27] has the following degree distribution:

1(x) = 0:2498x+0:2472x2+0:1480x5+0:0033x6+0:3517x19

1(x) = x7:

(39)

10 Let Code A be a randomly chosen code of length 4 from the ensemble ( ) defined by 1; 1 . Note that the maximum variable-node degree is 20 for this code. We now design a semiregular code from the ensemble

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:16:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2710

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 7, JULY 2005

Fig. 4. Performance of different half-rate LDPC codes over the BEC.

g(D; ). To simplify the design we restrict the maximum variable-node of these cycles exists in our code, we just regenerate the code. Since the

degree to be 7. Therefore, only a few choices are left. We can easily find probability of having these small stopping sets is bounded away from

the best possible code with the given constraints using density evolu- one, it is very likely that we get a code with no small stopping set by a

tion. For example, we found the following degree distribution:

few trials. It is worth noting that these cycles can be found using simple

graph algorithms [28]. Therefore, we avoid degree-two variable nodes

d1 = 4; d2 = 7; d3 = 3; d4 = 2; dc = 8:

(40)

Let Code B be a randomly chosen code of length 104 from the en-

semble that is defined by the above degree distribution. Since the max-

imum variable-node degree in Code B is 7, we also generated the best

code (with respect to threshold) given in [27] with the maximum vari-

able-node degree 7. Let Code C be a randomly chosen code of length 104 from this ensemble. Fig. 4 shows the performance of these codes.

h1Fi0igr0sht5e, rwwthehainnloe1teC0t0ohd9ae.t

both Codes A and C have an error floor higher than B does not have any error floor at least for BERs Furthermore, for almost all practical purposes, Code

B is the best among these codes. It is worth noting that the maximum

variable-node degree of Code A is much higher than that of Code B.

We also conclude that Code B has lower BERs than Code C for all

in our design at Section V-A2. We will show that we can still find very good codes from the ensemble g(D; ).
2) BIAWGN Channel: We now consider the VHM systems. As we mentioned before, each page of the VHM system can be considered as a set of parallel channels having different noise powers. As an example, we use the VHM system in [2]. In this system, we divide each page into four regions (kr = 4). The noise is assumed to be Gaussian. Therefore, the system can be modeled as a set of four BIAWGN channels. The relative SNRs of different regions are

0 SNR2 SNR1 = 1.61 dB

0 SNR3 SNR1 = 2.80 dB

0 SNR4 SNR1 = 3.74 dB:

(41)

values of , the average channel erasure probability. The performance of Code B over one single BEC is also shown in the figure. We observe that the performance of the code over the nonuniform channel (four parallel subchannels) is much better than its performance over the equivalent single channel. This verifies that we have utilized of the nonuniformity of the channel in the code design. Additionally, if it is

We want to design a code of rate 0:85 from the ensemble g(D; ). (In

VHM systems codes with rates between 0:7 and 0:9 are typically used.)

Since it at least

1is00ve1r2yiismnpeoerdtaendt),towperaevvoenidt

the error floor (because a BER of degree-two variable nodes in the

graph. We found the following degree distribution:

desired, by slightly relaxing the constraints on the ensemble g(D; ), we can get closer performance to the capacity.

d1 = 3; d2 = 4; d3 = 7; d4 = 10; dc = 40:

(42)

Asymptotically, the probability of a small (logarithmic size) stopping set in the expurgated ensemble that we defined in above (Code B)

Fig.
10000

5 shows the performance of this code for the block and 100000. As shown in the figure, at the BER of

l1e0n0gt9h,sthoef

goes to zero. Since we are concerned with the error floor, we need to distances from the capacity are only 0.65 and 1.04 dB for the lengths

be careful about variable nodes of degree two. In fact, any cycle whose variable nodes have degree two constructs a stopping set. Thus, if one

105 and floor at

a10B4E, rResopfec1t0iv0e9ly..AMnoortehoevreirn,ttehreesctoindgespdroopneorttyprtehsaetnitsanvyereirfireodr

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:16:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 7, JULY 2005

2711

Fig. 5. Performance of the irregular LDPC code of rate 0:85 over four parallel BIAWGN channels.

by our experiments is that it is almost always possible to find very Fig. 6 shows the performance of the code c0 when the length of the good codes from the ensemble g(D; ) having small maximum vari- code is n = 2000. It also shows the performance of the regular (3; 6)

able-node degree when the number of channels is greater than three. code of length 2000 which is the best regular LDPC code. We did

This implies that we can avoid the high complexity degree distribution not consider irregular codes because their performance is only slightly

optimization. When the number of channels is two or three, a small re- better than the regular codes for short lengths. Moreover, there is no

laxation on the restrictions is needed. For example, one possibility is efficient method to find good short-length irregular codes. In Fig. 6,

to allow two distinct degrees for the variable nodes of each type.
B. Unequal Error Protection
In this subsection, we describe experiments to measure the per-
formance of some codes from the ensemble gn (; ; h; dv; dc). We
showed in previous sections that the asymptotic performance of the UELDPC codes is good. Thus, here we concentrate on finite-length UELDPC codes and show that these codes have good performance even for short block lengths. To design UELDPC codes, we first
need to choose h. Note that taking h = 0 results in an ordinary LDPC code from the ensemble gn(; ) in which we assign the
high-degree variable nodes to the important bits. As we mentioned before, this is not an efficient approach. Our experiment shows that
usually h = 2 results in good codes. For short-length codes (with lengths between 1000 and 5000), it is not suitable to choose h larger.
We first consider the BEC. We designed half-rate UELDPC codes of
lengths n = 2000 and n = 4000. The value of (n) was chosen 50 and 100 for n = 2000 and n = 4000, respectively. Let c0 be either one of these codes and gc be its corresponding graph. Let A be the
set of important variable nodes. We chose the degree of the important
bits as dv = 12 and the degree of the vertices in N (A) as dc = 5. The degree of the vertices in N 2(A) was one of the values 8; 3; and
2. The degrees of all the other check nodes was 8. The degrees of

by bad bits we mean the bits other than the important bits in the code
c0. The figure shows both important bits and the bad bits have smaller BERs than the BER of the (3; 6) regular code. In particular, the impor-
tant bits have a much lower BER. Fig. 7 shows the same results when
the lengths of the codes are n = 4000. We observe that the results are similar to the case of n = 2000.
For the BIAWGN channel, let us consider the code c0 and compare its performance with the (3; 6) regular code. Although we designed
this code for the BEC, it is useful to evaluate its performance over the
BIAWGN channel. Fig. 8 shows the performance of the code c0 and the regular code for the length n = 2000. We notice that both bad bits and important bits of the code c0 have better BERs than the regular code.
Additionally, the BER of the important bits is considerably lower than
the BER of the regular code. Since the (3; 6)regular code is considered to be a good code for length n = 2000, we conclude that the code c0 is
 also a good UELDPC code for the BIAWGN channel. Finally, we would like to emphasize that the assumption (n) n
is crucial for the above proposed scheme. For finite-length cases, if the
ratio of the most important bits is comparable with the code length, it
is still possible to design UELDPC codes by choosing higher degrees
for these bits. However, it is an open question whether this code would
be efficient compared with two separate LDPC codes.
VI. OTHER APPLICATIONS

the rest of the variable nodes were either two or three. To construct The proposed framework to design LDPC codes for the nonuniform

UELDPC codes we use a method similar to one described in [3]. We error correction has several other applications. Multicarrier OFDM and

assign sockets to the vertices and construct the graph using a random multilevel coding are among these applications. The OFDM systems

permutation. The only difference with [3] is that the permutation that consist of several parallel channels in which some bits experience

we use is a restricted random permutation to make sure that the vertices higher SNRs than others. Thus, we need to perform nonuniform error
in N 0(A) = A; N (A); N 2(A); . . . ; N h(A) take the desired degrees. protection. In this case, we are not usually concerned about the error

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:16:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2712

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 7, JULY 2005

Fig. 6. Comparison between the performance of an UELDPC code of length 2000 and the regular (3; 6) code of the same length over the BEC.
Fig. 7. Comparison between the performance of an UELDPC code of length 4000 and the regular (3; 6) code of the same length over the BEC. Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:16:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 7, JULY 2005

2713

2000 (3 6) Fig. 8. Comparison between the performance of an UELDPC code of length

and the regular ; code of the same length over the BIAWGN channel.

floor problem. Instead we have other restrictions. Specifically, we may not be able to use long codes. It can be shown by simulations that for
finite-length cases, the codes from the ensemble g(3; ) may perform
better than the conventional irregular codes over the parallel channels. A similar situation exists in multilevel coding.

are asymptotically as good as any equal protecting LDPC codes. For short-length codes, simulations demonstrate that these codes outperform regular LDPC codes. Additionally, with the proposed scheme we can decode the important bits without having to decode the entire block. In ongoing research, we are exploring this issue further.

VII. CONCLUSION
In this correspondence, we proposed a framework to design good LDPC codes over a set of parallel channels. This method is useful for many applications such as the volume holographic memories, OFDM, and rate-adaptive coding systems. We showed that the proposed method has several advantages over the conventional method. First, the design procedure is very simple since we do not need to perform the high-complexity degree optimization algorithms that are necessary for conventional LDPC codes. Second, using the proposed method, we can find codes that have near Shannon limit performance and have lower error floor. Third, for the applications that the code length cannot be large, the proposed codes can have better performance than the ordinary LDPC codes. The proposed framework can also be used to design LDPC codes in other applications such as OFDM systems and multilevel coding.
We also showed that the analysis and optimization of rate-compatible LDPC codes can be done as a special case of our analysis for par-

APPENDIX GAUSSIAN APPROXIMATION

If the subchannels in Fig. 1 are BIAWGN, it is possible to use a

Gaussian approximation similar to [17]. This method is useful for de-

signing codes for VHM systems and for finding optimal puncturing

distributions over the Gaussian channels. Here, we give the Gaussian

approximation formulas for the g(3; ). We use the function  which is

dneofidnesedtoinva[r1i7a]b.leLentomdeu(sl)indethneotleththiteermateiaonn.oLf emt easlssaogmes0(jfr)o=m

the
2


check where

j is the variance of the noise in channel Cj in Fig. 1. Then we have

0 0 mu(l) = d01 1 1

( q(j)(ij) m0(j)

d

j;i

0 (d 1)

+(i 0 1)mu(l01))

(43)

allel channels. The developed LDPC code employs single encoder and

decoder for all combination of rates that are desired. As opposed to traditional rate-adaptive convolutional codes, we can generate any com-

where q(j) = jEjEj j . Similar to [17] we define

bination of rates very easily. We plan to expand on this research and find methods to design good rate-compatible LDPC codes.
Finally, we investigated unequal error protection using LDPC codes. In particular, we showed that good UELDPC codes exist for certain applications in which a small fraction of bits are highly protected. We proposed a technique to design these codes. We showed that these codes

fd(s; t) = 01 1 0 1 0 ( q(j)(ij) s(j) j;i 0 (d 1)

+ (i 0 1)t)

(44)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:16:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2714

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 7, JULY 2005

f (s; t) = dfd(s; t)

(45)

d

 1 for 0 t < . We can rewrite (43) as

tl = f (s; tl01)

(46)

where

s

=

s( (1); s(2); . . . ; s(k

))

=

m (

(1) 0

;

m(2) 0

;

.

.

.

;

m(k 0

))

2 and

tl

=

m , (l) u

and

t0

=

0. Similar

to

[17],

one

can show

that

tl(s)

converges to infinity if and only if t < f (s; t) for all t +. An

equivalent formulation can be made by the following change of the

variable:

rl =

0 q   s i (j)

(j) i

( (j) + (

1)tl):

(47)

j;i

We also define

0 0 0 h(j i

)

(s;

r)

=



s + (i

1)

0 0 d 1([1 (1 r)(d 1)])

(48)

d

h(s; r) =

 q h s ; r : (j) i

(j)

(j) i

(

(j)

)

(49)

j;i

Then, we have

rl = h(s; rl01)

(50)

where

s

=

s( (1); s(2); . . . ; s(k

))

=

m (

(1) 0

;

m(2) 0

;

.

.

.

;

m(k 0

))

0! and r0 = j q(j)(s(j)). Again rl(s)

0 if and only if r > h(s; r)

2 0! for all r (0; r0). It is easy to show that rl(s)

0 if and only

2 if r > h(s; r) for all r (0; 1). This fact is useful when we use

linear programming for the optimization of the degree distribution or

puncturing pattern.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers who helped to improve the content of the work. They are also thankful to Ralf Koetter, the Associate Editor, for handling the review.

REFERENCES
[1] H. Pishro-Nik, N. Rahnavard, and F. Fekri, “Nonuniform error correction using low-density parity check codes,” in Proc. 40th Annu. Allerton Conf., Monticello, IL, Oct. 2002.
[2] H. Pishro-Nik, N. Rahnavard, J. Ha, F. Fekri, and A. Adibi, “Low-density parity-check codes for volume holographic memory systems,” Appl. Opt., vol. 42, pp. 861–870, 2003.
[3] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[4] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[5] K. Nakamura, Y. Kabashima, D. Saad, and R. M. Zaragoza, “Statistical mechanics of broadcast channels using low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 2003 IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Yokohama, Japan, Jun./Jul. 2003, p. 294.

[6] J. Hagenauer, “Rate-compatible punctured convolutional codes (rcpc

codes) and their applications,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 36, no. 4,

pp. 389–400, Apr. 1988.

[7]

, “Rate-compatible punctured turbo (rcpt) codes in a hybrid

fec/arq system,” in Proc. Communications Theory Mini-Conf. of IEEE

GLOBECOM ’97, Phoenix, AZ, Nov. 1997, pp. 55–59.

[8] P. Jung and J. Plechinger, “Performance of rate-compatible punctured

turbob codes for mobile radio applications,” IEE Electron. Lett., vol. 33,

pp. 389–400, 1997.

[9] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse

matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar.

1999.

[10] S. Y. Chung, “On the construction of some capacity-approaching coding

schemes,” Ph.D. dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, MA, 2000.

[11] J. Ha and S. McLaughlin, “Rate-compatible puncturing of low-density

parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 11, pp.

2824–2836, Nov. 2004.

[12] B. Masnick and J. Wolf, “On linear unequal error protection codes,”

IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-13, no. 4, pp. 600–607, Oct. 1967.

[13] D. Mandelbaum, “Unequal-error-protection codes dervied from differ-

ence sets,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-18, pp. 686–687, Sep. 1972.

[14] C. C. Kilgus and W. C. Gore, “A class of cyclic unequal error protection

codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-18, no. 5, pp. 687–690, Sep.

1972.

[15] I. Boyarinov and G. Katsman, “Linear unequal error protection code,”

IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 1, pp. 168–175, Jan. 1981.

[16] W. Chou and M. A. Neifeld, “Interleaving and error correction in volume

holographic memory systems,” Appl. Opt., vol. 37, pp. 6951–6968,

1998.

[17] S. Y. Chung, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Analysis of sum-

product decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian

approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 657–670,

Feb. 2001.

[18] H. Pishro-Nik and F. Fekri, “On decoding of low-density parity-check

codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50,

no. 3, pp. 439–454, Mar. 2004.

[19] M. A. Shokrollahi, Codes, Systems, and Graphical Models. New York:

Springer-Verlag, 2001, ch. Capacity-achieving sequences, pp. 153–166.

[20] J. Justesen, “Coding for frames,” in Proc. 40th Annual Allerton Confer-

ence, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2002.

[21] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, “Im-

proved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs,” IEEE

Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 585–598, Feb. 2001.

[22]

, “Efficient erasure correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol.

47, no. 2, pp. 569–584, Feb. 2001. [23] C. Di, D. Proietti, I˙. E. Telatar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Finite-

length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure

channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun.

2002.

[24] C. Di, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Weight distributions: How de-

viant can you be?,” in Proc. 2001 IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory,

Washington, DC, 2001, p. 50.

[25] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis

of low-density parity-check ensembles for the binary erasure channel,”

in Proc. 2002 IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzer-

land, 2002, p. 1.

[26] P. Oswald and M. A. Shokrollahi, “Capacity-achieving sequences for

the erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 12, pp.

3017–3028, Dec. 2002.

[27] R. Urbanke. Report. [Online]. Available: http://lthcwww.epfl.ch/re-

search/ldpcopt/

[28] T. H. Cormen, C. E. Leiserson, and C. S. R. L. Rivest, Introduction to

Algorithms, 2nd ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:16:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

