1232

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 53, NO. 7, JULY 2005

Abstracts of Forthcoming Manuscripts

Performance of Filterbank and Wavelet Transceivers in the Presence of Carrier Frequency Offset Tiziano Bianchi, Fabrizio Argenti, and Enrico Del Re
Abstract—In this paper, we investigate the performance of a generic filterbank transceiver in the presence of a carrier frequency offset. We propose a theoretical model to compute the error probability in the case of a generic frequency-selective channel. Moreover, the proposed method is also extended to deal with nonuniform, i.e., wavelet, transceivers. The accuracy of the model is evaluated by means of computer simulations, using several types of filterbank transceivers. Systems based on cyclic prefix (CP) and zero padding (ZP) ar considered to avoid interblock interference (IBI) in frequency-selective channels. The analytical results obtained with the proposed method allow us to quickly compare different systems, characterized by a different filterbank selectivity, as well as by different methods to combat IBI (ZP or CP).
The authors are with the Dipartimento di Elettronica e Telecomunicazioni, University of Florence, Firenze, Italy.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2005.851641
Reduced-Complexity Decoding of LDPC Codes J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu
Abstract—Various log-likelihood-ratio-based belief-propagation (LLRBP) decoding algorithms and their reduced-complexity derivatives for lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes are presented. Numerically accurate representations of the check-node update computation used in LLR-BP decoding are described. Furthermore, approximate representation of the decoding computations are shown to achieve a reduction in complexity, by simplifying the check-node update or symbol-node update, or both. In particular, two main approaches for simplified check-node updates are presented that are based on the so-called min-sum approximation coupled with either a normalization term or an additive offset term. Density evolution is used to analyze the performance of these decoding algorithms, to determine the optimum values of the key parameters, and to evaluate finite quantization effects. Simulation results show that these reduced-complexity decoding algorithms for LDPC codes achieve a performance very close to that of the BP algorithm. The unified treatment of decoding techniques for LDPC codes presented here provides flexibility in selecting the appropriate scheme from a performance, latency, computational complexity, and memory-requirement perspective.
J. Chen and M. Fossorier are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA.
A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, and X.-Y. Hu are with IBM Research, Zurich Research Laboratory, CH-8803 Ruschlikon, Switzerland.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2005.851637
Spectral-Encoded UWB Communication Systems: RealTime Implementation and Interference Suppression Claudio R.C.M. DaSilva and Laurence B. Milstein

the possible implementation of this system by using surface acoustic-wave models is presented, and general expressions for the system performance are obtained. Numerical results show that a significant improvement in the system performance is obtained when the proposed interference-suppression method is used.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, San Diego, CA 92093-0407 USA.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2005.851644
Differential MMSE: A Framework for Robust Adaptive Interference Suppression for Direct-Sequence CDMA
Over Fading Channels
Upamanyu Madhow, Kristoffer Bruvold, and Liping Julia Zhu
Abstract—The linear minimum mean-squared error (MMSE) criterion is known to provide adaptive algorithms for interference suppression in direct-sequence code-division multiple-access (DS-CDMA) systems. However, standard MMSE adaptation is not robust to fast fading, being unable to compensate for rapid channel variations. In this paper, we provide a framework for deriving robust adaptive algorithms in this setting based on a new differential MMSE (DMMSE) criterion, which is a constrained optimization problem in which the quantity to be tracked is the ratio of the data appearing in two successive observation intervals. When applied to a DS-CDMA system with short spreading waveforms (i.e., with period equal to the symbol interval) operating over a flat fading channel, the DMMSE criterion avoids tracking the fades, exploiting the negligible variation of the fading gain over two consecutive symbols. For frequency-selective fading, the DMMSE criterion is extended to provide a new eigenrake receiver, which provides interference suppression and diversity combining without requiring explicit information regarding the desired user’s propagation channel.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106 USA.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2005.851635
Multistage Iterative Decoding With Complexity Reduction for Concatenated Space–Time Codes
Andres Reial and Stephen G. Wilson
Abstract—Space–time encoders exploiting concatenated coding structures are efficient in attaining the high rates available to large-dimensional multiple-transmitter, multiple-receiver wireless systems under fading conditions, while also providing maximal diversity benefits. We present a multistage iterative decoding structure that takes full advantage of the concatenated nature of the transmission path, treating the modulator and channel stages as an additional encoder in serial concatenation. This iterative decoder architecture allows an encoder employing decoupled coding and modulation to reach the performance of coded modulation systems. It also admits reduced-complexity decoding with a computational load that is nonexponential in the number of antennas or the transmission bit rate, and makes practical decoding for large transmitter arrays possible. The performance curves for these methods follow the shape of the Fano bound, with only a modest power penalty.

Abstract—This paper considers a particular implementation of an ultrawideband communication system that uses spectral encoding as both the multiple-access scheme and the interference-suppression technique. The main advantage of this technology is that the transmitted signal spectrum can be conveniently shaped to suppress narrowband interference and to not cause noticeable interference to overlaid systems. An extensive analysis of

A. Reial is with Ericsson Mobile Platforms AB, Research Department, 22183 Lund, Sweden.
S. G. Wilson is with the Communications, Control, and Signal Processing Laboratory, Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22903 USA.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2005.851632

0090-6778/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:17:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

