120

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 1, JANUARY 2005

Verification-Based Decoding for Packet-Based Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
Michael G. Luby and Michael Mitzenmacher, Member, IEEE

Abstract—We introduce and analyze verification-based decoding for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, an approach specifically designed to manipulate data in packet-sized units. Verification-based decoding requires only linear time for both encoding and decoding and succeeds with high probability under random errors. We describe how to utilize code scrambling to extend our results to channels with errors controlled by an oblivious adversary.
Index Terms—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, packet- based codes, -ary symmetric channel, verification-based decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
WORK on low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes has focused on the scenario where a bitstream is transmitted over a channel that introduces bit-level errors, such as the binary-symmetric error channel with a fixed error probability or with Gaussian white noise (see, e.g., [1]–[6]). For this scenario, encoding and decoding schemes normally perform computational operations on and maintain data structures for individual bits. For example, techniques based on belief propagation [6], [7] use a probability for each bit to represent the current belief that the transmitted bit was a zero or one, and perform computations to update these probabilities. In many practical situations, however, the basic unit of transmission might not be single bits, but blocks of bits organized as packets. Here we use the term packets to broadly refer to a collection of bits. For example, packets could be thousands of bits, as is the case with Internet packets, or a packet could simply represent a 32-bit integer. To achieve high speeds on many current systems, it is natural to consider coding schemes that perform computational operations at the packet level instead of the bit level. For example, packet-based LDPC codes for erasures have been applied to content delivery using reliable multicast and content delivery networks [7]–[10].
A further motivation for studying packet-level schemes is that they can be used in concatenated codes [11]. An inner code that works at the bit level can be used on individual packets.
Manuscript received September 19, 2003; revised June 8, 2004. The work of M. Mitzenmacher was supported in part by an Alfred. P. Sloan Research Fellowship and the National Science Foundation under Grants CCR-9983832, CCR-0118701, and CCR-0121154. Part of this work was done while M. Mitzenmacher was visiting Digital Fountain, Inc., Fremont, CA. The material in this paper was presented in part at the 40th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, October 2002.
M. G. Luby is with Digital Fountain, Inc., Fremont, CA 94538 USA (e-mail: luby@digitalfountain.com).
M. Mitzenmacher is with Harvard University, Division of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Cambridge, MA 02138 USA (e-mail: michaelm@eecs. harvard.edu).
Communicated by R. J. McEliece, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2004.839499

If this inner code fails, the bits in the packet could be erroneous

in unpredictable and seemingly arbitrary ways. An outer code

designed to deal with errors at the packet level could then be

used to correct failures from the inner code. Concatenated codes

may allow computationally complex inner codes that work on

packets of a small fixed size while also offering scalability to

large block lengths using the packet-level outer code. Alter-

natively, concatenated codes may allow computationally weak

inner codes, where a packet-level outer code is used to cope with

frequent inner code failure.

In this paper, we introduce and analyze verification-based de-

coding, a decoding approach for simple LDPC codes designed

especially for large alphabets. Verification-based decoding is

designed to deal with data in packet-sized units of 32 bits or

more. More specifically, if the code is over packets, then the

packets should have

bits, so that the total alphabet size

is suitably large compared to the number of packets. We use the

term verification-based decoding because an important aspect of

our codes is that packet values are verified as well as corrected

through a simple message-passing algorithm.

We first describe verification-based decoding for the case of

the -ary symmetric channel (qSC), for large values of . In the

qSC, the symbols are numbers in the range

, and when

an error occurs, the resulting symbol is assumed to take on a

value uniformly at random from the set of possible incor-

rect values. We then describe how verification-based decoding

for the qSC channel can be applied in more general settings in

practice by using code scrambling techniques.

A. Coding for the qSC

In principle, the problem of coding for the qSC should not be

very different from that of coding for the -ary erasure channel

(qEC) as becomes large. As the ratio of their capacities ap-

proach as

, we might expect that there should be

some coding scheme that is able to locate errors using relatively

little overhead, and then correct the errors using an efficient ca-

pacity-approaching erasure-correction code.

Indeed, the standard method of using a -bit checksum on a

-bit packet to detect packet errors, followed by erasure–correc-

tion, can approach capacity as goes to infinity. The probability

that the checksum will not detect an error is ; the overhead

is a factor of

. Assuming is chosen large enough that

errors will not occur with high probability, low-complexity era-

sure–correction schemes can be used to approach the capacity

of the resulting erasure channel.

Another natural scheme to consider would be a max-

imum-distance separable (MDS) code over a -ary alphabet.

0018-9448/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:45:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LUBY AND MITZENMACHER: VERIFICATION-BASED DECODING FOR PACKET-BASED LDPC CODES

121

It is easy to show that with maximum-likelihood (ML) de- group structure and group operation. Specifically, the symbols

coding, MDS codes can approach the capacity of the qSC as can be interpreted as numbers modulo , with the constraints

. However, ML decoding of known MDS codes such as being on the sum of values of the variable nodes modulo .

Reed–Solomon codes is much too complex, and it is not known When

, as when the packet is a string of bits, we

whether it is possible to construct MDS or MDS-like codes for may use the group

, so the sum operation is a bitwise

which low-complexity near-ML decoding schemes exist.

EXCLUSIVE–OR and the constraints are packet-level parity-check

This paper addresses the nonasymptotic but practical cases constraints.

where is only moderately large, say from

to

. A family of codes can be determined by assigning degree

In these cases, the -bit checksum technique may not be effec- distributions to the variable and check nodes. In regular LDPC

tive, because if is large enough to make the probability of not codes, all variable nodes have the same degree, and all check

detecting an error small, the rate overhead will be much too nodes have the same degree. More flexibility can be gained

high. We introduce an alternative error-locating scheme based by using irregular codes, introduced by Luby, Mitzenmacher,

on local checks rather than checksums. Our scheme requires Shokrollahi, and Spielman [2], [7], which allow the degrees of

only linear complexity. It achieves respectable rates for mod- each set of nodes to vary. Let

be the vector

erate-sized , although it does not approach capacity as

. such that the fraction of edges connected to variable nodes of de-

We hope that variations on the foundation we present will lead gree is . (We assume a minimum degree of two throughout.)

to schemes that do approach capacity.

Here is the maximum degree of a variable node. Note that

refers to the fraction of edges, and not the fraction of nodes,

B. Previous Work
Gallager considered the question of LDPC codes over large alphabets in his seminal work on the subject [13]; however, Gallager did not recognize the full potential of working over

of a given degree. Similarly, let

be such that

the fraction of edges connected to check nodes of degree is ,

and is the maximum degree of a check node. Based on these

degree sequences, we define the polynomials

the qSC. By making better use of properties of the underlying

channel, we achieve significantly better results.

and

Techniques quite similar to verification-based decoding were

suggested by Metzner, using what he calls majority-logic-like decoding [14], [15]. Metzner’s results were experimental, and he was the first to suggest that such codes could perform better than Reed–Solomon codes, under certain assumptions. Our work represents a significant advance, in that by placing these

which prove useful in subsequent analysis. The and variables must satisfy a constraint so that the number of edges is the same on both sides of the bipartite graph. This constraint is easily specified in terms of the design rate by the equation

codes in the LDPC framework, we are able to give asymptotic

analyses of code performance as well as determine improved

constructions.

Davey and MacKay [16] develop LDPC codes when the symbols are elements of small finite fields, using belief propagation techniques. Belief propagation is not scalable to the very large alphabets we consider here.
Our work also demonstrates some interesting connections between packet-level error-correcting codes and erasure codes. In this respect, the work has a similar feel to classic work on burst error-correction codes on bit-level channels, where a long bursty error can be treated like a long erasure if it can be detected; see [17] for a survey.

Once degrees have been chosen for each node (so that the total

degree of the check nodes and the variable nodes are equal), a

specific random code can be chosen by mapping the edge con-

nections of the variable nodes to the edge connections of the

check nodes. That is, to select a code at random, a random per-

mutation of

is chosen, where is the number of

edges. For all

, the edge with index out of the

left side is identified with the edge with index out of the right

side. In practice, it appears better not to choose the edge con-

nections entirely randomly. For example, improvements gener-

ally occur by avoiding duplicate edges between pairs of nodes II. FRAMEWORK FOR LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES or short cycles in the graph. We do not concern ourselves with

We briefly summarize the now-standard framework for these issues in the subsequent analysis.

LDPC codes, following [2]. LDPC codes are conventionally Unless otherwise specified, we assume that the constraints are

represented by bipartite graphs. One on side, the variable such that the sum of the symbols associated with the variable

nodes correspond to symbols in the codeword. On the other nodes adjacent to each check node is . In some circumstances,

side, the check nodes correspond to constraints on the ad- it may be better to design a layered code, as described in [2];

jacent variable nodes. We assume henceforth that there are this does not affect the analysis. For the layered version, the en-

check nodes. The design rate is given by

. (The coding time is proportional to the number of edges in the graph.

actual rate tends to be slightly higher than the design rate Linear time encoding schemes also exist for the single-layer

in practice, because the check nodes are not necessarily all scheme we analyze here [18].

linearly independent. This causes at most a vanishingly small We consider message-passing algorithms described below. To

difference as gets large, so we ignore this distinction hence- determine the asymptotic performance of such codes, it suffices

forth.) The -ary alphabet is assumed to have an appropriate to consider the case where the neighborhood of each node is a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:45:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

122

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 1, JANUARY 2005

tree for some number of levels. That is, there are no cycles in the

Proof: For an erroneous verification to occur, two or more

neighborhood around each node. Analysis in this case is greatly neighbors of a check node must be in error. Consider an arbi-

simplified since random variables that correspond to messages trary neighbor in error, . Given the values of the other neigh-

in our message-passing algorithms can be treated as indepen- bors of , there is at most one possible erroneous value for that

dent. The analysis is accurate because the graph is asymptot- would lead to a false verification. Under the assumption that er-

ically tree-like, and can be made rigorous using now-standard rors take on an incorrect value that is uniform over all

martingale arguments, as introduced in [19].

possibilities, the probability that takes on this precise value is

at most

. Hence, at each step where a check node at-

tempts to verify all of its neighbors, the probability of an error

III. DECODING ALGORITHMS FOR THE QSC

A. A Simple Decoding Algorithm

We suggest several decoding algorithms for the qSC, first pre-

senting a very simple algorithm that we improve subsequently.

Before explaining how to view our decoding algorithm as a mes-

sage-passing algorithm, we first describe an equivalent algo-

rithm from the point of view of the nodes for clarity.

With each variable node there corresponds a true value , a

received value , and a current value . Throughout the algo-

rithm, each variable node is in one of two possible states: either

unverified or verified. When a node is unverified, the algorithm

has not yet fixed the final value for that node. Hence, the de-

coding algorithm begins with all nodes being unverified. When

a node is verified, its current becomes fixed. Hence, the al-

gorithm should, with high probability, never assign a verified

node a value such that

. In the algorithm that fol-

lows, the current value is always equal to when the node

is unverified.

The decoding algorithm simply applies the following rules in

any order as much as possible.

is at most

. The second statement of the lemma then

follows from the first by a simple union bound.

To see the value of the preceding lemma, consider the case

where symbols consist of bits, so

. The probability

of a failure from a false verification is exponentially small in

at each step. It is straightforward to design a decoding process

so that the number of verification steps attempted is linear in

the size of the graph. Initially, all check nodes may gather the

received values of their neighboring variable nodes, and see if

a verification is possible. A check node can also take action

whenever the state of one of its neighboring nodes changes. The

total work done is then proportional to the number of edges in

the graph. For bounded degree graphs, the number of edges will

be . Hence, the packet size needs to be only

bits

in order that the probability of failure due to a false verification

be polynomially small in . Specifically, packets of size

32 bits should suffice for codes with hundreds or thousands of

nodes, and packets of size 64 bits should suffice for codes

with tens or hundreds of thousands of nodes.

The other role of a check node is to correct a neighboring vari-

able node that was received incorrectly, according to Rule 2. A

1) If the sum of the current values of all the neighbors of a check node equals , all currently unverified neighbors become verified and the final values are fixed to the current values.
2) If all but one of the neighbors of a check node is verified,

check node can correct a neighbor after all other neighbors have been verified and therefore are known (with high probability) to have the correct value. In this case, the value of the unverified neighbor is obtained by determining the value that results in a sum at the check node.

the remaining neighbor becomes verified, with its final

value being set so that the sum of all neighbors of the B. A Message-Passing Decoding Algorithm

check node equals . In order to analyze this algorithm, we refine our description of the node state. An unverified node is correct if its value was received correctly, and incorrect if it was received in error. This refinement is used only in the analysis, and not in the decoding algorithm, which does not know if an unverified node is correct or incorrect. Also, recall that we assume that an incorrect packet takes on a uniform incorrect value. In this decoding process, the check nodes play two roles. First, they may verify that all of their neighbors are correct, according to Rule 1. This verification rule applies because of the following fact: if the sum of the current values of all neighbors of a check node is , then with high probability all the neighboring variable nodes must be correct. Concretely, we have the following lemma.

We now develop a message-passing version of this decoding process to aid our analysis. The goal is to determine the asymptotic error threshold , which is the limiting fraction of errors tolerable under our decoding process as grows large. To picture the decoding process, we focus on an individual edge between a variable node and a check node , and an associated tree describing the neighborhood of . Recall that we assume that the neighborhood of is accurately described by a tree for some fixed number of rounds. The tree is rooted at , and the tree branches out from the check nodes of excluding , as shown in Fig. 1.
Given that our graph is chosen at random, we can specify how this tree branches in a natural way. This specification is the approximation obtained by thinking of the tree growing from as a branching process, which is correct in the asymptotic limit

Lemma 1: At any step where a check node attempts to as the number of nodes grows to infinity. As the probability that

verify all of its neighbors, the probability of an error is at most edge has degree is , with probability there are

. Over the entire decoding algorithm, if verification other check node neighbors of . Similarly, every such neighbor

steps are attempted, the probability of an error is at most has

other variable node neighbors with probability ,

.

and so on down the tree.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:45:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LUBY AND MITZENMACHER: VERIFICATION-BASED DECODING FOR PACKET-BASED LDPC CODES

123

As has

other neighboring check nodes besides with

probability , the probability that remains uncorrected when

passing to node in round

is

Fig. 1. The neighborhood around (v; c).

This yields (2); (1) is derived by similar considerations. We show how to use this analysis to find codes with good
properties. We first modify the above equations as follows:

We think of the decoding process as happening in rounds,

with each round having two stages. In the first stage, each vari-

able node passes to each neighboring check node in parallel its

current value and state. In the second stage, each check node

sends to a flag denoting whether it should change its state to

verified; if verifies , it also sends the appropriate value. Based

on this information, changes its value and state appropriately.

For convenience in the analysis, we think of each variable node

as passing on to the check node the current value excluding any

information obtained directly from . (This avoids the problem

of a circular flow of information.) That is, when the variable

node passes information to regarding its value and state, it

only considers changes in its state caused by other nodes.

We provide an analysis based on the tree model. Consider an

edge in the graph. Let be the probability that in round

the message from to contains the true value but is unver-

ified. Similarly, let be the probability that in round the mes-

sage from to contains an incorrect value for . We ignore the

possibility in the analysis that a false verification occurs, since

as we have already argued, for a sufficiently large alphabet this

occurs with negligible probability. Hence,

is the prob-

ability that, in round , can confirm to that it has been verified

via another check node. Initially is simply the initial proba-

bility a correct word is sent and

. If

tends to

, then our decoding algorithm will be successful, since then the

probability that an edge (and therefore its corresponding node)

remains unverified falls to .

The evolution of the process from round to round, assuming

that the neighborhood of is given by a tree, is given by

(3) (4)

Here (4) differs from (2) in that we have replaced with . This change does not change the final performance of the decoding; intuitively, this change is equivalent to changing our processing at each round by splitting it into two subrounds. In the first subround, variable nodes that have the correct value have their state updated. In the second subround, variable nodes with an incorrect value are corrected. The split clearly does not affect the final outcome; however, it allows us to replace with
in the defining equation for . With this change, we find

(5)

We have reduced the analysis to an equation in a single family

of variables . It is clear that if converges to , then so does

, by the definition of the decoding process. Hence, we need

only consider the . For

with initial error probability ,

we require that the sequence of decrease to . In particular, it

suffices to find and so that

(6)

for

. If we let

in (6) above, we find that

it corresponds to

, and, in fact, it implies that the

sequence of decrease to . Based on our discussion, we have

the following theorem.

Theorem 1: Given a design rate and an error probability (1) , then if there are and satisfying the rate constraint
(2)

We explain the derivation of (2) by considering the decoding

from the point of view of the edge . For an incorrect value

to be passed in the

th round, the node must have been and the code constraint

received incorrectly; this corresponds to the factor . Also, it

cannot be the case that there is some check node other than

neighboring that has all of its children verified after rounds,

or else could be corrected and verified for the

th round.

Now each has children below it with probability , and

each child is verified after rounds with probability

.

The probability that has not been corrected due to a specific

for

, then for any

there are codes of rate that

can correct errors on a qSC with error probability

with

high probability using the verification-based decoding scheme

described earlier.

check node by round is therefore

We emphasize that similar theorems using various decoding

schemes are implicit throughout the rest of the paper. Equation

(5) therefore provides us a tool for determining good sequences

and . This is a nonlinear equation in the coefficients and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:45:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

124

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 1, JANUARY 2005

, yielding a nonlinear optimization problem for which standard numerical techniques can be applied.
Unfortunately, solving the nonlinear optimization problem directly for a specific code rate does not shed a great deal of insight into what can be said for general code rates. We can, however, demonstrate a provable bound for this family of codes based on the family of codes determined in [2] for erasures. (Other constructions of codes with similar properties have been subsequently developed, for example, in [20], [21].)

Lemma 2: For any

and , there exist and

corresponding to a family of erasure codes of rate that correct

a

fraction of errors with high probability such

that

(7)

This lemma allows the following theorem.

Theorem 2: For any

and

family of codes of rate that correct a

, there exists a

As a comparison, we might consider Reed–Solomon codes, which in the worst case can correct up to a fraction errors very efficiently in practice. We find

when

. Hence, when

, the verification-based

decoding of Theorem 2 outperforms the worst case bounds for

Reed–Solomon codes. This is admittedly a somewhat unfair

comparison, since verification-based decoding corrects random

errors, and the result above applies to worst case errors for

Reed–Solomon codes. As discussed in Section I-A, in theory,

for the qSC, Reed–Solomon codes can approach the capacity

as goes to infinity, but we know of no such scheme that

requires only linear decoding time or for to be only polyno-

mial (as opposed to exponential) in . While verification-based

decoding does not meet the capacity

, its computational

complexity and the utility for packets with small numbers of

bits is appealing.

IV. IMPROVEMENTS

A. Additional Verification

fraction of errors with high probability using verification-based decoding.
Proof: We use the and defined by the erasure codes of Lemma 2, and apply the corresponding inequality to find the asymptotic fraction of errors we can correct using verificationbased decoding for these degree sequences. Let
. We seek the maximum value of for which

We may improve our verification-based decoding by allowing further means of verification. We describe the changes to the message-passing algorithm. In the first stage, each variable node passes to each neighboring check node its current value and state. In the second stage, each neighboring check node sends to a flag denoting whether can verify directly, using one of the two rules given previously. If so, again sends the verified value as before. If not, also sends to a proposed value,

which is the value that should take if all of the other neighbors

By repeatedly using Lemma 2, we find

of have sent the correct value. Now suppose receives two proposed values that are the same. In this case, should change

its value to the proposed value and label itself as verified for the

next round.

The reasoning behind this improvement is similar to the orig-

inal argument for verification. If all neighbors besides for a

check node are in fact correct, the proposed value will be the

correct value for . If not, the proposed value will be random

over all incorrect possibilities, and hence the probability of a

match is small. We must adopt the additional restriction that

Here, the first inequality follows by applying Lemma 2 to the

outer

expression, and the second inequality

similarly follows by then applying it to the inner expression.

The final right-hand size is less than or equal to whenever we

choose

there are no cycles of length four in the bipartite graph that represents the code, however. Otherwise, two check node neighbors of could be neighbors with the same variable node ; if is in error, the proposed values of the check nodes would match, inducing a subsequent incorrect verification at .
This improvement does increase the probability of a false ver-

ification, since there are now many additional ways a false ver-

ification could occur. The number of verification steps is pro-

and solving this quadratic we find we may choose

portional to the sum of the squares of the degrees of the variable nodes, instead of to the sum of the degrees of the variable nodes,

as in the original scheme. Assuming a constant maximum de-

(8) gree,

bits per packet still ensures that no false

As can be arbitrarily close to

, asymptotically

there exist codes that can correct anything less than a fraction

of errors with high probability using verifi-

verification occurs with high probability. The resulting equations describing the asymptotic behavior
in this situation are somewhat more difficult. Again we have

cation-based decoding.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:45:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LUBY AND MITZENMACHER: VERIFICATION-BASED DECODING FOR PACKET-BASED LDPC CODES

125

by the same reasoning as before. To determine an equation for The decoding algorithm we have described is still, in some

, note that for to continue to hold an incorrect value to sense, rather conservative. A variable node repeatedly passes

pass to , one of the following events must occur:

on its received value until it is corrected. At each step, each

• all neighbors of other than received an incorrect value

from some other neighbor in the previous round; or

• all but one neighbor of other than received an incorrect

value from some other neighbor in the previous round, and

the one neighbor that received all correct values did not

have all of these values verified.

The probability that the first case occurs is just

. For the second case, when has

other neighbors,

the probability that a specific set of

neighbors other

than receive at least one incorrect value during round is

. Ignoring (temporarily) the probability that

the last neighbor sends a correct value, since there are

possible ways of choosing the correct neighbor, we have the

term

variable node receives a proposed value from each neighboring check node, but nothing is done with these proposed values unless some two of them match. One might extend such a scheme so that each variable node keeps track of a list of proposed values received each round and passes this entire list on to the check nodes. The check nodes can then determine if any possible set of values within the cross-product of proposed values of its neighbors appropriately satisfy the check node, and respond accordingly. The advantage of such a scheme is that allowing proposed values to propagate and be verified may lead to more verifications, more quickly. The problem with such a scheme is that the lists of proposed values may become too long. This may cause a great deal of additional computation, since the cross-product of all proposed values from the message nodes would be considered at a check node. Additionally,

this approach greatly increases the probability that an erroneous

verification occurs, since the number of possible combinations

where is the derivative of . We multiply this term by the grows with the product of the lengths of the lists. We leave the

probability that the last check node sends the correct but unveri- possibility of designing looser verification codes that pass more

fied proposed value, which is

. (Here extensive information for exploration in future work.

is the probability of that all of the other neighbors of

the last check are correct, and

is the probability B. Using Reed–Solomon Codes With Verification-Based

that all of the other neighbors are verified.) Putting this all to- Decoding

gether yields

We may vary our codes by allowing the check nodes to hold

information other than the sum of the variable nodes. A natural

approach is to constrain -tuples of variables to belong to an (9) Reed–Solomon code with more than one redundant symbol, and

Again, we can modify the equation for into one that does not involve by replacing by and substituting the equation for in (9).

store these redundant symbols in the check nodes. For example,

consider the case where pairs of check nodes are associated with

variable nodes, so that the check node values are calculating

using a

Reed–Solomon code. The check nodes then

have the property that they can correct any single error among

(10) the neighboring variable nodes. As we explain later, the check

Finding codes of a specified rate that asymptotically handle a fraction of errors now corresponds to finding an appropriate
and satisfying the rate condition and

nodes have further correction properties; however, it is instructive to consider a decoding scheme which just uses the above property.
Consider our message-passing decoding scheme in this set-

ting. For any pair of check nodes and the associated set of vari-

(11) able nodes, if there is a single error among the variable nodes, it can be corrected and all the associated variable nodes verified.

Equation (11) corresponds to a design criterion for codes using Again, we have used here our assumption that an error replaces

verification-based decoding under the described decoding a value with a value taken uniformly at random. Because of this algorithm. Again, attempting to maximize the tolerable error assumption, with high probability throughout the execution of probability for a given rate is a complex nonlinear optimization the decoding no set of variable nodes containing multiple errors

problem that we do not delve into here. Also, we have not will be falsely verified with high probability.

developed a theorem similar to Theorem 2, because of the chal- In the message-passing algorithm, a variable node will

lenging form of (10). Because the decoding rules are a superset transmit an incorrect value to a neighboring check node pair

of those of the original scheme, a greater fraction of errors can after

rounds if and only if it was received incorrectly and

be tolerated. The improvement can be nontrivial; for example, every other neighboring check node pair had another incorrect

for a regular rate code with all nodes having degree on message node neighbor after round . This yields the following the left and degree on the right, the fraction of tolerable errors recurrence equation to describe :

jumps from approximately 17% to approximately 21%. The price, as we have mentioned, is a higher probability of a false

(12)

verification, which is still negligible for a sufficiently large This is exactly the same recurrence for the erasure codes de-

number of bits per packet.

veloped in [7]. By using Reed–Solomon codes, we are making

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:45:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

126

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 1, JANUARY 2005

errors “equivalent” to erasures in the LDPC code setting. As de-

scribed in [7, Lemma 2], vectors and were determined that

are essentially optimal: for codes of rate we can come ar-

bitrarily close to the optimal tolerable loss probability

.

We can apply these distributions (or other essentially optimal

distributions, as described in [20], [21]) to obtain the following

theorem.

Theorem 3: For any

and

, there exist

sequences and corresponding to a family of codes of rate

such that verification-based decoding with Reed–Solomon

codes as described above corrects a

fraction of

errors with high probability.

Proof: We use the and for an erasure code of rate

as guaranteed by Lemma 2. Such a code corre-

sponds to a rate code in this setting since each check node

uses two Reed–Solomon values per node. (To see this, consider

that a rate

erasure code with message nodes has

check nodes, which in this case corresponds to

symbol values.) Since we obtain the same recurrence

(12) for these codes as for the erasure codes, we can correct a

fraction of errors with high probability.

Following our standard practice, we can combine these into a single equation that can be used as a design criterion for good sequences.

(15)

Similar equations can be developed for Reed–Solomon codes

that can correct more errors. If the check nodes are associated

with variable nodes, and the check node values are calculated

using a

Reed–Solomon code (where is an even

integer), then

• when a check node collection has at most neighboring variable nodes that are in error, it can correct and verify all of its neighbors, and
• when a check node collection has at most neighboring variable nodes that are unverified, and all other neighboring nodes are verified, it can correct and verify all of its erroneous neighbors.

The appropriate recurrences are

(16)

We find that under this simple decoding rule we can correct al-

most the same fraction of errors as Reed–Solomon codes under

the worst case. Again, we emphasize the caveat that our results

hold only asymptotically with high probability for the qSC.

The decoding scheme above can be improved slightly. We

are not taking advantage of the following additional power of

(17)

the check nodes: whenever a check node pair has at most two

unverified neighbors, the remaining neighbors can be corrected,

as the correct and verified values suffice to reconstruct the re- Here

is the th derivative of at , with the th derivative

maining ones. A decoding scheme that takes advantage of this just being itself.

fact is not substantially more complex, although the equations that describe it are. Consider again a recursive description of

V. CODE SCRAMBLING

the . It is now not enough that every neighboring check node pair of a variable node has another incorrect variable node neighbor; now it must also have at least one other unverified neighbor.
Consider the probability that after round a check node pair neighboring has one other incorrect variable node neighbor but no other unverified neighbors. For a pair with neighbors, we must choose the one other incorrect neighboring message node, and all other nodes are verified. Hence, this probability is

Up to this point, we have assumed that our codes function on a qSC. This is a rather strong assumption; one might expect that errors introduced in packets are correlated in some nontrivial way. For example, perhaps it is always the last bit that is changed. In this case, verification-based decoding as we have described will perform poorly, since the sum of two erroneous packets will be the same as two correct packets, and hence the analysis of Lemma 1 will not apply. In general, we cannot know ahead of time what types of correlated errors might be intro-

duced by the channel.

It is well known to data communications engineers that any

-input, -output channel may be reduced to a memoryless qSC

which equals

, where is the derivative of the by randomization techniques such as scrambling and inter-

. This yields the recurrence

leaving. In this section, we discuss this idea in the framework

of [12], which gives the precise theorem we will use. (We (13) rediscovered this theorem ourselves independently.)

A similar formula for the values can be obtained. Here, a variable node with the correct value will become verified if there is a neighboring check node pair such that all other variable node neighbors of have the correct value, or if there is a neighboring check node pair with only one erroneous neighbor. This yields the recurrence

Suppose the sender and receiver have a source of shared random bits. We model the errors introduced by the channel as being governed by an oblivious adversary, who is unaware of the random bits shared by the sender and receiver. In this setting, the sender and receiver can use the random bits to ensure that regardless of the strategy of the adversary, the errors introduced appear equivalent to those introduced by a qSC, in

(14) the following sense: if the adversary modifies transmitted

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:45:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LUBY AND MITZENMACHER: VERIFICATION-BASED DECODING FOR PACKET-BASED LDPC CODES

127

symbols, the effect is as though randomly selected transmitted

symbols take on erroneous values taking on random values

from GF .

The sender and receiver use their shared random bits as fol-

lows. When sending values

, the random bits are used

to determine values

chosen independently and uni-

formly at random from the nonzero elements GF and values

chosen independently and uniformly at random from

GF . Instead of sending the symbol , the sender sends the

symbol

. Further, before sending the modified symbols,

a permutation on

is chosen uniformly at random

and the symbols are sent in the order given by the permutation.

Informally, it is clear that these steps stifle the adversary.

Since each symbol is now equally likely to take on any value

from GF , after the permutation of the symbols to be sent the

adversary cannot distinguish the original position of any trans-

mitted symbol. Hence, if the adversary modifies symbols, their

locations will appear random to the receiver after the permuta-

tion is undone. Further, suppose the adversary adds an error

to the transmitted symbol

, so that the received value is

. The receiver will reverse the symbol transforma-

tion, obtaining the symbol

in place of . Since

is uniform over GF and unknown to the adversary, the

erroneous symbol appears to take on a random erroneous value

over GF . A more formal proof appears in [12]. Specified to

our situation, we have the following.

Theorem 4: The probability that an adversary who introduces errors when using code scrambling as described above causes a decoding error is equal to the probability that the verification code makes an error when errors are introduced in the qSC.

In practice, a truly large sequence of random bits would not be necessary. A pseudorandom generator of small complexity would perform adequately, as errors introduced in real channels are not generally adversarial and specifically would almost surely be independent of the pseudorandom generator.

VI. CONCLUSION
Verification-based decoding with code scrambling demonstrates that the power of LDPC codes can be exploited for handling errors at the packet level. Using the simple paradigm that a check node can verify when its neighbors are correct in the case where errors are random and the alphabets are sufficiently large, verification-based decoding allows for extremely fast and simple packet-level encoding and decoding algorithms. By making use of code scrambling, verification-based decoding can be made to apply in settings even where errors may not be random.
The most important open problem is to gain more insight into the equations that arise in the analysis of verification-based decoding in order to design optimal families of codes from them. We have shown that by using families of codes that are known to be good for erasures we can prove that verification-based decoding can perform as well as the worst case bounds for Reed–Solomon codes, which in itself is an interesting result. These families of codes were not designed specifically for the

equations that arise from verification-based decoding, however,
so better bounds are clearly possible. The goal remains to use
verification-based decoding to approach the capacity as grows
large.
The framework for verification-based decoding may also
apply to other settings. For example, the second author has
described codes for packet-based deletion channels using this
framework that can be encoded and decoded in polynomial
time [22].
REFERENCES
[1] S. Chung, G. D. Forney, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[2] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 585–598, Feb. 2001.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[4] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 1645–1646, 1996.
[5] T. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[6] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[7] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, “Efficient erasure correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 569–584, Feb. 2001.
[8] J. W. Byers, J. Considine, M. Mitzenmacher, and S. Rost, “Informed content delivery across adaptive overlay networks,” in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM ’02, vol. 32, 2002, pp. 47–60.
[9] J. W. Byers, M. Luby, and M. Mitzenmacher, “Accessing multiple mirror sites in parallel: Using Tornado codes to speed up downloads,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM ’99, Mar. 1999, pp. 275–283.
[10] J. W. Byers, M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, and A. Rege, “A digital fountain approach to reliable distribution of bulk data,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 20, no. 8, pp. 1528–1540, Oct. 2002.
[11] G. D. Forney, Jr., Concatenated Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1966.
[12] P. Gopalan, R. Lipton, and Y. Z. Ding, “Codes, adversaries, and information: A computational approach,” paper, 2001, submitted for publication.
[13] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[14] J. M. Chung and J. J. Metzner, “Theoretical analysis of the error correction performance of majority-logic-like vector symbol codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 979–987, Jun. 2001.
[15] J. J. Metzner, “Majority-logic-like decoding of vector symbols,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 44, no. 10, pp. 1227–1230, Oct. 1996.
[16] M. C. Davey and D. J. C. MacKay, “Low density parity check codes over GF(q),” IEEE Commun. Let., vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 165–167, Jun. 1998.
[17] G. D. Forney, Jr., “Burst-correcting codes for the classic bursty channel,” IEEE Trans. Commun. Technol., vol. COM-19, no. 5, pp. 772–781, Oct. 1971.
[18] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 638–656, Feb. 2001.
[19] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, and M. A. Shokrollahi, “Analysis of random processes via and-or tree evaluation,” in Proc. 9th Annu. ACM-SIAM Symp. Discrete Algorithms, 1998, pp. 364–373.
[20] M. A. Shokrollahi, “New sequences of linear time erasure codes approaching the channel capacity,” in Proc. 13th Int. Symp. Applied Algebra, Algebraic Algorithms, and Error-Correcting Codes (Lecture Notes in Computer Science). Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag, 1999, vol. 1719, pp. 65–76.
[21] P. Oswald and M. A. Shokrollahi, “Capacity-achieving sequences for the erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 12, pp. 3017–3028, Dec. 2002.
[22] M. Mitzenmacher, “Verification codes for deletions,” in Proc. 2003 IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Yokohama, Japan, p. 217.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:45:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

