XB-4s

‘An FPGA Implementation of Low-Density Parity-Check Code Decoder with Multi-Rate Capability
Lei Yang, Manyuan Shen, Hui Liu and C.J.Richard Shi
Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98 195 {yanglei,mshen,hliu, cjshi}@ee.washington.edu

Abstract: With superior error correction capability, low-density
parity-check (LDPC) has initiated wide scale interests in wireless telecommunication fields. In the past, various structures of single code rate LDPC decoders have been implemented for different applications. However, in order to cover a wide range of service requirements and diverse interference conditions in wireless applications, LDPC decoders that can operate in both high and low code rates are desired. In. this paper, a new multi-rate LDPC ’ decoder architecture is presented and implemented in a Xilinx FPGA device. Through selection pins, three operating modes with the irregular 112 rate, regular 518 rate and regular 7/X rate are supported. The measurement results show LDPC decoder can
achieve BER below lW5 at SNR of 1.4dB in the most critical case
with the irregular 142 mode.
1. INTRODUCTICIN
Recently, low-dtmsity parity-check (LDPC) codes have attracted an increasing amount of attention due to their amazing error correction capacity. It has been shown that, in the infinite LDPC block length, 0.0045 dB from the Shannon limit is possible, and with block length lo7,the code can achieve 0.04 dB from the Shannon limit at a bit error rate of [I]. Furthermore, the LDPC decoding algorithm is inherently parallel and is much easier to be implemented than its comparator turbo coding, thus makes it more attractive.
LDPC code is a linear block code described with a binary sparse M X N panty-check matrix H. Each row of the matrix H corresponds to a parity check and each column represents a demodulated symbol [2]. The number of non-zero elements in each row or column is defiKed as a row weight or column weight. The LDPC code with uniform row weight and column weight is called a regular code. Othemise it is an irregular code. Noimally, Tanner . graph is widely used 10 represent LDPC codes. Tanner graph is a bipartite graph with variable nodes on one side and constraint nodes on the other side. Each variable node in the graph corresponds to a received symbol, each constraint bit corresponds to a set of parity check constraints, and each edge corresponds to a non-zero entry in the parity check matrix.
With consistency in the above structure, iterative logarithmic belief propagation (Log-BP) algorithm [3] is considered to be the best algorithm suitable for hardware implcmentation so far. During the decoding process, logarithmic messages are $xchanged along the graph edges, and computed at the variableicheck nodes. Unfortunately, eficiently mapping the algorithm to a VLSl implementation is challenging [21. Several approaches instantiate the BP algorithm to hardware using the most natural way, where each variable node is mapped to a variable processor, each check node is mapped to a check node processor, and all the processors are connected through Tanner graph interconnection network. This architecture can achieve amazing parallelism, but it is not scalable to LDPC codes with large block lengths due to the heavy burden of

hardware resource usage. To elude this problem, partial parallel architectures compromising between operating speed and hardware load are proposed, in which a certain number of variable nodes and check nodes are mapped to one hardware unit in time-division multiplexing mode [3]. However, all the implementations up to now have been limited to single rate LDPC code designs. In reality, especially in wireless applications, it is more desirable that a design scheme could adopt different coding rates in order to meet various service requirements and interference conditions.
In this paper, a multi-rate LDPC design architecture is presented. This architecture is not only suitable for different regular LDPC coding rates, but also can be employed to irregular LDPC codes. The proposed architecture is demonstrated through the design and implementation of a IOk bit, multi-rate LDPC decoder in Xilinx FPGA, which is the first published implementation of a multi-rate LDPC code decoder. Through configuring two pins of the FPGA device at “OD”, “01” or “IO”, the decoder works on three coding rate modes: 1/2 as irregular code, 518 and 7/X as regular codes, showing the great flexibility of our scheme.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. An overview of the LDPC Log-BP algorithm is given in Section 2. The detail o f designing the three rate codes is described in Section 3. The architecture of the multi-rate decoder is presented in section 4. Measurement results of the implemented FPGA device are shown in section 5. Concluding remarks are given in Section 6.
2. LDPC DECODINAGLGORITHM
If we use p to represent the log-likelihood ratio (LLR)
messages’exchanged between variable nodes and check nodes, and
Yito stand for intrinsic probability information for every bit from
a demodulator. The iterative Log-BP algorithm is summarized in the following steps.
1) Initialization
All variables nodes and their outgoing variable messages are initialized to the value of the intrinsic messages. The intrinsic message is defined as:

Here, yi is the received symbol and Xiis the transmitted symbol.

2) Check Node Computation

After the incoming messages are gathered in each check node from its connected variable nodes in the Tanner graph, the following check node computation is performed:

dc -I

dc-l

0-7803-&736-81051$20.0002005 IEEE.

760

ASP-DAC 2005

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:45:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Here dc is the degree of the check node C, U, , represents the
incoming message from neighbor variable node Y . # V to check
node C, and pcv is the outgoing message from check node C.
Function Y is equal to VI, and is expressed in the following:

Y ( x )= 'u-'(x) =log( 1+ expt- I x I))

(3)

1 exp(- I x I)

~

After the check node computation, the outgoing messages are

passed to variable nodes along the edges.

3) Variable Node Computation

The variable node computation is expressed in the comparatively simple equation as follow:

d,-I
(4)

Where pC,"is the incoming message from the neighbor check node C, + c to V, d yis the number of check nodes connected to node V, and pvc is the outgoing message from variable node V.
4) Check Stop Criterion When the variable node computation is finished, the LLR of every symbol i is updated as:

,=O
From the updated LLR vector A = {,l,,A,... ,,...A,v} , a hard
decision result X = {xl,x*,...xi ,...x,) is calculated as:

The calculated hard decision vector X is then checked against the
parity check matrix H. A case o f I I . X = O m e a n s the iterative process has converged to the correct codeword and decoding stops.
Otherwise, step 2) and 3) have to be repeated until H . X = 0 or a
fixed number of iterations is reached.
3. LDPC CODESDESIGN
As stated previously, three ratc codes are implemented: irregular rate U2, regular rate Si8 and 718. Based on many publications such as 181, irregular codes could outperform regular codes,in term of coding gain, thus ratc 112 is implemented as irrcgular code dealing with the worst transmission situation. While rate 5/8 are 7/8 are designed as regular structures to simpliFy hardware complexity.
In our design, similar code construction algorithms as [3][4] are adopted to attain the optimal balance between speed and hardware complexity. The main point of these methods is to build a parity check matrix H made of a set of square permutation L X L matriccs. Each permutation matrix is an identity matrix whose rows have been circuilarly shifted by a set of amount. This kind of code.structure can be smoothly mapped to a partial decoder structure implementation, in which there are NI, variable node computation units (VNU) and Mp check node computation units (CNU), and every VNU and CNU contain timc-multiplexed NMp variable nodes and MiMp check nodcs respectivcly.

1) Regular rate 518 code
A (3, 8) regular LDPC structure is adopted to construct the rate 5/8 code (every column has 3 non-zero elements, and every row has 8 non-zero elements), because this structure can provide good BER performance for moderate lengths. Similar,as [3J, H is made of three submatrixes [H1', HZT,H?IT. First a H=[HIT, H z ~ ] is constructed as a high girth (2, 8) regular structure. Submatrix HI
and Hz contain X2=64 permutation 149X 149 matrixes. The
codelength N=149Xg2 is equal to 9536, and the check node number M=3X 8 X 149 is 3576, However, unlike [3], in which H3 is specified by certain configuration parameters to realize the
rather "random" function, we design H3 as the structure with
permutation matrixes randomly located. The simulation results show that our method has almost no gain loss compared to [3], but uses much less hardware resources.
Because there are total S2=64 small matrixes in each row. One natural way to design the hardware architecture is to generate Np=64 VNUs. However, the parallelization factor Np=64 is too high to fulfill the latency requirement, so every two 149X 149 matrixes are folded into one VNU to form a decoder structure with Np=32. Each of the VNU has 3 RAMS with depth 2 X 149=298. The check node parallelization factor MP is designed to be 12. OveraIl, 298 clock cycles are needed to finish one VNU computation process and one CNU computation process.
2) Regular rate 718 code
(3,24) regular code structure is used to design the regular rate 7/8 code. The rate 718 matrix construction method is similar to the
rate 518. First, a high girth (2,24) structure H=[HLT.]:,H Both HI
and Hz contain 24'=576 permutation 17 X 17 matrix. So the code length N= I7 X 24l is 9792, and check node number M=3 X 17X 24 is 1224. Then, a substructure H3 is constructed with permutation matrixes randomly located.
The parallelization factors NP and MP are 24 and 3 respectively. Each VNU contains 3 RAMS, every RAM fold 24 17 X 17 small permutation matrixes, hereby the RAM depth is 24 X 17=408. In one clock, every VNU performs 3 variable nodes computation, and every CNU performs 24 check node computation. Totally, 408 clock cycles are needed for one iteration of VNU computation process and CNU computation process.
3) Irregular rate 1/2 code
Irregular LDPC codes do not outperform regular ones unless their degree distribution and girth are carefully designed. In this paper, the method to design irregular code is the modified bitfilling algorithm [ 5 ] . In order to be compatible with the rate 5/8 and the rate 718, N,=36, Mp=18 are chosen,' and every small permutation matrix is 251 X 251, so the code length is 36X215=9036, and checknodenumberM= IXX251=4518. '
As to the degree distribution design, there are some related works shown in [ 6 ] . In our implementation, a (2, 3,'7} degree distribution is chosen with average degree of 3.25. This distribution achieves comparably good results through fix point simulations. Once the codelength and degree distribution is determined, a modified bit-filling algorithm similar as [SI is performed to construct a NPX MP matrix, which is then expanded toa(251XNp)X(251XMp)matrix.

76 1
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:45:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4. DECODEARRCHITECTURE
In this part, a configurable partial parallcl decoder architecture is described. This architecture is not only suitable for different rates, but also can be used for both regular and irrcgular LDPC codes. Compared with the structure in [3][4], the multi-rate architecture has the following distinct characteristics:
U11D l l l
1
I
Figure 1. The multi-rate decoding architecture.
It exploits configurable structures for the VNU block, the CNU block and the memory banks so different rate LDPC regulariirregular codes can be fit. It contains a built-in intcrleaver, which eliminates extra intPrleaver/deinteIIeaverneed in a communication system. Min-sum with comection (MSC) algorithm [7] is adopted to replace normally applied.,table-lookup quantization method in order to diminish large performance loss.
4.1 FINITEPRECISIOINMPLEMENTATION
Up to now all publications on LDPC VLSI implementation
employ look-up tables (LUT) to quantize function Y' . However,
the LUT quantization method suffers from the tradeoff bctween dynamic range and precision. To eliminate this tradeoff, [7] present the MSC algorilhm to emulatc Y(x).
The correction term in equation (7) can be firther simplified as:
The above two equations describe the MSC algorithm and elude the problem of computing non-linear function T ( x ) , thus gives no requirement on the precision and enables freedom to increase the dynamic range. To show the performance of MSC algorithm, both LUT and MSC methods are used to simulate the 3 codes in our design. (6:3) and (6:l) quantization schemes are used for LUT and MSC respectively, here 6 means totally 6 bits are utilized, in which 3 or 1 bits are used for the fractional part of the value. The simulation results are shown in Fig. 2. From the curves we can see that the ( 6 3 ) LUT method performs badly at high,rate regular 7/X code and irregular 112 code, and other quantization schemes than (63)show even worse results. Fortunately, the MSC algorithm achieves good results for all the three cases.

Figure 2. Comparison of LUT and MSC simulation result
4.2 CHECKNODECOMPUTATIOBNLOCK
Because MSC algorithm is adopted in our design, every pair of messages needs to be performed by the check functions (7) and (8). For example, one check node with degree k follows the equation below to obtain the outputs:

,=I->*
Every output OUT,, is equal to the checking result of all the other k-1 input messages in the check node. In our architecture, a multilayer tree structure is proposed for fast parallel check node computation instead of normally proposed serial way, this structure
is configured to adapt to different rates.

The first layer of the network contains a set of 4-checknode-computation-units (4CUs). Each 4CU computer checking results of the 4 input messages. In the second layer, 4CU sets are connected to a set of XCUs or I2CUs. Fig. 3 shows an example of an 8CU made of two 4CUs. The 8CUs and I2CUs can be further connected to 24CUs or 36CUs in the third layer.

KI w2 W i w

HJWWKI______

Layer 1
---"--

Layer 2

&I C-2 &S M

OUTALL

_-----
0 - 5 M GI &$

Figure 3. Architecture of the 8CU made of two 4CUs.

4.3 VARIABLNEODECOMPUTATIOBNLOCK

Variable node computation in our configuration becomes simpler than in [3][4] because of employing MSC check function operators in CNUs. This avoids the use of lookup-tables and fixpoint format conversion (between sign-magnitude and two's complement). Fig. 4 shows the VNU architecture with node degree 3. The input of this VNU is one intrinsic message and three check-
X T , to-variable messages. The output is three computed variable-to-
check messages and 1-bit hard decision result.
IN-I

IN-2

D.ci,b"
Figure 4. Architecture of j=3 V N U without look-up table

762
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:45:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

In rate 5/8 and 7iX regular codes, variable node degree is uniformly distributed and each VNU is connected to 3 RAMs. However, in irregular code, every VNU is associated with different number of RAMs due to the non-uniform distribution of variable node degree. In order to make different rate code designs co-exist in one implementation, a VNU router is inserted between the memory bank and the variable node computation block to adapt to diffcrent code rates.

5. FPGA IMPLEMENTATIAONND RESULTS

Employing (6 : I ) quantization schemc and the architecture described in section 4, a multi-rate LDPC decoder is implemented on Xilinx Virtex-I1 XC2V8000 FPGA device. The design is describcd in VHDL, synthesized by Synplicity, placed and routed using Xilinx development tool ISE6.0. It works at 100MHz clock frequcncy and has codcword length about 10k bits.

The employed XCZV8000 FPGA belongs to Xilinx Virtex-I1 family, containing 168 I 8k-bit dual-port SelectRAM blocks and 46,592 slices, possessing the capacity to handle 8-million-gate design. One of the most challenging .problems in the LDPC decoder dcsign is memory usage bccause LDPC code structure requests large number of parallel working memories to store
exchanged messages. Therefore, memory blocks need to be properly partitioned to fully utilize the FPGA SelectRAM resources. In our architecture, memory bank and IRAM are the main sources of memory usage. The memory bank contains 117 512*7 independent RAM blocks, and IRAM is a large 4.5K*32 memory. Those RAMs are carefully combined to utilize the dualport FPGA RAM resources. The resource utilization statistics is shown in Table 1.

Table 1. FPGA Resource Usage Statistics.

Resource

Number

Usage Rate

Slices

34,127

73%

Slice Flip Flops

24,570

26%

4 Input LUTs

53,327

57%

Block RAMs

102

60%

Bonded IOBs

7s

9%

DCMs

I

8%

Another challenging problem of designing LDPC decoder is the routing congestion caused by the cumplex top-level connections. In our implementation, this problem is alleviatcd by carefully pipelining the data paths between VNU block, router and CNU block. In addition, the critical delay path is optimized and the decoder is able to operate at IOOMHz clock frequency. At this frequency, the decoder achieves a maximum throughput of 66Mbps for regular 518 and 718 mode whcn performing maximum 24 decoding iterations. For irregular li2 LDPC code, more iteration are required for the code to converge, so maximum decoding iteration is set to 60, and maximum 3OMbps throughput can be achieved.

The measured block error rate verses SNR curve of the three

rate is shown in Fig. 5. From the curves we can see that irregular

]/{design achieves remarkable code gain: block error rate IO4 (bit

error rate about

at SNR 1.4 dB, which outperforms the

regular 112 code by approximate 0.5 dB. With such amazing error

correcting ability, irregular Ii2 mode’can he utilized to handle

deep fading channel and the worst transniission condition.

However, it i s also secn from the curvc that irreguIar 112 modc

encounters the commonly observed error floor problem after IO4 block error rate. This problem is caused by the existence of short cycles in the codes and can be improved in the future through carefully designing the structure of the irregular codes [XI. The measurement curves also show that regular 5/8 and 7/X modes achieve satisfied results, with threshold SNR at about 3 dB and 6 dB respectively. Although they do not have as good coding gain as irregular 112 mode, they enjoy higher throughputs and error floor free capability. So they normally operate at better interference conditions and some particular services.
lo”

’ O ’ 1 . . I _ ~ _ . ”

10~1‘

’

I

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

EbR4o(dB)

Figure 5. Measurement performanceof the decoder

6. CONCLUSIONS

This paper presents a hardware architecture suitable for multirate LDPC decoder design. The architecture is implemented on a 10k bit LDPC decoder on the Xilinx XC2V8000 FPGA, and works on three diffcrent modes: irrcgular 1/2, regular 518 or regular 718. Finitc precision effect is also carefully analyzed and the best quailtization scheme fit for three rates is found to improve the decoder performance. For the most critical case, irregular 1/2 operating mode can achieve BER IOe5 at 1.4dB, which outperform the regular one by about 0.5 dB.

REFERENCES
C. Berrou, A, Glavicux, and P. Thitimajshima,“Near Shannon Limit Error-Correction Coding and Decoding”, froc. ICC’93, Gerreva, Swifzerlund.pp, 1064-1070, May 1993.
A.J. Blanksby and C.J. Howland, “A 690-mW l-Gb/s 1024-b, Rate1/2 tow-Density Parity-Check Code Decoder”, IEEE J. Solid-Stare Circrrits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404-412, March 2002. -
T. Zhang and K.K. Parhi, “VLSI Implementatlon-Onented (3,k)Regular Low-Density Parity-Check Codes”, IEEE Workshop on Signa/ Processing Sys/oms, pp. 25-36, Sept. 2001
H. Zhang and T. Zhang, “Design of VLSI Implemcntation-Oriented LDPC Codes”, Vehicular Technohey Conference, voI. I , pp. 670673,2003.
J. Campello, D.S. Modha and S.Rajagopalan, “Designing LDPC Codes Using Bit-Filling”, lEEE Inzemalrunal CnnJ On Communicutions, pp. 55-59, vol. I , June 2001.
T. Richardson, M.A. Shokrollahi and R.L. Urbanke, “Design of Capacity-Approaching Irregular Low-Density Panty-Check Codes”, IEEE Trans. On Informdon Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619-637, Fcb 2001.
A. Anastasopoulos,“A Comparison between the Sum-Product and the Min-Sum Iterative Dectection Algorithms Based on Density Evolution”,Global TelecommunicationsConference,vol. 2,pp. 25-29,
Nov 200 1.

T. Tian, C. Jones, J . D. Villasenor and R D. Wesel, “Construction of Irregular LDPC Codes with Low Error Floors”. i€EE Internafiunal Conference on Commtrnicalion , vol. 5 pp. 3 125-3129, May 2003.

763

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:45:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

