386

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 1, JANUARY 2005

Following the same argument in Section IV, T = i i, we have
the spectral entropy

H(S) = 0

i

i
T

log

i
T

:

Then the Campbell bandwidth is Wc = (1=2)eH S( ), and we can say

the Campbell bandwidth is the minimum average bandwidth for en-

coding the process across all possible distortion levels.

IX. CONCLUSION
We have presented two new derivations of the coefficient rate introduced by Campbell. One derivation solidifies its interpretation as a coefficient rate, and shows that the spectral entropy of a random process is proportional to the logarithm of the equivalent bandwidth of the smallest frequency band that contains most of the energy. The second derivation implies that the number of samples of a particular component should be proportional to the variance of that component. We discussed the implications of the latter result for realization-adaptive source coding and provided a connection with the familiar reverse water-filling result from rate distortion theory. From the coefficient rate, we defined a quantity called the Campbell bandwidth of a random process, and we contrasted Fourier bandwidth, Shannon bandwidth, and Campbell bandwidth.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors are indebted to the referees for their constructive comments and insights.

REFERENCES
[1] L. Campbell, “Minimum coefficient rate for stationary random processes,” Inf. Contr., vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 360–371, Dec. 1960.
[2] T. Berger, Rate Distortion Theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: PrenticeHall, 1968.
[3] N. Abramson, “Information theory and information storage,” in Proc. Symp. System Theory, New York, Apr. 1965, pp. 207–213.
[4] J. D. Gibson, S. P. Stanners, and S. A. McClellan, “Spectral entropy and coefficient rate for speech coding,” in Proc. Asilomar Conf. Signals, Systems, and Computers, Nov. 1993, pp. 925–929.
[5] S. McClellan and J. D. Gibson, “Variable-rate CELP based on subband flatness,” IEEE Trans. Speech Audio Process., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 120–130, Mar. 1997.
[6] J. D. Gibson, M. L. Moodie, and S. A. McClellan, “Variable rate techniques for CELP speech coding,” in Proc. Asilomar Conf. Signals, Systems, and Computers, Pacific Grove, CA, Oct. 29 –Nov. 1, 1995.
[7] S. McClellan and J. D. Gibson, “Variable rate tree coding of speech,” in Proc. 1994 IEEE Wichita Conf. Communications, Networking, and Signal Processing, Wichita, KS, Apr. 1994.
[8] R. Mester and U. Franke, “Spectral entropy-activity classification in adaptive transform coding,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 913–917, Jun. 1992.
[9] R. R. Coifman and M. V. Wickerhauser, “Entropy-based algorithms for best basis selection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 713–718, Mar. 1992.
[10] E. Wesfreid and M. V. Wickerhauser, “Adapted local trigonometric transforms and speech processing,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 41, no. 12, pp. 3596–3600, Dec. 1993.
[11] A. Said and W. A. Pearlman, “A new, fast, and efficient image codec based on set partitioning in hierarchical trees,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 243–250, Jun. 1996.
[12] J. M. Shapiro, “Embedded image coding using zerotrees of wavelet coefficients,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 41, no. 12, pp. 3445–3462, Dec. 1993.
[13] D. L. Donoho, M. Vetterli, R. A. DeVore, and I. Daubechies, “Data compression and harmonic analysis,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 44, no. 6, pp. 2435–2476, Oct. 1998.

[14] A. Ortega and K. Ramchandran, “Rate-distortion methods for image and video compression,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 23–50, Nov. 1998.
[15] M. Effros, “Optimal modeling for complex system design,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 50–73, Nov. 1998.
[16] S. Mallat and F. Falzon, “Analysis of low bit rate image transform coding,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 1027–1042, Apr. 1998.
[17] J. L. Massey, “Toward an information theory of spread-spectrum systems,” Code Division Multiple Access Commun., pp. 29–46, 1995.
[18] U. Grenander and G. Szego, Toeplitz Forms and Their Applications. Berkeley, CA: Univ. Calif. Press, 1958.
[19] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory. New York: Wiley, 1991.
[20] L. Rade, Beta Mathematics Handbook. Boca Raton, FL: CRC, 1992. [21] A. Gersho and R. M. Gray, Vector Quantization and Signal Compres-
sion. Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic, 1991. [22] C. E. Shannon, “Communication in the presence of noise,” Proc. IRE,
vol. 37, pp. 10–21, Jan. 1949.

Regular and Irregular Progressive Edge-Growth Tanner Graphs
Xiao-Yu Hu, Member, IEEE, Evangelos Eleftheriou, Fellow, IEEE, and Dieter M. Arnold, Member, IEEE

Abstract—We propose a general method for constructing Tanner

graphs having a large girth by establishing edges or connections between

symbol and check nodes in an edge-by-edge manner, called progres-

sive edge-growth (PEG) algorithm. Lower bounds on the girth of PEG

Tanner graphs and on the minimum distance of the resulting low-density

parity-check (LDPC) codes are derived in terms of parameters of the

graphs. Simple variations of the PEG algorithm can also be applied to

generate linear-time encodeable LDPC codes. Regular and irregular

LDPC codes using PEG Tanner graphs and allowing symbol nodes to

take values over GF( ) (

2) are investigated. Simulation results

show that the PEG algorithm is a powerful algorithm to generate good

short-block-length LDPC codes.

Index Terms—Girth, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, LDPC codes over GF( ), progressive edge growth (PEG), PEG Tanner graphs.

I. INTRODUCTION
Codes on graphs [1]–[13] have attracted considerable attention owing to their capacity-approaching performance and low-complexity iterative decoding. The prime examples of such codes are the low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. It is known that the belief-propagation (BP) or sum–product algorithm (SPA) over cycle-free Tanner graphs [1] provides optimum decoding. Hence, it is natural to try to minimize the influence of the cycles in the iterative decoding process. This approach has been adopted for both LDPC [14] and turbo codes [15]
Manuscript received September 2, 2002; revised July 18, 2004. The material in this correspondence was presented in part at 2001 IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, San Antonio, TX, November 2001.
X.-Y. Hu and E. Eleftheriou are with IBM Research, Zurich Research Laboratory, 8803 Rüschlikon, Switzerland (e-mail: xhu@zurich.ibm.com; ele@zurich.ibm.com).
D. M. Arnold was with IBM Research, Zurich Research Laboratory, Rüschlikon, Switzerland (e-mail: d.m.arnold@ieee.org).
Communicated by K. A. S. Abdel-Ghaffar, Associate Editor for Coding Theory.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2004.839541

0018-9448/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:45:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 1, JANUARY 2005

387

by using rather long block lengths. In fact, for the binary-symmetric PEG Tanner graphs. Simulation results show that the PEG algorithm is

channel and sufficiently small crossover probability, it was shown that a powerful algorithm for generating good regular and irregular LDPC

the decoding-error probability approaches zero with an increasing codes of short and moderate block lengths.

number of independent iterations [14]. Using the incidence matrix associated with a graph, Gallager proposed an explicit LDPC code construction [14, Appendix C] that guarantees independent decoding iterations up to a lower bound. Unfortunately, this construction is only valid for regular LDPC codes, and seems to be computationally infeasible for large block lengths.
For most existing LDPC codes, the Tanner graph is randomly constructed, avoiding cycles of length 4 [16]–[19]. To date, randomly constructed LDPC codes have largely relied on the sparsity of the parity-check matrix to avoid short cycles in the Tanner graph. Although random graphs have been used to construct LDPC codes with impressive performance [16], [20], large girths facilitate iterative decoding and impose a respectable minimum distance bound that enhances decoding performance in a high-signal-to-noise (SNR) regime. Note that a large girth does not automatically imply a large minimum distance. Consider, for example, a code with only one parity check whose girth is infinity, but whose minimum distance is only two. For large block lengths, random graphs work very well, but for short block lengths, the probability of choosing an unfavorable random graph is surprisingly high. As observed in [21], the random ensemble average is to a large degree dominated by such “bad”

Compared with other existing constructions, the significance of the PEG algorithm lies in 1) its simplicity, i.e., its complexity is such that it can easily be used for constructing codes of very large block lengths and good girth guaranteed by the lower bound, and 2) its flexibility, i.e., it successfully generates good codes for any given block length and any rate when using a density-evolution-optimized degree sequence. Moreover, with a slight modification, it can be used to generate lineartime-encodeable LDPC codes.
The remainder of this correspondence is organized as follows. Section II introduces the necessary definitions and notations on graphs. Section III describes the principle and the details of the PEG algorithm. In Section IV, we summarize the graph properties of PEG Tanner graphs; in particular, the lower bounds on the girth and on the minimum distance are derived. We briefly address linear-time encoding based on the PEG principle in Section V. Section VI presents simulation results comparing the performance of regular and irregular LDPC codes defined on PEG Tanner graphs with that of randomly constructed ones. In Section VII, we investigate the performance of PEG Tanner-graph codes over a finite field GF (q). Finally, Section VIII concludes this correspondence.

graphs for short block lengths. The minimum distance issue becomes

critical if an irregular degree sequence is used. This suggests that one needs to define an expurgated random ensemble to avoid graphs

II. DEFINITIONS AND NOTATIONS

having short cycles. Construction of LDPC codes based on finite geometries was reported
in [22]. Finite-geometry LDPC codes have relatively good minimum distances and their Tanner graphs do not contain cycles of length 4. They can be put in either cyclic or quasi-cyclic form so that the encoding can be achieved in linear time by using simple feedback shift registers. With a high rate and very long block length, these codes perform very well under iterative decoding, only a few tenths of a decibel away from the Shannon limit [22]. For more results obtained by various authors, the reader is referred to [23]–[26].
Since the early work of Gallager, the first significant work in constructing LDPC codes based on a graph-theoretic algebraic approach was reported in [27]. In [28], [29], explicit group-theoretic constructions of graphs were proposed. The girth of these graphs exceeds the Erdös–Sachs bound [30], which is a nonconstructive lower bound on the girth of random graphs and has the same significance

An LDPC code is a linear code defined by a sparse parity-check ma-
2 trix H having dimension m n. A bipartite graph with m check nodes
in one class and n symbol nodes in the other can be created using H as the integer-valued incidence matrix for the two classes. Such a graph is also called a Tanner graph [1]. As a Tanner graph defines a parity-check matrix and a parity-check matrix corresponds to a Tanner graph, we use the terms Tanner graph and parity-check matrix interchangeably. Formally, a Tanner graph is denoted as (V; E), with V the set of vertices
[ f g 0 (nodes), V = Vc Vs, where Vc = c0; c1; . . . ; cm 1 is the set of f g check nodes and Vs = 0 s0; s1; . . . ; sn 1 the set of symbol nodes. E  2 2 is the set of edges such that E Vc Vs, with edge (ci; sj ) E if 6 and only if hi;j = 0, where hi;j denotes the entry of H at ith row and   0   0 jth column, 0 i m 1; 0 j n 1. A Tanner graph is called
(ds; dc)-regular if every symbol node participates in ds check nodes and every check node involves dc symbol nodes; otherwise, it is called irregular. Denote the symbol degree sequence by

as the Gilbert–Varshamov bound does in the context of the minimum distance of linear codes. The notion of graph expansion was first introduced as an analysis tool in coding theory [3]. Recently, this approach

f Ds = ds ; ds ; . . . ; ds

g

has been pursued even further, with emphasis on constructing LDPC codes having almost the largest girth possible [31], [32].
In this correspondence, we present a simple but efficient method for constructing Tanner graphs having a large girth in a best effort sense by

  0 in which ds is the degree of symbol node sj , 0 j n 1, in

 1 1 1  nondecreasing order, i.e., ds ds

ds , and the parity-check

degree sequence by

progressively establishing edges between symbol and check nodes in an edge-by-edge manner, called progressive edge-growth (PEG) algo-

f Dc = dc ; dc ; . . . ; dc

g

rithm. Given the number of symbol nodes, the number of check nodes, and the symbol–node–degree sequence of the graph, an edge-selection procedure is started such that the placement of a new edge on the graph has as small an impact on the girth as possible. After a best effort edge has been determined, the graph with this new edge is updated, and the procedure continues with the placement of the next edge. In addition, lower and upper bounds on the girth and a lower bound on the minimum distance are derived in terms of parameters of the underlying

  0 in which dc is the degree of parity-check node cj , 0 j m 1,

 1 1 1  and dc

dc

dc . Let also the set of edges E be partitioned

[ [ 1 1 1 [ in terms of Vs as E = Es Es

Es , with Es containing

all edges incident on symbol node sj . Moreover, denote the kth edge

  0 incident

on

sj

by

k Es

,

0

k

ds

1. Fig. 1 shows an example of a

f g Ds = 2; 2; 2; 2; 3; 3; 3; 3 irregular Tanner graph, in which the check

f g degree sequence is uniformly of degree 5, i.e., Dc = 5; 5; 5; 5 .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:45:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

388

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 1, JANUARY 2005

= f2 2 2 2 3 3 3 3g Fig. 1. An example of a symbol-node degree Ds

;;;;;;;

irregular Tanner graph.

N [ N or equivalently sl

= l
s

Vc. The subgraph rooted from sj is

generated by means of unfolding the Tanner graph in a breadth-first

way; we start from sj , and traverse all edges incident on sj ; let
( ) ( ) . . . ( ) these edges be sj; ci ; sj; ci ; ; sj; ci . Then we traverse

. . . all other edges incident on vertices ci ; ci ; ; ci , excluding

( ) ( ) . . . ( ) sj; ci ; sj; ci ;

; sj ; ci

. This process continues until the

desired depth is reached. Note that in the subgraph duplicate vertices

or edges may occur. Referring to Fig. 2, any symbol node residing for

the first time at depth l has a distance of 2l to sj , and any check node

N residing for the first time at depth l has a distance of 2l + 1 to sj .

Therefore, of distance

l s

can

(relative

be to

alternatively defined as the check-node subset
sj ) smaller than or equal to 2l + 1. Similarly,

N for a given parity-check node ci, define its neighborhood with depth

l,

l c

,

as

the

set

consisting

of

all

parity-check

nodes

reached

by

a

subgraph (or a tree) spreading from ci within depth l.

A graph is called simple if 1) it does not have a self-loop that is an

III. PROGRESSIVE EDGE-GROWTH (PEG) CONSTRUCTION

edge joining a vertex to itself, 2) there is at most one edge between a

pair of vertices, and 3) all edges are nondirected. In a simple graph,
we say that vertices x and y are adjacent if (x; y) is an edge. The set

consisting of all vertices that are adjacent to x is called x’s neighbors.
2 AeosefltsiG eaurb,ientghsrVeuanbp0.shfeAootrsfseoeavqfegutrhreyaonpescdheegoG oeffeG =di.s(tNiE Vno;c0t,E teivtt)hemirasttuicaisfetgsG hr,oa0spltd=ahrttwh(inaVhgto0b;sforeEothvm0)etrhixtseeaxavnesadurntbedicngeedrsdainpgoghef

with y is called a path between x and y if any two consecutive vertices

in the sequence are joined by an edge. If there exists at least one path

between x and y, then x and y are called connected or x is reached by

y and vice versa. If two vertices x and y in the graph are connected,
their distance (d x; y) is then defined as the length (number of edges) of

the shortest path joining them. A closed path with edges starting from

x and ending at x is called a cycle of x. Girth g refers to the length

of the shortest cycle in a graph. For each symbol node sj , we define a

f g local girth gs as the length of the shortest cycle passing through that
symbol node. By definition, if follows that g = minj gs .

In general, an ensemble of bipartite or Tanner graphs is characterized

by degree distribution pairs. In the case of the symbol nodes, the degree

distribution is defined as

d

3(x) =

3i ix

i2

f g where
nodes;

3dmsi iasxthisetfhreaclatirognesotfesnytrmybionl

nodes
= Ds

connected
ds ; ds ;

to exactly
. . . ; ds

i

check , and

Constructing a Tanner graph with the largest possible girth is a

rather difficult combinatorial problem. Nevertheless, a suboptimum

algorithm to construct a Tanner graph with a relatively large girth is

feasible. One such algorithm is the PEG algorithm that we present

here, in which the local girth of a symbol node is maximized whenever

a new edge is added to this symbol node. Given the graph parameters,

i.e., the number of symbol nodes n, the number of check nodes m, and

the symbol–node–degree sequence Ds, an edge-selection procedure

is started such that the placement of a new edge on the graph has as

small an impact on the girth as possible. The underlying graph grows

in an edge-by-edge manner, optimizing each local girth. Accordingly,

the resulting Tanner graph is referred to as PEG Tanner graph. The

fundamental idea is to find the most distant check node and then to

place a new edge connecting the symbol node and this most distant

check node.

Whenever a subgraph from symbol node sj is expanded before an

N edge is established, two situations can occur: 1) the cardinality of N 6 N stops increasing but is smaller than m; 2) sl = , but sl+1

l s
=

. In the first case, not all check nodes are reachable from sj , so the

PEG algorithm chooses the one that is not reachable, thus not creating

any additional cycle. This often occurs in the initial phase of graph

construction. In the second case, all check nodes are reachable from sj ,

and the algorithm chooses the one that is at the largest distance from
sj , say at depth l + 1, so that the cycle created by establishing an edge is of the largest possible length 2(l + 2). We summarize the proposed

algorithm as follows.

d
3i = 1:
i2

Progressive Edge-Growth Algorithm:
for j = 0 to n 0 1 do

Similarly, in the case of the parity-check nodes, the degree distribution begin

is defined as

0 for k = 0 to ds 1 do

d

8(x) =

8i ix

i2

f g where 8i is the

exactly i symbol

. . . dc ; dc ;

; dc

nforadcetsio; ndcmoafx

parity-check nodes connected is the largest entry in Dc

, and

to
=

d
8i = 1:
i2

N For a given symbol node sj , define its neighborhood within depth l,

l s

, as

the set consisting of all check nodes reached by a subgraph (or

begin

0 = 0 if k0
( ) Es

edge

ci; sj

,

where

0
Es

is the first edge incident to sj

[ [ 1 1 1 [ and ci is a check node such that it has the lowest check-node degree

under the current graph setting Es Es

Es .

else

expand a subgraph from symbol node sj up to depth l under the

N current graph setting such that N 6 N creasing but is less than m, or

thsel

cardinality
= but

osfl+1

l s
=

stops in, then

k
0 ( ) Es

edge

ci; sj

,

where

k Es

is the kth edge incident to

N sj and ci is a check node picked from the set

l s

having the low-

est check-node degree.

N nN aextaremep) lsepirneaFdiign.g2f.rIotms csoymmpbloelmneondtaersyjsweti,thinsl

depth l, as shown , is defined as Vc

in

the

l s

,

end end

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:45:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 1, JANUARY 2005

389

Fig. 2. A subgraph spreading from symbol node sj .

N N The set

l s

and its complement

sl

can be efficiently obtained in a

I recursive manner. One can set an indicator c for each check node ci

f g I taking on values from the set 0; 1 . The indicator set is initialized

to 0. As the tree originating in sj proceeds to depth l, the indicators of

all check nodes included in the spanning tree are set to 1, indicating

N N that these nodes belong to

l s

. Likewise,

sl

is obtained by checking

I whether the indicator c equals 0. Note that this simple version is

definitely not the most efficient one; nevertheless, it proves to be good

enough for generating practical PEG Tanner-graph codes.

There is a subtle point in the PEG algorithm that needs further

comment. Whenever we encounter multiple choices for connecting
N to symbol node sj , i.e., multiple check nodes exist in sl , we select
the one having the smallest number of incidence edges under the

current graph setting. Such a check-node selection strategy renders

the resulting PEG Tanner graphs as check-node-degree uniform as

possible. In particular, it tends to produce graphs with uniform degree

in parity-check nodes (parity-check-node-regular graphs), or concen-

trated graphs with two consecutive nonzero degrees. One can easily

apply additional constraints on the check-node degree distribution,

e.g., by setting appropriate maximum degrees on individual check

nodes; this however might not be necessary as there is strong evidence

that a concentrated degree sequence on the check nodes is optimum

tional complexity and the storage requirements of the PEG algorithm scale as O(n m) and O(n), respectively, whereas the complexity and storage requirements of Gallager’s explicit con-
bstortuhctO io(nn[21)4., Appendix C] for large girth, in the best case, are

2) Nongreedy version—The version presented above is greedy

in the sense that the subgraph spreading from sj proceeds

N 6 N as deep
sl =

asbpuot ssisbl+le1,

i.e., =

the depth l is maximized such that . This approach appears to be favor-

able if the minimum distance is at a premium, particularly for

short-block-length and/or high-rate codes [36], [37]. However,

for long-block-length, low-rate codes, in which the minimum

distance is in principle large, it might be favorable to limit l to a

certain value lmax, 1) to make the check-node degree sequence

concentrated in the strict sense, and 2) possibly to reduce the

diameter of the graph, i.e., the maximum distance of distinct

vertex pairs, such that fewer decoding iterations are required.

This variant is called the nongreedy PEG algorithm. Note that if
0 one sets lmax = gt=2 2, where gt is the target girth, then this

variant bears some resemblance to the “bit-filling” algorithm

described independently in [38].

[33], [34].

Even so, we may still face a situation in which multiple choices exist
N because multiple check nodes in sl might have the same lowest de-
gree, particularly in the initial phase of PEG construction. There are

two main approaches to solve this problem. The first is to randomly

select one of these check nodes. The second is to always select one ac-
N cording to its position in the order of 0c ; 1c ; . . . ; cm01. For instance,
we can first sort the check nodes in sl that have the same lowest degree according to their subscripts, and then always pick the first one. In

this correspondence, we adopt the first approach. Note, however, that

the second may also be of interest because of its deterministic nature.

We close this section with the following remarks.

N 1) Complexity—The computational load in obtaining the set

l s

N or sl primarily depends on the degree sequences Ds and Dc

as well as on the depth l. In a sparse graph, the elements of

Ds and Dc are small numbers irrespective of n, and l grows at most logarithmically with m. In the worst case, the computa-

3) Look-ahead-enhanced version—The PEG principle refers to constructing graphs by attaching edges in stages, where at each stage we choose an edge emanating from a symbol node such that the shortest cycle passing through the assumed edge is locally optimized. Clearly, this local optimization usually does not produce the best possible overall solution. One can enhance the greedy PEG algorithm by looking one step ahead. In the look-ahead-enhanced version, the same procedure as in the greedy PEG algorithm is applied, except when several choices exist for placing the kth edge of sj . In this case, additional testing is introduced to ensure that a better choice is used. Specifically, for each candidate parity-check node in
Nsl , we evaluate the maximum possible depth l the subgraph
expanded from sj would have if an edge connecting the candidate parity-check node with sj had been put onto the graph. Then we select the parity-check node having the largest l as the parity-check node that the kth edge of sj joins.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:45:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

390

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 1, JANUARY 2005

4) Flexibility and scalability—The PEG algorithm can be used to construct regular and irregular bipartite graphs with arbitrary size. It generates good codes for any given block length and rate, provided a good degree sequence is supplied. Its low complexity makes it suitable for constructing codes of very large lengths and, with a slight modification, for constructing linear-time-encoding LDPC codes. Any other algorithm known, e.g., Gallager’s construction, does not have this degree of flexibility. The underlying PEG principle is flexible and broadly applicable; for example, with only a minor modification it can be used to generate graphs that are strictly regular [35]. By incorporating an extra criterion called “approximate cycle-extrinsic message degree (ACE)” [40] at the stage of selecting one
N check node from the set sl , the error floor at high SNRs for
irregular PEG codes can be further improved [41]. Rate-compatible LDPC codes based on the PEG principle have recently been published in [42].

0 0 0 00 0 dT(dehspmutsah,x1th.1eS)ri(emdcmailraaerxlya,t1t)mhpeoarsertiatydre-smcaahtxem(cdkosmsnatoxddsmesa1xin)((dtdhsmcemanaxxex1t )r1lo()udnccmdhaeoxcfks1pn)roel adcdehisencgakt.

nodes in the

at depth l. subgraph

In principle, duplicate during the spreading

parity-check process. Let

nl0odbees

may occur the largest

integer such that

0 0 max
ds

+

max
ds

(dsmax

1)(dcmax

1) +

1

1

1

+

max
ds

(dsmax

0

1)l

(dcmax

0

1)l

<m

(3)

which can be simplified to

max
ds

(dsmax 0 1)l +1(dcmax 0 1)l +1 0 1

(dsmax 0 1)(dcmax 0 1) 0 1

< m:

(4)

Let tliorrw be the solution of the equation

IV. GRAPH PROPERTIES
A randomly constructed Tanner graph guarantees neither a meaningful lower bound on the girth nor the minimum distance. In contrast, a PEG Tanner graph exhibits some rather elegant properties in terms of girth and minimum distance.
A. Girth Bounds
The number of independent iterations has been analyzed in [14]. In particular, an upper bound on the maximum number of independent iterations i is derived. This bound is general and applies to any (ds; dc)-regular Tanner graph. More importantly, an explicit construction procedure is described by which it is always possible to find a
0  (ds; dc)-regular graph for which the maximum number of independent
iterations is bounded by t 1 < i t, where the real number t depends on ds, dc, and the code block length n. In [14], it was also shown that the girth g and i are related by the following inequality:
 4 i < g= i + 1:

max
ds

(dsmax 0 1)t+1(dmc ax 0 1)t+1 0 1

(dsmax 0 1)(dcmax 0 1) 0 1

=m

(5)

that is,

00 00 0 tliorrw

=

log

max
mdc

log[(dsmax

md d

m+1

1)(dcmax 1)]

1:

(6)

Then

l



0
l

=

btilrorwc.

Note that graph, with

dthcmeaaxbo=vedlec mamnda

dasmlsaoxho=ldsdsfo. rWae(dnco;wdse)s-traebgluislharaTlaonwneerr

bound on the girth of a PEG Tanner graph.

dcmTahxeaonrdemdsm1a:x

Let are

(V; E) be the largest

an irregular PEG Tanner graph in which degrees of the degree sequences Dc and

Ds, respectively. The girth g of this graph is lower-bounded by

g  2(btliorrwc + 2)

(7)

The PEG construction procedure described here also guarantees the existence of a regular or irregular graph whose girth satisfies a lower bound. We use the following lemma to establish a lower bound on the

where tliorrw is given by (2).
Proof: Suppose that the closed path

girth of the PEG Tanner graphs.

andLedmsmmaxa

1: are

Let (V; E) be an irregular Tanner graph in the largest degrees of the degree sequences

which

max
dc

Dc and Ds,

N respectively. Let N  N node sj such that

sl sl

denote the Vc and

despl+th1-l=neVicg,htbhoernhlooisdloowf aenr-ybsoyumndbeodl

by

(sj ; ci ); (ci ; sj ); (sj ; ci ); (ci ; sj );

. . . ; (sj

; ci

); (ci

; sj )

is among those that provide the shortest cycle in a PEG Tanner graph
(V; E), where, without loss of generality, jg=201 is the largest index among 0j ; 1j ; . . . ; jg=201. Then, the length of the shortest cycle in the

l  btlirorwc

graph, i.e., girth g, is equal to the local girth of symbol node sj ,

(1) i.e., g = gj

. As jg=201 is the largest index, gj

can be viewed

where tliorrw is given by

00 00 tliorrw

=

log

max
mdc

log[(dsmax

md d

m+1

1)(dcmax 1)]

01

(2)

b1c indicates the floor of a floating-point number, and m denotes the

cardinality of the set Vc of parity-check nodes.

Proof: Consider a depth-l subgraph of an irregular Tanner graph

2 N  which N and

sslp+r1ead=s

from any Vc. Let

asylsmobdocml naxodaensdj

, smjax
ds

Vs, such that be the largest

sl Vc
degrees

of Dc and Ds, contains at most

drsmeasxpepcatirviteyl-yc.heBcyk

definition the depth-0 nodes, each giving rise

subgraph to at most

as the girth of symbol node sj
[ [ 1 1 1 [ edges in the set E0 E1 [ 1 1 1 [ complementary set Ej

in the intermediary graph with
Ej . Clearly, the edges in the
En01 have no impact on the local

girth of sj . Recall now the procedure in the PEG algorithm for

placing edges successively in the set Ej . Whenever a subgraph

from symbol node sj

is expanded before an edge is established,

N two cases may occur: 1) the cardinality of sl

stops increasing

N but is smaller than m; 2) sl

=6 , but Nsl+1 = . In

case 1), not all check nodes are reachable from sj , so the PEG algo-

rithm chooses the one that is not reachable, thus avoiding the creation

of an additional cycle. In case 2), by construction, the shortest pos-

sible cycle passing through symbol node sj

has length 2(l + 2),

N where l corresponds to the depth-l neighborhood sl

such that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:45:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 1, JANUARY 2005

391

Nsl

6 N = , but sl+1 = . Therefore, by making use of

 b c Lemma 1 we obtain g

2(

irr tlow

+2),

where

irr tlow

is

given

by

(2).

0 0 log 0 0 t2 =

(n

1)(1

d

d (d

01) ) + 1

log[(dc 1)(ds 1)]

(13)

The bound on the girth justifies the effort of the PEG algorithm to keep the check-node degree as uniform as possible. The more uniform the Tanner graph, the smaller the values of dsmax and dcmax, thereby improving the lower bound. Moreover, it can readily be seen that this lower bound is always better than the lower bound guaranteed by Gallager’s explicit construction [14, Appendix C].
An upper bound on the girth of a general Tanner graph can be derived based on the approach in [14] in a straightforward way. We state the result without a proof. The reader is referred to [14, Appendix C] for details.
Lemma 2: Let (V; E) be a (ds; dc)-regular Tanner graph. The girth g of this graph is upper-bounded by

I and 1 is equal to 0 if and only if

0 0 [(dc 1)(ds 1)]bt c

>

m010

dc(ds

0 f1) [(dc 0 1)(ds 0 1)]bt 0 0 0 (dc 1)(ds 1) 1

c

0 1g

(14)

I and 2 is equal to 0 if and only if

0 0 [(dc 1)(ds 1)]bt c

0 0 0 f 0 0 0 00 0 g > n

1

ds(dc

1) [(dc 1)(ds 1)]bt c
(dc 1)(ds 1) 1

1 : (15)

 b c g

4 reg tupp

+4

(8) The details of the proof of Lemma 3 can be found in [39].

where

reg tupp

is

given

by

0 0 log
= reg
0 0 tupp

(m

1)(1

d

d (d

01) ) + 1

log[(dc 1)(ds 1)]

:

Fig. 3 depicts both the lower bound on a PEG Tanner graph and the two upper bounds on a general Tanner graph for regular ds = 3, dc = 6 codes with varying m (in this case, n = 2m). It can be seen that the-
(9) upper bound of Lemma 3 is tighter than that of Lemma 2. Moreover, the lower bound of a PEG Tanner graph is higher than half of the two

upper bounds for the entire range of block lengths. The lower bound

Comparing the lower and upper bounds in (7) and (8), respectively, corresponding to Gallager’s construction is also shown in Fig. 3, illus-

one can easily see that the girth of a regular PEG Tanner graph is always trating that the lower bound of a PEG Tanner graph is better than that

larger than or equal to half of the upper bound. This result is analogous of Gallager’s explicit construction.

to the asymptotic bounds on the girth of regular graphs having only Compared with Gallager’s explicit construction, the PEG construc-

one type of nodes. Specifically, the asymptotic Erdös–Sachs bound [30] tion in general achieves a better girth with much less complexity. The

states that a randomly generated regular graph with n vertices and de-

! 1 gree r has a girth that is larger than or equal to (1 + o(1)) logr01 n,

with probability approaching 1 as n

, and is half of the asymp-

totic upper bound (2+o(1)) logr01 n [28]. Using similar arguments as

in [14, Appendix C], one can readily derive an analogous Erdös–Sachs

PEG algorithm is quite simple, whereas the complexity of Gallager’s explicit construction remains prohibitively large for medium and large block lengths. So far, we are not aware of practical LDPC codes based on Gallager’s explicit construction. More importantly, the PEG algorithm can also be applied to generate irregular graphs, whereas Gal-

asymptotic bound for bipartite (Tanner) graphs and show that the lower lager’s construction only applies to regular graphs. The flexibility of the

bound on the girth of PEG Tanner graphs in (7) always meets this anal- PEG algorithm even allows us to design linear-time-encoding LDPC

ogous Erdös–Sachs bound. The Erdös–Sachs bound may be regarded codes without sacrificing decoding performance. It is worthwhile to

as an analog of the Varshamov–Gilbert bound in coding theory, as both point out that in practice the lower bound on PEG Tanner graphs can

are derived from similar arguments. Note that, similarly to the Var- be exceeded. We have designed good LDPC codes based on the non-

shamov–Gilbert bound, the Erdös–Sachs bound is nonconstructive in greedy PEG variant or the look-ahead-enhanced variant that achieve a

the sense that the corresponding sequence of graphs is defined noncon- girth that is larger than the lower bound. In Fig. 3 these codes are indi-

structively. It is not clear from the proof of the Erdös–Sachs bound how

f g to construct a sequence Gj of regular graphs of degree r explicitly

f g ! 1 f g  f g such that n( Gj )

and g( Gj ) (1 + o(1)) logr01 n( Gj )

! 1 for j

.

The following lemma provides an even tighter upper bound on the

girth of a general Tanner graph.

Lemma 3: Let (V; E) be a (ds; dc)-regular Tanner graph. The girth g of the graph is upper-bounded by

cated by circles, corresponding to m = 20; 75; 430; 3000; 30 000; and 300 000.
B. Minimum-Distance Bound
f g Assume that Vs takes on values from the binary alphabet 0; 1 and
Vc is a set of simple parity checks (SPC), the Tanner graph then translates into Gallager’s binary LDPC code. The randomly constructed
 (ds; dc)-regular code for ds 3 has a minimum distance that increases

 f g g min g1; g2

linearly with block length n, for ds and dc constant [14]. This is only (10) valid for relatively large block lengths, however, and a code with a low

where

minimum distance will be impaired in its performance at high SNRs. Although finding the minimum distance of a generic linear code is an

in which

g1 = g2 =

b c 4 t1 + 2; b c 4 t1 + 4; b c 4 t2 + 2; b c 4 t2 + 4;

I if 1 = 0
otherwise
I if 2 = 0
otherwise

NP-hard problem, some bounds on the minimum distance of a gen-

eral Tanner graph have been established in [1], [43]. For a PEG Tanner

graph, it is possible to derive a lower bound on the minimum distance

(11)

in a similar way. In fact, using Tanner’s approach [1] and arranging the graph in tree form with the symbol node as root, it can readily be shown

 that for a (ds; dc)-regular graph with (ds 3), the minimum distance

dmin satisfies

0 0 log 0 0 t1 =

(m

1)(1

d

d (d

01) ) +

1

log[(dc 1)(ds 1)]

;

(12)

 0 0 0 dmin

1 + ds[(ds

1)b(g02)=4c
ds 2

1] :

(16)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:45:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

392

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 1, JANUARY 2005

Fig. 3. Lower and upper bounds on a PEG regular Tanner graph with ds = 3, dc = 6.

Furthermore, if g=2 is even, the lower bound on dmin can be made even tighter

 0 0 0 0 dmin

1 + ds[(ds

1)b(g02)=4c
ds 2

1] + (ds

b 0 c 1) (g

2)=4 :

(17)

The proof of this bound is based on counting symbol nodes in an active subgraph induced by a minimum-weight codeword, which is a straightforward variation of the minimum distance result in [1]. Compared with the original Tanner minimum-distance lower bound, (16) and (17) are
 slightly stronger as in general ds 3. For example, in the case of  g = 6, (16) reduces to the conventional bound dmin 1 + ds, whereas  0 the lower bound in [1] yields the weaker result dmin 4 2=ds, be cause in general ds 3. In the case of g = 8, both bounds yield the  same result, namely, dmin 2ds. On the other hand, for g = 10, the 0  bound in (16) yields 1 + ds2, whereas the lower bound in [1] leads to
the weaker result 4(ds 1) + 2=ds for ds 3. The above bound can readily be extended to the symbol-node-uni-
form case where the degree sequence of check nodes is not necessarily uniform. Thus, we obtain the following general result.

Lemma 4: Given a symbol-node-uniform PEG Tanner graph with
 ds (ds 3) edges incident to each symbol node, let dcmax be the largest
degree of check nodes. The minimum distance dmin of the resulting
LDPC code satisfies (18) at the bottom of the page, in which

0 0 irr 0 0 0 tlow

=

log(mdcmax log[(ds

md d
1)(dcmax

m + 1) 1)]

1:

(19)

The proof follows directly from (16), (17), and the lower bound on the girth of PEG Tanner graphs in Theorem 1.
Note that the above bound on the minimum distance still is a weak bound for two reasons. The first is the assumption that all active check nodes are satisfied by exactly two symbol nodes, which weakens the estimate of the minimum distance. The second is that the condition that the last row of check nodes in the active subgraph must be satisfied with additional active symbol nodes has not been taken into account. Nevertheless, (18) always furnishes a meaningful bound on graphs having a large girth.

V. LINEAR-TIME ENCODING

The computational complexity per block of iterative decoding using

BP or SPA on a Tanner graph has been shown to be essentially linear

with block length n, but the encoding complexity per block increases

quadratically

by

2 n

.

Several

publications

address

this

issue,

with

the

aim of obtaining linear-time-encoding complexity, see for example

[44]–[49]. The most common approach is to exploit the sparseness of

the parity-check matrix H and its corresponding graph to obtain an

efficient encoding format, namely, a triangular or almost triangular

parity-check matrix.

The PEG algorithm can easily be tailored to construct LDPC codes

having (almost) triangular structure, good girth properties, and an

 dmin

0 0 1 + d [(d

1)
d

2

0 0 1 + d [(d

1)
d

2

01] ;
0 0 b 1] + (ds 1)

b c if

irr tlow

is odd

c ;

b c if

irr tlow

is even

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:45:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(18)

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 1, JANUARY 2005

393

optimum irregular degree sequence. According to the linear-time-en-

coding principle, the codeword w and the parity-check matrix H are

partitioned

into

w

=

[p; d]

and

H

=

[p H;

H d ],

respectively,

such

that

[ ] p

dT

H ;H w

=0

(20)

2 f g where the m

m

component

p H

=

p hi;j

of the parity-check matrix

is forced (constructed) to have the special form

1 1 1 1 1 1 1

1 2p
h;

1p
h ;m

01

p H

=

... ...

. . . ...

...

(21)

1 1 1 01 0 1 p hm ;m

0

00 1

2 m m

f g in which hi;j = 1 for i = j and hi;j = 0 for i > j. Hence, the
parity-check bits p = pi are computed according to

pi =

m

0n m

= +1 =1 j i

+ p
hi;j pj j

d hi;j dj

mod 2

(22)

f g where d =

di

is

the

systematic

part

of

the

codeword, and

d H

=

d
f g 2 0 hi;j

is the m

(n

m) component of the partitioned parity-check

matrix H. Equation (22) is computed recursively from i = m to i =

1. Clearly, the encoding process has become much simpler because

the Gaussian elimination step is avoided. Moreover, computation and

storage requirements in the encoder are also reduced because H is

sparse by design.

Accordingly, we partition the symbol node set Vs in the Tanner-

graph

representation

into

the

redundant

subset

p Vs

and

the

information

0 subset

d Vs

,

which

contain

the

first

m

symbol

nodes

(parity

bits)

and

the

other n m symbol nodes (systematic information bits), respectively.

The edges of the symbol nodes are then established by means of the

PEG algorithm while observing the special pattern in (21), so that the

linear-time-encoding property results. As the procedure of establishing
0 the edges of n m information bits follows the construction of edges

of

p Vs

and

is

exactly

the

same

as

that

described

in

Section

III,

we

focus

on

the

modified

PEG

algorithm

for

constructing

edges

of

.p
Vs

0 PEG

Algorithm

for

Establishing

Edges

of

:p
Vs

for j = 0 to m 1 do

begin
0 for k = 0 to ds 1 do

begin

0 if k0= 0 Es

edge

(cj

;

sj

),

where

0
Es

is the first edge incident to sj .

This edge corresponds to the “1” in the diagonal line of matrix Hp.

ad hoc optimization procedures, and has been widely used as a benchmark. A PEG Tanner graph of 504 symbol and 252 check nodes is generated with uniform degree 3 for each symbol node. The resulting graph is nearly check-node uniform with degree 6, except for eight check nodes with a degree of 7, and eight with a degree of 5. We also use a randomly constructed rate-1=2 (504; 252) code, in which the degree of symbol nodes is 3 and the positions of 1’s in a column is determined by a random integer generator uniformly distributed among the
f 0 g set 0; 1; . . . ; m 1 . Additional tests are implemented to guarantee
that no four cycles occur in the graph representation. In the PEG Tanner graph, each symbol node has a local girth of 8,
except for three symbol nodes with a local girth of 10. In MacKay’s code, 63% of the symbol nodes have a local girth of 6 and 37% one of 8. In the random graph, 79% of the symbol nodes have a local girth of 6 and 21% one of 8. The average local girth of these three graphs is 8:01; 6:74; and 6:42; respectively. Fig. 4 shows a perspective of the girth properties of the various graphs. It depicts the girth of the left-hand
f g   0 subgraph of symbol node sj as a function of j. The left-hand subgraph
of sj consists of the symbol nodes 0 0 1 s ; s ; . . . ; sj 1 ; 0 j n 1,
the edges that emanate from them, and the parity-check nodes they are connected to. It is desirable, in particular for irregular LDPC codes, that the girth of the left-hand subgraph of sj decreases slowly as a function of j such that the possibility that lower degree nodes together form a small cycle decrease. Furthermore, for irregular Tanner graphs, lower degree symbol nodes intuitively require more iterations during the decoding process than higher degree symbol nodes do, and they are also more likely to lead to low-weight codewords. Therefore, having a large girth on the left-hand subgraph of lower degree symbol nodes is a nice property inherent in the PEG construction. In addition, optimizing the girth of the left-hand subgraph can also facilitate the design of LDPC codes having as high a rate as possible while satisfying the requirement of a good global girth. One can easily think of the following (minor) improvement to the generic PEG algorithm obtained by adding an extra procedure to make the girth of the left-hand subgraph decrease as slowly as possible: If the local girth of the current symbol node is less than the girth of its left-hand subgraph (before the current-working symbol node), which indicates a decrease in the girth of the left-hand subgraph, we simply discard all the edges for the the current symbol node and redo the PEG algorithm for it (with random seeds) until a maximum number of trials has been made or the local girth of the symbol node is no longer less than the girth of its left-hand subgraph. It is empirically observed that this modification will not always yield a noticeable improvement, but on some occasions—down to very low bit- or block-error rates—it can improve the error floor due to near- (pseudo-) codewords.
Fig. 5 compares the bit- and block-error rates for the three codes after 80 iterations over a binary-input additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, and shows that the performance of the random graph

else

is much worse than that of the other two codes, perhaps mainly because

expand a subgraph from symbol node sj up to depth l under the

N \ f g 6 current graph setting such that

N \ f g N but

 l+1 s

0 0 1 c ; c ; . . . ; cj 1

l s
=

0 0 1 c ; c ; . . . ; cj 1 =

, or the cardinality of

l s

0 stops

increasing,

then

k Es

edge

(ci ;

sj ),

where

k Es

is the

N \f g kth edge incident to sj and ci is a check node picked from the

set

l s

0 0 1 c ; c ; . . . ; cj 1 having the lowest check-node degree.

end

end

of its poor girth histogram. We collect at least 100 block errors per sim-

ulation point. We observe that the LDPC code based on the PEG Tanner

2 graph is slightly better
block-error rate of 5

t1h0a0n5M, tahceKLaDy’PsCcocdoed.eWbaitshed80onitethraetiPoEnGs aTnadnantear

graph outperforms MacKay’s code by 0.2 dB. The significance of this

result should not be underestimated, considering that, to the best of our

knowledge, MacKay’s codes are among the best codes for short and

medium block lengths. Note that although both MacKay’s code and

the random graph have a global girth of 6, the performance of the latter

VI. CODE PERFORMANCE

degrades significantly. This suggests that in reality the girth histogram may be of greater importance than the girth for the performance of iter-

In this section, we first study the performance of PEG Tanner graphs
applied to binary LDPC codes by means of computer simulations. For comparison purposes, we use the rate-1=2 (n = 504, m = 252) code of MacKay in [50], which is based on a regular Tanner graph with ds = 3, dc = 6. This code was randomly constructed followed by

ative decoding. For instance, in [51], the average of the girth histogram is used as a heuristic tool to select good codes from random graphs for short block lengths. Of course, one can also apply the approach of [51] to select good codes among PEG Tanner graphs, anticipating further performance improvements.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:45:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

394

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 1, JANUARY 2005

Fig. 4. Girth of the left-hand subgraphs of symbol node sj in a PEG Tanner graph, MacKay’s code, and a random graph, with n = 504, m = 252, ds = 3, dc = 6.

Fig. 5. Bit- and block-error rates of a PEG Tanner-graph code, MacKay’s code, and a random graph code, with n = 504, m = 252, ds = 3, dc = 6.

Density evolution [52], [18] has proved to be an efficient and ef- sign LDPC codes. We investigate the performance of symbol-node-de-

fective approach to design of good irregular degree-distribution pairs with which LDPC codes based on random construction exhibit a performance extremely close to the Shannon limit for sufficiently long block lengths. It is thus tempting to combine the PEG algorithm with the symbol-node-degree distribution optimized by density evolution to de-

gree distributions as given in [19, Tables I and II] using the PEG construction with n = 504, m = 252. Note that the check-node distribution is not needed as the check-degree sequence is made as uniform
as possible by the PEG algorithm. Among these symbol-node distributions with maximum symbol-node degrees 4; 7; 11; 15; 30; the one

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:45:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 1, JANUARY 2005

395

n m Fig. 6. Block-error rates of irregular PEG (solid lines) and irregular random-graph codes (dashed lines) with density-evolution-optimized degree distributions;
code parameters are = 504, = 252.

n Fig. 7. Bit- and block-error rates of an irregular PEG Tanner-graph code, an upper-triangular PEG Tanner-graph code, and MacKay’s code, all with = 1008, m = 504.

with maximum degree 15 achieves the best performance, see Fig. 6. The position of 1’s in each column is determined according to a uniThis reveals the interesting finding that even for short block lengths, the formly distributed integer random variable and there are no four cycles

degree distributions designed by the density-evolution approach still in the code’s graph representation

are very good if the PEG algorithm is used. We observe that the PEG construction significantly outperforms the irregular random construction, particularly in the high-SNR region. This irregular random code is constructed column by column with appropriate symbol-node degree.

We investigate the performance of an irregular PEG Tanner-graph LDPC code whose parity-check matrix is forced into an upper triangular form, thus having linear-time-encoding property. Fig. 7 compares the bit- and block-error rates of the irregular PEG Tanner-graph code,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:45:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

396

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 1, JANUARY 2005

TABLE I OPTIMIZED SYMBOL-NODE-DEGREE DISTRIBUTIONS FOR RATE-1=2 PEG CODES OVER GF (2b). THE BLOCK LENGTH IN BINARY BITS IS nb

an irregular PEG Tanner-graph code with a parity-check matrix in upper diagonal form, and MacKay’s regular code, all with n = 1008, m = 504. The symbol-node-degree distribution for both irregular PEG Tanner-graph codes chosen is that from [19, Table II] with maximum symbol-node degree 15. When the parity-check matrix is forced into an upper triangular form there is one symbol node of degree 1. As can be seen, the two irregular codes designed according to the PEG algorithm have essentially the same performance and are about 0.5 dB better than MacKay’s rate-1=2 (n = 1008, m = 504) code, which suggests that with the PEG construction linear-time encoding can be achieved without noticeable performance degradation.
VII. PEG TANNER-GRAPH CODES OVER GF (q)

a variant of the “downhill simplex” method described in [39]. We compare codes having a block length of n symbols over GF (2b) with binary codes of length nb bits.
The performance results indicate that PEG Tanner-graph codes over higher order fields significantly outperform the binary ones. Furthermore, thanks to the PEG algorithm, which aims at large girth as well as an optimized (by downhill search) irregular degree sequence, we have observed a monotonic improvement with increasing field order. It is also observed that the optimum degree sequence favors a lower average column weight as the field order increases. Interestingly enough, the irregularity feature seems to be unnecessary if the higher order field is sufficiently large, and the optimum graph tends to favor a regular one of degree-2 in all symbol nodes. This new insight complements the findings in [53], [54].

So far we have primarily considered binary LDPC codes represented by binary parity-check matrices or their corresponding bipartite graphs

VIII. CONCLUSION

constructed using the PEG algorithm. These codes can easily be gen- A general method for constructing Tanner graphs with large girth has

eralized to finite fields GF (q) in the same way as in [53], [54], i.e., been presented. Its main principle is to optimize the placement of a new

by allowing the symbol nodes to assume values from the finite field. edge connecting a particular symbol node to a check node on the graph As a symbol from the field GF (q), q = 2b for some integer b > 1, such that the largest possible local girth is achieved. In this way, the

may be represented as a binary string of b bits, we can use such codes underlying graph grows in an edge-by-edge manner, optimizing each

with binary-input channels, transmitting one q-ary symbol for every b local girth, and is thus referred to as a PEG Tanner graph.

uses of the binary channel. The decoder interprets b consecutive bits
(y0; y1; . . . ; 0 yb 1) from the channel as a single 2b-ary symbol and sets
the prior information of that symbol by assuming a product distribution
for the values of each constituent bit, i.e.,

Upper and lower bounds on the girth of a PEG Tanner graph have been derived. These bounds depend on the number of symbol and check nodes, as well as on the maximum values of the symbol- and checknode degrees of the underlying graph. In addition, a lower bound on

b01

x
f

:=

x fy :

i=0

Here

x fy

is the likelihood that the ith constituent bit is equal to xi,

where 0 (x0; x1; . . . ; xb 1) is the binary representation of the trans-

mitted symbol x.

the minimum distance of binary LDPC codes defined on PEG Tanner graphs has also been derived.
Simulation results demonstrated that using the PEG algorithm for constructing short-block-length LDPC codes results in a significant improvement compared with randomly constructed codes. We empirically found that even for small block lengths, such as n = 504, there is a good degree distribution from density evolution that works perfectly

Let us briefly recall the construction of PEG-based LDPC codes over with the PEG construction. Linear-time encodeable LDPC codes have

GF (q). Given the number of symbol nodes n, the number of parity- also been constructed by slightly modifying the PEG algorithm to yield

check nodes m, and the symbol-node-degree sequence of the graph, a Tanner graph with triangular format. This easy encoding property can

the PEG algorithm is initially started in exactly the same manner as be achieved without noticeable performance degradation.

in the binary case, i.e., such that the placement of a new edge on the Fig. 8 shows the performance of the irregular PEG Tanner-graph

graph has as small an impact on the girth of the graph as possible. In codes over a binary-input AWGN channel. Five codes of rate 1=2 over this way, a PEG Tanner graph is obtained that not only has a large GF (2), GF (8), GF (16), GF (32), and GF (64) are shown. All codes

girth but also a good girth histogram. To form a GF (q) parity-check correspond to block lengths of 1008 bits (except the irregular PEG

matrix, the positions of nonzero entries are determined by the PEG Tanner graph, whereas the values of the nonzero entries of the paritycheck matrix are selected randomly from a uniform distribution among nonzero elements of GF (q).
Table I shows optimized rate-1=2 irregular PEG Tanner-graph codes over GF (2b) and their corresponding symbol-node-degree distribu-

Tanner-graph code over GF(32), which has a block length of 202 symbols or 1010 bits). Also shown is the performance of the rate-1=2, n = 1008, m = 504 binary MacKay code as well as the sphere-packing bound for this block length. As can be seen, an improvement of 0.25 dB is obtained by moving from binary to GF (26). Furthermore, the overall gain of the GF (26) PEG code compared with the binary MacKay code

tions. The optimization of the degree sequences was accomplished with is approximately 0.75 dB. Finally, the rate-1=2 irregular PEG code over

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:45:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 1, JANUARY 2005

397

Fig. 8. Block-error rates of irregular LDPC codes over GF (2), GF (8), GF (16), GF (32), and GF (64), based on a PEG Tanner graph with the parameters given in Table I.

< E =N GF (26) shows a block error rate 1004 at b 0 = 2 dB, i.e., a

performance that is only 0.4 dB from Gallager’s sphere-packing bound1

of a binary-input AWGN channel [55], [56], which appears to be the

best iterative-decoding performance at this block length and rate known

today.

Finally, the regular and irregular binary LDPC codes have been gen-

eralized by using the same PEG construction but allowing the symbol

nodes to take values over higher order finite fields. This work con-

firms that by moving to higher order fields short-block-length codes

can be constructed that operate close to the Gallager’s sphere-packing

bound when decoded with the sum–product algorithm. We reported a

< = E =N sGhFor(t2-b6l)owckit-hleangbtlhoc(1k0e0r8ro-brirta),terate-110204irraetgulbar

PEG LDPC 0 = 2 dB,

code over which, to

our knowledge, appears to exhibit the best iterative-decoding perfor-

mance at this short block length achieved to date.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors are grateful to M. P. C. Fossorier, T. Mittelholzer, R. L. Urbanke, and M. Vetterli for insightful comments and suggestions. They also thank D. J. C. MacKay for valuable comments and for providing the parity-check matrices of some LDPC codes simulated herein. They thank the Associate Editor and two anonymous reviewers for constructive comments, which have greatly helped improve the exposition of the correspondence.

REFERENCES
[1] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 6, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[2] N. Wiberg, H.-A. Loeliger, and R. Kötter, “Codes and iterative decoding on general graphs,” Europ. Trans. Telecommun., vol. 6, pp. 513–526, Sep. 1995.
1Bear in mind, however, that no undue significance should be attached to this 0.4-dB gap, as at this block length the formula for computing the Gallager bound might not be sufficiently exact.

[3] M. Sipser and D. A. Spielman, “Expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1710–1722, Nov. 1996.
[4] N. Alon and M. Luby, “A linear-time erasure-resilient code with nearly optimal recovery,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1732–1736, Nov. 1996.
[5] R. J. McEliece, D. J. C. MacKay, and J.-F. Cheng, “Turbo decoding as an instance of Pearl’s belief propagation algorithm,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 140–152, Feb. 1998.
[6] F. R. Kschischang and B. J. Frey, “Iterative decoding of compound codes by probability propagation in graphical models,” IEEE J. Selected Areas Commun., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 219–230, Feb. 1998.
[7] R. Kötter and A. Vardy, “Factor graphs: Construction, classification, and bounds,” in Proc. 1998 IEEE Int. Symp Information Theory, Cambridge, MA, Aug. 1998, p. 14.
[8] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[9] A. R. Calderbank, G. D. Forney, and A. Vardy, “Minimal tail-biting trellises: The Golay code and more,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 1435–1455, Jul. 1999.
[10] Y. Weiss, “Correctness of local probability propagation in graphical models with loops,” Neural Computat., vol. 12, pp. 1–41, 2000.
[11] S. M. Aji and R. J. McEliece, “The generalized distributive law,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 325–343, Mar. 2000.
[12] G. D. Forney, “Codes on graphs: News and views,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes & Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 2000, pp. 9–16.
[13] “Special issue on codes and graphs and iterative algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, Feb. 2001.
[14] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963, Monograph.
[15] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo codes,” in Proc. 1993 IEEE Int. Conf. Communication, Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[16] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[17] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, “Analysis of low-density codes and improved designs using irregular graphs,” in Proc. 30th ACM STOC, Dallas, TX, 1998, pp. 249–258.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:45:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

398

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 1, JANUARY 2005

[18] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-

check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory,

vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.

[19] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of provably

good low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47,

no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.

[20] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, Jr., T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On

the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the

Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001. [21] C. Di, D. Proietti, I˙. E. Telatar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Finite-

length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure

channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun.

2002.

[22] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes

based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans.

Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.

[23] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, and T. Fuja, “A class of group-structured

LDPC codes,” in Proc. ICSTA 2001, Ambleside, UK, 2001.

[24] J. L. Fan, “Array codes as low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 2nd

Int. Symp. Turbo Codes & Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 2000, pp.

543–546.

[25] B. Vasic´, “Combinatorial constructions of structured low-density parity-

check codes for iterative decoding,” manuscript, submitted for publica-

tion.

[26] S. J. Johnson and S. R. Weller, “Regular low-density parity-check codes

from combinatorial designs,” in Proc. IEEE Information Theory Work-

shop, Cairns, Australia, Sep. 2001, pp. 90–92.

[27] G. A. Margulis, “Explicit constructions of graphs without short cycles

and low density codes,” Combinatorica, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 71–78, 1982.

[28]

, “Explicit group-theoretical constructions of combinatorial

schemes and their application to the design of expanders and concentra-

tors,” Probl. Inf. Transm., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 39–46, Jan.-March 1988.

Translated from Probl. Pered. Inf., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 51-60, Jan.-Mar.

1988.

[29] A. Lubotzky, R. Phillips, and P. Sarnak, “Ramanujan graphs,” Combi-

natorica, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 261–277, 1988.

[30] P. Erdös and H. Sachs, “Reguläre Graphen gegebener Taillenweite mit

minimaler Knotenzahl,” Wiss. Z. Martin-Luther-Univ. Halle-Wittenberg

Math.-Naturwiss. Reine, vol. 12, pp. 251–257, 1963.

[31] J. Rosenthal and P. O. Vontobel, “Construction of LDPC codes using Ra-

manujan graphs and ideas from Margulis,” in Proc. 38th Annu. Allerton

Conf. Communication, Computing and Control, Monticello, IL, Oct.

2000, pp. 248–257.

[32] P. O. Vontobel and R. M. Tanner, “Construction of codes based on fi-

nite generalized quadrangles for iterative decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Intl.

Symp. Information Theory, Washington, DC, Jun. 2001, p. 223.

[33] L. Bazzi, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Exact thresholds and optimal

codes for the binary symmetric channel and Gallager’s decoding algo-

rithm A,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 9, pp. 2010–2021, Sep.

2004.

[34] M. A. Shokrollahi, “New sequence of linear time erasure codes ap-

proaching the channel capacity,” in Proc. 13th Int. Symp. Applied

Algebra, Algebraic Algorithm and Error-Correcting Codes, 1999, pp.

65–76.

[35] G. Richter, “Construction of completely regular LDPC codes with large

girth,” in Proc. ETH Zurich 2003 Winter School on Coding and Infor-

mation Theory, Ascona, Switzerland, Feb. 2003. Available [Online] at

http://www.isi.ee.ethz.ch/winterschool/docs/richter.pdf.

[36] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D.-M. Arnold, “Progressive edge-growth

Tanner graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommunications Conf.

(GLOBECOM), San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001. CD Proceedings, paper

no. 0-7803-7208-5/01.

[37]

, “Irregular progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” in Proc. IEEE

Intl. Symp. Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, Jun./Jul. 2002,

p. 480.

[38] J. Campello, D. S. Modha, and S. Rajagopalan, “Designing LDPC codes

using bit-filling,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, Helsinki,

Finland, Jun. 2001, pp. 55–59.

[39] X.-Y. Hu, “Low-delay low-complexity error-correcting codes on sparse

graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Lau-

sanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland, 2002.

[40] T. Tian, C. Jones, J. D. Vilasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Construction of

irregular LDPC codes with low error floors,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.

Communications , vol. 5, Anchorage, AK, May 2003, pp. 3125–3129.

[41] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Improved progressive-edge-growth

(PEG) construction of irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., to

be published.

[42] M. R. Yazdani and A. H. Banihashemi, “On construction of rate-compatible low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Commn. Lett., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 159–161, Mar. 2004.
[43] R. M. Tanner, “Minimum distance bounds by graph analysis,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 808–821, Feb. 2001.
[44] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, D. Spielman, and V. Stemann, “Practical loss-resilient codes,” in Proc. 29th ACM Symp. Theory of Computing, El Paso, TX, May 1997, pp. 150–159.
[45] D. Spielman, “Linear-time encodeable and decodable error-correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1723–1731, Nov. 1996.
[46] D. J. C. MacKay, S. T. Wilson, and M. C. Davey, “Comparison of construction of irregular Gallager codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 10, pp. 1449–1454, Oct. 1999.
[47] L. Ping, W. K. Leung, and N. Phamdo, “Low density parity check codes with semi-random parity check matrix,” IEE Electron. Lett., vol. 35, pp. 38–39, Jan. 1999.
[48] H. Jin, A. Khandekar, and R. J. McEliece, “Irregular repeat-accumulate codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes & Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 2000, pp. 1–8.
[49] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 638–656, Feb. 2001.
[50] D. J. C. MacKay. Online Database of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. [Online]. Available: http://wol.ra.phy.cam.uk/mackay/codes/data.html
[51] Y. Mao and A. Banihashemi, “A heuristic search for good low-density parity-check codes at short block lengths,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Communications, vol. 1, Helsinki, Finland, Jun. 2001, pp. 41–44.
[52] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity-check codes and using irregular graphs and belief propagation,” in Proc. 1998 IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Cambridge, MA, Aug. 1998, p. 117.
[53] M. C. Davey, “Error-correction using low-density parity-check codes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. Cambridge, Cambridge, U.K., 1999.
[54] M. C. Davey and D. MacKay, “Low-density parity-check codes over GF (q),” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 165–167, Jun. 1998.
[55] C. Schlegel and L. Perez, “On error bounds and turbo-codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 3, pp. 205–207, Jul. 1999.
[56] R. G. Gallager, Information Theory and Reliable Communication. New York: Wiley, 1968.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:45:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

