106

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 51, NO. 1, MARCH 2005

Belief Propagation Decoding of Reed-Solomon Codes; a Bit-Level Soft Decision Decoding Algorithm
Behnam Kamali, Senior Member, IEEE and A. Hamid Aghvami, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this article we propose the application of Belief Propagation (BP) algorithm as a novel bit-level soft decision decoding (SDD) technique for Reed-Solomon (RS) codes. A brief tutorial on Belief Propagation algorithm is presented. A central issue in the application of BP algorithm to decoding RS codes is the construction of a sparse parity check matrix for the binary image of the code. It is demonstrated that Vardy’s technique may be applied to find a sparse parity check matrix for RS codes. However, this technique is not applicable to all cases. The BP algorithm is applied to two test codes. In one case, simulation models show that the BP algorithm outperforms the hard decision Euclidean decoding by more than 2 dB of additional coding gain. The results with the second test code are not as promising [1].
Index Terms—Belief propagation decoding, binary image codes, Reed-Solomon codes, soft decision decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
I N DIGITAL communication systems the transmitted symbols are selected from a finite set, however, what is received at the destination comes from a continuum of values. In hard decision decoding (HDD) the received signal is sampled, quantized, and converted to a vector of the same symbols as the channel input. An estimation of the transmitted signal is made based on this vector. In contrast to HDD, a soft decision decoder (SDD) accepts a vector of samples, which may take on continuous values, of the channel output and estimates the transmitted symbol vector. It is well known that soft decision decoding techniques may provide approximately 2 dB of additional coding gain relative to hard decision decoding in additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels. Two categories of SDD algorithms are available for RS codes; symbol oriented decoding and bit level decoding. Forney’s generalized minimum distance decoding [2] and Chase’s algorithm [3] are among common symbol oriented soft decision decoding techniques that may be applied to RS codes. In these symbol oriented SDD techniques, the channel reliability information associated with the received bits is manipulated to generate an average reliability measure for the symbols. The symbol reliability measures are then used in the decoding process. Clearly, some bit level reliability information is lost when symbol oriented SDD techniques are applied. More recently several algorithms for bit-level SDD of
Manuscript received May 29, 2003; revised November 23, 2004. The work of B. Kamali was conducted in part while he was with the Jet Propulsion Laboratory as a NASA summer research fellow.
B. Kamali is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Mercer University, Macon, GA 31207 USA (e-mail: kamali_b@mercer.edu).
A. H. Aghvami is with the Centre for Telecommunications Research, King’s College London, University of London, London WC2B 5RL, U.K. (e-mail: hamid.aghvami@kcl.ac.uk).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBC.2005.843984

RS codes have been proposed in the literature. Vardy introduces an elegant method in which the RS code is decomposed into its largest binary BCH subfield subcode and its coset codes, and presents a maximum likelihood decoding algorithm based on this decomposition [4]. Taleb and Farrel’s “Minimum Weight Soft Decision Decoding” method produces the codeword estimates using the “soft weight” of each symbol based on the soft weight of their constituent bits [5]. Liu and Lin report a two-stage scheme for “turbo decoding” of self-concatenated RS codes [6].
The Belief Propagation algorithm, whose origins may be traced back to 1960’s in Gallagher’s Ph.D. thesis [7] and is known as Pearl’s algorithm in the artificial intelligence community [8], is an iterative probabilistic decoding technique with multidisciplinary applications. This technique may be applied to decode Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes, and any other linear code for which a sparse parity check matrix may be found. It has also been shown that iterative MAP (maximum a posteriori) decoding of turbo codes is a special instance of BP algorithm [9]. This article explores the possibility of applying the BP algorithm as a bit-level soft decision decoding technique to RS codes. A central issue in application of BP algorithm to efficiently decode a RS is obtaining a sparse parity check matrix for the binary image of the Reed-Solomon code.
In pursuant of obtaining a sparse binary parity check matrix for the RS code, Section II of this article introduces an efficient direct method of deriving the generator matrix of a binary image code of an RS code from that of the original code. Section III is dedicated to describing Vardy’s decomposition method which provides a method of acquiring sparse generator matrix for the binary image of RS codes. In Section IV a brief tutorial on Pearl’s BP algorithm is presented. Section V discusses the decoding of RS codes with BP algorithm. In Section VI we venture some concluding remarks.

II. A METHOD OF CONSTRUCTING A GENERATOR MATRIX FOR A RS BINARY IMAGE CODE

When the codewords of an RS code are converted

to the binary form using a defined transformation of

, the resulting code is called a

binary image of the RS code. These codes are linear when the

transformation

is linear, but they are

not necessarily cyclic [10]. In the majority of bit-level SDD

techniques for RS codes a method for constructing a generator

matrix of the binary image of the RS code is required. Several

techniques for this construction have been reported in the

literature. Vardy introduces two methods for construction of the

binary matrix through the coset decomposition of an RS code

0018-9316/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:49:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KAMALI AND AGHVAMI: BELIEF PROPAGATION DECODING OF REED-SOLOMON CODES

107

[4]. Retter presents a Fourier domain technique to obtain the

makeup of the generator matrix of a binary image of an RS code.

However, these methods are not effective in construction of the

matrix for all transformations of

and

they are not applicable to modified versions of RS codes [6].

Liu and Lin present a different approach for construction of the

generator matrix of the binary image of the RS code. Although

this method is applicable to shortened and extended RS codes

as well, the structure of the resulting matrix is suitable just

for the application at hand. In this article a direct method for

conversion of the RS code to its binary image, and a straight-

forward method for construction of the generator matrix of the

binary image code are presented. The technique is general and

may be applied to any linear transformation, and the matrix

can be generated for shortened and extended versions of RS

codes. Furthermore, the matrix can be modified to suit various

applications.

Let a basis for vector space

over

be given by

(1) Consider a polynomial

When g(x) is the generator polynomial of an (N, K, D) ReedSolomon code, then using standard technique the following is a generator matrix of the RS code as shown in (2) at the bottom of page. This matrix may be put into systematic form by ordinary row operation. Using basis and generator matrix (2), as it is shown in [1], a binary image of the RS code may be generated by the matrix seen in (3) at the bottom of the page where implies the binary conversion of element according to the mapping whose basis is . It is worth mentioning that when the generator matrix of the RS code has a systematic form and under the assumption of polynomial basis, the resulting binary image code will also be systematic. For proof please see [1].

III. VARDY’S DECOMPOSITION TECHNIQUE

In this section Vardy’s decomposition technique is briefly ex-

plained. This is essentially a method of construction of the gen-

erator matrix of a binary image code of an RS code with a po-

tential of producing a sparse matrix. For every

RS

code constructed over

, there is a binary

BCH

subfield subcode with a generator matrix denoted by , where;

,

,

. The roots of the generator polynomial

of the BCH code consist of all roots of the RS code and their

cyclotomic conjugates.

To generate a binary image code of an RS code, assume that

the basis for the linear mapping from

to

is

(2)

...

...

...

...

... (3)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:49:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

108

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 51, NO. 1, MARCH 2005

given by in (1). Using basis , any element

may

be expressed as

where is a binary symbol. The

BCH code , together with basis provide a useful partitioning

of the Reed-Solomon code. In general any

) subcode

of a linear

block code , defines a partition of the code

into

disjoint cosets of [7]. Let’s define the following

nonbinary subfield subcodes for the RS code:

The direct sum of these subcodes is a subcode of RS code as well

The number of codewords in is . This code partitions

the RS code into

disjoint cosets as defined below.

As such the RS code, denoted here by , may be expressed as a union of these coset codes.

Assume that code , which is a nonbinary code, has a generator matrix given by

linear

Since the s are subcodes of , there exists a generator ma-

trix for the binary RS code that includes all rows of ’s

matrices. Since the dimension of the binary image code is ,

to complete the matrix, one needs to add

rows that

are linearly independent from the first rows. These rows are

called “glue vectors.” Upon conversion of all matrix elements to

binary symbols and with some column rearrangements, the gen-

erator matrix of the binary image code will have the following

structure.

(4)

heart of this unifying insight. It has been shown that the Viterbi

algorithm, turbo decoding algorithm, Kalman filter procedure,

Gallagher probabilistic decoding method for LDPC codes (be-

lief propagation), forward-backward algorithm (also known as

MAP), and a certain class of fast Fourier transform algorithms

are all instances of the sum-product algorithm [11]. The fun-

damental resemblance of all of these algorithms is they deal

with a rather complicated “global” function of several variables

with which the desired computations, if attempted directly, is

of exponential complexity with an argument that is equal to

the number of variables. However, computational efficiency is

achieved by exploiting the fact that the global function may

be expressed as a product of “local” functions, each of which

depends on just a subset of the variables. Such a factorization

is best represented using some form of a graph such as bipar-

tite graphs (Tanner graph [12]), trellis diagrams, Bayesian net-

works, and factor graphs in the most general cases [11].

For Gallagher algorithm, Pearl’s belief propagation al-

gorithm, and iterative turbo decoding algorithm, the global

function is a joint probability distribution function of several

random variables. The crux of the idea is to make probabilistic

inferences about the states of some “hidden nodes,” having ob-

served the states of a number of “evidence nodes.” This entails

marginalization of joint probability distribution functions. In

general such marginalization is computationally highly com-

plex if not intractable. A case that allows efficient computation

is when conditional independencies among random variables

form a suitable pattern. In dealing with this case Bayesian

networks (BN) offer a useful approach to characterizing con-

ditional independencies through directed graphs. A Bayesian

network is structured around a set of nodes which represent

random variables involved in the system of study. A directed

link (edge) is drawn from node to if there is a causal

influence from into . Under this circumstance, it is said

that is ’s “parent” and is ’s “child.” Denoting the set

of parents of a typical node by

in the BN, the joint

probability distribution of all random variables in the network

can be expressed as

where B is the generator matrix of the BCH code, and the s

are the components of the glue submatrix. The glue vectors may

be found by a computer search. It is noteworthy to observe that

this matrix may become a sparse matrix depending on the value

of . There are submatrices of size

bits, out of which

are all-zero submatrices. Thus the nonzero elements

reside only in the B and the glue submatrices.

(5)

Note that if has no parent then

(null set), thus

. This can demonstrated using

the probability chain rule

IV. A BRIEF REVIEW OF BELIEF PROPAGATION DECODING

and the fact that each random variable in the network is directly

Recently attempts have been made to acquire a simple way influenced only by its parents. If a Bayesian network does not

of understanding a large number of seemingly different algo- contain a directed closed path, it is called a directed acyclic

rithms that have been developed for application over a wide graph or a DAG for short. In summary Bayesian networks

spectrum of disciplines that include optimum detection, statis- are capable of presenting genuine dependencies and reflecting

tical physics, artificial intelligence, signal processing, medical causal relationships. An interesting feature of BN is the ability

diagnosis, and error control coding. A generic message passing to quantifying dependency strengths over directed links with

“sum-product” algorithm applied over “factor graphs” is the forward conditional Probabilities [8]. But more significantly,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:49:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KAMALI AND AGHVAMI: BELIEF PROPAGATION DECODING OF REED-SOLOMON CODES

109

This link is quantified by a fixed conditional probability ma-

trix

. If X and Y take their

values from alphabets of size and , respectively, then this

matrix has the following form.

Fig. 1. A Bayesian network.

...

...

...

as (5) implies, Bayesian networks may be used to express a factorization of global functions that are of the form of joint probability distribution functions. For instance consider six random variables , , , , , , that can be configured in a Bayesian network that is given in Fig. 1. Note that arrows indicate probabilistic dependencies and there are no other dependencies, i.e., random variables and , for instance, are unconditionally independent and random variables
and are conditionally independent given . Applying (5) to the BN shown in Fig. 1, the following factorization is expressed.
A number of important features of the BP algorithm are outlined in [13] vis-à-vis the decoding of LDPC codes. Primarily, a BP decoder may be fully parallelized, leading to higher decoding speed. Secondly, it is possible to approximate the BP decoder with low complexity decoders that are simple to implement. The BP algorithm is applicable to any linear block code for which a sparse parity check matrix may be obtained.
A. Belief Propagation Algorithm At this point a brief description of BP algorithm is presented;
the approach follows that of Pearl [8]. Consider a discrete random variable X represented by a node in a causal BN, the belief of X is defined by

(7)

Assume that the evidence is expressed in terms observed

value of the random variable Y, i.e.,

, then

(8)

where

is likelihood vector,

which is equal to the ’s column of the matrix in (7),

is “a priori” probability distribution of X, and

is a constant that may be viewed as a normalizing

factor. Assume that node X has a processor associated with it

that can compute

once it receives

and from

node Y.

Next we consider a more complex BN in which there are three

nodes and two sources of observation, as shown in Fig. 2.

Where is some evidentiary data or may be even viewed as

background knowledge about random variable U, and is the

observed value of random variable Y, therefore the total avail-

able evidence in the network may be expresses as

.

The evidence provided in the network may also be shown as

nodes connected to nodes U and Y as well. The belief distribu-

tion of X,

, may be computed by applying the general

definition, and taking advantage of conditional independencies

between the nodes, as well as the Bayes’ rule.

(6)

where is the total evidence related to random variable X existed in the network through the observation of the values of

Define

other random variables. In general

represents a dis-

crete probability distribution function. In the jargon of com-

munication theory belief is called a posteriori probability. The

main objective of the BP algorithm is to efficiently compute

distribution for every random variable in the network that is in- then volved in a statistical inference problem. The algorithm provides

exact solution to inference problems related to Bayesian net-

(9)

work represented by singly-connected graphs (i.e., each node in

the graph is connected to every other node through a single path, Note that this latter equation is very similar to (8) except that

therefore there is no loop in the network) [14].

P(x) has been replaced by . Thus

is computed

The simplest Bayesian network consists of two nodes, X and by the processor of node X, once the functions and

Y, and a link that connects them.

are calculated and made available to it.

is calculated by

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:49:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

110

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 51, NO. 1, MARCH 2005

Fig. 2. A Bayesian chain network.
the processor at node Y, as was explained earlier. To determine , we note that

(10)

Equation (10) can be generalized for the cases in which the

network shown in Fig. 2 includes any number of nodes. In sum-

mary for a general chain network, each node computes its

function and transmits it to its child node. On the other hand each

node computes its function and transmits to its parent node.

Consequently, every node is able to determine its belief distri-

bution once it receives the corresponding distribution function

from its parent and the corresponding function from its child.

At this point two issues need be addressed. First is the updating

process for belief distribution of every node when new eviden-

tiary data becomes available. Secondly, if this procedure is to be

used as an algorithm, one needs to define initial as well as ter-

mination procedures. These issues are discussed in the context

of a more general case of a Bayesian network described below.

Consider the following Bayesian network. Nodes s are said

to be root nodes (they have no parents) and node s are called

leaf nodes (they have no children). This network is said to have

a “Polytree” structure.

Let

be the total evidence obtained in the network,

be the evidence that flows to X from its parents

, and

be the evidence connected to X through its children

.

Again the evidence may be placed in the network as nodes con-

nected to and , or they may be assumed to manifest

themselves inside and , we will take the latter approach.

Each of the parents and/or children nodes contributes a fraction

of the total evidence. Using the graph, we can further decom-

pose the evidence into pieces corresponding to the contribution

of each the nodes.

Fig. 3. A “Polytree” Bayesian network.
where

(11)

Since each pair pairs

is independent of the other similar

(12)

Note that, as the graph indicates, random variables repre- where

sented by are unconditionally independent of each other,

(13)

the same holds true for random variables represented by .

However, each of the random variables in the set are con- Substituting (10) and (12) into (9) produces an equation for

ditionally independent form each and every random variable in the distribution of

.

the set given X. A computation similar to the one that was

carried out for the former BN may be conducted to determine

the belief distribution of X in the network of Fig. 3; the resulting

equation is the same as (9). For this case, however, shall be determined as follows.

amd

(14)

Equations (10) and (12) provide direct and simple means for

calculation of the main components of belief distribution for

random variable X. If we associate a processor with each node in

the network, each node can compute and pass on messages to

(10) its children (if any) and messages to its parents (if any). Thus the belief distribution of random variable X can be computed if

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:49:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KAMALI AND AGHVAMI: BELIEF PROPAGATION DECODING OF REED-SOLOMON CODES

111

three entities are made available; i)

; ii)

;

iii)

which is a fixed conditional proba-

bility distribution function of the sort discussed earlier. Having

these three pieces of information at disposal, local belief up-

dating can be accomplished in three steps as outlined below, the

order of execution is immaterial [8].

1. Updating

: Once node X is activated, it

simultaneously inspects the messages it has received

from its parents and children, it then updates

using (14).

2. Bottom-Up Propagation: Upon receiving new evi-

dence, node X calculates new messages to be sent

to its parents. For instance, new that node X sends to

its parent is computed by [8]

(15) 3. Top-Down Propagation: Once new evidence be-
comes available, each node is required to compute new messages to be sent to its children. For example, the new message that node X sends to its child is computed by [8]

(16)

where is an arbitrary constant. Note that and mes-

sages transmitted through the same “channels” are not

interacting with one another and remain independent.

For this message passing procedure to be used as an

algorithm an initiation mechanism and a termination

means are required, Pearl refers to these as boundary

conditions and are listed as follows.

• If X is a root node then set

• When X is a leaf node set

• If X is an evidence node and

, set

algorithm to RS codes is the construction of a sparse parity

check matrix for the binary image of the code.

Several methods may be applied to obtain a possible sparse

parity check matrix for an RS code. The most straightforward

alternative is to start with polynomial generator and apply the

standard technique to form a generator matrix, through which a

parity check matrix of the code may be determined. Equation (3)

is subsequently exploited to find a generator matrix of the binary

image code, from which a systematic binary parity check matrix

is obtained for the RS code. A second parity check matrix could

be found through the parity check polynomial. The parity check

polynomial of a cyclic code of length is calculated from

the following equation

. The gener-

ator polynomial of the dual code is calculated from

,

through which a second parity check matrix is computed. The

two standard methods of obtaining parity check matrices were

applied to (255, 223) CCSDS RS legacy code [18] as a case

study. The generator polynomial of the RS code is given by

A third parity check matrix is constructed using the first matrix

and replacing the rows of the matrix with linear combination of

other rows in order to get new rows with lower weight. Belief

Propagation algorithm is applied to all three matrices. Although

some performance improvement is observed, as the density

of the parity check matrix is reduced, standard hard decision

algebraic decoding outperforms all three BP decoding cases.

For error rates smaller than

, the Berlekamp-Massey

algorithm outperforms the BP algorithm with all three matrices

by at least 4 dB. It is evident that the densities of the parity check

matrices are too high for BP algorithm to show performance

improvement relative to hard decision decoding techniques.

Next the generator matrix structured based on Vardy’s de-

composition is examined. In this manner it might be possible to

find parity check matrices for RS codes with very low densities.

The parity check matrix of an RS code is the generator matrix

of its dual code, which is another RS code. Following the proce-

dure outlined in [1] the parity check matrix of the RS code may

be put into the form given in (17).

V. BELIEF PROPAGATION DECODING ALGORITHM APPLIED TO RS CODES
(17) The BP algorithm provides exact solution to inference problems in the Bayesian networks in which there are no loops [14]. However, when the Bayesian network contains loop, the algorithm is not guaranteed to work. It can be shown that The objective is to find a sparse binary matrix for the parity loops in the network break down the mutual independence of check matrix of the (255, 223) RS code. It has been observed and messages [15]. Nevertheless, recently a number of that there are limitations associated with this approach in its studies have demonstrated good BP algorithm performance in present form. In certain cases the BCH subfield subcode does loopy networks. A case in point is turbo code whose decoding not exist. In other cases the dimension of the BCH code is so algorithm is equivalent to loopy belief propagation [16]. The small that there will be a large number of “glue” vectors and conBayesian network for LDPC codes and other codes with sparse sequently the H matrix will not be sparse. The standard CCSDS parity check matrix, such as binary image of RS codes, is loopy, (255, 223) RS code falls into this category, and the technique yet the BP decoding of LDPC codes provides a performance introduced above in its present form is not applicable to high near Shannon limit [17]. The first step to applying BP decoding rate RS codes. Nonetheless, the Belief Propagation algorithm
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:49:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

112

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 51, NO. 1, MARCH 2005

Fig. 4. RS(7,2) code decoded with BP algorithm and standard hard decision Euclidean method.
may remain an attractive alternative algorithm for bit-level soft decision decoding of some RS codes. In order to demonstrate that the BP algorithm presents a viable alternative for soft decision decoding of RS codes, we selected two test codes: RS(7,2) and RS(255,32). The dual code of RS (7, 2) is RS (7, 5). Using Vardy’s technique a parity check matrix for this code is found as seen in the equation at the bottom of the page.
This is clearly a sparse matrix. The Belief Propagation decoding algorithm was applied to this test code. Fig. 4 illustrates the performance curve for this case study, alongside the performance curve of the same code decoded with hard decision algebraic decoding (Euclidean algorithm). For algebraic decoding, the Bit Error Rate and Frame Error Rate are shown; the former is the fraction of information bits in error, and the latter is the fraction of information blocks in error. For BP decoding, the Symbol Error Rate and Codeword Error Rate are shown. The former is the fraction of transmitted code symbols in error, and the latter is the fraction of codewords incorrectly decoded. These measures are used for BP decoding because no “uncoding” from codeword to message is performed. When a systematic encoder is used and under the condition that the systematic symbols and parity symbols are equally vulnerable to corruption (both reasonable assumptions), then BER would equal the SER for the BP decoder. Because a correctly decoded codeword implies a

correctly decoded message, but not vice versa, the FER is less than the BER for the BP decoder. As is observed in Fig. 4, BP decoding outperforms the standard hard decision decoding by over 2 dB of additional coding gain.
The next test code is the primitive (255, 32) RS code, which is the dual code of the legacy (225, 223) RS code. The results for this code were not as promising. Some observations on the parity check matrices of these codes are in order. The matrix of the (7, 2) code is sparse, most columns contain two or three nonzero elements, three columns possess only one nonzero element and a single column has four ones. All rows, with the exception of two of the glue rows, contain three nonzero components. For (255, 32) the matrix is relatively sparse, however, the average number of nonzero elements in the rows of the matrix is in excess of 80, which is very low compared to the length of each row that is 2040 elements long. The obvious conclusion is that the absolute number of nonzero elements in the rows and columns of the parity check matrix is related to the BP algorithm efficiency, and the relative densities of the rows and columns is less important in determining the performance.
VI. CONCLUDING REMARKS
Belief propagation algorithm provides an efficient decoding technique that may be fully parallelized, leading to higher decoding speed. It is possible to approximate the BP decoder with low complexity decoders that are simple to implement. The BP algorithm is applicable to any linear block code for which a sparse parity check matrix may be obtained, the performance improvement relative to conventional decoding techniques, however, to a great extent depends on the cycles that may exist in the BN of the decoding process. In this article we proposed the novel idea of applying BP algorithm as a bit-level soft decision decoding for Reed-Solomon codes. We demonstrated that for RS codes for which a truly sparse parity check matrix may be found, the full performance improvement expected in soft decision decoding is achievable. Belief Propagation algorithm remains an attractive alternative algorithm for bit-level soft decision decoding for RS codes. The stumbling block seems to be the construction of a sparse parity check matrix.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:49:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KAMALI AND AGHVAMI: BELIEF PROPAGATION DECODING OF REED-SOLOMON CODES

113

REFERENCES
[1] B. Kamali and K. Andrews, “Novel Techniques for Bit-Level Soft Decision Decoding of Reed-Solomon Codes,” Jet Propulsion Laboratory, D-24 738, Oct. 2002.
[2] G. D. Forney Jr., “Generalized minimum distance decoding,” IEEE Trans. Info. Theory, vol. 12, pp. 125–131, Apr. 1966.
[3] D. Chase, “A class of algorithms for decoding block codes with channel measurement information,” IEEE Trans. Info. Theory, vol. 18, pp. 170–182, Jan. 1972.
[4] A. Vardy and Y. Be’ery, “Bit-level soft-decision decoding of Reed-Solomon codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 39, pp. 440–444, Mar. 1991.
[5] F. Taleb and P. G. Farrel, “Minimum weight decoding of Reed-Solomon codes,” in Cryptography and Coding II, C. Mitchell, Ed: Oxford Press, 1992.
[6] Y. Liu, “Map decoding of linear block codes, iterative decoding of reed-solomon codes and interactive concatenated turbo coding systems,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of Hawaii, 1999.
[7] R. G. Gallagher, Low Density Parity-Check Codes: MIT Press, 1963. [8] J. Preal, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Network and
Plausible Inference: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.

[9] R. J. McEliece, D. J. C. MacKay, and J. F. Cheng, “Turbo decoding as an instance of Pearl’s “belief propagation” algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Info. Theory, vol. 16, pp. 140–152, Feb. 1998.
[10] F. J. MacWilliams and N. J. A. Sloane, The Theory of Error Correcting Codes: North-Holland, 1977.
[11] F. R. Kschischang et al., “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Info. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[12] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Info. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[13] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Info. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[14] C. Heegard and S. B. Wicker, Turbo Coding: Kluwer Academic, 1999. [15] Y. Weiss, Belief Propagation and Revision in Networks With Loops,
Nov. 1997. [16] Y. Weiss and W. T. Freeman, “Correctness of belief propagation in
Gaussian graphical models of arbitrary topology,” in Proc. Advances in Neural Information Processing System, Dec. 1999. [17] A. Shokrollahi, LDPC Codes: An Introduction: Digital Fountain Inc., Dec. 2002. [18] Telemetry Channel Coding. Recommendation for Space Data System Standards, Jun. 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:49:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

