Study on the Decoding Algorithm for LDPC based

on DMB-TH

Guo-Chun Wan, Yan-Fen Luo, Xun Liu, De-Cun Dong

School of Transportation Engineering of Tongji University, Shanghai, China

E-mail: wanguochun@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract-Terrestrial Digital Multimedia TV/Handle Broadcasting (DMB-TH) is a newly upcoming framing structure, channel coding and modulation for digital television terrestrial broadcasting system standard of China, which is recently drafted and is ready to be verified in order to deploy mobile multimedia broadcasting services for the public. The adoption of strong channel coding techniques appears to be of key importance for mobile operators and broadcasters. Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes have been widely considered as error-correcting codes for next generation communication systems. A good LDPC decoder design requires both implementation friendly LDPC codes and efficient decoder architectures. The quality of LDPC code is crucial in determining the coding gain and implementation complexity of LDPC hardware decoders. This paper presents a turbo-decoding message-passing algorithm (TDMP) based LDPC code search algorithm with hardware considerations. The main advantages of the proposed algorithm over the DMB-TH standard decoding algorithm are 1) improvement in coding gain by an order of magnitude at high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), 2) reduced decoder complexity. The performance of the proposed TDMP architecture is shown by the comparison of simulation results.
Index Terms-Terrestrial digital multimedia TV/Handle broadcasting (DMB-TH), low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, turbo decoding algorithms, integration decoder architectures.

of codes have been recently rediscovered and shown to form a class of Shannon limit approaching codes. This class of codes decoded with iterative decoding, such as the Sum-Product Algorithm (SPA) [3],[4], performs amazingly well. Since their rediscovery, LDPC codes have become a focal point of research.

Fig. 1. DMB-TH transmitter system architecture of China.

II. FEC OF DMB-TH STANDARD

The forward error correction is done after the bit stream has been scrambled. The FEC codes are realized by the concatenated coding of BCH code and LDPC code. The concrete parameters of FEC code are shown in Table I [1].

Number
Code rate 1 Code rate 2

TABLE I

FEC CODE PARAMETERS

Length of block(bits)

Information bits

7488

3008

7488

4512

Corresponding code efficiency
0.4 0.6

Code rate 3

7488

6016

0.8

I. INTRODUCE
Terrestrial Digital Multimedia TV/Handle Broadcasting (DMB-TH) is the standard of China for terrestrial digital TV broadcasting (GB20600-2006), which is ready to be verified in order to deploy mobile multimedia broadcasting services for the public. At present, it is the time to develop DTV (Digital Television) in China, so the application of DMB has a bright future. For all these to be realized, randomization, forward error correction, signal labeling and interleaving are incorporated into the DMB-TH system as depicted in Fig. 1. According to the standard, the function of forward error correction (FEC) is realized by BCH and LDPC [1].
Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes were discovered by Gallager in the early 1960s [2]. LDPC codes are specified by a matrix containing mostly 0’s and only a small number of 1’s. After being overlooked for almost 35 years, this class

BCH(762,752) code is shortened from BCH(1023,1013)

code. Add 261 bits to the data of 752 bits before scrambling,

so that we get 1013 bits in this data which can be encoded

into 1023 bits (with the information bits ahead). Then

remove the frontal 261 bits of zero and we can get 762 bits

of BCH code. The generate polynomial is

GBCH(x)=1+x3+x10.

(1)

The same BCH code is used in the FEC codes of three

different code rates. The structure of the generate matrix

Gqc is shown in equation (2), in which I is identity matrix of

b*b, o is a zero matrix of b*b and Gi,j is a circular matrix of b*b. 0≤i≤k-1,0≤j≤c-1.

⎡G 0,0

G0,1 " G 0,c−1 I O " O⎤

⎢

G qc

=

⎢G1,0 ⎢#

⎢

G1,1

" G1,c−1

O

I

"

O

⎥ ⎥

#

Gi, j #

# # % #⎥ ⎥

(2)

⎢⎣ G k −1,0 G k−1,1 " G k−1,c−1 O O " I ⎦⎥

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

When the BCH code is put into the LDPC encoder in passing series, the frontal bit is the first element of the information serial vector. The information bits of the code put out from the LDPC encoder lies behind the check bits.
LDPC code is generated from the circular matrix of Gi,j. The structures of the FEC codes with three different code rates of the internal codes are shown respectively.
1) The FEC(7488, 3008) code with the code rate of 0.4: 4 BCH(762, 752) code and LDPC(7493,3048) code are first cascaded, and then the first five check bits in LDPC(7493,3048) code are removed. The generate matrix Gqc of LDPC(7493,3048) code has the same form with the matrix shown in equation (2), in which k=24，c=35 and b=127. 2) The FEC(7488, 4512) code with the code rate of 0.6: 6 BCH(762, 752) code and LDPC(7493,4572) code are first cascaded, and then the first five check bits in LDPC(7493,4572) code are removed. The generate matrix Gqc of LDPC(7493,4572) code has the same form with the matrix shown in equation (2), in which k=36，c=23 and b=127. 3) The FEC(7488, 6016) code with the code rate of 0.8: 8 BCH(762, 752) code and LDPC(7493,6096) code are first cascaded, and then the first five check bits in LDPC(7493,6096) code are removed. The generate matrix Gqc of LDPC(7493,6096) code has the same form with the matrix shown in equation (2), in which k=48，c=11 and b=127.
III. LDPC DECODER IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES
LDPC codes are a class of linear error-correcting block codes. A LDPC code is defined as the null space of a parity-check matrix H with the following structural properties:
1)Each row consists of ρ“ones”; 2)Each column consists of ν“ones”; 3)The number of “ones”in common between any two columns, denoted λ, is no greater than 1; 4)Bothρandνare small compared to the length of the code and the number of rows in H. Sinceρandνare small, H has a small density of “ones” and hence is a sparse matrix. For this reason, the code specified by H is called a LDPC code. The LDPC code defined above is known as a regular LDPC code. If not all the columns or all the rows of the parity-check matrix H have the same number of “ones”(weights), a LDPC code is said to be irregular. The main challenge in the LDPC code decoder implementation is how to effectively manage the message passing during the iterative belief propagation (BP) decoding [5]. Generally, the LDPC decoder implementations fall into two categories: • Fully parallel decoders that directly instantiate the bipartite graph of the LDPC code to the hardware. • Partially parallel decoders that map a certain number of

variable nodes or check nodes to a single hardware unit in time-division multiplexing mode.
In a fully parallel decoder, each individual variable node or check node is physically implemented as a node decoding unit, and all the units are connected through an interconnection network reflecting the bipartite graph connectivity. It is clear that such fully parallel decoders can achieve very high decoding throughput, e.g., Howland and Blanksby [5] have implemented a 1Gbps decoder for 1024-bit, rate 1/2 LDPC code. However, the fully parallel decoder suffers from high implementation complexity, especially the prohibitive routing wire overheads with too many global long routing wires. Moreover, the random-like connection between the variable nodes and check nodes may cause routing congestion. Hence, the fully parallel decoder is only a feasible option for LDPC codes with short code length, i.e., few thousand bits.
Partially parallel LDPC decoder targets on appropriate trade-offs between hardware complexity and decoding speed. By using time-division multiplex mapping in which a certain number of variable nodes or check nodes are mapped to a single decoding unit, partially parallel decoder trades the decoding speed for reducing wire and logic implementation complexity [6]. In this work, we are interested in the LDPC codes suitable for partially parallel decoder implementations.
As mentioned in the above, the construction of the LDPC codes typically relies on random construction that results in unstructured bipartite graph topology. However, the partially parallel decoder implementation demands relatively structured LDPC code bipartite graph topology that could lead to the efficient realization of partially parallel message passing. Thus the partially parallel decoder implementation is not trivial. In this paper, we propose an approach to construct a class of LDPC codes that have relatively structured bipartite graph topologies that lead to very good performance and are directly fit to partially parallel decoder implementations.
One of the attractions of LDPC codes is their simple description in terms of a random sparse parity-check matrix, which makes it easy to construct LDPC codes of any rate. Many good codes can be built by specifying a fixed weight for each row and each column, and constructing at random subject to those constraints. However, the best LDPC codes use further design criteria. We review the basic constructions.
A. Gallager’s construction
In his original work Gallager imposed a fixed column weight j and a fixed weight k [2]. The parity-check matrix was divided horizontally into j equal size submatrices, each containing a single ‘1’ in each column. Without loss of generality the first submatrix was constructed in some predetermined manner (e.g. k concatenated identity matrices). The subsequent submatrices were random column permutations of the first.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

B. MacKay’s construction
MacKay was intereated in keeping to a minimum number of short cycles in the bipartite graph representing the parity-check matrix. The presence of short cycles can create difficulties for the belief propagation decoder [7].

C. Irregular matrices

Irregualr matrices are those for which there are several row and column weights. The matrix parameters are described in terms of row and column profiles. To build an irregular matrix, we use a construction described by Luby [8].
Let T be the total number of non-zero entries in our matrix. T is given by:

T = n∑iλi = m∑iρi .

(3)

i

i

where n is the block length, m is the number of parity-check, λi is the fraction of columns with weight i and ρi is the fraction of rows with weight i.
We consider a bipartite graph with T ‘left nodes’ {L1,L2,…,LT} and T ‘right nodes’ {R1,R2,…,RT}. For each column of weight j in our matrix, we label j left nodes with
that column’s index. Similarly we label i right nodes with
the index of each row of weight i. We connect each node Li to Ri.
Finally, we permute the labels on all the right nodes. This
defines our parity-check matrix. When permuting the right
nodes, we must avoid defining duplicate edges: we check that theρi right labels belonging a given row of weight i are all permuted to match left nodes of different columns.

IV. TDMP OPTIMIZING ALGORITHM APPROPRIATE

FOR DMB-TH

A. Algorithm Description

The TDMP algorithm will be described with the help of

the parity-check matrix H shown in Fig. 2 [9], which has six

parity check equations corresponding to a code of length 12.

The algorithm is based on decoding the rows (parity-check

equations) of the parity-check matrix sequentially. Extrinsic

messages generated from decoding earlier rows are used as

input prior messages to decode subsequent rows. To each row i in H, we associate the vector λi=[λi1, …, λiCi] of extrinsic message corresponding to the nonzero entries in

that row. The number of nonzero ci in a row is called the

weight. Let Ii denote the set of indexes of the nonzero entries

of row i in H. For example, in Fig. 2, the weight of row 3 is

c3=6

and

its

index

set

is

I3={1,3,6,10,12}.

Hence,

λ

3 1

corresponds

to

bit

1,

λ3 2

corresponds

to

bit

3,

…

,

λ3 6

corresponds to bit 12. The messages in vectorλi are related

to the likelihood with which the information and parity bits
corresponding to the nonzero entries in row i satisfy the i th

parity-check equation, given extrinsic estimates about the

bits from all other parity-check equations in which these bits participate. In addition, we maintain the vector γ=[γ1,…,

γN] of N posterior messages that store the sum of all
messages generated by the rows in which each bit
participates (i.e., the j th entry of γ,γj , corresponds to the sum of all messages for the j th bit generated by decoding
the rows in H where the j th entry is nonzero). For example,
N=12 in Fig. 2, and the sixth entry of γ is:

γ 6 = λ32 + λ33 + λ52 .

(4)

The posterior messages of row are indexed as λ(Ii). Hard decisions are made by slicing the vector γ.
Decoding the j th parity-check row involves the
following four steps. The steps are illustrated in Fig.2. 1) Read, 2)Subtract, 3)Decode, 4) Write back [10].

B. Design of decoder of DMB-TH based on TDMP algorithm
The design of DMB-TH receiver based on channel decoding is shown as Fig. 3.
Based on encoder of LDPC code, we apply TDMP algorithm to the DMB-TH receiver.

Fig. 2. Message-passing under the TDMP algorithm. The figure illustrates the four steps of the algorithm in decoding the third row of the parity-check matrix: (a) Read extrinsic and posterior messages, (b) subtract extrinsic messages from posterior messages to generate prior messages, (c) decode the parity-check equation using these messages as inputs, and (d) write back the output messages as new extrinsic messages and update the posterior messages.
Fig.3. Deinterleaver and channel decoding of DMB-TH receiver model.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

In this section, we propose a programmable decoder architecture implementing the TDMP algorithm for both regular and irregular LDPC codes that build upon the optimizations performed in DMB-TH receiver[9][10]. The architecture is shown in Fig.4, and the underlying parity-check matrix of the code has the following parameters: 1) S, the size of the sub-matrix partitions (assuming permutation matrices); 2)B, the number of submatrices per block row; 3)D, the number of submatrices per block column; 4)r, the maximum number of permutation matrices per block row; and 5)c1, …,cB , the number of permutation matrices in the block columns. The architecture includes memory modules for storing messages, message processing units (MPUs) that operate in parallel, and read/write networks for transporting messages between memory and these MPUs. The parameter acts as a scaling parameter.
Fig.4.Decoder architecture implementing the TDMP algorithm of DMB-TH.
The decoder completes a single decoding iteration by performing a round of D updates across the supercodes. An update corresponding to a single supercode Cj constitutes a subiteration which involves the following steps:
1— The read-network performs c read operations from
memory, where is the maximum node degree of Cj. It then forwards r messages to each of the S MPUs.
2— The MPUs update the messages in parallel. 3— The updated messages are routed by the write-network to the appropriate memory modules scheduled to receive messages related to Cj. 4— The messages are written in the designated memory modules and the address counters are updated. In the remainder of this section, we describe the memory architecture of the decoder, followed by the architectures of the read as shown in Fig.5.

figure. This parallel dataflow graph accepts soft messages (λ) and generates update soft messages (Λ).The α and β recursions are first performed by traversing the trellis from both ends, saving the intermediate metrics in the buffers designated by the grey-shaded rectangles in the figure.
Fig.6.A parallel dataflow graph of the MPU.
V. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
In this section, we present several LDPC codes and their error performances with iterative decoding using TDMP algorithm according to the DMB-TH standard of China. We assume 4QAM transmission over an AWGN channel.
The BER performance of decoder based on TDMP, BP and TSP algorithm are plotted in Fig.7. For comparison, Fig.7(a) plots the BER of a rate-0.4 LDPC(7493,3048) code from TDMP,BP to TSP algorithm. Fig.7(b) plots the BER of a rate-0.6 LDPC(7493,4572) code from TDMP,BP to TSP algorithm. Fig.7(c) plots the BER of a rate-0.8 LDPC (7493,6096) code from TDMP,BP to TSP algorithm. Fig.8 plots the performance of FER of decoder base on TDMP, BP and TSP algorithm.
Fig.9 plots 4QAM, max-Error=50, max-iterations=10 BER and FER performance of TDMP and BP, LDPC, TSP decoding algorithm. For comparison, Fig.9(a) plots the BER performance. Fig.9(b) plots the FER performance.
Fig.10 plots the float-point and fixed-point BER performance of TDMP algorithm together with BP and TP algorithm. For comparison, Fig.11 plots the float-point and fixed-point FER performance of TDMP algorithm together with BP and TSP algorithm.

Fig.5. Architecture of a memory module.
Fig.6 shows a soft-input soft-output message processing unit (MPU) [10] and designate it by the symbol shown in the

(a) rate=0.4

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(b) rate=0.6

(b) rate=0.6

(c) rate=0.8 Fig. 7. BER performance of TDMP and other decoding algorithm basic on DMB-TH.(a) rate=0.4.(b) rate=0,6.(c) rate=0.8.

(c) rate=0.8 Fig. 8. FER performance of TDMP and others decoding algorithm basic DMB-TH.(a) rate=0.4.(b) rate=0,6.(c) rate=0.8.

(a) rate=0.4

(a) BER performance

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(b) FER performance Fig.9. 4QAM, max-Error=50, max-iterations=10 BER and FER performance of TDMP and BP, LDPC, TSP decoding algorithm.
Fig.10. Float-point and fixed-point BER performance of TDMP algorithm.
Fig.11. Float-point and fixed-point FER performance of TDMP algorithm.

VI. CONCLUSION
In this research, a new LDPC-decoding algorithm suited for DMB-TH system is proposed. The algorithm has a faster convergence speed compared with other LDPC decoding algorithm such as BP and TSP algorithm, and attains an order of magnitude improvement in coding gain at moderate to high SNR values.
Simulation results are reported that it not only has very good error-correcting performance but also is fit to efficient partially parallel decoder hardware implementations. The code construction scheme and the corresponding partially parallel decoder design have been described in details. The main advantage of this proposed approach that it could realize flexible trade-off between hardware complexity and decoding speed and support any arbitrary node distribution configuration, hence shows great potential on achieving very good error-correcting performance.
Fixed-point simulations have demonstrated the effectiveness of the methodology pursued for efficient DMB-TH receiver LDPC decoder designs in term of usually other algorithms.
As has been demonstrated by this work, the TDMP algorithm is an attractive solution for the DMB-TH communications standards in term of decoding throughput and requirements.The algorithm can lead to significant improvement in decoding throughput.
Future work is directed to the investigation of appropriate irregular node degree distribution suited to this proposed code design scheme and how to reduce the decoding complexity by exploring the regularity of the code structure.
REFERENCES
[1] “Framing structure, channel coding and modulation for digital television terrestrial broadcasting system” .GB20600-2006. 2006. China.
[2] R.G.Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. on Information Theory,8(1962)1,pp.21-28.
[3] D.J.C MacKay, “Good error correcting codes based on very sparse matrices.” IEEE Trans .on Information Theory,45(1999)2,pp.399-431.
[4] Chung Sae-Young, T.J.Richardson.R.L.Urbanke, “Analysis of sum-product decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. On Information Theory,47(2001)2,pp.657-670.
[5] T.J.Richardson,R.L.Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. on Information Theory,47(2001)2,pp.599-618.
[6] Kou Y, Lin S. “Low-Density Parity-Check Codes Based on Finite Geometries: A Rediscovery and New Results.” IEEE Trans On Inform Theory,2001,47(11):pp.2711-2736.
[7] Chung S Y, Forney G D. “On the Design of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon Limit.” IEEE Communications Letters,2001,5(2):pp.58-60.
[8] Luby M G.. “Improved Low-Density Parity-Check Codes Using Irregular Graphs.”IEEE Trans on Inform Theory,2001,47(2):585-598.
[9] Mohammad M. Mansour. “A Turbo-Decoding Message-Passing Algorithm for Sparse Parity-Check Matrix Codes.” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 54, NO. 11, November 2006,pp.4376-4392.
[10] Mohammad M. Mansour, Naresh R. Shanbhag. “High-Throughput LDPC Decoders.” IEEE Trans. On Very Large Scale Integration Systems, vol. 11, NO. 6, December 2003,pp.976-996.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

