IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2009

473

Finite-Length Scaling for Iteratively Decoded LDPC Ensembles
Abdelaziz Amraoui, Andrea Montanari, Tom Richardson, Fellow, IEEE, and Rüdiger Urbanke

Abstract—We investigate the behavior of iteratively decoded low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes over the binary erasure channel in the so-called “waterfall region.” We show that the performance curves in this region follow a simple scaling law. We conjecture that essentially the same scaling behavior applies in a much more general setting and we provide some empirical evidence to support this conjecture. The scaling law, together with the error floor expressions developed previously, can be used for a fast finite-length optimization.
Index Terms—Binary erasure channel, density evolution, error probability curve, finite-length analysis, iterative decoding, lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes.

I. INTRODUCTION

I T IS probably fair to say that the asymptotic behavior (as the block length tends to infinity) of iterative coding systems is

reasonably well understood to date. Much less is known about

the finite-length behavior though.

As usual, the situation is clearest for the binary erasure

channel

. In this case, the finite-length analysis of

the average performance of an ensemble boils down to a com-

binatorial problem. In [10], recursions were given to solve this

combinatorial problem for some simple regular ensembles.

These recursions were generalized in [26], [32] to deal with

irregular ensembles, expurgation, and to compute block as well

as bit erasure probabilities. In principle, these recursions allow

to determine the average finite-length performance for any

desired ensemble. In practice though this approach runs into

computational limitations. Roughly, the computational com-

plexity of the recursions grows by a factor (the block length)

for each degree of freedom of the ensemble. For reasonable

lengths only very simple ensembles can currently be analyzed

in this way.

Given the computational complexity of an exact finite-length

analysis, it is of interest to find good approximations. Let us

Manuscript received June 17, 2004; revised September 17, 2008. Current version published February 04, 2009. The material in this paper was presented in part at the Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control and Computing, Monticello, IL, October 2003.
A. Amraoui and R. Urbanke are with the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (EPFL) , Lausanne, CH-1015 Switzerland (e-mail: abdelaziz.amraoui @epfl.ch; ruediger.urbanke@epfl.ch).
A. Montanari is with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Statistics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 USA and with Laboratoire de Physique Théorique de l’ENS, Paris, France (e-mail: montanari@stanford.edu).
T. Richardson is with Flarion Technologies, Bedminster, NJ 07921 USA (e-mail: richardson@flarion.com).
Communicated by G. Zémor, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Color versions of Figures 1–7 and 9–11 in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2008.2009580

consider ensembles whose threshold is not determined by the

stability condition, see [20]. In this case, the finite-length per-

formance curve can be divided into two regions, [25]. The wa-

terfall region and the error floor region. In the waterfall region,

the performance is determined by “large” (linear sized) failures

and it improves quickly for decreasing erasure probabilities. In

the error floor region, on the other hand, the performance is de-

termined by “small” (sublinear sized) weaknesses in the graph.

Fortunately, this second region is relatively easy to handle as

was demonstrated in [25].

In this paper, we address the issue of modeling the behavior of

large error events. Our approach is motivated by a general con-

jecture stemming from statistical physics [14], [24]. If a system

goes through a phase transition as a control parameter crosses

a critical value , then around this point the system behavior

obeys a very specific scaling law. This phenomenon has been

repeatedly observed in a number of statistical physics models

and rigorously proved in a few of them. To be concrete, consider

the block error probability

, as a function of the block

length and the channel parameter . As

, this quantity

exhibits a phase transition at the iterative decoding threshold .

Indeed

for

and

for

(we assume here that the ensemble is such that it has no error

floor; the more general case is discussed at length in later sec-

tions). The scaling law refines this description by postulating

the existence of a nonnegative constant and some nonnegative

function so that

(1)

The same statement can be written in a slightly different (but equivalent) form as follows:

(2)

In other words, if one plots

as a function of

then, for increasing , the finite-length curves are ex-

pected to converge to some function . The function de-

creases smoothly from to as its argument changes from

to . All finite-length performance curves are therefore, to

first order, scaled versions of some mother curve . It might

be helpful to think of the threshold as the zeroth order in a se-

quence of approximations (analogous to a Taylor series). Then

the above scaling, if it holds, represents the first-order approx-

imation. In fact, one can further refine the analysis to include

higher order terms and write

(3)

where is some positive real number and order correction term.

is the second-

0018-9448/$25.00 © 2009 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:23:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

474

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2009

Such scaling laws are expected to apply in a wide array of sit-

uations in communications. The following is probably the sim-

plest case in which a scaling law can be proved rigorously. Re-

call that Shannon’s random parity-check ensemble of length

and rate is defined by the ensemble of parity-check matrices

with

rows and columns, endowed with the uni-

form probability distribution. Consider transmission over the

using a random element of Shannon’s ensemble and

maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding. If is the set of erased po-

sitions, let be the submatrix of consisting of the columns

of indexed by . The ML block decoder will succeed if and

only if has rank equal to

. By definition, is itself

a uniformly random binary matrix of dimension

, where

. Some thought shows that

ensembles

l r , this parameter admits a par-

ticularly elegant expression

(6)

where , denote the largest density evolution fixed

point (i.e., solve the equations

l,

r ). Notice that this scaling law has a form similar to

the one holding for the Shannon ensemble, cf. (4). However,

strictly: the threshold width is only partially

explained by the fluctuations in the number of erased bits.

We conjecture that in fact the following refined scaling law is

valid:

, .

Let

denote the block error probability for communi-

cation over the channel

using a code with parity-check

matrix . A quick calculation reveals that

(7)

Notice that the term

represents a shift of the threshold

due to the finite block length. More explicitly, if we define a

finite-length threshold

as the smallest erasure probability

such that the block error rate crosses , then we have

(4)

(8)

where in the last line we used the fact that the -function as usual by

and we defined In other words, density evolution overestimates the threshold

by a quantity of order

. Again, this constant depends

on the ensemble and we will show how it can be computed

through covariance evolution. Once more, for regular ensem-

bles

l r , a particularly simple formula is ob-

tained In words, since the conditional probability of block erasure falls

off steeply away from the threshold, the scaling law is domi-

(9)

nated by the probability that the channel behaves atypically and

that the number of erasures exceeds

.

In this paper, we prove a scaling law for iteratively de-

coded regular low-density parity-check (LDPC) ensembles

and Poisson ensembles

when

transmission takes place over the

. Further, we provide

explicit values for the scaling parameters appearing in this

scaling law for the regular case

l,

r.

In the sequel, we give a leisurely overview regarding the main

results.

Assume first that (the variable node degree) is at least .

Let be a random element of the ensemble

,

and let

be its block error probability when used over

the channel

. Then, as will be stated more precisely in

Section III

where is a universal (ensemble-independent) constant that can

be expressed in terms of Airy functions (see below). In the fol-

lowing, we shall sometimes refer to and as to the slope and

shift scaling parameters.

Fig. 1 shows this scaling applied to the

en-

semble which will serve as our running example. It is impor-

tant to stress that the above scaling law models the behavior

of large error events. A better comparison with (7) is there-

fore obtained by considering expurgated ensembles, see [25].

For

the scaling (7) holds true asymptotically regard-

less of the expurgation scheme. This follows since, as shown in

[32], the contribution to the block error probability stemming

from sublinear-sized weaknesses in the graph decreases like1

l

. However, for expurgated ensembles, the wa-

terfall regime emerges more crisply, and a more accurate verifi-

(5) cation of the scaling law is possible.

The situation is somewhat more complicated if the Tanner

where is a parameter which depends on the ensemble and can graph contains a positive fraction of degree- variable nodes,

be determined through a procedure similar to density evolution, O 1In the sequel, we follow the standard convention to write (1) to denote an
which we shall call covariance evolution. In the case of regular upper bound but we write 2(1) to denote the exact behavior (up to constants).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:23:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

AMRAOUI et al.: FINITE-LENGTH SCALING FOR ITERATIVELY DECODED LDPC ENSEMBLES

475

Fig. 1. Scaling of IE

 [P (G; ")] for transmission over BEC(") and belief propagation decoding. The threshold for this combination is "

0:42944, see Table I. The block lengths/expurgation parameters are n=s = 1024=24; 2048=43; 4096=82; and 8192=147 , respectively. (More precisely, we

assume that the ensembles have been expurgated so that graphs in this ensemble do not contain stopping sets of size s or smaller.) The solid curves represent

0 the exact ensemble averages. The dashed curves are computed according to the refined scaling law stated in Conjecture III-A with scaling parameters  = 0:262633 + " (1 " ) and  = 0:616045, see Table I.

 Fig. 2. Scaling of IE

[P (G; ")] for transmission over BEC(") and belief propagation decoding. The threshold for this combination is

" 0:42944, see Table I. The block lengths/expurgation parameters are n=s = 1024=24; 2048=43; and 4096=82, respectively. The solid curves represent

0 the exact ensemble averages. The dashed curves are computed according to the refined scaling law stated in Conjecture III-A with scaling parameters
 = 0:262633 + " (1 " ) and  = 0:616045, see Table I.

i.e., if

. As long as the threshold is not given by the multiply the above expressions by we get the corresponding

stability condition, i.e., if

, one can still distin- scaling law for the bit erasure probability. Fig. 2 shows the re-

guish two types of error events: linear-sized error events, whose sulting approximation of

.

contribution scales like (7) and a contribution which stems from The scaling laws (5), (7) apply to regular as well as to irreg-

sublinear sized weaknesses in the graph. The contribution from ular ensembles under mild conditions on the degree distribu-

the latter part depends crucially on the expurgation scheme em- tion. More precisely, the threshold should not be determined

ployed and does not necessarily vanish as

.

by the stability condition (i.e.,

), and must

In the preceding discussion, we focused on the block erasure correspond to a unique critical point (i.e., the equation

probability. The equivalent scaling law for the bit erasure prob-

admits a unique nonvanishing solution), see

ability is an adaptation: If the decoder fails at the critical2 point Sections II and III. The computation of the scaling parameters

then, asymptotically, it incurs a fixed bit erasure probability, call though becomes significantly more involved in the irregular case

it (the fractional size of the residual graph). Therefore, if we and therefore we limit ourselves in this paper to providing the

2See Section II for a discussion of this notion.

detailed calculations only for regular ensembles. Fig. 3 demonstrates the scaling law for the block erasure probability applied

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:23:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

476

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2009

Fig. 3. Scaling of IE

[P (G; ")] for transmission over BEC(") and belief propagation decoding. The threshold for this combination

 is " 0:48281. The block lengths/expurgation parameters are n=s = 350=14; 700=23; and 1225=35. The solid curves represent the simulated ensemble 0 averages. The dashed curves are computed according to the refined scaling law stated in Conjecture III-A with scaling parameters  = 0:276 + " (1 " )

and  = 0:642274. These parameters were fitted to the data.

Fig. 4. Scaling of IE

(

)[P (G; ")] for transmission over the BEC(") and belief propagation decoding. The (bit) threshold for this combination

is " = . The solid curves are the exact ensemble averages for block lengths equal to n = 256; 1024; 4096; and 16384. The bold curve is the limiting (in n)

block erasure curve. The dashed curves are the finite-length approximations computed according to (10).

to the irregular ensemble

. In These curves are qualitatively different from the ones discussed

this case, the scaling parameters were simply fitted to the data. above. As investigated in more detail in Section III, the block

The performance of ensembles whose threshold is deter- erasure probability does not show a threshold effect: instead,

mined by the stability condition scales in a fundamentally it converges to a continuous function of , with discontinuous

different way. The simplest such ensembles are cycle codes, first derivative at . At finite block length , this singularity is

i.e., ensembles of the type

. We smoothed according to the following scaling law:

will discuss cycle codes in some detail since we conjecture

that the same scaling behavior applies to all ensembles for

which the stability condition determines the threshold. Fig. 4

shows block erasure curves for the cycle Poisson ensemble

(10)

with expurgation parameter

where

,

, and is a constant which depends

for

, , , . Also shown is the asymptotic on the expurgation scheme used. This form corresponds to the

block erasure probability and our approximation for the fi- approximate finite-block-length curves in Fig. 4. The form of

nite-block-length erasure probability around the threshold. the mother curve is given in Lemma 2 below.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:23:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

AMRAOUI et al.: FINITE-LENGTH SCALING FOR ITERATIVELY DECODED LDPC ENSEMBLES

477

 Fig. 5. Scaling of IE

[P (G; )] for transmission over BAWGNC() and a quantized version of belief propagation decoding implemented in

hardware. The threshold for this combination is (E =N )

1:19658. The block lengths n are n = 1000; 2000; 4000; 8000; 16000; and 32000; respectively.

The solid curves represent the simulated ensemble averages. The dashed curves are computed according to the refined scaling law (7) with scaling parameters

 = 0:8694 and  = 5:884. These parameters were fitted to the empirical data.

Fig. 6. Scaling of IE

 [P (G; ")] for transmission over BSC(") and belief propagation decoding. The threshold for this combination is " 0:084.

The block lengths/expurgation parameters are n=s = 1024=19;2048=39; 4096=79; and 8192=79; respectively. The solid curves represent the ensemble averages

obtained via simulation. The dashed curves are computed according to the refined scaling law stated in (7) with scaling parameters  = 1:156 and  = 0:1.

A. Scaling for General Channels

a code ensemble obeys a canonical scaling law with parameters and if

In many ways, this paper only represents the very first step in

what seems to be a promising research direction. The most im-

portant extension is undoubtedly the one to general binary-input

(11)

output-symmetric channels. Although there is currently little

hope of attacking this problem rigorously, empirically a scaling Note that for the

,

, so that this choice is

law seems to hold for general channels as well. In principle, consistent with our previous statements. The parameters and

any (function of the) channel parameter can be used for stating reported in the captions of Figs. 5–7 are defined according to

the scaling law. However, the following convention is partic- this canonical form.

ularly appealing. Given a family of binary-input output-sym- Partial evidence in this direction was obtained by Tillich and

metric memoryless channels parametrized by we denote by Zémor [28] that considered ML decoding. Their results imply

the channel capacity for the parameter . We will say that that, for ensembles with linear minimum distance, the threshold

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:23:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

478

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2009

Fig. 7. Scaling of IE

 [P (G; ")] for transmission over BSC(") and Gallager Algorithm A decoding. The threshold for this combination is "

0:03946. The block lengths/expurgation parameters are n=s = 512=50; 1024=70; 2048=100; and 4096=200; respectively. The solid curves represent the en-

semble averages obtained via simulation. The dashed curves are computed according to the refined scaling law stated in (7) with scaling parameters  = 1:11 and

 = 0:0.

behavior gets smoothed over a window of size at most

. C. Related Work and Outline

However, it is difficult to generalize their approach to iterative decoding.
Fig. 5 shows performance curves for the ensemble used over the bi-
nary-input additive white Gaussian noise (BAWGN) channel and decoded with a quantized version of belief propagation. Fig. 6 refers to the same ensemble when transmission takes place over the binary symmetric channel (BSC) and belief propagation decoding is used. Finally, Fig. 7 shows the performance curve for the Gallager Algorithm A. Although these cases are quite distinct one can see that the scaling laws are in excellent agreement with the numerically determined performance curves.

In [18], an approach to analyze the finite-length behavior of turbo codes was introduced. This method, which the authors call the “Exit band chart,” is used to describe the probabilistic convergence of the iterative decoding algorithm and provides an approximation of the bit-error rate (BER) in the waterfall region. However, the analysis of [18] is mainly empirical, and (unlike ours) does not claim to be asymptotically exact.
Zémor and Cohen [31] and Tillich and Zémor [28] studied the “threshold” behavior of general classes of codes. In particular, they considered linear codes with diverging minimum distance over the erasure channel, the Z-channel [31], and the BSC [28]. They proved that such codes exhibit a sharp threshold behavior under ML decoding, and derived explicit bounds on the

threshold width.

B. Applications of Scaling to Finite-Length Optimization

A preliminary numerical investigation of the scaling (5) was presented in [22]. Partial accounts of the present work appeared

in [2], [3]. After the present paper was submitted for publication,

As mentioned earlier, scaling laws provide an accurate ap- the approach discussed here was further developed in a number

proximation of the error probability in the waterfall regime. The of directions. In particular, a new method to compute the scaling

so-called error floor can be described by computing the con- parameters and for the erasure channel was introduced in

tribution stemming from small (sublinear sized) weaknesses of [4]. This allowed to derive analytic expressions for these pa-

the graph. By combining these two calculations one can obtain rameters for general LDPC ensembles, and in particular the for-

precise analytic predictions of the performances of finite-length mulas (6) and (9) for regular ones. The same paper demonstrated

ensembles. The most important use of these predictions is to op- how to use finite-length scaling for code optimization. The re-

timize LDPC ensembles at finite block length.

fined scaling law (7) was proved for Poisson ensembles in [9].

An optimization procedure based on this approach was in- The scaling approach was applied to irregular repeat–accumu-

deed developed and tested in [4].

late codes in [6], [23] and to turbo codes in [5]. Finally, and

Note also that from the limited examples exhibited in this most importantly, a method to compute the parameter for gen-

paper it appears that the scaling parameters depend only weakly eral memoryless channels was developed in [12], [13]. Despite

on the degree distribution. This suggests that a good optimiza- the mentioned progress, the approach developed in this paper

tion strategy for finite-length ensembles is to optimize the (based on the sequential representation of iterative decoding)

threshold under the condition that the contribution of is—so far—the only one allowing for a rigorous derivation of

the error floor leads to acceptable overall performance.

scaling laws.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:23:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

AMRAOUI et al.: FINITE-LENGTH SCALING FOR ITERATIVELY DECODED LDPC ENSEMBLES

479

The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we introduce the necessary notation and review some of the background material, in particular the analysis of the peeling decoder through ordinary differential equations introduced in [20]. In Section III, we state and prove the scaling law (5) In Section V, we then discuss how the scaling parameters can be computed for regular ensemble. In Section VI, we discuss in detail the refined scaling law and how the shift parameter can be computed. Some of the background material and some technical calculations have been relegated to Appendices.

the channel

and

the

, then we have

is the same probability for (12)

We consider scaling laws for both bit and block erasure probabilities and we will always consider ensemble averages. For example, in its full notational glory

II. REVIEW
In this section, we recall some basic facts on the density evolution analysis of LDPC codes under iterative decoding. We also fix some of the notation to be used throughout the paper.

will denote the expected block erasure probability for cycle

Poisson ensembles of rate one-half containing no double edges

when transmitted over the channel

. Because of

the obvious notational burden we will often replace this with

shorthands and we might write, e.g.,

A. Ensembles and Channel Models

In this paper, we consider both standard and Poisson LDPC ensembles. Standard ensembles are denoted in the usual way as We might further omit some of the parameters if they are clear
, where is the block length and and denote from the context.

the degree distributions from an edge perspective, see [20]. For the Poisson ensemble, the right degree distribution is Poisson. More precisely, given the left degree distribution and the rate , the right degree distribution tends to

B. Decoding

There are two alternative descriptions of the iterative de-

coding algorithm for the

. Although they correspond to

identical outputs, they are quite different from the point of view

as

of analysis. First, we can think of the standard message passing

decoder in which messages are passed in parallel from variable

We will denote such an ensemble by

. To sample

from the Poisson ensemble pick a bipartite graph with variable

nodes and the proper variable node degree distribution. Connect

each edge stemming from a variable node to one of the check

nodes, uniformly at random.

In some cases, it is more convenient to describe the degree

distributions from a node perspective. Our notation for the left

and right node degree distributions are and , respectively,

and we have the following important relationships:

to check nodes and then back from check to variable nodes until the codeword has been decoded or no further progress is achieved, [17]. Alternatively, one can think of a sequential process which decodes one bit at a time in a greedy fashion. This is the point of view introduced by Luby et al. in [19], [20] and that we will adopt in this paper. More precisely, the decoder proceeds as follows. Given the received message, the decoder passes all known values on to the check node side, along the edges of the Tanner graph. These values are summed at the check nodes and this partial sums are stored there. Further, all

known variable nodes and edges over which messages have

been passed are deleted. In this way, one arrives at a residual

We will also consider uniformly expurgated ensembles; these graph which has a certain degree distribution. The decoder pro-

can be defined as follows. Consider, to be definite, the case of ceeds now in an iterative fashion. If the residual graph contains

Poisson ensembles. We define

as the subset no degree-one check nodes the decoding process stops. Other-

of all elements in

whose minimum stopping set wise, the decoder randomly chooses one such degree-one check

size is at least . As always, we endow this set with the uni- node and passes its partial sum to the connected variable node.

form probability distribution. For example,

This variable node is now decoded (its value being determined

denotes the Poisson ensemble which contains no stopping sets by the message just passed). Its value is communicated to all

of size one or two. An analogous notation is used for expurgated connected check node, where the value is added to the current

standard ensembles.

partial sums. The involved variable node, check node, and all

We will consider two channel models. The more familiar involved edges are deleted. In this way a new residual graph

one is the binary erasure channel with parameter , denoted by results and a new iteration starts.

, where each bit is erased independently with probability . Sometimes though it is more convenient to consider C. Density Evolution

the model

, the channel model in which exactly

The advantage of the second description lies in the fact that

out of all bits are erased. The set of erased bits is chosen the decoding process can be described as a Markov process in a

uniformly from all

such choices. The relation between space of small dimension. More precisely, the degree distribu-

performances under the two models is easily derived. If, for tions of the residual graph form a Markov process. Further, at

instance

denotes the (block or bit) error probability for each iteration the change in the degree distribution is small. This

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:23:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

480

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2009

  Fig. 8. The evolution of  and  as a function of  for the LDPC(n; x ; x ) ensemble and " = " 0:4294. At  =  0:203, () has a minimum and
touches the -axis.

follows from the fact that at each step only a bounded number of

nodes change degree. By standard arguments one can show that,

in the large block length limit, the evolution of the degree distri-

bution follows with high probability the expected evolution and

the latter can be approximated by the solution of a differential

equation. This is the idea introduced in the coding context in

[20]. Let us recall this analysis since it forms the starting point

for our investigation. The basic observation is that all residual

graphs which have the same degree distribution (and, for expur-

gated ensembles, which have the same degree of expurgation)

are equally likely. Therefore, in order to analyze the behavior

of the decoder it suffices to analyze the evolution of the degree

distribution of the residual graph. Let denote the fraction of

erasure messages entering the variable nodes at a given point in

time (here, stands for right-to-left message). In terms of this

parametrization, the evolution of the degree distribution of the

residual graph is given (in the

limit) by

Example 1: [Density Evolution of

-En-

semble] Fig. 8 depicts the evolution of (dashed line) and

(solid line) as a function of for the ensemble

for

. Note that for this choice of the expected

number of check nodes of degree one reaches zero at some

critical time of the decoding process.

The density evolution equations completely specify the

asymptotic behavior of the decoder. Recall that the decoder

stops if the number of degree-one check nodes has reached

zero. If this point is reached before the size of the residual

graph has vanished, a decoding error occurs. Therefore, if we

plot

as a function of for a given channel parameter

we know that the decoder will succeed with high probability if

and only if

for all

. From (13), we see that

for

is equivalent to

(15)

We can therefore define the threshold

as

(13) We say that is a critical point if has a local minimum

at

and if this minimum is zero, i.e., if

(14)

together with

.

Hereby,

tracks the expected number of vari- To simplify the treatment, we will only discuss ensembles

able (check) nodes of degree at state , up to correc- that have a single critical point. The extension to several critical

tions. In the sequel, we will refer to these equations as density points poses no problems in principle but is technically more

evolution equations. As we have discussed, the most important cumbersome. For example, all regular ensembles have this prop-

parameter in the decoding process is the number of degree-one erty. We say that a degree distribution is unconditionally stable

check nodes, that we shall denote by . Asymptotically we have if

. This is equivalent to requiring that the threshold is

with high probability. Further im- not determined by the stability condition, i.e.,

portant parameters are the size of the residual graph,

strictly. One can check that this is the case for all regular en-

and the number of check nodes of degree at sembles with

. In the opposite case, i.e., if

, we

least two,

. We denote by

, say that the ensemble is marginally stable. Cycle code ensem-

, and

the respective asymptotic fractions:

bles are marginally stable. As already mentioned, the scaling

,

,

behavior is drastically different for the two cases. Finally, we

.

will assume that the degree distributions and (or just

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:23:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

AMRAOUI et al.: FINITE-LENGTH SCALING FOR ITERATIVELY DECODED LDPC ENSEMBLES

481

for Poisson ensembles) are polynomials of bounded max- Remark 1: The relation (12) allows to relate the scaling pa-

imum degree , . This is a purely technical condition to rameters for the two channel models

and

.

avoid some pathological cases which are of no practical interest. In fact

III. UNCONDITIONALLY STABLE ENSEMBLES

The main object of this paper are scaling laws for unconditionally stable ensembles with a single critical point. The results below apply both to standard ensembles and Poisson ensembles. For economy of notation we shall denote them generically by
. Formulas for Poisson ensembles can often be

recovered by letting

.

A. Scaling Laws

The basic scaling law as given in (5) is stated more precisely in the following.

Theorem 1: [Scaling of Unconditionally Stable Ensembles]

Consider transmission over the

using random elements

from an ensemble

which has a single critical

point and is unconditionally stable. Let

denote

the ensemble threshold and let

be the fractional

size of the residual graph at the threshold. Let

denote

the expected bit erasure probability and let

be the

expected block erasure probability due to errors of size at least

, where

. Then for any fixed

we have, as

tends to infinity

(16) (17)

where

is a constant which depends on the degree

distributions.

Proof: The proof is presented in Section III-C, with some

technical parts deferred to later sections. A heuristic argument to

explain the form of the scaling law is provided in Section III-B.

(18)

We shall not use subscripts in the following as the relevant channel model should be clear from the context.

Remark 2: Notice that, if the Tanner graph does not contain

degree-two variable nodes (i.e., if

), then the block

error probability is dominated by large error events for large . Corrections due to small stopping set vanish as l ,

with

the minimum left degree. This means that

l

.

The situation is different if

. If

then the ensemble can be expurgated in order to eliminate small

(sublinear) weaknesses in the graph and the above scaling law

will then account for all errors. If on the other hand, the en-

semble is not expurgated or if

, then the contri-

bution to from small stopping sets is nonnegligible. In this

case

does not vanish for fixed

and

.

Nevertheless, the above scaling law only applies to the first con-

tribution. Fortunately, the effect of sublinear-sized stopping sets

is relatively easy to assess by union bounding techniques. The

total erasure probability can be represented as the sum of these

two contributions. For a more detailed discussion we refer the

reader to [11], [25], [32].

Finally, the bit erasure probability is not affected by these

considerations since the contribution of sublinear-sized stop-

ping sets in the graph vanishes as -tends to infinity.

Remark 3: The refined scaling law can be described as a shift in the threshold, as we did in Conjecture 1 or, alternatively, as a correction to the scaling function, as in (3)

We conjecture that in fact the following refined scaling law is The two formulations are asymptotically equivalent. valid.

Conjecture 1: [Refined Scaling of Unconditionally Stable B. An Informal Argument

Ensembles] Under the hypotheses of Theorem 1, we have, as

tends to infinity

In the remainder of this section we describe an informal (al-

beit essentially correct) justification of the above scaling forms.

As already mentioned, the decoding process can be described

by a low-dimensional trajectory tracking the number of nodes

of each degree (which is typically of order ). Consider one

such trajectory, for a particular realization of the graph and the

where

and

on the ensemble.

are constants which depend

channel noise. We will see that the trajectory closely follows the deterministic prediction provided by the density evolution equa-

tions. Indeed, the expected (unnormalized) trajectory is within

In Section VI, we shall present an heuristic argument that order distance from the prediction and its standard deviation

supports this conjecture and allows to compute the threshold is of order .

shift parameter . We will also point out the gaps in this ar- Consider first the case

. Then, at the critical point, the

gument. After submission of the present paper, this conjecture expected number of degree-one check nodes is . Assume

was proved in the case of Poisson regular ensembles in [9].

now that we vary slightly, and let

. From the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:23:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

482

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2009

p Fig. 9. A pictorial representation of density and covariance evolution for the LDPC(n; x ; x ) ensemble. Notice that the ellipsoids corresponding to (s; t)
covariances should be regarded as living on a smaller (by a factor n) scale than the typical trajectory.

density evolution (13) we see that the expected number of de- precisely, they represent contours of constant probability. Note

gree-one check nodes at the critical point

that this picture is slightly misleading. The ellipsoids indeed

, where

live on a scale of , whereas the rest of the graph is scaled

by , i.e., for increasing length the ellipsoids concentrate more (19) and more around the expected value. Those trajectories that hit

the

plane correspond to unsuccessful realizations of the

If

, then we conclude from (19) that the expected

number of degree-one check nodes at the critical point is of

order . Since the standard deviation is of order

,

then with high probability the decoding process will either suc-

ceed (if

) or halt (if

).

The limit block error probability in nontrivial (i.e., strictly be-

tween and ) if

, where

is a constant. In

this case, the expected gap at the critical point scales in the

same way as the standard deviation and one would expect that

the probability of error converges to a constant. Varying now the

constant will give rise to the scaling function , cf. (1).

As mentioned earlier, a complete description of the state of

the algorithm is provided by the vector indicating the number

of nodes of each degree. We will see that the distribution

of this vector at any time before hitting the

plane is

approximately Gaussian. The evolution of its covariance ma-

trix is governed by a set of differential equations analogous

to the ones for the mean. We will refer to these as to the

covariance evolution equations. As an example, consider the

ensemble

and transmission over the channel

. In this case, the residual graph at the beginning

of the decoding process has exactly variable nodes and

since at each step of the decoding process exactly one variable

node is peeled off, the size of the residual graph after the th

decoding step is exactly

(assuming the decoder has

decoding process. They pass through the part of the ellipsoids

that vanishes below the

plane.

One can quantify the probability for the process to hit the

plane as follows. Stop density and covariance evolution

when the number of variables reaches the critical value . At

this point, the probability distribution of the state is well ap-

proximated by a Gaussian with a given mean and covariance

for

(while it is trivial for

). Estimate the survival

probability (i.e., the probability of not hitting the

plane at

any time) by integrating the Gaussian distribution over

.

Obviously this integral can be expressed in terms of a -func-

tion.

We will see that the above description leads indeed to the

scaling behavior as stated in Theorem 1. Where does the shift in

Conjecture 1 come from? It is easy to understand that we were

a bit optimistic (i.e., we underestimated the error probability)

in the above calculation: We correctly excluded from the sum

the part of the Gaussian distribution lying in the

half-

space—trajectories contributing to this part must have hit the

plane at some point in the past. On the other hand, we

cannot be certain that trajectories such that when crosses

did not hit the

plane at some time in the past and

bounced back (or will not hit it at some later point). We refer

to Section VI for an in-depth discussion on how to estimate this

effect.

not stopped prematurely). As we will discuss in more detail in Section V, in the case of regular ensembles, a sufficient statis- C. Proof of Theorem 1

tics is given by the vector

(i.e., we do not need to keep The idea is to regard the decoding process as a Markov chain

track of the whole degree distribution of the residual graph). with state space . A state

con-

Fig. 9 shows the evolution of as a function of the size of tains the number of nodes of each degree (thus,

the residual graph when

. The solid line corresponds to

). For the sake of definiteness, we will refer here to the case

the density evolution equation. The dot indicates the critical of regular ensembles: the extension to general unconditionally

point. The ellipsoids represent the covariance matrix. More stable ensembles is routine. For the regular case, consider the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:23:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

AMRAOUI et al.: FINITE-LENGTH SCALING FOR ITERATIVELY DECODED LDPC ENSEMBLES

483

process

, where is the number of vari-

able nodes, is the number of degree-one check nodes, and

is the number of check nodes of degree or more after de-

coding steps. Note that

itself is a Markov

chain. This simplifies the description. The transition rates and

the initial condition for such a Markov chain are computed in

Section V-B.

Under quite general conditions, families of Markov chains in

can be approximated by deterministic ordinary differential

equations plus Gaussian fluctuations. More precisely, consider

a family of Markov chains

parametrized by

and

taking values in . When

is the iterative decoding

process, then represent the block length and represents the

number of decoding steps. We drop the subscript hereafter.

Let the transition probability be

(20)

with

. We shall call

ogous quantities for the limiting rates

Finally, let

and

, denote the solution of

with initial conditions

and

used the shorthand

.

(24)

, .
, for

the analand

(25)

(26) . Here we

and the initial condition be

.

We denote the

coordinates of the state as

(21)

The corresponding random variable is

.

We assume throughout that

for a positive constant

(we reserve the symbols

for numerical constants

which we assume not to depend upon ). We further assume the

following regularity properties of the Markov chain.

1) The chain makes bounded jumps. In other words, there

exists a

such that

almost

surely.

2) The transition probabilities have a smooth

limit.

More precisely, there exist functions and a positive constant such that

Proposition 1: Under the conditions 1)–3) stated above, consider the following properties (here we use the symbols
, for constants independent of ). I. concentrates on the scale. In formulas, there exist
, such that

(27)

II. The average and covariance of are accurately tracked

by and

. More precisely, there exist constants

, such that

(28)

(29)

(22) III. The variable

converges weakly to a

Clearly, we have

. Moreover, we as-

sume

to be

with respect to its second

argument and to have bounded first and second derivatives.

-dimensional Gaussian with variance

.

More precisely, define the logarithmic moment gener-

ating function

3) The process has a finite range on the scale . Explicitly,

(30)

there exists

such that

almost surely.

In fact, because of condition 1) it suffices to require that

almost surely.

Assume that the distribution

is “approximately

for

. Then there exist a function

, such that

Gaussian.” We will show that, under the above hypotheses

the distribution of is also well described by a Gaussian

(31)

whose mean and variance are uniquely determined by a set of

ordinary differential equations. In order to state this fact more precisely, we need some additional notation. We denote by
the average of and

If properties I–III hold for the initial state , then they hold

for as well as long as

(eventually with larger con-

stants

).

Further, if the limiting kernel

is not

in

but the drift coefficients

are nevertheless Lipschitz con-

its covariance. We need furthermore the first two moments of tinuous, then (27), (28) still hold provided they hold for the ini-

the transition rates

tial condition , and the right-hand side in (28) is replaced by

. (23)
The proof of this statement is deferred to Appendix A.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:23:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

484

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2009

As mentioned above, we apply Proposition 1 to the process

. It is possible to check from the explicit expres-

sions in Section V and Appendix A, that conditions 1)–3) above

are indeed satisfied as long as

. On the other hand, the

decoding process is not defined if

, and we are interested

in trajectories passing close to the

plane. Indeed, Propo-

sition 1 cannot be true when is at a distance of order

from the

plane, since a part of the Gaussian density is

“cut away.”

In order to overcome this problem, we introduce a new

Markov process on the same states

which

is well defined for

. We extend the transition rates

computed in the proof of Lemma 3 to

by replacing

with

there. More precisely, we define the law of the

increment

as follows:

for

, the typical trajectory

touches the plane

only at one point, namely, for

. Since an

change in induces an

change

in

and thus an

change in the point at which

touches the plane

, we have

for any Let
we get

(36) .
. By conditioning on the state at time ,
(37)
(38)

(32)

Here, and are distributed according

, see (56),

where we put

and

and is determined as

in (54). Notice that the only nonzero entries of the distribution

in the G space are therefore

In order to approximate the function

, define

to be

the solution of the density evolution (34) with initial condition

. Define

if

for all

otherwise. (39)

Then by (27) and (28) above, we have

Such transition rates do not necessarily correspond to any graph

process in the

plane. However, upon conditioning on

the “extended” process coincides with the original one.

Therefore, we have the identity

(33)

where the probability on the right-hand side is with respect to

the extended process.

Notice that the extended Markov chain has the properties

1)–3) above: indeed, it makes finite jumps (at most of size

in either direction), and is confined to

(this

is true for the initial condition and follows for any

by

boundedness of the jumps).

Further, the transition kernel has an

limit as in (22):

this follows from the fact that the extended process coincides

with the original one for

, and has a kernel of the form

for

. For

, the limit kernel is .

Further, the drift coefficients are Lipschitz everywhere. They

are indeed defined by taking the composition of the functions

and in Lemma 3, with the Lipshitz function

.

Fix

, and let

be the corresponding solution of the density evolution equations

(40) whence

(41)

for some constant

. We take therefore

and

, thus obtaining

(42)

(43)

It is convenient to further simplify the function

. In-

deed, define

, where

is the solution

of the density evolution equations for

. Define

if

(44)

otherwise.

Then, for

(which we can always

assume for big enough), there exists

such that

(34)

(45)

with and as in Lemma 3 (with

). From On the other hand

(27) and (28) it follows that there exists a constant such that,

with high probability

(35) by weak convergence of

(46) to a Gaussian dis-

for all

. It is therefore sufficient to restrict our tribution with

variance in the direction (cf. Proposition

attention to states satisfying this condition. By hypothesis, 1, point III). By choosing

, the latter upper bound

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:23:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

AMRAOUI et al.: FINITE-LENGTH SCALING FOR ITERATIVELY DECODED LDPC ENSEMBLES

485

Fig. 10. The bit and block erasure probability for ELDPC n; (x) = x; r = ; s = 1 for n = 2 , i = 8; 10; 12; 14. As can be seen from the picture, the
block erasure curves converge to a limiting (nonzero) curve over the whole range of ", whereas the bit erasure curves decrease to zero below the threshold for
increasing block lengths. Also shown are the result of using the scaling laws for the block erasure probability as stated in Lemma 2.

becomes vanishing small as it follows that

. From (43), (45), and (46) (47)

By using again weak convergence of

to a Gaussian

distribution where the mean of is

, and its variance

(as determined, respectively, by density and co-

variance evolution), we get

(48)

In this expression, the quantities with index refer to the critical

trajectory, i.e., for

, and those without a to the trajectory

for

. The proof is completed by noticing that, as

,

, and

where

and is the solution of the equation

. For cycle code ensembles,

.

Unlike for ensembles without degree- variable nodes, the

block erasure probability does not vanish for cycle codes as

with

fixed. The following lemma characterizes this

limit, as a function of the channel parameter and the expurgation

level, in the case of cycle Poisson ensembles.

Lemma 1: [Asymptotic Block Erasure Probability Curve]

Consider transmission over

or

using

random elements from

, and denote

by

the corresponding block erasure probability.

Then

(49)
We therefore obtain (16) with
(50)
all quantities being evaluated at the critical point.
IV. MARGINALLY STABLE ENSEMBLES As already mentioned, marginally stable ensembles are expected to follow a different scaling from the one described in Theorem 1. We will limit our discussion to the simplest example: cycle code ensembles, i.e., LDPC ensembles with constant variable node degree equal to . We conjecture though that this scaling law is quite general and applies to all marginally stable ensembles. Let us start by revisiting the standard large-block length limit
at fixed. The asymptotic bit erasure probability under iterative decoding can be obtained through the standard density evolution analysis. It is given in parametric form by

The proof of this Lemma is completely analogous to the one

of Theorem 2 below and we therefore omit it. While similar re-

sults hold for general cycle ensembles, the Poisson cycle en-

semble is slightly easier to handle analytically, and we will focus

on this case in this section.

Fig. 10 shows the resulting bit and block erasure curves

for

, with various block

lengths.

The following theorem provides a characterization of the

block error probability in the finite-length scaling regime. Let

us stress two important differences with respect to uncondi-

tionally stable ensembles: i) The scaling window is of order

instead of

; ii) In order

to obtain a nontrivial scaling function, we “zoom” around the

singularity at

,

. The predictions of this theorem

are compared with numerical simulations in Fig. 10.

Theorem 2: [Scaling of Block Probability for Cycle

Poisson Ensembles] Consider transmission over

or

using elements from the ensemble

, and denote by

the

corresponding block erasure probability. Then

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:23:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

486

where

,

,

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2009
, and threshold, the total number of constellations which are compatible with the expurgation scheme behaves like

Hereby,

is the stable density with representation

(51)

From this, the block error probability around the threshold fol-

lows immediately once

is known, namely, we have

and

.

Proof: In principle, one could arrive at the above result by

the same technique used for unconditionally stable ensembles,

namely, density and covariance evolution. We will instead use a

direct combinatorial approach.

We start by considering the channel

which makes a fixed number of errors. Note that there

is a one-to-one correspondence between elements of

and simple graphs on

nodes with exactly edges, see [25]. If

, then double

edges and cycles of length four are excluded from the Tanner

graph. Therefore, each variable node connects two distinct

check nodes and no two variable nodes connect the same pair.

If we therefore identify each variable node (and the two edges

that emanate from it) with one edge in an ordinary graph we

get the desired correspondence.

Consider now the residual Tanner graph after the correctly

received variable nodes have been deleted. By the argument

above, this corresponds to a uniformly random simple graph

with

edges over vertices. The iterative decoder will

be successful if and only if this random graph is a forest, i.e., a

collection of trees. Let

denote the number of forests on

labeled nodes and components. Such a forest has edges

and therefore it corresponds to a constellation on

variable nodes. Since these variable nodes can be ordered arbi-

trarily it follows that there are

constellations

on variable nodes which do not contain stopping sets.

It remains to find the total number of constellations on vari-

able nodes which are compatible with the expurgation scheme.

The desired result will then follow by dividing these two quanti-

ties. Assume . Then the total number of constellations on

variable nodes is equal to

, since for each edge we can

choose one of the check nodes. Let

denote the number

of cycles of length in a fixed portion of the bipartite graph

of size . One can verify (and it is a well studied problem in

random graphs) that

Cayley’s Theorem states that there are labeled trees on

nodes, [30]. Unfortunately, there does not seem to exist an

equally elementary expression for the number of labeled forests.

The situation is aggravated by the fact that we are interested

in the region where the average number of edges per node is

around one. Exactly around this region the graph goes through a

phase transition and so the behavior of

is nontrivial even

in the limit of large sizes. Fortunately, the asymptotic behavior

has been determined by Britkov [8] and the result has been

made accessible (to the English speaking audience) in the book

by Kolchin [16]. The statement now follows for the channel

by employing the asymptotic approximation stated

in [16, Theorem 1.4.4].4

In order to prove that the same scaling law holds for the

channel

, we compute the block error probability for the

latter using the general relation (12). In other words, we con-

volve the expression (51) with a binomial law with mean .

However, the standard deviation of the number of erasures is of

order

which is much smaller than the scale

which is relevant for the scaling law (51). Therefore,

the same scaling law holds for the channel

as well.

Remark 1: Note, that for the cycle case the ML and the iterative decoder perform identically in terms of block erasure probability. This is true since in this case, the condition of no stopping sets is equal to the condition that there are no cycles which in turns implies that there is no codeword. Note, however, that this is no longer true once we look at the resulting bit erasure probability.

Remark 2: Cycle codes cannot be expurgated up to stopping

sets of size

. Indeed, the number of stopping sets

of size

are jointly Poisson and have mean equal to

, respectively [27]. Below the threshold

,

the bit erasure probability scales as . Expurgation changes

this scaling only by a constant factor. A simple calculation

yields

Further, it is known that for each fixed , the random variables

(52)

converge in distribution (as and tend to infinity

with a fixed ratio) to independent Poisson random variables with where we defined the function

means3

[7, Corollary IV.9, p. 79]. Finally, for the

Poisson ensemble we have

so that around the critical

value

and

. It follows that around the

3This statement is proved in [7] for the random graph model G with inde-
pendent edges. However, it is easy to extend it to the graph model with a constant number of edges via standard monotonicity arguments.

As shown in Fig. 11, this formula provides a good approximation to the bit error probability away from the critical region.
4The reader is warned that there is a slight typo in [16, Theorem 1.4.4].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:23:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

AMRAOUI et al.: FINITE-LENGTH SCALING FOR ITERATIVELY DECODED LDPC ENSEMBLES

487

= 2 = 8 10 12 14 Fig. 11. Comparison of the exact bit erasure curves (solid line) with the analytic expression given in (52) (dashed lines) for n , i ; ; ; ; and " < " .

Notice that the coefficient of the .

term in (52) diverges as

V. COMPUTATION OF THE SLOPE PARAMETER

degree one check nodes at the critical point. The relation is given by (50) that we copy here for greater convenience of the reader (both factors being evaluated at the critical point)

The basic scaling law for unconditionally stable ensembles,

cf. Theorem 1, depends on the ensemble only through the slope

scaling parameter

. In this section, we will present

the calculation of this parameter, while Section VI is devoted to

the shift parameter

.

Although conceptually it is straightforward to write down the

equations for the general irregular case, the actual computations

are quite cumbersome. We will therefore proceed as follows. In

Section V-A, we discuss the general approach. The actual com-

putation are then developed in Section V-B for the standard reg-

ular ensemble

l r , and the regular Poisson

ensemble

l . The scaling parameters of gen-

eral unconditionally stable ensembles can be found in [4].

A. General Strategy

Let us summarize the procedure to compute the scaling pa-

rameter :

(1) Determine a sufficient statistics for the decoding

process. For a general

ensemble, a suf-

ficient statistics is provided by the degree distributions

at variable and check nodes in the residual graph. As we

will see, a more compact representation is available for

the two special cases mentioned above.

(2) Write the transition probability for iterative decoding

and compute the drift and diffusion coefficients, cf. (23),

(24). Determine the

limit kernel and drift/diffu-

sion coefficients, in the sense of (22).

(3) Determine the initial condition, namely, the average

state and its variance before the decoding process has

been started.

(4) Integrate the density evolution and covariance evolution

equation, cf. (25) and (26) up to the critical point.

(5) The parameter in Theorem 1 is finally given (up to

a rescaling) by the standard deviation of the number of

(53)

B. Regular Ensembles

Some technical simplifications arise in the case of regular en-

sembles. Most importantly, the triple

(number of vari-

able nodes, check nodes of degree , check nodes of degree

or more) constitutes a sufficient statistics for the residual Tanner

graph. Here a residual Tanner graph (which we shall call, some-

times, a constellation) is a bipartite multigraph on a subset of

the variable nodes of size and a subset of the check nodes. The

nodes are assumed to be distinguishable, and each variable node

is associated to distinguishable half-edges (sockets). Within

the standard regular ensemble, each check node is associated to

distinguishable half-edges, and a residual Tanner graph is a

matching between the half-edges on the variable node side

and a subset of half-edges on the check node side.

Within Poisson ensembles, a graph is an assignment of check

node indices to the half-edges on the variable node side. With

these definitions we have the following.

Lemma 2: Consider communication over the

or

channel using random elements from the standard reg-

ular or Poisson regular ensemble. Let be the residual graph

after iterations of the sequential peeling decoder. Conditional

on the triple

, the graph is uniformly random.

Proof: The thesis holds by assumption for

and is

proved by induction for all . Consider two residual graphs

and of type

. We want to prove that the probability

of

is equal to the probability of

. Let

be a second type with

. Let

(respectively,

) be a weighted sum over the

graphs

of type

that can be reduced to

by one iteration of the decoding process, each graph being

weighted by the number of degree-one check nodes adjacent

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:23:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

488

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2009

to the removed variable nodes. By induction hypothesis it is

sufficient to show that

.

In order to show this, assume that is the result of applying

the iterative decoder to the graph . Then there exists a graph

which differs from only on the residual part (where it co-

incides with ) but agrees with it otherwise. The removed vari-

able node is adjacent to the same number of degree-one check

nodes in and . Since the correspondence is one-to-one, this

proves

.

This lemma implies that it suffices to keep track of the number

of variable nodes (all of which have degree since the graph is

regular), the number of degree-one check nodes, and the number

of check nodes of degree two or higher. Recall that we denote

by

the normalized state, i.e.,

,

, and

.

Let us now determine the typical degree distribution of a uni-

formly random element of type

. This knowledge will

be required in what follows. For the standard ensemble define

the generator polynomial

r

which

counts the number of connections into a check node of degree

two or higher. For the Poisson ensemble, the equivalent function

is

. Define

. The total number

of constellations on check nodes of degree at least two with

edges is easily seen to be

l . Let ,

, denote the number of check nodes of degree . Then the

total number of constellations which are compatible with the de-

sired type can be written as

Lemma 3: [Drift, Variance, and Partial Derivatives for

Regular Ensembles] Consider regular standard ensem-

bles

l r or regular Poisson ensembles

l

. Define

standard ensemble Poisson ensemble

and let rescaled state

. Then the limit drift functions at the are

The diffusion coefficients are

and the derivatives of the drift with respect to the state are

Since all constellations have equal probability, a typical con-

stellation will have the type which dominates the above sum.

The sum can be evaluated by standard generating function tech-

niques by letting

with

fixed. Some calculus

reveals that this dominating type has the form

,,

where

(54)

Proof: Let denote the fraction of degree-one check

nodes, ,

, the fraction of degree- check nodes, and

and is the unique positive solution of

denote the fraction of residual variable nodes. Since the total edge count on the left and right must match up we have

(55) The next lemma provides explicit formulas for the drift and

. A random edge therefore has probability

l of being connected to a degree-one check node and

probability

l of being connected to a degree- check

node, . As

, the types of the check nodes associ-

diffusion coefficients of regular ensembles. Since the evolution ated to the same variable node are asymptotically independent.

of the number of variable nodes is deterministic ( decreases at It follows that (in the large block-length limit) the probability

each step by ), it is sufficient to consider drift and diffusion in that a randomly chosen variable node has connections to

the directions and .

degree-one check nodes and connections to check nodes of

Further, we will see shortly that for Poisson ensembles the degree two (and the remaining ones to check nodes of larger

scaling parameters for general rate can be easily computed from degree), converges to

the rate zero case. Therefore, in the next lemma we can, without

loss of generality, assume that the rate is zero for Poisson en-

sembles.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:23:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

AMRAOUI et al.: FINITE-LENGTH SCALING FOR ITERATIVELY DECODED LDPC ENSEMBLES

489

Fig. 12. The evolution of f^ (dashed line), f^ (dotted line), and f^ (solid line) along the critical trajectory for the LDPC(n; x ; x ) ensemble.

In the iterative decoding process variables are not picked at random. The probability of picking a variable node is proportional to . Therefore, the induced probability distribution under iterative decoding is
(56)

In terms of

we have

Next we need to determine the partial derivatives. From (54)

for

we have

and The remaining derivatives follow in the same way and we skip the details.

Fig. 12 depicts , , and

as a function of

along the critical trajectory (i.e., for the choice

) for the

ensemble.

The last piece of information required to apply the strategy

outlined in the previous subsection consists in determining the

initial conditions for density and covariance evolution. This is

provided by the following lemmas, whose proof is a standard

application of generating functions techniques and therefore left

to the reader.

Lemma 4: [Initial Condition for Standard Regular Ensem-

bles] Let

denote the Gaussian distribution in

with mean

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:23:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

490

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2009

 Fig. 13. The evolution of  (dashed line),  (dotted line), and  (solid line) for the LDPC(n; x ; x ) ensemble and the choice " = " 0:42944.

and covariance

and covariance

Consider transmission over the channel

using

a random element of

l r , and bounded

away from and . Let

denote the distribution of

the number of check nodes of degree one and of degree at least

two, respectively, in the residual graph (after transmission).

Then, if we denote by

(57) (58) (59)

Further, the distribution of converges weakly (as
under dent).

under ) to the distribution of (the latter is in fact -indepen-

Lemma 5: [Initial Condition for Regular Poisson Ensemble]

A statement analogous to Lemma 4 holds in the case of Poisson

ensembles, whereby

is now Gaussian with mean

Note that, as one would expect, the random variables and

are in general correlated.

We can now solve (25) and (26). This allows us to track the

evolution of the probability distribution of and as decreases

from to , assuming that the

plane was not hit earlier.

Example 2: [ -Ensemble] Fig. 13 shows the evolution of

, , for the

ensemble for the choice

. Notice that the variances of and can

actually shrink as the decoding process evolves. This is an effect

of the term in square brackets in (26). In particular, the variance

shrinks to at

if is low enough (whenever decoding is

successful with high probability).

Finally, the parameter is given by (53).

In Table I we report the values of , , and for a few reg-

ular standard ensembles. Further explanations concerning the

parameter are provided in Section VI.

The computation of the scaling parameters

and

for the Poisson case are made easier by the fol-

lowing pleasing relationship.

Lemma 6: [Scaling of Erasure Probability for Poisson En-

sembles] Consider transmission over ments from the regular Poisson ensemble

using ele-

l

.

For fixed and

and

such that

and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:23:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

AMRAOUI et al.: FINITE-LENGTH SCALING FOR ITERATIVELY DECODED LDPC ENSEMBLES

491

TABLE I

THRESHOLDS AND SCALING PARAMETERS FOR SOME REGULAR STANDARD

BEC( ) ENSEMBLES, AND COMMUNICATION OVER THE CHANNEL

n; n" . THE


 
 = SHIFT PARAMETER IS GIVEN AS

WHERE IS THE UNIVERSAL CONSTANT

1 STATED IN (79) WHOSE NUMERICAL VALUE IS VERY CLOSE TO

TABLE II

LDPC( ) = 0 THRESHOLDS AND SCALING PARAMETERS FOR SOME POISSON ENSEMBLES
n; xl ; r r . NOTE THAT THESE PARAMETERS ASSUME THAT ,

BEC( ) AND COMMUNICATION OVER THE CHANNEL

n; n" . PARAMETERS FOR


 
 A GENERIC RATE CAN BE OBTAINED FROM THESE PARAMETERS THROUGH
(60)–(62). THE SHIFT PARAMETER IS GIVEN AS = WHERE IS THE

UNIVERSAL CONSTANT STATED IN (79) WHOSE NUMERICAL VALUE IS VERY
1 CLOSE TO

Proof: We start with the statement regarding the block

erasure probability. Compare transmission over

using elements from

l

to transmission over

using elements from

l

. The

condition

implies that the number of erased bits

is the same in both cases. Decoding fails if these erased bits

contain a stopping set. The condition

implies that the two ensembles have the same number of check

nodes. Together with the fact that is the same in both cases

(and therefore the involved number of edges is the same) this

shows that the erasure probability is the same.

The proof regarding the bit erasure probability is almost iden-

tical. Both decoders get stuck in identical constellations. The

factor takes into account what fraction of the overall code-

word this constellation is.

first discuss this issue in an abstract setting, cf. Section VI-A. The general procedure will then be applied to regular code ensembles in Section VI-B.

A. The General Approach

Let us reconsider the setting of Section III-C, i.e., a family

of Markov chains

taking values in

and parametrized by the integer . As before, we will

drop, in the sequel, the subscript to mitigate the notational

burden. Throughout this section, we assume the hypotheses of

Proposition 1 to be fulfilled. Further, we are interested in paths

which are confined to the “half space”

If we combine the above relationship with the general form

(63)

of the scaling law, cf. (5) and (7) as well as Lemma 1, we get the following scaling relations.

Lemma 7: [Scaling of Scaling Parameters] Consider trans-

mission over

using elements of the Poisson en-

semble

l

with threshold

. Assume that

the scaling (7) holds and let

and

denote the cor-

responding variance and shift parameters. Then

(60)

(61)

(62)

More precisely, we would like to estimate the “survival” probability

(64)

Notice that depends on the initial condition

, that

we assume to have distribution concentrated around its expecta-

tion

, and to satisfy the other hypotheses in Propo-

sition 1 (i.e., conditions I-III with ).

Recall that the Markov chain

can represent the de-

coding process by letting be the vector containing the

number of nodes of each given degree after decoding steps. If

is the number of degree-one check nodes, then is

the probability that less than

bits remain undecoded.

As already stressed in Section III-C, the decoding process

Proof: The proof is elementary and we leave it to the reader. We note that in order to prove (60) and (61) only the simplified form of the scaling law (5) is required as hypothesis and that this scaling law is proved in Theorem 1.

From the above observations it follows that we have to de-

termine the parameters

,

, and

only for

one rate . This is the reason why so far we have only consid-

ered Poisson ensembles of zero rate. In Table II we report the

resulting parameters for severla values of . Relations (60)–(62)

can be used to reintroduce the dependence upon .

VI. COMPUTATION OF THE SHIFT PARAMETER
In this section, we present the arguments for Conjecture 1, and the procedure for computing the shift parameter . We shall

is not defined for

. Here we shall neglect this

remark, and analyze a simpler class of processes that satisfy the

assumptions of Proposition 1 in the whole state space . We

will then apply the formulas derived in this case to the decoding

process (it turns out that they still make sense in this case). In

[9], it was proved that this procedure yields the correct shift

parameter, at least in the case of Poisson regular ensembles.

We begin by fixing

and will consider

with

.

We denote by the “critical trajectory,” i.e., a solution of

the density evolution (25), such that

, and

for any

,

. We call

the corre-

sponding initial condition. Motivated by the properties of the

iterative decoding process, we make the following assumptions

on the critical trajectory.

A. As

, we have

, with

independent of . This condition holds for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:23:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

492

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2009

the decoding process if the erasure probability is in the

critical window

.

B. Let

,

, be a “perturbed” critical trajec-

tory obtained by solving the density evolution (25) with

boundary condition

. As for the crit-

ical trajectory, we consider this solution in the interval

and take such that is small enough. We as-

sume that there exist a positive -independent constant

, and a function

such that

Fig. 14. A pictorial view of decoding trajectories near the critical point. The type of trajectory depicted here is responsible for the shift appearing in the refined scaling form (7).

for any

.

C. We finally assume that can be chosen in such a way

that

for some positive constant .

Notice that the assumptions B and C above can be checked on

the limit drift coefficients

introduced in Section V-A.

Condition A can be checked on the initial state distribution in

Lemmas 4 and 5.

Consider the survival probability

at the “latest” time.

As we have seen in Section V-A, the typical trajectories

are concentrated within distance

around

.

Therefore, the absolute minimum of

in the interval

is be realized for a “close” to . If the

absolute minimum is positive, the corresponding trajectory

contributes to , otherwise it does not.

In order to formalize this argument, fix

. Then

(65) Thanks to Proposition 1 we can accurately estimate the factor

. The term

is the prob-

ability that the global minimum of ,

, is

positive conditioned on

. Let us denote by time

(this is not necessarily unique) for which the global minimum

is realized. More precisely,

is a random vari-

able such that

for all

. Call

the perturbed critical trajectory defined above with perturbation

vector

. In other words, we perturbed the

critical trajectory by an

amount in order to match it

to the particular (finite ) realization of the Markov process we

are dealing with within the critical region. Concentration argu-

ments, analogous to the ones used to prove the point I of Propo-

sition 1, imply that, for a given

exist positive constants , and , and a function

such

that, for any

and

(67)

The proof is deferred to Appendix B. The content of this lemma is illustrated in Fig. 14.

The preceding result implies that corrections to the simplified scaling of Theorem 1 can be estimated through a two-step procedure: 1) Compute the probability for to be of order ;
2) Evaluate the probability for to be positive, conditioned

on a given of order . 1) Distribution of : The simplified scaling form, cf.
Lemma 1, was obtained by approximating the first factor in (65) by . The leading correction to this approximation comes from

trajectories such that

. Because of Proposition

1, the probability distribution of (second factor) is well ap-

proximated by a Gaussian with center at

and

variance of order . The probability of having

is therefore of order

. This explains why

the correction term in the refined scaling form (7) is of order

.

This argument can be made more precise by rewriting (65) as

for some positive constants and (as before, we use this symbols to denote generic constants which are proved to exist independent of ). In fact, a stronger condition holds true: by Doob’s maximal inequality [21, p. 227], for fixed
(66)
for some (possibly different) constants and . Using this fact we can prove an useful result.

The first term corresponds to the simplified scaling form. We shall hereafter focus on the second one,
. Notice that

varies much more rapidly (on a scale of order ) in

than in the other coordinates (on a scale of order ). It is

therefore useful to introduce the notation

(and analogously and ) which singles out explicitly the last

coordinates of . Since

varies on a scale ,

we can safely approximate it by setting the coordinate to

Lemma 8: Assume the same hypotheses as in Proposition 1 plus A, B, and C above. Let be a time at which the absolute

minimum of is realized, for

. Then there

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:23:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

AMRAOUI et al.: FINITE-LENGTH SCALING FOR ITERATIVELY DECODED LDPC ENSEMBLES

493

The term in curly brackets depends on only through the tran-

sition coefficients in a neighborhood of and varies therefore

on a scale of order . This point will be discussed in detail

in Section VI-A2. On the contrary,

is peaked

around

with a width of order . We can therefore

set

in the former term, and sum over , thus getting

Lemma 9: Let be distributed as above under the condition

. The process defined in (70) con-

verges as

to a diffusion process with generator

(68)

conditioned on

, and

where we recall that

denotes the last coordinates of the we used the notation

critical point. The second factor can be evaluated easily using

density and covariance evolution. Recall that, if represents

the iterative decoding process, then

is the number of

check nodes of degree one after steps. At the critical point and

within the critical window is Gaussian with mean

and variance . We therefore have

(71) . In the above formula

(69)

This formula can indeed be guessed without any computation at

all. The probability of

must be, in fact, proportional

to the derivative of the probability of having

, which

is given by (5) within the critical window.

While we expect (69), it should be stressed that it is not a

consequence of Proposition 1. Indeed, proving (69) amounts to

proving a local central limit theorem, while Proposition III-C

only implies weak convergence. This is indeed an important

technical obstacle which currently prevents us from proving

Conjecture 1.

2) Distribution of the Global Minimum: We are left with the

task of estimating the first factor in (68), and more generally the

probability distribution of conditioned on . Lemma 8

is, once again, quite helpful. The difference

is small on

the scale on which the transition rates are state dependent. This

suggests that the leading correction to the simplified scaling de-

pends on the transition rates only through their behavior at the

critical point . On the other hand,

is large on the

scale

of a single step. We can therefore hope to compute

the leading correction by approximating the Markov chain with

a continuous time stochastic process.

More precisely, define the rescaled trajectory

by

taking

In order not to burden the presentation, the proof of this state-

ment is postponed to Appendix C. Notice that the only role of

in the above lemma is to assure that stays within

a finite neighborhood of with high probability. We want

to use the process in order to compute the second factor

in (68) and therefore the distribution of the absolute minimum

of . Let us call the location of the minimum (i.e.,

. Lemma 8 implies that

with proba-

bility at least

. We can therefore safely let

and consider the diffusion process defined above

for

.

Notice that only the first derivative with respect to the co-

ordinates

appears in (71). The process

is

therefore deterministic:

for

. We

can substitute this behavior in (71) and deduce that

is a

time-dependent diffusion process with generator

(72) It is convenient to rescale and in order to reduce the above generator to a standard form
(73)
(74)

The generator for

has now the form (we keep the same

name with an abuse of notation)

(70)

(75)

for integers such that

, and interpolating A little thought shows that this is equivalent to saying that

linearly among these points. A textbook result in the theory of

with

a two-sided standard

stochastic processes [29] implies the following lemma.

Brownian motion with

. The problem of computing

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:23:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

494

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2009

the distribution of the global minimum of such a process has been solved in [15]. Adapting the results of this paper we find
(76) where

probability approaching one (as tends to infinity) the variable

node which is peeled off has (only) one check node of degree

one attached to it.5 Since

at the critical point, it follows

that

. Using again the relationship

some calculations show that

l l

and that

and

can be expressed as indicated.

with and the Airy functions defined in [1]. Putting everything together we get our final result

APPENDIX (77)
A. Covariance Evolution for a General Markov Process
In this appendix , we outline the proof of Proposition 1 under the assumptions 1)-3) stated in Section III-C.
Proof: We start with statement I. Define a Doob’s martingale
(78)

with

Note that

and

so that

(79)

A numerical computation yields

.

(81)

B. Application to Regular Ensembles

As already stressed, there is one important difficulty in

applying the general approach explained above to the decoding

process: in this case, the Markov process is not defined for

. On the other hand, both the drift and diffusion

coefficients

and

can be continued analytically

through the

plane. Since the final result (78) depends on

the transition rates only through these quantities, we are quite

confident that it remains correct also for iterative decoding

applications.

Conjecture 2: [Shift Parameter for Regular Stan-

dard Ensembles] Consider the regular standard ensemble

l

r

or the regular Poisson ensemble

l

. Then

For the regular standard ensemble
r r
r r

(80) l r define

The first term is bounded as in (27) by the Azuma–Hoeffding

inequality if we can show that

has bounded differ-

ences, i.e., if we can show that

To accomplish this task note that

(82)

where the is taken over all the and such that the trajecto-

ries

and

have

nonvanishing probability. Consider therefore two realizations of

the Markov chain which coincide up to time but are inde-

pendent afterward. Denote them by

and

,

respectively, where by our assumption

for

, but the processes evolve independently for

. Since

by assumption

and

almost surely, it follows that

Define

and

averages over times

almost surely. (overline denotes ). Then we have for

Then

(83)

Here, we approximated

by

where

l and all parameters are taken at the critical

point.

The generic equation (80) follows directly from (78), applied

to the iterative decoding setting. For regular standard ensembles

and then used the fact that

has bounded

derivative. By Gronwall’s lemma we now get

for some suitable constant . Since

for some particular choice

these expressions can be made somewhat more explicit. First, 5This is true since at this point the number of degree-one check nodes is sub-

we note that at the critical point

since with linear.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:23:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

AMRAOUI et al.: FINITE-LENGTH SCALING FOR ITERATIVELY DECODED LDPC ENSEMBLES

495

of (and some fixed “past”

) and the equiv-

alent statement is true for

it follows from (82) that

. In order to bound the second term in (81), we start with a general remark. If , are two independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) real random variables with

constant dian of

, then depending only on

for some . Indeed, letting be the me-

(84)

Since the second derivative of the Taylor expansion of
The first term vanishes because second can be upper-bounded by rizing, we proved that

is bounded, and by writing

around

, we get

, while the thanks to (85). Summa-

By using this inequality and the one obtained by replacing

with , we get

. This

immediately implies

, and therefore

. Consider now the second term in (81), and let ,
be two i.i.d. initial conditions of the Markov chain.

By the above remark (and setting

,

), it is sufficient to bound the tail prob-

(89)

for some constant . In other words, approximately satisfies

a difference equation with a precision of order . It is there-

fore not supering that

is well approximated by the solu-

tion of the corresponding ordinary differential equation. More

precisely

ability of

. By (83) we have

for a suitably large constant . The thesis follows from the con-

centration hypothesis on the initial condition (i.e., condition I

for

).

Notice that (27) implies

(85)

for some6 positive constants . Before passing to the following

points of the Proposition, let us notice that not all the assump-

tions on the transition rates

were used here. It is in fact

sufficient to assume that the drifts

are Lipschitz contin-

uous.

Let us now consider the point II. A simple computation shows

that

(86)

where we used

.

Since

, and

using (89) we get

for some constant large enough. Applying Gronwall’s lemma, this implies

(90)

(87)

where we used the shorthand

to denote the covariance of two random variables , . Con-

sider the first of these equations and notice that, approximating

by

one obtains

Notice that if we limit ourselves to assume Lipschitz continuous

drift coefficients

, the same derivation yields a slightly

weaker estimate:

.

Equation (29) is proved from (87) much in the same way, the

crucial input being an estimate on

, once again

obtained from (27). Here we limit ourselves to sketch how the

various terms emerge. We start by rewriting (87) in the form

(88)
= 2 IE 6One has in fact  p = Zj j with Z a standard Gaussian vari-
able. Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:23:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

496
With the remainders listed below

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2009
Here we defined the jump generating function

The proof of (31) is completed by estimating the various terms in (91) as shown in the expressions at the bottom of the page. We leave to the reader the task of proving these two last inequalities.

Each of these terms can be bounded separately as in the derivation of (90). Consider for instance

B. Proof of Lemma 8

In this appendix, we present the proof of Lemma 8, making

use of Doob’s maximal inequality (66). We shall prove that each of the two events considered in (67) occurs with probability

greater than

. This implies the thesis by a

simple union bound (by eventually changing the constants ,

).

Let us begin by considering the second event, namely,

. For sake of simplicity we redefine to be the

position of the global minimum of in the domain

.

The minimum for unrestricted can be treated by applying the

union bound to the cases

and

. It is also useful to

define

where we used the estimate (85). Let us finally consider part III of the proposition, as stated in
(31). It is easy to derive the following recursion for the generating function:

Equation (66) implies

(92)

where we rescaled the constants and .

Let

be a nondecreasing sequence of real numbers

(91) with

as

and

as

. A union

bound yields the second equation at the bottom of the page,

and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:23:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

AMRAOUI et al.: FINITE-LENGTH SCALING FOR ITERATIVELY DECODED LDPC ENSEMBLES

497

where we used (92) in the last inequality. At this point we choose (70), (69) using the transition rates

and the initial con-

. Plugging into the above expression we get

dition

,

. One has then just to compute the

generator

If

we get

where we made the substitution

which

implies a negligible

error. The formula (71) is easily

obtained by Taylor expansion of the above equation.

One can show that the right-hand side is smaller than

for some (eventually different) positive

parameters and and any

.

The second part of the proof consists in proving an analogous

upper bound for the probability of having

.

In fact, the proof proceeds as for the first event. One splits the

semi-infinite interval

in intervals

with

and (this time) , and then apply Doob’s maximal

inequality to each interval. We skip the details.

C. Convergence to Diffusion Process

In this appendix, we prove Lemma 9 as an application of the following statement which can be found in [29, Theorem 4.9, p. 69].

Theorem 3: Let

,

, be a

Markov process with values in and transition probability

and initial condition

. Let be the measure induced

on the space of continuous trajectories

by

the mapping

for integer and interpolating linearly

in between. Assume that the limit

(93)

exists uniformly in a compact

for functions

. Assume that the limit has the form

(94)

with continuous and uniformly bounded coefficients

( being a positive definite matrix) and

. Assume finally that there exists a unique contin-

uous time Markov process with generator and continuous

trajectories, and let be the resulting probability law on .

Then

converges in distribution to

as

.

The proof of Lemma 9 then proceeds as follows. Set and define the Markov chain in the variables , , see

REFERENCES
[1] M. Abramowitz and I. A. Stegun, Handbook of Mathematical Functions. Washington, DC: Nat. Bur. Stand., 1964, vol. 55.
[2] A. Amraoui, A. Montanari, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Finitelength scaling for iteratively decoded LDPC ensembles,” in Proc. 41st Annu. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2003.
[3] A. Amraoui, A. Montanari, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Finite-length scaling and finite-length shift for low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 42nd Annu. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control and Computing, Monticello, IL, 2004.
[4] A. Amraoui, A. Montanari, and R. Urbanke, “How to find good finitelength codes: From art towards science,” Europ. Trans. Telecomm., vol. 18, pp. 491–508, 2007.
[5] I. Andriyanova, “Finite-length scaling of parallel turbo codes on the BEC,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Toronto, ON, Canada, Jul. 2008, pp. 1893–1897.
[6] I. Andriyanova, “Finite-length scaling of repeat-accumulate codes on the BEC,” in Proc. 2008 IEEE Int. Zürich Seminar on Communications, Zürich, Switzerland, Mar. 2008, pp. 64–67.
[7] B. Bollobás, Random Graphs. San Diego, CA: Academic, 1985. [8] V. E. Britikov, “The asymptotic number of forests from unrooted trees,”
Math. Notes, vol. 43, pp. 387–394, 1988. [9] A. Dembo and A. Montanari, “Finite size scaling for the core of large
random hypergraphs,” Ann. Appl. Probab., 2008. [10] C. Di, D. Proietti, T. Richardson, E. Telatar, and R. Urbanke, “Finite
length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002. [11] C. Di, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Weight distribution of iterative coding systems: How deviant can you be?,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Washington, DC, Jun. 2001, p. 50. [12] J. Ezri, A. Montanari, and R. Urbanke, “A generalization of the finitelength scaling approach beyond the BEC,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Nice, France, Jun. 2007, pp. 1011–1015. [13] J. Ezri, A. Montanari, S. Oh, and R. Urbanke, “The slope scaling parameter for general channels, decoders and ensembles,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Toronto, ON, Canada, Jul. 2008, pp. 1443–1447. [14] M. E. Fisher, , M. S. Green, Ed., Critical Phenomena (Proc. Enrico Fermi School, Varenna, Italy, 1970, course no. 51). New York: Academic, 1971, International School of Physics Enrico Fermi, Course LI. [15] P. Groeneboom, “Brownian motion with a parabolic drift and airy functions,” Probab. Theory Related Fields, vol. 81, pp. 79–109, 1989. [16] V. F. Kolchin, Random Graphs. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1999. [17] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001. [18] J. Lee and R. Blahut, “Bit error rate estimate of finite length turbo codes,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Communications, Anchorage, AK, May 2003, vol. 4, pp. 2728–2732. [19] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Efficient erasure correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 569–584, Feb. 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:23:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

498

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2009

[20] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, D. A. Spielman, and V. Stemann, “Practical loss-resilient codes,” in Proc. 29th Annu. ACM Symp. Theory of Computing, 1997, pp. 150–159.
[21] C. McDiarmid, Concentration, in Probabilistic Methods for Algorithmic Discrete Mathematics, M. Habid, C. McDiarmid, R. Ramirez-Alfonsin, and B. Reed, Eds. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag, 1998, vol. 16, Algorithms and Combinatorics, pp. 195–248.
[22] A. Montanari, “The glassy phase of Gallager codes,” Europ. Phys. J. B, vol. 23, pp. 121–136, 2001.
[23] H. Pfister, “Finite-length analysis of a capacity achieving ensemble for the binary erasure channel,” in Proc. IEEE Inform. Theory Workshop, Rotorua, New Zealand, Sep. 2005, 5 pp..
[24] V. Privman, “Finite-size scaling theory,” in Finite Size Scaling and Numerical Simulation of Statistical Systems, V. Privman, Ed. , Singapore: World Scientific, 1990, pp. 1–98.
[25] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of various low-density parity-check ensembles for the binary erasure channel,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, Jun./Jul. 2002, p. 1.
[26] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Finite-Length Density Evolution and the Distribution of the Number of Iterations for the Binary Erasure Channel,” in preparation.
[27] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2008.
[28] J.-P. Tillich and J. Zémor, “Discrete isoperimetric inequalities and the probability of a decoding error,” Combin., Probab. Comput., vol. 9, pp. 465–479, 2000.
[29] S. R. S. Varadhan, Lecure Notes on Stochastic Processes 2000 [Online]. Available: http://www.math.nyu.edu/faculty/varadhan/
[30] H. S. Wilf, Generatingfunctionology, 2nd ed. San Diego, CA: Academic, 1994.
[31] G. Zémor and G. Cohen, “The threshold probability of a code,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 41, no. 2, pp. 469–477, Mar. 1995.
[32] J. Zhang and A. Orlitsky, “Finite-length analysis of LDPC codes with large left degrees,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, Jun. 2002, p. 3.
Abdelaziz Amraoui was born on June 1, 1978. He received an electrical engineering degree in 2000 from the ENAC, the French Civil Aviation University in Toulouse, France, and the Ph.D. degree in 2006 at the Communication Theory Laboratory of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne.
His research interests include the analysis and optimization of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes and various other topics of coding and information theory.

Andrea Montanari received the Laurea degree in physics in 1997 and the Ph. D. degree in theoretical physics in 2001 from Scuola Normale Superiore, Pisa, Italy.
He has been a Postdoctoral fellow at Laboratoire de Physique Théorique de l’Ecole Normale Supérieure (LPTENS), Paris, France, and the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute, Berkeley, CA. Since 2002, he has been Chargé de Recherche (a permanent research position with Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, CNRS) at LPTENS. In September 2006, he joined Stanford University, Stanford, CA, as Assistant Professor in the Departments of Electrical Engineering and Statistics.
Prof. Montanari was a corecipient of the ACM SIGMETRICS best paper award in 2008. He received the CNRS bronze medal for theoretical physics in 2006 and the National Science Foundation CAREER award in 2008.
Thomas J. Richardson (S’01–SM’02–F’07) received the Ph.D. degree from the Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, in 1990. His undergraduate and Masters work was done at the University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
From 1990 to 2000, he was a member of the Mathematical Research Center in Bell Laboratories, Lucent Technologies (originally AT& T Bell Labs.). From 2000 until 2006, he was at Flarion Technologies where he held the title of Vice President and Chief Scientist. Since 2006, he has been employed by Qualcomm Inc., Bridgewater, NJ, through the acquisition of Flarion.
Dr. Richardson is a corecipient of the 2002 IEEE Information Theory Society Best Paper Award.
Rüdiger L. Urbanke received the Diplomingenieur degree from the Vienna Institute of Technology, Vienna, Austria, in 1990 and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Washington University, St. Louis, MO, in 1992 and 1995 respectively.
From 1995 to 1999, he held a position at the Mathematics of Communications Department at Bell Labs. Since November 1999, he has been a faculty member at the School of Computer and Communication Sciences of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland.
Dr. Urbanke is a recipient of a Fulbright Scholarship. From 2000 to 2004, he was an Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY and he is currently on the board of the series “Foundations and Trends in Communications and Information Theory.” He is a corecipient of the IEEE Information Theory Society 2002 Best Paper Award and coauthor of the book Modern Coding Theory published by Cambridge University Press.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:23:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

