262

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 17, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2009

Multi-Gb/s LDPC Code Design and Implementation
Jin Sha, Zhongfeng Wang, Senior Member, IEEE, Minglun Gao, and Li Li

Abstract—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) code, a very promising near-optimal error correction code (ECC), is being widely considered in next generation industry standards. The VLSI implementation of high-speed LDPC decoder remains a big challenge. This paper presents the construction of a new class of implementation-oriented LDPC codes, namely shift-LDPC codes. With girth optimization, this kind of codes can perform as well as computer generated random codes. More importantly, the decoder can be efficiently implemented to obtain very high decoding speeds. In addition, more than 50% of message memory can be generally saved over conventional partially parallel decoder architectures. We demonstrate the benefits of the proposed techniques with an application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC) design (in 0.18- m CMOS) for a 8192-bit regular LDPC code, which can achieve 5 Gb/s throughput at 15 iterations.
Index Terms—Error correction codes (ECC), low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, Min-Sum algorithm, parallel processing, VLSI.
I. INTRODUCTION
E RROR correction codes (ECC) are widely applied in modern digital communication systems. Turbo codes and low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] are the two most popular ECC that have near the Shannon limit performance. Since the rediscovery of LDPC codes [2], significant improvements have been experienced on the design and analysis of LDPC codes. However, the realization of a high speed LDPC decoder implementation still remains a big challenge and is a crucial issue determining how well we can exploit the unmatched merits of the LDPC codes in practical applications.
A satisfying LDPC decoder usually means: good error correction performance, low hardware complexity and high throughput. To implement the decoder directly in its inherent parallel manner may get the highest decoding throughput. But for large codeword lengths (e.g., larger than 1000 bits), to avoid routing conflict, the complex interconnection may take up more than half of the chip area [3]. Both serial and partly parallel VLSI architectures are well studied nowadays [4]–[8]. However, none of these approaches are good for very high throughput (i.e., multi-gigabits per second) applications.
Manuscript received August 13, 2007; revised November 13, 2007 and January 21, 2008. First published November 25, 2008; current version published January 14, 2009. This work was supported in part by the High-Tech Foundation of Jiangsu Province of China under Grant BG2005030 and by the National Nature Science Foundation of China under Grant 90307011.
J. Sha, M. Gao, and L. Li are with Institute of VLSI design, KLAPEM, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China (e-mail: jeanshajin@gmail.com; gaominglun@nju.edu.cn; lili@nju.edu.cn).
Z. Wang was with School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331 USA (e-mail: zwang@ece.orst. edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVLSI.2008.2002487

In this paper, we propose a new LDPC decoder architecture targeting for multi-gigabits per second applications. The architecture has three major merits.
1) Memory Efficient. By exploring the special features of the Min-Sum [9], [10] decoding algorithm, the proposed architecture can generally save over fifty percent of message memory over the conventional design for high rate codes.
2) Highly Parallel. The architecture can normally exploit more level of parallelism in the decoding algorithm than conventional partially parallel decoder architectures [4], [5].
3) Low Routing Complexity. Through introducing a special structure in the parity check matrix, the complex message passing between variable nodes and check nodes can be alleviated by the regular communication between check nodes.
The codes suited for this kind of decoder architecture are named shift-LDPC codes.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, a brief review of LDPC codes is given. In Section III, the shift LDPC code construction is discussed. The decoder architecture is presented in Section IV. In Section V, an application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC) implementation of an 8192-bit rate-7/8 LDPC code based on the proposed architecture is presented. Section VI gives experimental results and concludes this paper.

II. REVIEW OF LDPC CODES

A. LDPC Decoding Algorithms

A

LDPC code has a Tanner graph with vari-

able nodes and check nodes in which all the variable nodes

have degree and all the check nodes have degree . The typical

LDPC decoding algorithm is the Sum-Product (or belief prop-

agation) algorithm [2]. After variable nodes are initialized with

the channel information, the decoding messages are iteratively

computed by all the variable nodes and check nodes and ex-

changed through the edges between the neighboring nodes.

The modified Min-Sum decoding algorithm [9]–[11] is

similar to the Sum-Product algorithm, with an approximation

of check node process. It has some advantages in imple-

mentation over the Sum-Product algorithm, such as less

computation complexity and no requirement of knowledge of

SNR (signal-to-noise ratio) for AWGN channels. In the modi-

fied Min-Sum decoding algorithm, the check node processors

compute the check-to-variable messages as follows:

(1)

1063-8210/$25.00 © 2008 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:20:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHA et al.: MULTI-GB/S LDPC CODE DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION

263

leftmost submatrices are arranged randomly ensuring one “1” in each row and one “1” in each column. Then for each submatrix on the right-hand side, the “1”s are cyclic-shifted up by 1 space. The “1” at the top is moved down to the bottom. Finally, we can get a regular shift-LDPC code.

Fig. 1. Example of the (2, 3) shift-LDPC parity check matrix.

where is a scaling factor around 0.75 [10], is the variable-to-check messages, denotes the set of variable nodes that participate in th check node.
The variable node processor computes the variable-to-check messages as the following:
(2)

where

denotes the set of check nodes connected to the

variable node excluding the variable node denotes the

intrinsic message of variable node .

B. Implementation Options
From the previously described decoding algorithm, it can be seen that the calculations are independent between different variable nodes or check nodes at each iteration. Therefore, LDPC codes are especially suitable for parallel implementation. In addition, the computation in the decoder is fairly simple, which means low logic consumption. The main obstacle for full parallelism is the complicated interconnection, which makes condensed chip layout impossible [3]. The problem can be alleviated through reducing the parallelism (partially parallel or serial processing) and using storage elements to store the intermediate messages passed along the edges of the graph [4]–[8]. Now the problem becomes how to reduce the complexity incurred by the message storage elements and how to speedup the decoding process.
In the following, we will introduce a new ensemble of LDPC codes, called shift-LDPC codes, to mitigate these decoder implementation problems.

B. Girth Optimization
The length of the shortest cycle in a Tanner graph is referred to as its girth. A large girth generally improves the bit error performance of the codes. Hence, LDPC codes with large girth are particularly desired.
Given a fixed block length, column weight, and row weight, the ensemble of shift-LDPC codes can have considerable variations in performance. To find the codes with large girth is an effective method to find good LDPC codes. Similar to the method used in [12], an efficient algorithm is developed for shift-LDPC codes to optimize the girth by exploiting the structured property of the codes. Normally, by using this girth optimization soft program, the cycle-4 can be easily eliminated, and the cycle-6 can be avoided for moderate code rate shift-LDPC codes.
C. Code Examples and Performance
Through extensive simulation, we found that the performance of the optimized shift LDPC codes can be comparable to the computer generated randomly codes.
Fig. 2 shows the performance comparison between a girth optimized (1008, 504) (3, 6) shift-LDPC code, the same size rate-1/2 code downloaded from Mackey’s website and a (960, 480) irregular WiMAX code as well as comparison between a (8192, 7168) (4, 32)-regular shift-LDPC code and a girth optimized QC-LDPC code [12]. It can be seen that the WiMAX code performs better due to its irregular property, and in other cases the shift-LDPC codes have comparable performance. In fact, a portion of QC-LDPC codes can be converted to shiftLDPC codes with proper column permutation. On the other hand, the performance of shift-LDPC codes could be further improved by introducing limited irregularity, e.g., to zero out some of the submatrices, which will cause tiny hardware overhead.
IV. DECODER ARCHITECTURE
In this section, we present the architecture specifically designed for shift-LDPC code decoders. For a regular
shift-LDPC code, Variable node processor units (VPU) and M check node processor units (CPU) are instantiated in the decoder.

III. SHIFT-LDPC CODE CONSTRUCTION

A. Decoding Schedule

A. Implementation-Oriented Code Construction

A regular

shift LDPC code example is shown in

Fig. 1, with

and

. As displayed, the parity

check matrix consists of submatrices. Each submatrix has

a dimension of

. The structures of the leftmost subma-

trices are random column permutations of the identity matrix.

The other submatrices are decided by the left-most subma-

trices.

The “1”s in the shift LDPC code parity check matrix are ar-

ranged just as the example in Fig. 1. At first, the “1”s in the two

First, let us discuss the decoding schedule. Fig. 3 illustrates the decoding flow for a simple shift-LDPC code. The schedule can be simply applied to other cases with different P, c, and t parameters.
P columns are processed concurrently in one clock cycle. The left-most P columns are processed first, then the second left-most P columns, and so on. The column process and the row process are interleaved. In every clock cycle, P VPUs get M check-to-variable messages and compute the M variable-tocheck messages, so that M CPUs get one message each, so each CPU can deal with one step of the check node process. The

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:20:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

264

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 17, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2009

Fig. 4. Massages iteratively exchange between VPU and CPU through the shuffle network.
Fig. 2. Performance comparisons for (1008, 504) (3, 6) LDPC codes and (8192, 7168) (4, 32) LDPC codes.

Fig. 5. Data flow of row process intermediate result.

message is quantized as b bits. Normally the quantization bits b

is chosen as 6.

Fig. 5 explains why each CPU always computes with the mes-

Fig. 3. Decoding flow for a sample code.

sages from a fixed VPU during the entire decoding process. With the simple shuffle network, CPU is connected with VPU X.

The row process of each check node is separated into steps with

whole check node process is divided into t steps. With this decoding schedule, we can finish one iteration in clock cycles. It is normally much faster than the traditional partly parallel decoder architectures [4], [5].

one variable-to-check message being processed in each step. At the first clock cycle of an iteration, having received the message from VPU X, CPU performs the first step of th row process. After that, CPU i passes the th row process intermediate result to CPU through the CPU communication network. Mean-

B. Overall Decoder Architecture

while, CPU receives the

th row process intermediate

result from CPU . In the second clock cycle of the iter-

The overall decoder block diagram is shown in Fig. 4. The ation, CPU i still receives the variable-to-check message from

critical part of this implementation is the network connecting VPU X. This message and the row process intermediate result

VPUs and CPUs. The shuffle network A transmits variable-to- in CPU are both corresponding to row . Therefore, CPU

check messages; the shuffle network B transmits check-to-vari- i can perform the second step of

th row process. At the

able messages. Shuffle network B is the same as shuffle net- same time, CPU is performing the second step of th row

work A except that the data flow is in the reverse direction. In process. Such process is continued until the whole iteration is

the LDPC decoding algorithm, CPUs only communicate with finished.

VPUs and the row processes of different check nodes are inde- For variable node processing, VPU X receives the check-to-

pendent of each other. In our shift-LDPC decoder architecture, variable message in sequential from row to

, etc.

one block called CPU communication network is added to the The CPU communication network can also ensure that VPU X

CPUs to reduce the complexity of the shuffle networks.

only need to receive its message from CPU .

For random codes, the shuffle network routing complexity is We next show the above decoding schedule more clearly

normally intolerable, while for shift-LDPC codes we introduced with Fig. 6. As an example, we will illustrate with the simple

above, the shuffle networks become really simple. Through the shift LDPC code matrix in Fig. 1. When one iteration starts, in

introduction of the CPU communication network, we can en- the first clock cycle, each CPU processes the message from a

sure that each CPU processes the variable-to-check messages VPU according to the “1”s positions in the left-most submatrix.

from and transmit the check- to-variable messages to a fixed When this one step row process is finished, the row process

VPU during the entire decoding process. This will be illustrated intermediate results are shifted between CPUs through the

more clearly later. In fact, the shuffle network connecting CPUs CPU communication network (intra iteration). In the second

and VPUs only consists of M*b wires, where we assume each clock cycle, CPU2 process the data of row 1; CPU3 process

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:20:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHA et al.: MULTI-GB/S LDPC CODE DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION

265

Fig. 6. Decoding schedule illustration.

Fig. 8. Part 1 of the check node processor unit.

nitude, second-minimum magnitude, the location of the min-

imum and the sign bits are saved. This message storage method

is similar to the method used in [8] and [9] and it can greatly

reduce the memory requirement. These row process results are

stored in three kinds of registers: old registers, new registers,

and sign registers.

It is defined that the old registers contain the row process

result of the last iteration; the new registers contain the row

process intermediate result of the current iteration. The sign reg-

Fig. 7. Message memory management in CPU.

ister group contains 32 sign bits of the variable-to-check messages. In each clock cycle, each sign register shifts in a sign

bit of the variable-to-check message and shifts out a sign bit

the data of row 2, etc. It can be seen from Fig. 6 that CPU1 of a check-to-variable message. The data in new registers and

always transmits to and gets message from VPU4; CPU2 old registers are always being passed between CPUs through

always transmits to and gets message from VPU2; etc. In brief, the CPU communication network (intra iteration and inter iter-

each CPU communicates with the same VPU in all the three ations). The signs in the sign registers are for the same VPU, so

clock cycles per iteration. Once the iteration is finished, the row they do not need to be passed.

process result will be transferred back to appropriate CPU to Figs. 8 and 9 show the architecture of CPU. Because only one

produce check-to-variable messages. The results are transferred variable-to-check message is processed in one time, the compu-

through the CPU communication network (inter iterations). tation in CPU has very low complexity. The CPU architecture

This network is a one-to-one communication network.

is separated into three parts.

Therefore, the communication between CPUs and VPUs Part 1 is the row process computation part. The work it does

required by the decoding algorithm is decomposed into three is to compare the magnitude of the input message with the cur-

kinds of connections: the connection between CPU and VPU; rent row process intermediate result, and to update the sign and

the CPU communication network (intra iteration); and the CPU index. Then the updated row process intermediate result is reg-

communication network (inter iterations).

istered and passed to its next CPU neighbor through the CPU

In the following, we will introduce the architecture of check communication network (intra iteration).

node processor applying the Min-Sum decoding algorithm. The Part 2 is the check-to-variable message computation part.

(8192, 7168) (4, 32) shift LDPC code is chosen as the design The work it does is to select the proper message magnitude

example.

according to the index value, and compute the sign of the mes-

C. Architecture of Check Node Process Unit

sage. Then the row process result of the last iteration is passed to next CPU. At the beginning of each iteration, it performs the

First of all, we show the message memory management in message scale calculation

.

Fig. 7. We only save the row process results. In addition, the re- Part 3 is a 32-bit FIFO. It receives a sign of input message

sults are saved in a compressed way that only the minimum mag- from part 1 and pops out a sign to part 2 at each clock cycle.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:20:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

266

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 17, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2009

TABLE I SYNTHESIS RESULTS

E. More Parallel Level
To further increase the decoding speed, more parallel level can be added to the decoder architecture. For example, to double the parallel level, 2*P VPUs should be instantiated. The architecture of CPU should be changed to process two messages per clock cycle. Then each iteration can be finished in t/2 clock cycles. A decoder example is designed to investigate the tradeoff between hardware cost and decoding speed.

V. IMPLEMENTATION OF SHIFT-LDPC CODE DECODERS

Fig. 9. Part 2 of the check node processor unit.

A. Synthesis Results

The technology used for this (8192, 7168) (4, 32) LDPC de-

coder implementation is a 0.18- m CMOS process with 6 metal

layers. Due to the large number of CPUs and VPUs (subma-

trix size

), the bottom-up synthesis strategy is applied.

Table I shows the synthesis result of four design examples: one-

level parallel design, one-level parallel with pipelining, two-

level parallel design, and two-level parallel with pipelining. It

can be seen that, by applying pipelining, the clock frequency can

be almost doubled, and the overhead is 81 registers per CPU.

The one-level parallel design with pipelining can achieve the

best tradeoff between the speed and the hardware complexity.

For the message storage, they are all implemented with reg-

isters. The transferring messages take

65 536 bits. In comparison, the traditional partially parallel ar-

chitecture (e.g., [4]) needs to store

196 224 bits in

total. It saves 67% of the message memory needed. The initial

intrinsic information takes

49 152 bits. It is the same

for both cases.

B. Floor-Plan and Layout

Fig. 11 shows the floor-plan and layout of the decoder chip

with a die size of 4.1 mm 4.1 mm. The logic density is 70%.

The placement of CPUs is critical to reducing the routing con-

gestion of CPU communication networks. The CPU array lo-

cated in the center of the chip is specially arranged: the 1024

CPUs are aligned with 31 CPUs per row, so that the communi-

Fig. 10. Architecture of the variable node processor unit. StoT will convert from the sign-magnitude format to two’s complement format. TtoS is for reverse conversion.

cations between CPUs can be locally routed.
VI. COMPARISON AND RESULTS Table II shows the decoder implementation results compared

with some other LDPC decoder architectures. The throughput

D. Architecture of Variable Node Processor Unit

we get is 5.1 Gb/s at a maximum iteration of 15. One parameter “Hardware Efficiency” as (Throughput Iterations/Area) is de-

The architecture of variable node processor unit is the same fined to evaluate the efficiency of each architecture. The area

with [3], [4]. It can be designed with only combinational logic. metrics are scaled to resemble 90-nm CMOS results (65 nm by

To increase the clock frequency, two level pipelines are added a factor of 2 and 180 nm by a factor of ). For the proposed

to the VPU design. Fig. 10 shows the VPU architecture.

design, the two values in area and “Hardware Efficiency” are

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:20:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHA et al.: MULTI-GB/S LDPC CODE DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION
Fig. 11. Floor-plan and layout. TABLE II
COMPARISONS WITH OTHER DECODER ARCHITECTURES

267
[7] Z. Wang and Q. Jia, “Low complexity, high speed decoder architecture for Quasi-Cyclic LDPC codes,” in Proc. ISCAS, 2005, pp. 5786–5789.
[8] M. Cocco, J. Dielissen, M. Heijligers, A. Hekstra, and J. Huisken, “A scalable architecture for LDPC decoding,” Proc. Des., Autom. Test Eur., vol. 3, pp. 88–93, Feb. 2004.
[9] F. Guilloud, E. Boutillon, and J. L. Danger, “-min decoding algorithm
of regular and irregular LDPC codes,” in Proc. 3nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Related Topics, Sep. 2003, pp. 451–454. [10] J. Chen, “Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, Aug. 2005. [11] J. Zhao, “On implementation of min-sum algorithm and its modifications for decoding low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 549–554, Aug. 2005. [12] J. Lu and J. M. F. Moura, “Partition-and-shift LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 41, no. 10, pp. 2977–2979, Oct. 2005. [13] T. Brack, “Low complexity LDPC code decoders for next generation standards,” in Proc. Des., Autom. Test Eur. (DATE), Apr. 2007, pp. 1–6.
Jin Sha received the B.S. degree in physics and the Ph.D. degree in microelectronics from the Nanjing University, Nanjing, China, in 2002 and 2007, respectively.
Since finishing his graduate study, he has been an ASIC Design Engineer with the Corporate Research and Development Group, OmniVision Technologies, Inc. His research interests include VLSI architectures and integrated circuit (IC) design for communications, coding theory applications, and image signal processing.

before/after place and route. The design results in [13] are after synthesis (do not include the layout utilization factors). Compared with the Ultra sparse code implementation proposed for UWB in [13], we can see that the proposed design can get more than 70% improvement in hardware efficiency while the higher clock speed benefited from much more advanced CMOS technology is not considered for this comparison. Otherwise our improvement will be even more significant.
From the implementation data shown in Table II, we can see that our decoder architecture is very efficient for high-speed LDPC decoder implementation.

Zhongfeng Wang (M’00–SM’05) received the B.E. and M.S. degrees in automation from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 1988 and 1990, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering from the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, in 2000.
Upon finishing his graduate study, he worked for Morphics Technology Incorporated for two years and then moved to National Semiconductor Company in 2002. From 2003 to 2007, he worked for the School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Oregon State University as an Assistant Professor. He is now a Senior Principle Scientist with Broadcom Corporation, CA. He has published numerous technical papers and has filed several U.S. patent applications. His current research interests include the area of VLSI design for digital communication systems. Dr. Wang was a recipient of the Best Student Paper Award at the IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems (SiPS’99) in 1999 and corecipient of the IEEE Circuits and Systems Society VLSI Transactions Best Paper Award in 2007. He has served as an Associate Editor for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS and is serving as an Associate Editor for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS. He has also served in various technical committees for IEEE and ACM conferences. He is a member of Sigma Xi.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron Lett., vol. 32, pp. 1645–1646, 1996.
[3] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gbps 1024-b, rate-1/2 Low-Density Parity-Check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.
[4] T. Zhang and K. Parhi, “A 54 Mbps (3, 6)-regular FPGA LDPC decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Sips’, 2002, pp. 127–132.
[5] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “A 640-Mb/s 2048-bit programmable LDPC decoder chip,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 684–698, Mar. 2006.
[6] Z. Wang and Z. Cui, “A memory efficient partially parallel decoder architecture for QC-LDPC codes,” in Conf. Signals, Syst. Comput., Record 39th Asilomar, Oct. 2005, pp. 729–733.

Minglun Gao received the B.S. degree in electronics from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 1968, the M.S. degree in the electrical engineering from Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, Anhui, China, in 1981, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from University of Dayton, Dayton, OH, in 1991.
Before 1997, he worked for an electronics company (China) and Philips Semiconductors (USA), respectively. He is currently a Professor with the Department of Physics, Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China, and a Professor with the Electrical Engineering Department, Hefei University of Technology. He is currently a Visiting Professor with Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, China, since 2003. He is also the Chief Scientist of the National IC Design Industrialization Base (Wuxi, China). His research interests include SoC-IP design methodology, MP-SoC architecture, NoC architecture, and hardware acceleration for EDA.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:20:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

268

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 17, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2009

Prof. Gao is a cochairman of the National Standard Group for SIP (China) since 2002 and has been the chair for annual conferences all of the years.

munication systems and multi-processor system-on-a-chip (MPSoC) architecture design.
Dr. Li was a recipient of the Excellent Faculty of Jiangsu Six Talent Peaks Project in 2004 and the Excellent Young Faculty of Nanjing University in 2006.

Li Li received the B.E. degree in electric engineering and automation and the Ph.D. degree in precision instrument from Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, China, in 1996 and 2002, respectively.
She worked for the Physics Department, Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China, after finishing her graduate study and is currently an Associate Professor. She has published numerous technical papers and coauthored two books. She has filed for three China invention patents. Her current research interests include the area of VLSI design for digital com-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:20:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

