Improved Low-Density Parity-Check Codes Using Irregular Graphs and Belief Propagation

Michael G. Luby’

Michael Mitzenmacher

M. Amin Shokrollahi

Daniel A. Spielman

International Computer

Digital Systems Research

International Computer Department of Mathematics,

Science Institute

Center

Science Institute

M.I.T.

Berkeley, CA

Palo Alto, CA

Berkeley, CA

Cambridge, MA

Email luby@icsi.berkeley.edu Email michaelm@pa.dec.com Email amin@icsi.berkeley.edu Email spielman@math.nlit.edu

Abstract - We construct new families of low-density parity-check codes, which we call imgdar codes. W h e n decoded using belief propagation, our codes can correct more errors than previously known low-density codes. Our improved performance comes from using codes based on irregular random bipartite graphs, based on the work of [2]. Previously studied lowdensity codes have been derived from regular bipartite graphs. Initial experimental results for our irregular codes suggest that, w i t h improvements, irregular codes may be able to match turbo code performance.

Left Degrees Right Degrees

A3 = 0.44506, & = 0.26704,
Xg = 0.14835, Xi7 = 0.07854, = 0.04046, A35 = 0.02055
p7 = 0.35282, p8 = 0.29548, pis = 0.10225, p20 = 0.18321,

Table 1: Sample code parameters.

I. INTRODUCTION

We have constructed new families of low-density codes, which we call irregular codes. The terminology comes from the fact that the parity-check matrices of our codes yield highly irregular bipartite graphs. These codes have significantly improved performance over previously known codes of this type. Using belief propagation, they can correct a substantially higher number of errors, albeit at the expense of a slightly slower running time. firther information can be

found in an extended version of this paper, available as TR97-044 of the International Computer ScienceInstitute or TN98-009 of Digital Systems Research Center.

Figure 1: From left to right, rate 1/2 turbo codes, irreg-

11. IRREGULAR GRAPHS: INTUITION AND EXAMPLE ular codes, and regular codes.

We offer some intuition as to why using irregular graphs should improve performance. Considertrying to build a regular low-density code that transmits at a fixed rate. From the point of view of a message node, it is best to have high degree, since the more information it gets &om its check nodes, the more accuratelyit can judge what its correct value should be. In contrast, from the point of view of a check node, it is best to have low degree, since the lower the degree of a check node, the more valuable the information it can transmit to its neighbors. These two competingrequirements must be appropriately balanced. Previous work has shown that for regular graphs, low degree graphs yield the best performance [l]. If one allows irregular graphs, however, there is significantlymore flexibilityin balancing these competing requirements. Message nodes with high degree will tend to their correct value quickly. These nodes then provide good information to the check nodes, which subsequentlyprovide better information to lower degree message nodes. Irregular graph constructions thus lead to a wave effect, where high degree message nodes tend to get corrected first, and then message nodes with slightly smaller degree, and so on down the line.

This intuition (which we observe in our experiments) unfortunately does not provide clues as to how to construct lappropriate irregular graphs. Moreover, because belief propagation is not yet well understood mathematically,creating the proper irregular graphs appears a daunting challenge. We mast this challenge by using irregular graphs that have been proven to be effectivefor erasurecodes that function in a similar manner [2]. In the area of erasure codes, the mathematical fram.ework has been establishedto both designirregulargraphs and prove their effectiveness.
We provide an example of the irregular graphs used in Table l. In the table, X i (pi) denotes the fraction of nodes of degree i on the left (right) hand side of the graph. Note that given a vector X and p one can construct a graph with (approximately) the correct node fractions for any number of nodes.
REFERENCES
[l] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Good Error Correcting Codes Based on Very Sparse Matrices,” available from http://wol.ra.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay.

‘Parts of this research were done while at Digital Systzms Re-
search Center. Research partially supported by NSF operating grant NCR-9416101.

[2] M.Luby, M.Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi,D. A. Spi(elman, and V. Stemann, “Practical Loss-Resilient Codes,” Pm:. 2gth Symp. on Theory of Computing, 1997,pp. 150-159.

0-7803-5000-6/98/$10.0001998 IEEE.

117

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:47:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

