IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 2, NO. 7, JULY 1998

183

A Simple Taboo-Based Soft-Decision Decoding Algorithm for Expander Codes
Albert M. Chan, Student Member, IEEE, and Frank R. Kschischang, Member, IEEE

Abstract—We present a simple soft-decision decoding algorithm that modifies Sipser and Spielman’s hard-decision sequential “bit-flipping” algorithm for decoding expander codes. The algorithm incorporates symbol reliability information and a simple “taboo” function that avoids repeated flipping of the same bit. The two algorithms have comparable simplicity, but simulations show that the soft-decision algorithm results in both improved performance and—because fewer decoding iterations are necessary—improved speed.
Index Terms— Codes, decoding, error correction, iterative methods.

I. INTRODUCTION
SIPSER AND Spielman present simple and fast “bitflipping” decoding procedures for expander codes [1], which are derived from bipartite expander graphs and can be classified as Gallager low-density parity-check codes [2]. In fact, Sipser and Spielman’s simple parallel decoding algorithm is equivalent to algorithms previously proposed by Gallager [2] and by Zyablov and Pinsker [3] for decoding low-density parity-check codes.
Sipser and Spielman’s decoding algorithms for their expander codes [1] are fast and simple but based on hard symbol decisions. In this paper, we present a soft-decision decoding algorithm for expander codes that maintains the simple elegance of Sipser and Spielman’s algorithm, yet improves performance both in terms of the decoded block error rate and in terms of computational load.

II. EXPANDER CODES

Sipser and Spielman’s expander codes [1] are derived from

bipartite expander graphs. An expander graph is a graph in

which every set of vertices expands by an unusually large

factor, i.e., has an unusually large number of neighbors. A

bipartite graph is a graph in which all vertices are partitioned

into two mutually exclusive sets such that no edges exist

between vertices in the same set. In particular, a bipartite graph

is called

-regular if all the vertices in one set have degree

and all the vertices in the other have degree .

Manuscript received May 16, 1997. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was Prof. Y. Bar-Ness.
A. M. Chan was with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3G4, Canada. He is now with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA.
F. R. Kschischang is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3G4, Canada (e-mail: frank@comm.utoronto.ca).
Publisher Item Identifier S 1089-7798(98)05582-3.

Let be a

-regular graph between a set of vertices

called variables and a set of

vertices

called constraints, where

. Let

be a function such that, for each constraint , the variables

neighboring are

. Let be a binary

block code of length and rate

. Then

the expander code

is the code of length and

rate at least

whose codewords are the words

such that

is a codeword

of for

. If is a sufficiently good expander

and if is a sufficiently good code, then

will be a

good code [1].

When is a rate

simple parity check (SPC)

code,

is a Gallager low-density parity-check code [2].

Sipser and Spielman [1] observed the best performance using

such expander codes; therefore we also focus our attention on

these codes.

III. DECODING ALGORITHMS

When a block is transmitted over a noisy binary channel,

some variables are received in error. A constraint is said to

be satisfied by a word

if

is a codeword of ; otherwise, the constraint is unsatisfied.

In the case that is an SPC code, a constraint is satisfied

if its neighboring variables have even parity. The decoder

must somehow identify the erroneous variables and then flip

them (i.e., complement their values) in order to satisfy all the

constraints and thus recover the transmitted block.

The criterion for selecting variables to flip is quite simple.

Whenever the decoder flips a variable, the unsatisfied con-

straints neighboring the variable become satisfied, while the

satisfied constraints neighboring the variable become unsat-

isfied. Therefore, if the decoder flips a variable that appears

in more unsatisfied than satisfied constraints, then the total

number of unsatisfied constraints decreases. For a variable ,

we denote by

the number of unsatisfied constraints in

which appears.

In this section, three decoding algorithms will be described.

The first two algorithms are hard-decision algorithms similar

to Sipser and Spielman’s algorithms [1], while the third is a

soft-decision algorithm.

Parallel Decoding Algorithm:

A. Identify the set of variables for which

is

largest.

B. In parallel, flip each of those variables.

C. Repeat these steps until

for all .

1089–7798/98$10.00 © 1998 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:59:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

184

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 2, NO. 7, JULY 1998

The parallel decoding algorithm has a natural sequential analog in which stepB is replaced with
Sequential Decoding Algorithm: B. Randomly select one of those variables and flip it.

Unlike the algorithms presented in [1], these algorithms

terminate when all constraints are satisfied, i.e.,

for all . This feature allows the algorithms to continue

and perhaps converge, even when no variable appears in

more unsatisfied than satisfied constraints. Although flipping

variables with more satisfied than unsatisfied constraints may

not seem beneficial, the idea behind it is analogous to making

negative progress in order to escape local minima in “slope-

descent” algorithms. It is possible that some blocks may

not converge at all; hence a maximum number of allowable

iterations of the decoding loop must be set. Should this

maximum be exceeded, the block is declared undecodable and

the algorithm terminates.

Although both hard-decision algorithms have comparable

performance and comparable complexity, the sequential algo-

rithm is considerably faster in software than its parallel coun-

terpart. Therefore, our soft-decision algorithm is an attempt

to improve the performance of the hard-decision sequential

algorithm.

We consider a binary system based on antipodal

signaling over a zero-mean white Gaussian noise channel with

sample variance . The channel output is denoted as . We

take

as a hard-decision of the corresponding transmitted

bit, and as a measure of the reliability of this decision. Our

soft-decision sequential decoding algorithm still requires hard

decisions to be made prior to decoding, but it also takes into

account the reliability of each individual decision during the

decoding process.

In the soft-decision algorithm, we replace step B with

Soft Decision Sequential Decoding Algorithm:
B. Of these variables, flip the least reliable one. That variable cannot be flipped again until iterations later, i.e., flipping that variable is ‘‘taboo" for the next iterations.

Although the soft-decision algorithm is sequential in nature,

there are two major differences between this algorithm and the

hard-decision sequential algorithm.

Unlike the hard-decision algorithm, which randomly selects

a variable to flip from among those for which

is largest,

the soft-decision algorithm selects the least reliable of these

variables. This modification improves the likelihood of flipping

erroneous variables.

However, now there is the increased probability of endlessly

flipping the same unreliable variables over and over again,

leading to a block that never converges to a valid codeword.

To help avoid this, the soft-decision algorithm uses the concept

of “taboos” [4]. Essentially, if a variable is flipped, it cannot

be flipped again until iterations later. We refer to as the

taboo length.

The algorithm can keep track of which variables are taboo

by associating with each variable a taboo number. A variable

can be flipped only if the current iteration number is equal to

or less than the taboo number of that variable. Before a block

is decoded, all variables are assigned a taboo number of ,

which means that any variable can be flipped during the first

iteration. Any time a variable is flipped, its taboo number is

set to more than the current iteration number, preventing the

variable from being flipped until iterations later.

One way to implement the soft-decision algorithm is to

maintain a collection of

queues,

, where

contains variables for which

. We think of these

queues as forming a hierarchy, with at the top, and

at the bottom. During each iteration, the algorithm chooses

the least reliable nontaboo variable appearing in the highest

nonempty , . If all variables appearing in , , are

taboo, then the least reliable variable in the highest nonempty

is chosen, i.e., the taboos are ignored. The chosen variable

is flipped, the status of the neighboring constraints is updated,

and the variables adjacent to the updated constraints are re-

queued. The algorithm terminates when all variables are in

or when the number of iterations exceeds the maximum

allowed. In the former case, the values of the variables are

output; in the latter case, the corresponding block is declared

to be undecodable.

The main difference between this soft-decision algorithm

and the sequential hard-decision algorithm of [1] is the method

used to determine which variable to flip. In our implementation

of the soft-decision algorithm, the variable to be flipped during

each iteration is located by performing an

search. (This

could be improved upon by maintaining sorted queues.) In

practice, for moderate values of signal-to-noise ratio (SNR),

we found that the size of the queues tapered toward to the top

of the queue hierarchy, making it possible to identify the bit to

flip after searching through only a tiny fraction of variables.

This search procedure makes the soft-decision algorithm

slightly more complicated (per iteration) than its hard-decision

counterpart. However, because the soft-decision algorithm

does a better job of identifying which variable to flip, as

described in Section IV, the number of iterations required by

the soft-decision algorithm is significantly smaller than that

required by the hard-decision algorithm, resulting in a net

decrease in overall decoding time for practical block lengths.

IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

We implemented a program to test the performance of the

decoding algorithms. The program obtains a

-regular

bipartite graph by choosing a random matching between -

regular vertices and

-regular vertices. As long as the

random graph is large, it will have high expansion with high

probability [1]. Without loss of generality, we assumed that

the all-zero codeword was sent in all cases.

A. Optimum Length of Taboo
The relationship between block length , taboo length , and soft-decision decoding performance was examined using a (4, 8)-regular graph. The noise variance was set at 0.3721, while and were varied. For each set of parameters, the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:59:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHAN AND KSCHISCHANG: TABOO-BASED DECODING ALGORITHM

185

Fig. 1. Decoding performance versus taboo length for rate 1/2 expander
codes, with N2 = 0:3721.

soft-decision algorithm attempted to correct 10 000 blocks. The

results, presented in Fig. 1, indicate that for a given and ,

an optimum exists. Intuitively, such a finding makes sense.

When is small, the same unreliable variables may be flipped

over and over again, thus leading to an undecodable block. The

special case

is equivalent to the case in which taboos do

not exist. When is large and the algorithm flips a variable that

is not erroneous, the algorithm will have difficulty correcting

this “mistake,” because it must wait until many iterations later

before getting the opportunity to flip the variable back to its

original correct value. Thus, a large causes a degradation of

performance.

The results also indicate that expander codes with larger

perform better (with a good choice of ), which is expected

since large graphs tend to have greater expansion.

Most interestingly though, the results suggest that the op-

timum value of is proportional to . A similar relationship

was observed using (5, 20)-regular graphs and values of

as high as 10 000, 20 000, and 40 000. The relationship can

be explained by considering the following heuristic argument.

Suppose the soft-decision algorithm desires to flip a particular

variable every so often for a given . When is doubled,

the algorithm has twice as many other variables that it can try

flipping. For optimum performance, the algorithm should now

flip twice as many other variables before going back as a “last

resort” to flip . Therefore, the optimum value of should be

approximately proportional to .

The relationship between , , and soft-decision decoding

performance was also examined. In general, the optimum value

of decreases with decreasing .

B. A Comparison of Decoding Algorithms

The hard-decision and soft-decision sequential decoding

algorithms were compared using expander codes of length

4000. Each algorithm attempted to correct 10 000 blocks for a

given code rate and . A suitable value of was chosen for

the soft-decision algorithm. The results of this experiment are

presented in Fig. 2, which plots the block error rate against

, defined as

, where is the expander code

Fig. 2. Comparing soft-decision and hard-decision sequential decoding performance for expander codes of length 4000 in Gaussian noise. Two curves are plotted for each of the code rates indicated; the leftmost curve corresponds to the soft-decision algorithm in each case.
rate. For a given block error rate (on the order of 5 10 ), the soft-decision algorithm is approximately 1.2 dB better than the hard-decision algorithm.
As mentioned in Section III, the actual number of variables searched through during each iteration of the soft-decision algorithm was observed to be only a small fraction of . Furthermore, the algorithm usually chose the proper bits to flip, so iterations were not wasted in flipping bits that were already correct. Specifically, for the expander code rates and values of
simulated, the soft-decision algorithm “wasted” 50%–95% fewer iterations than the hard-decision sequential algorithm. Thus, a slight increase in the number of operations performed per iteration results in significantly fewer iterations being performed. The net effect is a decrease in overall decoding time for the soft-decision algorithm.
V. CONCLUSIONS
The soft-decision algorithm modifies the hard-decision sequential algorithm in two main ways. First, the soft-decision algorithm uses the sample value obtained at the receiver in each signaling interval as a measure of reliability—information that the hard-decision sequential algorithm ignores. Second, the soft-decision algorithm uses the concept of taboos. The combination of both these ideas results in improved performance and improved decoding speed, while still maintaining the simplicity inherent in Sipser and Spielman’s bit-flipping approach.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Sipser and D. A. Spielman, “Expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 1710–1722, Nov. 1996.
[2] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[3] V. V. Zyablov and M. S. Pinsker, “Estimation of the error-correction complexity for Gallager low-density codes,” Probl. Inform. Transm., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 18–28, 1976.
[4] F. Glover, E. Taillard, and D. de Warra, “A user’s guide to tabu search,” Ann. Oper. Res., vol. 41, pp. 3–28, 1993.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:59:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

