ISlT 1998. Cambridge,MA, USA, August 16 -August 21
Skewness and Pseudocodewords in Iterative Decoding
BrendanJ. Frey (www.cs.utoronto.ca/-frey), Ralf Kotter (koetter@uiuc.edu) and Alex Vardy (vardy@uiuc.edu)
Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology and Coordinated Science Laboratory, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

1. FACTOGRRAPHS

Impressive performances by low-density parity-check codes and

turbocodes have inspired researchers to determine how their iterative

decoders depart from optimal decoding. Iterative decoding can be

viewed as the applicationof the sum-productor min-sum algorithmin

a graph that describes the constraints on a system of variables 11-31.

See [4] and [5] for contemporary monograph treatments. Fig. l a shows one possiblefacfor graph [6] for a 3-bit repetition

.25 .5 .75 1.0 1.25 1.5 Scale for bit 0

code C. Each check (filled disc) enforces a constraint (in this case, equality)on its neighboringcodeword bits (unfilled discs). A configuration of the bits x is a valid codeword only if all checks are satisfied. (Note that this particular graph is not “minimal”.)

Fig. 1: (a) Factor graph for an N = 3 repetition code. @) Tree code graph for 3 iterations terminatingon bit 0(the root). (c)SimulatedBER for the 3-bit repetition d e decoded by min-sumwith the channel output for bit 0 scaled.
Iv. PSEUDOCODEWORDS IN THE DECODINTGREE

11. ITERATIDVEECODINGMAXIMIZECSORRELATION In a repetition code, if xi is 1 in the original codeword, all of its

Fig. l b shows the computationtree [4] for 3 iterations of iterative correspondingsites in the tree codewordwill be 1. So, once corrected

decoding for bit 0. The most recent informationpassed to bit 0 comes for skewness, the iterative decoder finds the codeword (not just tree from its three neighboring checks, which received information from codeword) that is maximally correlated with y. When the original

bits 1 and 2, as shown in the top two levels of the tree. Earlier on during decoding, those bits received information from the bits shown at the next lower level, and so on.
It turns out that the iterative min-sum algorithm (the Viterbi form of turbodecoding) is equivalent to a noniterative min-sum _dlgorithm
on the computation tree. Let codewords % of the free code C be valid
configurationsof the bits in the tree. For_eachbit in the originalcode,
there are many corresponding sites in C. Let &(%) be the number of times that bit i in the original code has the value 1 in the tree codeword 2. For an AWGN channel with channel output column

code and the tree code are not isomorphic, there will be tree codewords called pseudocodewordsthat have no analogue in the original code. There may be a pseudocodeword whose signal-spacevector has higher correlation with the channel output vector than any of the true codewords. The skewnessdescribed in the previous section is caused by the graph alone, whereas the “skewness” due to pseudocodewords is caused by the local check functions.
After performing a fixed number of iterations, an iterative minsum decoder decodes the root bit by comparing the lowest-cost tree codeword with a 0 in the root bit and the lowest-cost tree codeword

vector y. the iterative min-sum algorithm computes

with a 1 in the root bit. For a given channel output, these two code

words compete for the decision. The costs induced by the bits where

2’ = argmax yTt(ji),

(1)

*€E

where “T”indicates vector transpose. Corresponding to each tree

these codewords differ will decide on the winner. Properties of the differencesbetween these critical tree codewordscause iterativemin-

codeword % is a vector in signal space e(%). The iterative min- sum decodingto depart from ML decoding.

sum algorithmfinds the tree codeword that maximizes the correlation The factor graph given in [5] for a Hamming (7,4) code has pseu-

between this vector and the channel output. In contrast, the itera- docodewords. If the channel outputs are corrected as described in

tive sum-product decoder averages over the exponentiated negative Scn. 111, the bit error rate becomes worse.This is because the critical

e(%) 1/2u2-weighted correlations between and the channel output. tree codewords usually differ in bits that have low multiplicityin the

tree, so that prescaling accentuates the wrong channel outputs.

111. SKEWNESS IN THE ITERATIVE DECODINGTREE
Each bit i in the original code may have a different multiplicity m; in the tree code, and as a result the correlation decoder is skewed. Let fi(jt) be the fraction of times that bit i in the original code has
the value 1 in the tree codeword Si: Is(%)= l?,(%)/mF,.rom (1) the
min-sum decoder computes

v. FUTURWEORK
We are working on statistical and mathematical models of how pseudocodewords influence min-sum decoding. We hope these models will shed light on the behavior of sum-product decoding in factor graphs with cycles.

%’ = agmax yTMf(%),

(2)

f€C

where M is the diagonal matrix ef multiplicities. By symmetry, the

decoder should base its decision on yTf(2).The multiplicitymatrix

skews the correlation decoder. By prescaling the channel outputs by

the inverses of the multiplicities,we can correct for skewness.

For a given computation tree. the multiplicities can be computed

using a recursion formula. For the 3-bit repetition code graph, each

of 2 1 and 22 appears in the tree 0.9156 times as often as xo asymp-

totically. Fig. ICshows the simulated BER for bit 0 as a function of

a scale factor applied to the channel output for bit 0, for three differ-

ent values of the AWGN Eb/No. The empirical optimal scale factor

matches the theoretical prediction of 0.9156.

REFERENCES [l] N. Wiberg, A. Loeliger, R. Kotter, “Codes and iterative decoding on
general graphs,” Eur Trans Telecom6,513-525, SepIOct 1995.
[2] F. Kschischang,B. Frey, “Iterativedecodingof compoundcodes by probability propagation in graphicalmodels,” /SAC 162,219-230, Feb 1998.
[3] R. McEliece, D. MacKay, J. Cheng, “Tuh-decoding as an instance of
Pearl’s ‘beliefpropagation’ algorithm:’ IEEE /SAC 16:2, Fe41 1998.
[4] N. Wiberg, Codes and Decoding on General Graphs, Dep Elec Eng, Linkoping Univ, Sweden, 1996.
[SI B. Frey. Graphical Models for Machine Learning and Digital Communi-
cation, MIT Press, Cambridge MA., mitpress .mit.edu,1998.
[6] B. Frey, F. Kschischang, A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and algorithms:’
seehttp: //www.cs.utoronto.ca/Nfrey,1998.

0-7803-5000-6/98/$10.001998 IEEE.

148

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:50:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

