276

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 16, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1998

On Iterative Soft-Decision Decoding of Linear Binary Block Codes and Product Codes
Rainer Lucas, Martin Bossert, Member, IEEE, and Markus Breitbach

Abstract— Iterative decoding methods have gained interest, initiated by the results of the so-called “turbo” codes. The theoretical description of this decoding, however, seems to be difficult. Therefore, we study the iterative decoding of block codes. First, we discuss the iterative decoding algorithms developed by Gallager, Battail et al., and Hagenauer et al. Based on their results, we propose a decoding algorithm which only uses parity check vectors of minimum weight. We give the relation of this iterative decoding to one-step majority-logic decoding, and interpret it as gradient optimization. It is shown that the used parity check set defines the region, where the iterative decoding decides on a particular codeword. We make plausible that, in almost all cases, the iterative decoding converges to a codeword after some iterations. We derive a computationally efficient implementation using the minimal trellis representing the used parity check set. Simulations will illustrate that our algorithm gives results close to soft decision maximum likelihood (SDML) decoding for many code classes like BCH codes, Reed–Muller codes, quadratic residue codes, double circulant codes, and cyclic finite geometry codes. We also present simulation results for product codes and parallel concatenated codes based on block codes.
Index Terms— Iterative decoding, linear binary block codes, majority-logic decoding, minimal trellis, product codes, separable (rectangular) codes, soft-decision decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
IN digital transmission systems with channel coding, it is well known that the use of reliability information on an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel gives better performance. In terms of the codeword (block) error probability, soft-decision maximum likelihood (SDML) decoding is the optimum decoding principle, provided that all codewords are equiprobable. Given a received sequence, the most likely transmitted codeword is computed. Unfortunately, the computational complexity increases exponentially with the dimension of the block code [5]. As a consequence, its practical application is limited to codes of moderate length with low dimension. On the other hand, it is well known from Shannon theory that increasing the code length leads to a better performance. Consequently, the goal from the viewpoint of decoding is the development of decoding algorithms of low complexity which allow the decoding of long powerful codes with high performance.
Manuscript received October 19, 1996; revised February 21, 1997. This paper was presented in part at the 1996 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory and Its Applications, Victoria, B.C., Canada, September 1996.
The authors are with the Department of Information Technology, University of Ulm, D-89081 Ulm, Germany.
Publisher Item Identifier S 0733-8716(98)00167-X.

One class of decoding algorithms accomplishing this goal constructs a list of candidate codewords on forming variants of the received sequence by erasing coordinates or switching the sign of coordinates with respect to their reliability. These candidate codewords are decoded using algebraic algorithms. Then, that codeword is chosen from the list which has the smallest Euclidean distance to the received vector. Forney’s generalized minimum distance decoding [6], the Chase algorithms [7], or the algorithm of Kaneko et al. [8] are representatives of this type. Other algorithms of the same type which do not use an algebraic decoder were suggested, e.g., by Snyders and Be’ery [9], Han et al. [10], or recently by Fossorier and Lin [11], to mention only a few. All of these algorithms can be regarded as branch-and-bound algorithms [12].
Another strategy of decoding is based on the modification of the received channel values by adding an appropriate symbol-by-symbol (s/s) reliability information. It can be used for decoding long codes obtained from concatenated codes, when the decoding is split into steps of moderate complexity and symbol-by-symbol reliability information is transferred between the decoding steps. This symbol-by-symbol softinput/soft-output decoding also allows a repeated (iterative) decoding of the same sequence. This kind of decoding can be interpreted as gradient optimization [13]. Recently, great success was achieved using this principle for the decoding of parallel concatenated (“turbo”) codes [1]. Thereby, the symbol-by-symbol reliability information is generated with the algorithms of Bahl et al. [14], or Hoeher et al. [15], or the less complex SOVA [16]. The theoretical description of this decoding, however, seems to be difficult. Since concatenated codes as well as terminated convolutional codes can be interpreted as block codes, this paper is focused on the iterative decoding of linear binary block codes to gain a better understanding of iterative decoding. Prior publications, e.g., by Rudolph et al. [17], Battail et al. [3], Kolesnik [18], or recently Hagenauer et al. [4] and Wiberg [19] are taken into account. We emphasize that we are particularly interested in finding a decoding algorithm providing as good as possible a codeword (block) error rate. Thus, throughout this paper, optimum decoding means SDML decoding with respect to codewords.
The organization of the paper is as follows. In Section II, the basic concept of symbol-by-symbol iterative decoding for linear binary block codes is introduced, and the computation of symbol-by-symbol reliability information for block codes is studied. Thereby, we restrict ourselves to algorithms using vectors of the dual code. An approximation of the optimum

0733–8716/98$10.00 © 1998 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:01:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LUCAS et al.: SOFT-DECISION DECODING OF BLOCK AND PRODUCT CODES

277

symbol-by-symbol reliability information which is sufficient for iterative decoding is proposed. Based on the results of Section II, we formulate in Section III an iterative decoding algorithm which only uses the set of minimum weight parity check vectors for the computation of symbol-by-symbol reliability information. In Section IV, the convergence of the iterative decoding is analyzed, and its interpretation as gradient optimization is shown. Section V deals with the computational complexity of our iterative decoding. We develop an efficient implementation using the minimal trellis representation of the used parity check set, and compare it to optimum decoding. In Section VI, the application of our iterative decoding to product codes and parallel concatenated codes is treated. Section VII illustrates the performance achieved with the iterative decoding for several classes of block codes and product codes based on them. The performance compared to optimum decoding is presented. Section VIII gives a brief conclusion.

II. BASIC CONCEPTS

A. Notations

Let

denote

a codeword of an

linear binary block code and

a codeword of the corresponding dual code

The support of binary vector is

Let be the set of minimum weight codewords

of the dual code with coordinate in their support, and

let

We assume BPSK modulation of the

code symbols which maps a codeword

into the

corresponding codeword

according

to

A codeword is transmitted over a

channel with AWGN. The received sequence is

The

estimated codeword is denoted by

and

respectively. The hard decision of an arbitrary real number

is obtained from the mapping

we obtain the a posteriori probability of on as

conditioned

(3)
Note that
B. Basic Principles of Symbol-by-Symbol Iterative Decoding
Symbol-by-symbol iterative decoding is based on algorithms using symbol-by-symbol soft-input information as well as generating soft-output information on the decoded symbols which is fed back to the decoder input (or to the decoder input of the next (first) stage in concatenated coding schemes). This enables a repeated (iterative) decoding of the same sequence. In the first iteration, the decoder only uses the channel output (1) as input, and generates soft output for each symbol. In subsequent iterations, the soft output can be utilized as input. Well-known algorithms providing symbolby-symbol soft-output are, e.g., the one of Bahl et al. [14] or the less complex SOVA [16]. In our paper, the case is considered only where the additional information is indirect, which means that it is independent of the considered symbol. In the literature, e.g., [4], this indirect information is called extrinsic information, while the direct information is called intrinsic information. The same terminology will be used in the sequel. The repeated decoding is finished if a stop criterion is fulfilled or a maximum number of iterations is exceeded. The hard decision of the final iteration gives the decoding result. All in all, the general algorithmic structure of a symbol-bysymbol iterative decoding is assumed as follows.

Let

denote the single-sided noise-power spectral den-

sity; then, together with

the corresponding

log-likelihood ratio of the channel transition probability of

coordinate is given as

(4)

(1)

Using Bayes’ rule, we obtain from (1) the corresponding a posteriori log-likelihood ratio

(2)

denotes the a priori log-likelihood ratio of Note

that the joint log-likelihood ratio

is equal to the

conditioned log-likelihood ratio

since the term

can be canceled out. We assume that the transmitted

symbols are equally likely, and thus,

As a result,

Note that in (4), the entire sequence is updated in contrast

to “turbo” decoding [1], where only information symbols are

updated.

Without going into details, error correction with such an

algorithm is based on the following considerations: An error

in position yields an incorrect sign of

In this case,

with an opposite sign can correct this error provided that

If

some additional iterations are

required until the sign of the erroneous position is switched on

condition that the sign of the extrinsic is correct also in these

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:01:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

278

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 16, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1998

iterations. If has a correct sign and has an incorrect

sign, then the hard decision of

will be correct as long

as for some iterations

does not change the sign of

Example 1 illustrates this principle.

Example 1: Consider the (3, 2, 2) single parity check code.

Assume, that

(0, 0, 0), respectively

(1, 1, 1), was

transmitted, and let

(0.6, 0.5, 0.8) be the received

vector. Obviously,

(0, 1, 0) is not a codeword.

Now, let the extrinsic information in iteration be computed

as follows:

Hence, we obtain after the first iteration

We observe that position 2 is still incorrect, and has attenuated the positions 1 and 3. On the other hand, positions 1 and 3 have “improved” position 2. After the next iteration, we obtain

Now,

(0, 0, 0), i.e., the iterative decoding has

corrected the error in position 2, and has found the transmitted

codeword.

Consequently, the key point of symbol-by-symbol iterative

decoding is to find an algorithm that computes extrinsic

information with a correct sign.

C. Optimum Extrinsic Information for Symbol-by-Symbol Iterative Decoding
We restrict ourselves to the computation of extrinsic information using codewords of the dual code.1 The optimum hard decision information on a certain coordinate, say is given by its maximum a posteriori (MAP) probability. It can be computed either using all codewords of the code or all codewords of the dual code The latter result was first derived by Hartmann–Rudolph [20]. Hagenauer et al. [4] interpreted the MAP probability as an intrinsic part and an extrinsic part, namely

(5)

with

for the iterative decoding. However, since all codewords of the dual code are taken into account, (6) certainly applies for decoding high-rate codes only. Similarly, if the extrinsic information is computed using all codewords of it can be used for low-rate codes only. Thus, for a practical application, an approximation of (6) is required. A possible approximation is proposed in the following section using the minimum weight codewords of the dual code.

D. Computation of Extrinsic Information Using Codewords of the Dual Code

In order to illustrate the principle of computing extrinsic

information using codewords of the dual code, we first describe

the concept of algebraic replicas and its extension to soft

values according to Battail et al. [3]. Using an orthogonal set

of codewords of the dual code, we get the results of Gallager

[2] and Massey [21]. Their results can be applied only to the

small class of codes with orthogonal parity check sets. We will

extend the set of parity check vectors, and with this result, we

can decode a larger class of codes.

1) Algebraic Replicas and Extrinsic Information for Orthog-

onal Parity Check Sets: Any codeword of the dual code permits

the computation of algebraic replicas. An algebraic replica is a

linear combination of code symbols generating a certain code

symbol. Let

then for all

we have

(7)

or, equivalently

(8)

where rewrite (8) as

In the field we can (9)

Assume that hard decisions are considered only, and that (9)

is computed using

in place of then the right-

hand side can be interpreted as hard extrinsic information of

coordinate with respect to the vector

The soft extrinsic information with respect to was derived

in [2] and [21] using the probability

that in

coordinates

an even (odd) number of ’s are located.

However, we get the same result from (6) by assuming that

the dual code consists of two codewords, namely, the zero

codeword and the parity check vector

(6)

(10)

Clearly, this extrinsic information is optimum with respect to its sign. As noted above, this property is basically required
1 The computation of extrinsic information using the code C is treated, e.g.,
in [4].

is a real number; its sign gives the hard decision in the field and its absolute value corresponds to the reliability of the hard decision. The extension of (10) to a set of parity check vectors orthogonal on coordinate is straightforward.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:01:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LUCAS et al.: SOFT-DECISION DECODING OF BLOCK AND PRODUCT CODES

279

Definition 1: A set of parity check vectors is called orthogonal on the th coordinate if is an element of the support of each vector of the set, but no other coordinate appears more than once in the support of all vectors of the set.
The extrinsic information obtained from the different parity check vectors of an orthogonal set is statistically independent. This is why the extrinsic information based on an orthogonal parity check set is simply the sum of the log-likelihood ratio of each parity check vector according to (10). Hence, we obtain

1) Hamming Weight and Cardinality of the Parity Check

Set: The sums in the numerator and the denominator of (6)

can be split into two parts. Let

and

respectively. Then (6) can be

rewritten as

(13)

where

(11) (14)

Equation (11) was first derived by Gallager [2] and Massey [21], respectively. It is optimum with respect to the set but in general, it does not give the MAP log-likelihood ratio of coordinate from (5). A relation between (11) and (6) is given by following theorem.
Theorem 1: The result of Gallager/Massey (11) and the result of Hartmann/Rudolph (6) coincides only for repetition codes (RC) and single-parity check codes (SPC).
Proof: See Appendix A. In general, (11) can be regarded as an approximation of (6). Unfortunately, an arbitrary set of parity check vectors introduces statistical dependencies. Therefore, the computation of soft extrinsic information is more difficult as for an orthogonal set. However, we will propose an approximation of (6) and give some plausibility arguments for it.
E. Extrinsic Information Based on the Set of Minimum Weight Parity Check Vectors
A proper approximation of the optimum extrinsic information on coordinate should have at least the following property:

Note that there is the restriction

in (13); other-

wise, a logarithm domain error will occur. Up to now, no proof

has been known to us that this assumption holds in general.

From (14), we observe that has no direct influence on

position since

Furthermore, since

parity check vectors of low Hamming weight

have a larger contribution than vectors of large Hamming

weight. Thus, we suggest to use only parity check vectors

of minimum weight and to neglect

2) Combinatorial Properties of the Parity Check Set: Both

(6) and (11) were derived from threshold decoding rules, which

is the same as weighted majority-logic decoding and defined

as follows. Let be a set of minimum weight parity check

vectors spanning the dual code.2 Now, let denote a subset

consisting of parity check vectors with a one at coordinate

Then a weighted majority-logic decision on coordinate is

defined as follows. If

(15)

(12)

and, of course, it must reduce the computational complexity

to realistic values, and should apply to various types of block

codes. The extrinsic information (6) is optimum with respect

to its sign. Thus, requirement (12) ensures that the addition

of

to coordinate improves this position whenever

(6) does. The absolute value of the extrinsic information

is equivalent to the step width of a gradient optimization

algorithm (see Section IV). Even in the optimization theory,

it is in general not clear how to compute an optimum step

width, and thus, also not for iterative decoding. Nevertheless,

the extrinsic information according to (6) at least provides an

optimum “search direction” for the first iteration.

Next, it will be shown that the extrinsic information obtained

from parity check sets depends on the following parameters.

• The Hamming weight of the parity check vectors and the

cardinality of the set.

• The combinatorial properties of the parity check set.

• The demodulation function used for the channel output.

then

otherwise,

Recall that the hard decision

of a real number is defined as

if if

Decoding rule (15) coincides with Massey’s a posteriori

probability (APP) threshold decoding [21] if set consists of

parity check vectors orthogonal on coordinate and

is computed according to (11). Furthermore, if

and

the

is computed from (6), then decoding rule (15) is

identical to the optimum threshold decoding rule of Hartmann

and Rudolph [20].

Proposition 1: If weighted majority-logic decoding de-

codes correctly, then the iterative decoding according to (4)

will decode correctly in a single iteration.

2 This is an important property because, otherwise, not only the codewords
of C fulfill the constraints according to (7), but also vectors which do not belong to C:

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:01:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

280

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 16, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1998

Proof: See Appendix A. Proposition 1 can be interpreted as follows. It is well known that the performance of hard decision majority-logic decoding depends on the combinatorial properties of the parity check set. Weighted majority-logic decoding additionally takes into account the soft output of the channel. Nevertheless, the combinatorial properties of the parity check set are still of the same importance for the decoding performance. In particular, from decoding rule (15), it is observed that error correction with weighted majority-logic decoding presupposes the computation of extrinsic information with the correct sign, just as required for symbol-by-symbol iterative decoding. Thus, the decoding performance of symbol-by-symbol iterative decoding depends also on the combinatorial properties of the used parity check set. Consequently, it is concluded from Proposition 1 that the better a parity check set is suited for weighted majority-logic decoding, the better it is suited for symbol-by-symbol iterative decoding. Well-known sets for weighted majority-logic decoding are those with orthogonal parity check vectors [21], or parity check vectors forming a -design [22]. In general, these sets consists of minimum weight codewords of the dual code. Moreover, in [23], it is pointed out that the average error-correction capability of majoritylogic decoding based on the minimum weight codewords of the dual code can exceed the half minimum distance of the code. In addition, error correction beyond the half minimum distance can be achieved, although the minimum weight parity checks may be neither orthogonal nor form a -design. As a result, in [23], it is shown that majority-logic decoding based on the minimum weight parity checks applies not only to the well-known majority-logic decodable codes, like finite geometry codes or Reed–Muller codes, but also to BCH codes and quadratic residue codes. All in all, it is concluded that the extrinsic information computed from a set of minimum weight parity checks, that are suited for majority-logic decoding, has a correct sign with a high probability, and applies to various types of block codes. 3) Demodulation Functions: Rudolph et al. derived in [17] a weighted majority-logic decoding algorithm that uses the sin( ) function for demodulation of the received symbols. They proved for this demodulation function that weighted majoritylogic decoding based on orthogonal parity check sets corrects any error provided it is within the half minimum Euclidean distance of the code. In our simulations, the sin( ) function showed a better performance in the first iteration compared to the tanh( ) function.3 However, the performance achieved after several iterations was best when using the tanh( ) function. The difference between these two demodulation functions is that they generate different absolute values of extrinsic information for the same received sequence. In principle, any function of the following type may be used for iterative decoding:

if if

(16)

If we regard the iterative decoding as gradient optimization (what will be shown in Section IV), the use of different demodulation functions leads to a different step width for the
3 For the tanh( ) function, it can be shown that the correction of all errors within the half minimum Euclidean distance is not guaranteed.

m m m ? TABLE I
E B E C PERCENTAGE OF CASES WHERE sign( ( )) = sign( ( ))
FOR DIFFERENT TYPES OF CODES

gradient optimization. Due to the different step width, it is

clear that the decoding results can be different for the same

received sequence. It has not been possible to prove which

demodulation function is optimum for a given parity check

set. However, in our simulations, we obtained the best results

when using the tanh( ) function [24].

4) Approximation of the Optimum Extrinsic Information:

We will approximate the exact extrinsic information by the

following choices of the check set, the demodulation function,

and the formula for computation. As parity check set, we

choose the set of minimum weight codewords of the dual

code

As demodulation function, we use the tanh( )

function, and as a computation formula, we use

(17)

If the set is suited for majority-logic decoding, we state

that this is an approximation which satisfies the requirement

(12). To justify our statement, we determined the percentage

of cases in which the sign of the above approximation is equal

to the sign of the optimum extrinsic information. In Table I,

the results for the (15, 7, 5) BCH code, the (31, 21, 5) BCH

code, the (21, 11, 6) difference set cyclic (DSC) code, and the

(28, 14, 8) double circulant (DC) code are shown. Note that

for the (15, 7) BCH code as well as for the (21, 11) DSC code,

the set is orthogonal. The minimum weight parity checks

of the (31, 21) BCH code form a 2-(31, 12, 44) design, and

those of the (28, 14) DC code form a 1-(28, 8, 156) design.

From Table I, it is observed that at an

dB,

the percentage of cases in which the sign of approximation

is equal to the sign of the optimum extrinsic information is

greater than 71%. At an

4 dB, this number is greater

than 97%. This corroborates the assumption that (17) satisfies

the requirement (12), in particular for higher signal-to-noise

ratios. Unfortunately, it is not possible to verify the statement

for longer codes because of the computational complexity of

the optimum extrinsic information. Nevertheless, it is supposed

that it holds for many classes of codes.

The computation formula can be derived from (11) by using

the following approximations.

• We use (11) even so the parity check vectors are not

orthogonal.

• The term is neglected.

• Since tanh

we can use the approximation ln

Remark: If necessary, we must extend the set of minimum weight parity check vectors by parity check vectors of higher weight in order to span the dual code.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:01:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LUCAS et al.: SOFT-DECISION DECODING OF BLOCK AND PRODUCT CODES

281

III. AN ITERATIVE DECODING ALGORITHM (IDA) Applying (17) to the iterative decoding concept presented in Section II-B yields the following symbol-by-symbol iterative decoding algorithm.
--

in many cases, it is far from being trivial to find these vectors

given an arbitrary code. Therefore, we regard the computation

of the minimum weight parity check set as a separate research

problem which is beyond the scope of this paper. Nevertheless,

we want to touch on this problem in Section VII, where the

simulation results for different classes of block codes are

presented.

Next, we show that the iterative decoding can be stopped

if a codeword is reached.

Theorem 2: Let

be the hard decision of the vector

in iteration Then for all subsequent iterations , the

hard decision of

is also

Proof: See Appendix A.

In the next section, we illustrate that IDA provides a

suboptimum sequence estimation.

IV. INTERPRETATION OF ITERATIVE DECODING AS GRADIENT OPTIMIZATION

Given a sequence and a parity check vector the

(18)

weighted syndrome

is

Then the generalized syndrome weight is defined as follows.

Definition 2: Given the set of parity check vectors of

minimum weight and given that spans the entire dual code.

(19)

Then, for a sequence the generalized syndrome weight

is defined as

(20)

Remark 1: Because of the statistical dependencies within

the a posteriori values obtained after the first iteration, the

repeated decoding is only heuristically motivated even if the

optimum extrinsic information is used. The unsolved problem

still is which extrinsic information is optimum after the first

iteration.

Remark 2: In contrast to Battail et al. [3] and Gallager [2],

we propose to use (11) not only for orthogonal parity check

sets, but also for nonorthogonal ones.

Remark 3: In our simulations, we found that the iterative

decoding with IDA yields the same performance as using the

MAP decision (5, 6) for the codes in Table I, although the

resulting signs of both methods are not identical in any case

[24] .

Remark 4: The parity check set

can be

represented in a minimal trellis that allows an efficient im-

plementation of IDA. Such a minimal trellis can be obtained

from the corresponding trivial trellis by merging the mergeable

vertices of the trivial one. This is treated in Section V in detail.

Remark 5: As already mentioned, IDA is especially suited

for decoding codes which are majority-logic decodable, e.g.,

codes having orthogonal parity check sets or sets building

a -design [22]. In addition, in [23], it is pointed out that

majority-logic decoding is not restricted to parity check sets

of such type. In the latter case, in fact, no minimum error-

correcting radius can be guaranteed, but the average number

of correctable errors can even exceed As an example, the

DC code (42, 21) is mentioned.

Remark 6: A parity check set for majority-logic decoding

generally consists of vectors of minimum weight. However,

The relation to IDA becomes obvious by computing the

gradient of

which is

(21)

(22) Applying (18) to (21) yields

The partial derivative of

coincides with the extrin-

sic information used in IDA except for The factor

can be interpreted as step width of the gradient optimization.

The quality of a gradient optimization depends in particular

on a proper computation of the step width and the search

direction

In classical optimization

theory, line optimization is a method for calculating an ap-

propriate step width, and algorithms like conjugate gradient

methods or variable metric methods are used to determine the

search direction (see, e.g., [25]). Although these methods are

only optimum for quadratic functions, they are known to give

good results for some nonquadratic ones also. Unfortunately,

the application of these methods to IDA yields unsatisfactory

results [24]. Thus, the computation of a proper step width is

still an open problem. In particular, if the weight of the parity

check vectors is large and the cardinality of set is small,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:01:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

282

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 16, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1998

it is clear from (18) that the absolute value of

is also

small. As a result, a large number of iterations is necessary

for decoding. For some codes, the consideration of the

term during the initialization of IDA remedies this problem.

Nevertheless, a proper weighting for the extrinsic information

which is generally valid was not found.

Now, the convergence of IDA is investigated. Therefore,

consider the following proposition.

Proposition 2: All terms

in (20) are positive if and

only if

Proof: See Appendix A.

From Proposition 2, it is a reasonable assumption that the

codewords are the maximum points of Consequently, the

iteration process will converge to codewords. A tempting con-

jecture is that IDA will reach maximum likelihood decoding if

a sufficient number of iterations is performed. This is not true

in general, even if the optimum extrinsic information is used.

Theorem 3: Iterative maximum a posteriori decoding is not

soft-decision maximum likelihood decoding in general.

Proof: A counterexample is given in Appendix A.

For a given a sequence it was not possible to show to

which codeword the iteration process converges. Moreover,

we can describe some points such that, for all coordinates,

, although no codeword was

reached. Let

(23)

and denote

Proposition 3: Given a sequence such that

Consequently,

In addition, if for all coordinates

(24)

then

, although no

codeword was reached.

Proof: A proof is given in Appendix A.

Simulations showed that if Proposition 3 is fulfilled for a

sequence then the hard decision of subsequent iterations

either oscillates between noncodewords or stays the same.

Fortunately, we found in our simulations that such points

do not influence the simulation result significantly since their

probability of appearance is very small, e.g., for the (31, 21)

BCH code, it was less than

at

dB. In all

other cases, the iterative decoding converges to codewords. We

conclude that IDA provides a suboptimum sequence estimation.

In addition, we want to emphasize that this result is contrary to

“turbo” decoding, where generally no codewords are reached

since only the information symbols are updated.

A. Further Results on the Influence of the Structure of the Parity Check Set

The computation of the generalized syndrome weight can

be decomposed as follows. Assume

then the com-

putation of the weighted syndromes can be regarded

as a nonlinear operator which maps the vector space

into i.e.,

Summing up these weighted syndromes, we have a linear

function that maps into Clearly, the operator

and with it the structure of set determines the properties of

However, is a nonlinear operator, and thus, its complete

analysis is very complicated. For iterative decoding of the (3,

1, 3) repetition code using codewords of the (3, 2, 2) single-

parity check code, however, we can compute the importance

of the structure of exactly that allows us to draw qualitative

conclusions to other cases.

Denote

and

Furthermore, the following parity check set is con-

sidered:

In this special case, is a symmetric matrix with real eigenvalues and orthogonal eigenspaces, and the generalized syndrome weight can be expressed in terms of a quadratic form, namely

The eigenvalues of are

and

The

eigenvector corresponding to eigenvalue is

Since eigenvalue has order 2, the

corresponding eigenspace is a plane, namely,

Eigenvector is orthogonal to this plane. From the theory of

matrices, it is known that a quadratic form takes its maximum

value along that eigenvector that has the largest eigenvalue.

Therefore, the maximum values of belong to and

are found as

and

which

correspond to the codewords of the (3, 1, 3) repetition code.

The eigenspace

coincides with the border

of the decision region for SDML decoding of the (3, 1, 3)

repetition code. The points where takes its minimum values

belong to this eigenspace. Therefore, the iterative decoding

gives SDML decoding for any received point. The resulting

gradient field is shown in Fig. 1. Since our aim is to decrease

the computational complexity, we use now the reduced parity

check set

for computing

Analyzing this case shows that again

the codewords of the repetition code coincide with the max-

imum points of However, we have a displaced border of

the decision region that is given by

As

a result, a suboptimum decoding is obtained since the third

coordinate has a larger influence than the other ones. This can

be interpreted as a kind of unequal error protection that is not

desirable in our case. The resulting gradient field is shown in

Fig. 2.

It is not possible to give an exact analysis of IDA with

respect to the used set in general. The above example,

however, shows that the parity check set defines the decision

regions for the iterative decoding. Dependent on this set, they

do more or less coincide with the optimum decision regions,

but we have no criterion that describes the quality of this

approximation. Nevertheless, we conclude that the influence

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:01:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LUCAS et al.: SOFT-DECISION DECODING OF BLOCK AND PRODUCT CODES

283

Fig. 1. Gradient plot with optimum decision regions.

Fig. 2. Gradient plot with nonoptimum decision regions.
of each coordinate for iterative decoding should be the same. This again shows that -designs are well suited for iterative decoding.

V. COMPUTATIONAL COMPELXITY OF IDA
The estimation of the computational complexity of a decoding algorithm depends on its implementation. In the following, we assume that IDA will be implemented on a digital signal processor. We estimate the decoding complexity by the number of floating-point additions and floating-point multiplications, and neglect binary operations.

A. Computational Complexity of the “Straightforward” Implementation

To determine the number of floating-point operations for

IDA, we assume that the tanh( ) function is stored in a lookup

table so that it does not require supplementary computations.

To compute the extrinsic information on coordinate accord-

ing to (18),

multiplications have to be executed

for each of the

parity check vectors. In addition, these

extrinsic information values have to be summed up. According

to (19), this sum is added to the received value. These steps

have to be repeated for each coordinate. Thus, we obtain for

the number of multiplications and the number of additions

respectively,

B. A Trellis-Based Implementation

A computationally more efficient implementation of IDA

is based on a minimal trellis which represents the used parity

check set. An algorithm for the construction of such a minimal

trellis is proposed. Before arriving at that, we introduce some

definitions and properties of trellis diagrams for block codes.

We closely follow the terminology of [26] and [27].

1) Construction of the Minimal Trellis for the Parity Check

Set : A trellis

is an edge-labeled digraph.

denotes the set of vertices, the label alphabet, and the set

of edges. An edge is an ordered triplet

with

and

The set of vertices is partitioned into

disjoint subsets such that every edge

beginning

at vertex

terminates at a vertex

The index

denotes the depth in The subsets

each

consist of a single vertex called the root and the toor by

Massey [28]. Consequently, the set of edges is partitioned

into disjoint subsets

where is the set of edges

terminating in An edge

is said to have initial

vertex

final vertex

and label

Furthermore, the edge is said to be incident from vertex

and incident to vertex The set of edges incident to a vertex

is denoted

and the set of edges incident from a

vertex is denoted

A path from the root to the

toor in a sequence of edges

defining

an tuple

over

In the case considered here, such an tuple is a vector of

the set of minimum weight parity check vectors over the

alphabet

We assume that different paths from

the root to the toor define different parity check vectors, and

that any path in defines a vector

Furthermore, the

trellis is assumed to be reduced [29], i.e., each vertex in the

trellis lies on at least one path from to Thus, the trellis

represents the set

Definition 3 [30]: A trellis for the set of length

is minimal if it satisfies the following property: for every

the number of vertices in at depth is

less than or equal to the number of vertices at depth in any

other trellis for

Before proposing an algorithm for the construction of the

minimal trellis, we have to introduce some definitions. For

a fixed

let us split a vector

into its

head

and its tail

Then,

according to [27], we define at the depth the tail set

as the set of all vectors with the same head

for a fixed
Similarly, the head set with the same tail

(25) is defined as the set of all vectors

for a fixed

(26)

Definition 4 [27]: A set is called separable if for every there is a partition of such that the following statement holds. Given

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:01:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

284

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 16, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1998

(27)

Note that in [29] codes which fulfill the above definition are

called rectangular. Both terms are synonymous.

The following theorem is proved in [29].

Theorem 4: A subset of a separable (rectangular) code4

consisting of all codewords of same Hamming weight is

separable.

As a result, the set of minimum weight parity check

vectors is separable. In [26], [27], it is shown that for separable

codes, the minimal trellis

exists and is unique, up to

isomorphism.

Definition 5 [27]: Vertices

are said to be left

relatives if they are connected with a vertex

by edges

labeled with the same symbol. Similarly, vertices

are said to be right relatives if they are connected with a vertex

by edges labeled with the same symbol.

Now, let be an arbitrary trellis representing the set

Merging Algorithm

Step F: For

merge all left relatives in

Step B: For

merge all right relatives in

Theorem 5: Algorithm generates the minimal trellis

representing

Proof: See Appendix A.

The expansion index

of a trellis is

[31]. Then another important property of separable

codes is formulated in the following theorem.

Theorem 6 [26], [27]: Let

be the minimal

trellis for a separable set , and let

be any

other trellis for Then

From Theorem 6, we see that the expansion index is minimum

for a minimal trellis. In the next section, we show that the

is one of two terms describing the computational

complexity of IDA, and this is why we obtain a compu-

tationally efficient implementation of IDA using a minimal

trellis.

2) Forward–Backward Algorithm: IDA can be imple-

mented on a trellis using a forward–backward algorithm

similar to the one of Bahl et al. [14]. Therefore, we introduce

an additional labeling

for each edge

namely

if if

Now, for

define

computed in a backward recursion from depth

to

respectively. Furthermore, let

such that

and let

Now the

extrinsic information required for IDA is readily computed.

We obtain for

(30)

3) Computational Complexity of the Minimal Trellis Imple-

mentation: Let the trellis represent a parity check set

Let denote the total number of vertices in and let

denote the total number of edges in respectively. The

number of expansions in is

Since at the

root respectively at the toor no floating-point operation

is performed, the total number of floating-point additions of

a forward recursion

respectively a backward recursion

is

(31)

Let us denote the total number of edges with label

by

Since a floating-point multiplication is only

carried out at edges with label

the total number

of floating-point multiplications of a forward recursion

respectively of a backward recursion

is

(32)

For computing the extrinsic information on coordinate

according to (30), we have to take into account

supplementary additions and

supplementary multi-

plications. At last, the extrinsic information is added to the

intrinsic information which requires a further addition. All

in all, the total number of floating-point multiplications and

additions for a single iteration of IDA is

(33) (34)

From Theorem 6, we observe that for a minimal trellis, the

term

in (33) is minimal. A tempting conjecture is that

and

respectively, are also minimal for a minimal

trellis, but up to now, we have no proof for this.

Note that the computation of the optimum extrinsic informa-

tion according to (13) on a trellis representing the dual code

is given as

(28)

(29)

where

The values of

are computed in a forward recursion

from depth

to

and the values of

are

4 Note that any binary linear code is separable, e.g., [27].

The above formula coincides with the one proposed by Bahl et al. [14], except that it is independent of the th coordinate.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:01:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LUCAS et al.: SOFT-DECISION DECODING OF BLOCK AND PRODUCT CODES

285

TABLE II COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY: “STRAIGHTFORWARD” IMPLEMENTATION
IN COMPARISON WITH MINIMAL TRELLIS IMPLEMENTATION

efficient coordinate ordering for a trellis representing such a BCH code, and consequently, this also leads to an efficient coordinate ordering for the minimum weight codewords of such a BCH code.
For other types of codes, we applied a slightly modified version of the heuristic algorithm proposed in [37] to find an efficient coordinate ordering for the minimum weight subcodes [24].

4) Influence of the Coordinate Ordering on the Computational Complexity: It is well known that codes obtained by permuting the coordinates of a linear binary block code are equivalent. However, the corresponding minimal trellises in general yield a different vertex complexity, as shown, for instance, in [32] and [33]. In particular, the vertex complexity of the minimal trellis for a cyclic or its extended code is worst among all equivalent codes [34]. Moreover, in [35], it is proved that the problem of finding a coordinate permutation that minimizes the number of vertices at a given depth in the minimal trellis is NP complete. An exception are Reed–Muller codes in standard-bit representation. In [33], the standard-bit representation of Reed–Muller codes is proved to be optimum with respect to the vertex complexity. For other types of codes, heuristic algorithms to find an efficient coordinate ordering are proposed, e.g., in [36] and [37].
In general, an optimum permutation of the coordinates of a linear binary block code also decreases the vertex complexity of the corresponding trellis for minimum weight parity check set However, we have to pay attention to the following theorem.
Theorem 7: A permutation of the coordinates of a linear binary block code that yields minimum vertex complexity does not, in general, give minimum vertex complexity for a subcode of constant weight.
Proof: A counterexample is shown in the Appendix. On the other hand, we have the conjecture that for Reed–Muller codes in standard-bit representation, the vertex complexity of a constant weight subcode is also minimum. Furthermore, there are some BCH codes which contain RM codes as a large subcode. This fact is used in [34] to find an

C. Comparison of the Computational Complexity of the Trellis-Based Implementation with the Straightforward Implementation
In Table II, the computational complexity in terms of the number of floating-point operations per iteration for the straightforward implementation is compared to the implentation on a minimal trellis (as well for the cyclic representation as for the best ordering found by the heuristic algorithm).
We used the abbreviation QR for quadratic residue codes, DC for double circulant codes, RM for Reed–Muller, DSC for difference-set cyclic codes, and EG for Euclidean geometry codes. In Section VII, short descriptions of DC codes, DSC codes, and EG codes are given. As we can see from Table II, the trellis implementation gains a factor in operations compared to the direct one (for the (63, 37) EG code) up to a factor 32.6 (for the (64, 42) RM code). The large gain obtained for RM codes corroborates the conjecture that the trellis complexity for constant weight subcodes of RM codes in standard bit representation is minimal.

D. Comparison of the Computational Complexity of IDA with SDML Decoding on the Syndrome Trellis

1) Preliminary Remarks: Any block code can be SDML

decoded by Viterbi decoding in the syndrome trellis [38]. The

decoding complexity in terms of floating-point operations for

conventional Viterbi decoding is

[26], [27].

For the computation of

given a generator matrix,

refer to [32]. As noted earlier, the vertex complexity of the

minimal trellis depends on the coordinate ordering. In the

following, the best ordering known to the authors is taken into

account for the calculation of the Viterbi decoding complexity.

However, for some codes listed in Table III, it was too time

consuming to use the heuristic algorithm given in [37] to find

an efficient coordinate ordering. In such cases, an arbitrary

noncyclic representation is chosen to avoid the cyclic code

representation.

In Table III, the computational complexity of IDA is com-

pared to Viterbi decoding. Clearly, the number of iterations

used for IDA gives a degree of freedom that balances the

computational complexity and the performance. We have

chosen the maximum number of iterations in IDA such

that subsequent iterations did not change the simulation results

significantly. Since the number of iterations needed for decod-

ing decreases with increasing signal-to-noise-ratio, an upper

bound on the floating-point operations is times the number

of operations per single iteration. This upper bound for the

number of operations needed for decoding is listed in Table III.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:01:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

286

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 16, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1998

TABLE III COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY: IDA IN COMPARISON WITH SDML

Fig. 3. Construction of a product code.

Fig. 4. Construction of a parallel concatenated code.

The advantages of IDA in terms of computational complexity compared to SDML decoding using the syndrome trellis are big for codes of medium rate and large length, e.g., SDML decoding of the QR codes, the DSC codes, and the EG codes listed in Table III is not practicable, whereas the iterative decoding is possible, and as we will illustrate in Section VII, it is close to SDML decoding. Note that for all codes listed in Table III, the computational complexity of MAP decoding is larger than for SDML decoding [24].

VI. DECODING OF PRODUCT CODES WITH IDA

Since the computational complexity with IDA is low for

many block codes, we can apply it for the decoding of product

codes based on powerful codes. This allows the construction

of fairly long codes that can be decoded with moderate

complexity.

Let and be, respectively,

and

linear binary block codes. It is assumed that the information

symbols are the first symbols of and the first symbols

of

Definition 6: The direct product

is an

product code

whose codewords

consist of all

arrays constructed by encoding

information symbols with and the resulting

symbols with (see Fig. 3).

We can also construct a parallel concatenated (“turbo”)

code based on systematic block codes by neglecting the

redundancy part arising from both codes (see Fig. 4).

The major advantage of a parallel concatenated code is a

gain in code rate. If we assume identical component codes,

this gain in decibels is given by

( denotes the code rate), and is plotted in Fig. 5.

Fig. 5. Code rate gain of a parallel concatenated code.

We observe that the higher the code rate of the component

code, the less is the gain in code rate for the parallel con-

catenated code, as expected. The major disadvantage of the

parallel concatenated code is the loss in minimum distance. It

is only

compared to for the product code.

For simplicity, we assume in the following that identical

component codes are used. Then, it is possible to decode a

product code

like a nonconcatenated block code since

the set of minimum weight parity check vectors

of

as well as of can be readily determined. These sets

can be constructed by either setting a single row or column

in Figs. 3 and 4 to a minimum weight parity check vector

of the component code and filling the remaining coordinates

with zeros. If

is the number of minimum weight

codewords of the component code, then the number

of

minimum weight codewords of the dual of the product code is

(35)

Accordingly, the number of minimum weight codewords of the dual of the parallel concatenated code is

(36)

The decoding of ( ) can now be performed such as for

a nonconcatenated code. However, in general, it is not clear

if the combinatorial properties of

( ) are suited for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:01:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LUCAS et al.: SOFT-DECISION DECODING OF BLOCK AND PRODUCT CODES

287

decoding with IDA, even though the combinatorial properties

of the component codes are well suited for IDA. In that respect, it is shown in [39] that the product of two one-step majority-

logic decodable cyclic codes is also one-step majority-logic

decodable. However, simulations showed that the decoding

via the set ( ) achieves worse performance compared

to the alternant decoding of the component codes described

below [24].

The decoding of

( ) via the component codes is

performed in two variants as follows. Let the received word

be represented in an

matrix. Furthermore, let us denote

the first component code according to Fig. 3 as horizontal

code and the second component code as vertical code Both component codes are again assumed to be identical.

The extrinsic information obtained from the vertical codes,

respectively horizontal codes, are the

matrices

...

The soft output computed during the iteration process is

represented by the

matrix

Decoding Variant (a):

Initialization:

Set iteration counter

and define

the maximum number of iterations

( ) if

and

(i) For the vertical codes, for

VII. SIMULATION RESULTS

In this section, we present the simulation results for different

codes classes obtained with IDA. For some codes consid-

ered in the sequel, it is not possible to simulate the SDML

performance because of the decoding complexity. For this

reason, we determined a lower bound on the SDML block

error probability (called SDML in the sequel) as follows.

• The zero codeword, respectively the -sequence, is trans-

mitted.

• The received sequence is decoded with IDA. This

yields the vector

• SDML now decides as follows: Given that

—

estimated codeword

—

estimated codeword:

estimated codeword

— If

(decoding failure): estimated code-

word:

An SDML decoder cannot be better than this bound, and

for an SDML decoder, the bound would coincide. From the

bound on the block error rate, the bit-error rate is estimated by

In the figures representing the simulation

results, we refer to as “approximation of the optimum

bit error probability.” Note that the application of this bound

requires a considerably low probability for a decoding failure.

For a low signal-to-noise ratio, this cannot be guaranteed for all

codes investigated in the following. In these cases, we compare

the performance to good convolutional codes of the same rate.

— compute

by means of a

single iteration with IDA

— update

(ii) For the horizontal codes, for

(iii)

— compute

by means of a

single iterations with IDA

— update

goto ( ).

stop.

In [40], a slightly different decoding is proposed as follows.

Decoding Variant (b):

• The first iteration is performed according to variant (a).

• For subsequent iterations, the algorithmic structure of

variant (a) is retained. However, the decoding result of the

first iteration

is saved, and in subsequent iterations, the

extrinsic information is always added to

Thus, the update

rule of steps (i) and (ii), respectively, becomes

• For the computation of the extrinsic information of itera-

tion

the “refined” values

are still used.

Note that the entire matrix is updated contrary to [4],

where the update is performed on information symbols only.

A. Finite Geometry Codes

The class of finite geometry codes is not as well known

as, e.g., BCH codes. Therefore, we give a short description

of these codes before presenting the simulation results. We

restrict ourselves to Euclidean geometry codes and projective

geometry codes. The exact definition of the Euclidean geom-

etry EG

and of the projective geometry PG

is

given in Appendix B.

1) Euclidean Geometry Codes:

Definition 7 [41]: A

th-order binary Euclidean geom-

etry (EG) code of length

is the largest cyclic code

whose null space contains the incidence vectors of all

flats of the Euclidean geometry EG

that do not pass

through the origin.

Note that a subspace of EG

is called flat. From

Definition 7, we know that the dual code of the

th-order

EG code contains the incidence vectors of all

flats

that do not pass through the origin. This fact can be used for

computing parity check vectors for majority-logic decoding

(see Appendix B). As a result, it can be shown that a

th-

order EG code is

-step majority-logic decodable [41].

In particular, we obtain for

a one-step majority-logic

decodable cyclic code. Table IV compares the parameters of

some th-order EG codes with BCH codes.

The parameters of EG codes get worse compared to BCH

codes with increasing length.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:01:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

288

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 16, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1998

TABLE IV EG CODES COMPARED TO BCH CODES

(255, 175, 17) EG Code: Fig. 6 depicts the simulations

result for the (255, 175) EG code. We observe that at a bit-error

probability of , the performance of IDA is 2.1 dB superior

to majority-logic decoding. Furthermore, the performance is

compared with the rate-2/3 convolutional code obtained from

puncturing the rate-1/2 convolutional code with generators

and constraint length

[42].

The computational complexity for Viterbi decoding of this

convolutional codes is approximately the same compared to

the iterative decoding of this block code [24]. We observe that

the iterative decoding of the (255, 175) EG code is slightly

better at low

At a bit-error probability of

it is

0.3 dB superior to the convolutional code. Note that this EG

code has approximately as good parameters as the (255, 191,

17) BCH code, but for the latter one, there exists no soft-

decision decoding algorithm of comparable complexity giving

the same performance.

(1023, 781, 33) EG Code: For the decoding of the (1023,

781) EG code, we took into account the term according to

(1) during the initialization of IDA. This was necessary since

the cardinality of the set is small and the weight of the

parity check vectors is comparatively large, so that IDA needs

an unacceptable number of iterations without the term.

The simulation result provided in Fig. 7 shows that at a bit-

error rate of

the performance of IDA is 1.6 dB superior

to majority-logic decoding. Moreover, the performance of IDA

is compared to the rate-3/4 punctured convolutional code with

generators

and constraint length

[42]. The computational complexity for Viterbi decoding of

this convolutional code is 20% less compared to the iterative

decoding of the block code [24]. For low signal-to-noise

ratios, the performance of the iterative decoding of the (1023,

781) EG is superior to the convolutional code, whereas the

latter one has its advantages at medium signal-to-noise ratios.

However, at an

4 dB, the performance achieved for

the block code becomes considerably better compared to the

convolutional code. Note that this EG code has approximately

as good parameters as the (1023, 863) BCH code, but for the

latter one, there exists no soft-decision decoding algorithm of

comparable complexity giving the same performance.

2) Reed–Muller Codes: Reed–Muller (RM) codes can be

regarded as subcodes of Euclidean geometry codes since a

th-order EG code is a th-order Reed–Muller code. As a

result, an RM

code is -step majority-logic decodable.

The codewords of minimum weight are exactly given by the

flats in EG

(64, 22, 16) Reed–Muller Code: The set of the minimum

weight parity check vectors forms a 3-(64, 8, 15) design.

Majority-logic decoding based on this set can correct up to five

errors, while bounded minimum distance decoding can correct

Fig. 6. Iterative decoding of (255, 175) EG code.

Fig. 7. Iterative decoding of (1023, 781) EG code.

up to seven errors. Fig. 8 provides the simulation results for the

(64, 22) RM code. At a block-error rate of 10 the decoding

performance of IDA is 0.1 dB inferior to SDML and

the union bound, respectively. Qualitatively, the same holds

for the bit-error rate. The computational complexity for the

iterative decoding is a factor 3.6 less than SDML decoding in

the syndrome trellis.

(64, 42, 8) Reed–Muller Code: The set of the minimum

weight parity check vectors forms a 3-(64, 16, 35) design.

Using this set, majority-logic decoding can correct two errors,

while bounded minimum distance decoding can correct three

errors. Fig. 9 shows the simulation results for the (64, 42) RM

code. At a block-error rate of

the performance of IDA is

0.1 dB inferior to SDML and the union bound is reached.

The computational complexity for the iterative decoding is a

factor 9.7 less than SDML decoding in the syndrome trellis.

Further simulation results for Reed–Muller codes can be

found in [24].

3) Projective Geometry Codes:

Definition 8 [41]: A

th-order projective geometry

(PG) code of length

is defined

as the largest subcode whose null space contains the incident

vectors of all flats in PG

Similar to EG codes, the dual code of the

th-order

PG code contains the incidence vectors of all flats. Again,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:01:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LUCAS et al.: SOFT-DECISION DECODING OF BLOCK AND PRODUCT CODES

289

Fig. 8. Iterative decoding of (64, 22) RM code.

Fig. 10. Iterative decoding of (273, 191) DSC code.

Fig. 9. Iterative decoding of (64, 42) RM code.
TABLE V DSC CODES COMPARED TO BCH CODES

this fact can be used for computing parity check vectors for

majority-logic decoding (see Appendix B). As a result, it can

be shown the

th-order PG code is -step majority-logic

decodable [41]. In particular, for

, we obtain a one-

step majority-logic decodable code, and for

a (1, 1)

PG code becomes a difference-set cyclic (DSC) code. Table V

compares the parameters of some DSC codes with shortened

BCH codes.

(273, 191, 18) DSC Code: Fig. 10 depicts the performance

of the (273, 191) DSC code compared to Viterbi decoding of

the rate-2/3 convolutional code with generators

and constraint length

The computational com-

plexity is approximately the same for both codes [24]. The

performance achieved for the (273, 191) DSC code compared

to the convolutional code is slightly better at low

At a

bit-error rate of 10 it is 0.5 dB superior to the convolutional

code. Moreover, at the same bit-error rate, the performance of

IDA is 2.1 dB superior to majority-logic decoding. Note that

this DSC code has as good parameters as the shortened (273,

Fig. 11. Iterative decoding of (1 057 813) DSC code.

201) BCH code, but for the latter one, there exists no soft-

decision decoding algorithm of comparable complexity giving

the same performance.

(1057, 813, 33) DSC Code: For the decoding of the (1057,

813) DSC code (Fig. 11), the term according to (1) was

taken into account during the initialization of IDA for the same

reasoning as for the (1023, 781) EG code. The performance is

compared with the rate-3/4 punctured convolutional code with

generators

and constraint length

The number of floating-point operations required for decoding

is 20% less for the convolutional code [24]. For low signal-

to-noise ratios, the performance of the (1057, 813) DSC code

is superior to the convolutional code, whereas the latter one

is slightly better at medium signal-to-noise ratios. However,

at an

3.5 dB, the performance of the block code is

better compared to the convolutional code. Moreover, at a bit-

error rate of 10 the performance of IDA is 1.8 dB superior

to majority-logic decoding.

B. BCH Codes
For BCH codes, it is more difficult to construct the set of minimum weight codewords than finite geometry codes. However, an algorithm for the construction of minimum weight codewords was proposed recently by Moorthy et al. [43]. It is based on purging the full code trellis to obtain a low-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:01:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

290

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 16, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1998

Fig. 12. Iterative decoding of (63, 24) BCH code.

Fig. 13. Iterative decoding of (63, 39) BCH code.

weight subtrellis. It is effective for codes of short to medium lengths, but very time consuming for long codes. Furthermore, it does not necessarily generate the minimal trellis for the minimum weight codewords. However, it is applicable to any code class, and Algorithm [Section V-B1)] can be used to construct the minimal trellis for the minimum weight codewords based on the trellis found by Moorthy’s algorithm.
(63, 24, 15) BCH Code: The minimum weight parity check vectors form a 1-(63, 8, 280) design. We observe from Fig. 12 that at a block-error rate of 10 the performance of IDA is 0.5 dB inferior to SDML . However, the computational complexity is a factor 20 less compared to SDML decoding in the syndrome trellis.
(63, 39, 9) BCH Code: The dual of the (63, 39) BCH code is the (63, 24) BCH code which contains the (63, 22) RM as large subcode. Thus, the minimum weight parity check vectors of the (63, 39) BCH code coincide with the minimum weight codewords of the (63, 22) RM code which form a 2-(63, 15, 35) design. Note that the rank of these parity checks is From Fig. 13, we see that at a block-error rate of 10 the performance of IDA is 0.6 dB inferior to SDML . However, the computational complexity is a factor 20 less compared to SDML decoding in the syndrome trellis.

C. Quadratic Residue Codes and Double Circulant Codes

Similar to BCH codes, the determination of the minimum

weight codewords for quadratic residue (QR) codes is gener-

ally far from being trivial. Again, the algorithm of Moorthy et

al. can be used. On the other hand, procedures are known to

find codewords of minimum weight, e.g., [44], [45]. Moreover,

if a binary extended QR code is constructed based on a

prime

then it is fixed by the projective special

linear group PSL which is a large permutation group [44].

In order to determine a set of minimum weight codewords,

we can make use of this permutation group. Moreover, the

PSL is doubly transitive, and thus, the set of all minimum

weight codewords forms a 2-design.

(113, 56, 16) QR Code: The set of minimum weight parity

check vectors can be partitioned into two orbits. One orbit

consists of 3164 vectors, and the other one consists of 452

vectors. Simulations showed that the use of the larger orbit

Fig. 14. Iterative decoding of (113, 56) QR code.

yields almost the same performance as the entire set. This

orbit forms 1-(113, 15, 420) design. The number of codewords

of minimum weight codewords of the (133, 56) QR code

is computed in [45] as 18 984. Based on this number, we

computed a “union bound” on the bit-error probability which

is tight at high signal-to-noise ratios. We observe from Fig. 14

that at a bit-error probability of 10 the iterative decoding

is 2.8 dB superior to majority-logic decoding. At a bit-error

probability of 10 the iterative decoding is 0.8 dB inferior

to the “union bound.” Further simulation results for QR codes

can found in [46].

Definition 9 [44]: A

double circulant code is a code

with generator matrix of the form

where is a

unity matrix and is a

circulant

matrix.

Some codes of this family have parameters close to the best

known codes, e.g., the following.

(42, 21, 10) DC Code: The set of minimum weight parity

check vectors does not form a design. From Fig. 15, it is

observed that at a block-error rate of 10 the performance

of IDA is 0.2 dB inferior to SDML . Qualitatively, the

same result was obtained for the (32, 16, 8) DC code [24].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:01:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LUCAS et al.: SOFT-DECISION DECODING OF BLOCK AND PRODUCT CODES

291

Fig. 15. Iterative decoding of (42, 21) DC code.

Fig. 16. Iterative decoding of (5329, 2025) product code and (4545, 2025) parallel concatenated code.

D. Product Codes

In this section, we present simulation results for some

product codes. First, in Fig. 16, we compare the two decoding

variants described in Section VI for the (5329, 2025, 100) DP

code of rate 0.38 and the corresponding (4545, 2025) PC code

of rate 0.45. Both are constructed from the (73, 45, 10) DSC

code. For the DP code, the performance obtained with variant

(b) is 0.2 dB superior compared to variant (a) at a bit-error

rate of 10 For the PC code, the performance obtained with

variant (b) is also superior compared to variant (a). Simulations

of other DP (PC) codes showed that decoding variant (b)

is better than variant (a) for component codes with orthog-

onal parity check sets [24]. For nonorthogonal parity check

vectors, decoding variant (a) achieved in almost all cases a

better performance. However, since an analytical performance

prediction is lacking, we are dependent on simulations in order

to find out which update rule is the best for a particular code.

Therefore, it is noted explicitly in the sequel which update

rule is used for decoding. Furthermore, we see that the parallel

concatenated code is better at low signal-to-noise ratios, but

inferior at higher signal-to-noise ratios. Such a behavior was

observed in our simulations in general.

In Fig. 17, the simulation results obtained for the following

codes are presented. A (441, 121, 36) DP code of rate 0.27

is constructed from the (21, 11, 6) DSC code, a (961, 441,

25) DP code of rate 0.46 is constructed from the (31, 21, 5)

BCH code, and a (3969, 1369, 81) DP code of rate 0.35 is

constructed from the (63, 37, 9) EG code. The performance

of these codes is compared to the rate-1/3 convolutional code

with generators

and constraint

length

We observe from Fig. 17 that the product

codes have worse performance at low

compared to the

convolutional code, whereas at

dB, the product

codes are better. For the (3969, 1369) DP code, a bit-error

probability of 10 is obtained at

dB.

VIII. CONCLUDING REMARKS
Initiated by the results of the so-called “turbo” codes [1], symbol-by-symbol iterative decoding methods have gained interest. Their theoretical description, however, is still far from being conclusive. Since any concatenated block code or

Fig. 17. Iterative decoding of (441, 121) DP code, (961, 441) DP code, and (3969, 1369) DP code.

terminated convolutional code can be regarded as block code,

this paper has been devoted to symbol-by-symbol iterative

decoding of block codes in order to get a better understanding

of symbol-by-symbol of iterative decoding methods. By ana-

lyzing the optimum symbol-by-symbol reliability information

in terms of the dual code, and by deriving the relation to

weighted majority-logic decoding, we proposed an iterative

decoding algorithm that uses the parity check vectors of

minimum weight only. We showed that this iterative decoding

can be interpreted as gradient optimization, where the decision

regions are defined by the used parity check set. The existence

of parity check sets giving the SDML decision regions could

be verified for the trivial codes. For all other codes, we could

describe points where the iterative decoding does not converge

into a codeword. Still an open problem is the computation of

an optimum step width for iterative decoding, as well as the

derivation of a tight bound on its performance. Furthermore,

we proposed a computationally efficient implementation of

our algorithm using the minimal trellis representing the used

parity check set. Based on this implementation, it was possible

to decode representatives of different classes of block codes

close to the SDML decoding performance. The decoding of

long block codes already showed at

dB a better

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:01:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

292

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 16, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1998

performance than good convolutional codes of the same rate.

In addition, the trellis implementation allowed the decoding

of product codes based on these block codes with justifiable

complexity. The decoding performance of the product codes

already showed at

dB a better performance

than SDML decoding of convolutional codes of the same rate.

Furthermore, codes with an orthogonal parity check set are

well matched to the iterative decoding. For a fixed length

and minimum distance of a code, we have obtained better

performance in comparison with the best known codes of

these parameters since no efficient decoding is yet available

for them. We think that the construction of codes matched

to the present algorithm, e.g., Gallager’s low-density parity

check codes, can be a promising way to obtain good decoding

results, particularly for long codes.

Since

for all

be rewritten as

the above equation can

The extrinsic information according to (6) for an SPC code can be computed by means of the codewords of the repetition code, e.g., [24]. This yields

APPENDIX A PROOFS
All formal statements such as theorems and propositions of this paper are proved in this Appendix.

Proof of Theorem 1

The dual code of an

repetition code (RC) is an

single-parity check (SPC) code and vice versa.

At first, we consider the computation of extrinsic information

using the repetition code. It consists of the -codeword and the

-codeword, respectively. Thus,

and (11) yields

and, thus, Obviously, the rank of the set taken into account in (6) is A necessary condition that (6) and (11) coincide is that
the set of vectors orthogonal on coordinate also has rank In the binary case, this is fulfilled for the trivial codes
only.
Proof of Proposition 1
Without loss of generality, it is assumed that the -vector was transmitted. The received vector is The extrinsic information obtained from a parity check set is then
(37)

with

If weighted majority-logic

decoding decodes correctly then for

we obtain

from (15)

With

(6) yields

(38)

Furthermore, we can write

and, thus,

Substituting the above equation into (38) leads to

Now, we consider the computation of extrinsic information

by means of an SPC code. The vectors of the set

are orthogonal on coordinate For this set, (11) yields

Now, the following two cases are considered. 1) Coordinate is correct, i.e.,
(39), we obtain

(39) From

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:01:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LUCAS et al.: SOFT-DECISION DECODING OF BLOCK AND PRODUCT CODES

293

TABLE VI COUNTEREXAMPLE ILLUSTRATING THAT s/s ITERATIVE DECODING IS NOT EQUIVALENT TO SDML DECODING

or, equivalently

According to (24) of Proposition 3, we have

With the above inequality, we get for the iterative decoding

rule (4)

as required.

2) Coordinate is erroneous, i.e.

From

(39), we obtain

Note that and, thus,

since

Hence, although

or, equivalently,

With the latter in-

equality, we obtain for decoding rule (4)

Proof of Theorem 2

Since sign

we find from (7) In terms of the field

mod 2, this is rewritten as
This implies
(40)

Proof of Theorem 3

Assume that the zero codeword was transmitted and se-

quence

was received. This may

look somewhat artificial, but nevertheless, it illustrates the

difference between SDML decoding and symbol-by-symbol

iterative decoding.

In Table VI, the different decoding results are shown. We

see that the iterative decoding finds the correct codeword,

whereas the SDML codeword does not coincide with the

transmitted codeword in this case.

According to (19), we have

and thus, from (40), it is clear that

Hence,

and obviously,

Proof of Proposition 2

Consider the hard decision of

mod 2. Assume that

we obtain

mod 2,

Assume now that

least one parity check vector such that

equivalently,

then from (7), or, equivalently, then there is at
mod 2 or,

Proof of Theorem 5

For proving Theorem 5, we have to introduce some definitions. Just as in [29], we define the past subcode and the future subcode of a vertex as

is a path from to

is a path from

to

Definition 10 [26]: Two distinct vertices and in of a trellis representing set are said to be mergeable if concatenating the past of one with the future of the other produces no paths that are not parity check vectors of Thus,
are mergeable if

Proof of Proposition 3
Without loss of generality, we assume that the zero codeword, respectively the -sequence, was transmitted. Then we can write (23) as

For separable codes, the following statements are equivalent [26], [27].
• A trellis for is minimal. • A trellis for is nonmergeable. We prove Theorem 5 by showing that Algorithm generates a nonmergeable trellis. Before doing so, consider the the following lemma.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:01:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

294

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 16, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1998

Lemma 1: Let the trellis represent a separable set If

for a

, the past subcodes

for all

are

disjoint, and additionally the future codes

for all

are disjoint, then the trellis is nonmergeable at depth

Proof: Assume that at a given depth the past subcodes

and the future subcodes are disjoint for all

Then,

obviously, the future subcode

coincides with the tail set

where corresponds to a path from the root to We

cannot merge any vertices since codewords with different tail

sets must pass through different vertices [27], [29]. Hence,

the trellis is nonmergeable at depth

Now, consider Step F of Algorithm

: Obviously, the past code consists of a single symbol

only and, thus, after merging all left relatives, we obtain two

vertices such that

for one vertex and

for the other one. Of course,

: After merging all left relatives, we obtain at most

four vertices

such that

Obviously, all past

codes are disjoint.

: After merging all left relatives, we obtain at most

vertices such that

Hence, after Step F, we have for

Similarly, we obtain after Step

B for

Note that after merging the right relatives, we still have the

property that the past codes of different vertices at any depth

are disjoint. Therefore, after Step B of the

algorithm, we have for

Thus, from the lemma above, the trellis generated by Algorithm is nonmergeable and, thus, minimal.

Proof of Theorem 7
Consider the binary (5, 3, 2) code generator matrix

generated by the

APPENDIX B A BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF FINITE GEOMETRIES AND FINITE GEOMETRY CODES

This Appendix provides a brief overview of codes-based

finite geometry. A more extensive description can be found,

e.g., in [44], [41], [47].

Definition 11 [44]: A finite projective geometry is a set

of points

together with a collection of subsets

of called lines, which satisfy the following axioms.

a) There is a unique line passing through any pair of distinct

points.

b) Every line contains at least three points.

c) If distinct lines

have a common point and if

are points of not equal to and are points of

not equal to then the lines and also have a

common point.

d) For any point , there are at least two lines not containing

and for any line there are at least two points not

on

e) A subspace of the projective geometry is a subset of

such that if are distinct points of then contains

all points of the line

A hyperplane is a maximal proper subspace, so that is

the only subspace which properly contains

Definition 12 [44]: A Euclidean geometry is obtained by

deleting the points of a fixed hyperplane from the sub-

spaces of a projective geometry. The resulting sets are called

subspaces of the affine geometry.

Examples of projective and Euclidean geometries are those

obtained from finite fields.

The Projective Geometry PG

: Consider GF

and its subfield GF The points of are taken to be

the nonzero

tuples

Let be a primitive element of GF

and let

be a primitive element of GF Every element

can be expressed as

where

There is a one-to-one

correspondence between the element and the

tuple

over GF We may consider as

representing a point in

Furthermore, let

From the above generator matrix, we obtain a minimal trellis

representing the code which has minimal number of vertices

and minimal number of edges

among

all other minimal trellises representing equivalent codes. The

trellis representing the subcode of minimum weight codewords

has ten vertices and ten edges. The generator matrix

Then the nonzero elements of GF into disjoint subsets as follows:

...

can be partitioned

represents an equivalent code The trellis representing the minimum weight subcode of has only nine vertices and nine edges. However, the trellis representing has 14 vertices and 20 edges.

Note that the

elements of

are considered to be the same point. The elements

are said to form an -dimensional pro-

jective geometry PG

over GF which satisfies the

axioms of Definition 11.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:01:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LUCAS et al.: SOFT-DECISION DECODING OF BLOCK AND PRODUCT CODES

295

Define a flat in PG

as follows. A 0 flat is a

point. If

are points not all in the same

flat, then all points collinear with and any point defined

by

form a flat. Thus, a line is a 1 flat,

and all other flats are defined recursively. Now, let

be an tuple over GF(2), and let be a

primitive element of GF

Then the components of

may be numbered with the nonzero elements of GF

such that is numbered

Definition 13: Let be a flat in PG

The com-

ponents of the incidence vector

of the

flat are defined such that

where is the location number of the component

A

th-order PG code is then defined as given in

Definition 8.

Definition 14 [41]: Let be a nonnegative integer less than

Its expression in radix form is

with denoted

Then the weight of is defined as

such that

where is the location number of the component

A

th-order EG code is then defined as given in

Definition 7.

Theorem 9 [41, p. 229]: Let be a primitive element of

GF

Let be a nonnegative integer less than

The generator polynomial

of the

th-order EG code

of length

has as a root if and only if

Construction of Parity Check Sets for EG Codes: The null

space of a

th-order EG code contains all of the

flats of EG

not passing through the origin. Let be

a flat passing through

Then there are

flats which intersect on

[41, p. 230]. Since any

point outside

is in one and only one of the

flats

that intersect on in

the incidence vectors of these

flats are orthogonal on the digits at locations that

correspond to the points in

Moreover, let

be a

flat passing through

Then there are

The following theorem characterizes the root of the generator

polynomial of a

th-order PG code.

Theorem 8 [41, p. 243]: Let be a primitive element

of GF

Let be a nonnegative integer less than

The generator polynomial

of the

th-

order PG code of length

has as a

root if and only if is divisible by

and

flats not passing through the origin which intersect on

in

Again, the incidence vectors of these

flats are orthogonal on the digits at locations corresponding

to the points in

This process can be continued until

Thus, a th-order EG code is

-step majority-

logic decodable.

The construction of parity check sets for projective geome-

try codes is similar to Euclidean geometry codes. An extensive

description can be found in [41].

with

The Euclidean Geometry EG

: The Euclidean ge-

ometry EG

is obtained from the projective geometry

PG

by deleting the points of a hyperplane Thereby,

it does not matter which one is deleted, but it is convenient

to consider the excluded hyperplane as the one consisting of

all points with

Then we are left with the points

whose coordinates can be taken to

Since there are

points in

PG

and the

points of a hyperplane

were removed, there remain

points which are said to

form the Euclidean geometry EG

These points can

be labeled by the -tuples

with

The zero tuple is called the origin of EG

Again, each

point can be represented by where is now a primitive

element of GF

Let

be a

tuple over GF(2). Then the components of may

be numbered with the nonzero elements of GF

such that

is numbered

Definition 15: Let be a flat in

that does not pass

through the origin

The components of the incidence

vector

of the flat are defined

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank Prof. Zyablov and Dr. Sidorenko from the Russian Academy of Science, Dr. Ko¨tter from the University of Linko¨ping, Sweden, and the anonymous reviewers for helpful suggestions and comments during the preparation of this work.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes(1),” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Geneva, Switzerland, 1993, pp. 1064–1079.
[2] R. Gallager, “Low density parity–check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[3] G. Battail, M. C. Decouvelaere, and P. Godlewski, “Replication decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-25, pp. 332–345, May 1979.
[4] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of binary block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 429–446, Mar. 1996.
[5] A. Lafourcade and A. Vardy, “Asymptotically good codes have infinite trellis complexity,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 41, pp. 555–559, 1995.
[6] G. D. Forney, “Generalized minimum distance decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-12, pp. 125–131, Apr. 1966.
[7] D. Chase, “A class of algorithms for decoding block codes with channel measurement information,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-18, pp. 170–182, Jan. 1972.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:01:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

296

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 16, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1998

[8] T. Kaneko, T. Nishijima, H. Inazumi, and S. Hirasawa, “An efficient

maximum-likelihood-decoding algorithm for linear block codes with

algebraic decoder,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 40, pp. 320–327,

Mar. 1994.

[9] J. Snyders and Y. Be0ery, “Maximum likelihood soft decoding of binary

block codes and decoders for the Golay codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform.

Theory, vol. 35, pp. 963–975, Sept. 1989.

[10] Y. S. Han, C. R. P. Hartmann, and C. C. Chen, “Efficient priority-

first search maximum likelihood soft-decision decoding of linear block

codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 39, pp. 1514–1523, Sept. 1993.

[11] M. P. Fossorier and S. Lin, “Computationally efficient soft-decision

decoding of linear block codes based on ordered statistics,” IEEE Trans.

Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 738–751, May 1996.

[12] G. L. Nemhauser and L. A. Wolsey, Integer and Combinatorial Opti-

mization. New York: Wiley, 1988.

[13] R. Lucas, M. Bossert, and M. Breitbach, “Iterative soft-decision de-

coding of linear binary block codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inform.

Theory Appl., Sept. 1996, pp. 811–814.

[14] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of

linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inform.

Theory, vol. IT-20, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.

[15] P. Hoeher, P. Robertson, and E. Villebrun, “Optimal and sub-optimal

maximum a posteriori algorithms suitable for turbo decoding,” Euro-

pean Trans. Telecommun., to be published.

[16] J. Hagenauer and P. Hoeher, “A Viterbi algorithm with soft-decision

outputs and its applications,” in Conf. Rec. GLOBECOM 89, Dallas,

TX, vol. 3, Nov. 1989, pp. 47.1.1–47.1.7.

[17] L. D. Rudolph, C. R. Hartmann, T. Hwang, and N. Duc, “Algebraic

analog decoding of linear binary codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory,

vol. IT-25, pp. 430–440, July 1979.

[18] V. D. Kolesnik, “Iterative code constructions and multistep decoding,”

Sci. Rep., Dec. 1993, DLR, NT, Oberpfaffenhofen, Germany.

[19] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation,

Linko¨ping Univ., Linko¨ping, Sweden, 1996.

[20] C. R. P. Hartmann and L. D. Rudolph, “An optimum symbol-by-symbol

decoding rule for linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-22,

pp. 514–517, Sept. 1976.

[21] J. L. Massey, Threshold Decoding. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.

[22] M. Rahman and I. F. Blake, “Majority logic decoding using com-

binatorial designs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, pp. 585–587, Sept.

1975.

[23] M. Bossert and F. Herget, “Hard- and soft-decision decoding beyond the

half minimum distance—An algorithm for linear codes,” IEEE Trans.

Inform. Theory, vol. IT-32, pp. 709–714, Sept. 1986.

[24] R. Lucas, “On iterative soft-decision decoding of linear binary block

codes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. Ulm, Germany, 1997.

[25] M. Papageorgiou, Optimierung. Mu¨nchen/Wien, Germany: R. Olden-

burg Verlag, 1996.

[26] A. Vardy and F. Kschischang, “Proof of a conjecture of McEliece

regarding the expansion index of the minimal trellis,” IEEE Trans.

Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 2027–2034, Nov. 1996.

[27] V. Sidorenko, “The Euler characteristic of the minimal code trellis

is maximum,” Probl. Inform. Transm., vol. 33, pp. 87–93, Jan.–Mar.

1997.

[28] J. L. Massey, “Foundations and methods of channel encoding,” in Int.

Conf. Inform. Theory Syst., vol. 65. Berlin, Germany: NTG Fach-

berichte, 1978, pp. 148–157.

[29] F. Kschischang, “The trellis structure of maximal fixed-cost codes,”

IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 1828–1838, Nov. 1996.

[30] D. J. Muder, “Minimal trellises for block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform.

Theory, vol. 34, pp. 1049–1053, 1988.

[31] R. J. McEliece, “On the B.J.C.R. trellises for linear block codes,” IEEE

Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 1072–1092, July 1996.

[32] G. D. Forney, “Dimension/length profiles and trellis complexity of linear

block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 40, pp. 1741–1752, Nov.

1994.

[33] T. Kasami, T. Takata, T. Fuijwara, and S. Lin, “On the optimum bit

orders with respect to the state complexity of trellis diagrams for binary

linear block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 39, pp. 242–245,

1993.

[34]

, “On complexity of trellis structure of linear block codes,” IEEE

Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 39, pp. 1057–1064, 1993.

[35] G. B. Horn and F. Kschischang, “On the intractability of permuting a

block code to minimize trellis complexity,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory,

vol. 42, pp. 2024–2047, Nov. 1996.

[36] A. Engelhardt, M. Bossert, and J. Maucher, “Heuristic algorithms for

ordering a linear block code to reduce the number of nodes of a minimal

trellis,” submitted for publication.

[37] F. R. Kschischang and G. B. Horn, “A heuristic for ordering a linear block code to minimize trellis state complexity,” in Proc. 32nd Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Contr., Computing, Sept. 1994, pp. 75–84.
[38] J. K. Wolf, “Efficient maximum likelihood decoding of linear block codes using a trellis,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-24, pp. 76–80, Jan. 1978.
[39] S. Lin and E. J. Weldon, “Further results on cyclic product codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-16, pp. 452–459, July 1970.
[40] J. Lodge, R. Young, P. Hoeher, and J. Hagenauer, “Separable MAP filters for the decoding of product and concatenated codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. ICC’93, Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 1740–1745.
[41] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Error Control Coding, Fundamentals and Applications. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1983.
[42] Y. Yasuda, K. Kashiki, and Y. Hirata, “High rate punctured convolutional codes for soft-decision Viterbi decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 32, pp. 315–319, Mar. 1984.
[43] H. T. Moorthy, S. Lin, and T. Kasami, “Soft decision decoding of binary linear block codes based on iterative search algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 43, pp. 1030–1039, May 1997.
[44] F. J. MacWilliams and N. J. A. Sloane, The Theory of Error-Correcting Codes. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North-Holland, 1977.
[45] D. Coppersmith and G. Seroussi, “On the minimum distance of some quadratic residue codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-30, pp. 407–411, Mar. 1984.
[46] R. Lucas, M. Bossert, M. Breitbach, and H. Griesser, “On iterative softdecision decoding of binary quadratic residue codes,” in Proc. 5th Int. Workshop Algebraic and Combinatorial Coding Theory, June 1996, pp. 184–189.
[47] R. E. Blahut, Theory and Practice of Error Control Codes. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1984.
Rainer Lucas was born in Ulm, Germany, in 1965. He received the Dipl.-Ing. degree in electrical engineering from the Technical University of Karlsruhe, Germany, in 1992, and the Ph.D. degree from the University of Ulm, Germany, in 1997.
He is a Research Assistant in the Department of Information Technology, University of Ulm, Germany. His main research interests lie in the area of soft-decision decoding of block codes.
Martin Bossert (M’94) received the Dipl.-Ing. degree in electrical engineering from the Technical University of Karlsruhe, Germany, in 1981, and the Ph.D. degree from the Technical University of Darmstadt, Germany, in 1987.
After a one-year DFG scholarship at Linko¨ping University, Sweden, he joined AEG Mobile Communication, where he was, among others, involved in the specification and development of the GSM system. Since 1993, he has been a Professor in the Department of Information Technology, University of Ulm, Germany. His main research areas concern secure and reliable data transmission, especially generalized concatenation/coded modulation, code constructions for block and convolutional codes, and soft-decision decoding.
Markus Breitbach was born in Andernach, Germany, in 1965. He received the Dipl.-Ing. degree in electrical and computer engineering from the Aachen University of Technology, Aachen, Germany, in 1991, and the Ph.D. degree from the University of Ulm, Germany, in 1997.
He is a Research Assistant in the Department of Information Technology, University of Ulm. His research interests include error-correction coding for multidimensional data transmission media, communication network protocols, and network security.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:01:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

