IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 16, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1998

153

Early Detection and Trellis Splicing: Reduced-Complexity Iterative Decoding
Brendan J. Frey and Frank R. Kschischang, Member, IEEE

Abstract— The excellent bit-error rate (BER) performance of new iterative decoding algorithms (e.g., turbodecoding) is achieved at the expense of a computationally burdensome decoding procedure. In this paper, we present a method called early detection that can be used to reduce the computational complexity of a variety of iterative decoders. Using a confidence criterion, some information symbols, state variables, and codeword symbols are detected early on during decoding. In this way, the computational complexity of further processing is reduced with a controllable increase in BER. We present an easily implemented instance of this algorithm, called trellis splicing, that can be used with turbodecoding. For a simulated system of this type, we obtain a reduction in computational complexity of up to a factor of four, relative to a turbodecoder that obtains the same increase in BER by performing fewer iterations.

I. INTRODUCTION
EXPLODING interest in the theory and application of iterative decoding algorithms was ignited by the impressive bit-error rate (BER) performance of the turbodecoding algorithm [1]–[16]. In this paper, we present a simple method for reducing the computational complexity of such iterative decoders. The new method stems from our observation that the values of certain information symbols, state variables, and codeword symbols often can be ascertained reliably early on in the decoding process. By identifying such candidates and detecting them early (i.e., clamping them early on in the decoding process), we reduce the computational complexity of subsequent decoding iterations. We refer to this general method as early detection.
One way to view early detection is as a refinement of a block-oriented stopping criterion used to terminate the iterative process in iterative decoders. For example, Hagenauer et al. [9] proposed monitoring the relative entropy between the set of information bit reliabilities for the current iteration and the previous iteration. When the change in this relative entropy falls below a threshold, the iterative decoding process is terminated. The basic idea is that iterative decoding should stop when the decoder’s reliability values are stable. Blockoriented stopping criteria lead to iterative decoders that are more efficient than fixed-complexity iterative decoders since
Manuscript received September 15, 1996; revised May 2, 1997. This paper was presented in part at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Ulm, Germany, July 1997.
B. J. Frey was with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ont., M5S 3G4 Canada. He is now with the Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801 USA.
F. R. Kschischang is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ont., M5S 3G4 Canada.
Publisher Item Identifier S 0733-8716(98)00162-0.

Fig. 1. Plot of the log-probability ratio versus iteration number for the correct value of each information bit in a randomly selected set of 100 bits within the same block of 10 000 bits.

the stopping criteria effectively allow the decoder to spend

more iterations on “tough” blocks, and fewer iterations on

“easy” blocks.

Taking this reasoning one step further, we believe that in

some cases, parts of the codeword may be more easily decoded

than other parts. Although different parts of a codeword

are usually interdependent, for particular noise patterns, the

coupling between parts may be weak. In these cases, it makes

sense that the decoder should spend more computations on

“tough” parts and fewer computations on “easy” parts. During

decoding, those parts that are deemed to be successfully

decoded are clamped. Decoding computations are then focused

on the remaining parts.

For example, Fig. 1 shows how the reliabilities for a ran-

domly selected subset of information bits within the same block

evolve during iterative decoding of a turbocode. A large pos-

itive value of the decoder log-probability ratio indicates that

the decoder is quite confident of the value of the information

bit, and that this value is correct. A large negative value (none

shown) of the log-probability ratio indicates that the decoder is

quite confident of the value of the information bit, and that this

value is wrong. These curves were produced by simulating the

transmission of a single codeword over an

dB

AWGN channel, using a binary rate 1/3 unpunctured turbocode

with 10 000 information bits, identical constituent encoders

(21, 37) , and a randomly drawn permuter. As evidenced by

the horizontal spread of these curves, the decoder is correctly

confident of many information bits before it has sorted out

the values of other information bits. By detecting some of the

0733–8716/98$10.00 © 1998 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:57:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

154

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 16, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1998

well-determined bits early, computations can be refocused on decoding the less well-determined bits.
The notion of revisiting a decoding operation after “pinning” some of the variables has been used before to improve BER performance. The most common application is for decoding the serial concatenation of a Reed–Solomon outer code with a convolutional inner code. For practical purposes, the Reed–Solomon decoder either outputs an error-free codeword segment or flags the segment as a decoding failure. After the convolutional code has been decoded and its output decoded by the Reed–Solomon decoder, the codeword segments that are practically known to be error free can be fed back to the convolutional decoder and used to pin certain trellis states for a second round of improved decoding. By using this approach, substantial coding gains have been reported by Lee [17], Collins [18], and Hagenauer et al. [19].
Our application of “pinning,” which we call “early detection,” is meant to decrease decoding complexity, but not improve BER performance or improve coding gain. For example, turbocodes do not have component decoders with large minimum distance, so there is no way to be practically certain that an early-detected variable is correct. When applied to some types of iterative decoders such as turbodecoders, early detection actually worsens the BER performance. However, we are interested in using early detection to reduce the complexity of iterative decoders in a way that leads to a smaller increase in BER compared to other techniques, such as performing fewer decoding iterations. Our method can be applied in conjunction with a variety of iterative decoding algorithms, including the decoders for turbocodes [14]–[16], serially concatenated convolutional codes [14], [15], product codes [14], [15], and Gallager’s low-density parity-check codes [11], [14].
In Section II, we trace the soft decision reliabilities of many information bits during turbodecoding. Based on these simulations, we speculate that identifying candidates for earlydetection through the use of a log-probability ratio threshold is more efficient than higher order methods, such as monitoring the change in the log-probability ratios.
In Section III, we describe the computational consequences for subsequent decoding in a variety of iterative decoders when an information symbol, codeword symbol, or state variable is detected early. By viewing iterative decoding as message passing in the “Bayesian network” that describes a code [12], [14]–[16], [20], we are able to obtain an approximate general formula for the computational complexity of a single iteration of decoding.
In Sections IV and V, we describe the trellis-splicing algorithm, and present results for thresholded early detection of information symbols in a turbocode system. Here, we find that for a specified BER, there is an optimal threshold that will lead to the greatest reduction in computational complexity, relative to simply performing fewer iterations of decoding without early detection.
II. EARLY-DETECTION CRITERIA
As discussed in the next section, the computational complexity of an iteration decreases with the number of earlydetected variables. So, in order to obtain the greatest reduction in computational complexity, the decoder should early detect as many variables as possible. However, an overly aggressive

early-detection criterion will lead to a high rate of erroneous decisions, spoiling the BER performance. In addition to this constraint, the early-detection criterion should be relatively simple, so that the overhead of ascertaining which variables ought to be early detected does not overshadow the reduction in the computational complexity of subsequent iterative decoding. In this section, we explore criteria that use the soft decision reliabilities in order to ascertain whether or not an early detection should occur.
The soft decisions used for iterative decoding can be represented as log-probability ratios that approximate the true a posteriori log-probability ratios. The log-probability ratio for an information symbol, state variable, or codeword symbol at iteration given the channel output is
(1)

where

is the approximation to the a posteriori

distribution

produced at iteration . We will let

be fractional when the meaning is clear. For example, in

a turbodecoder with two constituent codes,

refers to

quantities produced by processing the first constituent code for

the first time. Equivalently,

can be viewed as a decision

accompanied by a reliability value

Once the iterative decoding procedure is complete, the current

information symbol decisions are used as estimates of the

information symbol values.

In order to determine an appropriate early-detection cri-

terion, we simulated the transmission of 100 blocks from a

rate 1/3 unpunctured turbocode with 10 000 information bits,

identical constituent encoders (21, 37) , and a randomly

drawn permuter. We used binary signaling over an additive

white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel with

dB. To speed up decoding, our forward–backward algorithm

was implemented using a linear interpolation approximation

to the function

. Also, our decoder did not

weight the “extrinsic information” by the reliability variances

as was originally suggested by Berrou et al. [21]. (We found

that this weighting operation is not necessary at BER greater

than 10 .) Fig. 2 shows a plot of the log-probability ratio

versus iteration number for the correct value of a randomly

positioned information bit in each of the 100 blocks. In contrast

to Fig. 1, this figure shows the variability in log-probability

ratio convergence rate from block to block.

It appears from Fig. 2 that the only simple criterion that a

decoder can use without introducing too many early-detection

errors is a simple threshold. Higher order criteria, such as the

change in

, would produce too many erroneous early

detections. Although the relative entropy from one iteration

to the next was successfully used in [9] as a block-oriented

termination criterion, the same rule would not work at the more

refined symbol-oriented level of early detection. The decoder

remains undecided on some variables for many iterations

(up to

8.5 for one curve in Fig. 2), and consequently

does not change much for those variables. However,

eventually, the decoder finds a consistent codeword segment,

and then the log-probability ratios for the related information

bits change drastically.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:57:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FREY AND KSCHISCHANG: EARLY DETECTION AND TRELLIS SPLICING

155

Fig. 2. Plot of the log-probability ratio versus iteration number for the correct value of a randomly positioned information bit in each of 100 decoded turbocode blocks.

Fig. 3. Plot of the log-probability ratio versus iteration number for the correct
0 value of each of 25 information bits from 25 randomly selected blocks in
which the log-probability ratio dropped below 10.0 during decoding.

For the turbocode system described above, Fig. 3 shows

25 randomly selected cases (each from a different block) for

which the log-probability ratios drop below 10.0 during

decoding. These traces show that the decoder can become

incorrectly confident of the value of an information bit, but

then with further iterations, become correctly confident. By

using a threshold of 15.0 for early detection, all of the bits

that the decoder correctly decodes as

can be detected

early and correctly (the four curves that are between 5.0

and 10.0 at 12 eventually rise above 15.0). On the other

hand, if the change in the log-probability ratio is used for early

detection, many of the bits that the decoder correctly decodes

as

would be incorrectly detected early at the values

for where the curves stop falling and begin to rise. That is,

the change in

is close to zero at the iteration where

the decoder begins to correct the bit. Higher order criteria

may actually help in this case (by detecting that a curve is

turning around), but it appears the data are too noisy for this

approach to be successful. Also, higher order criteria increase

the computational overhead of early detection.

III. REDUCTION IN COMPLEXITY DUE TO EARLY DETECTION
As pointed out by MacKay and Neal [11] and Wiberg [22], the key ideas of iterative decoding using soft decisions were present in Gallager’s work in the early 1960’s on low-density parity-check codes [23]. Given the channel output, an iterative decoder processes each constituent code (one at a time or in parallel) while using soft decisions made by previous iterations to bias the results. The appropriate way to take into account the soft outputs from previous iterations can be derived to first order using Bayes’ rule [9]. In fact, this procedure has been well established for over a decade as the “probability propagation” algorithm for processing “Bayesian networks” used in the area of artificial intelligence [12], [14], [20]. For an overview of how graphical models such as Bayesian networks can be used to describe codes and to derive iterative decoders, see the paper by Kschischang and Frey in this issue [15]. See [14] for a comprehensive book on this subject. For an in-depth derivation showing that turbodecoding is, in fact, probability propagation in a Bayesian network, see the article

by McEliece et al. in this issue [16]. In this section, we

show how early detection reduces decoding complexity by

using an approximate general formula for the computational

complexity of a single iteration of decoding. This formula is

approximately valid for the iterative decoders for turbocodes,

serially concatenated convolutional codes, and product codes.

For a given code, this framework indicates which variables

ought to be given priority for early detection in order to save

the most computations.

Using the symbolic and graphical notation introduced in the

companion paper in this issue [15], the Bayesian networks for

a variety of codes are shown in the first column of pictures

in Fig. 4. (The channel output variables are not shown—their

likelihoods are to be included as “bias” effects on the state

variables, codeword bits, and information bits (where appli-

cable) during decoding.) Each vertex in a Bayesian network

represents a random variable in a probability model, and the

set of vertices that have directed edges connecting to variable

are called the parents of . The joint distribution over

all variables

in a Bayesian network can be

expressed by the following product:

(2)

Each term

gives the conditional probability for

given the values of its parents. In the Bayesian network for

a code, some of these conditional probabilities represent deter-

ministic relationships. For example, in the Bayesian network

for a turbocode

if state follows otherwise.

for input

(3)

Other probabilities do not represent deterministic relationships

such as the prior probabilities

for the information bits.

Including the channel likelihoods, the joint distribution

given by the turbocode Bayesian network shown in the first

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:57:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

156

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 16, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1998

and its discrete parents for which

,

and let be the number of parents for . (If has no

parents, let

.) Then, the computational complexity of

each iteration of iterative decoding usually scales as [15]

(a)

(4)

For example, if the constituent convolutional code for

the turbocode described above has memory , then

and so the state variable

contributes a complexity of

.

An early detection can reduce the computational complexity

given in (4) both directly and indirectly. The first three pictures

in Fig. 4(a) show how the early detection of information bit

directly simplifies the Bayesian network, thereby decreasing

(b)

. The modified sum in (4) no longer includes the term

) for , and in each of the terms for the children

and of , the number of configurations is reduced

by a factor of 2 and the number of parents is decreased by 1.

In the case of the turbocode, the former reduction decreases

the complexity contributed by from

to .

The indirect effect of detecting early is shown by the

fourth picture in Fig. 4(a). Since the objective of the decoder is

(c)

to make decisions for the information bits, the two states

and can actually be removed from the network. Suppose

is the early-detected value of . Then, the new conditional

distributions for , after has been removed, is

(d) Fig. 4. Early detection effectively modifies the Bayesian network for a code: (a) turbocode, (b) serially concatenated convolutional code, (c) product code, and (d) low-density parity-check code.
picture of Fig. 4(a) is
where is the interleaving function (in this case, ). The channel outputs for the
systematic bits are The probability propagation algorithm for estimating for an arbitrary observed subset of in a
Bayesian network was introduced in [25] and [26]. It turns out that the soft-decision iterative decoders for turbocodes, serially concatenated convolutional codes, product codes, and low-density parity-check codes can be viewed as the application of this algorithm to Bayesian networks like the ones shown in the first column of pictures in Fig. 4. Let
be the number of configurations of a discrete variable

(5)
where is a normalization operator, which ensures that . Notice that each of
the terms in this sum includes a channel likelihood. The computation of these new conditional probabilities is actually performed as a normal part of iterative decoding, so, in practice, all that is needed is a small integer lookup table to relate the configurations of and to the proper values of .
Fig. 4(b)–(d) shows how the networks for other codes are simplified by detecting variables. In the serially concatenated convolutional code, detecting information bits (not shown) early leads to relatively little reduction in . Instead, the intermediate codeword bits can be early detected to obtain a significant reduction in the complexity of decoding. Notice that only one trellis is simplified by a single early detection. Each section of the upper trellis requires that both its outputs be early detected, as shown by the lower two pictures in Fig. 4(b). For the product code and the low-density parity-check code, detecting codeword bits early simplifies the relevant constituent parity check equations.
IV. EARLY DETECTION FOR TURBOCODES: TRELLIS SPLICING
In this section, we illustrate how early detection applied to turbocodes can be used to reduce the overall decoding complexity. For turbocodes, the Bayesian network consists of two or more chains that are processed using a special case of the probability propagation algorithm, called the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:57:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FREY AND KSCHISCHANG: EARLY DETECTION AND TRELLIS SPLICING

157

forward–backward (a.k.a. “BCJR”) algorithm [27], [28]. This

algorithm computes the a posteriori information bit probabili-

ties using the channel output and a priori information bit prob-

abilities. The forward–backward algorithm can be viewed sim-

ply as a combination of probabilistic “flows” [29] computed in

the forward direction and in the backward direction. Alterna-

tively, a soft-output Viterbi algorithm (SOVA) [9] can be used.

Here, we consider early detection for information symbols

only. As discussed earlier, early detection of a single informa-

tion symbol reduces the complexity of both constituent codes.

Consider the simple two-state trellis shown in Fig. 5(a).

Let be the random variable for the information bit in

the th section of the trellis, and let be the random

variable for the state at the beginning of the th section

of the trellis. The edge in the th section of the trellis

that leaves state

in response to information

bit

has an associated branch metric

.

These metrics are determined from the received signals and

the a priori probabilities regarding the transmitted informa-

tion bit values. (For example, in a systematic code, the

likelihoods for the noisy received information bits can be

included in the a priori probabilities.) If

is the likelihood function for the th received signal and

is the a priori probability for information bit ,

then

. The forward

pass consists of computing the flows from these metrics in

the forward direction. This results in a flow value

for

each state at each section

, computed

as

, and

. The backward pass simply consists

of a flow computation in the reverse direction in order to obtain

a flow value

for each state at each section:

, and

. These two types of flow are combined to obtain

the a posteriori log-probability ratio that each information bit

is 1 versus 0, given the received signal sequence

(6)

The computational cost of each section in the for-

ward–backward algorithm thus consists of the time spent

computing the ’s and ’s for each state, as well as

the time spent computing the a posteriori log-probability

ratios. Although there are various useful techniques and

approximations for decreasing this cost [9], [13], such as

the SOVA [9], we will define it as our basic computational

unit, and refer to it as a trellis section operation.

Suppose that, according to some early-detection criterion,

we decide that the value of information bit

is one. (Here,

we will consider early detection for information bits only.)

As a consequence, the trellis simplifies to the one shown in

Fig. 5(b). The trellis can be simplified further by multiplying

out the path metrics, giving the trellis shown in Fig. 5(c).

Note that not only have the path metrics changed, but also the

transitions now correspond to different information bit values.

In general, portions of the trellis corresponding to early-

detected information bits can be cut away, and the remaining

segments spliced together with new path metrics and new

information bit edge labels. If the values of information

(a)

(b)

(c)
Fig. 5. Trellis splicing: (a) Two-state trellis with edges accompanied by
+ 1 information bit labels and metrics and with nodes accompanied by flows;
(b), (c) if we know that information bit k has a value of 1, we can cut the corresponding section out of the trellis and splice the trellis back together, introducing new information bit labels and new metrics for the connecting edges.

bits are known, the spliced trellis will be sections shorter,

leading to a computational savings of section operations for

each future forward–backward sweep.

In order to implement trellis splicing, an integer array must

be used to determine the state transitions

.

Whereas in the original trellis this mapping is very regular,

after trellis splicing, it is usually not [e.g., the information bits

associated with the outgoing edges of the th state in Fig. 5(c)

have opposite values compared to those in Fig. 5(a)]. The use

of this array slightly increases the computational complexity

of each section operation. Also, the array must be modified

each time a section is cut away. However, both of these

computational costs are insignificant compared to the cost of

the basic section operation. In the implementation of trellis

splicing used for the experiments presented in Section V,

we found that the fraction of CPU time spent on trellis

splicing was less than 6%. The integer array also requires extra

memory. However, the total memory requirement actually

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:57:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

158

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 16, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1998

= = Fig. 6. BER performance of turbodecoding with and without early detection Fig. 8. BER performance of turbodecoding with and without early detection

for Eb=N0 0.1 dB for thresholds of 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, and 18.

for Eb=N0 0.3 dB for thresholds of 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, and 20.

= Fig. 7. BER performance of turbodecoding with and without early detection
for Eb=N0 0.2 dB for thresholds of 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 20, and 22.
decreases while using trellis splicing. When a single section is cut away, the memory liberated by the elimination of ’s,
’s, and ’s more than makes up for the extra integer array memory introduced. Moreover, if sections adjacent to the first are cut away, the transition array is simply modified, so that the memory associated with the ’s, ’s, and ’s of the adjacent sections is completely recovered.

V. RESULTS

We have simulated trellis splicing results at

0.1,

0.2, and 0.3 dB for the turbodecoding system described in

Section II. At the end of each half iteration of turbodecoding,

the log-probability ratio of each information bit was compared

with a threshold in order to decide whether or not the bit should

be early detected. In order to average out the effects of block

failure modes (i.e., failure modes where a large fraction of

the information block is incorrectly decoded), we simulated

the transmission of 20 000 information blocks for each value

of the threshold. The resulting number of errors and number

of section operations were then averaged over block transmis-

sions. Figs. 6–8 show plots of the BER versus the average

number of section operations per information bit decoded for

= Fig. 9. Computational gain for turbodecoding with early detection compared
to turbodecoding without early detection as a function of BER for Eb=N0 0.1, 0.2, and 0.3 dB.

a variety of thresholds. The curves for turbodecoding without

early detection are also shown.

For a given BER, the computational complexity of decoding

can be most reduced (compared to standard turbodecoding)

by using the threshold that corresponds to the curve in each

figure that bottoms out at the prespecified BER. Thus, the

locus of points corresponding to the knees of the curves gives

the optimal achievable BER-complexity performance. Using

these curves, we can answer the question, “At a specified

and for different BER, what is the computational gain

obtained by using early detection compared to using fewer

decoding iterations without early detection?” The locus of

points described above is interpolated in Fig. 9, which shows

the computational gain as a function of BER for the different

values of

. For all three values of

, the greatest

computational gain is obtained near the minimal BER, and

ranges from two to four.

VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FURTHER RESEARCH
In this paper, we have introduced a method called early detection that can be used in conjunction with iterative de-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:57:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FREY AND KSCHISCHANG: EARLY DETECTION AND TRELLIS SPLICING

159

coders that use soft decisions. Information symbols, state variables, and codeword symbols are detected early on in decoding in order to reduce the computational complexity of later processing. For the case of turbocodes, early detection of information symbols allows sections to be removed from all constituent trellises. The resulting spliced trellises are shorter, and so can be processed more quickly.
We presented results for turbodecoding with early detection and found that a computational gain of up to a factor of 4 relative to conventional turbodecoding can be achieved. Early detection may be applied using a wide variety of constituent codes. The enhanced algorithm is not much more difficult to implement in software than standard soft iterative decoding, but leads to an overall decrease in the computational complexity of decoding.
We believe that greater reductions in computational complexity can be achieved than those presented in Section V. Specifically, the early-detection criterion stands to be improved. For example, it may be possible to assign a risk factor to each information symbol (e.g., based on the length of the minimum code graph cycle containing the information symbol). Each information symbol can have a different threshold that is determined from the risk factor. Also, there may be a useful way to adapt the threshold during decoding.
In general, it seems possible to make a wide variety of adjustments to the general graph-based iterative decoding algorithms. For example, see [14] for a “concurrent turbodecoding” method that speeds up decoding by a factor of 80. We feel that investigating the complexity/performance tradeoffs for these algorithms will continue to be a rich and potentially rewarding research area.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 1993.
[2] G. Battail, C. Berrou, and A. Glavieux, “Pseudo-random recursive convolutional coding for near-capacity performance,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM’93, 1993.
[3] J. Lodge, R. Young, P. Hoeher, and J. Hagenauer, “Separable MAP ‘filters’ for the decoding of product and concatenated codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. 1993, pp. 1740–1745.
[4] J. D. Anderson, “The TURBO-coding scheme,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inform. Theory, 1994.
[5] J. E. M. Nillson and R. Ko¨tter, “Iterative decoding of product code constructions,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inform. Theory Appl., 1994.
[6] P. Jung and M. Nasshan, “Dependence of the error performance of turbocodes on the interleaver structure in short frame transmission systems,” Electron. Lett., vol. 30, pp. 287–288, 1994.
[7] D. Divsalar and F. Pollara, “Turbo-codes for PCS applications,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Commun., 1995, pp. 54–59.
[8] N. Wiberg, H.-A. Loeliger, and R. Ko¨tter, “Codes and iterative decoding on general graphs,” European Trans. Telecommun., vol. 6, pp. 513–525, Sept./Oct. 1995.
[9] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of binary block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 429–445, Mar. 1996.
[10] S. Benedetto and G. Montorsi, “Unveiling turbo-codes: Some results on parallel concatenated coding schemes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 409–428, Mar. 1996.
[11] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996, Due to editing errors, reprinted in Electron. Lett., vol. 33, pp. 457–458, Mar. 1997.
[12] B. J. Frey and F. R. Kschischang, “Probability propagation and itera-
 tive decoding,” in Proc. 34th Allerton Conf., 1996, [www]. Available:
http://www.cs.utoronto.ca/ frey.

[13] S. Benedetto, D. Divsalar, G. Montorsi, and F. Pollara, “Soft-output decoding algorithms in iterative decoding of parallel concatenated convolutional codes,” submitted to IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 1996.
[14] B. J. Frey, Graphical Models for Machine Learning and Digital Com-
 munication. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998 [www]. Available:
http://www.cs.utoronto.ca/ frey. [15] F. R. Kschischang and B. J. Frey, “Iterative decoding of compound
 codes by probability propagation in graphical models,” this issue, pp.
219–230; Available: http://www.cs.utoronto.ca/ frey, 1997. [16] R. J. McEliece, D. J. C. MacKay, and J. F. Cheng, “Turbo decoding
as an instance of Pearl’s ‘belief propagation’ algorithm,” this issue, pp. 140–152. [17] L. Lee, “Concatenated coding systems employing a unit-memory convolutional code and a byte-oriented decoding algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. COM-25, pp. 1064–1074, Oct. 1977. [18] O. M. Collins, “Determinate state convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 41, pp. 1785–1794, Dec. 1993. [19] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Improving the standard coding system for deep space missions,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 1993, pp. 1092–1097. [20] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988. [21] C. Berrou and A. Glavieux, “Near optimum error correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 44, pp. 1261–1271, Oct. 1996. [22] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dep. Elect. Eng., Linko¨ping Univ., Linko¨ping, Sweden, 1996. [23] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963. [24] J. F. Cheng, “Iterative decoding,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dep. Elect. Eng., Calif. Inst. Technol., Pasadena, 1997. [25] J. Pearl, “Fusion, propagation, and structuring in belief networks,” Artifi. Intell., vol. 29, pp. 241–288, 1986. [26] S. L. Lauritzen and D. J. Spiegelhalter, “Local computations with probabilities on graphical structures and their application to expert systems,” J. Roy. Stat. Soc. B, vol. 50, pp. 157–224, 1988. [27] L. E. Baum and T. Petrie, “Statistical inference for probabilistic functions of finite state Markov chains,” Ann. Math. Statist., vol. 37, pp. 1559–1563, 1966. [28] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-20, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974. [29] R. J. McEliece, “On the BJCR trellis for linear block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, 1996.
Brendan J. Frey received the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering from the University of Toronto, Toronto, Ont., Canada, in 1997.
He was a member of the Neural Networks Research Group there and was an NSERC 1967 Science and Engineering Scholar. Currently, he is a Fellow of the Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. He researches interesting and approximate solutions to hard problems in digital communication and machine learning. In particular, he is interested in applying neural networks and graphical models.
Frank R. Kschischang (S’83–M’91) received the B.A.Sc. degree (with honors) in electrical engineering from the University of British Columbia, Vancouver, B.C., Canada, in 1985 and the M.A.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees, also in electrical engineering, from the University of Toronto, Toronto, Ont., Canada, in 1988 and 1991, respectively.
He is an Associate Professor in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto. During the 1997–1998 academic year, he is a Visiting Scientist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge. His research interests are focused on the area of coding techniques, primarily on soft-decision decoding algorithms, trellis structure of codes, and iterative decoders. He teaches graduate courses in information theory, coding, and communication theory and currently is an IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY Associate Editor for Coding Theory.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:57:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

