IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 16, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1998

219

Iterative Decoding of Compound Codes by Probability Propagation in Graphical Models
Frank R. Kschischang, Member, IEEE, and Brendan J. Frey

Abstract—We present a unified graphical model framework for describing compound codes and deriving iterative decoding algorithms. After reviewing a variety of graphical models (Markov random fields, Tanner graphs, and Bayesian networks), we derive a general distributed marginalization algorithm for functions described by factor graphs. From this general algorithm, Pearl’s belief propagation algorithm is easily derived as a special case. We point out that recently developed iterative decoding algorithms for various codes, including “turbo decoding” of parallelconcatenated convolutional codes, may be viewed as probability propagation in a graphical model of the code. We focus on Bayesian network descriptions of codes, which give a natural input/state/output/channel description of a code and channel, and we indicate how iterative decoders can be developed for paralleland serially concatenated coding systems, product codes, and low-density parity-check codes.
Index Terms— Concatenated coding, decoding, graph theory, iterative methods, product codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
COMPOUND codes are codes composed of a collection of interacting constituent codes, each of which can be decoded tractably. In this paper, we describe various graphical models that can be used not only to describe a wide variety of compound codes, but also to derive a variety of iterative decoding algorithms for these codes. Prominent among compound codes are the turbo codes introduced by Berrou et al. [1], in which the constituent convolutional codes interact in “parallel concatenation” through an interleaver. It is probably fair to say that the near-capacity error-rate performance of turbo codes has sparked much of the current interest in iterative decoding techniques, as evidenced by this special issue. Other examples of compound codes include classical serially concatenated codes [2] (see also [3], [4]), Gallager’s low-density parity-check codes [5], and various product codes [6], [7].
In [8] and [9], we observed that iterative decoding algorithms developed for these compound codes are often instances of probability propagation algorithms that operate in a graphical model of the code. These algorithms have been developed in the past decade in the expert systems literature, most notably by Pearl [10] and Lauritzen and Spiegelhalter [11]. (See [12]–[14] for textbook treatments on probability or “belief”
Manuscript received September 27, 1996; revised May 8, 1997 and July 29, 1997.
F. R. Kschischang is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ont., Canada, on leave at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02138 USA.
B. J. Frey is with the Beckman Institute, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801 USA.
Publisher Item Identifier S 0733-8716(98)00225-X.

propagation algorithms and [15] for an extensive treatment of graphical models.)
The first to connect Pearl’s “belief propagation” algorithm with coding were MacKay and Neal [16]–[18], who showed that Gallager’s 35-year-old algorithm [5] for decoding lowdensity parity-check codes is essentially an instance of Pearl’s algorithm. Extensive simulation results of MacKay and Neal show that Gallager codes can perform nearly as well as turbo codes, indicating that we probably “sailed” much closer to capacity 35 years ago than might have been appreciated in the interim. McEliece et al. [19] have also independently observed that turbo decoding is an instance of “belief” propagation. They provide a description of Pearl’s algorithm, and make explicit the connection to the basic turbo decoding algorithm described in [1].
Recently, and independently of developments in the expert systems literature, Wiberg et al. in [20] and Wiberg in his doctoral dissertation [21] have refocused attention on graphical models for codes. They show that a type of graphical model called a “Tanner graph” (first introduced by Tanner [22] to describe a generalization of Gallager codes) provides a natural setting in which to describe and study iterative soft-decision decoding techniques, much as the code trellis [23] is an appropriate model in which to describe and study “conventional” maximum likelihood soft-decision decoding using the Viterbi algorithm. Forney [24] gives a nice description of the history of various “two-way” algorithms and their connections with coding theory.
In this paper, we seek to unify this recent work by developing a graphical model framework that can be used to describe a broad class of compound codes and derive corresponding iterative decoding algorithms. In Section II, we review and relate various graphical models, such as Markov random fields, Tanner graphs, and Bayesian networks. These graphs all support the basic probability propagation algorithm, which is developed in Section III in the general setting of a “factor graph,” and in Section IV for the specific case of a Bayesian network.
Given a graphical code model, probability propagation can be used to compute the conditional probability of a message symbol given the observed channel output. For richly connected graphs containing cycles, exact probability propagation becomes computationally infeasible, in which case iterative decoding can still yield excellent results. The basic iterative decoding algorithm proceeds as if no cycles were present in the graph, with no guarantee that the computed “conditional probabilities” are close to the correct values, or that they even converge! Nevertheless, the excellent performance of turbo codes and Gallager codes is testimony to the efficacy of these iterative decoding procedures.

0733–8716/98$10.00 © 1998 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:55:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

220

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 16, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1998

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 1. Graphical models for the (7, 4) Hamming code. (a) Markov random field with a maximal clique indicated. (b) Tanner graph. (c) Bayesian network.

In Section V, we describe Bayesian network models for a variety of compound codes, and describe how probability propagation can be used to decode these codes. As it is a straightforward exercise to develop Bayesian network models for many coding schemes such as multilevel codes and coset codes, and also for channels more general than the usual memoryless channels, we believe that there are many possibilities for application of iterative decoding techniques beyond what has been described in the literature to date.

II. GRAPHICAL CODE MODELS

In this section, we present several graph-based models that

can be used to describe the conditional dependence structure in

codes and channels. Given a set

of random

variables with joint probability distribution

,a

graphical model attempts to capture the conditional depen-

dency structure inherent in this distribution, essentially by

expressing how the distribution factors as a product of “local

functions” (e.g., conditional probabilities) involving various

subsets of . Graphical models are useful for describing the

structure of codes, and are the key to “probability propagation”

and iterative decoding.

A. Markov Random Fields

A Markov random field (see, e.g., [25]) is a graphical model

based on an undirected graph

in which each vertex

corresponds to a random variable, i.e., an element of . Denote

by

the neighbors of

, i.e., the set of vertices of

connected to by a single edge of . The graph is a

Markov random field (MRF) if the distribution

satisfies the local Markov property:

. In other words, is an MRF if every variable

is independent of nonneighboring variables in the graph,

given the values of its immediate neighbors. MRF’s are well

developed in statistics, and have been used in a variety of

applications (see, e.g., [25]–[28]).

The joint probability mass (or density) function for the

vertices of a MRF is often expressed in terms of a Gibbs

potential function defined on the maximal cliques of . A

clique in is a collection of vertices which are all pairwise

neighbors, and such a clique is maximal if it is not properly

contained in any other clique. Corresponding to each clique

in the set of maximal cliques is a collection of vertices

that are contained in . Denote by the sample space for

the random variable . Given a nonnegative potential function

for each clique

, i.e., a function

, the joint probability mass (or density) function

over

is given by

(1)

where

is a normalizing constant, assuming that the

product in (1) is not everywhere zero. It is possible to define

an MRF in terms of potential functions defined over all cliques

in , not just the maximal cliques, but any potential function

defined over a nonmaximal clique can be absorbed into the

potential function defined over the maximal clique containing

.

From the structure of the potential functions, it is a straight-

forward exercise (see, e.g., [25]) to show that the resulting

probability distribution satisfies the local Markov property.

Indeed, every strictly positive MRF can be expressed in terms

of a Gibbs potential, although the proof of this result (given,

e.g., in [26, ch. 1]) is less straightforward. Lauritzen [15, pp.

37–38] gives an example due to Moussouris of a nonstrictly

positive MRF satisfying the local Markov property for which

it is impossible to express the joint distribution as a product

of potentials as in (1).

To illustrate how MRF’s can be used to describe codes, con-

sider the MRF with seven binary variables shown in Fig. 1(a).

There are four maximal cliques:

(dashed

loop),

, and

.

From (1), the joint probability distribution for

, can

be written as a product of Gibbs potential functions defined

over the variable subsets indicated by these four cliques. This

MRF can be used to describe a Hamming code by setting

(which is equivalent to neglecting ), and by letting

the first three potentials be even parity indicator functions. That

is,

if its arguments form a configuration with even

parity and 0 otherwise. The MRF places a uniform probability

distribution on all configurations that satisfy even parity in

cliques

, and , and zero probability on configurations

not satisfying these parity relations.

While the potential functions chosen in this example define a

linear code, it is clear that such potential functions can be used

to determine a code satisfying any set of local check condi-

tions. In particular, given a set of variables

,

let be a collection of subsets of . Corresponding to each

element of , a local check condition enforces structure on

the variables contained in by restricting the values that these

variables can assume. (For example, the check condition could

enforce even parity, as in the example above.) By defining an

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:55:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KSCHISCHANG AND FREY: ITERATIVE DECODING OF COMPOUND CODES

221

indicator function for each local check condition that assumes the value unity for valid configurations and zero for invalid configurations, and by defining a graph in which each element of forms a clique, an MRF description that assigns a uniform probability distribution over the valid configurations is obtained, provided that at least one valid configuration exists. As we shall see, a Tanner graph is another way to represent the same local check structure.

when the edge directions are ignored). As in an MRF, a

random variable is associated with each graph vertex. Given a

directed graph

, let the parents (or direct ancestors)

of vertex be the set of vertices of that have directed

edges connecting to . For a Bayesian network, the joint

probability distribution can be written

(3)

B. Tanner Graphs
Tanner graphs were introduced in [22] for the construction of good long error-correcting codes in terms of shorter codes. Our treatment follows the slightly different presentation of Wiberg et al. [20].
A Tanner graph is a bipartite graph representation for a check structure, similar to the one described above. In such a graph, there are two types of vertices corresponding to the variables and the “checks,” respectively, with no edges connecting vertices of the same type. For example, a Tanner graph corresponding to the Hamming code described above is shown in Fig. 1(b). Each check vertex in the set of check vertices is shown as a filled circle. In this case, a check vertex ensures that its set of neighbors satisfies even parity in a valid configuration.
We see that the check vertices play precisely the same role in a Tanner graph as do the maximal cliques in an MRF. In general, for each check vertex with neighbors , we can associate a nonnegative real-valued potential function
that assigns positive potential only to valid configurations of its arguments. We then write a probability distribution over the variables as
(2)

where

is a normalizing constant. Of course, (2) is

analogous to (1).

An MRF can be converted to a Tanner graph by introducing

a check vertex for each maximal clique, with edges connecting

that check vertex to each variable in the clique. The potential

function assigned to the check vertex would be the same as

that assigned to the clique.

A Tanner graph can be converted to an MRF by eliminating

the check vertices and forming cliques from all variables

originally connected to the same check vertex. The potential

associated with the clique would be the same as that assigned

to the check vertex. It is possible that some new cliques may be

formed in this process, which are not associated with a check

vertex of the Tanner graph. A unit potential is assigned to these

“induced” cliques. Different Tanner graphs may map to the

same MRF; hence, Tanner graphs may be more specific about

dependencies than MRF’s. For example, the graph in Fig. 1(b)

with an additional check vertex connected to

, and

will also map to the MRF in Fig. 1(a).

C. Bayesian Networks
We now introduce Bayesian networks that, unlike MRF’s and Tanner graphs, are directed acyclic graphs [12]. A directed acyclic graph is one where there are no graph cycles when the edge directions are followed (although there may be cycles

where, if

(i.e., has no parents), then we take

.

Every distribution can be described by a Bayesian network

since, by the chain rule of probability,

It follows that we can pick any ordering of the variables, and then condition each variable on all variables that precede it. However, this trivial network does not capture any useful probabilistic structure because the last factor
contains all variables, and so is really just as complicated as the full joint distribution.
A Bayesian network for the Hamming code described above is shown in Fig. 1(c). The joint distribution is obtained from (3) using parent–child relationships

The first four factors express the prior probabilities of

, while the last three factors capture the parity

checks: e.g.,

if

, and have

even parity and 0 otherwise.

A Tanner graph (and by extension, an MRF) can be con-

verted into a Bayesian network simply by directing edges

toward the check vertices. A binary

indicator ran-

dom variable is introduced at each check site such that

only if the random variables in the set

satisfy the constraint checked by the corresponding vertex in

the Tanner graph.

A potential advantage of Bayesian networks is that the

directed edges (arrows) can be used to model causality ex-

plicitly. By inspecting the arrows in such models, it is easy

to determine which variables directly influence others. This

often makes it possible to simulate the network, i.e., draw

a configuration of variables consistent with the distribution

specified by the network. One simply draws a configuration

for variables having no parents, consistent with the (prior)

distribution affecting those variables. Once a configuration has

been drawn for all parents of a variable , a configuration

for can be drawn consistent with the conditional probability

. For example, in Fig. 1(c), we simply pick values for

the parentless vertices

, and , and then determine

the remainder of the codeword

, and . This explicit

representation of causality is also useful for modeling physical

effects, such as channel noise and intersymbol interference.

It should be noted that simulating a Bayesian network can

become a hard problem when variables for which

are required to take on a specific value, i.e., when some child

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:55:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

222

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 16, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1998

simplify this computation, as we now show. A derivation along similar lines has also been carried out recently by Aji and McEliece [29], who also develop an algorithm for “information distribution” on a graph.

Fig. 2. General Bayesian network for channel coding.
variables are “clamped.” For example, drawing a configuration of variables consistent with the observed output of a channel is essentially as hard as (or harder than) decoding. Similarly, when a Tanner graph is converted into a Bayesian network in the manner described above, it may be difficult to draw a valid configuration of the variables, as all indicator variables have a nonempty set of parents and all are required to take on the value one.
In coding, the relationships among the information symbols , the encoder state variables (if there are any), the transmitted codeword symbols , and the received signals completely define the encoding and decoding problem for a given code. Without loss of generality, these relationships can be expressed probabilistically and depicted pictorially using graphical models. The Bayesian network for channel coding in general is shown in Fig. 2. By inspection of the network, the joint distribution is

Usually,

is a uniform distribution and

and

are deterministic (i.e., all probability mass is placed

on a single outcome). The channel likelihood

expresses

the noise and intersymbol interference introduced by the

channel.

Fig. 3(a) shows the Bayesian network for a systematic

convolutional code with a memoryless channel. The systematic

codeword symbols are simply copies of the information

symbols . The other codeword symbols are outputs of the

encoder;

depends on and state . By inspecting

the parents of the received signals, we find that

which expresses the absence of

memory in the channel. Fig. 3(b) shows a cycle-free network

for the same code, obtained by grouping information and state

variables together. This eliminates undirected cycles at the

expense of increasing the complexity of some of the network

variables.

Further examples of Bayesian networks for codes will be

discussed in Section V. In the next section, we will describe

the basic distributed marginalization algorithm that will form

the basis for iterative decoding.

III. A FRAMEWORK FOR DISTRIBUTED MARGINALIZATION
In this section, we develop the basic “probability propagation” algorithm that can be used to compute marginal probabilities in graphical models, given some observations. A common feature of the graphical models described in the previous section is that they can be used to describe a “global” joint probability distribution as a product of “local” functions. The computation of a conditional probability then amounts essentially to a “marginalization” of this global function. Using the structure of the local functions, it may be possible to greatly

A. Notation

We begin by introducing some notation. Let be a finite

index set, and let

be a collection of finite

sets called symbol alphabets, indexed by . The configuration

space is defined as the Cartesian product of symbol

alphabets

, and elements of are called

configurations. For

, let

denote the projection

of onto the coordinates indexed by , so that

, which is taken to be empty when is empty. For

a configuration

and nonempty , we denote by the

image of under this projection. We denote the complement

of relative to as . By abuse of notation, we equate the

pair

with , although formally, some reordering of

coordinates may be necessary for this equality strictly to hold.

A function

over the set of configurations is said

to be a global function. Initially, we assume that the codomain

is the set of real numbers, but later, we will allow to be

an arbitrary commutative semiring [21], [29]–[31].

It will often be useful to introduce families of global

functions, indexed by a set of finite-dimensional real-valued

parameters , which are fixed in any instance of distributed

marginalization. In this case, we write

for the value

the function assumes at configuration . Introducing such

parameters allows us to take into account the influence of

continuous-valued variables such as channel outputs. How-

ever, for notational convenience, we will sometimes omit the

explicit dependence on .

For a set

, we define the marginal function

with respect to as

In other words, the value of the marginal function with respect

to at the point is obtained by summing the global

function over all configurations that agree with in the

coordinates indexed by . Any variable not indexed by is

said to be marginalized out in . Note that is the constant

obtained by summing over all configurations of variables,

while

. We have chosen the symbol for the global

function, as we view as a “Zustandssumme” (a sum-over-

states), i.e., a partition function as in statistical physics (see,

e.g., [32, p. 13]).

If the function is the joint probability mass function of

a collection of random variables indexed by , then is

the marginal joint probability mass function for the random

variables indexed by , and

. Reintroducing the

parameter , suppose the function

is the conditional

joint probability mass function of a collection of random

variables given the observation of continuous-valued random

vector . Then the marginal functions represent conditional

probability mass functions. For example,

, the conditional probability mass function for given

the observed value of . Such formulations will often be useful

in decoding problems, when the continuous-valued output of

a noise channel is observed.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:55:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KSCHISCHANG AND FREY: ITERATIVE DECODING OF COMPOUND CODES

223

(a)

(b)

Fig. 3. (a) Bayesian network for a systematic convolutional code and a memoryless channel. (b) Cycle-free connected network for the same code and channel.

When , the number of arguments of , is small, we will sometimes use a modified notation for the marginal functions. We replace an argument of with a “ ” sign to indicate that the corresponding variable is to be summed over, i.e., marginalized out. Thus, if
, and so on. It will often be useful to marginalize some variables while holding other variables constant, for example, in the case of computing a conditional probability mass function given that some variables are observed. Since the key operation in the computation of a marginal function or in the computation of a conditional probability is marginalization, we shall focus attention on developing efficient algorithms for this operation.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 4. Factor graphs for (a) a Markov chain, (b) a loopy example, and their corresponding second higher power graphs, (c) and (d), omitting self-loops.

B. Local Functions and Factor Graphs

The key to efficient marginalization is to take into account

any structure that the global function possesses. Suppose

that is “separable,” i.e., that can be written as the product

of a number of local functions, each a function of the variables

contained in a subset of . More precisely, let

be

a collection of nonempty subsets of , and suppose

(4)

The functions

are called local functions.

For example, suppose that

are random variables

forming a Markov chain (in that order) given a specific

observation

. (For example, these random variables

might represent the state sequence of a convolutional code

in successive time intervals, and might represent the cor-

responding channel output.) The conditional joint probability

mass function can be written as

Translating to the notation of this section, and observing

that a conditional probability mass function

is

essentially a function of two variables (since is a constant),

we write

(5)

We will have occasion to consider products of local func-

tions. For example, in (5), the product of

and

is a function of three variables that we denote

. We will also apply the “ ”-sign notation

to local functions and their products.

It will be useful to display a particular factorization of

the global function by means of a bipartite graph called

a factor graph. Suppose

factors as in (4). A factor

graph

is a bipartite graph with vertex set

. The only edges in are those

that connect a vertex

to a vertex if and only

if

, i.e.,

. In words, each

vertex of a factor graph corresponds to either a variable

or a local function. An edge joins a variable to a local

function if and only if appears as an argument of .

For example, Fig. 4 shows the factor graph corresponding to

the Markov chain (5). Note that a factor graph is essentially

a generalization of a Tanner graph, in which local “checks”

involving the incident variables have been replaced with

local functions involving the incident variables.

It is a straightforward exercise to convert the various graph-

ical models described in Section II into a factor graph repre-

sentation. A Markov random field that expresses a Gibbs

potential function yields a factor graph with one local function

vertex for every maximal clique, i.e., a local function vertex

for every factor in (1). A Tanner graph directly yields a factor

graph by associating with each check vertex a binary indicator

function that indicates whether the local check condition is sat-

isfied. More generally, each factor of (2) can be associated with

a local function vertex, as in the MRF case. Finally, a Bayesian

network is converted into a factor graph by introducing a local

function vertex for every factor of (3), and a variable vertex for

each variable. Clearly, the local function vertex associated with

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:55:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

224

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 16, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1998

Fig. 5. Computation of marginal functions by message passing. The messages are descriptions of (possibly marginalized) local function products, and are passed along the graph edges as indicated by the arrows. (The arrows themselves are not part of the graph.)

is connected by an edge to the variable vertices in

the set

. Thus, a Bayesian network with variables

yields a factor graph with vertices.

C. Marginalization by Message Passing

Our aim is to derive a graph-based algorithm for computing

the marginal functions

for all . The functions

are called “local” functions because we assume that access

to these functions is local to a specific vertex in the graph.

Knowledge of local functions (or functions derived from local

functions) can be propagated to nonlocal vertices by “message

passing” along the edges of the graph. The “messages” are

descriptions of (possibly marginalized) local function products.

To illustrate what we mean by this, and to motivate the

general situation in which this “graph-based message-passing”

paradigm is made more precise, we consider the specific case

where

is defined in (5).

Consider the computation of

. We

write

(6)

where we have identified the various factors that need to be

computed to obtain

. Our primary observation is

that

can be computed knowing just

and

. The latter factor can be computed knowing

just

and

.

Analyzing the computation of the remaining marginal func-

tions in the same manner, we find that

(7)

(8)

Examining (6)–(8), we see that all marginal functions can be

computed recursively from a chain of local function products,

which we view as messages passed between the vertices of the

“propagation tree” shown in Fig. 5. Comparing with (6)–(8),

we observe that the information passed to the vertex associated

with

, is precisely that needed to compute the

marginal function for , and so we choose that vertex as a

“fusion site” for the variable .

We consider now the general case. Let

be a

factor graph, describing the way in which the global function

factors as a product of local functions as in (4). Consider

the second higher power graph , defined as having the same

vertex set as , but with edges connecting two vertices if and only if there is a path of length two between the vertices in . Self-loops are ignored. Since is bipartite, will always split into at least two disconnected components, having vertices associated with variables and having vertices associated with local functions. For example, Fig. 4(c) and (d) shows the second higher power graphs associated with the factor graphs shown in (a) and (b).
Observe that in , two variables will be joined by an edge if they are both arguments of the same local function, so all arguments of a particular local function form a clique. When the local functions of the factor graph correspond to Gibbs potential functions, then is the corresponding Markov random field. In other words, an MRF can be recovered as a component of the second higher power graph (omitting self-loops) of the corresponding factor graph.
Consider now , which we call the propagation graph
corresponding to . We assume that consists of a single connected component; if not, marginalization can be carried out independently in the various components. The vertices of
correspond to local functions. Two vertices are joined by an edge for each argument that the corresponding local functions have in common, although we will collapse multiple edges between two vertices to a single edge. A description of the general message-passing algorithm is simplified by imagining that a vertex is an active processing element, capable of receiving and transmitting messages (i.e., marginalized local function products) along the edges incident on the vertex, and capable of performing computations involving messages and the local function associated with the vertex.
We now describe a general distributed marginalization algorithm that operates in a tree spanning the propagation graph; we refer to this spanning tree as a propagation tree. Given a factor graph , we must
1) specify a spanning tree for , and 2) identify a “fusion vertex” in for each marginal func-
tion to be computed.
Note that is in general quite different from the graphical model (MRF, Tanner graph, or Bayesian network) from which
is derived. In general, it may be a difficult problem to choose optimally so as, e.g., to minimize overall computational complexity. For now, we assume that is chosen in some (arbitrary) manner. For a given , we say that a variable is involved at a vertex of if is an argument of the corresponding local function. Let be an edge of . We say that a given variable must be carried over if is part of a path that joins any vertex in which is involved with the fusion vertex for . In essence, must be carried over an edge of the subtree of that spans the fusion vertex for and the other vertices in which is involved. Outside this subtree, only marginal knowledge of is needed, and hence can be marginalized out. Given a propagation tree , and an assignment of fusion vertices, it is easy to determine which variables must be carried over any given edge in . (For example, each edge of the trees shown in Figs. 5 and 6 is labeled with the indexes of the variables to be carried over that edge.) The size of the messages sent over an edge is greatly influenced by the number of variables that must be carried over the edge, and by the number of possible values that each

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:55:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KSCHISCHANG AND FREY: ITERATIVE DECODING OF COMPOUND CODES

225

such variable can assume. A simplistic measure of complexity associated with an edge is its thickness, defined as the number of variables that are to be carried over that edge. (A more useful measure would be the product of the sizes of the symbol alphabets corresponding to these variables, or the size of a minimal description of the corresponding local function product.) It may be desirable to find a propagation tree and an assignment of fusion vertices so that the maximum thickness is minimized, but we conjecture that this is a hard problem in general. (Given a propagation tree, the maximum thickness is minimized if the fusion vertex for a variable is a vertex in the subtree of that spans the vertices in which is involved, so the problem is to find a suitable propagation tree.)
To illustrate that it is not always possible to achieve unit maximum thickness, consider the global function
. The factor graph and its second higher power graph are shown in Fig. 4(b) and (d). By symmetry, there is essentially only one propagation tree for this function, as shown in Fig. 6. Numbering the vertices in the figure from 1–3 (left to right), we choose vertex as a fusion vertex for . We observe that must be carried over both of the edges in the propagation tree, while
and each need to be carried over only one edge, as indicated in Fig. 6. The thickness of each edge is two, and no assignment of fusion vertices can reduce this number.
D. Marginalization Algorithms
The fundamental idea behind marginalization algorithms is to compute the product of local functions (i.e., messages) marginalizing out unnecessary variables. We now describe two versions of a general message-passing algorithm that can be used to compute marginal functions. In the first version (the two-way schedule), messages are passed once in each direction along each edge in the propagation tree. This is the minimum possible, and for this reason, the two-way schedule is best suited for serial implementation.
The Two-Way Schedule
Let be a propagation tree. We allow each vertex of to be in one of way two states: “inbound” or “outbound.” Initially, all vertices are placed in the inbound state.
1) (The inbound state) At a vertex in the inbound state, wait until messages have arrived on all edges but one, and call this remaining edge the “prime” edge. Compute the product of all incoming messages with the local function, marginalize out any variables not to be carried on the prime edge, and send the result on the prime edge. Toggle to the “outbound” state.
2) (The outbound state) At a vertex in the outbound state, wait until a message arrives on the prime edge. For each nonprime edge , compute the product of all incoming messages with the local function, except the message on . Marginalize out any variables not to be carried on , and pass the result on . If this vertex is a fusion vertex, the desired marginal function(s) can be computed as the product of all incoming messages with the local function, marginalizing out any undesired variables.

Fig. 6. Another example of marginalization by message passing. Sets of indexes identifying the variables carried along each edge are shown.

Observe that only a single edge is incident on any leaf

vertex, and so leaf vertices are not required to “wait” in

the inbound state. Thus, message passing is initiated at the

leaf vertices. Messages propagate from the leaves to the

interior of the graph, and then back toward the leaves. The

algorithm terminates when all leaf vertices have received a

message. Since each edge is used to convey exactly one

“inbound” message and exactly one “outbound” message, the

total number of messages transmitted is twice the number of

propagation tree edges, namely,

.

In the second version of the algorithm (the flooding sched-

ule), nodes do not necessarily “wait” before passing messages,

and hence messages may pass more than once in a given

direction along an edge in the propagation tree. The flooding

schedule is better suited for parallel implementation since

more than the minimum number of messages will usually be

passed.

The Flooding Schedule
1) (Initialization) At any collection of vertices, carry out the “flooding” procedure described in the next step, with a unit message arriving on a fictitious edge.
2) (Flooding) When a message is received on any any edge at a vertex, define this message as the “current” message for , designate as “incoming” and all other edges as “outgoing.” For each outgoing edge , compute the product of the local function with all current messages except the current message on , and marginalize out any variables not to be carried on , passing the result on . For a (leaf) vertex with no outgoing edges, simply “absorb” the message received.
3) (Marginalization) The algorithm terminates when no vertices have more messages to pass, at which point marginalization can be carried out at each fusion vertex in the same way as in the two-way schedule. Indeed, marginalization can take place at any time during the previous step to yield a “current estimate” of the marginal function.

The basic principle behind the flooding schedule is that the receipt of a message at a vertex “triggers” that vertex to send messages on all other edges. At a leaf vertex, there is no “other” edge, so a received message is absorbed. Since the propagation tree has no cycles, eventually, all messages are absorbed at the leaf vertices.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:55:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

226

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 16, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1998

It is clear that both the two-way schedule and the flooding schedule are versions of the same algorithm, the difference being only the order in which messages are propagated. Indeed, one can also devise hybrid schedules. When a message arrives on an edge at a vertex, that message effectively creates “pending” messages on all other edges incident on that vertex. These pending messages need not be sent immediately; indeed, the pending messages may change to reflect the content of other messages arriving at the vertex. In general, a wide variety of such schedules is possible, of which the two-way and flooding schedules represent two extremes. In our simulations of the flooding schedule for a turbo decoder [33], we observed that, compared with the standard message-passing schedule, several orders of magnitude more messages are passed, but if the messages are passed concurrently, then several orders of magnitude fewer time steps are required to achieve a given decoding performance.
Note that, regardless of the message-passing schedule, message passing in a tree is guaranteed to converge to a state in which no messages are pending. At this point, marginalization at each fusion vertex can be carried out, with exactly the same result for each different message-passing schedule.

E. Generalization to Commutative Semirings
Up to now, we have made the assumption that the global function is real valued. However, the only properties of the reals of which we have made use are essentially the commutativity of multiplication and the distribution of multiplication over addition. Hence, the distributed marginalization algorithm described will work over any commutative semiring (see, e.g., [30, Sect. 3.2] and [21], [29], [31]). For example, replacing the real-valued product operation with summation and the summation operation with the max operator will yield a generalization of the Viterbi algorithm equivalent to Pearl’s “belief revision” algorithm [12, Sect. 5.3] and the “min-sum” algorithm described by Wiberg et al. [20]. We conjecture that many of the distributed algorithms used in data networks for routing, network topology determination, etc., such as the distributed Bellman–Ford algorithm (see, e.g., [34, ch. 5]) are instances of this general marginalization algorithm in an appropriately defined semiring.

IV. PROBABILITY PROPAGATION IN BAYESIAN NETWORKS
We now specialize the general message-passing algorithm described in the previous section to the special case of Bayesian networks. We begin with the special case of a Bayesian network that (neglecting the direction of edges) has no cycles, i.e., is a tree.

A. The Cycle-Free Case

Let be a Bayesian network on random variables

. By definition of a Bayesian network (3), the

joint probability mass function of these random variables can

be written as

. In other

words, the joint probability mass function can be written as a

(a)

(b)

(c)
Fig. 7. Translating a cycle-free Bayesian network (a) into a factor graph (b) and a propagation tree (c).

product of local functions, each representing the conditional

probability mass function for a variable given its parents.

In this subsection, we assume that forms a tree, i.e., that

it contains no undirected cycles. We take as a spanning tree

for in which the vertex corresponding to the variable is

associated with the local function

. We choose this

vertex as the fusion site for . For example, Fig. 7(a) shows

a simple cycle-free Bayesian network . The corresponding

factor graph and propagation tree are shown in Fig. 7(b) and

(c), respectively.

For simplicity, we refer to the vertex of the propagation tree

into which translates as vertex . If is a child (parent)

of in the Bayesian network, then we refer to as a child

(parent) of in the propagation tree, even though the edges

of the propagation tree are undirected.

Observe that a variable in the propagation network is

involved with vertex , and all of the children of this vertex.

Thus, in the propagation network, must be carried along

all edges connecting vertex to its children, but these are

the only edges along which must be carried. Since a given

edge connects precisely one parent to one child, precisely one

variable must be carried along that edge, namely, the parent

variable. In other words, a cycle-free Bayesian network yields

a propagation tree of unit thickness. This observation is the

key to Pearl’s “belief propagation” algorithm.

We now determine the messages that must be propagated.

Following Pearl [12], we denote child-to-parent messages as

messages, and parent-to-child messages as messages, so

that, e.g.,

and

, are, respectively, messages

transmitted from vertex to its parent and to its child .

Note that a message is always a function of the parent variable.

Consider a vertex , and suppose the children of are

indexed by the set , and the parents

of are indexed

by the set , written explicitly as

.

For

, the message sent by to its child is given by

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:55:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KSCHISCHANG AND FREY: ITERATIVE DECODING OF COMPOUND CODES

227

For

, the message sent by to its parent is given by Each message sent to a parent of requires the com-

putation of the product of the incoming messages, which

requires on the order of

operations, together with

operations, since we must sum over

nonzero products of

factors to marginalize the product

of the incoming messages. Each message sent to a

child of can be computed from (9) using approximately

operations. The total number of operations at is

approximately

, which is usually

dominated by the second term. We conclude, therefore, that

the total number of operations performed by the two-way

schedule for a Bayesian network with vertex set scales as

.

The conditional probability mass function for , given the set of messages received (which we denote by for “observations”) is given by

Note that

(9)

Although these expressions may at first glance seem com-

plicated, they are really a simple application of the general

propagation rule, which states that an outgoing message sent

on edge is computed as the product of all incoming messages

(except that on edge ) with the local function, with any

variables not to be carried on marginalized out. For Bayesian

networks common in coding applications, these propagation

updates are quite simple.

In applications of Bayesian networks, it will often be useful

to include variables that are continuous valued so as to

model, for example, channel outputs. While, strictly speaking,

continuous-valued variables do not enter the framework as

we have described it (except through the parameter ), we

will allow our Bayesian networks to have continuous-valued

variables, provided that such variables are observed and that

the corresponding vertices have no children. Since is re-

stricted to be childless, the problem of describing a continuous

conditional density function (needed for a message sent

from ) is avoided. In our diagrams of Bayesian networks,

continuous-valued observed vertices will be shown as filled

circles.

The complexity of probability propagation in a Bayesian

network (using the two-way schedule) depends on the manner

in which the messages are represented. Assuming that each

message is a vector of values of size given by the size of the

parent’s sample space, the computational complexity can be

estimated as follows. Denote the set of children of a vertex

as , and let

denote the size of this set. Recall

that the parents of are denoted . Let

denote the

number of nonzero entries in the table corresponding to the

local function at , and let denote the size of the sample

space for .

B. Probability Propagation in Bayesian Networks with Cycles
The tactic of deriving a propagation tree from the structure of the Bayesian network itself does not apply to Bayesian networks with (undirected) cycles because, clearly, the Bayesian network does not form a tree. In this subsection, we show with a small example that exact probability propagation is possible, but only at the expense of greater than unit thickness of the propagation tree. While this may be an acceptable tradeoff for simple networks, it may not be acceptable in complicated networks.
Consider the Bayesian network shown in Fig. 8(a). Two possible propagation trees for this Bayesian network are shown in Fig. 8(d) and (e), each of which has thickness 2. For this Bayesian network, it is not possible to achieve a propagation tree of unit thickness.
V. COMPOUND CODES
In Section I, we defined a compound code to be one which can be described by the interaction between constituent codes, each of which is tractably decodable on its own. Graphically, each constituent code is represented by a cycle-free constituent Bayesian network. These constituent networks share some variables so that, taken as a whole, the total Bayesian network is not cycle free. In general, there does not exist a unique decomposition of a compound code into its constituent codes, but the compound code is usually designed using well-known constituent codes.
A. Bayesian Networks for Some Known Codes
The Bayesian network for a systematic rate-1/3 compound turbo code is shown in Fig. 9(a), along with its cycle-free constituent networks. This compound code consists of two chain-type networks that are connected using a different ordering of the information symbol vertices. Whereas the upper chain directly uses the information sequence , the lower chain uses a permuted sequence, obtained by applying an interleaver. The systematic codeword component has been included with the upper constituent code. Wiberg et al. [20], [21] were probably the first to describe turbo codes using this type of graphical model.
A “serially concatenated” convolutional compound code was proposed by Benedetto and Montorsi [3]. Their system is essentially the same as Forney’s concatenated codes [2], with

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:55:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

228

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 16, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1998

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Fig. 8. In a Bayesian network with cycles (a), with factor graph (b), and propagation graph (c), the corresponding propagation trees must have maximum thickness at least 2. Two examples are shown in (d) and (e).

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 9. Bayesian networks for three compound codes and their constituent codes. (a) Systematic rate-1/3 turbo code. (b) Rate-1/2 “serially concatenated” convolutional code. (c) Low-density parity check code. (d) (15, 9) product code.

convolutional inner and outer codes. The Bayesian network for a nonsystematic rate-1/2 compound code of this sort is shown in Fig. 9(b), along with its two cycle-free constituent networks. Notice that the output of the outer convolutional code (including the systematic part) is used as the input to the inner convolutional code, via an interleaver. Only the output of the inner convolutional code is transmitted over the channel.
Fig. 9(c) shows an example of a Gallager low-density parity check code [5]. This code consists of parity check restrictions on subsets of the codeword symbols, denoted by . (The mapping from information blocks to codewords is not directly specified.) Each variable in the row of variables above the codeword symbol row is a binary indicator, which takes on the nonzero value only for configurations of its parents that

have even parity. The channel outputs are indicated below the row of codeword symbols. MacKay and Neal [16] were the first to describe Gallager’s codes using Bayesian networks.
Fig. 9(d) shows an example of a simple product code, in which a single parity bit checks the parity of each row and column of the information bit array (enclosed in the dotted box). The channel output symbols are not shown.
B. Iterative Decoding: Probability Propagation for Compound Codes
Since each constituent Bayesian network in a compound code is cycle free, probabilities for each random variable given the observed random variables can be efficiently computed exactly within each constituent network. However, because the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:55:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KSCHISCHANG AND FREY: ITERATIVE DECODING OF COMPOUND CODES

229

compound network has cycles, probability propagation is only an approximate algorithm for computing these probabilities. As we see it, the general idea of iterative decoding is to make use of the efficient probability propagation algorithm for each constituent network, while either ignoring the cycles or somehow taking them into account. This graphical framework unifies several iterative decoding algorithms. The turbo decoding algorithm, the “separable MAP filter” algorithm [6], the new iterative decoding algorithm [4] used for decoding “serially concatenated” convolutional codes, and, as first pointed out by MacKay and Neal [16], Gallager’s algorithm for decoding low-density parity check codes [5] are all a form of probability propagation in the compound code networks shown in Fig. 9.
The overall decoding procedure essentially consists of applying probability propagation while ignoring the graph cycles. The procedure can be broken down into a series of processing cycles. In each cycle, probabilities are propagated across a particular constituent network, producing current estimates of the distributions over information symbols, state variables, and codeword symbols, given the observed channel output. The next cycle then uses the probability estimates produced by the previous cycle when processing the next constituent network. Usually, the constituent codes are processed in order, and one pass through all of the codes is called an iteration. An iteration essentially consists of propagating probabilities across the network as if it were cycle free, stopping when each vertex has been processed once. In fact, because the compound code network has cycles, the propagation procedure actually never self-terminates. Usually, the cyclic procedure is allowed to iterate until some termination criterion is satisfied. Then, the information symbols are detected, usually in the fashion of the maximum a posteriori (MAP) symbol probability decoding rule.
C. Turbo Decoding: Probability Propagation for Turbo Codes
For example, as shown explicitly in [19], this probability propagation algorithm, when applied to turbo codes, is the standard turbo decoding algorithm. The turbo decoding algorithm uses the forward–backward algorithm [35], [36] (or an approximation to it) to process each constituent trellis. The algorithm uses “extrinsic information” [1], [7] produced by the previous step when processing the next trellis. This is the information that is passed from one trellis to the other through the information symbols. In probability propagation terminology, extrinsic information is the set of parent–child probability messages that are passed down from the information symbols to one constituent network, in response to the child–parent messages received from the other network.
Fig. 10 shows the message-passing dynamics for a simplified turbo code Bayesian network. When the channel output is observed (as shown by the filled disks), messages propagate up to the state vertices of both constituent networks, creating pending messages on the incident edges (as indicated by black dots in the figure). These messages are the codeword symbol likelihoods as determined by the channel model and the channel output. Each constituent network is processed one at a time in the manner of the forward–backward algorithm. The information symbols receive probability messages from the constituent network just processed. In the case of the single

Fig. 10. Probability propagation in the Bayesian network for a turbo code. The dashed polygon encloses the steps in a single iteration. Black dots without arrows represent pending messages.
code, the information symbols are each connected by a single edge, and so propagation terminates. In this case, however, a set of messages is passed to the other constituent network (these messages are the “extrinsic information”). Since there will always be messages pending, the overall procedure repeats the basic “iteration” shown in the pictures outlined by the dashed polygon.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we have attempted to unify various recently developed themes in iterative decoding. We have reviewed graphical code models, including Markov random fields, Tanner graphs, and Bayesian networks, all of which encode the “local” probabilistic structure of codes and channels.
We have developed a distributed marginalization algorithm in the general setting of a factor graph. Given a function of discrete variables that can be written as a product of local potential functions, marginalization can be carried out by a message-passing procedure in a propagation tree, derived from the second higher power of the factor graph. The “thickness” of an edge in this tree is equal to the number of variables that must be carried over this edge to perform exact marginalization. In a cycle-free Bayesian network, the network itself—when used as a propagation tree—achieves a maximum edge thickness of unity. This observation is the key to Pearl’s “belief” or probability propagation algorithm, which computes the a posteriori distribution exactly in a cycle-free Bayesian network.
For compound codes, however, the Bayesian networks are not cycle free. Nevertheless, the networks are broken into tractable subnetworks, each describing a constituent code and in which probability propagation can be applied. Iterating over these constituent decoders can result in excellent decoding performance in practice, as demonstrated by Berrou et al. [1]. We have shown that many recently proposed iterative decoders can be described as message passing in a graphical code model.
In general, it is a straightforward exercise to develop Bayesian network models for many coding schemes, such

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:55:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

230

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 16, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1998

as multilevel codes and coset codes, and also for channels more general than the usual memoryless channels. We believe that there are many possibilities for the application of iterative decoding techniques beyond what has been described in the literature to date.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors are grateful for useful comments on an earlier version of this paper made by the reviewers and by G. D. Forney, Jr., H.-A. Loeliger, and C. Asavathiratham. The concept of factor graphs as a generalization of Tanner graphs was devised by a group at ISIT’97 in Ulm that included the authors, H.-A. Loeliger, D. J. C. MacKay, N. Wiberg, and R. M. Tanner. The authors are grateful for discussions on this topic with S. M. Aji, G. D. Forney, Jr., R. Ko¨tter, and R. J. McEliece.

REFERENCES

[1] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit

error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int.

Conf. Commun. (ICC), Geneva, Switzerland, 1993, pp. 1064–1070.

[2] G. D. Forney, Jr., Concatenated Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,

1966.

[3] S. Benedetto and G. Montorsi, “Serial concatenation of block and

convolutional codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 887–888, 1996.

[4]

, “Iterative decoding of serially concatenated convolutional

codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 1186–1188, 1996.

[5] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA:

MIT Press, 1963.

[6] J. Lodge, R. Young, P. Hoeher, and J. Hagenauer, “Separable MAP

‘filters’ for the decoding of product and concatenated codes,” in Proc.

IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 1993, pp. 1740–1745.

[7] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of binary

block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42,

pp. 429–445, 1996.

[8] B. J. Frey and F. R. Kschischang, “Probability propagation and itera-

tive decoding,” in Proc. 34th Annual Allerton Conf. Commun., Contr.,

Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 1996, pp. 482–493.

[9] B. J. Frey, Graphical Models for Machine Learning and Digi-

 tal Communication. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998 [www].
http://www.cs.utoronto.ca/ frey.

[10] J. Pearl, “Fusion, propagation, and structuring in belief networks,” Artif.

Intell., vol. 29, pp. 241–288, 1986.

[11] S. L. Lauritzen and D. J. Spiegelhalter, “Local computations with

probabilities on graphical structures and their application to expert

systems,” J. Roy. Stat. Soc. B, vol. 50, pp. 157–224, 1988.

[12] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of

Plausible Inference. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988,

revised 2nd printing.

[13] R. E. Neapolitan, Probabilistic Reasoning in Expert Systems: Theory and

Algorithms. Toronto, Ont., Canada: Wiley, 1990.

[14] F. V. Jensen, An Introduction to Bayesian Networks. New York:

Springer Verlag, 1996.

[15] S. L. Lauritzen, Graphical Models. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford Univ. Press,

1996.

[16] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Good codes based on very sparse

matrices,” in Cryptography and Coding, 5th IMA Conf., C. Boyd, Ed.,

no. 1025 in Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Berlin, Germany:

Springer, 1995, pp. 100–111.

[17]

, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check

codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645–1646, 1996. Reprinted

in Electron. Lett., vol. 33, pp. 457–458, Mar. 1997.

[18] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse

matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, submitted for publication, 1997.

[19] R. J. McEliece, D. J. C. MacKay, and J.-F. Cheng, “Turbo decoding

as an instance of Pearl’s ‘belief propagation’ algorithm,” this issue, pp.

140–152.

[20] N. Wiberg, H.-A. Loeliger, and R. Ko¨tter, “Codes and iterative decoding

on general graphs,” Eur. Trans. Telecommun., vol. 6, pp. 513–525,

Sept./Oct. 1995.

[21] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation,

Linko¨ping Univ., Sweden, 1996.

[22] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE

Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.

[23] G. D. Forney, Jr., “Trellises old and new,” in Communications and

Cryptography: Two Sides of One Tapestry, R. E. Blahut, D. J. Costello,

Jr., U. Maurer, and T. Mittelholzer, Eds. Norwell, MA: Kluwer, 1994,

pp. 115–128.

[24]

, “The forward–backward algorithm,” in Proc. 34th Annual Aller-

ton Conf. Commun., Contr., Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 1996, pp.

432–446.

[25] R. Kindermann and J. L. Snell, Markov Random Fields and their

Applications. Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society, 1980.

[26] C. J. Preston, Gibbs States on Countable Sets. Cambridge, U.K.:

Cambridge Univ. Press, 1974.

[27] V. Isham, “An introduction to spatial point processes and Markov

random fields,” Int. Statist. Rev., vol. 49, pp. 21–43, 1981.

[28] G. E. Hinton and T. J. Sejnowski, “Learning and relearning in Boltz-

mann machines,” Parallel Distributed Processing: Explorations in the

Microstructure of Cognition, D. E. Rumelhart and J. L. McClelland,

Eds. Cambridge MA: MIT Press, 1986, vol. I, pp. 282–317.

[29] S. M. Aji and R. J. McEliece, “A general algorithm for distributing

information on a graph,” in Proc. 1997 IEEE Int. Symp. Inform. Theory,

Ulm, Germany, July 1997, p. 6.

[30] S. Verdu´ and H. V. Poor, “Abstract dynamic programming models

under commutativity conditions,” SIAM J. Contr. Optim., vol. 25, pp.

990–1006, July 1987.

[31] R. J. McEliece, “On the BJCR trellis for linear block codes,” IEEE

Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 1072–1092, July 1996.

[32] E. Schro¨dinger, Statistical Thermodynamics. Cambridge: Cambridge

University Press, 1962.

[33] B. J. Frey, F. R. Kschischang, and P. G. Gulak, “Concurrent turbo-

decoding,” in Proc. 1997 IEEE Int. Symp. Inform. Theory, Ulm, Ger-

many, 1997, p. 431.

[34] D. Bertsekas and R. Gallager, Data Networks, 2nd ed. Englewood

Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1992.

[35] L. E. Baum and T. Petrie, “Statistical inference for probabilistic func-

tions of finite state Markov chains,” Ann. Math. Statist., vol. 37, pp.

1559–1563, 1966.

[36] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of

linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inform.

Theory, vol. IT-20, pp. 284–287, 1974.

Frank R. Kschischang (S’83–M’91), for a photograph and biography, see this issue, p. 159.

Brendan J. Frey, for a photograph and biography, see this issue, p. 159.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:55:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

