140

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 16, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1998

Turbo Decoding as an Instance of Pearl’s “Belief Propagation” Algorithm
Robert J. McEliece, Fellow, IEEE, David J. C. MacKay, and Jung-Fu Cheng

Abstract—In this paper, we will describe the close connection between the now celebrated iterative turbo decoding algorithm of Berrou et al. and an algorithm that has been well known in the artificial intelligence community for a decade, but which is relatively unknown to information theorists: Pearl’s belief propagation algorithm. We shall see that if Pearl’s algorithm is applied to the “belief network” of a parallel concatenation of two or more codes, the turbo decoding algorithm immediately results. Unfortunately, however, this belief diagram has loops, and Pearl only proved that his algorithm works when there are no loops, so an explanation of the excellent experimental performance of turbo decoding is still lacking. However, we shall also show that Pearl’s algorithm can be used to routinely derive previously known iterative, but suboptimal, decoding algorithms for a number of other error-control systems, including Gallager’s low-density parity-check codes, serially concatenated codes, and product codes. Thus, belief propagation provides a very attractive general methodology for devising low-complexity iterative decoding algorithms for hybrid coded systems.
Index Terms—Belief propagation, error-correcting codes, iterative decoding, Pearl’s Algorithm, probabilistic inference, turbo codes.
I. INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY
TURBO codes, which were introduced in 1993 by Berrou et al. [10], are the most exciting and potentially important development in coding theory in many years. Many of the structural properties of turbo codes have now been put on a firm theoretical footing [7], [18], [20], [21], [27], [45], and several innovative variations on the turbo theme have appeared [5], [8], [9], [12], [27], [48].
What is still lacking, however, is a satisfactory theoretical explanation of why the turbo decoding algorithm performs as well as it does. While we cannot yet announce a solution to this problem, we believe that the answer may come from a close study of Pearl’s belief propagation algorithm, which is largely unknown to information theorists, but well known in the artificial intelligence community. (The first mention of belief propagation in a communications paper, and indeed the
Manuscript received September 27, 1996; revised May 3, 1997. This work was supported by NSF Grant NCR-9505975, AFOSR Grant 5F49620-971-0313, and a grant from Qualcomm, Inc. A portion of R. J. McEliece’s contribution was done while he was visiting the Sony Corporation in Tokyo. The collaboration between D. J. C. MacKay and R. J. McEliece was begun at, and partially supported by, the Newton Institute for Mathematical Sciences, Cambridge, U.K.
R. J. McEliece is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125 USA.
D. J. C. MacKay is with the Cavendish Laboratory, Department of Physics, Darwin College, Cambridge University, Cambridge CB3 OHE U.K.
J.-F. Cheng is with Salomon Brothers Inc., New York, NY 10048 USA. Publisher Item Identifier S 0733-8716(98)00170-X.

paper that motivated this one, is that of MacKay and Neal [37]. See also [38] and [39].)
In this paper, we will review the turbo decoding algorithm as originally expounded by Berrou et al. [10], but which was perhaps explained more lucidly in [3], [18], or [50]. We will then describe Pearl’s algorithm, first in its natural “AI” setting, and then show that if it is applied to the “belief network” of a turbo code, the turbo decoding algorithm immediately results. Unfortunately, however, this belief network has loops, and Pearl’s algorithm only gives exact answers when there are no loops, so the existing body of knowledge about Pearl’s algorithm does not solve the central problem of turbo decoding. Still, it is interesting and suggestive that Pearl’s algorithm yields the turbo decoding algorithm so easily. Furthermore, we shall show that Pearl’s algorithm can also be used to derive effective iterative decoding algorithms for a number of other error-control systems, including Gallager’s low-density parity-check codes, the recently introduced lowdensity generator matrix codes, serially concatenated codes, and product codes. Some of these “BP” decoding algorithms agree with the ones previously derived by ad hoc methods, and some are new, but all prove to be remarkably effective. In short, belief propagation provides an attractive general method for devising low-complexity iterative decoding algorithms for hybrid coded systems. This is the message of the paper. (A similar message is given in the paper by Kschischang and Frey [33] in this issue.)
Here is an outline of the paper. In Section II, we derive some simple but important results about, and introduce some compact notation for, “optimal symbol decision” decoding algorithms. In Section III, we define what we mean by a turbo code, and review the turbo decoding algorithm. Our definitions are deliberately more general than what has previously appeared in the literature. In particular, our transmitted information is not binary, but rather comes from a -ary alphabet, which means that we must deal with -ary probability distributions instead of the traditional “log-likelihood ratios.” Furthermore, the reader may be surprised to find no discussion of “interleavers,” which are an essential component of all turbo-coding systems. This is because, as we will articulate fully in our concluding remarks, we believe that the interleaver’s contribution is to make the turbo code a “good” code, but it has nothing directly to do with the fact that the turbo decoding algorithm is a good approximation to an optimal decoder. In Section IV, we change gears, and give a tutorial overview of the general probabilistic inference problem, with special reference to Bayesian belief networks. In Section V,

0733–8716/98$10.00 © 1998 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:54:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MCELIECE et al.: TURBO DECODING AS PEARL’S ALGORITHM

141

= Fig. 1. Codeword X (U ; X 1) is transmitted over a memoryless channel
and received as Y = (Y s; Y 1):

we describe Pearl’s BP algorithm, which can be defined on any belief network, and which gives an exact solution to the probabilistic inference problem when the belief network has no loops. In Section VI, we show that the turbo decoding algorithm follows from a routine application of Pearl’s algorithm to the appropriate (loopy) belief network. In Section VII, we briefly sketch some other decoding algorithms that can be derived from BP considerations. Finally, in Section VIII, we summarize our findings and venture some conclusions.

II. PRELIMINARIES

In this section, we will describe a general class of -ary

systematic encoders, and derive the optimal symbol-by-symbol

decoding rule for a memoryless channel.

Let

be a -dimensional random vector of

independent, but not necessarily equiprobable, symbols from

a -letter alphabet with

for

The vector represents information to be transmitted reliably

over an unreliable channel. We suppose that is encoded

systematically, i.e., mapped into a codeword of the form

(2.1)

(A communication theorist would use the term “a poste-

riori probability,” rather than “belief.”) If is such that

for all

the decoder infers that

The following straightforward computation is central

to our results. In this computation, and for the rest of the paper,

we will use Pearl’s notation [44].

Definition 2.1: If

and

are vectors of nonnegative real numbers, the notation

means that

for

In

other words, is a probability vector whose components are

proportional to those of (If

and

are nonnegative

real-valued functions defined on a finite set, the notation

is defined similarly.)

Lemma 2.2: If the likelihood

1 is denoted by

then the belief

defined in (2.4) is given by

(2.5)
Proof: We have, by the definition (2.4), Then

where is the “systematic” part and is the “nonsystem-

atic” part of the codeword In the rest of the paper, we will

sometimes call a codeword fragment.

We assume that the codeword is transmitted over a

noisy channel with transition probabilities

and received as

where is

the portion of corresponding to the systematic part of the

codeword and is the portion corresponding to the

codeword fragment We assume further that the channel is

memoryless, which implies that the conditional density factors

according to the rule

using the notation by

by (2.2)

(2.3)

where denotes the th component of The situation is depicted in Fig. 1.
The decoding problem is to “infer” the values of the hidden variables based on the “evidence,” viz. the observed values
and of the variables and The optimal decision, i.e., the one that minimizes the probability of inferring an incorrect value for is the one based on the conditional probability, or “belief,” that the information symbol in question has a given value
(2.4)

The last two lines of the above calculation are the assertions

of the lemma.

We see from (2.5) that

is the product of three

terms. The first term,

might be called the systematic

evidence term. The second term,

takes into account the a

priori distribution of Note that the effect of the systematic

evidence is, in effect, to change the prior distribution of

from

to

The third term, which is more

1 If the encoder is not systematic, i.e., if the uncoded information symbols Ui are not transmitted, these likelihoods should all be set equal to one.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:54:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

142

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 16, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1998

= = TABLE I
UPDATE RULES FOR PEARL’S ALGORITHM (HERE, hvi

n v1v2 1 1 1 v ; IF v

n (v1; 1 1 1 ; v )

IS A VECTOR OF REAL NUMBERS)

complicated, takes into account the geometry of the code.

Following [10], we will call this term the extrinsic term, and

denote it by

The extrinsic term is so important to what

follows that we shall introduce a special notation for it. (This

notation will also prove useful in Section V, where we shall

use it to describe Pearl’s algorithm—see Table I, line 6.)

Thus, let

be finite alphabets, let

and let denote the set of real numbers. Let

be a function mapping into

In

other words, is a vector of real-valued functions, and if

then

Now, suppose that

is a real-valued function defined on

the set which we call a kernel. The transform of is

the vector

where is defined by

(2.6)

where the codeword fragment

is a deterministic

function of Then Lemma 2.2 can be summarized as follows:

(2.9)

where

and

III. SYSTEMATIC PARALLEL CONCATENATED (TURBO) CODES
In this section, we will define what we mean by a turbo code, and present a general version of the turbo decoding algorithm.
With the same setup as in Section II, suppose we have two systematic encodings of

One way to combine and into a single code is via the mapping

We summarize (2.6) by writing

(2.7)

Next, if and are vector-valued functions as above, we de-

fine their adjacent product

as a simple componentwise

product, i.e.,

where

(2.8)

Using the circle and adjacent notation,2 we can express the

result of Lemma 2.2 compactly. To do so, we take

and define a kernel

as

which is called the parallel concatenation of and or the

turbo code formed by combining and

Once again, we assume that the codeword is transmitted

through a noisy channel with transition probabilities

It

is received as

where is the component

of corresponding to

is the component of corre-

sponding to and is the component of corresponding

to We assume again that the channel is memoryless, which

implies that the conditional density factors according to the

rule

(3.1)

2 We assume that “adjacent” takes precedence over “circle” in order to

minimize the use of parentheses.

The situation is as depicted in Fig. 2.

(3.2)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:54:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MCELIECE et al.: TURBO DECODING AS PEARL’S ALGORITHM

143

= Fig. 2. Generic “turbo code.” The codeword X (U ; X1; X 2) is trans-
mitted over a memoryless channel and received as Y = (Y s; Y 1; Y 1):

By Lemma 2.2, the optimal decisions for the turbo code are Fig. 3. Block diagram of turbo decoding procedure.

based on the beliefs

given.) If the decision is made after iterations, the th

turbo decision is defined as

(3.9)

(3.3)

For simplicity, and in accordance with engineering practice,

from now on we will assume that the a priori probability

density of the ’s is uniform, i.e.,

With

this assumption, using the notation introduced in Section II,

(3.3) becomes3

We conclude this section by observing that, as we have

stated it, the turbo algorithm [(3.7) and (3.9)] does not appear

to be significantly simpler than the optimal algorithm (3.4)

since (for example)

is not, in general, much easier

to compute than

The following theorem, and the

discussion that follows, shed light on this problem.

Theorem 3.1: If the components of are assumed to be

independent, with

for

then

if is odd

(3.4) where the kernels and are defined by

(3.5)

The celebrated “turbo decoding algorithm” [10], [50], [3]

is an iterative approximation to the optimal beliefs in (3.3)

or (3.4), whose performance, while demonstrably suboptimal

[41], has nevertheless proved to be “nearly optimal” in an im-

pressive array of experiments. The heart of the turbo algorithm

is an iteratively defined sequence

of product probability

densities on defined by

if is even (3.10)
Proof: We consider the case odd, the proof for even being essentially the same. By reasoning similar to that in Lemma 2.2, we find that

If we divide both sides of (3.11) by

(3.11) we obtain

(3.6)

i.e., is a list of uniform densities on and for

if is odd if is even.

(3.7) Since by (3.7),

(3.12) the theorem follows.

Then the th turbo belief vector is defined by
(3.8)
The general form of (3.7) is shown in Fig. 3. In a “practical” decoder, the decision about the information
bits is usually made after a fixed number of iterations. (The hope that the limit of (3.8) will exist is, in general, a vain one since, in [41], several examples of nonconvergence are
3 As we observed earlier, the effect of  is to change the prior distribution from  to : It follows that if there is a nonuniform prior ; it can be accounted for by replacing every occurrence of “” in our formulas with :

The significance of Theorem 3.1 is that it tells us that the

appropriate components of the vectors

can be computed

by a decoder for (or which is capable of computing the

probabilities

based on an observation

of the noisy codeword

i.e., an optimal “soft”

symbol decision decoder. The th component of the message

passed to the second decoder module is then

(3.13)

which is the “extrinsic information” referred to earlier.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:54:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

144

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 16, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1998

One of the keys to the success of turbo codes is to use component codes and for which a low-complexity soft bit decision algorithm exists. For example, the BCJR or “APP” decoding algorithm [4] provides such an algorithm for any code, block or convolutional, that can be represented by a trellis.4
As far as is known, a code with a low-complexity optimal decoding algorithm cannot achieve high performance, which means that individually, the codes and must be relatively weak. The brilliant innovation of Berrou et al. [10] was to devise a code of the type shown in Fig. 2, in which the individual codes and are indeed relatively weak (but have a low-complexity decoding algorithm), in such a way that that the overall code is very powerful. Roughly speaking, they accomplished this by making the encoder identical to except for a random permutation (accomplished by the “interleaver”) of the inputs. (The encoders were short-constraint-length systematic convolutional encoders with feedback.) However, since it is the object of this paper to study the decoding algorithm without regard to the resulting performance, we shall not discuss the constructive aspect of turbo codes further.

IV. BACKGROUND ON PROBABILISTIC INFERENCE, BAYESIAN BELIEF NETWORKS, AND PEARL’S ALGORITHM

In this section, we will give a tutorial overview of the

so-called probabilistic inference problem of the artificial in-

telligence community, as well as a brief discussion of Pearl’s

algorithm, which solves the probabilistic inference problem in

many important special cases.

Thus, let

5 be a set of discrete

random variables, where assumes values in the finite

alphabet The joint density function

is then a mapping from

into the set of real

numbers We assume that the marginal densities

are also known. The marginal density func-

tion

represents our a priori “belief” about the random

variable Now, suppose that one or more of these random

variables is measured or “observed.” This means that there is

a subset

(the evidence set) such that, for all

the random variable is known to have a particular

value, say The evidence is then defined to be the event

Fig. 4. Simple example of a DAG which represents a five-variable directed
Markov field [see (4.4)]. This DAG is “loopy,” with the vertices v1; v3; v4; and v5 forming a loop.

or To simplify notation, we assume

and

Then we have

(4.1)

If can assume different values, then computing the

sum in (4.1) for each possible value of requires

additions, which is impractical unless and the ’s are very

small numbers.

The idea behind the “Bayesian belief network” approach

[28], [51] to this inference problem is to exploit any “partial

independencies” which may exist among the ’s to simplify

belief updating. The simplest case of this is when the random

variables

are mutually independent, in which

case the work in (4.1) can be avoided altogether since an

observation of one such variable cannot affect our belief in

another. More generally, the partial independencies can be

described by a directed acyclic graph, or DAG.

A DAG is a finite, directed graph, in which there are no

directed cycles. For example, Fig. 4 shows a DAG with five

vertices and five edges. Let us agree that if there is a directed

edge

then will be called a “parent” of and will

be called a “child” of If the set of parents of a vertex is

denoted by

then we can describe the graph of Fig. 4

as follows:

The fundamental probabilistic inference problem is to com-

pute the updated beliefs, i.e., the a posteriori or conditional

probabilities

for all

The brute force approach to computing

is to sum

over all of the terms of

which do not involve either

4 As we shall see in Section IV, the BCJR algorithm itself, and the many variations of it, are themselves special cases of Pearl’s algorithm. In this application, the algorithm is provably exact since the corresponding “belief” diagram has no loops.
5 We have already used upper case X’s to denote codeword components, for example, (2.1). We use upper case X’s here to denote arbitrary random variables, and hope no confusion will occur.

(4.2)
If is a DAG, and if is a set of random variables in one-to-one correspondence with the vertices of the joint density function is said to factor according to if

(4.3)

where

denotes a value assignment for the parents of

For example, a five-variable density function

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:54:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MCELIECE et al.: TURBO DECODING AS PEARL’S ALGORITHM

145

Fig. 6. Bayesian network for the “hidden Markov chain” problem. Here,
N X1; 1 1 1 ; X form a Markov chain, and N Y1; 1 1 1 ; Y are noisy versions of X1; 1 1 1 ; XN : The problem is to compute the conditional probabilities of the hidden variables Xi based in the “evidence” variables Yi:

Fig. 5. Bayesian network interpretation of the decoding problem.
factors according to the graph of Fig. 4 if

(4.4)

A set of random variables whose density functions factor

according to a given DAG is called a directed Markov field

[35], [32], [65]. For example, if is a directed chain, then

is an ordinary Markov chain. A DAG, together with the

associated random variables is called a Bayesian belief

network, or Bayesian network for short [28].

At this point, we observe that the general coding framework

of Fig. 1 can be represented as the Bayesian network shown

in Fig. 5. From the decoder’s viewpoint, the observed noisy

information bits are probabilistic functions of the hidden

information bits Similarly, the observed noisy codeword

fragment is a probabilistic function of the codeword

which in turn is a deterministic function of the hidden

input bits. (Fig. 5 implies that the information bits are

independent.) The decoder’s problem is thus to infer the values

of the hidden variables based on the evidence variables

and

Bayesian networks can sometimes lead to considerable

simplifications of the probabilistic inference problem. The

most important of these simplifications, for our purposes, is

Pearl’s belief propagation algorithm. In the 1980’s, Kim and

Pearl [31], [42]–[44] showed that if the DAG is a “tree,”

i.e., if there are no loops,6 then there are efficient distributed

algorithms for solving the inference problem. If all of the

alphabets have the same size Pearl’s algorithm solves the

inference problem on trees with

computations, where

is the maximum number of parents of any vertex, rather than

where is the number of unknown random variables,

which is required by the brute-force method. The efficiency

of belief propagation on trees stands in sharp contrast to

the situation for general DAG’s since, in 1990, Cooper [16]

showed that the inference problem in general DAG’s is NP

hard. (See also [17] and [53] for more on the NP hardness of

probabilistic inference in Bayesian networks.)

Since the network in Fig. 5 is a tree, Pearl’s algorithm will

apply. However, the result is uninteresting: Pearl’s algorithm

applied to this Bayesian network merely gives an alternative

derivation of Lemma 2.2.

! ! ! ! 6 A “loop” is a cycle in the underlying undirected graph. For example, in
the DAG of Fig. 4, v1 v4 v5 v3 v1 is a loop.

A more profitable application of Pearl’s algorithm is to the classic “hidden Markov chain” inference problem, where the appropriate Bayesian network is shown in Fig. 6. Here, the result is a linear-time exact solution which is functionally identical to the celebrated “forward–backward algorithm” discovered in the 1960’s and 1970’s.7
For us, the important feature of Pearl’s BP algorithm is that it can be defined for an arbitrary DAG which is not necessarily a tree, even though there is no guarantee that the algorithm will perform a useful calculation if there are loops in the DAG. We believe that the key to the success of turbo codes, and a potentially important research area for the AI community, is the experimentally observed fact that Pearl’s algorithm works “approximately” for some loopy, i.e., nontree DAG’s.8 We shall explain the connection between turbo codes and BP in Section VI, after first describing the BP algorithm in detail in Section V. For now, as a preview of coming attractions, we present Fig. 7, which is a loopy Bayesian network appropriate for the turbo decoding problem.9
V. DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF PEARL’S ALGORITHM
In this section, we will give a detailed functional description of Pearl’s algorithm as described in [44, Ch. 4].
7 The forward–backward algorithm has a long and convoluted history that merits the attention of a science historian. It seems to have first appeared in the unclassified literature in two independent 1966 publications [6], [11]. Soon afterwards, it appeared in papers on MAP detection of digital sequences in the presence of intersymbol interference [23]. It appeared explicitly as an algorithm for tracking the states of a Markov chain in the early 1970’s [40], [4] (see also the survey papers [47] and [49]). A similar algorithm (in “minsum” form) appeared in a 1971 paper on equalization [62]. The algorithm was connected to the optimization literature in 1987 [63]. All of this activity appears to have been completely independent of the developments in AI that led to Pearl’s algorithm!
8 There is an “exact” inference algorithm for an arbitrary DAG, developed by Lauritzen and Spiegelhalter [34], which solves the inference problem with O(NcqJ ) computations, where Nc is the number of cliques in the undirected triangulated “moralized” graph Gm which can be derived from G; and J is the maximum number of vertices in any clique in Gm: However, this proves not to be helpful in the turbo decoding problem since the appropriate DAG produces moralized graphs with huge cliques. For example, the turbo codes in [10] have an associated Gm with a clique of size 16 384.
9 Our Fig. 7 should be compared to Wiberg [67, Fig. 2.5], which describes the “Tanner graph” of a turbo code. The figures are similar, but there is a key difference. Wiberg incorporates the turbo code’s interleaver, citing it (the interleaver) as necessary for ensuring that there are no short cycles in the graph. In our Fig. 7, on the other hand, there are many short cycles. It is our belief the presence of short cycles does not, at least in many cases, compromise the performance of the decoding algorithm, although it may degrade the quality of the code. We will expand on these remarks at the conclusion of the paper.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:54:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

146

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 16, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1998

! ! ! ! Fig. 7. Bayesian network interpretation of the turbo decoding problem. Note
the presence of many loops, i.e., U1 X 2 U2 X 1 U1:

(a)

Pearl’s belief propagation algorithm is a decentralized “message-passing” algorithm, in which there is a processor associated with each vertex of Each processor can communicate only with its parents and children. Furthermore, the processor associated with a variable is assumed to

“know” the conditional density function

where

are the

parents of (If has no parents, this knowledge is assumed

to be the marginal density function

.)

Thus, the “local environment” of a node is as shown in

Fig. 8(a).

When a processor is activated, it “reads” the messages

received from each of its parents and children, updates its

belief based on these messages, and then sends new messages

back to its parents and children.

The message a node receives from its parent denoted

is in the form of a list of probabilities (“ ” for

“probability”), one for each value

Informally,

is the probability of the event

conditioned

on the evidence in the tree already “known” to Similarly,

the message receives from its child denoted

is

in the form of a list of nonnegative real numbers (likelihoods:

“ ” for “likelihood”), one for each value of

Informally,

is the probability of the evidence

“knows,” conditioned on the event

For simplicity,

we adopt a vector notation for these incoming messages

(b)

(c)
Fig. 8. Summary of Pearl’s algorithm. (Boldface symbols denote random vectors; ordinary symbols represent random variables.)

the event

Again, we adopt a vector notation

(5.2)

(5.1)

The situation is summarized in Fig. 8(b).

After has been activated, the message that passes to its

child denoted

is a list of probabilities, one for

each value of Roughly speaking,

is the probability

of the event

given the evidence in the tree already

“known” to which now includes any new evidence which

may have been contained in the incoming messages. Similarly,

the message that passes to its parent denoted

is the probability of the evidence it now knows about, given

This situation is summarized in Fig. 8(c). Additionally, each node of the graph keeps track of a
number of other quantities

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:54:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MCELIECE et al.: TURBO DECODING AS PEARL’S ALGORITHM

147

TABLE II INITIALIZATION RULES FOR PEARL’S ALGORITHM

The quantities

and

have no

particular intrinsic significance, but the quantity

is

the heart of the algorithm since, when the algorithm termi-

nates,

gives the value of the desired conditional

probability

Here, then, is a complete description of Pearl’s

algorithm. When the node is activated, it “reads” its

incoming messages

and

and updates

and

in that order, using the update rules in Table I and

the initial values given in Table II. (In Table I, we use the

notation

if

is a vector

of real numbers.) A node can be activated only if all of

its incoming messages exist. Otherwise, the order of node

activation is arbitrary. Pearl proved that if the DAG is a

tree, then after a number of iterations at most equal to the

diameter of the tree, each node will have correctly computed

its “belief,” i.e., the probability of the associated random

variable, conditioned on all of the evidence in the tree, and

no further changes in the beliefs will occur. If the network is

not a tree, the algorithm has no definite termination point, but

in practice, the termination rule chosen is either to stop after

a predetermined number of iterations, or else to stop when

the computed beliefs cease to change significantly.

VI. TURBO DECODING AS AN INSTANCE OF BP

In this section, we will show formally that if Pearl’s BP

algorithm is applied to the belief network of Fig. 7, the result

is an algorithm which is identical to the “turbo decoding”

algorithm described in Section III. More precisely, we will

show that if the network of Fig. 7 is initialized using the rules

of Table II, and if the nodes are updated (using Table I) in

the order

the results are summarized

in Table III. In particular, the sequence of “beliefs” in the

TABLE III PEARL’S ALGORITHM APPLIED TO THE BELIEF NETWORK OF FIG. 7 (NODES ARE ACTIVATED IN THE ORDER SHOWN IN THE FIRST COLUMN)

information symbols will be

in agreement with (3.8).

Let us now verify the entries in Table III. First, we discuss

the necessary initializations. Because is a source node (i.e.,

it has no parents), and since we are assuming that the prior

distribution on the ’s is independent and uniform, by line 3

in Table II, the quantity

is permanently set as follows:

permanent

(6.1)

Since the ’s are “direct evidence” nodes (i.e., evidence nodes which have only one parent), by line 6 of Table II, the message that sends the is permanently set as follows:

permanent (6.2)

Since the nodes and are not evidence nodes, by line 6 of Table II, the messages that they send to the ’s are

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:54:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

148

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 16, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1998

initially set as follows:

temporary

(6.3)

which appears (in vector notation) in line 1 of Table III. Now, we simultaneously activate the nodes
Since is a source node, it is not necessary to evaluate or the messages. By line 2 of Table I

(6.4)

by (6.2) and (6.3)

(6.5)

Similarly, by line 5 of Table I

(6.6)

by (6.1) and (6.5)

(6.7)

In vector notation, (6.7) is equivalent to

TABLE IV PEARL’S ALGORITHM APPLIED IN A SLIGHTLY DIFFERENT WAY TO THE BELIEF NETWORK OF FIG. 7 (NODES ARE ACTIVATED IN THE ORDER SHOWN IN THE FIRST COLUMN)
Similarly, using the definition (6.6), and the previous values in (6.4) and (6.1)

which appears in line 2 of Table III. The message sends to is, according to line 7, Table I

(6.8)

by (6.1), (6.2), (6.3)

(6.9)

for

In vector notation, (6.9) becomes

(6.10)

which also appears in line 2 of Table III. A similar calculation

gives

which again appears in line 2 of Table III.

Next, we update The quantities

and

are not required since we do not update the

evidence node Since is an evidence node, by line

6, Table II, the message

is permanently fixed as

Thus, by line 2, Table I,

is also fixed

permanent

(6.11)

Next, we compute

using line 4 of Table I:

Since is a deterministic function of if follows that is equal to 1 for that value of that produces the
code fragment i.e.,

permanent

(6.12)

where in 6.12 we have used the definition (3.5). Finally, we

update the messages

using line 6 of Table I

by (6.10) and (6.12)

by (3.6)

by (3.7)

(6.13)

which appears in line 3 of Table III. Now, we update again, using the definition (6.4), and the
previous values given in (6.2), (6.13), and (6.3)

(6.14)

which, in vector notation, is

in agreement with line 4 of Table III.

Next, we update

and

by (6.8) by (6.1), (6.2), (6.3)
(6.15)

and

like (6.8) by (6.1), (6.2), (6.4)
(6.16)

The values (6.15) and (6.16) are the ones given in line 4 of

Table III. It is now a matter of routine to verify that the rest

of the values given in Table III are correct.

The order in which we chose to update the nodes in

Fig. 7 was arbitrary, and other orders give different algo-

rithms. For example, it is easy to verify that the update

order

yields the results in Table IV, where

the sequences

and

are defined by

and

if is odd if is even
if is even if is odd.

(6.17) (6.18)

It would be interesting to experiment with this alternative version of the turbo decoding algorithm. (This “parallel update” rule is, in fact, the rule used to derived the decoding algorithm for multiple turbo codes, as discussed in Section VII.)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:54:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MCELIECE et al.: TURBO DECODING AS PEARL’S ALGORITHM

149

Fig. 10. Belief network for decoding a Gallager “low-density parity-check” code.

M Fig. 9. Belief network appropriate for decoding a “multiple” turbo code, in
which there are code fragments.

VII. OTHER DECODING ALGORITHMS DERIVED FROM BELIEF PROPAGATION

As we have seen in Sections IV and V, Pearl’s algorithm

can be applied to any belief network, not just to one like Fig. 7.

It is a fruitful exercise to apply Pearl’s algorithm to the belief

networks of a variety of hybrid coding schemes, to see what

results. In this section, we will briefly outline (without proofs)

what we have discovered along these lines.

Multiple Turbo Codes: As we have defined them, turbo

codes involve only two encodings of the information, as

shown in Fig. 2. However, several researchers (e.g., [19]) have

experimented with three or more parallel encodings. If there

are parallel encodings, the appropriate belief network is

as shown in Fig. 9. Applying the BP algorithm to this belief

network, with the update order

we obtain a

generalized turbo decoding algorithm which is identical to the

one employed successfully in [19].

Gallager’s Low-Density Parity-Check Codes: The earliest

suboptimal iterative decoding algorithm is that of Gallager,

who devised it as a method of decoding his “low-density

parity-check” codes [25], [26]. This algorithm was later gen-

eralized and elaborated upon by Tanner [61] and Wiberg

[67]. But as MacKay and Neal [37]–[39] have pointed out,

in the first citation of belief propagation by coding theo-

rists, Gallager’s algorithm is a special kind of BP, with

Fig. 10 as the appropriate belief network. [In Fig. 10,

is a codeword which satisfies the parity-check

equations

is a noisy version

of The “syndrome”

is defined as

which is perpetually “observed” to be

].

Although LDPC codes had largely been forgotten by cod-

ing theorists until their rediscovery by MacKay and Neal,

simulations of Gallager’s original decoding algorithm made

with powerful modern computers show that their performance

is remarkably good, in many cases rivaling that of turbo

codes. More recently, Sipser and Spielman [57], [60] have

replaced the “random” parity-check martrices of Gallager and

MacKay–Neal with deterministic parity-check matrices with

desirable properties, based on “expander” graphs, and have

obtained even stronger results.

Low-Density Generator Matrix Codes: Recently, Cheng

and McEliece have experimented with BP decoding on certain

Fig. 11. Belief network for decoding systematic, low-density generator matrix codes.
systematic linear block codes with low-density generator matrices [13]. (This same class of codes appeared earlier in a paper by MacKay [36] in a study of modulo-2 arithmetic inference problems, and in a paper by by Spielman [60] in connection with “error reduction.”) The decoding algorithm devised by Cheng and McEliece was adapted from the one described in the MacKay–Neal paper cited above, and the results were quite good, especially at high rates. More recently, Cheng [14], [15] used some of these same ideas to construct a class of block codes which yield some remarkably efficient multilevel coded modulations. Fig. 11 shows the belief network for low-density generator matrix codes used by McEliece and Cheng.
Serially Concatenated Codes: We have defined a turbo code to be the parallel concatenation of two or more components codes. However, as originally defined by Forney [22], concatenation is a serial operation. Recently, several researchers [8], [9] have investigated the performance of serially concatenated codes, with turbo-style decoding. This is a nontrivial variation on the original turbo decoding idea, and the iterative decoding algorithms in [8] and [9] differ so significantly from the original Berrou et al. algorithm that they must be considered an original invention. Still, these decoding algorithms can be derived routinely from a BP viewpoint, using the network of Fig. 12. Here, is the information to be encoded, is the outer (first) encoding, is the inner (second) encoding, and is the noisy version of
Product Codes: A number of researchers have been successful with turbo-style decoding of product codes in two or more dimensions [46], [48], [54], [27]. In a product code, the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:54:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

150

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 16, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1998

Fig. 12. Belief network for decoding a pair of serially concatenated codes.

information is arranged in an -dimensional array, and then

encoded separately in each dimension. Thus, the appropriate

belief network is like the ones in Figs. 7 and 9 (a product

code, is, by definition, systematic). We have experimented

with “BP” decoding of product codes, and obtained results

similar to those in the cited references. However, in this case,

it appears that the BP algorithms differ in some small details

from turbo-style decoding, and we are currently investigating

this phenomenon.

“Tail-Biting” Convolutional Codes: The class of “tail-

biting” convolutional codes introduced by Solomon and van

Tilborg [56] is a natural candidate for BP decoding. Briefly,

a tail-biting convolutional code is a block code formed by

truncating the trellis of a conventional convolutional code and

then pasting the ends of the trellis together. If the parent

convolutional code is an

code, and if the truncation

depth is the resulting tail-biting code is an

block

code.

In Fig. 13, we show a belief diagram for a tail-biting code

where the truncation depth is

Assuming as above that

the parent convolutional code is an

code, then in Fig. 13,

the ’s are -bit information words, and the ’s are -bit

codeword segments. The ’s are the observed noisy versions

of the ’s. The nodes intermediate between the information

words and the codeword segments are pairs of encoder states.

For a given encoder state pair

and information

word the encoder rules (deterministically) produce the next

pair of codeword states

and the next codeword

segment If it were not for the “tail-biting” edge from

to

this belief net would be without loops

and would represent an ordinary convolutional code. If, then,

the BP algorithm were applied, the result would be identical

to the BCJR APP decoding algorithm.10

If we were to apply Pearl’s algorithm to the belief diagram

of Fig. 13, we would obtain an iterative decoding algorithm for

the tail-biting code. To our knowledge, no one has done exactly

that, but Wiberg [67] has applied his algorithm to the Tanner

10 In this connection, we should note that Wiberg [67] has observed that his algorithm, when applied to a Tanner graph similar to Fig. 13 (less the tail-biting edge), also implies the BCJR algorithm. The “min-sum” form of Wiberg’s algorithm, when applied to the same graph, is closely related to Viterbi’s algorithm. Incidentally, there is a “min-sum” version of Pearl’s algorithm described in [44, Ch. 5], called “belief revision,” which does the same thing.

N = Fig. 13. Belief network for decoding a tail-biting convolutional code, illus-

trated for a truncation length of

5:

graph of a tail-biting code with good success, and functionally, these two approaches yield virtually identical algorithms. Forney [24] has also discussed the iterative decoding of tailbiting codes using the Tanner–Wiberg approach.
VIII. CONCLUDING REMARKS
We have shown that Pearl’s algorithm provides a systematic method for devising low-complexity, suboptimal iterative decoding algorithms for a wide variety of error-control systems. Although there is as yet no guarantee that these algorithms will give useful results, the great body of experimental work done in the “turbo-code” literature suggests that the performance is likely to be very good.
One of the most interesting historical aspects of the turbo decoding problem is how often in the past inventors of decoding algorithms have hit upon a “BP”-like algorithm. The earliest, almost clairvoyant, occurrence is in the papers of Gallager [25], [26]. Later, Tanner [61], realizing the importance of Gallager’s construction, made an important generalization of low-density parity check codes, and of Gallager’s iterative decoding algorithm. With hindsight, especially in view of the recent work of Wiberg [67], it is now evident that both Viterbi’s algorithm [64], [23] and the BCJR algorithm [4] can be viewed as a kind of belief propagation. Indeed, Wiberg [66], [67] has generalized Gallager’s algorithm still further, to the point that it now resembles Pearl’s algorithm very closely. (In particular, Wiberg shows that his algorithm can be adapted to produce both the Gallager–Tanner algorithm and the turbo decoding algorithm.) Finally, having noticed the similarity between the Gallager–Tanner–Wiberg algorithm and Pearl’s algorithm, Aji and McEliece [1], [2], relying heavily on the post-Pearl improvements and simplifications in the BP algorithm [29], [30], [52], [58], [59] have devised a simple algorithm for distributing information on a graph that is a simultaneous generalization of both algorithms, and which includes several other classic algorithms, including Viterbi’s algorithm (which is already subsumed by Wiberg’s algorithm in “min-sum” form) and the FFT. It is natural to predict that this algorithm or one of its close relatives will soon

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:54:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MCELIECE et al.: TURBO DECODING AS PEARL’S ALGORITHM

151

become a standard tool for scientists in communications, signal processing, and related fields.
We conclude with our view of “why” turbo coding is so successful. We believe that there are two, separable, essential contributing factors.
First: The presence of the pseudorandom interleavers between the component codes ensures that the resulting overall code behaves very much like a long random code, and by Shannon’s theorems, a long random code is likely to be “good” in the sense of having the potential, with optimal decoding, to achieve performance near channel capacity. But optimal decoding would be impossibly complex. This brings us to the second essential factor.
Second: We believe that there are general undiscovered theorems about the performance of belief propagation algorithms on loopy DAG’s. These theorems, which may have nothing directly to do with coding or decoding, will show that in some sense BP “converges with high probability to a near-optimum value” of the desired belief on a class of loopy DAG’s that includes most or all of the diagrams in Figs. 7, 9, and 10–13 of this paper. If such theorems exist, they will no doubt find applications in realms far beyond information theory.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank P. Smyth for apprising them about the “post-Pearl” developments in the belief propagation algorithm, and one of the referees for supplying them with much of the history of the forward–backward algorithm that appears in Section IV.

REFERENCES

[1] S. Aji and R. J. McEliece, “A general algorithm for distributing

information on a graph,” in Proc. 1997 IEEE Int. Symp. Inform. Theory,

Ulm, Germany, June 1997, p. 6.

[2]

, “The generalized distributive law,” in Proc. 4th Int. Symp. Com-

mun. Theory Appl., Ambleside, U.K., July 1997, pp. 135–146. Revised

version available from http://www.systems.caltech.edu/EE/Faculty/rjm.

[3] J. Andersen, “The TURBO coding scheme,” unpublished manuscript

distributed at 1994 IEEE Int. Symp. Inform. Theory, Trondheim, Norway,

June 1994.

[4] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of

linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inform.

Theory, vol. IT-20, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.

[5] A. S. Barbulescu and S. S. Pietrobon, “Interleaver design for three

dimensional turbo-codes,” in Proc. 1995 IEEE Int. Symp. Inform. Theory,

Whistler, B.C., Canada, Sept. 1995, p. 37.

[6] L. E. Baum and T. Petrie, “Statistical inference for probabilistic func-

tions of finite state Markov chains,” Ann. Math. Statist., vol. 37, pp.

1554–1563, 1966.

[7] S. Benedetto and G. Montorsi, “Unveiling turbo codes: Some results

on parallel concatenated coding schemes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory,

vol. 42, pp. 409–428, Mar. 1996.

[8]

, “Serial concatenation of block and convolutional codes,” Elec-

tron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 887–888, May 1996.

[9] S. Benedetto, G. Montorsi, D. Divsalar, and F. Pollara, “Serial concate-

nation of interleaved codes: Performance analysis, design, and iterative

decoding,” JPL TDA Progr. Rep., vol. 42-126, Aug. 1996.

[10] G. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit

error-correcting coding: Turbo codes,” in Proc. 1993 Int. Conf. Com-

mun., Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.

[11] R. W. Chang and J. C. Hancock, “On receiver structures for channels

having memory,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-12, pp. 463–468,

Oct. 1966.

[12] J.-F. Cheng and R. J. McEliece, “Unit memory Hamming turbo codes,”

in Proc. 1995 IEEE Int. Symp. Inform. Theory, Whistler, B.C., Canada,

Sept. 1995, p. 33.

[13]

, “Near capacity codecs for the Gaussian channel based on low-

density generator matrices,” submitted to 1996 Allerton Conf.

[14] J.-F. Cheng, “On the construction of efficient multilevel coded modula-

tions,” submitted to the 1997 IEEE Int. Symp. Inform. Theory.

[15]

, “Iterative decoding,” Ph.D dissertation, Caltech, Pasadena, CA,

Mar. 1997.

[16] G. Cooper, “The computational complexity of probabilistic inference

using Bayesian belief networks,” Artif. Intell., vol. 42, pp. 393–405,

1990.

[17] P. Dagum and M. Luby, “Approximating probabilistic inference in

Bayesian belief networks is NP-hard,” Artif. Intell., vol. 60, pp. 141–153,

1993.

[18] D. Divsalar and F. Pollara, “Turbo codes for deep-space communica-

tions,” TDA Progr. Rep., vol. 42-120, pp. 29–39, Feb. 15, 1995.

[19]

, “Multiple turbo codes for deep-space communications,” TDA

Progr. Rep. vol. 42-121, pp. 66–77, May 15, 1995.

[20] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, R. J. McEliece, and F. Pollara, “Transfer

function bounds on the performance of turbo codes,” TDA Progr. Rep.

vol. 42-122, pp. 44–55, July 15, 1995.

[21] D. Divsalar and R. J. McEliece, “Effective free distance of turbo-codes,”

Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 445–446, Feb. 1996.

[22] G. D. Forney, Jr., Concatenated Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,

1966.

[23]

, “The Viterbi algorithm,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 63, pp. 268–278, Mar.

1973.

[24]

, “The forward-backward algorithm” in Proc. 34th Allerton Conf.

Commun., Contr., Computing, Allerton, IL, Oct. 1996.

[25] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform.

Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.

[26]

, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT

Press, 1963.

[27] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of binary

block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory vol. 42,

pp. 429–445, Mar. 1996.

[28] D. Heckerman and M. P. Wellman, “Bayesian networks,” Commun.

ACM, vol. 38, pp. 27–30, 1995.

[29] F. V. Jensen, S. L. Lauritzen, and K. G. Olesen, “Bayesian updating

in recursive graphical models by local computations,” Computational

Statist. Quart., vol. 4, pp. 269–282, 1990.

[30] F. V. Jensen, An Introduction to Bayesian Networks. New York:

Springer-Verlag, 1996.

[31] J. H. Kim and J. Pearl, “A computational model for combined causal

and diagnostic reasoning in inference systems,” in Proc. 8th Int. Joint

Conf. AI (IJCAI83), Karlsruhe, Germany, pp. 190–193.

[32] R. Kindermann and J. L. Snell, Markov Random Fields and their

Applications. Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society, 1980.

[33] F. R. Kschischang and B. J. Frey, “Iterative decoding of compound

codes by probability propagation in graphical models, this issue, pp.

219–230.

[34] S. L. Lauritzen and D. J. Spiegelhalter, “Local computations with

probabilities on graphical structures and their application to expert

systems,” J. Roy. Statist. Soc., Ser. B, vol. 50, pp. 157–224, 1988.

[35] S. L. Lauritzen, A. P. Dawid, B. N. Larsen, and H.-G. Leimer,

“Independence properties of directed Markov fields,” Networks, vol. 20,

pp. 491–505, 1990.

[36] D. J. C. MacKay, “A free energy minimization framework for infer-

ence problems in modulo 2 arithmetic,” in Fast Software Encryption,

B. Preneel, Ed. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag Lecture Notes in

Computer Science, vol. 1008, 1995, pp. 179–195.

[37] D. J. C. MacKay and R. Neal, “Good codes based on very sparse

matrices,” in Proc. 5th IMA Conf. Cryptography and Coding, C. Boyd,

Ed. Berlin, Germany: Springer Lecture Notes in Computer Science,

vol. 1025, 1995, pp. 100–111.

[38] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse

matrices,” submitted to IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory. Preprint available

from http://wol.ra.phy.cam.ac.uk.

[39] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of

low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 1645–1646,

Aug. 1996. Reprinted in Electron. Lett., vol. 33, pp. 457–458, Mar. 1997.

[40] P. L. McAdam, L. Welch, and C. Weber, “M.A.P. bit decoding of

convolutional codes,” in Abstr. Papers, 1972 IEEE Int. Symp. Inform.

Theory, Asilomar, CA, Jan. 1972, p. 90.

[41] R. J. McEliece, E. R. Rodemich, and J-F. Cheng, “The turbo decision

algorithm,” in Proc. 33rd Allerton Conf. Commun., Contr., Computing,

Oct. 1995, pp. 366–379.

[42] J. Pearl, “Reverend Bayes on inference engines: A distributed hierar-

chical approach,” in Proc. Conf. Nat. Conf. AI, Pittsburgh, PA, 1982,

pp. 133–136.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:54:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

152

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 16, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 1998

[43]

, “Fusion, propagation, and structuring in belief networks,” Artif.

Intell., vol. 29, pp. 241–288, 1986.

[44]

, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of

Plausible Inference. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.

[45] L. C. Perez, J. Seghers, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “ A distance spectrum

interpretation of turbo codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp.

1698–1709, Nov. 1996.

[46] A. Picart and R. Pyndiah, “Performance of turbo decoded product codes

used in multilevel coding,” in Proc. IEEE ICC’96, Dallas, TX, June

1996.

[47] A. M. Poritz, “Hidden Markov models: A guided tour,” in Proc. 1988

IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech, Signal Processing. New York: IEEE

Press, vol. 1, pp. 7–13.

[48] R. Pyndiah, A. Glavieux, A. Picart, and S. Jacq, “Near optimum decod-

ing of product codes,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM’94, San Francisco,

CA, Nov. 1994, vol. 1, pp. 339–343.

[49] L. Rabiner, “A tutorial on hidden Markov models and selected ap-

plications in speech recognition,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 77, pp. 257–285,

1989.

[50] P. Robertson, “Illuminating the structure of code and decoder of parallel

and concatenated recursive systematic (Turbo) codes,” in Proc. IEEE

GLOBECOM 1994, pp. 1298–1303.

[51] R. D. Shachter, “Probabilistic inference and influence diagrams,” Oper.

Res., vol. 36, pp. 589–604, 1988.

[52] G. R. Shafer and P. P. Shenoy, “Probability propagation,” Ann. Mat.

Artif. Intell., vol. 2, pp. 327–352, 1990.

[53] S. E. Shimony, “Finding MAPS for belief networks is NP-hard,” Artif.

Intell., vol. 68, pp. 399–410, 1994.

[54] J. Seghers, “On the free distance of turbo codes and related product

codes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Swiss Fed. Inst. Technol., Zurich, Switzer-

land, Aug. 1995, Final Rep., Diploma Project SS 1995.

[55] P. Smyth, D. Heckerman, and M. Jordan, “Probabilistic independence

networks for hidden Markov probability models,” Neural Computation,

accepted for publication.

[56] G. Solomon and H. C. A. van Tilborg, “A connection between block

and convolutional codes,” SIAM J. Appl. Math., vol. 37, pp. 358–369,

Oct. 1979.

[57] M. Sipser and D. A. Spielman, “Expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform.

Theory, vol. 42, pp. 1710–1722, Nov. 1996.

[58] D. J. Spiegelhalter and S. L. Lauritzen, “Sequential updating of condi-

tional probabilities on directed graphical structures,” Networks, vol. 20,

pp. 579–605, 1990.

[59] D. J. Spiegelhalter, A. P. Dawid, S. L. Lauritzen, and R. G. Cowell,

“Bayesian analysis in expert systems,” Statist. Sci., vol. 8, pp. 219–283,

1993.

[60] D. A. Spielman, “Linear-time encodable and decodable error-corecting

codes.” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 1723–1731, Nov.

1996.

[61] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE

Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.

[62] G. Ungerboeck, “Nonlinear equalization of binary signals in Gaussian

noise,” IEEE Trans. Commun. Technol., vol. COM-19, pp. 1128, Dec.

1971.

[63] S. Verdu and H. V. Poor, “Abstract dynamic programming models

under commutativity conditions,” SIAM J. Contr. Optimiz., vol. 25, pp.

990–1006, July 1987.

[64] A. J. Viterbi, “Error bounds for convolutional codes and an asymptot-

ically optimum decoding algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol.

IT-13, pp. 260–269, Apr. 1967.

[65] J. Whittaker, Graphical Models in Applied Multivariate Statistics.

Chichester, U.K.: Wiley, 1990.

[66] N. Wiberg, H.-A. Loeliger, and R. Ko¨tter, “Codes and iterative decoding on general graphs,” Europ. Trans. Telecommun. vol. 6, pp. 513–526, Sept.–Oct. 1995.
[67] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Linko¨ping Studies in Sci. and Technol., dissertations no. 440. Linko¨ping, Sweden, 1996.
Robert J. McEliece (M’70–SM’81–F’84) was born in Washington, DC, in 1942. He received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in mathematics from the California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, in 1964 and 1967, respectively, and attended Trinity College, Cambridge University, U.K., during 1964–1965.
From 1963 to 1978, he was employed by the California Institute of Technology’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, where he was Supervisor of the Information Processing Group from 1971 to 1978. From 1978 to 1982, he was a Professor of Mathematics and Research Professor at the Coordinated Science Laboratory, University of Illinois, Urbana–Champaign. Since 1982, he has been on the faculty at Caltech, where he is now the Allen E. Puckett Professor of Electrical Engineering. Since 1990, he has also served as Executive Officer for Electrical Engineering at Caltech. He has been a regular consultant in the Communications Research Section of Caltech’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory since 1978. His research interests include deep-space communication, communication networks, coding theory, and discrete mathematics.
David J. C. MacKay was born in Stoke on Trent, U.K., on April 22, 1967. Following his education at Newcastle-under-Lyme School and Trinity College, Cambridge, he received the Ph.D. degree in computation and neural systems from the California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, in 1991.
He is now a Lecturer in the Department of Physics, Cambridge University and a Fellow of Darwin College, Cambridge. His interests include the construction and implementation of hierarchical Bayesian models that discover patterns in data, the development of probablistic methods for neural networks, and the design and decoding of error correcting codes.
Jung-Fu Cheng was born in Taipei, Taiwan, in March 1969. He received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical engineering from National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, in 1991 and 1993, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering with a subject minor in social science from the California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, in 1997.
His academic research interests focused on coding and communications theory. Since July 1997, he has been employed as a Research Analyst in the Fixed Income Research Department of Salomon Brothers, Inc., New York, NY.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:54:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

