A Two Stage Selective Averaging LDPC Decoding
Dinesh Kumar. A , Ambedkar Dukkipati Department of Computer Science and Automation
Indian Institute of Science, India Email: {dinesh.a, ambedkar}@csa.iisc.ernet.in

arXiv:1107.2867v1 [cs.IT] 14 Jul 2011

Abstract—Low density parity-check (LDPC) codes are a class of linear block codes that are decoded by running belief propagation (BP) algorithm or log-likelihood ratio belief propagation (LLR-BP) over the factor graph of the code. One of the disadvantages of LDPC codes is the onset of an error floor at high values of signal to noise ratio caused by trapping sets. In this paper, we propose a two stage decoder to deal with different types of trapping sets. Oscillating trapping sets are taken care by the first stage of the dcecoder and the elementary trapping sets are handled by the second stage of the decoder. Simulation results on regular PEG (504,252,3,6) code shows that the proposed two stage decoder performs significantly better than the standard decoder.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes were proposed by R. Gallager in 1963 [1] and was rediscovered by Mackay [2] in late 1990s. Since they are based on sparse parity-check matrix, iterative decoders becomes an attractive option. Due to the near-capacity performance and the low complexity of the decoder they have become an intensive research topic among the coding theory community.
A LDPC code can be described by a parity-check matrix H that is represented using a special type of graph called factor graph. A factor graph is a bipartite graph with two different types of nodes, variable nodes and check nodes corresponding to the columns and rows of the parity-check matrix H. H(i, j) = 1 corresponds to an edge between the variable node vj and check node ci.
Unlike the maximum a-poteriori probability (MAP) decoding algorithm that seeks for the global optimization over the whole code word space, belief propagation (BP) algorithm seeks for a local optimization by using only the information that is flowing through the variable nodes, without the knowledge of the global state. BP algorithm achieves this by passing messages iteratively between the variable nodes and check nodes. The message mv(li)cj at iteration l from the variable node vi to the check node cj can be interpreted as the probability that the variable node vi is in state x in the absence of the check node cj. Similarly, the message mc(lj)vi at iteration l from the check node cj to variable node vi is the probability that the check node cj is satisfied in the absence of variable node vi.
The main problem with LDPC codes is that these codes tend to exhibit a sudden saturation for sufficiently high signal to noise ratio (SNR). Trapping sets [3] are considered the primary reason for this behavior of LDPC codes. In this paper, we propose a two stage decoder that in the first stage averages the

messages from the selected variable nodes over two iterations and the nodes are selected if the belief in the node is decreasing below a certain threshold or if the belief is increasing rapidly. The decoded string is checked if it has converged to a valid code word in each iteration. If the decoded string has not converged to a valid code word even after maximum number of iterations and the number of check nodes that are not satisfied is below a certain threshold, we proceed to the second stage of the decoder where we flip certain bits connected to the unsatisfied check nodes. Then the first stage of the decoding process is repeated for the processed string. The selective averaging of the messages in the first stage slows down the information flow from the nodes affected by the trapping sets and the remaining variable nodes are not affected. These reliable nodes grow in belief and helps in solving the oscillating trapping sets. The elementary trapping sets are an unstable equilibrium, flipping some of the bits in trapping set will break the trapping set. This is the intuition behind the second stage of the proposed decoder.
The paper is organized as follows. § II-A explains the basic decoding algorithm. § II-B contains a description of trapping sets and how they affect the performance of the decoding BP algorithm. § II-C explains the various methods proposed in literature for improving the decoder performance. § III proposes our two stage decoder and analyses how they improve the performance from the trapping set point of view. § IV gives the simulation results to prove that the proposed algorithm does better than averaging decoder and standard decoder. We provide the concluding remarks in § V.
II. BACKGROUND
A. Decoding Algorithm
The parity check matrix of the LDPC codes are represented by a bipartite factor graph composed of N variable nodes vj, for j ∈ {1, . . . , N }, that represent the message bits in the codeword and M check nodes ci, for i ∈ {1, . . . , M }, that represents the parity-check equations. The channel considered here is the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. There are two types of decoding algorithms . The standard belief propagation (BP) algorithm which uses product of probabilities as messages and the other being a modified version of BP algorithm which uses loglikelihood ratio (LLR) as the messages between the nodes.In general the log likelihood ratio belief propagation (LLR-BP) algorithm is prefered for computational accuracy. The sign of LLR indicates the most

likely value of the bit (0 or 1) and the absolute value of the
LLR gives the reliability of the message. Let m(vli)cj be the message passed from a variable node vi to
a check node cj at the lth iteration of the algorithm. Similarly, one can define m(clj)vi . The initial values of the message m(v0i)cj
is equal to the channel information LLR Cvi of the variable node vi and it is independent of cj. We have

mv(li)cj = Cvi +

m(cla−v1i ) ,

ca∈N (vi)\cj

and



mc(li)vj = 2 × atanh 

tanh

vb∈N (ci)\vj

m(vlb−ci1) 2

 ,

where N (vi)\cj denotes the neighbors of vi excluding ci and N (ci)\vj denotes the neighbors of ci excluding vj.
The algorithm follows the flooding schedule in which an iteration consists of simultaneous update of all the messages mvicj , followed by the simultaneous update of all the messages mcjvi . The decoding algorithm stops if the decoded bits satisfy all the parity-check equation or maximum number of iterations is reached.

B. Trapping sets
The notion of trapping set was described in the context of error-floor analysis in [4]. This concept was further developed in the seminal paper by Richardson [3], in which trapping set configurations were shown to exhibit a strong influence on the point of onset as well as on the slope of the error-floor curve of LDPC codes.

Trapping set is defined as follows. An (x, y) trapping set τ is a configuration of x variable nodes, for which the induced subgraph contains y ≥ 0 odd degree check nodes.

Fig. 1. (6,2) Trapping set
An example of a trapping set can be seen in Figure 1. In the above figure we can see six variable nodes and two unsatisfied check nodes. A trapping set always has some unsatisfied check nodes. This is how we differentiate the error due to trapping set and the error that occurs due to minimum distance of the codes.

There are three types of error events in the error floor region [5]. They are
1) unstable error events, which dynamically change from iteration to iteration and for which x and y are typically large,
2) stable or elementary trapping sets, for which x and y are small and are the main cause of the error floor and
3) oscillating trapping sets, which periodically vary with the number of decoder iterations and which are some times subsets of stable trapping sets.
As explained in [6], the onset of of error-floors in LDPC codes can be attributed to the following phenomena. In the initial stages of the belief propagation, due to presence of low-probability noise samples, variable nodes internal to one particular trapping set (initial trapping set) experience a large increase in belief towards the wrong bit value. This information gets propagated to other variable nodes in the trapping set, some of which already have very low belief in their bit value. After this initial increase in belief, external variables usually start adjusting the incorrect estimates towards the correct bit values. By this time the variable nodes in the trapping sets that are affected by the inital information surge are significantly biased towards the incorrect bit values. Since there are only a few check nodes capable of detecting errors within the trapping sets, this incorrect bit estimates remain unchanged until the end of the decoding process.
The trapping sets are union of several cycles. One of the most prevalent types of error in the waterfall region is the oscillating trapping sets which causes the LLR values of a node to oscillate. This could be caused by two or more cycles passing through a node. When the messages looping in the cycles supporting different bit values arrive at the variable node at different times, the LLR values seems to oscillate.
C. Related Work
A lot of research has gone into designing decoders to mitigate the errors caused by the trapping sets. The decoders are designed in such a way that the computational complexity of the modified decoder is not high compared to the standard decoder.
In [6], the problems caused by the trapping sets and why the decoder fails in overcoming these problems are well studied. Landner et al. [6], [7] propose an averaging decoder that averages the LLR value of the node over several iterations. Averaging prevents the erroneous information from being trapped in the code graph by slowing down the convergence speed of the nodes. This method though computationally less complex, it slows down the convergence of the reliable nodes. This affects the performance of the decoder in the waterfall region as oscillating trapping sets are prevalent in this region than the elementary trapping sets.
In [8], the BP algorithm is well studied in the point of view of the Bethe energy and how it fails in the presence of cycles. They propose a BP algorithm with a tunable parameter ∆ and a modification to the outgoing message from the variable node. On adjusting the parameter ∆ at different SNR points, they

are able to achieve better performance than the standard BP decoder. This modification also follows the same principle as the averaging decoder by slowing down the information flow to prevent the trapping of the erroneous information.
The work put forward in [9] concentrates on short and middle length LDPC codes as they are largely affected by cycles in the graph. These cycles causes the oscillation of the LLR values in the nodes. The messages from the previous iteration is added to the message in the current iteration if the sign of the message changes. This modification helps in damping the oscillation, but their method does not handle the errors caused by elementary trapping sets.
A two stage backtracking decoder was proposed in [10] [11]. The fact that an unsatisfied check node is connected to odd number of variable nodes in trapping set is used to construct a matching set Ψ. Then each variable node that belong to the matching set Ψ is flipped seperately and the first stage is run. This process is repeated till the error is solved or all the nodes in the matching set have been exhausted.
III. PROPOSED ALGORITHM
The proposed decoding algorithm consists of two stages. The first stage is selective averaging decoding in which we concentrate on the oscillating trapping sets. If the decoder does not converge after a fixed number of iterations and the number of unsatisfied check nodes is below a certain threshold, we assume that it is due to elementary trapping sets and identify the variable nodes that are connected to the unsatisfied check node and multiply the channel information LLR Cvi with a constant and repeat the first stage of the decoder.
Our aim in the first stage is to prevent the error due to oscillating trapping sets and initial trapping set. One has to take care that the algorithm does not affect the convergence of reliable nodes. Faster convergence of the reliable nodes seems to help the convergence of the oscillating nodes as the messages from the converged reliable nodes are very strong compared to the belief in the oscillating nodes. As explained in § II-B, the nodes affected by the initial trapping set have a rapid increase in reliability value on the wrong bit and the errors caused by this can be prevented by slowing down the wrong information from flowing out of these nodes.
The selective averaging algorithm modifies the outgoing messages m(vli)cj from the variable nodes as follows.

 , (l) m = m , vicj

m(vli)cj +mv(li−cj1)
2 (l) vi cj

if Selected(vi) > 0 if Selected(vi) = 0

The messages from the check nodes m(clj)vi are not modified.
Algorithm 1 proposes the method for selection of nodes. L((lv)i) represents the log likelihood ratio of the node vi at iteration l and L((lv−i)1) represents the log likelihood ratio of the node vi at iteration l−1. We assign |L((lv)i)| to B((vl)i) and |L((lv−i)1)| to B((vl−i)1). We then check if the belief in the node B(vi) is decreasing or increasing with the iteration. If the belief is

Algorithm 1 Node Selection
for i ∈ 1, 2, . . . , N do B((vl)i) ← |L((lv)i)| B((vl−i)1) ← |L((lv−i)1)| if Selected(vi)! = 2 then Selected(vi) ← 0 end if if B((vl)i) < B((vl−i)1) && (B((vl−i)1) − B((vl)i)) > β then Selected(vi) ← 1 else if B((vl)i) > B((vl−i)1) then if (B((vl)i) − B((vl−i)1)) > ν then Selected(vi) ← 1 end if end if
end for
decreasing below a constant β, we assume this as an oscillating node and the node is selected. If the belief is increasing rapidly at a rate above the constant ν, we consider this behaviour as an initial trapping set and the node is selected for averaging of the messages in the next iteration. This condition also helps prevent the oscillating nodes. All the nodes are unselected at the beginning of the node selection procedure at each iteration except the nodes which are modified in the second stage of the algorithm. These nodes are assigned Selected(vi) = 2 and the messages from these nodes are always averaged. A more detailed explanation for this special treatment of the modified nodes will follow when we explain the second stage of the algorithm.
The first stage of the decoder is not designed for dealing with the elementary trapping set which is the most prevalent type of trapping set in the error floor region. We will use a similar algorithm to the one proposed in [10]. The algorithm proposed in [10] [11], uses a backtracking approach and forming a set of matching sets of vertices which might belong to the trapping set. The initial LLR value of the variable nodes that belong to one of the members of the set of matching set is flipped and the decoding process is repeated. If the trapping set error is not solved, then the decoder backtracks and repeats the process for the next member of the set of matching set. The second stage of our decoder also follows a similar approach but we avoid backtracking as it increases the complexity of the decoder.
Algorithm 2 lists the second stage of the proposed decoder. If the first stage of the decoder has not converged even after the maximum number of iterations and the number of unsatisfied check nodes is below CNthreshold which is a very small number (Trapping set errors are low weight errors in error floor region), we conclude that the error occured is due to an elementary trapping set. As the trapping set is an unstable equilibrium condition, if we flip even one or two variable nodes that belong to the check nodes, it is enough to break the trapping set. But we do not know which variables nodes belong to the trapping sets. The only information that is available to

Algorithm 2 Second Stage of the decoder

1: First stage decoder unsuccessful.
2: Find the set C of unsatisfied check nodes.
3: if |C| < CNthreshold then 4: V hatold ←output of first stage of the decoder. 5: Find the set of variable nodes Vun where Vun =
N (cj).
cj ∈C
N (cj) is the set of all variable nodes which are connected to the check node cj. 6: Find the subset of variable nodes Vnc ⊆ Vun such that no two variable nodes have common check nodes other

than the unsatisfied check nodes.

7: for vk ∈ Vnc do

8:

C(vk) = −C(vk) ∗ η

C(vk) is the channel information LLR of the variable

vk

9:

Selected(vk) ← 2

10: end for

11: end if

12: re-decode with the the new channel information LLR C(vk ) .
13: if re-decode is successful then

14: stop and exit

15: else

16: V hatnew ←output of re-decode.

17: Find the set C of unsatisfied check nodes.

18: if |C| < |C | then

19:

output V hatold.

20: else

21:

output V hatnew.

22: end if

23: end if

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS We ran simulations of the proposed decoder for (504,252,3,6) regular PEG code at different SNR points. We compare the results of the proposed decoder to the averaging decoder [6] and standard decoder. Without loss of generality, the codewords send were all-zero.
Fig. 2. Comparison of BLER (504,252,3,6) regular PEG code

us is that the unsatisfied check nodes are connected to odd number of variable nodes (one node in the worst case) in the trapping set as shown in Figure 1. We find the set of variables nodes Vun that is a union of all variable nodes connected to the unsatisfied check nodes. Find a subset Vnc ⊆ Vun such that no two variable nodes in the set Vnc has a common check node other than the unsatisfied check nodes. We will multiply the initial LLR value Cvk with -1 and η. This flips the bit value of the node and the decoding process is repeated. But some of the correctly decoded nodes which do not belong the trapping set might also be flipped. Since the variable nodes do not have any common check nodes, the wrongly flipped nodes are easily corrected by other reliable nodes in the decoding process. If the re-decoding is not successful, then we report the string with the least number of unsatisfied check nodes. To be cautious we assign Selected(vk) = 2 so that they remain always selected and the messages from these nodes are always averaged. This helps in preventing the wrong information from spreading intially before the reliable nodes converge. The nodes that we have flipped in this stage that belong to trapping set will help in breaking the trapping set.

Fig. 3. Comparison of BER (504,252,3,6) regular PEG code
In Figure 2, 3 we can see that the proposed two stage decoder performs better than the other two decoders in both bit error rate (BER) and (BLER). This performance is expected because the proposed two stage decoder solves the trapping sets better than the averaging decoder [6] and standard decoder.
In Figure 4 we can see the number of bit errors in the decoder after processing in the second stage of the decoder and the number of bit errors in the averaging decoder. We can

[6] S. Landner and O. Milenkovic, “Algorithmic and combinatorial analysis of trapping sets in structured LDPC codes,” in Proceedings of International Conference on Wireless Networks, Communications and Mobile Computing, June 2005, vol. 1, pp. 630 –635.
[7] Stefan Landner, Thorsten Hehn, Olgica Milenkovic, and Johannes B Huber, “Two methods for reducing the error-floor of LDPC codes,” Tech. Rep. arXiv:cs/0701006, Jul 2007.
[8] M. G. Stepanov and M. Chertkov, “Improving convergence of belief propagation decoding,” in Proceedings of 44th Allerton Conference, Sep 2006.
[9] S. Gounai, T. Ohtsuki, and T. Kaneko, “Modified belief propagation decoding algorithm for low-density parity check code based on oscillation,” in Proceedings of IEEE 63rd Vehicular Technology Conference VTC 2006-Spring, May 2006, vol. 3, pp. 1467 –1471.
[10] Jingyu Kang, Li Zhang, Zhi Ding, and Shu Lin, “A two-stage iterative decoding of ldpc codes for lowering error floors,” in Proceedings of IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, Dec 2008, pp. 1 –4.
[11] Jingyu Kang, Qin Huang, Shu Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “An iterative decoding algorithm with backtracking to lower the error-floors of ldpc codes,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 64 –73, january 2011.
Fig. 4. Comparison of the error performance of two stage decoder and averaging decoder.
see that the second stage of the proposed decoder helps in solving the error due to the elementary trapping sets.
We can improve the second stage of the decoder by decreasing the number of bits flipped that do not belong to the trapping sets. We are also working on error-floor prediction methods which will be useful for high SNR value where simulation is not a possibility.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a two stage decoding algorithm for LDPC codes that reduces the error performance of the code especially in the error floor region. In the first stage we handle the oscillating trapping sets by selecting the nodes based on rate of increase or decrease of the belief. The messages from the selected nodes are averaged with message from the previous iteration to slow down the flow of erroneous information in the system. The reliable nodes are allowed to converge faster and they help in solving the oscillating trapping sets. The first stage decoder does not solve the errors due to elementary trapping set. To address this we added a second stage to the decoder that flips bits that are connected to the unsatisfied check nodes. This helps in breaking the trapping sets.
REFERENCES
[1] R.G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes, MIT Press, Cambridge,MA, 1963.
[2] D.J.C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399 –431, Mar 1999.
[3] T. Richardson, “Error-floors of LDPC codes,” in Proceedings of the 41st Annual Conference on Communication, Control and Computing, Sept 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[4] D.J.C. MacKay and M.J. Postol, “Weaknesses of margulis and ramanujan-margulis low-density parity-check codes,” in Proceedings of MFCSIT2002, Galway. 2003, vol. 74 of Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, Elsevier.
[5] Y. Han and W. Ryan, “Low-floor decoders for LDPC codes,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 57, pp. 1663–1673, June 2009.

