IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 56, NO. 3, MARCH 2020

6701705

On Efficient Concatenation of LDPC Codes With Constrained Codes
Chi Dinh Nguyen 1,2,3, Kui Cai 1, Bingrui Wang1, and Yan Hong1
1Cluster of Science and Mathematics, Singapore University of Technology and Design (SUTD), Singapore 487372 2Faculty of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Phenikaa University, Hanoi 12116, Vietnam
3Phenikaa Research and Technology Institute (PRATI), A&A Green Phoenix Group JSC, Hanoi 11313, Vietnam
In this article, an efficient concatenation of error correction codes with constrained codes is proposed. Generally, constrained codes are designed to match specified channels, whereas error correction coding schemes are designed to correct the channel errors. Both play important roles to ensure the integrity of data in data storage systems. In this study, we first investigate the design of k-constrained codes combined with a low-density parity-check (LDPC) code, and then we extend the idea to the design of dc-free k-constrained LDPC codes. Simulation results show that the proposed designs achieve an improved bit error rate (BER) performance, compared to prior art schemes. In particular, the proposed design for the dc-free k-constrained codes not only fully eliminates the effect of error propagation in a reverse configuration but also achieves significant dc suppression.
Index Terms— Balanced codes, dc-free code, k-constrained code, low-density parity-check (LDPC) code.

I. INTRODUCTION
R ECORDING systems are typically designed based on a concatenation of two separate coding schemes: an error-correction coding (ECC) scheme and a modulation code or constrained code. Each coding scheme realizes its own encoding procedure to improve recording performance. The ECC schemes attempt to correct already-occurred errors, which can be caused by impairments of the channel, whereas the constrained codes impose positive constraints onto the input sequence to match specified channel characteristics, e.g., a certain run-length constraint or a certain spectrum constraint. The low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1]–[3] are currently regarded as potential candidates for the nextgeneration recording systems as they have been shown to have low error floors. For a different aspect, in fact, the low code rate constraint codes can be easily constructed using lookup tables. The challenge of designing high code rate runlength constrained codes comes from the complexity in the implementation of encoding and decoding processes [4]. The modern constraint codes need to be designed with simple encoders and decoders, but also high code rates.
From the above-mentioned conditions, to design an optimized coding scheme for recording systems, generally, the following requirements need satisfying: 1) constrained codes with high code rate, low complexity; 2) ECC scheme with low error floors; and 3) non or limited error propagation.
To deal with the problem, several approaches using LDPC codes for the ECC scheme have been addressed [5]–[10]. In [5], a user-data word was split into some portions, and then each portion was encoded by a constrained encoder
Manuscript received April 23, 2019; revised October 31, 2019; accepted November 25, 2019. Date of publication January 15, 2020; date of current version February 19, 2020. Corresponding author: K. Cai (e-mail: cai_kui@sutd.edu.sg).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this article are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2019.2957278

and was formatted according to the LDPC structure so that combined ECC-constrained codewords satisfy both ECC structure condition and constrained code condition. However, this construction was complicated and inflexible because of using many constrained encoders and matching the output of the constrained encoders to the LDPC structure. Moreover, a computation of error correction syndrome from the first constrained sequence and a first portion of the LDPC was needed. A partial reverse concatenation was presented in [6] to improve error-rate performance for tape drives. This construction was quite large and complex because of using two ECCs at the same time. Vasic and Pedagani [7] proposed an ECC-modulation concatenation based on flipping, where selected bits in the LDPC codeword were deliberately flipped to satisfy the constraints. A concatenation of run-lengthlimited (RLL) and ECC scheme based on uniform interleaving was proposed in [8]. Han and Ryan [9] also proposed a simple method to concatenate a structured LDPC code and a high-rate constrained code. We use the models in [9] as benchmarks to assess the performance of the proposed designs.
In this study, we first design a configuration of k-constrained codes with LDPC codes. The k-constrained codes herein are constructed using a nibble replacement method [10], [11], which as reported recently could achieve high code rates, simple encoders and decoders, and limited error propagation. Then, we also extend our research to design dc-free k-constrained LDPC codes. To obtain a dc-free channel sequence, our strategy is carried out two-fold: 1) use guided scrambling (GS) [4] to randomize for the user part and 2) use a 4/6 balance code to construct dc-free sequence for the parity part. In this way, the error propagation is fully eliminated before LDPC decoding and the performance of the LDPC decoder is significantly improved accordingly.
It is important to note that the proposed design is a reversed concatenation, where the signal is first encoded by a constrained code, and the constrained coded signal is then encoded by a systematic ECCs. The parity part is reencoded

0018-9464 © 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:46:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6701705

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 56, NO. 3, MARCH 2020
TABLE I DESIGNED k-CONSTRAINED CODES

Fig. 1. Parity error propagation in the reversed concatenation.

by the second constrained code. However, at the receiver, the second modulation encoder for the parity part has no error correction capability, and may propagate errors to the ECC decoder. In other words, the error propagation means the error propagation of the parity information part before decoded by the ECC decoder herein. Fig. 1 illustrates the situation.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. The construction of k-constrained codes based on the nibble replacement is introduced in Section II. The proposed designs are presented in Section III. Simulation results and discussion are shown in Section IV. Finally, the concluding remarks are shown in Section V.
II. K-CONSTRAINED CODES BASED ON NIBBLE REPLACEMENT
The k-constrained codes based on the nibble replacement have been reported recently in [10] and [11]. Basically, the technique removes all inadmissible q-bit nibbles and replaces them by q-bit admissible ones, where the admissible nibbles are predefined, i.e., dec(u) ≥ w, where the function dec() refers to the decimal representation of a binary sequence u, and w is a predefined integer. During retrieving information, the signal is uniquely decoded by the receiver through two corresponding steps, de-flipping and de-replacing processes. Detailed designing of k-constrained codes with w = 1 used in this research is represented as follows.
A. Encoding of k-Constrained Codes
The encoding procedure consists of two steps: the first step is the nibble replacement and the other is the nibble flipping. For the first step, the n − 1 user bits are split into a first nibble of q − 1 bits and subsequent L − 1 nibbles of q bits. The first nibble prefixed with an initial pivot bit of “1” is named as pivot nibble. The encoder then carries out scanning for L − 1 subsequent nibbles to find out all-0 nibbles (i.e., inadmissible nibbles), whereby an all-0 nibble refers to {0, 0, . . . , 0} nibble. Once an all-0 nibble is found, the encoder is to: 1) replace it by the pivot nibble; 2) set the pivot bit to “0”; and 3) convert the address and the decimal value of the all-0 nibble into the binary data and then use the remaining q − 1 bits of the pivot nibble to store. The encoder continues the scanning to find and replace the inadmissible nibbles in the rest of the user data sequence.
The nibble flipping is then used in the second step of the encoding process. We denote L nibbles obtained from the first step as Ui , i = [1, L]. The encoder first checks each of the L nibbles with the last bit of the previous nibble, i.e., checking {Ui , Ui−1(q)}. In case of Ui is all-1 nibble, at the same time Ui−1(q) = 1, the encoder flips whole nibble Ui . Otherwise, the encoder outputs the unchanged nibble Ui . The nibble of all-1 refers to {1, 1, . . . , 1} nibble.

B. Decoding of k-Constrained Codes
At the receiver, the decoding procedure is also established in two steps: the first is a de-flipping process and the other is a recursively de-replacing one. Let us denote L received nibbles as Ui , i = [1, L]. In the first step, the decoder checks each of the L received nibbles, if Ui = {0, 0, . . . , 0} then the decoder flips Ui , otherwise, the decoder keeps Ui . During the second step, the decoder checks the pivot bit of the first nibble, if the pivot bit is equal to “1,” the user data is easily decoded by moving the pivot bit from the received sequence. Otherwise, the decoder will recover the information by simple recursively de-replacing the replacement [10]. Examples of the designed k-constrained codes are shown in Table I.
III. PROPOSED DESIGNS OF K-CONSTRAINED CODES WITH LDPC
In this section, we first present the concatenation of k-constrained codes and an LDPC code. Later, we extend the idea to design the dc-free k-constrained LDPC codes.
A. Design of k-Constrained LDPC Codes
Fig. 2(a) shows a block diagram of the first proposed design. The user data are first encoded using the (1023, 1024) nibble replacement encoder (NRE) as presented in Section II. The signal is passed through the LDPC encoder. The output of LDPC encoder is composed of two parts: the user part and the parity part. The parity part is then encoded by the (31, 32) NRE. The encoded parity signal then is concatenated with the user part through a multiplexer. At the receiver, a demultiplexer separates the received user and parity parts. The parity part is first decoded by the (31, 32) nibble replacement decoder (NRD), and then is concatenated with the received user and sent to the LDPC decoder. The output of the LDPC decoder is finally decoded by the (1023, 1024) NRD.
B. Design of DC-Free k-Constrained LDPC Codes Binary codes with a spectral null at zero frequency ( f = 0)
are called dc-free codes. The dc-free codes are a subclass of spectrum shaping codes. The codes have been employed in many applications of digital transmission and recording systems [12]–[14]. For example, the effects of low-frequency noise which can be caused by some scratch on the disk

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:46:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NGUYEN et al.: ON EFFICIENT CONCATENATION OF LDPC CODES WITH CONSTRAINED CODES

6701705

TABLE II MAPPING 4-BIT DATA SEQUENCE INTO 6-BIT BALANCED SEQUENCE

converted into k-constrained sequences, then controlled dc by the balance code. The encoding of the balance modulation code is a mapping 1-1 between the 4 bits input into the block of balanced 6-bit output using a little mapping table as shown in Table II. The decoding procedure is based on the Euclidean distance concept.
At the receiver, the parity signal is first decoded by the demodulation code. We believe that using the balance modulation will reduce the effect of error propagation for the parity part, and the input of the LDPC decoder is also improved accordingly. At the output of the LDPC decoder, the signal is decoded by the user-NRD. The untied k-constrained signal is then de-scrambled and removed the p redundant bits to recover the original user data through the de-scrambler.

Fig. 2. Block diagram of the proposed designs. (a) First design of k-constrained LDPC codes. (b) Second design of dc-free k-constrained LDPC codes. NRE and NRD stand for NRE and NRD, respectively.
surface are easily avoided using the dc-free codes in the optical memory devices. The dc-free k-constrained codes are motivated by the need for combining the typical features of both dc-free and k-constrained codes.
Fig. 2(b) shows a block diagram of the second proposed design. As shown in this figure, dc controlling is carried out separately for the user part and the parity part. For the user part, dc controlling is completed using the GS method [4]. During the encoding procedure, the m user bits are prefixed with p redundant bits, it means a selection set 2p candidates of (m + p) bits is generated. The signal is then scrambled with a polynomial g(x). After scrambling, the 2p scrambled sequences of (m + p) bits are encoded by the user-NRE (1023, 1024). The encoder then selects the best codeword according to the minimum running digital sum (RDS) criterion. The dc-free k-constrained signal continues to be processed by the LDPC encoder.
The dc controlling on the k-constrained parity bits is designed based on the concatenation of the k-constrained NRE (31, 32) and a simple balance modulation code (4, 6). The parity part of the output of the LDPC encoder is first

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is herein defined as S N R = 10log10(Vp2/σn2 · R), where Vp is the peak of a readback signal, σn2 is the noise power, and R is the total code rate. The proposed designs are simulated over the additive white noise (AWGN) channel as a generic data storage channel. It is important to note that the proposed designs relax k of 14. Moreover, since the LDPC codes of [9] are not fit well to the NREs in the proposed design, for applying the LDPC codes to the proposed design, a number of added “dummy” bits are necessary to match the input–output data of the encoders.
For the first case of k-constrained LDPC codes, constructing the k-constrained LDPC code in [9], named RLL5051-LDPC code herein, is based on the concatenation of an RLL (50, 51) code and the LDPC (4182, 4592) code. The LDPC code for the proposed design is the same as that of [9]. We use a sum– product algorithm for the LDPC decoders. The comparison between the first proposed design and the RLL5051-LDPC code is shown in Fig. 3 in terms of bit error rate (BER). It is straightforward to see that the BER performance of the first proposal is better than that of [9]. The performance gain can be explained since, one of the main reasons, the first one has provided a higher code rate compared to the prior art suggested scheme of [6], the code-rate of 0.9075 compared to that of 0.8929. In other words, based on the SNR definition, higher the code rate, less the noise effect.
In the case of the dc-free k-constrained LDPC design, we first investigate the spectrum of the second proposed design. Fig. 4 shows the simulated power spectrum density (PSD) of the proposal with two different redundant bit lengths p

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:46:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6701705

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 56, NO. 3, MARCH 2020

Fig. 3. BER comparison in the case of k-constrained LDPC codes.

Fig. 5. Error propagation for the second proposed design of dc-free k-constrained LDPC code.

Fig. 4. Simulated PSD of the proposed design according to different

redundancies for the GS.

Fig. 6. BER comparison in the case of dc-free k-constrained LDPC codes.

during the user-GS: p = 3, g(x) = 1 + x + x3 and p = 5, g(x) = 1 + x + x5. As shown in Fig. 4, the proposed design generates spectrum nulls of more than −50 dB.
The dc-free k-constrained LDPC scheme of [9], named DCRLL5054-LDPC code herein, has been constructed based on a separate controlling dc on the user part and the parity part. The dc controlling on the user part is accomplished using a dc-free RLL code (50, 54), which is a combination of the above-introduced RLL (50, 51) and a 3-bit GS. Moreover, a purposefully selected flipping for a party of the parity bits is used to control dc for the parity part.
There are two LDPC codes to be used in the second design, namely, a (4428, 4920) LDPC code which is same as in [9] and a (4096, 4344) LDPC code which not only matches with the NREs/NRDs, i.e., there are no “dummy” bits, but also provides a higher code rate. We first consider the performance of the proposal for the effect of error propagation. As shown in Fig. 5, there is no error propagation for the parity part

in the proposed design. The result is obtained due to the advantage of using the (4, 6) balance modulation block code for controlling dc-free for the parity part. First, the block code does not propagate errors, thanks to the independence of encoded blocks; in general, it is always one of the most favored choices for storage systems. Second, the balanced codewords very well provide the dc suppression. In particular, the balance code is extremely useful for error-correction power because the minimum Hamming distance between balanced codewords is always at least 2. This distance is thoroughly exploited by many detection schemes in the research; for the sake of simplicity, we use the Euclidean distance concept to detect the parity data sequence. Fig. 5 shows enhanced BER performances of the parity part at the input of the LDPC decoder.
Finally, we estimate the performance of the second proposed scheme with different code rates and compare to the DCRLL5054-LDPC in terms of BER. As shown in Fig. 6,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:46:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NGUYEN et al.: ON EFFICIENT CONCATENATION OF LDPC CODES WITH CONSTRAINED CODES

6701705

the proposed design with the (4096, 4344) LDPC code provides the most-effective performance, followed by the one with the (4428, 4920) LDPC code and the DCRLL5054-LDPC, respectively. For instance, at 10−4 BER, the DCRLL5054LDPC is about 0.4 and 0.7 dB worse than the proposed design with the (4428, 4920) LDPC code and with the (4096, 4344) LDPC code, respectively.
V. CONCLUSION
In this article, we have proposed two new methods for concatenating the LDPC codes with the constrained codes. The proposed designs deployed the nibble-based technique to generate k-constrained sequences. In the case of the dc-free k-constrained LDPC code, dc-free channel-coded sequences have been constructed based on the GS technique and the (4, 6) balanced modulation code. The designed dc-free k-constrained code has been further combined with the LDPC code such that the modulation constraints were satisfied at both user and parity parts. The proposed designs have achieved high code rates and avoided the effect of error propagation with a very simple added part. The BER performance has also been improved substantially. Moreover, the proposed dc-free k-constrained LDPC code generates spectrum nulls of more than −50 dB at dc with reasonable computational complexity.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by Singapore Ministry of Education Academic Research Fund Tier 2 MOE2016-T2-2-054, SUTD-ZJU grant ZJURP1500102, and SUTD SRG grant SRLS15095.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] N. Bonello, S. Chen, and L. Hanzo, “Low-density parity-check codes and their rateless relatives,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 3–26, Feb. 2011.
[3] C. K. Matcha, S. Roy, M. Bahrami, B. Vasic, and S. G. Srinivasa, “2D LDPC codes and joint detection and decoding for two-dimensional magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 54, no. 2, Feb. 2018, Art. no. 3100111.
[4] K. A. S. Immink, Codes for Mass Data Storage Systems, 2nd ed. Eindhoven, The Netherlands: Shannon Foundation Publishers, 2004.
[5] P. Chaichanavong, “Systems and methods for combining constrained codes and error correcting codes,” U.S. Patent 9 419 653 B1, Aug. 16, 2016.
[6] R. D. Cideciyan, R. A. Hutchins, T. Mittelholzer, and S. Oelcer, “Partial reverse concatenation for data storage devices using composite codes,” U.S. Patent 20 130 326 306 A1, Dec. 05, 2013.
[7] B. Vasic and K. Pedagani, “Run-length-limited low-density Parity check codes based on deliberate error insertion,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 1738–1743, May 2004.
[8] J. Lu and K. G. Boyer, “Novel RLL-ECC concatenation scheme for high density magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 2271–2273, Jun. 2007.
[9] Y. Han and W. E. Ryan, “Concatenating a structured LDPC code and a constrained code to preserve soft-decoding, structure, and burst correction,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 2558–2560, Oct. 2006.
[10] K. A. S. Immink, “High-rate maximum runlength constrained coding schemes using nibble replacement,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-58, no. 10, pp. 6572–6580, Oct. 2012.
[11] K. Cai, K. A. S. Immink, M. Zhang, and R. Zhao, “On the design of spectrum shaping codes for high-density data storage,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 63, no. 4, pp. 477–482, Nov. 2017.
[12] G. Pierobon, “Codes for zero spectral density at zero frequency,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-30, no. 2, pp. 425–429, Mar. 1984.
[13] K. A. S. Immink, “Spectral null codes,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 1130–1135, Mar. 1990.
[14] K. A. S. Immink, J.-Y. Kim, S.-W. Suh, and S. K. Ahn, “Efficient DCfree RLL codes for optical recording,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 326–331, Mar. 2003.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:46:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

