1358

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 68, NO. 3, MARCH 2020

A Novel Graph Expansion and a Decoding Algorithm for NB-LDPC Codes

V. B. Wijekoon , Student Member, IEEE, Emanuele Viterbo , Fellow, IEEE, Yi Hong , Senior Member, IEEE, Rino Micheloni, Senior Member, IEEE, and Alessia Marelli, Member, IEEE

Abstract— Non-binary low-density parity-check (NB-LDPC) codes are known to offer several advantages over their binary counterparts, but the higher complexity, and the resource-hungry nature of decoding algorithms have so far restricted their practical usage. In this paper, we propose a new decoding algorithm for NB-LDPC codes over finite fields of characteristic 2, based on a novel binary expansion of the Q-ary Tanner graph. While it offers substantial complexity gains, simulation results demonstrate that the performance loss of the new algorithm, in comparison to the best known decoder, is quite small. Furthermore, due to being based on a binary graph, it is particularly attractive for hardware implementations. We also suggest a simplified version of the algorithm, which offers even higher gains in complexity.
Index Terms— Non-binary LDPC codes, graph expansion, iterative decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
F IRST introduced by Gallager in 1962 [1], low-denisty parity-check (LDPC) codes have become quite popular due to their capacity-approaching performance [2], and are now used in many practical applications such as Ethernet, digital television and Wi-Fi. Non-binary counterparts of these codes (NB-LDPC), introduced in [3], have been shown to perform even better for short-to-moderate code lengths. Their performance is superior to that of binary LDPC codes in the presence of burst errors [4] as well. While many algebraic structures could be used to construct NB-LDPC codes, they are most often defined over finite fields of characteristic 2 [3], i.e. GF (2p).
Sum-product algorithm (SPA) for decoding binary LDPC codes can be generalized for NB-LDPC codes [3], in which case it is popularly referred to as Q-ary sum-product algorithm (QSPA). While performance of NB-LDPC codes with QSPA is very good, decoding complexity is quite high, of the order O(q2), where q is the size of the field on which the code is defined. Algorithm also requires substantial amounts of hardware resources, since now probability vectors of size
Manuscript received March 19, 2019; revised July 27, 2019, October 22, 2019, and December 10, 2019; accepted December 13, 2019. Date of publication December 23, 2019; date of current version March 18, 2020. This research work is supported by the Australian Research Council under Linkage Project ARC LP160100002. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was H. Saeedi. (Corresponding author: V. B. Wijekoon.)
V. B. Wijekoon, Emanuele Viterbo, and Yi Hong are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Systems Engineering, Monash University, Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia (e-mail: wijekoon.wijekoon@monash.edu).
Rino Micheloni and Alessia Marelli are with the Flash Signal Processing Labs, Microsemi-Microchip Corporation, 20871 Vimercate, Italy.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this article are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2019.2961884

q have to be considered. In [5], a version of QSPA was introduced which uses the fast Fourier transform (FFT-QSPA) to decrease the order of complexity to O(q log q) without any performance loss. Log domain implementations of QSPA [6] and FFT-QSPA [4] were also considered to make the decoding algorithms more suitable for hardware implementations.
Simplification of QSPA using an approach similar to minsum decoding of binary LDPC codes was first attempted in [6]. It was further modified, resulting in the extended min-sum algorithm (EMS) [7], which uses only a subset of the q probability values. Another simplification of QSPA was introduced in [8], the min-max algorithm. While these simplifications provide some gains in complexity at a little performance loss, those gains have not been enough for NB-LDPC codes to be used widely in practical applications.
An alternative approach to reducing decoding complexity of NB-LDPC codes is to consider them as binary codes, and employ bit-level decoding schemes. This approach is particularly attractive since NB-LDPC codewords are often transmitted as sets of bits over binary input channels. A primary concern with bit-level decoding is the binary representation of the non-binary parity-check matrix. One option in this regard is to use the binary image of the matrix, which results in a p times larger binary matrix for a code over GF (2p). This technique is successfully employed in [9] for majoritylogic decoding (MLgD), and substantial gains over other MLgD algorithms are reported. Ideas in [9] are developed further in [10], where redundant rows are added to the binary image, resulting in significant performance improvements. A different representation, referred to as the ‘extended binary representation’, was first proposed in [11]. Extended binary representation of a code over GF (2p) results in a (2p − 1) times larger binary matrix. The technique is used for decoding over the binary erasure channel in [11], [12], and is generalized for other channel models in [13], [14]. Still, schemes proposed in [13] and [14] do not fully realize the complexity advantage offered by the binary representation. In particular, scheme proposed in [13] is from the same family as FFT-QSPA [5], and the soft decoding scheme highlighted in [14] requires transmission of an additional set of parity bits.
This paper introduces a novel decoding algorithm for NBLDPC codes over GF (2p), with substantial gains in complexity and hardware implementation costs. Algorithm is based on a new binary expansion of the Q-ary Tanner graph, which produces a larger binary graph. The idea of symbols belonging to different cosets of size 2p−1 in GF (2p), which can be interpreted as a set of binary random variables, is used for

0090-6778 © 2019 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:48:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WIJEKOON et al.: NOVEL GRAPH EXPANSION AND A DECODING ALGORITHM FOR NB-LDPC CODES

1359

the expansion. Resulting binary graph is (2p − 1) times larger than the Q-ary graph, but only consists of binary nodes. Although the graph expansion shares a lot of similarities with the extended binary representation [11], the two expansions are derived from different theoretical backgrounds. Our interpretation allows us to propose a novel decoding algorithm that succeeds in realizing the significant complexity advantage offered by the binary representation. Since the algorithm operates on a binary graph, it becomes very attractive in terms of hardware implementation. Simulations show that in comparison with QSPA, the new algorithm loses very little in performance, and, for certain codes, outperforms the best known simplifications. Furthermore, simplification techniques used in decoding of binary LDPC codes can be directly applied to the new algorithm for higher gains in complexity.
We explain the novel graph expansion in detail in Section II, and present the new decoding algorithm, along with its simplified version, in Section III. Section IV presents the simulation results while Section V analyzes the complexity of the algorithms. Section VI concludes the paper.
II. NOVEL GRAPH EXPANSION
Given a random variable in the additive group K = {GF (2p), +}, and a subset of K, the variable belonging to the subset can be treated as another random variable. In other words, we can define how likely it is for a certain random variable to belong to a given subset. The graph expansion presented in this paper is based on such idea: i.e., treating ‘belonging to a subset’ as a random variable. The subsets we are considering for the expansion are the proper cosets of the additive subgroups H of order 2p−1 in K. In the following, we first present the distinctive properties of these cosets which make the graph expansion possible, and then present the expansion in detail.
A. Cosets of K
Proper cosets of additive subgroups may be defined as follows.
Definition 1: Let H denote a subgroup of order 2p−1 of K, and let γ be an element of K that does not belong to H. Proper coset CH of H is:
CH = {h + γ | h ∈ H}
CH is a set of 2p−1 elements that is disjoint with H, hence H ∪ CH = K. Therefore, only one distinct proper coset CH exists for any H, and the quotient group QH = K /H consists of only two elements: H and CH .
As noted in [15], QH is isomorphic to Z2, and an analysis of its additive properties leads to some interesting observations. In particular, the sum of any two elements in CH would always belong to H, and the sum of any element in CH with any element in H would belong to CH . This behaviour means that given three elements β1, β2, β3 ∈ K that are related as β1 + β2 = β3, and a specific CH , either none of the three, or exactly two, belong to CH . This observation will be used to significantly simplify the check node operations in decoding NB-LDPC codes, as elaborated on later in this section.

In the following, in interest of brevity, we may sometimes refer to CH simply as ‘coset’, and the trivial coset H, as ‘subgroup’.
The number of distinct subsets CH is equal to the number of distinct subgroups H of order 2p−1.
Lemma 1: There are (2p − 1) distinct subgroups of order 2p−1 in K.
Proof: K is a binary vector space of dimension p, with modulo 2 addition. Similarly, a subgroup of order 2p−1 is a binary vector sub-space of dimension (p − 1). Then the number of distinct subgroups is equal to the number of distinct subspaces of dimension (p − 1) in a binary vector space of dimension p.
First we count the ways such a subspace can be constructed, which will be denoted with nw. To construct a subspace of dimension (p − 1), one should simply pick (p − 1) linearly independent vectors from the original vector space. For the
first choice, any vector other than the all-zero vector is valid.
For the second, vectors linearly dependant on the first pick
have to be disregarded, but since the vector field is binary,
there are none. In the third choice, the vector resulting from
the addition of the first two has to be left-out. Continuing in
this manner, we find;

nw = (2p − 1)(2p − 2) . . . (2p − 2p−2)

nw may contain the same vector space several times. Therefore, in order to find the number of distinct subspaces, nw has to be divided by the number of different bases of a (p − 1)-dimensional vector space, which we denote with nb. Following the same approach as before;

nb = (2p−1 − 1)(2p−1 − 2) . . . (2p−1 − 2p−2)

Now, the number of distinct subspaces, which is equal to the number of distinct additive subgroups, is simply nw/nb.

nw nb

=

(2p − 1)(2p − 2) . . . (2p − 2p−2) (2p−1 − 1)(2p−1 − 2) . . . (2p−1 − 2p−2)

=

(2p − 1)2p−2 (2p−1 − 2p−2)

= 2p−1

Now we consider H and CH as subsets of GF (2p) in order to observe their behavior with the multiplication operation in

the field.

Lemma 2: Multiplying all the elements of a subgroup by some β ∈ GF (2p), where β = 0 (additive identity), results in

another distinct subgroup. Proof: Let H denote an additive subgroup of order 2p−1 in
GF (2p). It is evident that multiplying all the elements of H by some β ∈ GF (2p) preserves the additive property. Therefore

βH is also a subgroup.

In order to prove that each different β would result in a

different subgroup, we first assume that the subgroups βH

are not distinct. That is, for some β1 and β2, β1 H = β2 H.

ThWis eredseunlotsteinβ1ββ12−β21−1=Hα=d ,

H. where

α

is

a

primitive

of

GF

(2p).

We also denote the set of powers of α of all the elements in

H, except the additive identity, as H∗. H∗ is a sub-set of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:48:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1360

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 68, NO. 3, MARCH 2020

ring of integers modulo (2p − 1), with (2p−1 − 1) elements. Multiplying all the elements of H with αd would transform H∗ into d + H∗, where the addition is modulo (2p − 1).
Since αdH = H, d + H∗ should also result in the set H∗. Without loss of generality, we assume H∗ = {x0, x1, . . . , x2p−1−2} is an ordered set, and therefore, d + H∗ should be some i’th cyclic shift of H∗. This results in the
following set of congruence relations.

xj + d ≡ xj⊕i mod 2p − 1;

j = 0, 1, . . . , 2p−1 − 2

⊕ denotes the addition modulo 2p−1 −1. Expressing the above as equations;

xj⊕i − xj = d; j = 0, 1, . . . , 2p−1 − 2 − i xj⊕i −xj +(2p − 1) = d; j = 2p−1 −1−i, . . . , 2p−1 −2

Now, summation of all the 2p − 1 equations above gives;

i(2p − 1) d = 2p−1 − 1
Note that d has to be an integer, and that (2p−1) and (2p−1−1) share no common factors. Thus, i = (2p−1 − 1), and d = (2p − 1). This results in β1β2−1 = α2p−1 = 1, and β1 = β2. Therefore, βH for each different β results in a different subgroup.
Corollary 1: Multiplying proper cosets CH with some β = 0 always results in another distinct proper coset.
Corollary 1, along with the additive property briefly overviewed at the start of the section, enable us to formulate a binary expansion for NB-LDPC codes that significantly reduces the complexity at check nodes. Traditionally, check node operations are viewed as a combination of two distinct steps; permutation of symbol probabilities, and convolution of permuted probability vectors [5]. The main reason for the high decoding complexity of NB-LDPC codes is this convolution of probability vectors [7], [8].
For the purpose of explaining how the aforementioned properties are related to decoding, we assume that instead of symbol probabilities, probabilities of belonging to each specific coset are available at check nodes, and that the output of check node operations should be the same. It is interesting to note that the two sets of probabilities are of similar size. In GF (2p), there are 2p symbol probability values, and from lemma 1, it can be seen that there are (2p − 1) ‘coset probability’ values.
The permutation step is necessary in decoding NB-LDPC codes due to the fact that a symbol turns into a different one when multiplied with a non-binary edge weight. From lemma 2, it is evident that this behavior is the same with proper cosets as well; a coset turns into another when multiplied with the edge weight. Thus, similar to symbol probabilities, coset probabilities also have to be permuted at check nodes. Therefore, there would be no discernible change in the permutation step of check node operations. But the impact on the convolution step is more significant, and requires a closer look.
Consider the case of a check node with three neighboring variable nodes, v1, v2, v3. Assuming edge weights equal to 1, these are related as v1 + v2 = v3. When calculating symbol

probabilities for one variable node, probability vectors of the other two have to undergo a convolution operation because probability of a specific output symbol is affected by those of all the input symbols. But this is not the case when it comes to coset probabilities. Output probability of belonging to a given coset is only impacted by the two input probabilities of belonging to the same coset. Using the additive properties highlighted at the start of this section, one may see that given the input probabilities of v1 and v2 belonging to the k‘th coset, pik/,vp1 and pik/,vp2 , output probability pok/,vp3 can be calculated as;
pok/,vp3 = pki/,vp1 (1 − pki/,vp2 ) + (1 − pki/,vp1 )pik/,vp2
This equation actually represents the operation at check nodes of binary LDPC codes [2]. Thus, in the case of calculating coset probabilities, a single non-binary check node operates as a set of binary check nodes. We explain how this observation could be used to formulate a novel expansion of a non-binary Tanner graph in the following.

B. Graph Expansion
From the observations on how permutation and convolution operations are impacted from using coset probabilities, it seems straight-forward to expand a non-binary Tanner graph into a binary one by replacing each non-binary node in the original graph with a set of binary nodes, one each for the (2p − 1) cosets. A binary variable node would represent the probability of the original non-binary symbol belonging to a particular coset, whereas a binary check node would calculate estimates of the said probability. As evident from property 2, how the binary variable and check nodes are to be connected would be defined by the non-binary edge weights of the original graph.
As an example, consider a parity-check equation ρ of a code over GF (23), involving two code symbols v1 and v2. Primitive polynomial p(x) = x3 + x + 1 has been used to generate GF (23), and α denotes a primitive element.

ρ ⇒ αv1 + α6v2 = 0

(1)

Now assume that v1 and v2 transmit the set of coset probabilities to the check node ρ. Referring the cosets listed in Table I, one may observe that CH1 is turned into CH7 upon multiplication with α, and into CH3 when multiplied with α6. All the other cosets behave similarly. Therefore, coset probabilities have to be permuted, and the
edges in the expanded graph, between the binary vari-
able nodes and check nodes, are defined according to this
permutation.
Analyzing the permutation from the point-of-view of the
parity-check matrix, one may observe that it is akin to replacing each non-binary value with a (2p−1)×(2p−1) permutation matrix M , where M (i, j) is 1 if the j’th coset turns into the i’th coset upon multiplication with that value, and 0 otherwise. The expanded matrix Hexp1 for the parity-check equation

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:48:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WIJEKOON et al.: NOVEL GRAPH EXPANSION AND A DECODING ALGORITHM FOR NB-LDPC CODES

1361

TABLE I SUBGROUPS AND PROPER COSETS IN GF (23)
TABLE II COSET REPRESENTATION OF GF(23)

given by (1) would take the form of (2).

H = ⎡α | α6

⎤

0010000|0000001

Hexp1 = ⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢⎢⎢00000

0 1 0 0 0

0 0 0 0 0

1 0 0 0 0

0 0 0 0 1

0 0 1 0 0

0 0 0 1 0

| | | | |

0 1 0 0 0

0 0 1 0 0

1 0 0 0 0

0 0 0 0 1

0 0 0 0 0

0 0 0 1 0

00000⎥⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥

(2)

1000000|0000100

The straight-forward approach would work if the coset
probabilities of a given variable node were independent of
each other. But obviously, this is not the case. For example,
consider cosets CH1 , CH2 and CH7 , listed in Table I. If it is known that a symbol is in CH1, but not in CH2 , then we can safely come to the conclusion that the symbol must be in CH7 .
In order to capture the dependencies between coset probabilities, we present an alternate binary representation of GF (2p)
symbols. For this purpose, we first define a set of auxiliary
binary random variables as follows. Given some symbol β and a coset Ci, both in GF (2p);

aβ,i = 1; β ∈ Ci aβ,i = 0; β ∈/ Ci

Using these auxiliary variables, each symbol in GF (2p) could be uniquely represented as a binary vector of length (2p − 1),
which we call the ‘coset representation‘ of the field. For example, again consider GF (23). Table II shows how each
symbol could be represented, using cosets given in Table I.
Observing Table II, one may see that the 8 binary vectors for the symbols of GF (23) form a (7, 3) binary linear code.

In fact, coset representation of GF (2p) constitutes of the 2p

codewords of a (2p − 1, p) linear code. Parity-check matrix

of this linear code, which we will call the ‘local code’, can

be easily utilized to capture the dependencies between coset

probabilities. The said matrix is a (2p−p−1)×(2p−1) matrix, and the (2p − p − 1) parity-check equations obtained from its

rows are sufficient to capture the dependencies. Continuing the

example with GF (23), parity-check matrix of the (7, 3) code

(H2o3rg) is given below.

⎡

⎤

1011000

H2o3rg = ⎢⎣⎢10

1 1

1 1

0 0

1 0

0 1

00⎥⎥⎦

(3)

1100001

From the point-of-view of the new binary graph, parity-

check equations of the local code represent an additional set

of binary check nodes. For each non-binary variable node (of

the original graph), (2p − p − 1) binary check nodes have to

be added to the expanded graph. This is the only modification

necessary to the straight-forward approach described at the

start of this section. New set of check nodes would capture

all the dependencies between the binary variable nodes. New

check nodes are only connected with a subset of the set of

binary nodes of a single non-binary variable node and although

the number of them seem quite large, it should be noted that

they are of very low degree. In the matrix representation, these

additional check nodes translate to new parity-check equations,

and continuing with the example of (1), new expanded binary matrix, Hexp2 , would now be given by (4), where 4 additional parity-check equations each have been added to Hexp1 for the

2 variable nodes.

⎡

Hexp1

⎤

Hexp2 = ⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢0110001

0 1 1 1
0 0 0

1 1 1 0
0 0 0

1 0 0 0
0 0 0

0 1 0 0
0 0 0

0 0 1 0
0 0 0

0 0 0 1
0 0 0

| | | |
| | |

0 0 0 0
1 1 0

0 0 0 0
0 1 1

0 0 0 0
1 1 1

0 0 0 0
1 0 0

0 0 0 0
0 1 0

0 0 0 0
0 0 1

0000000⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥

(4)

0000000|1100001

When it comes to message passing decoding, it is consid-
ered desirable not to have short cycles in the graph [2]. Short
cycles may create graphical structures that are detrimental for
iterative decoding, such as stopping sets and trapping sets
(also called near codewords) [18], [19]. For these reasons,
construction methods of LDPC codes attempt to increase the
girth; the length of the shortest cycle in the code [20].
So, even though the parity-check matrix of the local code
does help in capturing all the dependencies, an additional set of
properties such as girth has to be considered to evaluate the
suitability of the matrix for message passing decoding. For example, from (3) it can be observed that Ho23rg has a girth of only 4, and that it contains 3 cycles of that length. This means that H2o3rg is unsuitable for message passing decoding. In order to amend this, we propose carrying out row operations

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:48:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1362

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 68, NO. 3, MARCH 2020

Fig. 1. Graph expansion for GF(23).

on the local parity-check matrix until a matrix with girth at

least 6 is obtained. This approach of creating a suitable parity-

check matrix has been used in iterative decoding of Reed-

Solomon codes as well [21]. Since non-binary LDPC codes are not usually considered over fields larger than GF (28) [22],

largest parity-check matrix possible for the local code is

247 × 256, and constructing a better matrix is quite feasible.

For GF (23), matrix obtained through this method (H23 ) is

given below.

⎡

⎤

1011000

H23 = ⎣⎢⎢01

0 1

0 1

0 0

1 0

1 1

00⎦⎥⎥

(5)

1100001

H23 is obtained simply by replacing the second row of H2o3rg with the binary summation of that row with the third. An additional advantage of H23 is that it is a bit sparser than Ho23rg, and it has a constant row weight of 3.
Observing table II closely, it can be seen that the codewords
listed comprise the codebook of the dual code of the (7,4)
Hamming code, also called the simplex code [16]. In fact, the (2p − 1, p) code arising from the coset representation of any field GF (2p) is the dual code of the Hamming code of length (2p − 1). Since Hamming codes are guaranteed to have a minimum distance of 3, it should always be possible to find a
parity-check matrix with a constant row weight 3 for the local code of any field GF (2p). Such a matrix is also guaranteed to have no cycles of length 4, as two weight 3 binary Hamming
codewords can never have more than a single common bit.
Thus, the new graph expansion we introduce can be sum-
marized in the following three distinct steps.
1) Expand each GF (2p) node into (2p − 1) binary nodes 2) Obtain a parity-check matrix without short cycles, and
row weight 3, for the local code 3) Add (2p − p − 1) ‘local‘ check nodes to each set of
(2p − 1) binary nodes resulting from a variable node over GF (2p)
Fig. 1 presents the expansion for parity-check equation over GF (23), given by (1). In the figure, squares represent check nodes, circles variable nodes, and the extra check nodes
added (local check nodes) are represented with hexagons.
Shaded graph at the top is the original, non-binary Tanner
graph.

Graph expansion presented shares similarities with the extended binary representation first proposed in [11]. Both expansions initially result in binary matrices (2p − 1) times larger than the original, and in both cases, additional binary check nodes added are the constraints of a simplex code. But the extended binary representation is derived based on an endomorphism of the set of integers {0, 1, . . . , 2p − 1} and an isomorphism between that set and the vector space of dimension p [14], whereas the proposed expansion is developed using the algebraic properties of GF (2p). As noted earlier as well, our approach leads to a novel decoding algorithm which offers attractive complexity gains. Algorithm is presented in detail, along with its distinctive features, in Section III.
III. COSET PROBABILITY BASED DECODING ALGORITHM
Decoding algorithm we present is implemented on the expanded, binary graph. Since the graph is now binary, it seems straight-forward to use the binary sum-product algorithm (SPA) [2], or the well-known simplification, min-sum (MS) decoding [17]. But there are certain special characteristics of the expanded graph which require some modifications to SPA.
New expansion replaces each GF (2p) variable node, which corresponds to a single GF (2p) symbol, with (2p − 1) binary nodes. One GF (2p) symbol only carries p bits of information and, therefore, only p of the binary nodes can receive channel estimates. Initializing the remaining set of nodes is a concern.
Two different types of check nodes are present in the expanded graph. First type are the ones which replaced the nodes in the original graph. Then some additional check nodes had to be added in order to capture the relationships between coset probabilities of a single non-binary node. We will call the first category ‘global’ check nodes and the second ‘local’ check nodes.
Global check nodes can be satisfied even if the different sets of binary variable nodes do not represent symbols in GF (2p) (in other words, a codeword of the local code). Local check nodes are concerned only with the local code. The set of local checks added for a single non-binary node will be satisfied when the set of binary nodes which replaced that represents some symbol in GF (2p). For the local checks, it is irrelevant whether the decoder has converged to an actual codeword of the NB-LDPC code, or not. These observations suggest that the two types need to be treated differently.
In the following we first describe the steps of SPA for the sake of completion, and then elaborate on how it should be modified to operate on the expanded graph, taking into account the aforementioned unique characteristics. An LDPC code over GF (2p) with an m × n parity-check matrix that is transmitted over the binary-input additive white Gaussian noise (BI-AWGN) channel is considered. Description of SPA is presented step-wise; initialization, check node operations, and variable node operations.
A. Initialization
Each GF (2p) variable node has now been replaced with (2p − 1) binary nodes, and in the initialization step, channel estimates, called a priori probability values, should be

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:48:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WIJEKOON et al.: NOVEL GRAPH EXPANSION AND A DECODING ALGORITHM FOR NB-LDPC CODES

1363

assigned to each of these. But the set of binary nodes corresponds to only p bits of information transmitted across the channel. These p bits are represented by the message bits of the local code, and that particular set of nodes may be initialized with channel log-likelihood ratios (LLRs).

Li,t

=

2ri,t σ2

(6)

Li,t is the initial estimate, and ri,t is the value received, for the
t’th bit (binary node) of i’th variable node, and t = 1, . . . , p. As usual, σ2 represent noise variance.
Remaining (2p − p − 1) binary nodes represent the parity

bits of the local code. This means that each of those bits could

be written as a linear combination of the p message bits which

were initialized with channel values. Equations of the original

local parity-check matrix (not modified for a large girth; given by (3) for GF (23)) represent these relationships. Utilizing the

channel LLR values of the p message bits, initial estimates for the (2p − p − 1) parity bits could be calculated as follows.

Li,t = 2 tanh−1

tanh Li,j 2

(7)

j∈Et

Et represents the set of message bits involved in deriving the t‘th parity bit, and t = p + 1, . . . , 2p − 1.
After initialization, binary nodes would send all initial
estimates Li,t to their neighboring check nodes.

B. Check Node Operations

Both global and local check nodes operate similar to a check node of a binary LDPC decoder [2]. In the k’th decoder iteration, j’th check node would calculate a probability estimate (called a posteriori probability) for the i’th variable node in its neighborhood Mj, in the form of an LLR as;

rj(k−→) i = 2 tanh−1

tanh ri(k−→−1j)

(8)

2

i ∈Mj ;i =i

where ri(−→k−j1) is the LLR from i’th variable node to j’th check node in the previous iteration.

C. Variable Node Operations

Similarly to a binary LDPC decoder [2], variable nodes first need to combine the a posteriori probability values received from neighboring check nodes with the a priori probability from the channel. Since the decoder operates in the LLR domain, this is done by simple addition of the values. Combining probability estimates at variable node i in k’th decoding iteration is carried out as follows.

Ri(k) = Li +

rj(k→ −) i +

rj(k−→) i

(9)

j∈Nig

j∈Nil

Nig and Nil denote global and local check nodes in the neighborhood of variable node i. Li is its a priori probability
estimate. Based on Ri(k) values, some ‘tentative’ decision needs to
be taken to check whether the decoder has converged. Only

the p message bits of the local code need to be considered for

this step, since they alone form a symbol in GF (2p). Decision rule for the bit value is the same as in a binary decoder [2], where only a comparison against zero is necessary. GF (2p) symbols are obtained as length p binary vectors. Syndrome check is carried out with these, and if the syndrome is zero, which means the decoder has converged to a codeword of the NB-LDPC code, it terminates with success. If not, maximum number of allowed decoding iterations is checked. In the case in which that number has been reached, decoder terminates with failure, or else, extrinsic messages are calculated for another iteration, as given in equation (10).

ri(−→k+j1) = Ri(k) − rj(k→ −) i; j ∈ Nig ∪ Nil

(10)

D. Modifications to SPA

Using the sum-product algorithm as highlighted in the previous sub-sections, does not address the peculiarities of the expanded binary graph which were briefly overviewed at the start of this section. Major concerns raised there were;
1) Calculation of initial estimates for (2p − p − 1) bits out of the (2p − 1) bits that represent a non-binary symbol
2) Need to distinguish between the estimates of global and local check nodes that focus on different aspects of the expansion
As detailed in subsection A, an initial estimate for the bits that are not transmitted through the channel can be calculated using the channel LLR values of the p transmitted bits. But there is no guarantee on the accuracy of those LLRs, and errors there may propagate into calculated initial estimates, which can affect the overall performance of the decoder. Also, these estimates do not reflect a priori probabilities in the true sense. Therefore, calculated initial estimates can be considered as not as reliable as the ones received from the channel. To reflect this, we suggest using a scaling factor β (0 <β≤ 1) when calculating the estimates. Optimal value of β has to be found through simulations for each code. This coefficient will only be used in initialization, and because of that, impact of the scaling operation on decoding complexity is negligible. Equation (7) is slightly modified to represent the scaling operation as follows.

Li,t = 2β tanh−1

tanh Li,j 2

(11)

j∈Et

Variable node operations of SPA, presented in subsection C, do not distinguish between estimates from global check nodes and local check nodes. But, as discussed earlier, there is a need for this, since each type of check node deal with different code constraints; global check nodes handle the constraints resulting from the original code, and local check nodes deal with the constraints enforced by the coset representation. The obvious way of differentiating between the two types is to scale the estimates with different weighting factors, wl for the ones from local check nodes and wg for global check nodes (0 < wl, wg ≤ 1). We suggest setting wg = 1, and finding the appropriate value of wl through simulations.
A set of binary variable nodes, those which represent parity bits in the local code, do not really have a priori probability estimates. They are initialized with a value calculated as in (9),

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:48:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1364

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 68, NO. 3, MARCH 2020

which is then sent to check nodes as the a priori estimate.

This value is calculated using some of the constraints of the

local code, and the local check nodes also represent a set of

these. Whether the constraints used in the calculation and those

represented by the local checks have any in common depends

on the parity-check matrix used for the local code (step 2 of

the expansion, detailed in Section II-B). Still, sending a priori

estimates calculated using the local code back to check nodes

which represent the same code seem to be in contrast to

the extrinsic principle of message passing, and could create

undesirable correlations between messages from the very first

decoding iteration. This should also be reflected when setting

a value for wl. Equation (9) is slightly modified as follows to represent the

usage of weighting factor wl.

Ri(k) = Li +

rj(k−→) i + wl

rj(k→ −) i

j∈Nig

j∈Nil

(12)

Equation (10) is not modified for the global check nodes (j ∈ Nig), but for local check nodes, it now takes the following form.

ri(→ −k+j1) = Ri(k) − wl.rj(k→ −) i; j ∈ Nil

(13)

As explained, scaling a posteriori probability estimates received from local check nodes is a necessary operation in each decoder iteration. Therefore, in the interest of keeping the complexity low, we suggest using values of the form 1/2r for wl. Then the scaling operation simply becomes a set of bit shifts, which are of almost negligible complexity at hardware level. Optimal value for r, has to be obtained through simulations for each code. For certain codes, marginal gains in performance (around 0.1dB) were observed with scaling factors not of the form 1/2r, but for the majority, there were no observable gains.
Comparing the decoding schemes presented in [13] and [14] with the algorithm proposed here, we note some important differences. [13] presents an algorithm from the family of FFT-QSPA [5], which means the complexity advantages one might expect from using a binary expansion are not available. In [14], all (2p − 1) bits are transmitted when using the expansion with soft decoding, thereby lowering the code rate, and both types of constraints are treated similarly. In contrast, the algorithm we proposed employs bit-level decoding, thereby gaining significant complexity advantages, and distinguishes between the two types of constraints for additional performance gains. Furthermore, since the algorithm requires only p bits to be transmitted per symbol, there is no loss of rate, and the normal transmission setup requires no modification. We also note that the matrix used for decoding in [14] is not the extended binary representation of the original non-binary matrix, but a matrix obtained from optimizing the extended representation for girth.

E. Simplifications
In the interest of further reducing decoding complexity, certain modifications could be applied to the decoding algorithm. In particular, calculation of tanh and tanh−1 functions, required in equations (7) and (8), is a complex operation at

hardware level. In binary LDPC decoders, these operations are simplified to a level where only comparisons are required [17]. This version of SPA is known popularly as ‘min-sum‘ decoding, and although there is some performance loss, it is widely used in practice due to complexity savings.
Since equation (7) is only required during initialization, its impact on total decoding complexity is minimal. Also, modifying that equation would be akin to setting different initial parameters for the two versions of the algorithm. Therefore, we suggest using the min-sum simplification only for equation (8), which is then modified as;

rj(k−→) i

=

i

∈Mj ;i

sign(ri(k→ −−1j)). i
=i

min
∈Mj ;i

= i

|ri(k→−−1j) |

(14)

In the case of binary codes, it has been identified that the deterioration in decoding performance resulting from min-sum simplification is due to the a posteriori probabilities calculated by check node being overestimates of the actual value [23]. Various methods to ‘correct‘ this overestimation error has been suggested in the literature [23]–[25], among which the simplest is to use a constant normalization factor δ (0 <δ≤ 1) [23]. We also follow this method to improve performance of the simplified version of the algorithm, and in this case, equation (14) gets slightly modified as follows.

rj(k−→) i

=

δ.

i

∈Mj ;i

sign(ri(k→ −−1j) ).
=i

i

min
∈Mj ;i

=i

|ri(k−→−1j) |

(15)

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS

In this section, we evaluate performance of the new

algorithm, ‘Coset Probability based Decoding (CPbD)’,

against well-known decoding algorithms for NB-LDPC codes.

We assess performance of three versions of CPbD; without

any modifications to SPA, as highlighted in Section III-A-C

(CPbD), with the modifications suggested in Section III-D

(CPbD-M), and then with both the modifications and the

min-sum simplification (CPbD-MS). Existing algorithms con-

sidered include the optimum decoding algorithm QSPA in

its LLR-domain implementation [6], and two simplifications,

min-max algorithm [8] and max-log-SP algorithm [6]. We note

that max-log-SP algorithm is a special case of extended min-

sum (EMS) algorithm [7], where the two parameters nm and
nc are set to the maximum values possible, respectively the size of the field (2p) and check-node degree (dc).

Simulations were done over the BI-AWGN channel, with

BPSK modulation. Optimum values of the two parameters

of CPbD-M, β and wl, and the normalization factor δ of

CPbD-MS, were found through simulations.

Fig.2 shows FER performance of algorithms with C1, a rate

1 2

code

over

GF (23),

of

816

symbols

in

length.

Code

was

generated through random re-labeling of a regular binary

LDPC code of column weight 5, obtained from [26]. Optimum

parameters were found to be β = 0.5, wl = 0.25 and δ = 0.7. Maximum number of decoding iterations was set to 50 for all

algorithms.

It can be seen that performance of CPbD without the

modifications is quite unsatisfactory. It has a gap of around 1dB with QSPA, at a FER of 10−4. But with the usage

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:48:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WIJEKOON et al.: NOVEL GRAPH EXPANSION AND A DECODING ALGORITHM FOR NB-LDPC CODES

1365

Fig. 2. FER perf. with a (816,408) code over GF (23) (C1).

Fig. 4. FER perf. with a (32,16) code over GF (24) (C3).

Fig. 3. FER perf. with a (1998,1776) code over GF (24) (C2).
of optimized scaling factors, as suggested in Section III-D, performance improves significantly. In fact, CPbD-M is the algorithm which performs closest to QSPA. The gap between the two is less than 0.3dB at a FER of 10−4. At the same FER level, CPbD-M is outperforming the min-max algorithm by around 0.1dB, and the max-log-SP algorithm by close to 0.5dB. With the min-sum simplification, performance of CPbD-M deteriorates by about 0.3dB, and the gap with the optimum decoder is now less than 0.6dB. Even though minmax algorithm outperforms CPbD-MS, it is still better than max-log-SP algorithm, which can be considered as the direct application of min-sum decoding to NB-LDPC codes [7].
Fig. 3 shows performance of algorithms with C2, a rate 0.89 code over GF (24), of 1998 symbols in length. Again, the code was constructed through random re-labeling of a regular binary graph obtained from [26]. In this case, code has a column weight of 4. Optimum parameters were found to be β = 0.7, wl = 0.25 and δ = 0.9, and maximum number of decoding iterations was set to 50.
For this code, min-max algorithm performs closest to QSPA. At a FER of 10−4, the gap between min-max and QSPA is less than 0.1dB. At the same level, CPbD-M has a gap of about 0.35dB with QSPA. It should be noted that this gap increases to around 0.9dB at a FER of 10−3 if CPbD was used without the scaling factors. Min-sum simplification of CPbD-M loses a further 0.1dB, which makes its gap with QSPA less than 0.5dB. Once more, max-log-SP algorithm is outperformed by

CPbD-MS, although in this case, the gap between the two is very small, about 0.02dB.
FER performance of proposed algorithms with a rate 0.5 code over GF (24), of 32 symbols in length (C3), is presented in Fig. 4. This code was originally proposed in [27] based on an irregular protograph, and is also presented as a candidate for short block length transmissions in [28]. Here, we relax the condition on wl in the interest of better performance, which was achieved at wl = 0.3. Optimum values for β and δ were 0.2 and 0.85 respectively. Maximum number of decoder iterations was set to 100.
It can be seen that in this case, min-max algorithm performs within 0.15dB of QSPA, at a FER of 10−5. CPbD-M shows a higher gap of around 0.5dB at the same FER level. With min-sum simplification, a further loss of 0.07dB is observed. However, it does offer considerable complexity savings, which are presented in Section V. New algorithm without modifications was not considered for this code due to poor performance, while performance of max-log-SP was quite close to that of min-max decoding. Respective curves were removed in the interest of a clearer figure.
We also evaluate performance of binary LDPC and polar codes of same rate and bit length. Binary LDPC code used is the (128,64) code specified in [28]. Performance of polar codes are evaluated with CRC-aided successive cancellation list (SCL) decoding, with two list sizes, 8 and 32. Performance with list size of 32 is from [29]. Polar code outperforms all LDPC codes in both settings, but interestingly, when list size is 8, gap between polar code and NB-LDPC using QSPA diminishes with error rate, going from around 0.45dB at FER of 10−1 to 0.15dB at 10−4, and a performance crossover can be expected at higher SNRs. When list size is 32 though, a consistent gap of around 0.75dB with QSPA can be observed. It should be noted that this configuration of SCL is four times as complex as the one where list size is 8. Binary LDPC code with SPA, performs worst of the lot, and a gap of 0.8dB with QSPA can be observed. CPbD-M, which is also a binary decoder, has a gain of 0.3dB over binary LDPC.
When it comes to decoding complexity, binary SPA has an edge over SCL, particularly since SPA is highly parallelizable, yet with a significant performance loss of close to 1dB that increase to around 1.6dB when the list size is larger. NB-LDPC codes close this gap to just 0.15dB for list size 8, and 0.75dB

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:48:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1366

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 68, NO. 3, MARCH 2020

for list size 32. They even outperform polar codes at slightly

longer lengths, but the highly complex nature of QSPA is a

considerable disadvantage. In contrast, proposed algorithm has

a complexity close to SPA, but with less performance loss.

Thus, it manages to reduce the gap between binary LDPC and

polar significantly, while not losing the complexity advantage

of a highly parallelizable binary decoder.

Results show that when used with the proposed modifi-

cations, the new algorithm, CPbD-M, performs quite close

to the best known decoder for NB-LDPC codes, QSPA.

Its simplified version does not lose much performance, and

it can be further improved using an advanced method for

correcting the min-sum approximation error. In particular,

methods discussed in [24] and [25] report substantial gains

over the factor correction method used in the simulations.

Since using the new algorithm without scaling factors results

in substantial performance losses, we do not consider that

version of the algorithm further in this paper, and refer to the

version with scaling factors simply as ‘CPbD’. Both CPbD and

CPbD-MS offer substantial advantages in terms of complexity

and hardware implementation, which would be discussed in

detail in Section V.

Interestingly, from simulations carried out for CPbD with

a number of different codes, it was observed that the gap it

has with QSPA is somewhat related to the column weight

of the code. With increasing column weight, gap seems to

reduce. This phenomenon can be explained from the point-

of-view of a ‘parity bit’ of the local code. These variable

nodes do not receive a priori estimates from the channel,

and are initialized with calculated values, which makes their

initial estimates less reliable. When the column weight is

high, variable nodes receive more a posteriori estimates, which

reduces the negative impact of the unreliable initial estimate

in the following iterations. A similar idea is used in [30] to

explain the improved performance of irregular LDPC codes

over the regular ones.

From analyzing the impact of ‘calculated‘ initial estimates,

one may obtain an idea on how to chose the scaling factor β.

If the code has a low row weight, then the negative impact

of an erroneous a priori estimate could be higher, since check

node calculations would be impacted more by that estimate.

As explained earlier, calculated initial estimates are not as

reliable as channel estimates, and, as such, they have a higher

chance of being in error. Therefore, for codes with lower row

weights, a smaller value for β is advisable. Since low rate

LDPC codes usually have a low row weight, optimum value

for β would generally be smaller for those. This can be seen

from the results presented in this paper as well. For the rate

1 2

codes,

β

is

0.5

and

0.2,

while

for

rate

0.89

code,

β

is

0.7.

V. COMPLEXITY AND RESOURCE REQUIREMENTS
In the following, we compare decoding complexities of CPbD and CPbD-MS, with that of the two popular versions of QSPA, LLR-QSPA [6] and FFT-QSPA [5], and min-max decoding [8]. An NB-LDPC code over GF (2p), transmitted over the BI-AWGN channel, is considered for the comparison. Complexities of the two major steps of message

TABLE III CHECK NODE COMPLEXITY
TABLE IV VARIABLE NODE COMPLEXITY
passing decoding, check node computations and variable node computations, are compared separately. We consider a single node of each type for the comparison. Since the new graph expansion replaces each node over GF (2p) with (2p − 1) binary nodes, complexity of that many nodes is considered together for CPbD and CPbD-MS. Also, as explained in Section II, for each GF (2p) variable node, (2p − p − 1) binary check nodes are added to the new graph. Because of that, in order to keep the comparison fair, complexity of one such set of nodes is added to that of variable node operations.
Table III lists complexities at check node operations of each algorithm, and table IV considers variable node operations. We use dc and dv to denote, respectively, the average degree of a check node and a variable node in the original Q-ary graph. dlc denotes the average degree of a local check node. This would depend on the parity-check matrix used for the local code, but as explained in Section II-B, it is always possible to find a matrix with dlc = 3.
At hardware level, apart from the number of operations, type of operation is another consideration for complexity. It is considered that operations such as multiplications are more complex than, say, comparisons, in hardware [31]. Therefore, number of operations of each type, comparisons (Comp), additions (Add), multiplications (Mult) and table look-ups (LUT), are given in the tables. It has been assumed that max∗ operation of LLR-QSPA [6], transformation between log and probability domains necessary in FFT-QSPA [5], and tanh, tanh−1 calculations for CPbD are carried out with the help of look-up tables. For check node operations of LLR-QSPA and min-max decoding, it has also been assumed that the forwardbackward approach is used [6], [8].
Observing table III, it can be seen that CPbD and FFT-QSPA require the same number of multiplications and table look-ups for check node operations. But CPbD does not require the large

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:48:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WIJEKOON et al.: NOVEL GRAPH EXPANSION AND A DECODING ALGORITHM FOR NB-LDPC CODES

1367

number of additions necessary for FFT-QSPA, and therefore

has an advantage in complexity. LLR-QSPA requires a much

larger number of additions and table look-ups than FFT-QSPA,

and thus, it is also more complex than CPbD. Although min-

max algorithm requires a large number of comparisons, in fact

more comparisons than the total number of operations required

by CPbD, comparisons are the only operation necessary for

the algorithm. Taking into account the fact that comparisons

are simpler than multiplications or table look-ups, we can

expect CPbD and min-max to be of a similar complexity level.

As expected, CPbD-MS has the lowest check node complexity.

It requires only a

1 2p

fraction of

the

comparisons necessary

for min-max decoding. Calculation of the sign in min-sum

simplification [17] is disregarded since it can be done with

simple XOR operations, which are of negligible complexity.

For variable node operations, all the algorithms need the

same number of additions. CPbD is at a disadvantage here

since it is the only algorithm which requires multiplications

and table look-ups (for ‘local‘ check node operations). But

since dlc, as explained in Section II-B, can always be set to 3,

the additional number of operations would not be too large

for it to eclipse the complexity advantage gained at check

nodes. Both CPbD and CPbD-MS has the slight advantage

of requiring just p comparisons to obtain a tentative hard decision, whereas all the others need to compare 2p values.

It should be seen that min-max decoding is slightly complex

than the two versions of QSPA at variable nodes, since it

requires a much larger number of comparisons. CPbD-MS

uses roughly the same number of comparisons and additions

as min-max decoding. Therefore, it is also slightly complex

than the two QSPA versions at variable nodes.

When compared with the two major steps discussed, impact

on decoding complexity from initialization is much less. But

CPbD and CPbD-MS offer some advantages there as well.

When the channel in use is a binary input channel, all the

standard decoders of NB-LDPC codes have to construct sym-

bol probabilities from bit probabilities, which requires some

real number operations. When using the binary expansion, this

is not necessary. For the ‘message‘ bits of the local code, bit

probabilities can be simply assigned, and calculations have to

be done only for the parity bits. Since the number of parity bits is (2p − p − 1), and there are 2p symbol probabilities,

less operations are required in initialization of CPbD and

CPbD-MS.

It is worth noting here that the soft decoding scheme

proposed in [13] based on the extended binary representation

[11] is of the same complexity order as FFT-QSPA. The

hybrid decoding scheme proposed in [14] based on the same

representation, ‘Hybrid Parallel Decoding’ (HPD), relies on

transmitting an additional set of parity bits, and thus cannot be

fairly compared with the algorithms we have so far considered.

Nevertheless, we note that the soft decoding part in HPD is of

roughly the same complexity order as CPbD at check nodes,

and FFT/LLR-QSPA at variable nodes. In addition, a number

of hard decoding iterations are also carried out.

Apart from check node and variable node complexities,

number of iterations required to converge is an important fac-

tor in determining the total complexity of decoding algorithms.

TABLE V
DECODING THRESHOLDS, ITERATIONS, AND NUMBER OF OPERATIONS REQUIRED

TABLE VI DECODING LATENCY PER ITERATION

Table V reports decoding thresholds of the algorithms, along

with the number of iterations, and total number of operations

(of each type) required in decoding one codeword of C1,

the

rate

1 2

code

over

GF (23)

used

in

Section

IV.

Decoding

thresholds and number of iterations were derived from ana-

lyzing BER plots obtained through Monte Carlo simulations

for different numbers of iterations.

Summarizing the results in Table III, IV, and V, and the

insights on initialization, we can conclude that LLR-QSPA

and FFT-QSPA are the two most complex algorithms, and

that CPbD-MS is the least complex. Min-max decoding and

CPbD are of the same level of complexity, in-between the two

extremes. This conclusion is further validated by Table VI,

which lists the average time to complete one iteration with

three separate LDPC codes, for all the algorithms. Codes are

the ones considered in Section IV, and settings are the same

as the ones used there. All the algorithms were implemented

in C, and tested on the same machine with a 2.4-GHz CPU

and 8 GB of RAM.

Table VI presents some interesting observations. First up,

FFT-QSPA seems more complex than LLR-QSPA for both

codes over the smaller field. Complexity advantage FFT-QSPA

offers is at check node operations. When you compare the
complexity orders of the two algorithms, O(2pp) of FFTQSPA is more of an advantage over O(22p) of LLR-QSPA

when the field is larger. Thus, with an increase in field order,

FFT-QSPA should become less complex than LLR-QSPA, and

we see this in Table VI.

A similar argument may be used to analyze the complexity

advantages offered by CPbD and CPbD-MS. Observing

Table IV, it seems that the two new algorithms have a slight

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:48:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1368

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 68, NO. 3, MARCH 2020

complexity disadvantage at variable node operations, due to the additional check nodes added to the graph. But there is a big gain at check nodes, where the complexity order is now O(2p). When comparing this with the complexity orders of other algorithms, which are of orders O(22p) and O(2pp), it becomes apparent that the gains should get more prominent with increasing field order.
Comparing the decoding latency of CPbD with the fastest QSPA version, it can be seen that gains of 33% for C1, 40% for C2, and 26% for C3 are achieved. For CPbD-MS, gains are 78%, 80% and 67% respectively, which translate to speed-ups of around 3-5 times. It should also be noted that complexity gains offered from min-max decoding are 37%, 27%, and 11% for the three codes.
Apart from the complexity advantages discussed, CPbD and CPbD-MS have features which make them attractive for hardware implementations. As [31] notes, finite field operations at check nodes for handling the permutations of probability vectors due to non-binary edge weights is only feasible at hardware level when the field size is small. But with the new expansion, these operations are not strictly necessary. Given the code to be used, it is now possible to hardwire the connections between binary nodes, similar to the architecture suggested for FFT-QSPA in [31]. Also, since the new algorithms only use LLR domain operations, which have better numerical stability, they are more suited for hardware implementations [31]. Since the expansion adds (2p−1) binary nodes for every GF (2p) node, CPbD and CPbD-MS do not offer any advantage in memory. Still, it should be noted that the messages passed along the edges of the new graph are just single values, not length 2p vectors as in existing decoders.
Moreover, although the new algorithms are for decoding NB-LDPC codes, the operations utilized are the ones used in binary LDPC decoders. Therein lies the major advantage in terms of hardware implementations. With CPbD, all the technologies developed and optimized for binary LDPC codes over the years can be used for decoding NB-LDPC codes.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a new decoding algorithm for NB-LDPC codes over GF (2p), which is based on a novel binary expansion of non-binary Tanner graphs. While the algorithm offers better complexity-performance trade-offs than the existing decoders for NB-LDPC codes, its simplified version is able to achieve speed-ups of several factors with a minimal performance loss. Both versions of the algorithm have features which make them very attractive for hardware implementations. New expansion has features which may offer advantageous in applications different to decoding NB-LDPC codes as well.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Mr. Mohommad Rowshan for helping with the polar code results.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.

[2] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[3] M. C. Davey and D. MacKay, “Low-density parity check codes over GF (q),” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 165–167, Jun. 1998.
[4] H. Song and J. R. Cruz, “Reduced-complexity decoding of Q-ary LDPC codes for magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 1081–1087, Mar. 2003.
[5] L. Barnault and D. Declercq, “Fast decoding algorithm for LDPC over GF(2q),” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Paris, France, Mar./Apr. 2003, pp. 70–73.
[6] H. Wymeersch, H. Steendam, and M. Moeneclaey, “Log-domain decoding of LDPC codes over GF(q),” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Paris, France, Jun. 2004, pp. 772–776.
[7] D. Declercq and M. Fossorier, “Decoding algorithms for nonbinary LDPC codes over GF(q),” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 633–643, Apr. 2007.
[8] V. Savin, “Min-Max decoding for non binary LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE ISIT, Toronto, ON, Canada, Jul. 2008, pp. 960–964.
[9] Q. Huang and S. Yuan, “Bit reliability-based decoders for non-binary LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 1, pp. 38–48, Jan. 2016.
[10] M. Zhang, K. Cai, Q. Huang, and S. Yuan, “On bit-level decoding of nonbinary LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 66, no. 9, pp. 3736–3748, Sep. 2018.
[11] V. Savin, “Binary linear-time erasure decoding for non-binary LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE ITW, Taormina, Italy, Oct. 2009, pp. 258–262.
[12] L. P. Sy, V. Savin, and D. Declercq, “Extended non-binary low-density parity-check codes over erasure channels,” in Proc. ISWCS, Aachen, Germany, Nov. 2011, pp. 121–125.
[13] V. Savin, “Fourier domain representation of non-binary LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Cambridge, MA, USA, Aug. 2012, pp. 2541–2545.
[14] Y. Yu, W. Chen, J. Li, X. Ma, and B. Bai, “Generalized binary representation for the nonbinary LDPC code with decoder design,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 9, pp. 3070–3083, Sep. 2014.
[15] J. J. Rothman, Advanced Modern Algebra, 1st ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 2003, pp. 82–94.
[16] F. J. MacWilliams and N. J. A. Sloane, The Theory of Error-Correcting Codes, 1st ed. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North Holland, 1977, pp. 30–31.
[17] M. P. C. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May 1999.
[18] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of lowdensity parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 638–656, Feb. 2001.
[19] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. E. Telatar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[20] Y. Wang, S. C. Draper, and J. S. Yedidia, “Hierarchical and highgirth QC LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 4553–4583, Jul. 2013.
[21] J. Jiang and K. R. Narayanan, “Iterative soft-input soft-output decoding of Reed–Solomon codes by adapting the parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 3746–3756, Aug. 2006.
[22] J. Sayir, “Non-binary LDPC decoding using truncated messages in the Walsh-Hadamard domain,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory Appl., Melbourne, VIC, Australia, Oct. 2014, pp. 16–20.
[23] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406–414, Mar. 2002.
[24] V. Savin, “Self-corrected min-sum decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Toronto, ON, Canada, Jul. 2008, pp. 146–150.
[25] X. Wu, Y. Song, M. Jiang, and C. Zhao, “Adaptive-normalized/offset min-sum algorithm,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 667–669, Jul. 2010.
[26] D. J. C. Mackay. Encyclopedia of Sparse Graph Codes. Accessed: Sep. 12, 2018. [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.org.uk/mackay/ codes/data.html
[27] L. Dolecek, D. Divsalar, Y. Sun, and B. Amiri, “Non-binary protographbased LDPC codes: Enumerators, analysis, and designs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 60, no. 7, pp. 3913–3941, Jul. 2014.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:48:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WIJEKOON et al.: NOVEL GRAPH EXPANSION AND A DECODING ALGORITHM FOR NB-LDPC CODES

1369

[28] Short Blocklength LDPC codes for TC synchronization and channel coding, document CCSDS 231.1-O-1, Experim. Specification, Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems, Apr. 2015.
[29] G. Liva, L. Gaudio, T. Ninacs, and T. Jerkovits, “Code design for short blocks: A survey,” 2016, arXiv:1610.00873. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1610.00873
[30] M. C. Davey, “Error correction using low-density parity-check codes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Cavendish Lab., Cambridge Univ., Cambridge, U.K., Dec. 1999.
[31] C. Spagnol, E. M. Popovici, and W. P. Marnane, “Hardware implementation of GF(2m) LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 56, no. 12, pp. 2609–2620, Dec. 2009.
V. B. Wijekoon (Student Member, IEEE) received the B.Sc. degree in electronic and telecommunication engineering from the University of Moratuwa, Sri Lanka. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Department of Electrical and Computer Systems Engineering, Monash University, Australia. His research interests include classical and modern coding theory and its applications in communications and storage systems.
Emanuele Viterbo (Fellow, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the Politecnico di Torino, Torino, Italy, in 1995. He is currently a Professor with the ECSE Department and the Associate Dean of graduate research with Monash University, Melbourne, Australia. From 1990 to 1992, he was as a Patent Examiner of dynamic recording and error-control coding with the European Patent Office, The Hague, The Netherlands. From 1995 to1997, he held a Post-Doctoral position at the Dipartimento di Elettronica, Politecnico di Torino. From 1997 to 1998, he was a Post-Doctoral Research Fellow of the Information Sciences Research Center, AT&T Research, Florham Park, NJ, USA. From 1998 to 2005, he was an Assistant Professor and then Associate Professor with the Dipartimento di Elettronica, Politecnico di Torino. From 2006 to 2009, he was a Full Professor with the DEIS, University of Calabria, Italy. He has been an ISI highly-cited researcher since 2009. He has received the NATO Advanced Fellowship from the Italian National Research Council in 1997. His main research interests include in lattice codes for the Gaussian and fading channels, algebraic coding theory, algebraic space-time coding, digital terrestrial television broadcasting, digital magnetic recording, and irregular sampling. He is an Associate Editor of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, European Transactions on Telecommunications and Journal of Communications and Networks. He is also the Guest Editor of IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN SIGNAL PROCESSING with the Special Issue on Managing Complexity in Multiuser MIMO Systems.

Yi Hong (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering and telecommunications from the University of New South Wales (UNSW), Sydney. She is currently a Senior Lecturer with the Department of Electrical and Computer Systems Engineering, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia. Her research interests include communication theory, and coding and information theory with applications to telecommunication engineering. Since 2018, she has been serving on the Australian Research Council College of Experts. She received the NICTA-ACoRN Earlier Career Researcher Award at the Australian Communication Theory Workshop, Adelaide, Australia, in 2007. She was the General Co-Chair of IEEE Information Theory Workshop, Hobart, in 2014. She was the Technical Program Committee Chair of the Australian Communications Theory Workshop in 2011, Melbourne. She was the Publicity Chair of the IEEE Information Theory Workshop, Sicily, in 2009. She was a Technical Program Committee Member of many IEEE leading conferences. She was an Associate Editor of IEEE WIRELESS COMMUNICATION LETTERS and Transactions on Emerging Telecommunications Technologies (ETT).
Rino Micheloni (Senior Member, IEEE) is the Vice President and a Fellow of Microsemi-Microchip Corporation, where he is currently with the Flash Signal Processing Labs, Milan, Italy, with a special focus on NAND flash, error correction codes, and machine learning. Prior to joining Microsemi, he was a Fellow of PMC-Sierra, working on NAND Flash characterization, LDPC, and NAND signal processing as part of the team developing flash controllers for PCIe SSDs. Before that, he was a Lead Flash Technologist with Integrated Device Technology (IDT), driving the architecture and design of the BCH engine in the world’s first PCIe NVMe SSD controller. Early in his career, he led NAND design teams at STMicroelectronics, Hynix, and Infineon/Qimonda. During this time, he developed the industry’s first MLC NOR device with embedded ECC technology and the industry’s first MLC NAND with embedded BCH. He has coauthored more than 80 publications. He holds 291 patents worldwide (including 137 U.S. patents). He received the STMicroelectronics Exceptional Patent Award in 2003 and 2004, and the Infineon/Qimonda IP Award in 2007. He has published the following books, including VLSI-Design of Non-Volatile Memories (2005), Memories in Wireless Systems (2008), Error Correction Codes for Non-Volatile Memories (2008), Inside NAND Flash Memories (2010), Inside Solid State Drives (2013), 3D Flash Memories (2016), SolidState-Drives (SSDs) Modeling (2017), and Inside Solid State Drives (Springer, Second Edition, 2018).
Alessia Marelli (Member, IEEE) received the degree in applied mathematics in 2003. She is the Technical Leader of Microsemi-Microchip Corporation. She has 15 years of experience in error correction codes applied to storage, flash characterization, and data mining. Before Microsemi-Microchip Corporation, she was a part of the characterization with PMCSierra and the ECC Team, IDT. Before IDT, she was a Senior Digital Designer with Infineon for two years and STMicroelectronics for five years. She holds several U.S. patents related to ECC applied to storage. She has coauthored five books edited by Springer regarding ECC, NAND flash, and solid state drives.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:48:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

