IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 56, NO. 3, MARCH 2020

6701807

Performance Analysis and Optimization of Spatially Coupled
Protograph-Based Low-Density Parity-Check Codes for
Two-Dimensional Magnetic Recording Systems
Zhaojie Yang 1,2, Yi Fang 1,2, Guohua Zhang 3, Guojun Han 1, and Lingjun Kong 4
1School of Information Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China 2National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China 3School of Communications and Information Engineering, Xi’an University of Posts and Telecommunications,
Xi’an 710121, China 4College of Telecommunication and Information Engineering, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications,
Nanjing 210003, China
As a class of convolutional-based low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, spatially coupled protograph (SC-P) codes not only can exhibit outstanding error performance but also can realize low-complexity implementation. Motivated by the prominent superiorities, SC-P codes have been intensively investigated in various communication environments. However, no research works regarding SC-P codes in the magnetic recording (MR) scenarios have been done so far. To explore such an issue mentioned previously, this article carries out a comprehensive study on the SC-P codes in the two-dimensional magnetic recording (TDMR) systems. Specifically, a turbo-like extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) algorithm is conceived for the SC-P-coded TDMR systems. With the help of such an algorithm, we evaluate the convergence performance (i.e., decoding thresholds) for conventional SC-P codes over TDMR channels with turbo equalization and illustrate that such codes should be re-constructed to attain better performance. Therefore, we develop an optimization scheme to generate a novel class of SC-P codes, called enhanced SC-P codes, which can exhibit promising decoding thresholds without losing the linear-minimum-distance superiority. The convergence-performance analyses and simulated results reveal that such enhanced SC-P codes can obtain more desirable coding gains in contrast to the conventional SC-P codes and the state-of-the-art protograph codes for the whole signal-to-noise-ratio (SNR) range under study. The excellent performance and simple implementation make the enhanced SC-P codes a very competitive error-correction solution for the next-generation TDMR devices.
Index Terms— Extrinsic information transfer (EXIT), magnetic recording (MR) channels, spatially coupled protograph (SC-P), turbo equalization.

I. INTRODUCTION
A S an excellent error-correction coding (ECC) scheme, protograph low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes can be implemented for data-transmission/data-storage scenarios, since they not only produce outstanding performance but also possess simple graph structures [1]. During the past decade, substantial research works related to the theoretical-analysis tools of the protograph codes have been done, which significantly facilitate the design and optimization for such codes. For instance, the extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) and asymptotic-weight-distribution (AWD) algorithms have been conceived to estimate the asymptotic-performance metrics of the protographs, i.e., the decoding threshold and typical minimum distance ratio (TMDR) [2], [3]. As widely recognized, the EXIT and AWD algorithms are very useful for designing the best candidate for a specific communication application.
Motivated by the structure advantage of the protograph, a class of convolutional-based protograph codes, called spatially coupled protograph (SC-P) codes, has been proposed. They not only inherit all of the superiorities of the protograph
Manuscript received April 18, 2019; revised October 4, 2019; accepted November 5, 2019. Date of publication January 10, 2020; date of current version February 19, 2020. Corresponding author: Y. Fang (e-mail: fangyi@gdut.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this article are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2019.2952407

codes [4] but also possess the convolutional property to acquire non-trivial performance gains [5]. In the past few years, increasing attention has been devoted to the SC-P codes in the field of channel coding. In particular, a large set of research activities has been conducted to promote the theoretical and practical advancements for SC-P codes in different transmission environments, such as binary erasure channels (BECs) and additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels [6], [7].
Unlike the aforementioned memoryless channels, inter-symbol interference (ISI) stands out as the dominating negative effect on the data-storage reliability in magnetic recording (MR) channels [8].1 To boost the performance of the MR systems, the Bahl–Cocke–Jelinek–Raviv (BCJR) detector has been combined with the belief-propagation (BP) decoder in order to formulate a serial concatenated decoding scheme [9], [10]. In addition, a variety of code design and analysis techniques have been developed for the one-dimensional magnetic recording (ODMR) channels [11], [12]. However, with the fast development of MR devices, the ODMR systems can no longer meet the ultra-high-density requirement in practical applications.
In order to overcome the data-storage-density limitation, two-dimensional magnetic recording (TDMR) systems have emerged as a preferable choice [8]. In contrast to the ODMR
1MR channels are a type of channels with memory.

0018-9464 © 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 25,2026 at 02:01:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6701807

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 56, NO. 3, MARCH 2020

systems, the TDMR systems possess higher data-storage 0 to L. From the perspective of the matrix structure, the edge-

density, but at the cost of suffering from more severe interference, such as the inter-track interference (ITI) [13]. Owing to this reason, the TDMR systems are not able to perform as well as the ODMR systems. As proved in [10] and [14], LDPCbased codes (including the protograph codes and the SC-P

spreading rule will decompose the base matrix of a protograph
into multiple submatrices. As an example, given a coupling width w and a protograph, the corresponding base matrix B can be split into w+1 submatrices, i.e., B0, B1, . . . , Bw, where all submatrices share the same size with the base matrix.

codes), which perform well over the memoryless channels (e.g., BECs and AWGN channels), cannot preserve their performance advantage over the TDMR channels suffering from both ISI and ITI. To address the above issue, some new encoding methods and detection/decoding algorithms possessing fast convergence property have been studied for the TDMR systems in recent years [15]–[17]. Meanwhile, protograph codes have been carefully investigated for the TDMR systems

Moreover, the relationship between the base matrix and the

submatrices is governed by

w k=0

Bk

=

B.

Therefore,

the

base

matrix corresponding to a terminated SC-P (TE-SC-P) code

can be expressed as (1), where the size of BL is bc(L + w) ×

bv L and the number for the CNs and VNs in each submatrix

is bc and bv , respectively

⎡

L

⎤

in order to improve the data-storage reliability [18]. Due to the excellent performance and simple implementation, the SC-P codes have great potential to be a desirable ECC scheme for the TDMR systems. Nevertheless, to the best of our knowledge, there is no related work regarding the design and analysis of SC-P codes in TDMR scenarios to date.
From the above discussion, this article conducts a comprehensive study (including the convergence-performance analysis and the code-design scheme) for SC-P codes in TDMR scenarios. Specifically, a turbo-like EXIT algorithm is conceived for the SC-P-coded TDMR systems. Furthermore, we construct a novel class of SC-P codes, called enhanced SC-P codes, which not only possesses better decoding thresh-

BL

=

⎣⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢

B0 B1 ...
Bw

B0
B1 ... Bw

...
. . . B0
B1 B0 . . . ... B1
Bw ...
Bw

... ...
...

B0
B1 ...

⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦ .

(1)

Bw

olds but also enables the linear-minimum-distance property. Simulated results agree well with the theoretical analyses and demonstrate that the enhanced SC-P codes exhibit excellent performance in the whole signal-to-noise-ratio (SNR) range over TDMR channels.

Moreover, the code rate for BL equals

RL

=

1

−

bc(L + bv L

w) .

(2)

Unless otherwise mentioned, we assume that the SC-P codes

considered in this article are the TE-SC-P codes.

II. PROTOGRAPH-BASED SC LDPC CODES
A. Protograph Codes
A protograph G = (V, C, E) can be regarded as a Tanner graph with three different types of sets, i.e., a variable node (VN) set V, a check node (CN) set C, and an edge set E. The cardinalities corresponding to the above three sets are n, m, and E, respectively. Moreover, each edge ei, j ∈ E connects a CN ci ∈ C as well as a VN v j ∈ V, and the presence of parallel edges is allowed. Based on the aforementioned definition, an adjacency matrix corresponding to a protograph can be defined as an m × n base matrix B = (bi, j ), where bi, j represents the number of edges connecting a CN ci to a VN v j . Furthermore, a “copy-and-permute (i.e., lifting)” operation can be implemented on a given protograph so as to obtain a large protograph, which corresponds to a protograph code [3], [10].

III. SYSTEM MODEL

In the TDMR scenarios, each bit is interfered in both down-

track and cross-track directions. For this reason, the channel

impulse response (CIR) matrix corresponding to a TDMR

channel can be specified as

⎡

⎤

h1,1

H = ⎣⎢⎢⎢

h2,1 ...

h1,2 h2,2
...

··· ··· ...

h1,L N h2,L N
...

⎥⎦⎥⎥

(3)

h L M ,1 h L M ,2 · · · h L M ,L N

where L M and L N denote the interference lengths corresponding to the cross-track and down-track directions, respectively, and hs,t denotes the (s, t)th element in the CIR matrix. In particular, the ITI is mainly determined by the interference
coming from two adjacent tracks associated with the main

B. SC-P Codes
An SC-P code can be generated by spatially coupling L identical protograph codes in sequence, where L denotes the coupling length. For the ease of exposition, one can utilize a time index t to distinguish different protographs. Afterward, based on a given edge-spreading rule, the edges originating from the VNs of the protograph at time t (t = 0, 1, . . . , L −1) are connected to the CNs of the protograph at times t (t = t, t + 1, . . . , t + w), where the coupling width w ranges from

track, and thus, the interference coming from the nonadjacent

tracks can be omitted [19]. Consequently, a 3 × 3 CIR matrix

has been assumed in most related works about the TDMR

systems [8]. For example, the CIR matrix corresponding to a TDMR channel with a recording density of 4 Tb/in2 is defined

as [13], [17], [18]

⎡

⎤

0.0368 0.1435 0.0368

H4T = ⎣ 0.2299 0.8966 0.2299 ⎦ .

(4)

0.0368 0.1435 0.0368

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 25,2026 at 02:01:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS AND OPTIMIZATION OF SC-P-BASED LDPC CODES FOR TDMR SYSTEMS

6701807

Considering a bipolar sequence x(i, j ), which is distributed in a TD array with M rows (i.e., i = 1, 2, . . . , M) and N columns (i.e., j = 1, 2, . . . , N), the readback signal at position (i, j )
in the TDMR scenarios is assumed as

LM LN

yi, j =

hs,t xi−s, j −t + ni, j

(5)

s=1 t =1

where ni, j denotes an AWGN with zero mean and variance σn2 = N0/2. Moreover, the TD array is assumed to be surrounded by a boundary of “−1s,” i.e., x(i , j ) = −1 for all (i , j ) ∈/ {(i, j )|1 ≤ i ≤ M, 1 ≤ j ≤ N}.
For simplicity, the recording density in the TDMR scenarios is assumed to be 4 Tb/in2 in this article. Nevertheless,
the design and analysis approaches are also applicable to the
TDMR systems with different recording densities.

IV. TURBO-LIKE EXIT AND AWD ALGORITHMS FOR TDMR CHANNELS

A. Turbo-Like EXIT Algorithm

In the BP decoding procedure, the threshold is the minimum SNR that allows the system to realize error-free transmission/data storage with a protograph-based code (including the SC-P code). To accurately predict the convergence performance (i.e., decoding thresholds) for SC-P codes over TDMR channels with turbo equalization, a turbo-like EXIT algorithm is presented in this section. Such an algorithm can track the iterative convergence behavior of mutual information (MI) between the BCJR detector and the LDPC decoder (i.e., turbo iteration). Aiming to simplify the illustration of the algorithm, different MIs for an SC-P code are defined as follows.

1) IAd and IEd denote the a priori MI and the ex tri nsi c MI of the BCJR detector, respectively.
2) IAv(i, j ) and IAc(i, j ) denote the a priori MI passing from ci to v j and v j to ci , respectively.
3) IEv(i, j ) and IEc(i, j ) denote the extri nsi c MI passing from v j to ci and ci to v j , respectively.
4) IAPP( j ) denotes the a posteriori MI of v j .
In addition, the maximum numbers corresponding to the
turbo iterations and the BP iterations (i.e., the iterative con-
vergence behavior of MI in the LDPC decoder) are set to be T1 and T2, respectively. Furthermore, we have IAv(i, j ) = IEc(i, j ) and IAc(i, j ) = IEv(i, j ) in each BP iteration. In accordance with the aforementioned definitions, the turbo-
like EXIT algorithm can be illustrated as below.

1) Initialization: At the beginning of such an algorithm, there exist an Eb/N0 and an a priori MI IAd, which have been considered as the initial parameters for the BCJR detector.
2) Update the extrinsic MI of BCJR detector: By implementing the Monte Carlo simulation, the extri nsi c log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) corresponding to the coded bits output from the BCJR detector can be obtained. Afterwards, the extri nsi c MI IEd, which is assumed as an initial decoding message for the VNs in the LDPC decoder, can be computed by

IEd = 1 − E[log2(1 + e−u j l j )|u j = 0]

(6)

Fig. 1. MI update schedule of an SC-P code in the turbo-like EXIT algorithm over a TDMR channel.
where E[·] denotes the expectation function, u j denotes the j th coded bit, u j and l j denote the j th transmitted symbol and its corresponding extri nsi c LLR in the BCJR detector, respectively. 3) Pass the extrinsic MI From BCJR detector to decoder: Set the initial channel MI of the VN decoder as Icjh = IEd, where j = 1, 2, . . . , n. As a special case, Icjh is equal to zero when the j th VN v j is punctured. 4) Update the VN-to-CN extrinsic MI: Exploiting the initial channel MI Icjh and the a priori MI IAv(i, j ) of a VN, the extri nsi c MI IEv(i, j ) can be calculated for i = 1, 2, . . . , m and j = 1, 2, . . . , n. 5) Update the CN-to-VN extrinsic MI: Similarly, using the a priori MI IAc(i, j ) of a CN, the corresponding extri nsi c MI IEc(i, j ) can also be calculated, for i = 1, 2, . . . , m and j = 1, 2, . . . , n. 6) Update the a priori MI of BCJR detector: Exploiting the a priori MI IAv(i, j ), one can further compute the extri nsi c MI flowing from the decoder to detector, which is viewed as an updated a priori MI IAd. 7) Calculate the a posteriori MI of VNs: The a posteriori MI IAPP( j ) corresponding to each VN can be easily measured by exploiting IAv(i, j ) and Icjh, for j = 1, 2, . . . , n,. 8) Finalization: The evaluation process is terminated until IAPP( j ) = 1 for j = 1, 2, . . . , n, or the maximum number corresponding to turbo iterations is reached; otherwise, Steps 2)-7) will be repeated continuously.
It is noteworthy that the smallest Eb/N0 (dB) is the decoding threshold that can ensure the a posteriori MIs of all VNs converging to 1. As a further advancement, Fig. 1 shows the MI update schedule of an SC-P code in the turbo-like EXIT algorithm over a TDMR channel.
Note also that the following holds:
1) The proposed turbo-like EXIT algorithm is a theoreticalanalysis tool for the SC-P-based TDMR systems. Specifically, the proposed algorithm is implemented by a serial concatenated scheme composed of both Monte Carlo simulation and information-theoretical derivation.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 25,2026 at 02:01:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6701807

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 56, NO. 3, MARCH 2020

2) Although the proposed turbo-like EXIT algorithm is an asymptotic analysis tool, the decoding threshold calculated by such an algorithm is reasonably consistent with the waterfall-region performance of the simulated bit-error-rate (BER) result in the finite codeword-length scenario.

B. Asymptotic-Weight-Distribution Analysis

In the TDMR systems, one can utilize the proposed turbo-

like EXIT algorithm to estimate the convergence performance

(i.e., decoding thresholds) for SC-P codes. However, the

SC-P codes that enable low decoding thresholds may suffer

from performance degradation (i.e., error floor) in the high

SNR region. Consequently, aiming at measuring the perfor-

mance of SC-P codes in a more comprehensive manner, the

AWD analysis has been introduced to evaluate the minimum

(Hamming) distance of the SC-P codes [4], [5]. Compared

with the turbo-like EXIT algorithm, the AWD analysis is of

great usefulness to reflect the performance of the SC-P codes

in the high SNR region over TDMR channels.

More specifically, one can determine whether the min-

imum distance dmin of an SC-P code grows linearly

with the codeword length N (also known as the linear-

minimum-distance property) based on its corresponding

TMDR δmin (δmin must be larger than 0). Since dmin and δmin follow the equation dmin = N × δmin, the SC-P codes with a relatively larger δmin must possess a larger minimum

distance and desirable performance in the high SNR region.

According to the aforementioned discussion, we can utilize a

normalized logarithmic AWD function [3] to characterize the

AWD analysis process of an SC-P code

⎧

⎫

⎨m

n

⎬

r (δ)

=

δt

max
:|δt |=nt

δ

⎩

i =1

θ ci (δi ) −

(dv j −1)H (δ j)⎭
j =1

nt .

(7)

Here, δ is the scalar normalized weight of the SC-P code; δt is the normalized partial weight vector of the transmitted VNs; m, n, and nt denote the number of CNs, VNs, and transmitted VNs, respectively; δi denotes the normalized partial weight vector of the VNs associated with the CN ci ; θ ci (δi ) denotes the normalized logarithmic AWD for the CN ci ; dv j denotes the degree of the VN v j ; δ j denotes the normalized partial weight of the VN v j ; and H (δ j ) denotes the binary entropy function.
In summary, an SC-P code that is suitable for TDMR
applications must have a sufficiently low decoding threshold
and an effective TMDR.

V. DESIGN AND ANALYSIS OF ENHANCED SC-P CODES FOR TDMR SYSTEMS
A. Code-Design Methodology
It is well known that the SC-P codes in terms of code rate and performance are very sensitive to their coupling length L, when the coupling width w and the edge-spreading rule are given. On the one hand, assuming that a small or moderate coupling length L is given, the SC-P codes will encounter an intractable problem, i.e., rate loss. This is a critical issue

that severely limits the implementation of SC-P codes in communication and data-storage scenarios. On the other hand, in the case of a sufficiently large coupling length L, the rate loss can be compensated for the SC-P codes. However, the SC-P codes always have very long codeword lengths, and thus are difficult to meet the low-latency requirement in hardware implementation.
For the above reasons, the parameters of SC-P codes should be reasonably chosen in the practical design. Based on a rate-R protograph code with a bc × bv protograph, a new optimization method is conceived to construct the enhanced SC-P codes over TDMR channels.
1) Uniform-Weight Edge-Spreading Scheme: Referring to (2) described in Section II-B, when a fixed coupling length L is given, the code rate of SC-P codes will be dominated by their coupling width w. Aiming to ensure the minimum rate loss, the coupling width w can be set to 1 (i.e., the base matrix corresponding to a protograph is split into two submatrices). To be specific, we first adopt a uniform-weight edge-spreading method to decompose the elements larger than 1 into two nonzero subelements, which are allocated into two submatrices (i.e., B0 and B1), respectively. Furthermore, the remaining elements should be reasonably allocated so as to meet a condition that the two submatrices have the same weight in each row (i.e., the two subgraphs have the same CN-degree distribution). Finally, the base matrix corresponding to an SC-P code can be attained by substituting the two submatrices into the BL .
2) Code-Rate Compensation Scheme: In order to deal with the rate-loss problem in an SC-P code, one can incorporate some additional VNs into its corresponding base matrix. First, a VN connecting to all CNs can be added in the protograph, which will not degrade the linear-minimum-distance superiority of an SC-P code. Afterwards, if the code rate of the new SC-P code does not reach that of the original protograph code, some degree-2 VNs can be further appended to the new protograph until the code rate is consistent with that of the original protograph. It is because properly increasing the fraction of degree-2 VNs in an SC-P code can improve the decoding threshold. Note that the number of edges bi, j connecting an additional VN v j and an existing CN ci can be optimized by exploiting the turbo-like EXIT analysis over TDMR channels.
Based on the proposed design methodology, we can construct the enhanced SC-P codes and demonstrate that they exhibit outstanding performance in the whole SNR regions over turbo-equalized TDMR channels.
For instance, we illustrate the structure of an enhanced (3, 6) SC-P code, which is generated from the original rate1/2 (3, 6) protograph code. According to the proposed design methodology, the base matrix B(3,6) corresponding to the (3, 6) protograph code should be split into two submatrices, i.e., B0(3,6) and B1(3,6). Such two submatrices are expressed as
B(3,6) = 3 3 , B0(3,6) = 1 2 , B1(3,6) = 2 1 . (8)
Then, one can promptly obtain the base matrix corresponding to a (3, 6) SC-P code. Aiming at effectively compensating the rate loss of such a code, a degree- 3 × bc(L + w)/2 VN and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 25,2026 at 02:01:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS AND OPTIMIZATION OF SC-P-BASED LDPC CODES FOR TDMR SYSTEMS

6701807

Fig. 2. Generation process of the protograph corresponding to an enhanced (3, 6) SC-P code in TDMR systems. The coupling length is assumed to be L = 12.

a degree-2 VN, which connect to all the CNs and the first two

CNs, respectively, are incorporated into the new protograph.

Through this method, we formulate a novel class of SC-P code,

called enhanced (3, 6) SC-P code. Suppose that the enhanced

(3, 6) SC-P code has a coupling length L = 12, then the base

matrix BE(3−,6S)C−P,12 is given as

⎡

⎤

12

21

BE(3−,6S)C−P,12 = ⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢ 2

1

1 2

2 1

...

1

2

1
2 ... 1

1 ⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥ .

(9)

212

The last two columns in BE(3−,6S)C−P,12 of size 13 × 26 are the two additional VNs. In general, the number of edges emanating from the newly added degree- 3 × bc(L + w)/2 VN to the (2k − 1)th CN and the 2kth CN are 2 and 1, respectively, where k = 1, 2, . . . , bc(L + w)/2 . As a further illustration, the generation process of the protograph corresponding to an enhanced (3, 6) SC-P code is shown
in Fig. 2.

TABLE I DECODING THRESHOLDS (Eb/N0)th (dB) AND TMDRs δmin OF TWO
TYPES OF SC-P CODES AND SIX TYPES OF PROTOGRAPH CODES OVER A TURBO-EQUALIZED TDMR CHANNEL WITH A RECORDING DENSITY OF 4 Tb/in2

B. Asymptotic Performance Metrics
Aiming to validate the performance superiority of the enhanced (3, 6) SC-P code, the decoding thresholds and TMDRs have been analyzed by exploiting the turbo-like EXIT and AWD algorithms, respectively, over TDMR channels. In addition, codes including the corresponding conventional SC-P code [4], original protograph code [3], accumulaterepeat-by-4-jagged-accumulate (AR4JA) code [3], improved AR4JA code [10], accumulate-repeat-3-accumulate (AR3A) code [3], improved AR3A code [10], and non-binary-2 (NP2) protograph code [18] are adopted to as benchmarks in the performance evaluation. In fact, the improved AR4JA/AR3A code and the NP2 protograph code are designed for the ODMR and TDMR systems, respectively, and thus can accomplish excellent performance in such scenarios. It is noteworthy that all the aforementioned codes have the same code rates (i.e., R = 1/2) except that the conventional (3, 6) SC-P code, whose code rate is 0.46.
1) Decoding Threshold: The estimated thresholds corresponding to such two types of SC-P codes and six types of protograph codes over a turbo-equalized TDMR channel with

Fig. 3. AWD curves of the enhanced (3, 6) SC-P code, conventional (3, 6) SC-P code, (3, 6) protograph code, NP2 protograph code, AR4JA code, improved AR4JA code, AR3A code, and improved AR3A code.
a recording density of 4 Tb/in2 are presented in Table I.2 As shown in this table, the (3, 6) SC-P code, improved AR4JA code, and improved AR3A code have great threshold improvement as compared with their original protograph codes. As a further insight, the enhanced (3, 6) SC-P code achieves the smallest threshold, indicating that it can outperform other seven types of codes in the low SNR region over TDMR channels.
2The CIR matrix of a TDMR channel with a recording density of 4 Tb/in2 is given in (4).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 25,2026 at 02:01:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6701807

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 56, NO. 3, MARCH 2020

Fig. 4. BER performance curves of the enhanced (3, 6) SC-P code, conventional (3, 6) SC-P code, (3, 6) protograph code, and NP2 protograph code over a TDMR channel with a recording density of 4 Tb/in2.

Fig. 5. BER performance curves of the enhanced (3, 6) SC-P code, AR4JA
code, improved AR4JA code, AR3A code, and improved AR3A code over a TDMR channel with a recording density of 4 Tb/in2.

2) TMDR: In addition to the decoding thresholds, we analyze the AWDs and TMDRs of the enhanced (3, 6) SC-P code, corresponding conventional SC-P code, and original protograph code. Furthermore, codes including the NP2 protograph code, AR4JA code, improved AR4JA code, AR3A code, and improved AR3A code are also investigated. The results are given in Table I and Fig. 3. As can be seen, the enhanced (3, 6) SC-P code, corresponding conventional SC-P code, original protograph code, AR4JA code, and improved AR4JA code possess TMDRs (i.e., δmin > 0), while the NP2 protograph code, AR3A code, and improved AR3A code do not have TMDR (i.e., δmin = 0). Based on the above observations, the former five types of codes benefit from the linearminimum-distance superiority, and hence should exhibit more excellent error performance than the latter three types of codes in the high SNR region.
Remark: Although we only adopt the (3, 6) protograph to construct the enhanced SC-P code in this section, the design methodology is also feasible for other protographs, such as the repeat-jagged-accumulate (RJA) protograph [5]. We have performed analyses and simulations on the enhanced RJA SC-P code and found that it also outperforms the conventional RJA SC-P code [5] and other protograph codes over TDMR channels (see Section VI).
VI. NUMERICAL RESULTS
This section provides various BER-simulated results regarding the SC-P codes and protograph codes over TDMR channels with a recording density of 4 Tb/in2. In particular, the codeword length is assumed to be 4800. Furthermore, the maximum numbers corresponding to the turbo iterations and the BP iterations are set to be T1 = 10 and T2 = 30, respectively.
The BER curves regarding the enhanced (3, 6) SC-P code, corresponding conventional SC-P code [4], original protograph code [3], and NP2 protograph code [18] over a turbo-equalized TDMR channel are shown in Fig. 4. As can be seen, the enhanced (3, 6) SC-P code achieves

optimal performance, while the (3, 6) protograph code exhibits the worst performance in the low SNR region (Eb/N0 2.4 dB). This phenomenon is reasonably consistent with the threshold-analysis results. For example, at Eb/N0 = 2.4 dB, the enhanced (3, 6) SC-P code accomplishes a BER of 2 × 10−6, while the conventional (3, 6) SC-P code, (3, 6) protograph code, and NP2 protograph code only achieve BERs of 1 × 10−5, 7 × 10−5, and 4 × 10−5, respectively. Furthermore, at a BER of 10−5, the enhanced (3, 6) SC-P code achieves a gain of about 0.1 dB over the corresponding conventional SC-P code, which exhibits an additional gain of about 0.1 dB over the original protograph code and the NP2 protograph code. More important, we can observe that
the error-floor phenomenon does not occur for the enhanced (3, 6) SC-P code when the BER reduces to 10−6. From this perspective, a lower BER can be expected as Eb/N0 further increases.
To validate our design, we compare the BER performance of the enhanced (3, 6) SC-P code, AR4JA code [3], improved AR4JA code [10], AR3A code [3], and improved
AR3A code [10] in Fig. 5. As seen from the performance curves, the enhanced (3, 6) SC-P code is better than that of the improved AR3A code and improved AR4JA
code, which significantly outperform their original protograph
codes, respectively. This phenomenon is consistent with the threshold-analysis results.3 Precisely speaking, at a BER of 10−5, the enhanced (3, 6) SC-P code attains gains of about 0.1 and 0.2 dB over the improved AR3A code and the improved AR4JA code, which further outperform their original protograph codes by 0.2 and 0.4 dB, respectively. Furthermore, in contrast to the other codes, the enhanced (3, 6) SC-P code exhibits optimal error performance for the whole range of Eb/N0 under study.
3The decoding thresholds derived in Table I are mainly utilized to predict the relatively waterfall-region error performance among different codes [8], [18]. It is noteworthy that different codes may have different convergence characteristics due to their inherent structures. Thus, the decoding thresholds of different codes may correspond to different finite-length BERs in the waterfall region.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 25,2026 at 02:01:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS AND OPTIMIZATION OF SC-P-BASED LDPC CODES FOR TDMR SYSTEMS

6701807

Southeast University, under Grant 2018D02, in part by NSF, Guangdong Province, under Grant 2019A1515011465 and Grant 2016A030310337, in part by the Science and Technology Program of Guangzhou under Grant 201904010124, in part by the Guangdong Province Universities and Colleges Pearl River Scholar Funded Scheme under Grant 2017-ZJ022, in part by the Guangdong Innovative Research Team Program under Grant 2014ZT05G157, in part by the Research Project of the Education Department of Guangdong Province under Grant 2017KTSCX060 and Grant 2017KZDXM028, and in part by the Graduate Education and Innovation Project of Guangdong Province under Grant 2020SQXX12.

Fig. 6. BER performance curves of the enhanced RJA SC-P code, conventional RJA SC-P code, and RJA protograph code over a TDMR channel with a recording density of 4 Tb/in2.
To further verify the feasibility and superiority of the proposed code-design methodology, we have performed simulations on the enhanced RJA SC-P code, conventional RJA SC-P code [5], and RJA protograph code [5] over a TDMR channel.4 As seen from Fig. 6, the enhanced RJA SC-P code achieves significant gains of about 0.1 and 0.2 dB over the conventional RJA SC-P code and RJA protograph code at a BER of 3×10−5, respectively. This phenomenon suggests that the enhanced RJA SC-P code is preferable to the other two codes over TDMR channels.
Based on the observations, there exists a reasonable consistency between the tendency of the BER performance curves and the decoding threshold and TMDR analyses, which can verify the effectiveness of the turbo-like EXIT and AWD algorithms.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this article, an efficient turbo-like EXIT algorithm has been proposed to facilitate the performance investigation of SC-P codes over the TDMR channels. By exploiting the proposed turbo-like EXIT algorithm and AWD analysis, a new code-design methodology has been conceived to formulate an enhanced class of SC-P codes that can exhibit outstanding performance over such channels. Through simulations and analyses, it has been demonstrated that such enhanced codes not only are superior to the conventional SC-P codes but also significantly outperform the state-of-the-art protograph codes. Thanks to the structure and performance superiorities, the enhanced SC-P codes appear to be a better alternative to the existing protograph-based codes for practical implementation in ultra-high-density data-storage systems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported in part by NSF, China, under Grant 61771149, Grant 61871136, Grant 61471294, and Grant 61501250, in part by the Open Research Fund of National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory,
4The enhanced RJA SC-P code is constructed by performing the proposed code-design methodology on an RJA protograph [5].

REFERENCES
[1] Y. Fang, P. Chen, G. Cai, F. C. M. Lau, S. C. Liew, and G. Han, “Outagelimit-approaching channel coding for future wireless communications: Root-protograph low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Veh. Technol. Mag., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 85–93, Jun. 2019.
[2] G. Liva and M. Chiani, “Protograph LDPC codes design based on EXIT analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Nov. 2007, pp. 3250–3254.
[3] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, C. R. Jones, and K. Andrews, “Capacityapproaching protograph codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 876–888, Aug. 2009.
[4] D. G. M. Mitchell, M. Lentmaier, and D. J. Costello, “Spatially coupled LDPC codes constructed from protographs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 9, pp. 4866–4889, Sep. 2015.
[5] D. G. M. Mitchell, A. E. Pusane, and D. J. Costello, “Minimum distance and trapping set analysis of protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 254–281, Jan. 2013.
[6] M. Stinner and P. M. Olmos, “On the waterfall performance of finitelength SC-LDPC codes constructed from protographs,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 345–361, Feb. 2016.
[7] T. Jerkovits, G. Liva, and A. G. I. Amat, “Improving the decoding threshold of tailbiting spatially coupled LDPC codes by energy shaping,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 660–663, Apr. 2018.
[8] Y. Fang, G. Han, G. Cai, F. C. M. Lau, P. Chen, and Y. L. Guan, “Design guidelines of low-density parity-check codes for magnetic recording systems,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1574–1606, 2nd Quart., 2018.
[9] D. Fertonani, A. Barbieri, and G. Colavolpe, “Reduced-complexity BCJR algorithm for turbo equalization,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no. 12, pp. 2279–2287, Dec. 2007.
[10] Y. Fang, G. Bi, Y. L. Guan, and F. C. M. Lau, “A survey on protograph LDPC codes and their applications,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 1989–2016, 4th Quart., 2015.
[11] H. Esfahanizadeh, A. Hareedy, and L. Dolecek, “Spatially coupled codes optimized for magnetic recording applications,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 53, no. 2, Feb. 2017, Art. no. 3100211.
[12] W. Phakphisut, P. Supnithi, and N. Puttarak, “EXIT chart analysis of nonbinary protograph LDPC codes for partial response channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 50, no. 11, Nov. 2014, Art. no. 3101904.
[13] L. Kong, K. Cai, P. Chen, and B. Fan, “A detector-aware LDPC code optimization for ultra-high density magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 53, no. 11, Nov. 2017, Art. no. 2500504.
[14] M. Franceschini, G. Ferrari, and R. Raheli, “Does the performance of LDPC codes depend on the channel?” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 2129–2132, Dec. 2006.
[15] S. Jeong and J. Lee, “Iterative LDPC–LDPC product code for bit patterned media,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 53, no. 3, Mar. 2017, Art. no. 3100704.
[16] S. S. Shafiee, C. K. Sann, and G. Y. Liang, “Novel joint detection and decoding schemes for TDMR channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 51, no. 4, Apr. 2015, Art. no. 9401206.
[17] L. Kong, Y. Jiang, G. Han, F. C. M. Lau, and Y. L. Guan, “Improved min-sum decoding for 2-D intersymbol interference channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 50, no. 11, Nov. 2014, Art. no. 3101304.
[18] P. Chen, C. Kui, L. Kong, Z. Chen, and M. Zhang, “Non-binary protograph-based LDPC codes for 2-D ISI magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 53, no. 11, Nov. 2017, Art. no. 8108905.
[19] J. Yao, K. C. Teh, and K. H. Li, “Joint iterative detection/decoding scheme for discrete two-dimensional interference channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 12, pp. 3548–3555, Dec. 2012.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 25,2026 at 02:01:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

