IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 66, NO. 1, MARCH 2020

187

Quasi-Cyclic Spatially Coupled LDPC Code for Broadcasting
Yushu Zhang , Kewu Peng , Senior Member, IEEE, Jian Song, Fellow, IEEE, and Yiyan Wu , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Flexible and robust transmission schemes are required to support different coded modulation modes, receiver types and channel conditions in future broadcasting systems. However, conventional low-density parity-check (LDPC) coded schemes are usually optimized towards particular scenario, and may face the problem of performance degradation in other different scenarios. In this paper, a type of quasicyclic spatially coupled LDPC (QC-SC-LDPC) codes, which have been recently proven to be able to universally achieve capacity over different channels under conventional belief propagation decoding, are proposed as the forward error correcting codes for broadcasting applications. Then a QC-SC-LDPC coded transmission scheme is proposed, which is capable of showing good performance in various scenarios under practical constraints of finite coupling length, smoothing parameter, uncoupled code length and number of decoding iterations. To maintain the universal property under the above constraints, a typical construction method is developed, based on which a QC-SC-LDPC code is constructed as an example. Finally, the performance and robustness of the proposed QC-SC-LDPC coded transmission scheme are demonstrated via simulations under different yet typical coded modulation modes and channel conditions.
Index Terms—Spatially coupled low-density parity-check (LDPC) code, quasi-cyclic, universal, broadcasting.
I. INTRODUCTION
O VER the last two decades, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have captured worldwide attention for the capacityapproaching capability under belief propagation (BP) decoding, the complexity of which only increases linearly with the code length. In fact, quasi-cyclic (QC-) LDPC codes, as a class of array-structured LDPC codes suitable for high-throughput implementation, have already been adopted as the forward error correcting (FEC) codes in several digital television terrestrial broadcasting (DTTB) standards, such as DVB-S2/T2/NGH [1]–[3], DTMB [4], DTMB-A [5] and ATSC 3.0 [6].
Various emerging applications and increasing number of terminals have posed great challenges for future DTTB systems, including the FEC coding schemes. For example, various coded modulation modes, with different constellation orders and code rates, should be supported to provide various transmission rates for different services. The future
Manuscript received March 19, 2019; revised June 12, 2019; accepted June 24, 2019. Date of publication August 14, 2019; date of current version March 4, 2020. This work was supported by the Science, Technology and Innovation Commission of Shenzhen Municipality under Grant JCYJ20160331171115521. This article was partially presented at the 2017 IEEE International Symposium on Broadband Multimedia Systems and Broadcasting (BMSB). (Corresponding author: Kewu Peng.)
Y. Zhang, K. Peng, and J. Song are with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China, also with the Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China, and also with the Key Laboratory of Digital TV System of Guangdong Province and Shenzhen City, Research Institute of Tsinghua University in Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518057, China (e-mail: zhang-ys15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; pengkewu@tsinghua.edu.cn; jsong@tsinghua.edu.cn).
Y. Wu is with the Communications Research Centre Canada, Ottawa, ON K2H 8S2, Canada (e-mail: yiyan.wu@ieee.org).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this article are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBC.2019.2932336

DTTB systems should also efficiently support the co-existence of different types of receivers, including but not limited to those with single/multiple receiving antennas and independent/iterative demapping. Besides, one of the key differences between terrestrial broadcasting and 2-way mobile communications is that the channel state information is not available at the transmitter in DTTB systems. Therefore, the capability of maintaining near-capacity performance under varying channel conditions are particularly important for future broadcasting in practice.
However, for conventional LDPC codes, the degree distributions of Tanner graphs are usually optimized towards particular scenario to achieve capacity-approaching performance under BP decoding. When the coded modulation mode, receiver type or channel condition is changed or unknown, the optimized codes may face the problem of performance degradation, or even decoding failure. As a result, in order to improve the performance of conventional LDPC coded transmission schemes, the system parameters are usually individually optimized towards different scenarios, which may increase the description, design and implementation complexity for practical systems. For example, in ATSC 3.0 [7], the bit-interleavers between channel encoder and constellation mapper are optimized for each pair of modulation order and code rate. In DVB-NGH [8], the bit-interleavers for single-input single-output (SISO) transmissions are redesigned for multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) transmissions towards different transmit power imbalance levels, as well as coded modulations modes. Furthermore, to support different types of receivers with independent or iterative demapping and approach the corresponding theoretical limits, conventional LDPC coded transmission schemes need to be individually optimized towards these two cases, such as the bit-mapping optimization in [9].
Recently, spatially coupled (SC-) LDPC codes have been proven to be capable of universally achieving capacity over different channels under BP decoding [10]–[12], i.e., a single SC-LDPC ensemble/code can exhibit excellent BP performance over any one of these channels. This makes SC-LDPC coded transmission schemes promising to simply and efficiently achieve good performance in various scenarios for DTTB applications. And SC-LDPC codes constructed from random decomposition/spreading have been studied to improve the bit error rate (BER) performance in DTTB systems [13].
An SC-LDPC code can be constructed by coupling together the Tanner graphs of L uncoupled LDPC codes with smoothing parameter w. Since memory is introduced into the (w + 1) neighboring uncoupled codes, SC-LDPC codes can be regarded as a class of LDPC convolutional codes [14], which could achieve convolutional gain over the uncoupled codes and better approach the asymptotic BP threshold of the uncoupled codes with comparable code length [14]–[17]. Different from conventional LDPC convolutional codes, the Tanner graphs of SC-LDPC codes are terminated at two ends, which results in the key feature of SC-LDPC codes, threshold saturation. With sufficiently large coupling length L, smoothing parameter w, uncoupled code length nunc and number of decoding iterations Iiter, the BP thresholds of SC-LDPC codes can asymptotically saturate to the maximum a posteriori (MAP) thresholds of the underlying uncoupled codes, and have the attractive universal property over different channels.

0018-9316 c 2019 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:47:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

188

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 66, NO. 1, MARCH 2020

This paper is focused on constructing quasi-cyclic (QC-) SC-LDPC codes to universally achieve good performance in various scenarios for broadcasting applications. Different from previous works [10], [12], several constraints and requirements of practical DTTB systems should be jointly taken into consideration for QC-SC-LDPC code construction. The total code length is usually limited in practical broadcast systems to support multi-service applications, which will result in limited L, w and nunc. The number of decoding iterations Iiter at the receiver is also constrained due to limited computational resources and power consumption consideration. Therefore, to develop robust QC-SC-LDPC coded transmission schemes for broadcasting applications, the universal property of QC-SC-LDPC codes should be maintained under the constraints of finite L, w, nunc and Iiter.
Considering the above constraints, this paper proposes a type of QC-SC-LDPC codes as the FEC codes for broadcasting applications, and a simple yet effective QC-SC-LDPC coded transmission scheme. The contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows.
1) A QC-SC-LDPC coded transmission scheme with intrauncoupled-code interleaver is proposed to support robust transmission. The proposed scheme is capable of achieving near-capacity performance in varying scenarios with low design and implementation complexity, e.g., the bit-interleaver doesn’t need to be optimized towards different modulation orders, channel conditions or code lengths. Meanwhile, a type of QC-SC-LDPC codes with two main characteristics are also proposed as the FEC codes for broadcasting applications, and adopted in the proposed scheme. As the first characteristic, the edge spreading pattern, pre-lifting and post-lifting of every uncoupled code are identical, which could facilitate the practical implementation of windowed decoder [18], [19]. The second characteristic is that the edge spreading patterns and lifting need to be designed to maintain the universality under the constraints of finite L, w, nunc and Iiter.
2) A construction method is developed for the QC-SC-LDPC codes. In this method, the variable node degree distributions and edge spreading pattern [20], [21] of the uncoupled base matrix are designed towards good threshold performance in different scenarios, as well as low error floor, under the above four constraints. Then two-step lifting [22], [23], including pre-lifting and post-lifting, is adopted to improve the finite-length performance. General permutation matrices are used in pre-lifting to offer larger design freedom, and circulant permutation matrices are chosen in post-lifting to maintain the quasi-cyclic structure and facilitate efficient implementation.
3) A QC-SC-LDPC code is constructed as an example, and the performance and robustness of the proposed transmission scheme in different broadcasting scenarios are further demonstrated. For simplicity of presentation, the cases of different coded modulation modes and channel conditions through simulations are mainly considered in this short paper.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the structure of the type of QC-SC-LDPC codes proposed for broadcasting applications, and the system model of the QC-SC-LDPC coded transmission scheme. In Section III, a typical code construction method is presented, and a QC-SC-LDPC code is designed as an example. In Section IV, the performance and the robustness of the QC-SC-LDPC coded transmission scheme is verified through simulations. Finally, the conclusions are drawn in Section V.
II. CODE STRUCTURE AND SYSTEM MODEL
A. QC-SC-LDPC Codes
An LDPC code can be defined by its parity check matrix H or the equivalent Tanner graph. The n columns, m rows and non-zero

entries in parity check matrix correspond to the n variable nodes, m check nodes, and edges in the Tanner graph, respectively. For a protograph-based LDPC code, the m × n parity check matrix H is usually constructed from a smaller base matrix B of size M × N via lifting, which replaces the ones in the B with Z × Z permutation matrices and the zeros with Z × Z zero matrices. As a result, m = MZ, n = NZ, and Z is called the lifting factor. The lifting process can also be described in terms of Tanner graph. To obtain the final Z-fold Tanner graph, the protograph, also called base graph, associated with B is repeated Z times, and the connections between the Z copies of each edge are permutated. QC-LDPC codes can be regarded as a subclass of protograph-based LDPC codes, which use simple circulant permutation matrices instead of general permutation matrices in the lifting process.
By coupling together the Tanner graphs of L LDPC block codes, SC-LDPC codes with coupling length L and smoothing parameter w can be constructed. More specifically, the variable nodes of each uncoupled code are re-connected to the check nodes of their own and the adjacent w uncoupled codes. Owing to the terminated coupled chain, there exists threshold saturation phenomenon in BP decoding of SC-LDPC codes, which implies the BP threshold of an SC-LDPC code can asymptotically saturate to the MAP threshold of the uncoupled code [12]. Furthermore, the threshold saturation provides the universally capacity-approaching property for SC-LDPC codes, when w, L, the uncoupled code length nunc and Iiter are sufficiently large.
For QC-SC-LDPC codes, the base graphs of uncoupled codes are also spatially coupled, which can be realized via edge spreading [20], [21]. Given the smoothing parameter w and a series of Munc × Nunc base matrices Bu1nc, Bu2nc, . . . , BuLnc corresponding to the L uncoupled codes, the edges in each Blunc, l = 1, 2, . . . , L, are spread to connect with the check nodes of Blunc and other w adjacent base matrices, and the resulting edge spreading pattern is denoted by the (w + 1)Munc × Nunc matrix Blpattern = [B0l T , B1l T , . . . , Bwl T ]T , where Blunc = Bl0 +B1l +· · ·+Blw, and (·)T denotes the transposition. Then the final base matrix of the QC-SC-LDPC code ensemble can be described as follows

BSC

=

⎡ ⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢

B01 B11 ... Bw1

B20 B21 ... Bw2

... ... ... ...

⎤

BL0 BL1 ...

⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥⎥

.

(1)

BwL (L+w)Munc×LNunc

The rate of the uncoupled code is called true rate, Rtrue = (Nunc − Munc)/Nunc, and the rate of the final QC-SC-LDPC code is called design rate, Rdesign = (LNunc − (L + w)Munc)/(LNunc) = Rtrue − wMunc/(LNunc), which suffers from an inevitable rate loss of wMunc/(LNunc) compared with the true rate Rtrue due to the termination of coupled chain.
Generally speaking, the base matrices and edge spreading patterns
of different uncoupled codes can be different, like those constructed
via the random spreading method for the proof of universality [12].
However, considering the implementation complexity in practical
systems, the base matrices and the edge spreading patterns of all
uncoupled codes are assumed to be identical in this paper. Thus, the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:47:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING

189

base matrix can be described as follows

⎡ B0

⎤

BSC

=

⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢

B1 ... Bw

B0 B1 ... Bw

... ... ... ...

B0 B1 ...

⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥

,

(2)

Bw (L+w)Munc×LNunc

where the edge spreading pattern for every uncoupled code Bunc is Bpattern = [B0T , B1T , . . . , BwT ]T .
In fact, as the first main characteristic for this type of QC-SC-
LDPC codes proposed for broadcasting applications, the uncoupled

codes are assumed to be identical, which implies not only the identical base matrices and edge spreading patterns, but also the identical pre-lifting and post-lifting in the two-step lifting process. This results in the time-invariant periodic structure for the final parity check matrix, which can significantly simplify the code description in prac-

tical systems. Moreover, the hardware implementation of windowed

decoding, i.e., BP decoding with a sliding window, can also be simplified, since the computation graph corresponding to each decoding window is identical. Thanks to windowed decoding, the complexity and latency of QC-SC-LDPC decoding is independent of the coupling length L, which is very beneficial for the cases requiring relatively

large L.

The second main characteristic is that the edge spreading patterns need to be designed to maintain the universality under the constraints of finite L, w, nunc and Iiter. Though a lot of edge spreading patterns are capable of achieving near-capacity performance over certain channel, it can be observed that there still exist some of the edge spreading

patterns with poor threshold performance under the above constraints, or showing degraded threshold performance over different channels, which should be avoided in the process of base matrix design. The second main characteristic ensures the universally good performance of the proposed QC-SC-LDPC coded transmission schemes in practical DTTB systems, where the computational resources and the total

code length are usually limited.
Besides, there are other characteristics of this type of QC-SC-
LDPC codes, which can facilitate their application. The base matrices of the uncoupled code can be very compact, such as Munc = 1 and Nunc = 3 in the design example of this paper, which ensures the simple implementation of the encoder/decoder. Due to the identical

uncoupled codes, scalable code length could be easily obtained based on a constructed QC-SC-LDPC code by varying the coupling length L and the lifting factor Z.

B. QC-SC-LDPC Coded Transmission Scheme
Based on the above-mentioned type of QC-SC-LDPC codes, a QCSC-LDPC coded transmission scheme is proposed for broadcasting applications. Owing to the universality under the constraints of finite L, w, nunc and Iiter, the QC-SC-LDPC coded transmission scheme is capable of showing robustness in different scenarios. In other words, the system parameters of the QC-SC-LDPC coded transmission scheme do not need to be individually optimized towards different scenarios to achieve good performance, which could not only simplify the design, description and implementation, but also improve the practical performance with unknown channel state information and diversified receivers.
The system model of the QC-SC-LDPC coded transmission scheme is shown in Fig. 1. At the transmitter, the information bits are

Fig. 1. System model of the QC-SC-LDPC coded transmission scheme.

first encoded by the QC-SC-LDPC encoder. Then the coded bits are

interleaved by the pseudo-random intra-uncoupled-code interleaver,

which interleaves the nunc coded bits associated with each uncoupled code. With the intra-uncoupled-code interleaver, the spatially

coupled chain of QC-SC-LDPC codes can be maintained regardless

to independent or iterative demapping, which is essential for provid-

ing the universality in practical systems. Finally, the interleaved bits

are consecutively mapped to constellation symbols x, instead of using

the bit-interleaver or bit-mapping optimized towards different coded

modulation modes or channel conditions.

The memoryless equivalent baseband model can be described as

y = √ρgx + v,

(3)

where y is the received symbol, x and g are the normalized transmitted symbol and complex channel gain, respectively, v represents the complex Gaussian noise subject to CN (0, 1), and ρ denotes the received signal-to-noise ratio (SNR).
At the receiver, the received symbols are demapped first. After de-interleaved by the intra-uncoupled-code de-interleaver, the output extrinsic information of bits from the soft-in soft-out demapper is sent to the QC-SC-LDPC decoder as a priori information. For the case with independent demapping, the outputs of the receiver can be directly obtained based on the a posteriori information of the information bits from QC-SC-LDPC decoder. For the case with iterative demapping, the output extrinsic information of coded bits is fed back to the demapper as a priori information, which is illustrated via dashed line in Fig. 1.

III. QC-SC-LDPC CODE CONSTRUCTION
To construct the type of QC-SC-LDPC codes described in Section II-A, a typical code construction method is developed and detailed in two stages, i.e., the base matrix design and the twostep lifting. Via the given construction method, a QC-SC-LDPC code is designed as an example. During the construction process, corresponding discussions are also carried out to provide some insights on QC-SC-LDPC code design with universality under the constraints of finite L, w, nunc and Iiter.
A. Base Matrix Design
Since the finite-length performance of QC-SC-LDPC codes is mainly affected by the smoothing parameter w and the uncoupled code length nunc [21], the constraint length, defined as nconst = (w + 1)nunc, should not be too small. However, for the cases with relatively strict constraint on the total code length nSC = Lnunc, the coupling length L is accordingly limited, which could lead to the increase of the inherent rate loss wMunc/(LNunc). In this paper, the last (w − wremain)Munc rows of the final base matrix in (2) are intentionally removed to lower the rate loss to wremainMunc/(LNunc) [24]–[26]. Note that the base matrix design and two-step lifting in the developed construction method are both targeted for the QC-SC-LDPC codes with the row-removal.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:47:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

190

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 66, NO. 1, MARCH 2020

Fig. 2. Threshold gaps to Shannon limit for (a) BI-AWGN channel, (b) two-user GMAC, and (c) comparison between BI-AWGN channel and two-user GMAC. The indices on the x-axes correspond to the base matrices from w = 2 ∼ 8 case, sorted according to the threshold gaps over BI-AWGN channel for (a) and (c), and the threshold gaps over two-user GMAC for (b).

As introduced in Section II-A, a QC-SC-LDPC code is usually
lifted from a spatially coupled base matrix BSC, which can be constructed by performing edge spreading on the base matrices Bunc of the uncoupled codes. In this paper, the size of Bunc is chosen to be extremely small, i.e., Munc = 1, and no parallel edges are employed in edge spreading, i.e., all entries in BSC can only be zeros and ones. The parallel edges correspond to the entries larger than one
in the base matrix, and need to be removed via extra lifting opera-
tion [22], which means the original base matrix with parallel edges
is equivalent to a larger-size base matrix with only zeros and ones.
Though using parallel edges could increase the design freedom and
improve the threshold performance [22], it would also result in higher
implementation or description complexity for practical systems.
It has been pointed out that the degree distributions of the uncou-
pled base matrix Bunc and the edge spreading pattern Bpattern are related to the convergence speed [27] and the threshold
performance [21] of the final coupled code. We first analyze the
threshold performance for BSC with different degree distributions of Bunc and different Bpattern via a simple case, where the Bunc is chosen to be the 1 × 2 matrix [J1 J2] with variable-node degrees of J1 and J2, Rtrue = 1/2 and L = 60. The smoothing parameter w is traversed from 2 to 8, and all possible Bpattern are enumerated. This case is referred to as the w = 2 ∼ 8 case for brevity in the following discussion. Since no parallel edges are adopted in the edge spreading
pattern, the maximum variable-node degree in the considered case is 9. Let wremain = 2, and remove the last (w − 2) rows of the final base matrix BSC, which limits the rate loss to 2/(2L) = 1/60. Accordingly, the design rate is Rdesign = Rtrue −1/60 = 29/60. Note that those edge spreading patterns, which lead to the variable-node
or check-node degrees less than 2 for BSC after row-removal, are excluded for the consideration of linear minimum distance growth
property [22].
Several base matrices BSC with edge spreading patterns from [21] are also analyzed. Specifically, the edge spreading pattern for the 3 × 5 base matrix of rate-1/2 accumulate-repeat-jagged-accumulate (ARJA) code with w = 1 is adopted from Fig. 4(b) in [21]. Since one column of the uncoupled ARJA base matrix is punctured, L = 30 is assumed for the case with ARJA code to obtain the same size
of the coupled base matrix excluding the punctured columns. The rate loss for this case is 1/(2L) [21], which is also equal to 1/60. For the three (J, 2J)-regular LDPC codes with J = {3, 4, 5}, as

given in [21, Sec. II-D, Definition 6], the uncoupled base matrices are [J J], the smoothing parameter is w = J − 1, and the edge spreading patterns are J × 2 matrices with all entries equal to one. L = 60 and wremain = 2 are assumed for the regular code cases to obtain the same size and rate loss for the coupled base matrices.
Since the universal property is important for the QC-SC-LDPC codes constructed in this paper, the base matrix analysis in this subsection is carried out over two different channels, the binary-input (BI-) AWGN channel and the two-user Gaussian multiple access channel (GMAC). Different from the point-to-point transmission in BI-AWGN channel, two equal-power users are assumed to transmit with quadrature phase-shift keying (QPSK) modulation in two-user GMAC. Since the signals of both users suffer from strong interference with single-user spectral efficiency as high as 1 bits/symbol, conventional LDPC codes optimized towards BI-AWGN channel usually fail in two-user GMAC. Besides, the multipoint-to-point transmission over two-user GMAC is also similar to the multiple-input sultipleoutput (MISO) transmission with V-BLAST architecture. Therefore, edge spreading patterns, which could approach capacity in both BI-AWGN channel and GMAC, have the potential to be universally capacity-approaching over different channels.
In BI-AWGN channel, density evolution with reciprocal channel approximation (RCA) [28] is employed to calculate the asymptotic threshold for these base matrices, and the number of decoding iterations is set as 40 × L. In two-user GMAC, the complex channel gains of both users are normalized with random phase rotation, and the noise is subject to complex Gaussian distribution CN (0, 1). The iterative joint decoder is employed to perform multi-user detection and LDPC decoding iteratively at the receiver side. To calculate the asymptotic threshold for the base matrices over two-user GMAC, the multi-edge type density evolution aided extrinsic information transfer (DE-EXIT) analysis [29] is adopted, and RCA instead of conventional density evolution is utilized to lower the computational complexity in this paper. The number of iterations between the multi-user detection and LDPC decoding is set as 20 × L, and that within the LDPC decoder is 2. This makes the total number of LDPC decoding iterations to be 40 × L, the same as that for BI-AWGN channel. For simplicity, the precision of the thresholds is set as 0.01 dB for both BI-AWGN channel and two-user GMAC.
In this paper, we mainly focus on the gaps of the thresholds to Shannon limits with constellation-constrained input corresponding to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:47:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING

191

Fig. 3. Threshold gaps to Shannon limit of BI-AWGN channel vs. (a) average variable-node degree, (b) minimum variable-node degree, (c) maximum variable-node degree, and (d) smoothing parameter w. Threshold gaps to Shannon limit of two-user GMAC vs. (e) average variable-node degree, (f) minimum variable-node degree, (g) maximum variable-node degree, and (h) smoothing parameter w.

the true rate Rtrue. Due to the inherent rate loss, there exists SNR loss comparing the Shannon limit for Rtrue with that for Rdesign. For example, in BI-AWGN channel, the Shannon limit for Rtrue = 1/2 is 0.22 dB away from that for Rdesign = 29/30, and in two-user GMAC with QPSK, the Shannon limit for the sum rate of 4Rtrue is 0.29 dB away from that for the sum rate of 4Rdesign. However, the rate loss, as well as the corresponding SNR loss, could become negligible by increasing the coupling length L, which is feasible for practical systems with windowed decoding employed.
The threshold gaps of the w = 2 ∼ 8 case for BI-AWGN channel and two-user GMAC are shown in ascending order in Fig. 2(a) and (b), respectively. As we can see, there are nearly 76% of the edge spreading patterns with threshold gaps no more than 0.05 dB over BI-AWGN channel, and nearly 77% of them with threshold gaps no more than 0.07 dB over two-user GMAC. Then the threshold performance of the w = 2 ∼ 8 case over BI-AWGN channel and two-user GMAC is compared in Fig. 2(c), where the base matrices are sorted by their threshold gaps in BI-AWGN channel. Though a majority of the edge spreading patterns can achieve good performance over either one of the two channels, there are still some with small gaps in BI-AWGN channel or two-user GMAC show relatively large gaps in the other channel. Therefore, the edge spreading patterns with degraded threshold performance over either or both of the two channels should be excluded in the base matrix design for QC-SCLDPC codes.
The threshold gaps for the base matrices with edge spreading patterns from [21] are also given in Fig. 2(a) and (b). The threshold performance of these base matrices varies over two kinds of channels. For the ARJA code case, the threshold gap is only 0.05 dB in BI-AWGN channel, which is comparable to the best threshold gaps in w = 2 ∼ 8 case. However, the threshold gap becomes 0.13 dB in two-user GMAC, which is worse than 99% of the threshold gaps in w = 2 ∼ 8 case. Among the (J, 2J)-regular code cases, the (3, 6)-regular code case shows the best threshold performance in two-user GMAC, but faces performance degradation in BI-AWGN channel.
Furthermore, the threshold gaps of the w = 2 ∼ 8 case versus the average, minimum and maximum variable-node degree and the smoothing parameter w are demonstrated in Fig. 3(a)(b)(c)(d) for BI-AWGN channel and Fig. 3(e)(f)(g)(h) for two-user GMAC. This could provide some insights on the degree distribution and edge

Fig. 4. Base matrix BSC of the constructed QC-SC-LDPC code with L = 40, w = 6 and wremain = 2.
spreading pattern design for achieving good threshold performance over the two kinds of channels. In Fig. 3(a) and (e), the smallest achievable threshold gap increases when the average variable-node degree is too low or too high in both BI-AWGN channel and twouser GMAC. Besides, the average variable-node degree also directly affects the decoding complexity. As shown in Fig. 3(d) and (h), the smallest achievable threshold gap decreases with larger smoothing parameter w. The smallest achievable threshold gap is also related to the maximum and minimum variable-node degrees.
In this paper, the QC-SC-LDPC code of Rtrue = 2/3 is designed as a typical example for the transmission scheme proposed in Section II-B. The size of uncoupled base matrix is 1 × 3. Inspired by the above analysis and observations for Rtrue = 1/2 over BI-AWGN channel and two-user GMAC, the average variable-node degree within 4 ∼ 6 is mainly considered. To achieve good performance in error-floor region, the minimum variable-node degree of 3 is selected to ensure the linear minimum distance growth property for the constructed QC-SC-LDPC code. The maximum variablenode degree is set as 7, the irregular uncoupled base matrix is chosen to be Bunc = [7 3 3], and w = 6 is selected. Since the last 6 − wremain rows will be removed from the spatially coupled base matrix to lower the inherent rate loss, wremain = 2 is selected, which ensures that the size of the edge spreading pattern of the rightmost uncoupled code in (2) is 3 × 3 even after row-removal. In this way, the minimum variable-node degree of the rightmost uncoupled code could still be 3 with edge spreading pattern

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:47:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

192

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 66, NO. 1, MARCH 2020

designed as following

⎡

⎤

111

Bpattern

=

⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢

1 1 1 1 1

1 1 0 0 0

1 1 0 0 0

⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥⎥.

(4)

100

The final base matrix BSC of the QC-SC-LDPC code with L = 40 is obtained and shown in Fig. 4, where the squares and dots represent
ones and zeros, respectively. With the number of decoding iterations set as 40 × L in BI-AWGN channel, the threshold of the designed base matrix BSC is only 0.07 dB away from Shannon limit for Rtrue, and the SNR loss due to limited L is 0.21 dB. In two-user GMAC with QPSK modulation, the number of iterations between multi-user
detection and decoding and that within the LDPC decoder are still set as 20 × L and 2, respectively, and the threshold is only 0.08 dB away from Shannon limit for sum rate of 4Rtrue with an SNR loss of 0.31 dB.

Fig. 5. (a) Pre-lifted base matrix and (b) parity check matrix of the constructed QC-SC-LDPC code. For simplicity, only the submatrices associated with an uncoupled code are shown. In (a), the squares and dots represent ones and zeros, respectively. In (b), only the ones are shown.

B. Two-Step Lifting
Though the BP threshold of an SC-LDPC code can asymptotically approach the MAP threshold of the uncoupled code, the performance of an SC-LDPC code with finite code length under BP decoding is affected by the construction of the final parity check matrix. First, the minimum distance of the code plays an important role in the finite-length performance in error-floor region. Thus, as described in Section III-A, the minimum variable-node degree of 3 is maintained after row-removal for the base matrix design, which ensures linear minimum distance growth. Second, the short cycles in the final Tanner graph can also be harmful to the finite-length performance under iterative BP decoding. Therefore, the cycle property of the QC-SC-LDPC codes is considered in the lifting process in this subsection.
For a QC-LDPC code, the cycles in the base graph correspond to potential cycles in the final Tanner graph. If there are no parallel edges in the base graph, the parity check matrix of the QC-LDPC code can be constructed by one-step lifting with circulant permutation matrices. In the lifting process, the permutation for each non-zero entry in the base graph needs to be designed, and some potential cycles in base graph could be intentionally eliminated for the Tanner graph. However, while benefiting the practical implementation, the identical uncoupled codes also pose extra challenges for the lifting of the type of QC-SC-LDPC codes considered in this paper. Since the lifting for each uncoupled code is required to be identical, there are some potential length-6 cycles at certain positions of the base graph, which can not be eliminated via one-step circulant lifting. These inevitable length-6 cycles could severely limit the design freedom, and make it difficult to find a code with good finite-length performance from the code ensemble represented by the base matrix.
As a result, two-step lifting is adopted for the code construction in this paper. Usually, pre-lifting is performed to remove the parallel edges in the base matrix [22]. Though there are no parallel edges in the constructed base matrix of the QC-SC-LDPC codes, pre-lifting is still employed to introduce extra design freedom. Some harmful potential cycles could be directly eliminated in pre-lifting, which facilitates the search for good codes in the following circulant post-lifting. The pre-lifting factor Zpre is set to be very small, and general permutation matrices are employed for larger search space under the constraint of small Zpre. Accordingly, a relatively large post-lifting factor Zpost can be selected for a given uncoupled code length nunc = NuncZpreZpost. In this way, the implementation

advantages brought by the quasi-cyclic structure can be maintained to a large extent, and QC-SC-LDPC codes with good finite-length performance can also be constructed more easily.
In both pre- and post-lifting, short cycles with small approximated cycle extrinsic message degree (ACE) [30] are eliminated first, instead of the shortest cycles. The ACE of a cycle in Tanner graph can be used to approximately describe the extrinsic message degree (EMD) for the variable nodes in the cycle, and is defined as
i∈Vcycle (Ji − 2) [30], where Vcycle represents the index set of all variable nodes in the cycle and Ji represents the degree of variable node i. And the EMD for a set of variable nodes is equivalent to the number of extrinsic check codes, which are singly connected to these variable nodes and can pass extrinsic information to them during BP decoding [30]. Since a short cycle with smaller ACE might receive less extrinsic information from outside the cycle, it could be more harmful to the BP performance of the code, and should be considered with higher priority in cycle-elimination process. Moreover, all length-4 cycles are eliminated in post-lifting for the final parity check matrix for better error-floor performance.
Take the base matrix in Fig. 4 as an example. The pre- and postlifting factors are set as Zpre = 6 and Zpost = 128, respectively, which makes the uncoupled code length nunc = NuncZpreZpost = 2304. There are totally 13 ones in the base matrix for an uncoupled code, which correspond to 13 permutations to be designed in pre-lifting process. First, without loss of generality, 6 × 6 identity matrices can be selected for the pre-lifting of the three ones in the first row of (4), because the pre-lifted base matrix is equivalent under the operation of column permutations. Then the rest of the ones in (4) are pre-lifted entry by entry. For the pre-lifting of each one in (4), the corresponding permutation is designed based on the kseed seeds, each one of which consists of the permutations for those entries that have been prelifted. All of the Zpre! = 720 different permutations are enumerated, and the candidates that do not satisfy the pre-selected constraint are deleted first. In this example, the pre-selected constraint is that the ACEs of the length-4 cycles in the base graph should be maintained larger than 4. If the number of the potential candidates is too large, the candidates are further randomly deleted to obtain the seeds for the pre-lifting of next entry.
In this way, the pre-lifted base matrix can be constructed from the base matrix in Fig. 4, and the 42 × 18 submatrix associated with an uncoupled code is shown in Fig. 5(a), where the squares and dots represent ones and zeros, respectively. Similarly, the parity check matrix

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:47:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING

193

Fig. 6. BER (solid curves) and FER (dashed curves) simulations with QPSK Fig. 7. BER (solid curves) and FER (dashed curves) simulations with

over AWGN and Rayleigh fading channel.

256-NUC over AWGN and Rayleigh fading channel.

of the QC-SC-LDPC code can be constructed from the pre-lifted base matrix via post-lifting. The permutations are constrained to be circulant in post-lifting, for which conventional circulant progressive edge growth algorithm with ACE is employed. The 5376 × 2304 submatrix, corresponding to an uncoupled code, of the constructed parity check matrix is given in Fig. 5(b), where only the ones are shown.

IV. ROBUSTNESS OF QC-SC-LDPC CODED TRANSMISSION SCHEME
In this section, preliminary simulation results are presented to demonstrate the robustness of the QC-SC-LDPC coded transmission scheme under different coded modulation modes and channel conditions. For simplicity, we mainly consider the case of high code rate in this paper, and the QC-SC-LDPC code of Rtrue = 2/3 constructed in Section III is employed in the proposed scheme. To verify the validity of the construction method, the simulation results of the rate-2/3 ATSC 3.0 LDPC codes of lengths 64800 and 16200, referred to as scheme A and B, respectively, are also provided as benchmark.
The non-uniform constellations (NUCs) of modulation orders 256, 1024, and 4096 from ATSC 3.0 for rate-2/3 LDPC codes, as well as QPSK, are adopted for simulations. Two channel models, i.e., AWGN channel and Rayleigh fading channel, are considered. Independent demapping is employed at the receiver. And MAP algorithm is employed for symbol-by-symbol demapping. Since the channel input of a practical systems is usually constrained by the constellation alphabet, the average mutual information (AMI) with constellation-constrained input is utilized for performance evaluation in this section. For the case with independent demapping, the transmission rate is bounded by the sum AMI between the constellation-constrained input and the output for each bit, called bitinterleaved coded modulation (BICM)-AMI, and can be calculated as in [9], [31].
In this section, standard BP decoding with flooding schedule is adopted. The decoding iteration number of LDPC decoding iterations is set as 50 for scheme A/B, and 250 for the proposed scheme. However, since the decoding process of QC-SC-LDPC codes is wave-like, i.e., the reliable information is first obtained at the starting position and then propagates along the coupled chain, it will be a waste of computational resources to use standard BP decoding. According to the previous works and our preliminary results, the number of decoding iterations for the proposed scheme can be reduced to 100 iterations per bit with the windowed decoding employed. Thus the computational complexity of the proposed scheme is about two times higher than scheme A/B.

Fig. 8. BER (solid curves) and FER (dashed curves) simulations with 1024-NUC and 4096-NUC over AWGN and Rayleigh fading channel.
TABLE I GAPS OF SNR THRESHOLDS AT BER = 10−5 AND FER = 10−3 TO
CORRESPONDING THEORETICAL THRESHOLDS SNRtheo
In scheme A and B, the corresponding bit-interleavers from ATSC 3.0, which are specially designed for each pair of modulation order and code rate, are also adopted. In the literature, e.g., [20], [21], [32], [33], an SC-LDPC code with constraint length nconst is usually compared with the conventional LDPC block code with code length equal to nconst. This is because that the finite-length performance and computational complexity of QC-SC-LDPC codes are mainly determined by the constraint length

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:47:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

194

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 66, NO. 1, MARCH 2020

The BER and frame error rate (FER) curves of three schemes for QPSK and 256-NUC are depicted in Fig. 6 and Fig. 7, respectively, and the curves for 1024-NUC and 4096-NUC are shown in Fig. 8. The corresponding theoretical SNR thresholds obtained from BICM-AMI analysis are also provided. Then the SNR thresholds of the three schemes for different cases are obtained at BER = 10−5 and FER =10−3, and the gaps to corresponding theoretical thresholds are summarized in Table I.
The BER and FER performance of the proposed At BER = 10−5, the threshold gaps of the proposed scheme are 0.01–0.07 dB larger than those of scheme A for all the cases, except the case of QPSK over AWGN channel. However, the SNR thresholds at FER= 10−3 of the proposed scheme are even slightly better than those of scheme A for all these modulation orders over both channels. These simulation results indicate that the proposed QC-SC-LDPC coded transmission scheme can achieve comparable thresholds than scheme A and better thresholds than scheme B, though the same simple bit-interleaver is employed instead of those optimized case by case.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a type of QC-SC-LDPC codes are proposed as the FEC codes for DTTB system, and correspondingly, a typical construction method is developed, which consists of edge spreading design and two-step lifting. Based on the type of QC-SC-LDPC codes, a QC-SC-LDPC coded transmission scheme is proposed, and robust broadcast transmission can be supported with simple implementation for practical systems. BER simulations are carried out to demonstrate the robustness of the QC-SC-LDPC coded transmission scheme against different modulation orders and channel conditions for high code rate. Simulation results show that nearcapacity performance can be achieved in all the scenarios with the constructed QC-SC-LDPC code and simple bit-interleaving. In the future, we will work on QC-SCLDPC code design for the low code rate, and consider other different scenarios.
REFERENCES
[1] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Second Generation Framing Structure, Channel Coding and Modulation Systems for Broadcasting, Interactive Services, News Gathering and Other Broadband Satellite Applications (DVB-S2), ETSI Standard EN 302 307, Mar. 2013.
[2] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Frame Structure Channel Coding and Modulation for a Second Generation Digital Terrestrial Television Broadcasting System (DVB-T2), ETSI Standard EN 302 755, Apr. 2012.
[3] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Next Generation Broadcasting System to Handheld, Physical Layer Specification (DVB-NGH), ETSI Standard EN 303 105, Jun. 2013.
[4] Framing Structure, Channel Coding and Modulation for Digital Television Terrestrial Broadcasting System, Chin. Nat. Standard GB 20600–2006, Aug. 2006.
[5] “Error-correction, data framing, modulation and emission methods for digital terrestrial television broadcasting,” Int. Telecommun. Union, Geneva, Switzerland, ITU Recommendation BT. 1306-7, Jun. 2015.
[6] K.-J. Kim et al., “Low-density parity-check codes for ATSC 3.0,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 189–196, Mar. 2016.
[7] L. Michael and D. Gómez-Barquero, “Bit-interleaved coded modulation (BICM) for ATSC 3.0,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 181–188, Mar. 2016.
[8] D. Vargas, D. Gozalvez, D. Gomez-Barquero, and N. Cardona, “MIMO for DVB-NGH, the next generation mobile TV broadcasting,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 130–137, Jul. 2013.
[9] T. Cheng, K. Peng, F. Yang, J. Song, and Z. Yang, “A near-capacity MIMO coded modulation scheme for digital terrestrial television broadcasting,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 367–375, Sep. 2015.
[10] S. Kudekar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Threshold saturation via spatial coupling: Why convolutional LDPC ensembles perform so well over the BEC,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 803–834, Jan. 2011.

[11] S. Kudekar and K. Kasai, “Spatially coupled codes over the multiple access channel,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), 2011, pp. 2816–2820.
[12] S. Kudekar, T. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Spatially coupled ensembles universally achieve capacity under belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 7761–7813, Dec. 2013.
[13] S. Asakura, T. Shitomi, S. Saito, T. Saito, and K. Shibuya, “Technologies for the next generation of digital terrestrial television broadcasting— A study on spatially coupled LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Broadband Multimedia Syst. Broadcast. (BMSB), Beijing, China, 2014, pp. 1–4.
[14] A. J. Felstrom and K. S. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181–2191, Sep. 1999.
[15] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja, and D. J. Costello, “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984, Dec. 2004.
[16] A. E. Pusane, A. J. Feltstrom, A. Sridharan, M. Lentmaier, K. S. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, “Implementation aspects of LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 1060–1069, Jul. 2008.
[17] A. E. Pusane, R. Smarandache, P. O. Vontobel, and D. J. Costello, “Deriving good LDPC convolutional codes from LDPC block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 835–857, Feb. 2011.
[18] A. R. Iyengar, M. Papaleo, P. H. Siegel, J. K. Wolf, A. Vanelli-Coralli, and G. E. Corazza, “Windowed decoding of protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes over erasure channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 2303–2320, Apr. 2012.
[19] A. R. Iyengar, P. H. Siegel, R. L. Urbanke, and J. K. Wolf, “Windowed decoding of spatially coupled codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 2277–2292, Apr. 2013.
[20] D. J. Costello, L. Dolecek, T. E. Fuja, J. Kliewer, D. Mitchell, and R. Smarandache, “Spatially coupled sparse codes on graphs: Theory and practice,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 168–176, Jul. 2014.
[21] D. G. M. Mitchell, M. Lentmaier, and D. J. Costello, “Spatially coupled LDPC codes constructed from protographs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 9, pp. 4866–4889, Sep. 2015.
[22] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, C. R. Jones, and K. Andrews, “Capacityapproaching protograph codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 876–888, Aug. 2009.
[23] D. G. Mitchell, R. Smarandache, and D. J. Costello, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes based on pre-lifted protographs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 60, no. 10, pp. 5856–5874, Oct. 2014.
[24] K. Tazoe, K. Kasai, and K. Sakaniwa, “Efficient termination of spatiallycoupled codes,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop (ITW), 2012, pp. 30–34.
[25] Y. Zhang, K. Peng, and J. Song, “Spatially coupled QC-LDPC for the tradeoff between MIMO BICM and BICM-ID schemes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Broadband Multimedia Syst. Broadcast. (BMSB), 2017, pp. 1–4.
[26] S. Chen, K. Peng, Y. Zhang, and J. Song, “Optimization of finitelength SC-LDPC for uplink NOMA,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. Workshops (ICC Workshops), 2018, pp. 1–6.
[27] V. Aref, L. Schmalen, and S. ten Brink, “On the convergence speed of spatially coupled LDPC ensembles,” in Proc. 51st Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun. Control Comput. (Allerton), 2013, pp. 342–349.
[28] S.-Y. Chung, “On the construction of some capacity-approaching coding schemes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elect. Eng. Comput. Sci., Massachusetts Inst. Technol., Cambridge, MA, USA, Sep. 2000.
[29] Y. Zhang, K. Peng, X. Wang, and J. Song, “Performance analysis and code optimization of IDMA with 5G new radio LDPC code,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 22, no. 8, pp. 1552–1555, Aug. 2018.
[30] T. Tian, C. R. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPC code construction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1242–1247, Aug. 2004.
[31] P. Fertl, J. Jaldén, and G. Matz, “Capacity-based performance comparison of MIMO-BICM demodulators,” in Proc. IEEE 9th Workshop Signal Process. Adv. Wireless Commun. (SPAWC), 2008, pp. 166–170.
[32] K. Huang, D. G. M. Mitchell, L. Wei, X. Ma, and D. J. Costello, “Performance comparison of LDPC block and spatially coupled codes over GF(q),” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 63, no. 3, pp. 592–604, Mar. 2015.
[33] B. Amiri, A. Reisizadehmobarakeh, H. Esfahanizadeh, J. Kliewer, and L. Dolecek, “Optimized design of finite-length separable circulant-based spatially-coupled codes: An absorbing set-based analysis,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 10, pp. 4029–4043, Oct. 2016.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:47:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

