A modified Belief Propagation algorithm based on
Attenuation of the Extrinsic LLR
Liang Gong‚àó, Yin Xu‚àó, Bo Liu‚àó, Lin Gui‚àó, Bo Rong‚ÄÝ, Yiyan Wu‚ÄÝ and Wenjun Zhang‚àó ‚àóInstitute of Image Communication and Information Processing Department of Electronic Engineering Shanghai Jiao Tong University Shanghai, P. R. China
Email: {gong liang, xuyin, liubo lb, guilin, zhangwenjun}@sjtu.edu.cn ‚ÄÝCommunications Research Centre, Canada Email: bo.rong@crc.gc.ca, yiyan.wu@crc.ca

Abstract‚ÄîIn this paper, we propose a modification to Belief Propagation (BP) decoding algorithm for LDPC codes. The modification is to attenuate the check to bit extrinsic logarithm likelihood ratio by a factor Œ±, when sudden sign change happens. This modification can be applied to both the standard BP algorithm and the joint row and column (JRC) BP algorithm. Simulation results show that the BER and WER performance of both traditional BP and JRC BP algorithms is improved by this method. The expense of the proposed modification is a slight increase in the average number of decoding iterations.
Keywords ‚Äì Low-Density Parity-Check Codes, BP algorithm, Joint Row and Column algorithm, Logarithm Likelihood Ratio(LLR), Extrinsic LLR, Sign Fluctuation.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes was first proposed by R. Gallager in 1963 [1] and rediscovered by MacKay [2] in the late 1990s. It is proved to be a family of capacityachieving codes and has been a hot research spot over the years. In addition to insight theoretical studies, LDPC codes are applied in many error sensitive communication systems, such as long haul optical channels, data storage and deepspace communication systems, and also adopted by many communication standards, such as IEEE 802.16e/n WMAN standard, ETSI DVB T2 and DVB S2 standard.
Besides the common features of conventional block codes, LDPC codes have two major features, i.e., the low-density parity-check matrix and the Belief Propagation (BP) decoding algorithm. An m √ó n parity-check matrix H can be associated to a bipartite graph with each column (each component of a codeword) corresponding to a bit node and each row (a parity-check constraint) to a check node. An edge connects the i-th bit node and the j-th check node, if the i-th codeword component participates in the j-th constraint equation,i.e., Hji = 1. In this way, the seemingly complicated BP decoding
This is a joint work of SJTU, China and CRC, Canada. This work is supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (60902018 and 60625103), the 111 Project (B07022) and the Shanghai Key Laboratory of Digital Media Processing and Transmissions; in addition, it is partially supported by the National Hi-Tech Research and Development Program of China (National 863 Program) under Grant NO. 2009AA011505 and Shanghai Science and technology Development Funds (10QA1403600).

process can be interpreted to be the exchange of information iteratively between the two kinds of nodes over edges.
Unlike the MAP decoding algorithm that seeks for the global optimization over the whole codeword space, BP algorithm seeks only for the local optimization, which means that a bit node in the bipartite graph can only make use of the information that flow into it without the knowledge those of other bit nodes. This local optimization of BP lowers the decoding complexity at the expense of the decoding performance. One of the drawbacks is the error-floor phenomenon that bit error ratio (BER) curve appear to decrease slower at high SNR region due to the decoder‚Äôs convergence to some near codeword[4]. In recent years, many theoretical explanations based on problematic subgraphs have been raised to further explain this phenomenon, such as trapping sets, pseudo-codewords, etc.. At the same time, many modified BP decoding algorithms are proposed to alleviate this problem, such as joint row and column algorithm (JRC) BP algorithm [5], [6], oscillation based algorithm (OSC)[7], etc.. Although these improvement in decoding algorithms are not aimed at dealing with the problematic subgraph structures in the fist place, they refine the updating process of the extrinsic information between the bit nodes and check nodes to some extent so that they reach the same goal by a different means.
In this paper, we will propose an improved BP algorithm that modifies the check-node decoding process by tuning the value of the output likelihood ratios. It is based on the consideration of the innate drawbacks of the check-node process in BP algorithm. Moreover, the modification is simple and of low cost which can be applied to both the standard BP and the JRC BP algorithms. This paper is arranged as follows: in Section II, the standard and the JRC BP algorithms are introduced; in Section III, the drawbacks of BP algorithm is analyzed and the modification to the check node ex-LLR updating process is proposed; simulation results are shown in Section IV and conclusion is drawn in Section V.
Notations: To facilitate the conveyance, we summarize the notations that will be used in the sequel. We will use i and j to index the bit nodes and check nodes respectively. The set of check nodes that link to the i-th bit node is represented by

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei9U7n8iv-.1D-4o2w4n4lo-a3d5e7d4o-n6/J1u0ne/$2245,2.00026¬©a2t 0031:006I:E51EUETC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

C(i) and the set of bit nodes connected to the j-th check

node by B(j). Let Lch,i, Lc‚Üíb,ij and Lb‚Üíc,ij denote the

logarithm likelihood ratios (LLRs) of the channel output, the

extrinsic LLR (ex-LLR) sent by the j-th check node to the

i-th bit node and the ex-LLR from the i-th bit node to the

j-th

check

node,

respectively.

Let

œï(x)

=

ln(

ex +1 ex ‚àí1

)

,

|x|

be

the absolute value of x and sgn(x) be the sign of x. The

binary-input AWGN channel‚Äôs noise variance is denoted by œÉ

and the channel output symbol by y.

II. BP ALGORITHM AND JRC BP ALGORITHMS
The stadnard Belief Propagation (BP) is also called SumProduct Algorithm, which is described in Algorithm. 1. In [5], [6], a modified version of BP algorithm called joint row and column BP algorithm is introduced. This algorithm is described in Algorithm.2.

Algorithm 1 Standard BP Algorithm
Initialization: Lch,i = 2yi/œÉ2, for all i; Lb0‚Üíc,ij = Lch,i, for all i and j ‚àà C(i). for l = 1 to lmax do
for j = 1 to m do for all i ‚àà |B(j)| do rilj = œï‚àí1( k‚ààB(j)\i œï(|Lbl‚àí‚Üí1c,kj |))) slij = k‚ààB(j)\i sgn(Lbl‚àí‚Üí1c,kj ) Lcl ‚Üíb,ij = silj rilj end for
end for
for i = 1 to n do Llsum,i = Lch,i + j‚ààC(i) Llc‚Üíb,ij for all j ‚àà |C(i)| do Llb‚Üíc,ij = Lsum,i ‚àí Lcl ‚Üíb,ij end for
end for
for i = 1 to n do ci = 1 ‚àí 2sgn(Lsum,i)/2
end for
if c satisfies all the check constraints then Stop decoding and output c
end if
end for

Unlike the standard BP algorithm, each time after a check node updates its outgoing ex-LLRs on all its edges, the LLR sums of the bit nodes connecting to it is updated immediately. In this way, the newly updated LLR sums in one iteration can be put into use in the same iteration rather than wait until the next iteration as in the standard BP algorithm. Furthermore, since there is no explicit bit node side updating, only the check to bit ex-LLRs need to be saved for each iteration. These advantages of JRC algorithm is explained in [8] that the JRC algorithm speeds up the expanding of the decoding computation tree, i.e. the immediate updating of exLLR at bitnodes speeds up the propagation of the extrinsic information. It also needs to be noted that the JRC decoding scheme is preferable for hardware implementation.

Algorithm 2 JRC BP Algorithm Initialization: Ls0um,i = L0b‚Üíc,ij = Lch,i, Lc0‚Üíb,ij = 0,for all j and i ‚àà B(j). for l = 1 to lmax do for j = 1 to m do rjl = 0, slj = 1 for all i ‚àà |B(j)| do Lbl‚àí‚Üí1c,ij = Lsl um,i ‚àí Lcl‚àí‚Üí1b,ij end for for all i ‚àà |B(j)| do rilj = œï‚àí1( k‚ààB(j)\i œï(|Lbl‚àí‚Üí1c,kj |))) slij = k‚ààB(j)\i sgn(Lbl‚àí‚Üí1c,kj ) Lcl ‚Üíb,ij = slij rilj Lsl um,i = Lsl um,i ‚àí Lcl‚àí‚Üí1b,ij + Lcl ‚Üíb,ij . end for end for for i = 1 to n do ci = 1 ‚àí 2sgn(Lsum,i)/2 end for if c satisfies all the check constraints then Stop decoding and output c end if end for
III. ANALYSIS OF BP ALGORITHM AND THE MODIFICATION
A. The drawback of BP algorithm
In this section, we will investigate the drawback of the BP algorithm by comparing the difference of the ex-LLR updating process at the bit-node and check-node sides.
From the introduction in the previous section, the ex-LLR updating rule of both BP algorithms are quite different at the two kinds of nodes. At the bit-node side, the LLR sum is the summation of the LLR output from channel and the incoming ex-LLRs from the edges. An outgoing ex-LLR on an edge is the LLR sum excluding the incoming ex-LLR on this edge. In this way, all the LLRs can be considered competing to decide the sign of the bit to be decoded and the sign of outgoing exLLRs to check nodes. In other words, the bit node performs a weighed sum of the signs where each of the absolute values of the incoming ex-LLRs takes part in the determination of the resulting value.
However, at the the check-node side, each check node updates its outgoing ex-LLRs in quite a different way, i.e., the sign part and the absolute value part are computed separately. The sign part of an ex-LLR on an edge is the multiplication of those of all the incoming ex-LLRs on all the other edges, which means that all the signs weigh equally. For the absolute value part, rilj = œï‚àí1( k‚ààB(j)\i œï(|Lbl‚àí‚Üí1c,kj |))), it is only a scaling factor attached to the sign part that can be considered as a measure of the confidence in the sign of the ex-LLR to be send on the edge. The œï() function makes the ex-LLR of the least confidence, the smallest absolute value, among all the incoming values impact the output absolute value the most.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:06:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Therefore, when the sign of an incoming ex-LLR to a bit node is changed, the signs of the out-coming ex-LLRs on other edges are not liable to change since the out-coming exLLRs are all weighed sum of the incoming ex-LLRs on the remaining edges. However, once the sign of any one of the incoming ex-LLRs to a check node is changed, the signs of all the outgoing ex-LLRs on the other edges will flip since there is no such weighed balance among the incoming ex-LLRs as for the bit node side. Once the sign of an exLLRs to a check node flips, this kind of flipping will continue to spread to the more bit and check nodes in the succeeding decoding iterations. We call this phenomenon the fluctuation of the signs of the ex-LLRs. The sign fluctuation is necessary for the decoder to
Fig. 1. A sample of numbers of bit error of modified and standard BP decoder versus decoding iteration (IEEE 802.16e length-576 LDPC code rate 1/2 at Eb/N0= 2.0dB
converge in the early iterations. However, as decoding iteration increases and most bit nodes have converged to the right states, this kind of sign flipping may cause a sudden surge in the number of converged bits to leave their right state. If there are problematic subgrapgh structures in the underlying bipartite graph, this fluctuation may easily lead the decoder to get stuck at wrong decoding states and not easy to get out of.
We plot an example of the ill decoding behavior of the BP decoder in Fig.1. It can be observed that the number of error bits decreases steadily the early iterations, but then goes up again, and at last fluctuates around 30 staying unconverged. The similar phenomenon was also reported in [6], [7]. We must mention here that in the referred works only the link between sign flipping and errors bits was reported but there was no further explanation.
B. The proposed modification Based on the consideration in the previous section, we
propose a modification to the check to bit node ex-LLR updating process as to remedy the fluctuation phenomenon. Since there is no competition of signs at the check node ex-LLR updating stage, we introduce an attenuation factor Œ± ‚àà (0, 1] to scale the absolute value of the outgoing ex-LLR for the check nodes shown in Algorithm.3.

Algorithm 3 Modification of exLLR update rule After the calculation of slij and rilj: if silj = sil‚àíj 1 then Lcl ‚Üíb,ij = Œ±silj rilj else Llc‚Üíb,ij = slij rilj end if
Note that when Œ± = 1.0, there is no attenuation and the algorithm is equivalent to the standard BP algorithm. As the sign flipping is more likely to happen at the check node side, our modification intends to reduce the confidence measure when there is a sudden change in the outgoing ex-LLRs over an edge in two successive iterations. By this modification,the probability of the sign flipping that may happen in the later iterations can be reduced.
In fact, in the early decoding iterations, ex-LLR signs on all the edges are subject to flipping and this attenuation would apply to most of the outgoing ex-LLRs. This will postpone the bit nodes entering their stable state but will not affect the whole course of decoder‚Äôs convergence. As the decoding proceeds, more and more bit nodes converge to the correct state and less and less remain in unstable state whose outgoing ex-LLRs‚Äô signs are still liable to change. Once a sudden change of the sign happens in the outgoing ex-LLR from those unstable nodes, all the signs of the outgoing ex-LLRs will change in the check nodes connecting to them. Due to the scaling factor, those outgoing ex-LLRs that have sign changes will be attenuated, thus, it will not affect those stable bit node strongly. In this way, those converged bit nodes are less likely to flip into the wrong states and the sign fluctuation phenomenon in the later decoding iterations is alleviated.
Decoding the same received vector as the shwon Fig.1 with modified method, the decoder converges to the right codeword at the 21st iteration due to the introduction of the attenuation factor. In Fig.2, the number of bit errors of each iteration is averaged over 1500 samples of received codeword blocks. Since the sign fluctuation is attenuated, the average number of errors decreases faster than the standard BP algorithm i.e., the convergence behavior is improved.
It needs to be pointed out that a modification based on exLLR oscillation is proposed in [7], in which the sign of the outgoing ex-LLRs from bit-nodes, i.e., Lb‚Üíc, in successive iterations are compared and when there is a change the two successive ex-LLRs values are added and then forwarded to the check node. Although this modification is also a ‚Äùsign change‚Äù based algorithm, it is based on the empirical observation of the relation of ex-LLRs‚Äô sign fluctuation and error bits number, that is also mentioned in [7] that the oscillation phenomenon is not common and can not be always observed. The proposed attenuation algorithm is introduced base on the analysis of drawbacks of check node process. In addition, our proposed algorithm needs only to save the sign of the ex-LLRs in the previous iteration rather than both sign and absolute values

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:06:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 2. The average number of bit errors for modified and standard BP algorithms versus iterations (IEEE 802.16e length-576 rate 1/2 at Eb/N0= 2.0dB

Fig. 3. BER and WER of length-576 IEEE 802.16e LDPC code

as in [7]. Moreover, by choosing the factor Œ± properly, the multiplication can be implemented very easily on hardware . All the these characteristics make our algorithm a low-cost algorithm.
Since Œ± is applied on the outgoing exLLR Lc‚Üíb, it has an innate connection with the JRC BP algorithm so that the extension to JRC algorithm is straightforward.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS

Fig. 4. BER and WER of length 2304 IEEE 802.16e LDPC code

In this section, we will compare the proposed algorithm with the standard and JRC BP algorithms by simulation. We choose the length 576 and length 2304, rate 1/2 LDPC codes from IEEE 802.16e standard[9]. The modulation is BPSK and the channel is binary-input AWGN channel. We set the number of maximum decoding iterations to be 50. The attenuation factor is Œ± = 0.125, which is based on our experience. We plot the results are in the form of bit error ratio (BER) and codeword error ratio (WER) curves as well as the average decoding iterations in Fig.3 - 6.
The BER and WER curves of the length 576 code decoded by standard BP, JRC, modified BP and modified JRC algorithms are shouwn in Figure.3. Since the absolute parts of exLLRs with sudden sign flipping is attenuated, the chance of the decoder getting struck in the fluctuating and unconverged state is lowered and the probability of the decoder‚Äôs convergence increases. Thus, both the modified algorithms outperform the respective original algorithms by about 0.1dB. In Fig.4, the BER and WER performance of length-2304 codes is provided, still the Eb/N0 improvement is around 0.1dB.
The average decoding iteration numbers of the four algorithms for the two codes are shown in Fig.5 and Fig.6, respectively. The modified algorithms need more average decoding iterations, as we mentions before the attenuation in ex-LLRs may slow down the speed of the LLR sum to reach its stable state. However, the increase of iteration numbers is about one for the length-576 code and two for the length-2304 code.

Fig. 5. The average decoding iteration numbers of different algorithms for length-576 IEEE 802.16e LDPC code
Fig. 6. The average decoding iteration numbers of different algorithms for length-2304 IEEE 802.16e LDPC code

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:06:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

V. CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION In this paper, we proposed a modified BP algorithm based on the analysis of the drawbacks the ex-LLR process in BP algorithm. This proposed algorithm reduces the effects of sudden sign flips in the check to bit extrinsic information by attenuating the values of ex-LLRs, when signs change in the ex-LLRs happens in successive decoding iterations. This algorithm can be applied in both standard and JRC BP decoding algorithm. We showed by simulation that this modification can improve the BER performance through improving the decoder‚Äôs convergence behavior. It must be noted that the selection of attenuation factor is still an open problem. In this paper, Œ± is chosen to be 0.125 which is an empirical choice for the Sum-Product based BP algorithm. However, how to choose an appropriate attenuation factor when adopting other BP algorithms, such as Min-Sum Algorithm and Modified Min-Sum algorithm, whether there is a theoretical way of finding Œ±, further investigation is still required .
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, Low-Density Parity Check Codes, MIT Press, Massachusetts, 1963.
[2] D. J. C. Mackay, ‚ÄùGood Error-Correcting Codes Based on Sparse Very Matrices‚Äù, IEEE Trans. on Information Theory, vol.45, no.2, pp.399-431, March, 1999.
[3] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory, Cambridge University Press, 2007, available at ‚Äùhttp://lthcwww.epfl.ch/mct/index.php‚Äù.
[4] T. J. Richardson, ‚ÄùError Floors of LDPC Codes‚Äù, 41st Annual Allerton Conf. on Communications, Control and Computing, pp.1426-1435, Monticello, Illinois, USA, October, 2003.
[5] D. E. Hocevar, ‚ÄùA reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes‚Äù, Proc. IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems, pp.107-112, October, 2004.
[6] Z. He, S. Roy, and P. Fortier, Lowering Error Floor of LDPC Codes Using a Joint Row-Column Decoding Algorithm, Proc. IEEE International Conf. on Commun., pp.920-925, June, 2007.
[7] S. Gounai, T. Ohtsuki, and T. Kaneko, ‚ÄùModified Belief Propagation Decoding Algorithm for Low-Density Parity Check Code Based on Oscillation‚Äù, Proc. 63rd IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference - VTC 2006-Spring, Melbourne, Australia, vol.3, pp.1467-1471, May, 2006.
[8] E. Sharon, S. Litsyn, and J. Goldberger, ‚ÄùEfficient Serial Message-Passing Schedules for LDPC Decoding‚Äù, IEEE Trans on Information Theory, vol.53, no.11, pp.4076-4091, 2007.
[9] IEEE, Std 802.16e-2005 and IEEE Std 802.16-2004 Cor 1-2005 (Amendment and Corrigendum to IEEE Std 802.16-2004), 2004.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:06:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

