4286

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2010

Low-Density Parity-Check Codes for Nonergodic Block-Fading Channels
Joseph Jean Boutros, Senior Member, IEEE, Albert Guillén i Fàbregas, Senior Member, IEEE, Ezio Biglieri, Life Fellow, IEEE, and Gilles Zémor, Member, IEEE

Abstract—We design powerful low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes with iterative decoding for the block-fading channel. We first study the case of maximum-likelihood decoding, and show that the design criterion is rather straightforward. Since optimal constructions for maximum-likelihood decoding do not perform well under iterative decoding, we introduce a new family of full-diversity LDPC codes that exhibit near-outage-limit performance under iterative decoding for all block-lengths. This family competes favorably with multiplexed parallel turbo codes for nonergodic channels.
Index Terms—Block-fading (BF) channel, iterative decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding, maximum-distance separable (MDS) codes, outage probability.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE block-fading (BF) channel model was first introduced in [20], and further elaborated upon in [2] (see also [1, p. 98 ff.]). This is a realistic and convenient model for a number of channels affected by slowly varying fading, and, as observed for example in [8], is especially relevant in wireless communications involving slow time–frequency hopping (e.g., cellular networks and wireless Ethernet) or multicarrier modulation using orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM). The design of error-control codes for BF channels offers a challenging problem, which differs greatly from its counterparts referred to additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) or independent-fading channels (see [8] for a summary of recent results). The main reason for this major difference stems from the fact that in BF channels the random channel gains remain
Manuscript received October 05, 2007; revised November 02, 2009. Date of current version August 18, 2010. The work of J. J. Boutros was supported by the Broadband Communications Systems project funded by Qatar Telecom (Qtel). The work of E. Biglieri was supported in part by the project INFSCO-ICT216203 (DaVinci) within the 7th Framework Program of the European Commission and in part by the Spanish Ministry of Education and Science under Project CONSOLIDER-INGENIO 2010 CSD2008-00010 “COMONSENS”. The material in this paper was presented in part at the 2007 Information Theory and Applications Workshop, San Diego, CA, February 2007.
J. J. Boutros is with Texas A&M University at Qatar, Doha, Qatar (e-mail: boutros@ieee.org).
A. Guillén i Fàbregas is with the Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, U.K. (e-mail: guillen@ieee.org).
E. Biglieri is with Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain (e-mail: e.biglieri@ieee.org).
G. Zémor is with the Institut de Mathématiques de Bordeaux, Université de Bordeaux 1, Bordeaux, France (e-mail: zemor@math.u-bordeaux1.fr).
Communicated by T. J. Richardson, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2010.2053890

constant during a block of symbols (see below for additional details and definitions), and take independent values from block to block. As a result, while the word-error probability in independent-fading channels depends on the Hamming distances between code words, in BF channels it depends on a new parameter, the blockwise Hamming distance. Since codes exhibiting a large minimum Hamming distance may not have a large blockwise Hamming distance, codes that are good when used on the independent-fading channel may not be as good for a BF channel. In addition, over independently faded channels permutations of the symbols cause no variation of the code performance, but this property does no longer hold on the BF channel. Thus, if an off-the-shelf code, designed for the independent-fading channel, is used for transmission over the BF channel, it is important to carefully select the best permutation of its symbols. Finally, one must consider that the BF channel is nonergodic. As a consequence, to determine the information-theoretical rate limit which cannot be surpassed by the word error probability of any coding scheme, one cannot use channel capacity, but rather the outage probability [1], [2], [20]. Classical random-like codes, designed to approach ergodic capacity, cannot generally approach the ideal performance limits of BF channels, and, hence, code designs suited to the nonergodic nature of the channel are called for. This paper is devoted to this design problem.
Two main parameters that determine the error rate of coded BF channels for high signal-to-noise (SNR) ratios are the diversity order and the coding gain. The former determines the slope of the error-rate curve as a function of the SNR on a log-log scale.1 Since the error probability of any coding scheme is lower-bounded by the outage probability, the diversity order is upper-bounded by the intrinsic diversity of the channel, which reflects the slope of the outage limit. When maximum diversity is achieved by a code, the coding gain yields a measure of SNR proximity to the outage limit. The maximum achievable diversity order with discrete input constellations is given by the Singleton bound [8], [14], [17], and codes achieving the Singleton bound are termed blockwise maximum-distance separable (MDS). Blockwise MDS codes are outage-achieving over the (noiseless) block-erasure channel [9], but may not achieve the outage-probability limit on noisy BF channels. As a matter of fact, as shown in [8], blockwise MDS codes are necessary, but not sufficient to approach the outage probability of the channel.
1The diversity order is exactly the asymptotic slope for Rayleigh fading, while for other fading distributions it is only proportional to the slope. See [19], [27] for details. In this paper, we shall restrict our attention to Rayleigh fading.

0018-9448/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:57:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BOUTROS et al.: LDPC CODES

4287

Recent code designs for BF channels include near-outage schemes based on a suitable permutation of parallel turbo codes [3]–[5]. Multiplexers for convolutional, turbo and repeat-accumulate codes [3], [8], [14] appeared one decade after the analysis of random and periodic interleaving of convolutional codes on the block-erasure channel [16]. Random ensembles of low-density parity-check codes (LDPC) designed for ergodic AWGN channels [11], [23], in spite of the excellent decoding threshold of their irregular structures, do not have full-diversity, and hence exhibit a poor performance over a BF channel. Decoding thresholds of LDPC code ensembles over ergodic BF channels have been studied [12]. Unfortunately, these codes are not designed to be blockwise MDS, and therefore fail to achieve the outage limit in the nonergodic setup.
In this paper, we introduce a new family of blockwise MDS LDPC codes, the root LDPC codes, based on a special type of checknode that we call rootchecks.2 Under iterative message-passing decoding, they achieve the outage-probability limit on block-erasure channels, and they perform close to that limit on Rayleigh BF channels. This paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the channel model and the relevant notations. LDPC codes with full diversity under Maximum Likelihood (ML) decoding are discussed in Section III. Our new family of LDPC codes suited for iterative decoding is further described. Section V analyzes their density evolution in the presence of block fading. Conclusions are finally drawn in Section VI. Complementary support material is shown in the Appendices.

II. CHANNEL MODEL AND NOTATION

We consider codewords of binary digits transmitted on a

BF channel, where independent fading gains (whose values

form the channel state) affect each codeword. The length is a

multiple of , with

denoting the number of bits per

fading block. The received signal when symbol is transmitted

is given by

= 2 Fig. 1. Codeword representation for a BF channel with n

. The fading

gains  ;  are independent between themselves and among codewords.

= 2 Fig. 2. Parity-check matrix notations for a block-fading channel with n . 0 2 The L N= extra rows are added in order to enhance the coding gain of a
full-diversity code.

. The code is defined by an

parity-check matrix

(Fig. 2), or, equivalently, by the corresponding Tanner graph

[1]. This has single-parity checknodes. It is assumed that

has full rank , so that

.

Let us recall that the diversity order attained by is defined as

[21], [25]

(2)

where is the word error probability at the decoder’s output. Thus, the diversity order depends on the decoding algorithm.

Definition 1: An error-correcting code is said to have full

(1) diversity if

.

where

, and

, with de-

noting the integer part of a real number . The nonnegative real

number is the fading gain at block

. The sym-

bols are chosen from a BPSK alphabet

where

is the average energy per symbol. The noise samples are i.i.d.

with

. We assume perfect channel

state information (CSI) at the receiver, and channel gains which

The word error probability of a code with full diversity de-

creases as

at high SNR [1], [21], [25], [27]. For a given

codeword

, we define the blockwise Hamming weight

vector

, where

is the Hamming

weight of coded bits affected by fading . Under maximum

likelihood decoding, it is well known [3], [8], [14] that the

diversity order is determined by

are i.i.d. Rayleigh-distributed from block to block and from codeword to codeword. Thus, when the information rate is

(3)

bits per channel use, the average SNR per symbol is given by

, and the average SNR per bit is

.

Fig. 1 illustrates the channel model for

and

.

In this paper, we focus on linear binary codes

with

block length , dimension , and rate

2We hasten to observe that our definition of rootchecks can also be formulated in terms of stopping sets, as defined in [7] (see Definition 1.1 and Lemma 1.1) and in Section 3.22 of [24] in the context of binary erasure channels. Since the context is quite different in this paper, we deem it more natural to use our concept of rootchecks here.

In words, the integer is the minimum number of blocks that

have nonzero Hamming weight. We refer to as the blockwise

minimum Hamming distance. Qualitatively, this implies that an

ML decoder of will be able to decode correctly in presence

of

deep fades, which one can think of as block erasures.

We also define the minimum blockwise Hamming weight as

(4)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:57:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4288

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2010

Having

, i.e., nonzero weight in all blocks, implies that

under ML decoding. Under these conditions, the pair-

wise error probability can be upper bounded by [14], [3]

(5)

where the right approximation is valid at high SNR. The quan-

tity

is referred to as the coding gain. Since

is constant for a given codeword , then increasing would

lead to a higher coding gain.

The diversity order attained by admits a Singleton-like bound

[1], [8], [14], [17]

(6)

Consequently,

is the highest achievable rate for a

full-diversity code.

The instantaneous mutual information of a block-fading

channel depends on channel realization [2], [20], [25]. Such a

quasi-static channel is not information stable [26]. Therefore,

its Shannon capacity is zero since there is a nonvanishing

probability that the decoder makes a word error. In the limit of

large block length, this probability is the information outage

probability, defined as [2], [20]

(7)

where

is the instantaneous input–output mutual infor-

mation between the input and output of the channel, defined as

= 2 Fig. 3. ML-designed full-diversity LDPC code with !

.

Following the notations defined in the previous section, the

parity-check matrix is written in the form

, where the left and right parts

are

.

The vector space generated by the left columns is denoted

. Similarly, is the vector space generated by the right

columns. Recall that the addition of redundant rows does not

modify the code nor its Hamming weight distribution. There-

fore, as stated in Section II, can be assumed to have full rank

without any loss of generality.

Proposition 1: A binary code with rate , has full diversity if and only if and
rank.

, i.e., are both full-

Proof: If

, then a nonzero codeword cannot

have its support on , because all columns in are inde-

pendent. Hence,

for all nonzero codewords. Similarly,

when

. Finally,

and

for

all nonzero codewords, which yields

.

(8) The full-rank property of the above proposition was first

observed in [10]. Its extension to coding rate

with

with

the input–output mutual information of an

AWGN channel with SNR per symbol equal to . The BF

channel is also commonly referred to as nonergodic since, for

can be obtained by imposing that the

matrices

, and

all have full rank.

Generalization to any rate

is straightforward.

finite values of

is a nonconstant random variable.

The information outage probability

is the nat-

ural fundamental limit for the BF channel for sufficiently large

word length, i.e., achievability and converse results hold for

the outage probability [18] Therefore, any code approaching

should have a word-error probability that, as in-

creases, becomes independent of the code length [4], [8].

Unless stated otherwise, we shall focus our study on a coding

rate

(or just slightly smaller than ) and a nonergodic

Rayleigh fading channel with

blocks per codeword, as

Proposition 2: Consider a binary code with rate

,

and hence with

. If has full diversity, then

.

Proof: If has full diversity, then

. Any column from can then be written as a linear com-

bination of columns from . This is also valid for any column

belonging to . Hence, nonzero codewords with

exist

for both

and

if the coding rate is exactly equal to

.

depicted in Figs. 1 and 2. However, most of our results can be The minimum blockwise Hamming weight must be increased

easily generalized to

.

in order to improve the coding gain of . Proposition 2 states

that to achieve this, one must decrease the coding rate. The next III. FULL-DIVERSITY LDPC CODES UNDER ML DECODING proposition shows that adding just one extra row is enough to

In this section, we study LDPC codes in the presence of BF improve ML decoding by moving from

to

.

under ML decoding. As we shall see, the design of full-diversity LDPC codes under ML decoding is rather straightforward. We recognize that ML decoding is unfeasible in practice; however,

Proposition 3: There exists a binary code of rate

that has full diversity with

.

it yields valuable insight into code structures suitable for noner-

Proof: The proof is based on the special parity-check ma-

godic channels. The main result of this section is that, under it- trix structure shown in Fig. 3 where is a full-rank matrix

erative decoding, ML-designed full-diversity codes fail to guar- whose columns have odd Hamming weight (the identity ma-

antee diversity due to badly located pseudo-codewords.

trix, for example). Let now be such that its first column is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:57:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BOUTROS et al.: LDPC CODES

4289

 Fig. 4. ML-designed full-diversity LDPC code with ! 3.

the all zero vector, and the remaining

columns are all

even-weight and full-rank.

Next, we show that the corresponding to this construction

is 2. Clearly, the first (leftmost) columns of and the last

(rightmost) columns of have full rank, so that we have

.

None of the first columns of can be a linear combina-

tion of the last columns of , due to the 1 in the last posi-

tion of each of the first columns. None of the last columns

of can be a linear combination of the first columns of ,

because columns of have odd weight and any linear combi-

nation of columns of has even weight.

These last statements imply that

.

The rate reduction necessary to achieve for large code length . If we now require result holds.

is negligible , the following

hence have a minimum blockwise pseudoweight equal to zero when belief propagation is applied.
To simulate ML decoding of this code we have used a “genieaided” iterative decoder: this is an iterative decoder that considers that it has correctly decoded if there is no residual error in the positions corresponding to or to . This is because we argue that if a suboptimal decoder is able to correct all errors in one block of positions, then the ML decoder should be able to remove all residual errors, because there is no codeword whose support belongs to a single block. Similarly, to simulate the case
guaranteed by Proposition 4, we have considered that the “genie-aided” decoder has correctly decoded if the number of residual errors in one position is less than 3.
Fig. 5 shows therefore that the structures investigated in this section do not improve the performance of belief propagation. To achieve this we have to introduce a new LDPC design: this is the object of the following section.
IV. FULL-DIVERSITY LDPC CODES FOR ITERATIVE BELIEF PROPAGATION DECODING
The results presented at the end of Section III show that, if iterative decoding is used, the design criteria derived under the assumption of ML decoding are irrelevant. In this section, we proceed to design LDPC codes with iterative decoding. Our design is based on a graphical representation [1], [24], which is then translated into a matrix description. We then analyze the construction by means of log-ratio probability-density evolution.
A. Limiting Case: Block-Erasure Channels

Proposition 4: Consider a binary code with rate

. We illustrate our solution to the design problem by referring

The code has

only if

. to a limiting case. Specifically, observe that, if the fading coef-

Proof: Recall that denotes the linear span of the set of

columns of . Consider the

sets consisting of

together with its translates

for all columns of .

No two of these sets can intersect, otherwise either a column of

, or a sum of two columns of , equals a sum of columns of

, which would imply the existence of a codeword of weight

at most 2 on the first positions. Therefore we must have

.

ficients belong to the set

, the BF channel becomes

a block-erasure channel [9], [16]. This corresponds to the large

SNR regime. The reader is referred to Fig. 6, where the outage

boundaries are illustrated (see [4] for more details).

In our approach, we need to find a graph whose topology

yields full diversity. For simplicity, we illustrate the case of the

(3,6) LDPC ensemble with

(generalizations to other de-

gree distributions and rates will be treated infra). Fig. 7 shows

the notation employed in this section. Two examples of local

Proposition 5: There exists a full-diversity binary code with graphs whose diversity is not guaranteed are shown in Fig. 8.

and

.

The checknodes defining an LDPC code are single-parity check

Proof: The code has the parity-check matrix of Fig. 4. The presence of a Hamming code whose minimum distance is 3 rules out a blockwise Hamming weight equal to 2.

codes, and hence they cannot tolerate more than one erased bit.

For example, if

then the checknodes in Fig. 8 are not

able to recover the erased bit, because it is connected to bitn-

odes which are also erased, because they are subject to the same

It is interesting to simulate iterative decoding of LDPC codes fading coefficient. Notice also that the design must be sym-

that are full-diversity for ML decoding, i.e., with

, and metric, i.e., any analysis with respect to is valid for , and

results are shown in Fig. 5, for

and the (3,6) ensemble. hence permuting the order of the two fading gains should yield

The code used is of the type guaranteed by Proposition 1, i.e., an equivalent design.

it is simply chosen so that and have full-rank. We see The two unique local graphs that guarantee full diversity in

that this structure does not help the iterative decoder and that the presence of block erasures are illustrated in Fig. 9. The im-

the code actually has diversity 1 for iterative decoding and not mediate consequence is the definition of rootchecks. We start

diversity 2 guaranteed by Proposition 1 for ML decoding. The by building a regular (3,6) structure where bitnodes have de-

performance is the same as that of randomly chosen (3,6) LDPC gree 3 and checknodes have degree 6, next we generalize to any

code (not shown in the figure). This effect is caused by the pseu-

degree distribution [23]. A checknode connected

docodewords [15] whose support is restricted to or , and to bits

is written as

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:57:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4290

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2010

= 2 Fig. 5. Rate 1/2 ML-designed LDPC codes with iterative decoding on a Rayleigh block-fading channel with n

. The thick solid line corresponds to the

outage probability with BPSK inputs, the dotted lines with 3 markers corresponds to the ML-designed code with iterative decoding, the dotted lines with

= 1 + markers corresponds to the ML-designed code with !

using a genie ML decoder and the dotted lines with markers corresponds to the ML-designed code

= 3 with !

using the genie ML decoder. The genie ML curves show the performance of a decoder that knows whether errors occur in positions corresponding

to H or H .

= 2 Fig. 6. Outage boundaries in the fading plane for a BF channel with n

.

To approach the outage limit, one should: (a) reduce the gap on the ergodic line,

which requires an excellent decoding threshold and (b) reduce the gap at infinity,

which requires a full-diversity code (MDS) on a block-erasure channel.

Definition 2: Let be a binary element transmitted on fading

. A type-1 rootcheck for is a checknode

where all bits

are transmitted on fading .

Type-2 rootchecks are defined similarly.

Fig. 7. Notations for graph representation.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:57:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BOUTROS et al.: LDPC CODES

4291

Fig. 8. Two examples of bad configurations under belief propagation decoding on a block-fading channel.

Fig. 9. Two unique good configurations (rootchecks) under belief propagation decoding on a block-fading channel.

Using Definition 2, consider a length- , rate- LDPC

code. Information bits are split into two classes:

bits

(tagged ) are transmitted on , while bits (tagged )

are transmitted on . Parity bits are also partitioned into two

sets, say and . Finally, we connect all information bits

to rootchecks in order to guarantee full diversity when word

error probability is measured on those bits. The protection of

parity bits is not considered. More general structures with parity

bit protection are considered in [6]. This design produces the

bipartite Tanner graph drawn in Fig. 10(a). Its extension to rate

1/3 is portrayed in Fig. 11. Integers labeling edges indicate the

degree of a node along those edges. The structure of for a

root-LDPC code is directly derived from its Tanner graph, and is

shown in Fig. 10(b). The

identity matrix is written

twice in connections

and

. Two all-zero

submatrices prohibit any edge of type

and

. The other four submatrices are all sparse, and

are random sparse matrices of Hamming weight 2 per row and

per column. Similarly, and are random sparse matrices

of Hamming weight 3 per row and per column.

An irregular version of a root-LDPC code can be built from

a left degree distribution

and a right degree distribution

by appropriately modifying the weight distribution of the

4 submatrices

, and . Equivalently, the de-

gree distribution changes the distribution of edges connected

to nonrootchecks in the Tanner graph. Irregularity has no influ-

ence on the diversity order because rootchecks are maintained.

Fig. 10. Tanner graph and parity-check matrix for a regular (3,6) root-LDPC
code of rate 1/2. An irregular structure ((x); (x)) can be easily plugged
on edges connected to nonroot checknodes. (a) Tanner graph. (b) Parity-check
matrix.

Irregularity should enhance the coding gain by pushing the code boundary near the outage capacity limit on the ergodic line.

Proposition 6: Consider a rate-

root-LDPC code

with degree distribution

transmitted on a block-

erasure channel with

. Then, under iterative message

passing decoding, the root-LDPC code has full-diversity.

Proof: The two fading coefficients and are inde-

pendent and take two possible values

. Examining the

Tanner graph of Fig. 10(a), we observe that the only outage event

occurs when

(both blocks erased). Indeed, when

and

, it is straightforward to see that informa-

tion bits are determined using rootchecks . Similarly, when

and

, information bits are determined using

rootchecks .

On a block-erasure channel, let be the probability that be equal to 0. From the proof of Proposition 6 above, we find that the word error probability of a root-LDPC code is . As shown in [9], this is precisely the outage probability of the channel, and, therefore, full-diversity blockwise MDS codes are outage achieving in the block-erasure channel. As remarked in [9], blockwise MDS codes are necessary, but not sufficient to achieve the outage limit in noisy channels. In the following, we study the behavior of root-LDPC over general Rayleigh BF AWGN channels.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:57:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4292

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2010

a) First Decoding Iteration: We first study the output after

one decoding iteration. We assume that the all-zero codeword

has been transmitted. The channel crossover probability associ-

ated with fading

, is

The channel message for a bit transmitted over fading coefficient is

(11)

Fig. 11. Tanner graph for a regular (4,6) root-LDPC code of rate 1/3. The intro-
duction of any ((x); (x)) irregularity is always possible on edges connected
to nonroot checknodes.

B. The General Case
Now we study the general case of Rayleigh BF. Some simple facts about fourth-order distributions are reviewed in Appendix I. In the sequel, we use the notations of Appendix I to analyze the diversity metric in log-ratio messages.

Proposition 7: Consider a rate-1/2

root-LDPC

code transmitted on a Rayleigh block-fading channel with

. Then, under iterative belief propagation decoding, the root-

LDPC code has full-diversity.

where

and

(assuming

). At the

first decoding iteration, all input messages in (10) have an

expression identical to (11).

An information bit of class has

. It

also receives 3 messages

from its 3 neighboring

checknodes. The total a posteriori message corresponding to

is

. Let be the extrinsic mes-

sage generated by the rootcheck of class connected to . The

error rate

on class is given by the negative tail of the

density of messages. The addition of

to

cannot degrade

because the convolution with the density

of messages from nonrootchecks can only physically upgrade

the resulting density. Thus, it is sufficient to prove that message

brings full diversity. The expression of is found

by applying (10). Input messages to the rootcheck are negative

with probability . Then

Proof: As indicated in the design of a root-LDPC code before Proposition 6, the diversity order of a root-LDPC code does not depend on its left or right degree distribution. This can also be proved via the evolution trees in the next section. Thus, we restrict this proof to a regular (3,6) LDPC. The extension to the irregular case is straightforward.

where

Let

, denote the input log-ratio probabilistic

messages to a checknode of degree . The output message

for belief propagation is

We obtain

(9)

where

denotes the hyperbolic-tangent function. Super-

scripts and stand for a priori and extrinsic, respectively. In

order to simplify the proof, we will show that a suboptimal belief

propagation decoder is able to achieve diversity order 2. There-

fore, if a suboptimal decoder achieves full diversity, the optimal

decoder also achieves full diversity. Consider the min-sum de-

coder. The output message produced by a checknode is now

approximated by

(10)

The partial a posteriori log-ratio message becomes

The embedded metric

guarantees full

diversity. At high SNR (i.e., when

), behaves

exactly as

.

b) Further Decoding Iterations: As can be seen from the

decoding tree of a bitnode in Fig. 14, the diversity order 2

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:57:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BOUTROS et al.: LDPC CODES

4293

= 2 Fig. 12. Regular (3,6) root-LDPC codes with iterative decoding on a Rayleigh block-fading channel with n

. Word-error rate is measured on information

2 = 200 bits. The thick solid line corresponds to the outage probability with BPSK, the dotted lines with markers correspond to N

, the dotted lines with

= 2000 3 = 20000 markers correspond to N

and the dotted lines with markers correspond to N

.

1 Fig. 13. Local neighborhood of bitnode i. This tree is used to determine the 1 ! 1 evolution of messages i c.

1 Fig. 14. Local neighborhood of bitnode i. This tree is used to determine the 1 ! 2 evolution of messages i c.

is maintained after the first iteration. Indeed, at the input of the

rootcheck, information bits of class have already full diversity

and parity bits bring always a term proportional to . Due

to the particular structure of root-LDPC codes, the density of

message

can only be improved with respect to the first

iteration. Hence, full diversity is preserved.

The proof of the previous proposition is based on showing

that the information bits have diversity 2. In the following, we

examine the diversity of the parity bits. A parity bit of class

has

. It also receives 3 messages

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:57:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4294

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2010

Proof: Consider an information bit of class . Let

be the degree of . At high SNR, the log-ratio message pro-

duced by its rootcheck has an embedded metric

. Con-

sider the

nonroot checknodes connected to . Since parity

bits of class dominate the error probability at the input of

checknodes, then its metric will be . Finally, the a posteriori

log-ratio message associated to will contain a metric of the

type

. Hence, the parameter under iterative de-

coding is 1.

! Fig. 15. Local neighborhood of bitnode 1p. This tree is used to determine the
evolution of messages 1p 2c.

In Fig. 12, we illustrate the performance of the (3,6) rootLDPC ensemble. As we observe, the performance is similar for all ranges of , and it is also close to the outage probability of the channel. This effect was first observed with blockwise-concatenated codes and repeat-accumulate codes in [8], and then in [3]–[5] for parallel turbo codes. For large this effect is due to the threshold behavior of good codes, i.e., for a given channel realization, the code has a SNR threshold (independent of ) below which the decoder cannot decode successfully. Hence, whenever this threshold is larger than the SNR , the decoder will make an error for sufficiently large word length [8]. This is considered in more detail in the following section, where the analysis of the word error probability under iterative decoding for large is done using density evolution.

V. DENSITY EVOLUTION IN PRESENCE OF BLOCK FADING

from its 3 neighboring checknodes all of class .

The total a posteriori message of is

.

Now let us determine the nature of based on input messages

to a checknode of class as illustrated in Figs. 10(a) and

15. The node is not a rootcheck. We need to determine the

metric embedded in its output message. In the case

(this happens with probability ), it can be shown that, after

one decoding iteration, the extrinsic message produced by

satisfies

The evolution of message densities [22], [24] under iterative

decoding is described through six evolution trees for a binary

root-LDPC code. The evolution trees represent the local neigh-

borhood of a bitnode in an infinite-length code whose graph has

no cycles. Figs. 13, 14, and 15 show the local neighborhoods

of classes and . Similar evolution trees can be drawn for

classes and . Full diversity in the presence of fading is guar-

anteed, thanks to messages

(respectively,

)

as indicated in the proof of Proposition 7. Irregularity is de-

fined in the standard way [23] through the polynomials

and . Root-LDPC ensembles are a special case of multi-

edge-type LDPC codes [24]. Nevertheless, we do not use the

compact notation of multiedge-type codes as in [24, Ch. 7]. In-

where the function is defined in Appendix II. On the contrary,

when

, it can be shown that

deed, root-LDPC codes have two specific properties which are not found in general ensembles.
• Nodes associated to information bits are clearly distin-

guished from those associated to parity bits. For each

channel state, two classes must be created in order to

separate parity nodes from information nodes.

We conclude that, for parity bits, with a probability greater than

, the output message has diversity order one. In spite of the

presence (with a nonzero probability) of diversity-2 messages,

the error probability of parity bits will be dominated by weak

messages with diversity 1. The above arguments are still valid

for further decoding iterations.

Recall now that under ML decoding the coding gain is con-

trolled by the quantity which is the minimum blockwise

Hamming weight defined in (4). Under iterative decoding we

now use to refer to the analogous quantity

defined

in Appendix I which controls the coding gain in the same way.

We conclude this section by analyzing the behavior of this

in the case

.

• On a BF channel the root-LDPC ensemble is designed to

ensure full diversity for information bits only. Hence, what

mainly matters in Density Evolution is the convergence

analysis of messages associated to information bits, mainly

messages

and

. This second property can

be thought as an unequal error protection because parity

bits will exhibit an average error probability with diversity

order 1.

The following notations are used, where the superscript is an

integer denoting the decoding iteration order:

•

and

: Probability density functions of log-

ratio messages on the edges

and

, re-

spectively. See Fig. 13.

•

and

: Probability density functions of log-

Corollary 1: A root-LDPC code with

satisfies

ratio messages on the edges

and

, respec-

under iterative belief propagation decoding.

tively. See Fig. 14.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:57:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BOUTROS et al.: LDPC CODES

4295

•

and

: Probability density functions of log-

ratio messages on the edges

and

, re-

spectively. See Fig. 15.

• Let

and

be two independent real

random variables. The density function of

ob-

tained by convolving the two original densities is written

as

. The notation

denotes the convo-

lution of with itself times. The expression

represents the density function

.

• Let

and

be two independent real

random variables. The density function of the vari-

able

obtained through a chec-

knode is written as

and is called R-convolu-

tion [24]. The notation

denotes the R-convolution

of with itself times. The expression

repre-

sents the density function

.

The polynomial is replaced by each time an edge

is isolated at the input of a bitnode. In addition, the polyno-

mial

is replaced by

each time an edge is isolated

at the input of a checknode. Also, the degree distribution of

bitnodes and checknodes from a node perspective will be de-

noted by and , respectively. For regular ensembles, it

is obvious that

,

and

. Now, let and denote, respectively,

the maximum left degree and the maximum right degree in the

Tanner graph. If the original degree distribution polynomials are

written as

and

,

then a straightforward edge counting in the Tanner graph leads

to the general expressions of polynomials involved in the mul-

tiedge-type structure of root-LDPC ensembles

where the multi-edge-type fraction is

and

is the Gaussian density at the output of the channel

with fading . The other three similar density evolution equa-

tions are obtained by permuting the two fading gains.

Proof: Let us carefully examine the set of edges con-

necting and to as in the Tanner graph of Fig. 10(a) that

illustrates a regular root structure. For general irregular struc-

tures, the integers 2 and 3 indicating the number of edges should

be replaced by degree distribution polynomials defined in (12)

and (13), as clearly illustrated in the evolution trees in Figs. 13,

14, and 15. We have

, with is the number

of

edges and

is the number

of

edges. Next, introduce the fraction as

Now, the six density evolution equations can be directly de-

rived from local neighborhoods of bitnodes in the graphical rep-

resentation of the root-LDPC code. For example, as shown in

Fig. 14, the message

is obtained by convolving the

channel output density

with the outgoing message den-

sity from the set of checknodes and then convolving with

the single-edge density produced by checknodes. Before ap-

plying the transformation through checknodes and the

transformation through checknodes, input messages must

be averaged via

and

,

respectively.

In the special case of regular root-LDPC ensembles, i.e.,

and

are monomials, density evolution will be de-

(12) scribed by four equations only since and

implies that . A result on the

and

ergodic threshold of regular ensembles follows.

Proposition 9: Consider an (ergodic) AWGN channel (i.e.,

assume

). Under iterative decoding, a regular

root-LDPC code has the same decoding threshold

(13) as a random regular

LDPC code.

where

is the average degree of bitnodes

and

is the average degree of checknodes.

Keeping the above notations in mind, we can now state the den-

sity evolution equations for root-LDPC codes.

Proposition 8: Consider a nonergodic BF channel with

. For fixed fading coefficients

, the six density evolu-

tion equations of a

root-LDPC code are, for all

Proof: With the two fading gains equal to unity, the six

evolution trees degenerate into a single tree, and all densities

become identical:

for any decoding iteration . Thus, density

evolution of a regular root-LDPC code reduces to a classical

density evolution of a random code given by

, where

.

For irregular ensembles on the ergodic channel

, we have three distinct message densities

, and

. It is difficult to deter-

mine the root-LDPC threshold as a function of the random en-

semble threshold. Many numerical examples undertaken by the

authors showed that there may be a slight loss in SNR, about

1 or 2 hundredths of a decibel. Surprisingly, in some irregular

root-LDPC ensembles, there may be a slight gain in the ergodic

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:57:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4296

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2010

= 2 Fig. 16. Iterative decoding on a block-fading channel with n

. Density evolution of irregular root-LDPC and and its finite length performance. The irregular

ensemble defined by (15) is also compared to a regular (3,6) ensemble and to the outage probability with BPSK.

threshold, about a couple of tenths of decibel. Thus, it should where in the SNR gap separating the decoding threshold and

be possible to design root-LDPC codes for the block fading the capacity limit on the Gaussian channel. To better understand

channel that are also efficient in the absence of fading. The ir- the gain due to irregularity illustrated in Fig. 16, we evaluate the

regular code given at the end of this section is one such example. ratio

.

A good ergodic threshold (i.e., an irregular LDPC structure) is • For the regular (3,6) LDPC ensemble, the threshold is

also necessary to achieve near-outage performance on a noner-

1.10 dB over the Gaussian channel (ergodic line). Hence,

godic channel. Refer again to the outage boundary representa-

.

tion in the fading plane of Fig. 6. Let be the fading value • For an irregular root-LDPC ensemble having a threshold of

defined by the intersection of the BPSK outage boundary and

0.38 dB over the Gaussian channel (ergodic line), we get

the ergodic line. For rate 1/2, this intersection point satisfies

.

, where

is the av- Using the best irregular code proposed in [23] with a

erage mutual information on an AWGN channel with a binary threshold of 0.25 dB, we obtain

. Hence,

input and an SNR per bit equal to .

with

close to 1, the area between the outage capacity

Let denote the fading value defined by the intersection of boundary and the code outage boundary is decreased in the

the LDPC code outage boundary and the ergodic line. Then we neighborhood of the ergodic line. However, this does not ensure

have

that, the code outage boundary would be close to the outage

capacity boundary in the critical region between the ergodic line

and the block-erasure channel. Therefore, in order to approach

the outage probability limit, a full-diversity capacity-achieving

code is necessary, but may not be sufficient. The numerical

optimization of an ensemble degree distribution in order to fully

where

is the decoding threshold of the LDPC code over match the BPSK outage boundary is outside the scope of this

the ergodic AWGN channel. Finally, we obtain

paper. Nevertheless, we describe below an irregular ensemble

with excellent performance on the block-fading channel. Before

completing this section with the irregular root-LDPC example,

let us briefly describe how Proposition 8 is used to estimate the

asymptotic performance.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:57:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BOUTROS et al.: LDPC CODES

4297

= + Fig. 17. Coding gain and diversity order of Y a b ( of fourth order) where  and  are Rayleigh distributed.

Let us assume that the root-LDPC ensemble is well defined,

i.e., the pair

is given. Thanks to Proposition 8, for a

fixed fading pair

it is possible to determine whether the

information bit error probability converges to 0 or not. We refer

to the event where the bit error probability does not converge to

0 by Density Evolution Outage (DEO). Thus, at a fixed SNR, it

is possible to determine the probability of a Density Evolution

Outage

by averaging over a sufficient number of fading

instances. Now, it is possible to write the word error probability

of the ensemble as

(14)

where

is the word error probability given a DEO event

and

is the word error probability when DE con-

verges. It is obvious that

. On the other hand,

depends on the speed of convergence of density

evolution and the population expansion of the ensemble with

the number of decoding iterations [13]. For any root-LDPC en-

semble, we will simply use the following inequality directly de-

rived from (14)

Finally, we illustrate in Fig. 16 some performance results of an irregular rate- LDPC ensemble with the following degree distribution:
(15)
On an ergodic Gaussian channel, the threshold of a random ensemble based on the above degree distribution is 0.63 dB. The root-LDPC ensemble based on the same degree distribution has a better threshold equal to 0.38 dB. The results shown in Fig. 16 can be compared to those of the best parallel turbo codes on block fading channels reported in [3], [4]. Our proposed root-LDPC codes compete favorably with turbo codes since the performance is within a 2-dB gap from the outage probability limit. Notice that the range of SNR on fading channels is 10 times larger than the standard scale of turbo and LDPC codes on ergodic Gaussian channels. Consequently, a 2-dB gap on the nonergodic channel is comparable to a 0.2-dB gap on the Gaussian channel.
VI. CONCLUSION

We have studied LDPC codes in the block-fading channel

under both ML and iterative decoding. We have shown that con-

structions designed for ML decoders fail to guarantee diversity

Thus, the performance estimated via density evolution is a lower under iterative decoding. Driven by this restriction, we have in-

bound for the word error probability.

troduced the new family of root-LDPC codes, which achieve full

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:57:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4298

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2010

Fig. 18. 3-D plot of G = Pr(jX j < jX j) versus  and   for a variance = 1=10.

diversity under iterative decoding. We have shown both finiteand infinite-length performance, and we have illustrated how the error-rate performance of root-LDPC is close to the outage probability limit and almost insensitive to the block-length. This makes root-LDPC codes attractive for slowly varying wireless communications scenarios.

The energy of is normalized,

. The exact mathemat-

ical expression relating to depends on the type of iterative

algorithm used for decoding, e.g.,

where is an

additive noise. To understand the influence of the product on

the performance, one should study the error probability associ-

ated with , i.e.,

. When

,

the order-4 distribution is balanced, and its probability den-

sity function is

APPENDIX I CODING GAIN OF A FOURTH-ORDER
UNBALANCED DISTRIBUTION
Here we limit our description to a diversity order of 2, but all

(16)

When

, the order-4 distribution is unbalanced,

and its probability density function is

results are easily extendable to rate- coding on a channel

(17)

with diversity order . In the context of ML decoding, the

Euclidean distance between two codewords is proportional

to

. As fading have a Rayleigh density, their

squares are exponentially distributed, i.e.,

. The

latter is a central distribution of order 2 with parameter

[21]. Diversity 2 is achieved with a distribution

The expression of

is obtained after

integrating

. The diversity order and the coding gain em-

bedded in appear when

. For a balanced distribu-

tion, we have

of order 4. Hence, a full-diversity code must satisfy

(18)

and

in order to get the order-4, distributed, metric

. Once maximum diversity is guaranteed, the For an unbalanced distribution, we obtain

maximization of the product

increases the coding gain.

The above simple facts are still valid in the context of itera-

tive probabilistic decoding. Let be the a posteriori probability

(19)

log-ratio of a binary element. Achieving full diversity under it-

erative decoding is equivalent to letting behave as the metric In Fig. 17, the performance function

is plotted versus

, where and are two positive real numbers.

on a double logarithmic scale for different values of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:57:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BOUTROS et al.: LDPC CODES

4299

and . The slope is always 2 (i.e.,

) for

all positive values of and . The function degenerates to

when

(diversity order equal to 1 instead of 2).

Notice also that an unbalanced distribution with

and

generates a coding loss about 0.65 dB. This loss is

slightly higher (about 0.75 dB) when considering

for

since additive noise depends on the fading

coefficients as shown in Section IV.

APPENDIX II BIDIMENSIONAL CUMULATIVE DENSITY
FUNCTION

Consider two real independent Gaussian random variables

and

. We define the

multivariate function

. The

function is given by the integral expression

(20)

where

is the Gaussian tail function. A 3-D plot of is

illustrated in Fig. 18. The main properties of are:

•

for all

.

• is a nondecreasing function of and a decreasing func-

tion of . Hence,

if

and

if

.

• For fixed and

as

.

• For fixed and

as

.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank D. Duyck from Ghent University for his detailed and precious comments.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Biglieri, Coding for Wireless Channels. New York: Springer, 2005. [2] E. Biglieri, J. Proakis, and S. Shamai (Shitz), “Fading channels: In-
formation-theoretical and communications aspects,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 44, no. 6, pp. 2619–2692, Oct. 1998. [3] J. J. Boutros, E. C. Strinati, and A. Guillén i Fàbregas, “Turbo code design for block fading channels,” in Proc. 2004 Allerton Conf. Commun., Contr. Comput., Monticello, IL, Sep. 2004 [Online]. Available: http://. josephboutros.org [4] J. J. Boutros, A. Guillén i Fàbregas, and E. Calvanese Strinati, “Analysis of coding on non-ergodic channels,” in Proc. 2005 Allerton Conf. Commun., Contr. Comput., Monticello, IL, Sep. 2005 [Online]. Available: http://.josephboutros.org [5] J. J. Boutros, G. M. Kraidy, and N. Gresset, “Near outage limit spacetime coding for MIMO channels,” in Inaugural ITA Workshop, San Diego, CA, Feb. 2006 [Online]. Available: http://.josephboutros.org, UCSD [6] J. J. Boutros, “Diversity and coding gain evolution in graph codes,” in ITA Workshop, San Diego, CA, Feb. 2009 [Online]. Available: http://. josephboutros.org, UCSD

[7] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. E. Telatar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[8] A. Guillén i Fàbregas and G. Caire, “Coded modulation in the blockfading channel: Coding theorems and code construction,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 91–114, Jan. 2006.
[9] A. Guillén i Fàbregas, “Coding in the block-erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 11, pp. 5116–5121, Nov. 2006.
[10] S. Hirst and A. Burr, “Design of low density parity check codes for space–time coding,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 1–5, 2003, pp. 315–318.
[11] J. Hou, P. H. Siegel, and L. B. Milstein, “Performance analysis and code optimization of low density parity-check codes on Rayleigh fading channels,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 924–934, May 2001.
[12] X. Jin, A. W. Eckford, and T. E. Fuja, “Analysis of LDPC decoding for correlated and uncorrelated block fading channels,” in Proc. 2004 IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Chicago, IL, 2004.
[13] H. Jin and T. Richardson, “Block error iterative decoding capacity for LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Adelaide, Australia, Sep. 2005.
[14] R. Knopp and P. A. Humblet, “On coding for block fading channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 189–205, Jan. 2000.
[15] R. Koetter and P. O. Vontobel, “Graph covers and iterative decoding of finite-length codes,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Rel. Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 1–5, 2003, pp. 75–82.
[16] A. Lapidoth, “The performance of convolutional codes on the block erasure channel using various finite interleaving techniques,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 40, no. 5, pp. 1459–1473, Sep. 1994.
[17] E. Malkamäki and H. Leib, “Evaluating the performance of convolutional codes over block fading channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 1643–1646, Jul. 1999.
[18] E. Malkamäki and H. Leib, “Coded diversity on block-fading channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 771–781, Mar. 1999.
[19] K. D. Nguyen, A. Guillén i Fàbregas, and L. K. Rasmussen, “A tight lower bound to the outage probability of discrete-input block-fading channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory vol. 53, no. 11, Nov. 2007 [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/0707.1588
[20] L. H. Ozarow, S. Shamai (Shitz), and A. D. Wyner, “Information theoretic considerations for cellular mobile radio,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 359–378, May 1994.
[21] J. G. Proakis, Digital Communications, 4th ed. New York: McGrawHill, 2000.
[22] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[23] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[24] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2008.
[25] D. N. C. Tse and P. Viswanath, Fundamentals of Wireless Communication. Cambridge , U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2005.
[26] S. Verdú and T. S. Han, “A general formula for channel capacity,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 1147–1157, Jul. 1994.
[27] Z. Wang and G. B. Giannakis, “A simple and general parameterization quantifying performance in fading channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 51, no. 8, pp. 1389–1398, Aug. 2003.
Joseph Jean Boutros (M’94–SM’09) received the M.S. degree in electrical engineering in 1992 and the Ph.D. degree in 1996, both from Ecole Nationale Supérieure des Télécommunications (ENST, Telecom ParisTech), Paris, France.
From 1996 to 2006, he was with the Communications and Electronics Department, ENST, as an Associate Professor. He was also a member of the research unit UMR-5141 of the French National Scientific Research Center (CNRS). In 2007, he joined Texas A&M University at Qatar (TAMUQ) as a full Professor in the electrical engineering program. He has been a scientific consultant for Alcatel Espace, Philips Research, and Motorola Semiconductors, and was a member of the Digital Signal Processing team of Juniper Networks Cable. His fields of interest are codes on graphs, iterative decoding, joint source-channel coding, space-time coding, and lattice sphere packings.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:57:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4300

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2010

Albert Guillén i Fàbregas (S’01–M’05–SM’09) was born in Barcelona, Catalunya, Spain, in 1974. He received the telecommunication engineering degree and the electronics engineering degree from the Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, and the Politecnico di Torino, Torino, Italy, respectively, in 1999, and the Ph.D. degree in communication systems from Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland, in 2004.
From August 1998 to March 1999, he conducted his Final Research Project at the New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, NJ. He was with Telecom Italia Laboratories, Italy, from November 1999 to June 2000, and with the European Space Agency (ESA), Noordwijk, The Netherlands, from September 2000 to May 2001. During his doctoral studies, from 2001 to 2004, he was a Research and Teaching Assistant with the Institut Eurécom, Sophia-Antipolis, France. From June 2003 to July 2004, he was a Visiting Scholar with EPFL. From September 2004 to November 2006, he was a Research Fellow with the Institute for Telecommunications Research, University of South Australia, Mawson Lakes. Since 2007, he has been a Lecturer with the Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, U.K., where he is also a Fellow of Trinity Hall. He has held visiting appointments with Ecole Nationale Supérieure des Télécommunications (ENST), Paris, France; Texas A&M University, Doha, Qatar; Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain; and the University of South Australia. His research interests are in communication theory, information theory, coding theory, digital modulation, and signal processing techniques with wireless applications.
Dr. Guillén i Fàbregas is currently an Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS. He received a pre-Doctoral Research Fellowship of the Spanish Ministry of Education to join ESA. He received the Young Authors Award of the 2004 European Signal Processing Conference EUSIPCO 2004, Vienna, Austria, and the 2004 Nokia Best Doctoral Thesis Award in Mobile Internet and 3rd Generation Mobile Solutions from the Spanish Institution of Telecommunications Engineers. He is also a member of the ARC Communications Research Network (ACoRN) and a Junior Member of the Isaac Newton Institute for Mathematical Sciences.

Ezio Biglieri (M’73–SM’82–F’89–LF’10) was born in Aosta, Italy. He received the Dr. Engr. degree in 1967 in electrical engineering from the Politecnico di Torino, Torino, Italy.
He is presently an Adjunct Professor of Electrical Engineering at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), and an honorary Professor with the Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain. Previously, he was a Professor with the University of Napoli, Napoli, Italy, with the Politecnico di Torino, and with UCLA. He has held visiting positions with the Department of System Science, UCLA; the Mathematical Research Center, Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill, NJ; Bell Laboratories, Holmdel, NJ; the Department of Electrical Engineering, UCLA; the Telecommunication Department of The Ecole Nationale Supérieure des Télécommunications, Paris, France; the University of Sydney, Australia; the Yokohama National University, Japan; the Electrical Engineering Department, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ; the University of South Australia, Adelaide; the University of Melbourne, Australia; the Institute for Communications Engineering, Munich Institute of Technology, Germany; the Institute for Infocomm Research, National University of Singapore; the National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, R.O.C.; the University of Cambridge, U.K.; and ETH Zurich, Switzerland.
Prof. Biglieri was elected three times to the Board of Governors of the IEEE Information Theory Society, and he served as its President in 1999. He was the Editor-in-Chief of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY and is the Editor-in-Chief of the Journal of Communications and Networks. Among other honors, in 2000, he received the IEEE Third-Millennium Medal and the IEEE Donald G. Fink Prize Paper Award, in 2001 the IEEE Communications Society Edwin Howard Armstrong Achievement Award, and a Best Paper Award from WPMC01, Aalborg, Denmark, and in 2004, the Journal of Communications and Networks Best Paper Award.
Gilles Zémor (M’92) was born in Paris, France, in 1963. He received the Agrégation de Mathmatiques degree in 1984, the Ph.D. degree in computer science from Ecole Nationale Supérieure des Télécommunications (ENST), Paris, France, in 1989, and the Habilitation Diriger des Recherches degree in mathematics from Paris 6 University, in 2002.
From 1990 to 2006, he was an Associate Professor with the Computer Science and Network Department, ENST. Since 2006, he has been a Professor with the Mathematics Institute of Bordeaux University, Bordeaux, France. His research interests include combinatorial mathematics, coding theory, additive number theory, and cryptography.
Prof. Zémor was an Associate Editor for Coding Theory for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY from 2003 to 2006.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:57:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

