Proceedings of IC-NIDC 2010
PERFORMANCE OPTIMIZATION OF LDPC CODES USING SELECTIVE CODING APPROACH AND BEACON PARITY CHECK MATRIX
Tariq Aziz, Muhammad Iqbal, Muhammad Adnan, Lin Zhang, Jiaru Lin
School of Information and Communication Engineering Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications (BUPT), Beijing, China [tariqaziz94,miqbal1976,engineer.adnan]@gmail.com,[zhanglin, jrlin]@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper we have presented a novel idea to optimize the performance of Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) Codes by using selective encoding and decoding approach. We have also proposed a new simplified form of parity check matrix, H named as beacon matrix which is useful for the efficient implementation of the proposed scheme. The proposed scheme is more suitable for real time applications like voice and video where bandwidth and delay are important considerations. The simulation results validate that bit error rate (BER) performance of LDPC codes is improved significantly by using the proposed scheme.
Keywords: Low Density Parity Check Codes (LDPC), Channel Coding, Iterative decoding
1 Introduction
Low density parity-check (LDPC) codes, although originally introduced by Robert Gallager [1] in 1963, remained out of scene for a long time due to un-availability of high speed processing devices required for their complex iterative decoding algorithm. However, due to the technological development made during last decade their significance has been revealed again and these are now widely being investigated in the field of Distributed Source Coding (DSC) for applications like Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) [2]. Also when compared with the turbo codes, they have shown better performance because of having less per-iteration complexity than the later [3]. LDPC decoder has the provision to declare decoding failure in a very natural way if it is unable to decode correctly and any extra computation is not required to stop the process. Due to inherent error correction capabilities of LDPC codes, it is shown in the earlier research [4] that their performance closely approaches the Shannon limit.
The design of an LDPC code starts with the construction of the corresponding sparse parity check matrix X from which an equivalent ___________________________________ 978-1-4244-6853-9/10/$26.00 ©2010 IEEE

systematic parity check matrix H is obtained using Gaussian elimination method leading to the formulation of generator matrix G of the code. If message to be coded , U , is a row vector of order
1 u k , the length of coded row vector C , is n , the dimension of corresponding parity check matrix and generator matrix will be (n  k ) u n and k u n
respectively, where n ! k and the difference in length of coded vector C and the message vector U represents dimension of the code and ratio k / n is referred as code rate, R . The codeword C is obtained from G using the following equation. [5]

C mod [ (U $ G ) , 2 ] [ c1, c2, c3, .......cn ]

(1)

In this form of systematic encoding, the message bits appear at the end of the code vector. The sparse parity check matrix X may be generated at random with the appropriate column and row weights with certain conditions fulfilled. The weight of binary vector in a parity check matrix is the number of non zero elements in it [6]. The LDPC codes are called regular if row and column weights are constant for a parity check matrix, otherwise they are irregular. Also an earlier research [7] shows that performance of irregular LDPC codes is better than regular LDPC codes. Theoretically, LDPC codes of every length and code rate can be created simply by specifying shape of parity check matrix. The performance of LDPC codes is based on the design and construction of the parity check matrix.

In this paper we have exploited the simple and straight-forward encoding process (just by matrix multiplication) of LDPC codes and defined a new simplified form of parity check matrix H , which we have used to create the beacon message in order to get an idea about the instant channel condition. We have introduced a novel scheme for selective encoding and decoding procedure which results in bandwidth saving as well as reduced delay, hence achieving performance optimization for LDPC codes. The core idea is to perform

599 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:58:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LDPC encoding only when it is unavoidably required and avoid it when it is possible. We have also discussed possibility of recovering the original message from the LDPC codeword without using complex decoding algorithm. We have suggested to use this selective decoding approach for certain frames of LDPC codes if the instant channel condition is checked and validated by the beacon message. As the decoding complexity increases linearly with length of codeword, by using this selective approach, the decoding delay can be somewhat minimized.
The motivation behind the proposed idea is depicted from the famous English saying: “Hope for the best, prepare for the worst”. Preparing for the worst is, no doubt important but why should we always be pessimistic? We observe that the Additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, which is assumed for most of the communication design problems exhibits different behavior at different times. The channel conditions are found neither always good nor always bad rather it varies randomly then why do we always suppose the channel to be adverse and encode every frame of date. The effect of AWGN channel is to add certain real value in the signal amplitude level. Although, sometimes signal amplitude is increased to counter the effect of AWGN, yet it requires more power and is not always desired specially in case of power limited devices. The point is, do we really need to encode each and every message frame? Well, if coding is done at source end, can we retrieve the original message from the codeword without performing complex decoding in LDPC decoder? We propose that encoding and decoding process for LDPC codes to be made flexible enough to decide about when and how to encode/decode in response to channel condition. In this way we can get optimum utilization of bandwidth and time saving as well, and hence improved performance for LDPC codes.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section we have described our scheme of flexible implementation of encoding and decoding of LDPC codes and explained it with the help of flow-chart. In Section-3 we have introduced our proposed beacon parity check matrix H and discussed its impact on the proposed scheme. Section-4 summarizes the simulation results of our idea and finally conclusion is drawn in last section.
2 Proposed scheme
In order to optimize the performance of LDPC codes we suggest followings:
1) - We suggest that there is no need to encode each and every block of message information: rather we may send certain blocks even without

encoding. It may seem strange at a first glance but

we must not forget that for every message block of

length k , and code rate R =0.5 , we are consuming

double the bandwidth than what is actually

required for the transmission of original (un-coded)

message. If we send every

th
i

block of message

data without coding, we can save i / 2 % of the

bandwidth and get faster data transfer. The

decision of whether to perform coding or not for a

particular block of data may depend upon the

decoding results of last few blocks or on the result

of beacon message as will be discussed later in this

paper. If the last few frames (say-4) have been

transmitted to the receiver successfully without

error induced by channel or the beacon message

has validated the channel condition, the risk of

sending the next (5th) frame without coding should

not be a big deal. The core idea is to achieve

flexibility for LDPC encoding, i.e. when it must be

done and when it can be avoided and save the

additional bandwidth required for the transmission

of parity bits, depending on the code rate. The flow

chart below shows the sequence of proposed

scheme for LDPC encoder and decoder.

Figure 1. Block Diagram of the proposed Scheme
2) - The message received at destination consists of two parts. For a code rate R = 0.5 , the first (right) half represents the original message while the remaining half shows the parity bits. We suggest that if we can have some good idea about the instant channel condition, either by observing last few decoding results or on the basis of received signal strength (RSS) in certain applications, we

600 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:58:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

can just discard the parity part of the coded vector and retrieve the message therefore avoiding the complex iterative decoding for that particular block of data as shown below for an example
codeword created from arbitrary message of k 4 .
C [0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0]

parity bits

message bits

So, by doing this we can save the time and increase the decoding efficiency for LDPC codes. 3) - We also propose that the message length for LPDC codes may not be kept constant for a particular communication session: rather it should vary according to the channel condition. As the selection of codeword length is related to the dimension of the initially designed parity check matrix. The LDPC codes encoder/ decoder must be compatible for this change and have capability to deal with multiple parity check matrices simultaneously. The messages with short block length are decoded in less time and vice versa because of linear relationship between codeword length and decoding complexity. This concept of variable length messages is already in place and is being investigated for certain applications. However we propose that, if the channel conditions are found exceptionally good by any of previously described method, the largest block size may be selected. And if selective encoding is also implemented in addition, the significant improvement can be made in the performance.
Now we define a simplest form of parity check matrix H which we name as beacon matrix and discuss its impact on the flexible decision making process of LDPC encoder and decoder.
3 Beacon parity check matrix
The effectiveness of previously suggested ideas depends upon the exactness of information about the channel condition. The question arises here is how to get an idea about the instant channel condition? As we can observe from the results of LDPC decoding that the messages of same block length are decoded in different number of iterations (which shows different decoding time interval) at different times. This is because of the random addition of Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) which results in different channel posterior probabilities at the receiver. So, any information about instant channel behavior can be helpful to effect performance of LDPC codes.
Now we introduce a novel way to validate channel behavior and to get knowledge about the instant channel condition by defining a unique and simplest form of parity check matrix H , named as beacon matrix as shown below.

H

ª « « « ¬

1 0 0 0

0 1 0 0

0 0 1 0

0 0 0 1

1 0 0 0

0 1 0 0

0 0 1 0

0001»»¼º»

[ I nk

P
(

nk

)

x

(

nk

)

]

(

nk

)

x

n

This parity check matrix has dimension (n  k ) u n

like any other parity check matrix but it produces no cycle of any length in its corresponding Tanner Graph [8]. Here we see that not only left half portion in H is an identity sub-matrix but right half

(which generally comprises of a parity sub-matrix) is also another identity matrix of order (n  k ) u (n  k ) . So for LDPC codes of rate R =0.5

these two identity sub-matrices will be exactly the same. The corresponding generator matrix G will

be a similar matrix and is shown below.

G

ª « « « ¬

1 0 0 0

0 1 0 0

0 0 1 0

0 0 0 1

1 0 0 0

0 1 0 0

0 0 1 0

0010»º¼»»

T
[ P Ik ]

Where PT is the transpose of the parity matrix P . And when the message vector U is multiplied by G as per equation-1, the coded vector obtained will consist of message part and parity part but this parity part is exactly the replica of the original message. Suppose the message vector U is given by U [ 1 0 1 1 ] , the coded vector obtained using equation-1 is shown below:
C = [1 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 ]

parity

message

So, by careful comparison of the message bits and
parity bits i.e. ( if ci ci k for i = 1 to length (k)) at the LDPC decoder, fairly good estimate about the channel condition can be made. However we have made an assumption here about the channel that its behavior does not change during the transmission of single frame. Since this proposed matrix is used to encode a message with purpose to get an idea about the channel condition, we have named the message as bacon message and the matrix as beacon matrix.
Once the channel condition is validated by the beacon message at a particular time, proposed ideas can be implemented to get the enhanced performance for LDPC codes. We can also adjust the frequency of beacon signal as per requirement or to get different level of optimization.
Although, it seems apparent that idea of selective encoding and decoding needs further refinement as

601 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:58:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

there are certain open issues & challenges in the proposed scheme like how to recover un-coded but lost frames and how to deal with erroneous delivery of beacon message as the accuracy of beacon message may also be questionable. However we believe that the proposed scheme will work better for real time applications like voice and video where bandwidth and delay are more important parameters while accuracy can be compromised within certain threshold limit especially in wireless sensor networks where same information is being collected by multiple sensors and redundancy is already considered. Now we present our simulation work using proposed ideas.
4 Simulation results
In this section, the proposed scheme is compared with simple LDPC codes performance using Matlab simulation. This work comprises of three parts. Figure 2, 3 and 4 represent each part respectively. In our experiment we have used short-length codeword with n 100 , while total
number of frames taken as 1000. The code rate R is set as 0.5 and BPSK modulation is considered.
In first part, as shown below in figure 2 we have implemented our idea of selective encoding based on the decoding results of last few frames. If the number of frames received at the decoder without any error approaches certain threshold value as 4 in our case, the source sends a frame without encoding it. In this way many frames are sent by the source without encoding saving the additional bandwidth required for transmission of parity bits. Since instant channel condition is validated, no error is observed for those frames and we observe improved Bit Error Rate (BER) performance for LDPC codes as shown below in figure 2.

approach accordingly. We can see from Figure 3 that our scheme produces better results than conventional LDPC encoding, as shown below.
Figure 3 Selective encoding based on beacon matrix In the third part, in addition to selective encoding approach, we have also used concept of retrieving original message from the LDPC codeword without involving complex iterative decoding algorithm as discussed earlier and we observe that BER is not only improved but it is still remains comparable with the previous two results, while significant reduction in decoding time is achieved in addition.

Figure 2 Encoding based on last decoding results
Similarly, in second part we have used our proposed beacon matrix to validate the instant channel condition and applied selective encoding

Figure 4 Selective encoding and decoding approach
5 Conclusions
In this paper we have introduced a new concept of flexible implementation of LDPC coding and decoding to optimize the existing performance. We have introduced a beacon parity check matrix H , to estimate instant channel condition and used it for efficient implementation of our proposed scheme. To deal with the open issues and challenges already discussed, will be the focus of our future research.

602 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:58:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

References
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] Mina Sartipi and F. Fekri, “Distributed source coding in wireless sensor networks using LDPC coding: the entire Slepian-Wolf rate region. IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC), New Orleans, LA, USA, in 2005; pp. 1939-1944.
[3] Mohamed Adnan Landolsi, “A comparative performance and complexity study of ShortLength LDPC and Turbo Product codes”, Information and Comm. Technologies, 2006, ICTTA October 2006.
[4] D. Mackay and R. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes”, Electron Letters, 1996, pp.1645-46.
[5] Jorge Castineira Moreira, Patrick Farrell, “Essentials of Error-Control Coding, by John Wiley & sons, Inc New Jersey.
[6] Todd K. Moon, “Error Correction Coding, Mathematical Methods and Algorithm” by John Wiley & sons Inc., New Jersey.
[7] Michael G. Luby, Michael Mitzenmacher, M. Amin Shokrollahi, and Daniel A. Spielman, “Improved Low-Density Parity-Check Codes Using Irregular Graphs” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory Vol. 47, No.2, February 2001, pp 585-598..
[8] R. Tanner, “A Recursive Approach To Low Complexity Codes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, pp. 533-547, Sept. 1981.
603 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:58:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

