A Receiver Structure of Joint LDPC Decoding and Synchronization for Deep Space Communications

Wan Zengran, Zhan Yafeng
Space Center Tsinghua University
Beijing, China wanzr@wmc.ee.tsinghua.edu.cn

Wu Jianqiang
School of Electronic Engineering Guilin University of Electronic Technology
Guilin, China

Bao Jianrong
School of Telecommunication Engineering Hangzhou Dianzi University Hangzhou, China

Abstract—A receiver structure based on a joint LDPC decoding and synchronization algorithm realized on FPGA platform is introduced. The realization system achieves the BER of 10-5 at the channel SNR of -4.6 dB with moderate hardware complexity, and the performance degradation is less than 1.3 dB from the ideal situation. So it is suitable for deep space communications and other wireless communications.
Keywords-receiver; LDPC decode; synchronization; deep space communications
I. INTRODUCTION
In deep space communications (DSC), as the downlink power is limited, the received signal power is very limited; accordingly the signal-to-noise-ratio (SNR) is rather low. To ensure the communication quality, a high performance error correction coding is required. In the recent decade, low density parity check (LDPC) code became another practical forward error correction code besides Turbo code which can approach the channel capacity [1]. These codes reduced the channel SNR required to achieve the desired bit error rate (BER). An extreme example [2] shows a rate of 1/31 Turbo code that achieves the BER of 10-6 at Eb/N0 of -0.9dB, and the corresponding channel SNR is lower than -15dB.
In conventional DSC receivers, phase lock loops (PLL) are used for both carrier and timing synchronization [3]. At such a low SNR, it requires a very narrow loop bandwidth to ensure the precision of synchronization, which brings in additional difficulties in design and hardware debugging.
In this paper, we give a receiver structure without PLL, which is designed based on a joint LDPC decoding and synchronization algorithm. The receiver has been realized on an FPGA platform and works stably at channel SNR of -4.6dB with BER less than 10-5. The modulation type is the simplest square shaped BPSK.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the signal model. In section III, the joint LDPC

decoding and synchronization algorithm is described as well as some simulation results. Section IV presents the structure and modules of the receiver. Section V shows the performance of the system, including the hardware resource utilization and BER performance. Finally, Section VI summarizes the paper and gives the conclusion.
II. SIGNAL MODEL
The deep space channel can be approximately considered as an AWGN channel. The BPSK signal with residual synchronization errors is expressed as

∑ r(t) = ak g(t − kTb −τ k ) ⋅ e jϕk + n(t) .

(1)

k

Where {ak} denotes the transmitted symbols, g(t) is the impulse response of the shaped filter which is a square wave
here, Tb denotes the symbol cycle, τk and φk is the timing and carrier errors defined as follows, respectively.

τk = θt + kΔft

(2)

φk = θc + kΔfc

(3)

Here, θt is timing phase offset; Δft is timing frequency offset, θc is carrier phase offset and Δfc is carrier frequency offset. n(t) is an independent additional white Gaussian noise(AWGN).

III. JOINT DECODING AND SYNCHRONIZATION ALGORITHM
A. Algorithm Description Some efforts have been done in literatures. Reference [4]
shows a simulation system deal with large initial synchronization errors. But in this system the LDPC code rate is 1/2 which is different from the conditions of some DSC

This work was supported by the National Basic Research Program of China (2007CB310601) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants No. 60532070 and No. 60525107.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei9U7n8iv-.1D-4o2w4n4lo-a3d7e0d9o-n2/J1u0ne/$2245,2.00026©a2t 0031:007I:E46EUETC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

systems with the code rate lower than 1/3 or even 1/6 [5] which will lead to the problem described before; also the hardware complexity is high in realization.
The algorithm we used is similar as that described in [6] with MSK modulation. As the analysis shows, carrier and timing errors result in degradations of SNR. From density evolution algorithm [7] and Gaussian approximation theory [8], summation of the posteriori Log-likelihood ratio (LLR) of LDPC decoding output is positively correlative to the SNR of input signal. So, perfect synchronization leads to the largest summation of posteriori LLR.
Define an objective function as

ψ (κ ) = ∑ L(Qi | κ ) .

(4)

i

Where Qi is the i-th variable node value in LDPC decoding after iterating a given times, L(·) represents the posteriori LLR. κ is the synchronization errors including carrier and timing errors.
4 parameters are needed to estimate in receiver: θt, Δft, θc and Δfc. Because directly searching the optimum values in a four-dimensional space requires an unbearable computation complexity, planar searches are performed in carrier and timing domain respectively, and actually they nearly don’t affect each other.
Fig.1 shows the objective function values corresponding to different carrier errors with perfect timing synchronization. Fig.2 shows the values corresponding to different timing errors with perfect carrier synchronization. These results show that the origin points correspond to the peak values of the objective function.
From Fig.1 and Fig.2, it is obvious that if an iterative method such as simplex search is used to find the peak values, the convergence domains are approximately parallelograms and expressed as follows.

⎧− 0.5 ≤ θc / π ≤ 0.5 ⎩⎨− 50 ≤ ΔfcTb /10−6 + 100θc / π ≤ 50

(5)

Figure 1. The objective function corresponding to carrier phase and frequency offsets.
Figure 2. The objective function corresponding to timing phase and frequency offsets.

⎧− 0.5 ≤ θt / Tb ≤ 0.5 ⎩⎨− 100 ≤ ΔftTb /10−6 + 300θt / Tb ≤ 100

(6)

Here an N&M simplex search [9] is adopted. The origin point and 4 points around are selected as initial points for iteration. For each point in iteration, the objective function will be calculated by the relevant parameters. The search is first made in carrier domain and then in timing domain.
From (5) (6), the convergence domains are shown in Fig.3. To satisfy the convergence requirement, coarse estimation is needed. Because the residual error range of most estimation methods is symmetry, the coarsely compensated signal should have the residual error ranges in a square area shown in Fig.3.

Figure 3. The convergence domains of simplex search.
B. Algorithm Simulation A (5120, 1024) QCARA-GLDPC code [10] with high
performance and low realization complexity is adopted for the following simulations, system design and performance evaluation.
Simulation results of bit error rate (BER) are shown in Fig. 6. Here we choose SNR instead of commonly used Eb/N0 to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:07:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

express the relationship between signal and noise power. For the rate 1/5 code, the SNR of -6dB corresponds with the Eb/N0 of 1dB. The line with square marks shows the code’s ideal performance, while the line with plus marks shows the performance of the algorithm under fixed synchronization errors as

θc = π/8, Δfc = 30×10-6/Tb;

(7)

θt = Tb/4, Δft = 5×10-6/Tb.

(8)

The iteration number of simplex search is 20. The iteration number of LDPC decoder is 3 when being referred by simplex search and 50 for final decoding. The degradation of BER performance is less than 0.2 dB comparing with the code’s ideal performance.

IV. SYSTEM DESIGN
The system works at an intermediate frequency (IF) of 70MHz. A pilot sequence of 1024 bits is used for frame synchronization. The information data rate is 16.67 kbps, so the BPSK symbol rate is 100 ksps. The algorithm needs the initial synchronization errors ranging in the convergence domains described before. Since timing frequency offset relies on the oscillators, high stable oscillators are adopted. The other three parameters are estimated and compensated by the corresponding modules before the iterative algorithm module. The system is shown in Fig. 4.

A. Sampling and down converter
The received signal is first sampled by a 40 MHz oscillator. The sampled signal is then down converted by a digital down converter (DDC) and extracted with a group of Cascade Integrator Comb (CIC) filters. After these operations a zero IF signal with 400 KHz sample rate is produced which corresponds with four times of the symbol rate.
B. Coarse carrier frequency compensator
From the previous discussion, the carrier errors need to be limited in the square area shown in Fig.3 to ensure the convergence of simplex search. Because the coarse carrier phase estimation and compensation can reduce the range of θc to ±0.1π which will be analyzed later, and the coarse carrier frequency estimation needs to reduce the Δfc to the range of ±40×10-6/Tb. Periodogram of the square of the signal is calculated using FFT, and the frequency offset is estimated by search the peak value of the Periodogram. To achieve this requirement of estimation precision, the number of samples for FFT should be larger than 50000, so a 65536 point FFT IP-core is used. This method can deal with the initial Δfc ranges up to ±1/Tb.
Placing the module at this location is because that the differential demodulation in the next segment requires Δfc to be limited in the range of ±0.1/Tb and we expect the system to work stably with the initial Δfc as wide as possible.
C. Frame Synchronizer and Coarse Timing Offset Estimator
To start the iterative synchronization, it is necessary to obtain the frame synchronization first. Since the oscillators are high stable and the coarse carrier frequency compensation has been done, the Δft and Δfc don’t have much effect on frame synchronization. So we choose differential demodulation with a 4-path correlator for frame synchronization and coarse timing offset detection. Accordingly, differential encoding is required for the pilot sequence in transmitter.
Fig. 5 shows the structure of the frame synchronizer. The four-time over sampled signal is divided into 4 branches of one-time sampled signals. Each branch of signal is demodulated by a differential demodulator and correlated with the pilot sequence independently. Length of the observation interval is selected to ensure that one and only one integrated pilot sequence is covered, so that there will be only one

Figure 4. Receiver structure block diagram.

Figure 5. Frame synchronizer structure.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:07:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

conspicuous correlation peak in each path. Since the signal is matched filtered, just finding out the maximum correlation value of the 4 peak values of each path will obtain the start sample (not symbol) of the signal. This work also reduces the range of θt to ±Tb/8.
The data are saved into Block Ram 1 at the same time of the frame synchronization with the same order. And the module of correlation peak searching finally gives out the pilot sequence location as an address of Block Ram 1.
D. Coarse Carrier Phase Compensator
Because the residual Δfc is quite small and the pilot sequence has been positioned, a simple data-aided (DA) phase estimation [11] is used. Ignore the other parameters in (1), the received signal is

∑ r(t) = e jθ ak g(t − kTb ) + n(t) .

(9)

k

The phase is estimated as

∑ θˆ

=

⎧ arg⎨

⎩

k

ak*

x(k

⎫ )⎬ ⎭

.

(10)

Where x(k) represents the sample at t = kTb of the convolution

x(t) = r(t) ⊗ g (−t) .

(11)

Actually, we don’t really need the value of θ, but the value of exp(jθ). So it just needs addition and subtraction operations to achieve this work as g(t) has a square waveform. The signal compensated by exp(-jθ) is then saved in Block Ram 2 for iterative synchronization. The estimation variance is given by [11]:

designed with a QC manner, the work of addressing nodes can be done conveniently by a counter.
F. Iterative Synchronizer The progress of iterative synchronization is composed of
two phases: the first one is carrier synchronization and the second one is timing synchronization. Each phase is described similarly as follows:
The simplex search gives out a group of parameters ({θc, Δfc} or {θt, Δft}), and the signal read from Block Ram 2 are compensated by these parameters. Then the signal is demodulated and sent to the decoder. After some times of iteration, the simplex search collects the output LLR and calculates the objective function value. From the function value, the simplex search decides the next group of parameters. After several cycles, the surviving group with largest objective function value is saved as the final synchronization parameters.
Finally, the signal in Block Ram 2 are compensated by the final synchronization parameters, demodulated and sent to the decoder for final decoding.
V. REALIZATION OF THE SYSTEM
A. Hardware Description The system is built on a platform based on 2 chips of
Virtex-4 XC4VLX100 FPGA. One chip is used for DDC, down sampling and coarse carrier frequency compensation. Another chip contains the rest parts. As an integrated system, there are DAC, ADC, AGC, IF filter and other devices as well.
The whole system consumes 81 Block Rams and 8,468 slices in the first FPGA and 246 Block Rams and 24,888 slices in the second FPGA.
B. System Performance The performance of the actual system is shown in Fig. 6. It
achieves the BER of 10-5 at channel SNR of -4.6dB. There is

Var(θˆ − θ ) = (2L ⋅ Es / N0 )−1 .

(12)

Where Es/N0 is defined as symbol-to-noise-ratio and equals to the SNR in this paper. L is the number of observed samples.
Exactly, we want to get the phase of the first sample of the code which is the first sample after the pilot sequence. Although the residual Δfc is quite small, it still affect if observation interval is long, so L is set to 512. At the SNR of 5dB, the estimation deviation is less than ±0.1π.

E. LDPC Decoder
The LDPC decoder is designed based on the sum-product algorithm and is realized in a partially parallel type. 8-bits quantification is adopted for intermediate calculation. The simulation performance of quantified decoding is shown in Fig. 6. The performance degradation is nearly 1dB at the BER of 10-5. FPGA realization is designed with exactly the same behaviors of the simulation program. Since the code is

Figure 6. BER performance of the idea decoding, the algorithm, quantified decoding and the FPGA realization sysyem.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:07:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

few actual system can perform well at such low channel SNR. The degradation is about 1.3 dB compared with the code’s ideal performance. Consider the quantification loss of the LDPC decoder, the degradation is less than 0.3 dB at BER of 10-5.
VI. CONCLUSION
A receiver structure of joint LDPC decoding and synchronization based on FPGA platform for low SNR of DSC is introduced. The system is based on the algorithm of iterative synchronization with the feedback from LDPC decoding. A (5120, 1024) LDPC code is used and the hardware complexity is moderate.
The practical test results show that the system performs well at channel SNR of -4.6dB, and the BER performance degradation is less than 1.3 dB. This structure can be possibly used in deep space communications and other wireless communications with power constraint.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the National Basic Research Program of China (2007CB310601) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants No. 60532070 and No. 60525107.
REFERENCES

[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,”IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21-28, Jan 2003. (references)
[2] Jon Hamkins, Daruish Divsalar, “Coupled Receiver-Decoders for Low Rate Turbo Codes,” ISIT 2003, Yokohama, Japan, pp. 381, July 4, 2003.
[3] DSMS Library, ”DSMS Telecommunications Link Design Handbook – 34-m and 70-m Telemetry Reception,” June 31, 2003.
[4] Esteban L. Valles, Richard D. Wesel and John D. Villasenor, ”Carrier and Timing Synchronization of BPSK via LDPC Code Feedback,” Signals, Systems and Computers, 2006. ACSSC '06. Fortieth Asilomar Conference, pp. 2177-2181, Oct. 29, 2006.
[5] DSMS Library, ”DSMS Telecommunications Link Design Handbook Telemetry Data Decoding,” March 31, 2004.
[6] Bao Jianrong, “Research on Reception Techniques for Deep Space Communications with Extremely Low Signal-to-Noise Ratios,” PHD Dissertation of Tsinghua University, June, 2009.
[7] Richardson T, Urbanke R, “The capacity of low density parity check codes under message passing decoding,” IEEE Tansactions on Information Theory, vol. 47, NO. 2, pp. 599-618, Feb 2001.
[8] Chung S Y, Richardson T, Urbanke R L, “Analysis of sum-product decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Transaction on Information Theory,” vol. 47, NO. 2, pp. 657-670, Feb 2001.
[9] C. L. Jeffrey, A. R. James, H. W. Margaret and E. W. Paul, “Convergence properties of the Nelder-Mead simplex method in low dimensions,” SIAM Journal of Optimization, vol.9, No.1, pp. 112-147, 1998.
[10] Jianrong Bao, Yafeng Zhan, Jianqiang Wu and Jianhua Lu. “Design of Efficient Low Rate QCARA GLDPC Codes,” 2009 IET International Communication Conference on Wireless Mobile & Computing, 2009.
[11] Umberto Mengali and Aldo N.D’Andrea. “Synchronization Techniques for Digital Receiver,” New York and London: Plenum Press, 1997.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:07:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

