IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 58, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2010

4883

Majority-Based Tracking Forecast Memories for Stochastic LDPC Decoding
Saeed Sharifi Tehrani, Student Member, IEEE, Ali Naderi, Guy-Armand Kamendje, Saied Hemati, Senior Member, IEEE, Shie Mannor, Senior Member, IEEE, and Warren J. Gross, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper proposes majority-based tracking forecast memories (MTFMs) for area efficient high throughput ASIC implementation of stochastic Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) decoders. The proposed method is applied for ASIC implementation of a fully parallel stochastic decoder that decodes the (2048, 1723) LDPC code from the IEEE 802.3an (10GBASE-T) standard. The decoder occupies a silicon core area of 6.38 mm2 in CMOS 90 nm technology, achieves a maximum clock frequency of 500 MHz, and provides a maximum core throughput of 61.3 Gb/s. The decoder also has good decoding performance and error-floor be-
havior and provides a bit error rate (BER) of about 4 10 13 at 0 = 5.15 dB. To the best of our knowledge, the implemented
decoder is the most area efficient fully parallel soft-decision LDPC decoder reported in the literature.
Index Terms—ASIC, CMOS, iterative decoding, low-density parity-check, stochastic decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
L DPC codes are an important class of linear error-correcting codes proposed by Gallager in the 1960s [1]. An LDPC code can be graphically represented by a factor graph [2]. A factor graph consists of two different groups of processing nodes, called variable nodes (VNs) and parity-check nodes (PNs). The VN and PN groups in a factor graph are connected to each other by bidirectional edges. Iterative decoding of LDPC codes usually involves message passing between VNs and PNs over the edges of the factor graph for some number of decoding iterations. These messages represent the VNs’ and PNs’ beliefs about the correctness of the received information from the channel. Graph-based decoding of LDPC
Manuscript received October 24, 2009; accepted May 04, 2010. Date of publication June 01, 2010; date of current version August 11, 2010. The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it for publication was Dr. Tong Zhang. The authors acknowledge the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), the Canada Research Chairs (CRC), and the Fonds Québécois de la Recherche sur la Nature et les Technologies (FQRNT) for their financial support. This research has been achieved in part thanks to the use of WestGrid and CLUMEQ computing resources.
S. Sharifi Tehrani, A. Naderi, G.-A. Kamendje, S. Hemati, and W. J. Gross are with the Department of the Electrical and Computer Engineering, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 2A7, Canada (e-mail: saeed.sharifitehrani@mail.mcgill.ca; ali.naderi@mcgill.ca; guy-armand.kamendje@mcgill.ca; saied.hemati@mcgill.ca; warren.gross@mcgill.ca).
S. Mannor is with the Department of the Electrical and Computer Engineering, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 2A7, Canada, and also with the Department of the Electrical and Computer Engineering at the Technion—Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel (e-mail: shie@ee.technion.ac.il).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TSP.2010.2051434

codes inherently provides a high degree of computational parallelism which is suitable for high throughput applications. In addition, it has been demonstrated that iterative decoding of LDPC codes can provide decoding performance close to the Shannon capacity limit [3], [4]. For these reasons, LDPC codes have been adopted for several recent standards in digital communications including the IEEE 802.3an (10GBASE-T) [5], the IEEE 802.16 (WiMAX) [6], the IEEE 802.11 (WiFi) [7], and the digital video broadcasting (DVB-S2) standards [8].
Fully parallel and partially parallel are the two main approaches for design and hardware implementation of LDPC decoders. A fully parallel decoder instantiates all the VNs and PNs in the factor graph to completely make use of the inherent parallelism involved in LDPC decoding. A partially parallel decoder instantiates a portion of VNs and PNs in the factor graph and therefore it requires the use of embedded memory blocks to store messages that should be received by other parts of the graph. In this respect, fully parallel decoders usually have higher overall hardware complexity, compared to partially parallel decoders, but they are usually able to provide higher throughput and do not require the use of embedded memory blocks. Therefore, they are especially suited for applications with high throughput demands such as the 10 Gb/s Ethernet standard, IEEE 802.3an [5].
Stochastic decoding is a new approach for iterative decoding on graphs. This approach is inspired by the method of stochastic computation developed in the 1960s (see [9]). In stochastic decoding, instead of propagating probabilistic beliefs by exchanging distinct probability messages, as in the sum-product algorithm (SPA) and the min-sum algorithm (MSA), beliefs are conveyed in streams of stochastic bits in a sense that the probability of observing a “1” in a stream is equal to the original (encoded) probability. Therefore, VNs and PNs are exchanging beliefs in a bit-serial manner along the edges of the graph. Stochastic decoding was first proposed in [10]. Early stochastic decoding methods [10]–[14] resulted in significant decoding performance loss and high error floors, and hence were unsuccessful, when applied to practical LDPC codes. Stochastic decoding was first successfully applied to LDPC codes in [15]. The first FPGA-based stochastic decoders that decode practical LDPC codes were proposed in [16] and [17]. The FPGA-based decoder in [17] decodes a (1056,528) irregular code from the IEEE 802.16 standard and provides a maximum throughput of 1.66 Gb/s. This decoder is one of the most area-efficient fully-parallel FPGA-based LDPC decoders reported to date. Stochastic decoding has been successfully applied for decoding linear codes with high-density parity

1053-587X/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:01:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4884

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 58, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2010

TFMs. Section IV proposes MTFMs and discusses hardware implementation of MTFMs. It also compares the complexity and decoding performance of EMs, TFMs and MTFMs. The ASIC (2048,1723) MTFM-based stochastic LDPC decoder is proposed in Section V and its comparison with recent fully-parallel LDPC decoders are presented in Section VI. Finally, Section VII gives the concluding remarks.

II. REVIEW OF STOCHASTIC LDPC DECODING

This section briefly reviews stochastic LDPC decoding. The

reader may refer to [15], [17] for more details.

Fig. 1. EMs or TFMs are used for rerandomization/decorrelation of stochastic Stochastic decoding is a bit-serial iterative decoding apstreams and are assigned to each outgoing edge of stochastic VNs [20], [21]. proach. In this approach, probabilities received from the

channel are converted to random sequences/streams of sto-

chastic bits called Bernoulli sequences [9]. The position of 1 s

check matrices such as Reed–Solomon (RS) codes, Bose– and 0 s in a stochastic bit stream is random. This conversion be

Chaudhuri–Hocquenghem (BCH) codes and BCH-based block done by comparing each received channel probability against a

turbo codes in [18]. It also has been applied for decoding (pseudo) random number which is changing in every stochastic

nonbinary LDPC codes in [19].

decoding iteration, referred to as decoding cycle.1 The outcome

The stochastic approach proposed in [15] for decoding of this comparison is fed to a stochastic VN as the input bit

practical LDPC codes is based on edge memories (EMs). EMs from the channel in every decoding cycle. Stochastic VNs and

are assigned to outgoing edges of stochastic VNs (see Fig. 1). PNs respectively perform the SPA’s equality and parity-check

They rerandomize and decorrelate stochastic stream to prevent operations (in the probability domain) on stochastic bit streams

the latch-up (locking) problem [13], [15], [17] in stochastic (see Fig. 2). Stochastic decoding is performed by VNs and

decoders. EMs can be implemented as shift registers with a PNs iteratively exchanging bits for a fixed maximum number

single selectable bit. Despite the efficient hardware imple- of decoding cycles. As proposed in [17], an early termination

mentation of EMs in FPGAs [17], EMs consume considerable criterion may be exploited to terminate the decoding opera-

silicon area in ASIC stochastic decoders. In addition, because tion as soon as all parity-checks are satisfied and, hence, to

EMs are assigned to each outgoing edge in a factor graph, a significantly increase the throughput of stochastic decoders.

practical stochastic LDPC decoder requires thousands of EMs Fig. 2(a) and (b) shows the structure of a degree-2 stochastic

whose area consumption becomes the bottleneck of the overall VN and a degree-2 stochastic PN, respectively. Stochastic VNs

hardware complexity of the decoder. To alleviate this problem, with higher degrees can be constructed by a cascade of lower

tracking forecast memories (TFMs) were recently introduced degree stochastic subnodes in which internal memories [17] are

in [20] and [21]. Similar to EMs, TFMs are assigned to each used as rerandomization units. A stochastic VN has two states

outgoing edge of the stochastic VNs. However, TFMs exhibit of operation: the hold state and nonhold (regular) states. A hold

much less hardware complexity compared to EMs, and hence, state occurs when the input bits of a VN disagree and a nonhold

considerably reduce the overall complexity of stochastic de- state occurs when input bits are equal. The output bit of a VN

coders. TFMs are also able to provide similar/better decoding during a nonhold state is referred to as a regenerative bit and

performance compared to EMs. It has been recently shown in the output bit of the VN during the hold state is referred to as a

[22], that the concept of stochastic decoding and TFMs can conservative bit [17]. An EM (or a TFM) can be considered as

be applied not only in the probability domain, but also in the a rerandomization unit that rerandomizes an input stochastic bit

log-likelihood ratio (LLR) domain.

stream,

, and produces a new random bit stream,

,

In this paper, we propose MTFMs as a new stochastic with the same input probability. EMs (or TFMs) are assigned to

decoding approach for area-efficient and high throughput each outgoing edge of a VN. Therefore, a degree- VN uses

implementation of ASIC LDPC decoders. Unlike the EM EMs (or TFMs). The input stream of an EM (or a TFM) is

and TFM approaches, in this approach each stochastic VN the regenerative bit stream,

, generated by the VN for

uses only one MTFM which results in low complexity imple- the corresponding edge. As shown in Fig. 2(a), when the hold

mentation of ASIC stochastic LDPC decoders. We apply the state happens

, the VN uses the output of the EM (or

MTFM approach for ASIC implementation of a fully parallel TFM) as the output bit,

, and when a nonhold state

stochastic decoder that decodes the (2048,1723) LDPC code happens

, the VN directly uses the regenerative bit as

from the IEEE 802.3an (10GBASE-T) standard and compare the output bit,

.

this decoder with state-of-the-art high throughput LDPC de- Stochastic decoding offers several interesting features which

coders in the literature. The paper also extends the discussion are useful for hardware implementation of LDPC decoders. Sto-

of TFMs and proposes several new architectures for reduced chastic nodes have low hardware complexity. Also, because of

complexity realizations of TFMs. The remainder of the paper the bit-serial nature of stochastic decoding stochastic decoders

is organized as follows. Section II briefly reviews stochastic LDPC decoding. Section III reviews the TFM approach and proposes several new reduced complexity architectures for

1The term decoding cycle in the context of stochastic decoding is used to stress that it is not equivalent to one iteration in SPA or MSA. In the rest of this paper, it is assumed that a decoding cycle is equal to one clock cycle.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:01:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHARIFI TEHRANI et al.: MAJORITY-BASED TRACKING FORECAST MEMORIES FOR STOCHASTIC LDPC DECODING

4885

random sequences of bits, therefore, the state and the trajectory of the decoding operation at a given decoding cycle depends on the realization of these random sequences. This implies that repeating the decoding operation can bring the decoder in a different trajectory and produce different results. Therefore, if the decoder fails on the first decoding round it is possible to repeat the decoding operation over and over to possibly find the correct codeword. This feature is especially useful to lower the error-floor caused by trapping sets [25], [26] in LDPC decoders.

Fig. 2. (a) Structure of a degree-2 stochastic VN (only one output and its corresponding inputs are shown). An EM or a TFM can be used as a rerandomization unit. (b) Structure of a degree-2 stochastic PN.

III. TRACKING FORECAST MEMORIES

This section reviews the concept of TFMs, first introduced in

[20] and [21], and proposes several new architectures for hard-

ware implementation of TFMs.

A TFM extracts the moving average probability of a sto-

chastic stream based on the method of successive relaxation

[27]–[29]. Let

be the regenerative bit from a VN

and be the probability extracted by the TFM at time for

the corresponding stochastic stream

. The TFM

updates in nonhold states as follows:

(1)

where is the relaxation coefficient2 and usually . When the VN is in the hold state, is compared against a
(pseudo) random number, , to generate as follows:

otherwise.

(2)

The TFM update criterion provides an exponential time-decaying dependence on input bits. By unrolling (1), we have

Fig. 3. The dependence of output probability on previous input bits in (a) TFM

= 2 = with 

, (b) EM with M 32 bits length, and (c) approximate bit-serial

= = 2 TFM with M 32 bits length and 

.

Also, when

is a constant value equal to , we have

require only one wire (per direction) to connect a VN to PN.

(3)

This increases the logic utilization and significantly alleviates

the routing congestion and interconnect problem [23], [24] in

fully parallel LDPC decoders. Another interesting feature of sto- Fig. 3(a) and (b) depicts the dependence of

on previous

chastic decoding is asynchronous pipelining introduced in [17]. input bits in a TFM with

and an EM with a length

Unlike conventional message passing algorithms, in stochastic of

, respectively. As shown, the dependence in the

decoding the order of bits is not important and hence the opera- TFM exponentially decreases over time as

tion of stochastic PNs and VNs at a given decoding cycle does

, but the dependence in EM is equal to

for the

not depend on the output bits produced in the previous decoding last input bits and is zero for the prior input bits. Fig. 3(c)

cycle. This enables stochastic decoders to use nonuniform levels shows the dependence in a bit-serial TFM which is presented in

of registers to pipeline the decoder and to increase the clock fre- Section III-A-3).

quency and throughput (see Section IV-F in [17] for more de- The strong dependence on recent input regenerative bits

tails). Redecoding [22] is another useful feature of stochastic and gradual forgetting of older input bits enable TFMs to

decoding which can be used to lower the error floor of LDPC track changes in

. The value of

codes. In SPA and MSA, the decoding outcome is determined by received channel probabilities and deterministic operation of the VNs and PNs. In stochastic decoding, however, streams are

2In stochastic decoding,  is considered as an empirical factor whose value
(for decoding a specific code) can be chosen by simulation (i.e., based on the
best decoding performance obtained for different ).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:01:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4886

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 58, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2010

Fig. 6. Architecture of a reduced complexity TFM. (t) is a negative power of
2.

Fig. 4. (a) Convergence speed and (b) corresponding estimation error of a TFM
for different values of (t).

power of 2. In this case, the multiplication involved in TFM operation can be replaced by shifting bit wires of . We also propose that when is represented as an unsigned integer,
is equal to , the complement of , therefore, the two adders in Fig. 5 can be replaced by one adder/subtractor unit because

(4)

Fig. 6 shows the proposed reduced complexity architecture for

a TFM. Compared to the general architecture, this architecture

Fig. 5. General architecture of a TFM [21]. (t) can change and take any value
in the [0, 1] interval.

does not use any multiplier and uses one adder less. In our simulations, we observed that by using the reduced complexity architecture the decoder is able to provide similar decoding per-

formance as the general architecture.

determines the speed and the accuracy of the convergence/re-

sponse of TFMs. Fig. 4(a) shows the convergence of a TFM

for different values of . The input stream of the TFM is

generated based on input stream probability of

and the TFM is initialized to

for each case. As

3) Approximate Bit-Serial Architecture: As it was shown in Fig. 3, a TFM provides an exponential time-decaying dependence on the past input regenerative bits. In approximate bit-serial TFMs, the TFM operation is approximated using only the last regenerative input bits as

shown, as the value of decreases, TFM converges more

conservatively toward , but after convergence, approx-

imates

more accurately and with less fluctuations. This

can be also seen in Fig. 4(b) where the TFM estimation error,

, is depicted.

Fig. 3(c) depicts the dependence on previous input bits in an

approximate bit-serial TFM with

and

. It

A. Hardware Realization of TFMs

can be seen that for the last bits the dependence is the same as a TFM while for the prior input bits the dependence is zero.

This section discusses various architectures and proposes new Fig. 7 depicts the proposed architecture for bit-serial approxi-

reduced complexity architectures for hardware realization of mate TFM. In this architecture the last regenerative bits are

TFMs.

stored in an -bit shift register and upon receiving a new regen-

1) General Architecture: Fig. 5 shows the general architec- erative bit a single shift operation is performed. The TFM oper-

ture of a TFM proposed in [21]. In this architecture, it is assumed ation is performed by series of concatenated multiplexers. The

that can vary over time. We recall that the signal U in the selection line of each multiplexer is an independent stochastic

figure determines if the VN is in hold state

or if it is in stream with a probability of

where

. This

a nonhold state

and hence is regenerative. When means that at each multiplexer stage, the bit in the shift register

, the is updated and VN directly uses as the is (directly) selected with a probability of and the bit from the

output bit. When

, the does not change and the VN previous stage is passed through with a probability of

. To

uses as the output bit. This architecture requires the use of provide an (initial) estimation for (residual) regenerative input

one multiplier, two adders, one comparator and one register. bits that has been neglected (i.e., with

), the

2) Reduced Complexity Architecture: The complexity of a generated stochastic stream,

, from the received channel

TFM is significantly reduced when is chosen as a negative probability,

, can be connected as the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:01:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHARIFI TEHRANI et al.: MAJORITY-BASED TRACKING FORECAST MEMORIES FOR STOCHASTIC LDPC DECODING

4887

Fig. 7. Architecture of an approximate bit-serial TFM. in is the input sto-
chastic bit from the channel and P = .

Fig. 9. MTFM-based stochastic decoder uses one MTFM per VN.

Fig. 8. Architecture of an approximate counter-based TFM.
input bit to the last multiplexer. In this case, the probability of being equal to 1 is

It should be noted that compared to the shift register used in an

EM, the shift register in the bit-serial TFM is less complex, be-

cause it does not provide a single selectable output bit and hence

does not require to use an address decoder. However, compared

to EMs and non bit-serial architectures for TFMs, the random

number generation for bit-serial TFMs is more complex and,

depending on the length of the shift registers used, can require

more physical wires.

4) Approximate Counter-Based Architecture: Another

method for approximating the TFM operation, for the sake of

lower hardware complexity, is to approximate the addition/sub-

traction in (1). Since the probability stored in a TFM memory

is in [0, 1] interval, the TFM update rule in (1) implies that

the maximum absolute change in the value of is , in

other word,

. Therefore, for the sake

of lower hardware complexity, it is possible to approximate

by an up/down counter (see Fig. 8) with a step-size

equal to which operates as follows:

(5)

IV. MAJORITY-BASED TRACKING FORECAST MEMORIES

Compared to EMs, TFMs are much less complex to imple-

ment (see Section IV-B). However, similar to the EM approach,

in the TFM approach a stochastic VN uses one TFM per each

outgoing edge. Therefore, the total number of TFMs in a sto-

chastic decoder for a LDPC code is equal to the number of

edges in the code’s factor graph and even though the hardware

complexity of a TFM is much less than an EM in ASIC, the

total number of TFMs is still the bottleneck of the overall hard-

ware complexity of the decoder. In this section, we propose

the MTFM stochastic decoding approach. In this approach, in-

stead of assigning one TFM per outgoing edge, each VN uses

only one MTFM as its rerandomization unit (see Fig. 9). This

significantly reduces the total number of rerandomization units

used in a stochastic LDPC decoder. For example, the number of

rerandomization units for the (2048,1723) decoder reduces from

12 288 to 2048. As it will be shown in Sections IV-B

and V, the MTFM approach significantly reduces the hardware

complexity of stochastic LDPC decoders. We refer to this ap-

proach as MTFM approach, since it relies on the TFM approach,

but it has a different update rule based on the majority of out-

going regenerative bits in a stochastic VN.

Fig. 10 depicts the block diagram of the proposed degree-6

MTFM-based VN. The VN receives the bit (from a com-

parator that converts the corresponding channel probability to a

stochastic stream) and 6 input bits, to , from the six con-

nected PNs. The corresponding output bits are

and

to . The final output of the VN,

, is determined by

the majority of bits received from connected PNs. The structure

of the VN is based on the cascaded subgraphs of degree-3 and

degree-2 subnodes in which each degree-3 subnodes uses 2-bit

internal memory. The (final) input stream of an MTFM is the

majority of the VN’s outgoing regenerative bits for all edges.

Note that at a given time the VN might be in a nonhold state

for some of its edges and be in the hold state for the rest of the

edges.3 Therefore, some of the input bits of the MTFM might be

regenerative and the rest are conservative bits. For this reason,

each degree-2 subnode sends two bits,

and , to the

MTFM. determines if the edge is in the hold state or non-

hold state, and is the output bit of the subnode which can

Section IV-B of the paper provides the comparison of hardware complexity and decoding performance of different TFM architectures.

3We recall that a VN is in the hold state for an edge, when the input bits of the
final/exiting subnode for that edge are not equal. Therefore, the VN in Fig. 10
is in the hold state for edge i when the two input bits of the degree-2 subnode i
are not equal.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:01:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4888

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 58, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2010

Fig. 11. General architecture of an MTFM. T is a fixed threshold for updating the TFM and T is the majority threshold.

A. Hardware Realization of MTFMs

1) General Architecture of MTFMs: Fig. 11 shows the gen-

eral architecture of MTFM for a degree- VN. Note that the

TFM block in the figure can use any TFM architecture discussed

in Section III. We recall that is the output bit of the VN for

the th edge. Also, determines the state of the VN for the

th edge:

means that the VN is in the hold state, and

means that the VN is in a nonhold state for the th

edge and is regenerative. The MTFM architecture shown

in the figure uses as a majority threshold and it uses as a

(fixed) threshold for updating the TFM. The MTFM calculates

which determines the number of input bits

that are regenerative. It also computes

which determines how many of these regenerative bits are equal

to 1 (note that when

, is not regenerative and it is

forced to be 0 by using an AND gate at the input). The comparator

in this architecture applies the majority criterion according to

Fig. 10. Structure of a degree-6 MTFM-based stochastic VN. P is the channel probability, RA is a (pseudo) uniform random number, ra is a random
bit and IM refers to internal memory.

the majority threshold, . In this respect, is usually set to which implies that the output bit of the comparator, ,
is equal to 1 when more than half of the regenerative bits at time

are 1, and it is equal to 0, otherwise. The TFM is only updated

when

which indicates that

, i.e., the number

be regenerative or conservative. The MTFM of a degree-6 VN of input regenerative bits is greater than . In general, is a

computes the majority of to bits if they are regener- fixed integer

whose value can be chosen based

ative. The VN operates as follows.

on the decoding performance of the decoder for different . As

• When the VN is in a nonhold state for edge , it directly shown in Fig. 10, the MTFM-based VN uses the output bit of

uses the corresponding regenerative bit as the outgoing bit the MTFM, , as the outgoing bit for any edge which is in

of the edge.

the hold state, however, if edge is in a nonhold state it directly

• In case that the VN is in the hold state for the edge , it uses as the outgoing bit for that edge.

refers to the VN’s MTFM and uses its output bit as the 2) Reduced Complexity Architecture for MTFMs: The com-

outgoing bit.

plexity of an MTFM can be significantly reduced by properly

adjusting and . Fig. 12 shows the reduced complexity

Different thresholds might be exploited for i) updating an implementation of architecture of an MTFM. In this structure,

MTFM and ii) for calculating the majority of regenerative bits in the TFM is only updated when all the input bits are regenera-

a MTFM. For example, the MTFM might be updated only when tive (i.e.,

), therefore, the update signal for the TFM,

at least a certain percentage of its input bits are regenerative, signal U, can be determined by a -input AND gate (instead of

and the majority criteria might be set to “ 50%” or “ 75%,” a comparator in Fig. 11). Also, is set to , hence, the

etc. The next two sections discuss the hardware realization of most significant bit (MSB) of directly determines the ma-

MTFMs and how the choice of these parameters can affect the jority and if the input bit of the TFM, , is 0 or 1. Compared

hardware complexity of MTFMs.

to the general architecture of MTFMs in Fig. 11, the reduced

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:01:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHARIFI TEHRANI et al.: MAJORITY-BASED TRACKING FORECAST MEMORIES FOR STOCHASTIC LDPC DECODING

4889

Fig. 12. Architecture of a reduced complexity MTFM. r(t) is the most significant bit (MSB) of X(t).

Fig. 14. Comparison of BER decoding performance of EM-based, TFM-based, and MTFM-based stochastic decoding approaches.

channel are quantized to 6 bits and an early decoding termina-

tion (based on syndrome checking) until a maximum number

of 400 clock cycles is used. As shown, the reduced complexity

MTFM approach provides similar decoding performance com-

pared to the TFM approach which outperforms 64 bits and 32

bits EMs for decoding the (2048,1723) LDPC code. The per-

formance loss of the MTFM approach compared to SPA with

Fig. 13. Extracted output probability of an edge in degree-6 TFM-based and MTFM-based VNs. Both VNs receives same input streams.

floating-point implementation and 32 iterations is about 0.2 dB loss. The figure also shows the decoding performance of approximate bit-serial and counter-based TFM approaches.

Table I shows the silicon area consumption, two-input NAND

complexity MTFM uses one less adder and two less compara- gate count, and the maximum achievable clock period for de-

tors. The reduced complexity MTFM architecture is used in the gree-6 stochastic VNs and a degree-32 stochastic PN in CMOS

ASIC stochastic LDPC decoder in Section V.

90 nm technology. The table is divided into two sections. Re-

B. Comparison of the Hardware Complexity and Decoding Performance of MTFMs With EMs and TFMs

sults shown in the first section are obtained for synthesizing for the maximum possible speed. Therefore, as shown in the second section of the table, by synthesizing the modules for a

As described previously, in an MTFM-based stochastic VN, lower target clock frequency, lower silicon area consumption

the output bit for an edge is determined by the MTFM only can be obtained. The first section of the table confirms that

when the edge is in the hold state. In nonhold (regular) states, stochastic nodes are able to operate very fast, with clock fre-

the output bit for an edge is directly determined by the newly re- quencies beyond 2.5 GHz. With respect to the area consump-

generative bit in both TFM and MTFM approaches. Therefore, tion, the table shows that a reduced complexity TFM-based VN

the majority approximation made in the MTFM approach is only consumes about 67% silicon area of a 64-bit EM-based VN.

effective when an edge is the hold state, and no approximation is Also, it is possible to further reduce the area-consumption of

made in nonhold (regular) states. Also, the majority approxima- a TFM-based VN by about 30% by using approximate bit-se-

tion used in MTFM approach is precise when the degree of the rial or approximate counter-based TFM architecture proposed in

VN is high (usually, a degree of 4 or more). For instance, Fig. 13 Sections III-A-3) and III-A-4). The reduced complexity MTFM

shows the output probability of an edge in degree-6 TFM-based approach results in significant area reduction when compared to

and MTFM-based VNs and compares them with the ideal target the TFM and EM approaches. The area of a degree-6 MTFM-

output probability (computed according to floating-point SPA). based VN is about 29% of the area of a reduced complexity

Both VNs receives same input streams. As shown, the extracted TFM-based VN and 19% of the area of a 64-bit EM-based VN.

output probabilities in both approaches closely follow the SPA’s The hardware complexity of an MTFM-based VN and a sto-

output probability.

chastic PN operating at 500 MHz (2 ns clock period) is equiv-

Fig. 14 compares the performance of EM, TFM and MTFM alent to the complexity of 351 and 79 two-input NAND gates,

approaches for decoding the (2048,1723) LDPC code with de- respectively. Since the main difference between stochastic ap-

gree-6 VNs and degree-32 PNs. Results reported for the MTFM proaches is in the VN architecture, it is possible to approxi-

approach in this section is based on the reduced complexity mately compare the area efficiency of LDPC decoders imple-

MTFM architecture that uses a reduced complexity TFM (see mented using these approaches from Table I. For example, we

Fig. 12). For all of these approaches, received symbols from the can estimate that the implementation of a (2048,1723) LDPC

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:01:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4890

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 58, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2010

TABLE I HARDWARE COMPLEXITY OF DEGREE-6 VNS AND
DEGREE-32 PN IN CMOS 90 nm TECHNOLOGY

decoder using the 12-bit MTFM approach in CMOS 90 nm tech-

nology and with maximum 500 MHz clock frequency results

in saving of about

6.89 mm silicon

area compared to 12-bit reduced complexity TFM approach, and

about

21.15 mm silicon area com-

pared to the 64-bit EM approach.

V. THE (2048,1723) FULLY PARALLEL MTFM-BASED STOCHASTIC LDPC DECODER
The (2048,1723) LDPC code from the IEEE 802.3an standard is a regular Reed–Solomon (RS) based code [30] with degree-6 VNs and degree-32 PNs. This code is adopted for the standard to provide enough coding gain that allows for a BER level of or less. This section discusses the ASIC implementation of a fully-parallel stochastic decoder for this code using the MTFM approach. Section VI of the paper compares this decoder with state-of-the-art high-throughput soft-decision LDPC decoders. To demonstrate the applicability of the MTFM approach to decode other LDPC codes, in Appendix I of the paper we provide the performance of the MTFM approach for decoding a (1057,813) LDPC code at low BERs.

[31]. However, we note that compared to the split-row technique for MSA it has the following major benefits.
• In the split-row technique increasing the number of splits/ partitions results in decoding performance loss and, possibly, a higher error-floor [31]–[33]. Recently, MSA-based threshold decoding methods have been proposed for the split-row technique to reduce this performance loss (e.g., see [33]). In stochastic decoders, however, partitioning PNs does not affect the decoding performance or the error-floor. This is because in the split-row technique for MSA, each PN is divided into lower degree PNs (assigned to each partition). These lower degree PNs calculate the minimum of only a portion of incoming messages. Therefore, their outputs is not necessary the absolute minimum of all incoming messages received by the PN. As the number of splits increases, the approximation made in lower degree PNs becomes less accurate. In stochastic decoding, the PN operation is XOR-based, hence, as shown in Fig. 15, each lower degree PN can send its 1-bit outcome to neighboring PNs and, therefore, no approximation is made in the PN operation.
• Increasing the number of partitions/splits results in long physical wires between VN blocks. This wires can become the bottleneck of the clock frequency and throughput. For instance in Fig. 15 the input signal of the VNs in the block number 32 starts from block 1 and passes through 30 VN blocks before reaching the block 32. Stochastic decoding benefits from asynchronous pipelining [17]. Asynchronous pipelining enables stochastic decoders to pipeline long wires with negligible effect on the average number of decoding cycles and throughput. By relying on this useful feature, nonuniform levels of registers can be inserted to pipeline the signals between VN blocks and break long wires to small pieces to increase the clock frequency and throughput. In the implemented decoder three levels of flip-flops (i.e., one level of flip-flop after every 8 VN block) are used to break these wires.

A. Decoder Architecture and Specifications

The implemented fully-parallel stochastic decoder instanti-

ates 2048 MTFM-based degree-6 VNs and 384 degree-32 PNs

based on the partitioned design shown in Fig. 15. The decoder

uses flooding-schedule for updating VNs and PNs. The binary

parity-check matrix of the (2048,1723) LDPC code is based on

the permutation of

sub-matrices. This parity-check ma-

trix is not full-rank and has 384 degree-32 PN. Each PN has ex-

actly one connection to a VN in every 64 columns. Therefore, it

is possible to partition the whole parity-check matrix into 32 VN

blocks in which each block has 64 degree-6 VNs (see Fig. 15).

In this configuration, each block receives

384 input

bits from each one of its neighbor blocks and outputs 384 bits

to each of them. To form the parity-check equation, each VN

inside a block XORs its output bit with the input received from

neighboring block and passes it to the next neighbor block. The

VN also XORs the input bits received from the neighbor blocks

to from its input bit. This method of partitioning relies on the

split-row technique for MSA-based decoders first introduced in

The decoder receives 6-bit input symbols from the channel.

It applies log-likelihood ratio (LLR) scaling [17] and converts

these symbols to 7-bit probabilities using

bits (56 bytes)

lookup tables. The MTFM resolution in VNs is 11 bits and all

the MTFMs are initialized to corresponding received channel

probabilities prior the start of the decoding operation.

1) Random Number Generation: The stochastic decoder re-

quires (pseudo) random numbers at input (channel) comparators

to convert probabilities to stochastic streams. Random numbers

are also required in MTFMs to convert probabilities stored in

MTFMs to stochastic streams. Random numbers used in the

decoder are generated using a distributed random engine ar-

chitecture which consists of 64 independent random engines

[17]. Every two random engines are assigned to a VN block.

Each random engine consists of four 16-bit linear feedback shift

registers (LFSRs) associated with different prime polynomials

and generates an 11-bit random number which is shared among

32 VNs.

2) Early Decoding Termination Criterion: The VNs and PNs

exchange bits until decoder output bits satisfy all the parity

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:01:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHARIFI TEHRANI et al.: MAJORITY-BASED TRACKING FORECAST MEMORIES FOR STOCHASTIC LDPC DECODING

4891

Fig. 15. The (2048,1723) stochastic decoder is implemented using 32 VN blocks where each block contains 64 degree-6 VNs. Each block receives 384 input bits from each one of its neighbor blocks and outputs 384 bits to each of them. To form the parity-check equation, each VN inside a block XORs its output bit with the input receives from neighboring block and passes it to the next neighbor block. The VN also XORs the inputs receives from neighbor blocks to from its input bit. One level of flip-flops is used after every 8 VN blocks to break long wires.

checks (i.e., syndrome checking) or, a maximum number of 400 ASIC decoder uses a postprocessing scheme to correct the re-

clock cycles is exhausted (see Section V-A-3)). The final output maining bit errors. During the postprocessing mode, the output

of each VN is determined by the majority of bits received from bit of each VN is directly sent to PNs. The PNs perform the

connected check nodes. The syndrome checking is performed parity-check operation and send back their bit messages to VNs.

in every clock and hence the decoder stops decoding as soon This postprocessing scheme can efficiently correct remaining

as it finds a valid codeword. The syndrome check is performed bits errors provided they are few. When the number of bit er-

by XORing the output bits of VNs that are connected to the same rors are high, this scheme may result in propagation of errors

PNs. If the outcome of all of these XOR gates are zero, decoding in the entire graph, therefore, the ASIC decoder only uses this

terminates. The early termination logic consists of 384 32-input postprocessing scheme at the end of decoding rounds 1, 2, and

XOR gates whose 384 output bits are passed through a 384-input 3 and does not use it for the last round. If the syndrome check is

NOR gate or equivalently 383 2-input NOR gates in a tree config- not satisfied during decoding rounds 1 to 3, all MTFMs are reset

uration. Due to the early termination criterion, the throughput of to the corresponding channel probabilities and the next round

the decoder is determined by the average number of clock cycles of decoding is started. In the last round of decoding (round 4),

used and the decoding latency is determined by the maximum stochastic decoding is performed for a maximum of 100 clock

number of clock cycles used.

cycles.

3) Redecoding and Postprocessing: The idea of combining

different decoding algorithms, for the sake of better perfor-

mance or less latency, has been used in the literature (e.g., see [34]). The ASIC stochastic decoder uses a combined rede- B. Decoding Performance

coding and postprocessing scheme which lowers the error-floor of the 10GBASE-T LDPC code and enables the decoder to achieve a good BER decoding performance with less latency. As mentioned in Section I, redecoding [22] is an interesting feature of stochastic decoders which is useful for lowering the error-floor of LDPC codes. In stochastic decoding the decoding trajectory depends on the stream of random numbers generated for conversion of probabilities to stochastic bit streams. Consequently, by using different sequence of random numbers different decoding trajectories are possible. Therefore, if the decoding outcome does not converge to a codeword after some clock cycles, it is possible to restart the decoding operation with different random numbers (different decoding trajectory) to possibly converge to a codeword in the new round. For the case of the (2048,1723) LDPC code, it is known that the dominant error events in the error floor region are due to (8,8) absorbing sets (e.g., see [25], [35], and [36]). Redecoding in this respect helps to reduce these events by randomizing the decoding trajectory.
The ASIC stochastic decoder uses 4 rounds of decoding for

Fig. 16 depicts the BER and frame error rate (FER) decoding performance of the MTFM-based stochastic decoder.4 For the sake of comparison, the figure shows the decoding performance of MTFM-based stochastic decoding without postprocessing and redecoding (with the same maximum number of clock cycles), the floating-point sum-product with 32 iterations, 6-bit fixed-point sum-product with 50 iterations from [35], and 4-bit fixed-point offset min-sum from [35]. Also shown in the figure are the decoding performance of the (2048,1723) ASIC LDPC decoder in [37] which uses the approximate bit-serial MSA, the (2048,1723) MSA Split-16 decoder in [33], and the (2048,1723) ASIC LDPC decoder in [35] and [36]. The decoder in [33] is a recently proposed fully parallel decoder which provides a maximum throughput of 92.8 Gb/s by using an early termination criterion. The decoding performance of this decoder is demonstrated down to a BER of about in [33]. The decoder in [35], [36] is also a recently proposed partially parallel decoder that uses 4-bit fixed-point offset MSA and a special postprocessing technique [25] to lower the error

5 dB in which each decoding round uses a maximum number of 100 clock cycles (i.e., a maximum of 400 clock cycles including redecoding and postprocessing). In rounds 1 to 3 of decoding the stochastic decoding is performed for 92 clock cycles. In the last 8 clock cycles of these decoding rounds, the

= 4The BERs of the MTFM-based decoder at E =N

5.00 dB and

= 5 15 E =N

: are obtained by counting 30 and 10 frame errors, respectively.

 4 75 For E =N

: at least 100 frame errors are counted. To simulate a very

low BER, we used two Canadian clusters (namely, WestGrid and CLUMEQ)

and a local cluster available at our research group. Our simulations took about

two months and were distributed on about 1000 CPUs.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:01:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4892

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 58, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2010

Fig. 16. Decoding performance of the MTFM-based stochastic decoder. The stochastic decoder uses early termination until a maximum of 400 clock cycles are exhausted.
TABLE II SUMMARY OF THE ASIC IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS FOR THE (2048, 1723)
MTFM-BASED STOCHASTIC LDPC DECODER

Fig. 17. The stochastic decoder chip layout.

floor of the (2048,1723) LDPC code. It also uses an early

termination criterion to increase the decoding throughput.

As shown in the figure, the proposed MTFM-based stochastic

decoder is able to provide a BER of

at

Fig. 18. Average number of clock cycles used (left y-axis) for decoding at different SNRs and the corresponding core throughput (right y-axis) for the
achieved clock frequency of 500 MHz.

5.15 dB. Compared to 4-bit offset min-sum (without postpro-

cessing) and 6-bit sum-product algorithm, the stochastic de-

coder shows a superior error-floor behavior since no error-floor

is observed down to the BER of

. This decoder outper-

forms the bit-serial decoder in [37] and [38] by about 1 dB and

6-bit sum-product decoding algorithm by about 0.4 dB. Com-

pared to the decoder in [35] and [36] with postprocessing, the

MTFM-based decoder has about 0.2 dB loss. The stochastic

decoder and the decoder in [33] have similar decoding perfor-

mance down to a BER of about in the waterfall region.

500 MHz after the place and route step. As mentioned before,

the stochastic decoder uses early termination criterion and the

core throughput of the decoder is determined by the average

clock cycles used. At

5.50 dB the MTFM-based sto-

chastic decoder uses an average of 16.7 clock cycles which re-

sults in a core throughput of

b/s or 61.3 Gb/s.

The throughput of the decoder at

5.15 dB is about

49.4 Gb/s. Also, as Fig. 18 shows, the decoder is able to provide

throughput of more than 23 Gb/s for

4.5 dB (BERs

C. Hardware Complexity, Throughput and Latency

less than , approximately). Fig. 19 shows histograms of the

clock cycles used for decoding at different

. The figure

Table II summarizes the ASIC implementation characteristics also shows the corresponding mean and the standard devi-

of the MTFM-based stochastic decoder. The decoder is imple- ations associated with each histogram. Each histogram is

mented using GP 90 nm CMOS technology (standard Vt) from based on observation of one million transmitted codewords. As

STM with 1 V supply voltage. It is synthesized using Cadence shown, at high

the majority of transmitted codewords

RTL-Compiler in nominal process corner and place and route are decoded very fast and hence the histograms become highly

was done by using Cadence Encounter. The decoder achieves a concentrated near the average clock cycles used.

maximum clock frequency of 500 MHz after the place and route The latency of the MTFM-based decoder is determined by the

step and its core occupies 6.38 mm silicon area with a high final maximum number of clock cycles used. As mentioned before,

logic utilization of 95%. Fig. 17 shows the chip layout after the the decoder uses a maximum of 400 clock cycles (including

place and route step.

postprocessing), hence, with the clock frequency of 500 MHz

Fig. 18 depicts the average number of clock cycles used (left the decoder maximum latency is 800 ns. If lower latency is re-

-axis) for decoding at different

and the corresponding quired, it is possible to tradeoff BER with the maximum number

throughput (right -axis) with the achieved clock frequency of of clock cycles used. For example, Fig. 20 shows the BER/FER

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:01:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHARIFI TEHRANI et al.: MAJORITY-BASED TRACKING FORECAST MEMORIES FOR STOCHASTIC LDPC DECODING

4893

Fig. 19. Histograms of clock cycles used for decoding codewords at different
SNRs. One million codewords used for each histogram.  is the average number of clock cycles and  is the standard deviation.

= Fig. 21. Probability of codeword overflow for different sizes of (a) input buffer
and (b) output buffer at E =N 5.15 dB.

= Fig. 20. Decoding performance versus latency (in nanosecond) at E =N

10 5.15 dB. A BER of about

is achieved with about 580 ns maximum de-

coding latency (i.e., maximum 290 clock cycles). The shown 800 ns latency cor-

responds to the maximum 400 clock cycles with the achieved 500 MHz clock

frequency.

versus latency (in nanosecond) tradeoff at

5.15 dB.

As shown, at this SNR a BER of about

can be achieved

with 580 ns decoding latency (i.e., maximum 290 clock cycles).

cles used by the decoder for decoding, , is a random variable

where

and its probability distribution function

(PDF) is obtained by the histograms shown in Fig. 19. Every

clock cycles, the decoder takes a codeword from the input

buffer. On the other hand, the output buffer of the decoder re-

ceives a decoded codeword from the decoder every clock

cycles and outputs a codeword every

clock cycles. Note

that each decoded codeword occupies 2048 bits or 256 bytes

which is much less than a received codeword. Fig. 21 shows the

simulation results for the probability of codeword overflow at

5.15 dB for different input and output buffer sizes

(

and

). As shown, the codeword over-

flow probability sharply decreases by increasing the size of the

input and output buffers. This is mainly because the PDF of the

number of clock cycles used is highly concentrated near the av-

erage. For example, at

5.15 dB with a FER of about

, the input and output buffers require about 10 K

bytes in total (roughly about 0.28 mm in CMOS 90 nm tech-

nology) to have a codeword overflow probability that is below

the FER, induced by the channel, by more than an order of mag-

nitude.

D. Input and Output Buffer Requirements

VI. COMPLEXITY COMPARISON Table III compares the implemented MTFM-based stochastic

Due to the use of early termination in the decoder, the pro- decoder with some state-of-the-art high-throughput soft-deci-

posed stochastic decoder needs to use input and output buffers sion ASIC LDPC decoders. The table is partitioned in two parts:

to accommodate the difference between the variable number of first, ASIC decoders that decode the (2048,1723) LDPC code

clock cycles used and the maximum number of clock cycles. from the IEEE 802.3an standard and second, ASIC decoders

The distribution of number of clock cycles used changes with that decode other LDPC codes.

. Based on the histograms of the number of clock cycles With respect to the decoding latency, the stochastic decoder

used (see Fig. 19), it is possible to determine the buffer require- requires 800 ns latency which is higher than other (2048,1723)

ments of the stochastic LDPC decoder for a specific operating LDPC decoders in the table, but it is within an acceptable la-

. In particular, we would like to determine such require- tency range

s for a channel decoder. Also, if lower la-

ments for low BER regimes (high

) where the decoder is tency is desired, it is possible to tradeoff latency with decoding

supposed to operate.

performance as shown in Fig. 20. The stochastic decoder oc-

The input buffer of the decoder receives a codeword from the cupies a core area of 6.38 mm in CMOS 90 nm technology.

channel every clock cycles. Each received codeword oc- To compare with the area of the decoders that are implemented

cupies 2048 6 bits or 1.5 K bytes. The number of clock cy- in different technologies, the table also shows the scaled area

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:01:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4894

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 58, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2010
TABLE III COMPARISON WITH SOME STATE-OF-THE-ART HIGH THROUGHPUT SOFT-DECISION ASIC LDPC DECODERS

(in CMOS 90 nm technology) per coded bit. As shown, this factor for the stochastic decoder is 3115 m , which indicates the most area efficiency among the soft-decision decoders in the table. The decoder also achieves a maximum core throughput of 61.3 Gb/s which is the second highest throughput among the decoders. To bring the effect of technology and code block length into account, the table shows the throughput per coded bit per scaled area (in CMOS 90 nm technology) for each decoder. This factor for the stochastic decoder is 4.69 Mb/s/mm which is about twice that of for the decoder in [35] and it is about 4% less than that of for the decoder in [33].

VII. CONCLUSION

The paper proposes MTFMs for area efficient and high

throughput ASIC implementation of stochastic LDPC decoders. It presents a (2048,1723) fully parallel MTFM-based ASIC LDPC decoder. The decoder provides a maximum

Fig. 22. Performance of the proposed MTFM approach for decoding a (1057,813) LDPC code. An early termination criterion until a maximum of 400 clock cycles is used.

throughout of 61.3 Gb/s and occupies 6.38 mm core area in

CMOS 90 nm technology. To the best of our knowledge, this (2048,1723) stochastic LDPC decoder we used 6-bit input prob-

decoder is the most area efficient soft-decision fully parallel abilities, 12-bit reduced complexity MTFMs (with

LDPC decoder reported in the literature.

and

), and the same postprocessing and redecoding

APPENDIX I PERFORMANCE RESULTS FOR A (1057,813) LDPC CODE
To demonstrate the applicability of the proposed MTFM approach for decoding other LDPC codes, Fig. 22 depicts the performance of the MTFM approach for decoding a (1057,813) LDPC code chosen from [41]. The figure also shows the decoding performance of the floating-point SPA with 32 and 16

scheme in our simulations. Also, an early termination criterion

is used until a maximum of 400 clock cycles are exhausted. As

shown the proposed MTFM approach (with postprocessing and

redecoding scheme) has good decoding performance behavior

at low BERs and at

5.75 dB it outperforms the SPA

with 32 iterations.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

iterations. At least 40 frame errors were counted for BERs less The authors would like to thank the reviewers and the asso-

than . The (1057,813) LDPC code has maximum PN and ciate editor for providing helpful comments. They also would

VN degrees of 18 and 4, respectively. Similar to the proposed like to thank Prof. C. Jego for helpful discussions.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:01:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHARIFI TEHRANI et al.: MAJORITY-BASED TRACKING FORECAST MEMORIES FOR STOCHASTIC LDPC DECODING

4895

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] F. Kschischang, B. Frey, and H. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645–1646, 1996.
[4] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–432, Mar. 1999.
[5] The IEEE P802.3an 10GBASE-T Task Force [Online]. Available: www.ieee802.org/3/an
[6] The IEEE 802.16 Working Group [Online]. Available: http://www. ieee802.org/16/
[7] The IEEE 802.11n Working Group [Online]. Available: http://www. ieee802.org/11/
[8] The Digital Video Broadcasting standard [Online]. Available: www. dvb.org
[9] B. Gaines, Advances in Information Systems Science. New York: Plenum, 1969, ch. 2, pp. 37–172.
[10] V. Gaudet and A. Rapley, “Iterative decoding using stochastic computation,” Electron. Lett., vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 299–301, Feb. 2003.
[11] A. Rapley, C. Winstead, V. Gaudet, and C. Schlegel, “Stochastic iterative decoding on factor graphs,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 2003, pp. 507–510.
[12] W. J. Gross, V. Gaudet, and A. Milner, “Stochastic implementation of LDPC decoders,” in Proc. 39th Asilomar Conf. Signals, Systems, Computers, Pacific Grove, CA, Nov. 2005, pp. 713–717.
[13] C. Winstead, V. Gaudet, A. Rapley, and C. Schlegel, “Stochastic iterative decoders,” in Proc. IEEE ISIT, Sep. 2005, pp. 1116–1120.
[14] C. Winstead, “Error-control decoders and probabilistic computation,” presented at the Tohoku Univ. 3rd SOIM-COE Conf., Sendai, Japan, Oct. 2005.
[15] S. Sharifi Tehrani, W. J. Gross, and S. Mannor, “Stochastic decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 10, no. 10, pp. 716–718, Oct. 2006.
[16] S. Sharifi Tehrani, S. Mannor, and W. J. Gross, “An area-efficient FPGA-based architecture for fully-parallel stochastic LDPC decoding,” in Proc. IEEE SiPS, Shanghai, China, Oct. 2007, pp. 255–260.
[17] S. Sharifi Tehrani, S. Mannor, and W. J. Gross, “Fully parallel stochastic LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 56, no. 11, pp. 5692–5703, Nov. 2008.
[18] S. Sharifi Tehrani, C. Jego, B. Zhu, and W. J. Gross, “Stohastic decoding of linear block codes with high-densiy parity-check matrices,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 56, no. 11, pp. 5733–5739, Nov. 2008.
[19] G. Sarkis, S. Mannor, and W. J. Gross, “Stochastic decoding of LDPC codes over GF(q),” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications (ICC), Dresden, Germany, pp. 1–5.
[20] S. Sharifi Tehrani, A. Naderi, G.-A. Kamendje, S. Mannor, and W. J. Gross, “Tracking forecast memories in stochastic decoders,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoustics, Speech, Signal Processing (ICASSP), Taipei, Taiwan, Apr. 2009, pp. 561–564.
[21] S. Sharifi Tehrani, A. Naderi, G.-A. Kamendje, S. Mannor, and W. J. Gross, “Tracking forecast memories for stochastic decoding,” J. Signal Process. Syst. (Invited Paper) 2010 [Online]. Available: http://www.springerlink.com/content/9j386874m12681r0/, accepted for publication
[22] F. Leduc-Primeau, S. Hemati, W. Gross, and S. Mannor, “A relaxed half-stochastic iterative decoder for LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommunications Conf., Nov. 30–Dec. 4, 2009, pp. 1–6.
[23] A. Blanksby and C. Howland, “A 690-mw 1-Gb/s 1024-b rate-1/2 lowdensity parity-check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.
[24] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. R. Kschischang, “Block-interlaced LDPC decoders with reduced interconnect complexity,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 74–78, Jan. 2008.
[25] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam, and M. Wainwright, “Lowering LDPC error floors by postprocessing,” in Proc. IEEE Global Communications Conf. (IEEE GLOBECOM), Nov. 2008, pp. 1–6.
[26] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam, and M. J. Wainwright, “Design of LDPC decoders for low error rate performance,” IEEE Trans. Commun. [Online]. Available: http://www.eecs.berkeley. edu/\texttildelowananth/2008+/TCOM0303.pdf, to be published

[27] J. M. Ortega and W. C. Rheinboldt, Iterative Solution of Nonlinear Equations in Several Variables. New York: Academic, 1970.
[28] D. M. Young and R. T. Gregory, A Survey of Numerical Mathematics. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1973.
[29] C. T. Kelley, Iterative Methods for Linear and Nonlinear Equations. Philadelphia, PA: SIAM, 1995.
[30] I. Djurdjevic, J. Xu, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, and S. Lin, “A class of lowdensity parity-check codes constructed based on Reed–Solomon codes with two information symbols,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 317–319, Jul. 2003.
[31] T. Mohsenin and B. M. Baas, “Split-row: A reduced complexity, high throughput LDPC decoder architecture,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Computer Design (ICCD), 2006, pp. 320–325.
[32] T. Mohsenin and B. M. Baas, “High-throughput LDPC decoders using a multiple split-row method,” in IEEE Int. Conf. Acoustics, Speech, Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2007.
[33] T. Mohsenin, D. Truong, and B. Baas, “A low-complexity messagepassing algorithm for reduced routing congestion in LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I [Online]. Available: http://www.ece.ucdavis.edu/vcl/pubs/2009.11.TCAS.LDPC/ldpc.tcas.pdf, accepted for publication
[34] M. Ardakani and F. Kschischang, “Gear-shift decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 1235–1242, Jul. 2006.
[35] Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic, “A 47 Gb/s LDPC decoder with improved low error rate performance,” in Proc. Symp. VLSI Circuits, Jun. 2009.
[36] Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. J. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic, “An efficient 10GBASE-T ethernet LDPC decoder design with low error floors,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 843–855, Apr. 2010.
[37] A. Darabiha, “VLSI Architectures for multi-Gbps low-density paritycheck decoders,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2008.
[38] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. R. Kschischang, “A 3.3-Gbps bitserial block-interlaced min-sum LDPC decoder in 0.13-um CMOS,” in Proc. Custom Integrated Circuits Conf., Sep. 2007, pp. 459–462.
[39] L. Liu and C.-J. R. Shi, “Sliced message passing: High throughput overlapped decoding of high-rate low density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, vol. 55, pp. 3697–3710, Dec. 2008.
[40] T. L. Brandon, R. Hang, G. Block, V. Gaudet, B. F. Cockburn, S. L. Howard, C. Giasson, K. Boyle, S. S. Zeinoddin, A. Rapley, S. Bates, D. G. Elliott, and C. Schlegel, “A scalable LDPC decoder ASIC architecture with bit-serial message exchange,” Integr. VLSI J., vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 385–398, May 2008.
[41] David MacKay’s Gallager Code Resources [Online]. Available: http:// www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/
Saeed Sharifi Tehrani (S’05) received the B.Sc. degree in computer engineering from Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran, in 2002 and the M.Sc. degree in electrical and computer engineering from the University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada, in 2005. He is currently working towards the Ph.D. degree at the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
From January to June 2010, he was a visiting Ph.D. student at the Signal Transmission And Recording (STAR) group, Center for Magnetic Recording Research (CMRR), University of California, San Diego (UCSD), CA. His research interests include stochastic decoding, digital signal processing systems, low hardware-complexity and high throughput error-control coding, efficient design and hardware implementation of iterative decoders, and coding for data storage systems. Mr. Sharifi Tehrani has been awarded several merit-based scholarships in national and provincial competitions during his graduate studies. He received the Post Graduate Scholarship from the Alberta Informatics Circle of Research Excellence (iCORE) during his M.Sc. study at the University of Alberta. Also, during his Ph.D. study at McGill University, he has been a recipient of the Alexander Graham Bell Canada Graduate Scholarship (CGS Doctoral) and the Michael Smith Foreign Study Scholarship from the Natural Science and Engineering Council of Canada (NSERC), and has been an awardee of the Quebec doctoral scholarship and the Quebec International Internship Scholarship from the Fonds Québécois de la Recherche sur la Nature et les Technologies (FQRNT).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:01:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4896

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 58, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2010

Ali Naderi received the B.Sc. degree from the Iran University of Science and Technology (IUST) Tehran, in 2000, the M.Sc. degree from the Urmia University, Urmia, Iran, in 2003, and the Ph.D. degree from Ecole Polytechnique, Montreal, QC, Canada, in 2008, all in electrical engineering.
He then joined the Microelectronic Laboratory at the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, as a postdoctoral associate. His research interests include design of analog and mixed signal circuits, oversampling data converters, and forward error correction algorithms.

Dr. Hemati is the recipient of several awards and scholarships, including the Senate Medal for outstanding academic achievement at Carleton University, a ReSMiQ (Le Regroupement Stratégique en Microsystèmes du Québec) postdoctoral fellowship, an Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) postdoctoral fellowship, a Canadian Space Agency (CSA) NSERC postdoctoral supplement award, a Communications and Information Technology Ontario (CITO) research excellence award, an Ontario Graduate Scholarship, an Ontario Graduate Scholarship in Science and Technology, and the Best Paper Award in the Communications and Information Technology Ontario Knowledge Network Conference in 2002.

Guy-Armand Kamendje received the M.Sc. (Dipl.Ing) degree from the Graz University of Technology, Graz, Austria, in 1999.
He held various design engineering positions in several companies mainly working on low power VLSI systems for cryptographic applications and radio frequency identification. From 2008 to 2009, he was with the Integrated Microsystem Laboratory at McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, where he carried research on VLSI implementation of error correcting codes. He is currently a Senior Product Design Engineer at the PMC-Sierra’s Communication Product Division (CPD) and works on wireless back-haul systems.

Shie Mannor (S’00–M’03–SM’09) received the B.Sc. degree in electrical engineering, the B.A. degree in mathematics, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the Technion—Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, in 1996, 1996, and 2002, respectively.
From 2002 to 2004, he was a Fulbright scholar and a Postdoctoral Associate at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge. Since 2004, he has been with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, where he was a Canada Research Chair in Machine Learning. He has been a Horev Fellow and an Associate Professor at the Faculty of Electrical Engineering at the Technion since 2008. His research interests include machine learning and pattern recognition, planning and control, multi-agent systems, and communications.

Saied Hemati (S’01–M’06–SM’08) was born in Isfahan, Iran. He received the B.Sc. and the M.Sc. degrees in electronics engineering from the Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan, Iran, in 1993 and 1997, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada, in 2005.
From 1997 to 1999, he worked at the Isfahan Optics Center of the Integrated Electronics Industry (IEI), Isfahan, Iran. From 1999 to 2001, he was a Researcher at the Research and Education Center of the Isfahan Telecommunication Company, Isfahan, Iran. From 2005 to 2007, he was an NSERC Postdoctoral Fellow and a part-time Professor at the School of Information Technology and Engineering at the University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada. He was an Assistant Professor at the Department of Electrical Engineering at Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran, in 2008. Currently, he is a Senior Researcher at the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada. His research interests include the theory of operation and the design and implementation of low-power/low-complexity/high-speed digital and analog iterative error-correcting decoders.

Warren J. Gross (S’92–M’04–SM’10) received the B.A.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada, in 1996, and the M.A.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, in 1999 and 2003, respectively.
Currently, he is an Associate Professor with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada. His research interests are in the design and implementation of signal processing systems and custom computer architectures. Dr. Gross currently serves as Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING. He is a member of the Design and Implementation of Signal Processing Systems Technical Committee of the IEEE Signal Processing Society. He served on the Program Committees of the IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems, the IEEE Symposium on Field-Programmable Custom Computing Machines, the Int. Conf. Field-Programmable Logic and Applications and as the General Chair of the Sixth Annual Analog Decoding Workshop. He is a licensed Professional Engineer in the Province of Ontario.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:01:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

