2010 IEEE 21st International Symposium on Personal Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications

Low-Complexity Iteration Control for MIMO-BICM Systems
C. Gimmler, T. Lehnigk-Emden, N.Wehn Microelectronic Systems Design Research Group
University of Kaiserslautern Erwin-Schroedinger-Strasse, 67663 Kaiserslautern, Germany
Email: {gimmler, lehnigk, wehn}@eit.uni-kl.de

Abstract—Air bandwidth is a precious resource for wireless communication. Multiple-antenna (MIMO) systems enable an increase in channel capacity without increasing the air bandwidth. An iterative demapping and decoding at the receiver improves the communications performance remarkably. However, MIMO demapping and channel decoding have a high computational complexity. Energy consumption, latency and throughput of a hardware implementation strongly depend on the number of iterations. Iteration control techniques are very efficient to reduce the average number of iterations thus increasing decoder throughput and reducing energy consumption and average decoding latency.
To the best of our knowledge, we present the first analysis of iteration control in MIMO bit interleaved coded modulation systems. We introduce a novel stopping metric for iteration control, which outperforms existing stopping metrics for middle and high signal-to-noise ratios. Additionally, we analyze state-of-theart stopping metrics with respect to their algorithmic complexity in due consideration of a later hardware implementation.
I. INTRODUCTION
Wireless services are driven by the rising demand to provide high-speed data transmissions (several 100 Mbit/s) anytime and everywhere. A common way to increase the throughput and the system capacity is to increase the transmission bandwidth. The available frequency space for wireless transmission is naturally limited and already occupied by different services. Multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) antenna systems can overcome this problem by increasing the channel capacity without increasing the bandwidth, e.g., the LTE standard already includes a MIMO transmission mode [1].
The receiver of a MIMO system consists of a MIMO detector, which recovers the transmitted bits from all receive antennas. After that a channel decoder corrects corrupted bits to provide a certain quality of service. The communications performance of the receiver can be remarkably improved by introducing an iterative decoding between the MIMO detector and the channel decoder [2] [3].
However, this iterative improvement comes at a cost as energy consumption, latency and throughput of the receiver are directly related to the number of iterations. Instead of using a fixed number of iterations, an iteration control exploits the dynamics of the channel and adapts the number of iterations accordingly. This way, latency and energy consumption are considerably reduced and throughput is increased. The implementation of stopping conditions causes an energy and area

overhead. Therefore, the complexity of stopping metrics has to be low to avoid that the benefits of iteration control are counterbalanced by its implementation cost.
A. Related Work
Iteration control methods have been extensively studied for the decoding of iterative channel codes like e.g. turbo codes or low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. It was shown that iteration control is the most efficient technique for energy saving in a turbo decoder system without sacrificing communications performance [4]. Common iteration control metrics are based on either the sign bits [5] [6] or the extrinsic or a posteriori values [5] [7] [8] at the output of the channel decoder. Some of them can be implemented with a very low complexity [9] [10]. For systematic codes in high signal-tonoise ratio (SNR) ranges, it is even possible to avoid decoding completely by detecting valid codewords at the entry of the channel decoder [11]. A more theoretical approach was chosen in [7], where Hagenauer et al. use the cross-entropy between different iterations for iteration control. However, all those works restrict iteration control to the field of channel decoding.
In the context of MIMO bit interleaved coded modulation (BICM) systems, Zimmermann et al. [12] use an estimate of the information content at the entry of the turbo decoder to reduce the overall number of iterations of the inner channel decoder. However, this technique is not able to reduce the number of iterations between MIMO detection and channel decoding.
B. New Contributions
In contrast to the afore mentioned work, we aim at reducing the number of iterations between MIMO detector and channel decoder and not the iterations within the channel decoder. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first paper analyzing iteration control for MIMO-BICM systems.
We introduce a novel stopping metric for iteration control and compare it with several state-of-the-art stopping metrics. We present the first analysis for these stopping metrics for iterative demapping and decoding in a MIMO-BICM system regarding
• their impact on communications performance,

978-A1ut-h4or2iz4e4d -lic8e0ns1e6d-u6se/1lim0/it$ed2t6o:.0Yo0ns©ei2U0ni1v.0DoIEwnEloEaded on J2u4n1e 24,2026 at 03:08:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

• their ability to reduce the number of iterations and thereby influencing throughput, latency and energy consumption of a hardware implementation,
• and their algorithmic complexity.
All presented simulation results are obtained with lowcomplexity algorithms where all values have been quantized. The choice of the algorithms was determined by their suitability for a later hardware implementation.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section II introduces the analyzed communications system and basic receiver algorithms. An overview on iteration control techniques is given in III. Furthermore, a new stopping metric based on mutual information is presented. Its algorithmic complexity is compared to several state-of-the-art metrics. Simulation results on communications performance and reduction of iterations are discussed in IV. Finally, the paper is concluded in V.

II. SYSTEM MODEL

In this paper, we focus on a bit interleaved coded modulation
(BICM) scheme like shown in Fig. 1. The source generates a random infoword u of length Kc, which is encoded by the channel encoder. The interleaved codeword XN consists of Nc bits, which are grouped into N subblocks xn.

XN = (x1, x2, . . . , xn, . . . , xN )

(1)

Each subblock xn consists of Q coded bits.

xn = (x1,n, x2,n, . . . , xq,n, . . . , xQ,n), xq,n ∈ {−1, +1}
(2)
Each subblock xn is mapped directly to a complex symbol s chosen from a 2Q-ary QAM modulation scheme. MT symbols are combined in one transmission vector st.

st = (s1,t, s2,t, . . . , sm,t, . . . , sMT ,t)

(3)

The whole modulated sequence is represented by

ST = (s1, s2, . . . , st, . . . , sT )

(4)

T = N/MT time slots are needed to transmit all symbols

of one codeword. The transmission of vector st in time step

t is modeled by

yt = Ht · st + nt

(5)

with Ht the channel matrix of dimension MT ×MR and nt the noise vector of dimension MR whose entries are zero-mean and unit variance Gaussian variables. The elements of Ht
are modeled as independent, complex, zero-mean, Gaussian

random variables. Real and imaginary parts are independent variables each with variance σ2 = N0/2. All received vectors yt are gathered in the matrix Y T

Y T = (y1, y2, . . . , yt, . . . , yT )

(6)

with

yt = (y1,t, y2,t, . . . , ym,t, . . . , yMR,t)

(7)

It is assumed that Ht is perfectly known by the MIMO detector and that symmetric antenna constellations are employed with MT = MR = M .

Fig. 1. MIMO bit interleaved coded modulation system model

The decoding process is iterative between MIMO detector

and channel decoder. They iteratively exchange probability in-

formation of the codeword. The soft-input soft-output MIMO

detector determines the likelihood of the bits for each received vector yt using the a-priori information La from the channel decoder. Thus, T MIMO detections are needed to process a

whole codeword. The MIMO detector works on one received

vector yt at a time. For ease of notation, the time indices of y, H and s are dropped. xq,m denotes the qth bit of the mth
symbol in s. For iterative detection and decoding the MIMO

detector computes logarithmic likelihood values (LLRs) on

each bit

λ(xq,m)

=

log

P (xq,m P (xq,m

= =

+1|y) −1|y)

(8)

The likelihood that a specific vector s has been sent is measured by the metric d(s).

d(s) = 1 N0

y − Hs 2 − 1 2

xq,mLa(xq,m)

q,m

(9)

Small metrics d(s) relate to a high probability of s being sent. Equation (8) can then be calculated by the Max-LogMap approximation [2].

λ(xq,m) = min d(s) − min d(s)

s|xq,m =−1

s|xq,m =+1

(10)

Only the extrinsic information λe = λ − La is passed on to the channel decoder.

The channel decoder works on the whole codeword at the

same time. The channel decoder uses the interleaved a-priori information λa from the MIMO detector for the calculation of
the estimated information bit sequence uˆ and the a-posteriori LLRs Λ of the codeword. The extrinsic information Le = Λ − λa is returned to the MIMO detector.

III. LOW-COMPLEXITY STOPPING METRICS
An iteration control typically monitors exchanged values in an iterative system and checks stopping conditions to detect convergence of processed block. The iterative process is stopped as early as possible to minimize decoding costs in terms of energy and throughput.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J2u4n2e 24,2026 at 03:08:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Stopping metrics can be based on the input or the output values of the channel decoder. In this paper, we concentrate on metrics at the output of the channel decoder (see Fig. 3). A stopping metric Cit is calculated after each iteration it. It serves as an estimate of the convergence state of decoding. Cit can either increase or decrease for a converging block. If a stopping condition is true, decoding is stopped. Stopping conditions can be formulated using the stopping metric Cit in two ways:
• direct comparison of Cit to a threshold
Cit ≤ θmin1 Cit > θmax1
• taking the metric Cit−1 of the previous iteration into account (thus a minimum of two iterations is necessary)
Cit − Cit−1 ≤ θmin2 Cit − Cit−1 > θmax2
The crucial point for all stopping conditions is the choice of the thresholds θ since they allow a trade-off between decoding complexity (number of iterations) and decoding performance (frame error rate (FER)).
For ease of notation, we reduce the notation of the LLR values to Lit(xk) for the introduction of the metrics. it stands for the iteration in which the LLRs have been generated and k for the bit position within the codeword. In the following paragraphs, we analyze different metrics Cit.

A. State-of-the-art stopping metrics

1) Sign-Change Ratio (SCRit) [6]: This metric keeps track of the sign changes of the output values between two iterations. The number of changes is divided by the number of considered values to obtain a ratio that is independent of the block length. If decoding has converged, no changes will occur. However, if the block is not converging many sign bits will change after each iteration.
2) Re-Encoding [11]: For this metric, estimates of systematic and parity bits have to be available. The decoded systematic bits are re-encoded and the resulting codeword is compared to the codeword estimate at the decoder output. The number of differences Δit is zero if a valid codeword has been found. It is high in the case of non-convergence.
3) Mean-Reliability [9]: Many state-of-the-art stopping metrics try to estimate the information content of the output LLRs by simple functions. The mean of the absolute values of the LLRs μit is one of those measures, which can be calculated with very low complexity.

μit =

1 Nc

Nc k=1

Lit (xk )

(11)

The mean reliability can be seen as an estimation of the mutual information [12]. There are other metrics based on LLR values (Minimum-Reliability, Sum-Reliability [9]) with similar complexity. Our simulations have shown that their performance is similar or worse than the performance of Mean-Reliability. Thus, they are not considered in the following analysis.

Mutual Information at output of MIMO detector

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Mutual Information at output of channel decoder

Fig. 2. EXIT chart showing the typical behavior of decodable (dashed lines) and non-decodable (solid lines) blocks during iterative detection and decoding of the analyzed MIMO-BICM system

4) Channel Capacity: Shannon’s theorem [13] states that

reliable communication is only possible for transmission rates

smaller or equal to the channel capacity. The channel capacity

C of a MIMO Rayleigh fading channel is according to Telatar

[14]

C = log2 det

I MT

+

ES/N0 HHH MT

(12)

where IMT is an identity matrix of size MT and HH is the Hermitian transpose of the channel matrix. The channel capacity can be used to detect non-decodable blocks. If the capacity is too low, decoding is not started at all.
5) Magic Genie: We additionally introduce Magic Genie as an exact lower bound for all other stopping conditions. It stops blocks as soon as they are correctly decoded. If a block cannot be decoded within the maximum number of iterations, Magic Genie does not even start decoding. Thus, Magic Genie has no false alarms and uses the minimum number of iterations possible.

B. Novel Stopping Criterion: Mutual Information
The convergence behavior of iterative systems composed of soft-input soft-output decoders is often studied by means of extrinsic information transfer charts (EXIT charts) [15]. EXIT charts based on mutual information have been shown to predict the decoding behavior very exactly [15]. Another advantage is that the mutual information is practically unaffected by clipping of values [15]. This is especially important for a hardware implementation where LLR values constantly have to be clipped to fit in a given bit width.
Figure 2 shows several exemplary block trajectories for the considered MIMO-BICM system (compare Fig. 1). One trajectory is generated by measuring the mutual information of the extrinsic information λe after the MIMO detector and the extrinsic information Le after the channel decoder for each iteration. A mutual information of 1 relates to a fully corrected block. It is observed that even for high SNR and high a priori knowledge the output of the MIMO detector does not reach a mutual information of 1. Therefore, it is concluded that decoding can only be stopped after the channel decoder.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J2u4n3e 24,2026 at 03:08:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Moreover, decodable (dashed lines) and non-decodable blocks
(solid lines) show very different characteristics in the EXIT chart. Therefore, we propose a new stopping metric Mit for iteration control based on mutual information of the extrinsic information Le after the channel decoder.
The exact calculation of the mutual information between the original bit sequence X and Le involves tracking the
conditioned probability density function of the LLR values Le [15]. This relates to a high complexity in a hardware
implementation. However, in [16], it was shown that the
mutual information can be calculated only based on the LLR
values of one iteration.

1 Nc Mit = Nc k=1

1 1 + eLit(xk) · log2

2 1 + eLit(xk)

1

2

+ 1 + e−Lit(xk) · log2 1 + e−Lit(xk)

(13)

This equation is exact when Log-APP decoders are used. As we use Max-Log-Map decoders, a small inaccuracy can be expected but Mit is still a very good indicator for the convergence behavior of a block. Equation (13) includes a division by Nc. Divisions have a very high implementation cost in hardware compared to additions or comparisons. Instead of using Mit as stopping metric we use Nc · Mit, which avoids this division.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that mutual information is used for iteration control.

C. Complexity Analysis
The calculation and evaluation of stopping metrics naturally introduces an overhead in the receiver decoding complexity. It has to be ensured that this overhead is low to avoid that the benefits of iteration control are counterbalanced by its implementation cost.
The SCR metric compares all signs of the coded bits (XOR) and counts (ADD) the number of differences. The MeanReliability is calculated by adding all the LLR values of the coded bits. A convolutional encoder is needed for the ReEncoding metric, which consists of single bit XOR operations. The re-encoded bits are compared to the decoded bits (XOR) and the number of differences is counted (ADD). The mutual information metric seems to have a higher complexity due to the term in the sum of (13). However, the values of Lit(xk) are quantized with 6 bits and the term is an even function of Lit(xk). Therefore, it can be stored in a Look Up Table (LUT) with only 32 entries.
Table I shows the algorithmic complexity for each of the analyzed stopping metrics normalized on one information bit and one iteration. As a comparison, the complexity for one iteration of the convolutional decoder normalized on one information bit is given. (The complexity of the convolutional decoder is determined by the operations needed in one trellis step.) It can be seen that all metrics have a very low complexity compared to the channel decoder. The calculation of the channel capacity has a higher complexity than the other

Stopping metrics

Operations per information bit and iteration

Sign-Change Ratio Mean-Reliability Re-Encoding Mutual information
Convolutional Decoder

2x XOR, 2x ADD 2x ADD 6x XOR, 2x XOR, 2x ADD 2x LUT, 2x ADD
398x ADD , 266x COMPARE

TABLE I ALGORITHMIC COMPLEXITY FOR DIFFERENT STOPPING METRICS

Fig. 3. Iterative MIMO-BICM receiver including iteration control based on channel decoder outputs
metrics. However, part of the computations are already done in the preprocessing for the MIMO detection and the additional complexity is low.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
The design space for MIMO-BICM systems is huge. Therefore, a feasible simulation setup was defined which is shown in Table II. It is assumed that the channel stays constant during the transmission of one codeword (quasi-static channel). As channel code, a convolutional code is chosen, which is used in many communication standards like e.g. WiMax [17]. However, the presented stopping metrics are not specific for convolutional codes and, with adapted thresholds, they can also be applied to other soft-output channel decoders like e.g. turbo codes or LDPC codes. The iterative process can only be stopped after the channel decoder (compare Section III-B). Therefore, all stopping metrics are evaluated on the outputs of the channel decoder (see Figure 3).
For any efficient hardware implementation, an algorithm with low computational complexity is mandatory. This decrease in complexity always comes with a certain degradation in communications performance.
• A sphere decoder is selected which considerably reduces the exponential algorithmic complexity of MIMO detection. For ML detection, the sphere decoder provides the optimal solution. However, for iterative detection and decoding, a soft-input soft-output sphere decoder is mandatory [2] [3] which is not optimal due to the MaxLog-Map approximation [2].
• MIMO detector and channel decoder both use quantized values in their calculations. Real and imaginary part of the channel matrix H and the received values y are quantized with 12 bits each. The exchanged likelihood values are represented by 6 bits. This quantization was chosen because it is a good trade-off between communications performance and implementation complexity.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J2u4n4e 24,2026 at 03:08:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

100

4.5

θmax1=2015

4

θmax1=2010

θmax1=2005

Magic Genie 3.5

10−1 3

FER
Number of Iterations

2.5

1 iteration

10−2

2 iterations

4 iterations

6 iterations

8 iterations

10 iterations

Outage capacity

10−3

7

8

9

10
Signal-to-noise

11
ratio

Es N0

12

13

14

Fig. 4. Frame error rate versus signal-to-noise ratio for different number of iterations

Modulation Antenna constellation Convolutional code polynomials System code rate Block length Max. number of iterations

16-QAM
4×4
1358, 1638
1 2
2016 bits
10

TABLE II SIMULATION PARAMETERS

Fig. 4 shows the communications performance for the iterative decoding of quantized sphere decoder and channel decoder. Compared to the communications performance of the unconstrained MIMO detection and floating point accuracy, the loss is smaller than 0.2 dB.
All stopping conditions presented in section III need thresholds θmin/max in order to decide if a block is further processed or not. The choice of these thresholds is always a trade-off between decoding complexity (number of iterations) and decoding performance (FER). Figure 5 demonstrates this tradeoff for the mutual information metric Nc · Mit. Mit can only take on values between 0 and 1. Therefore, the stopping metric Nc·Mit can never be larger than 2016. In the block trajectories of Fig. 2, correctly decoded blocks have a mutual information of 1. Due to the approximation of the mutual information (Eq. (13)) and the influence of quantization, this value is not always reached for correctly decoded blocks. The threshold θmax1 is varied between the values 2005 and 2015 while the threshold θmin2 = 0 stays constant. Table III shows the degradations in communications performance evaluated at FER 1%, which result from the different choices of θmax1 in Fig. 5.
Next, we will analyze and compare the performance of different stopping conditions. The thresholds (see Table IV) have been chosen such that the loss in communications performance induced by the iteration control is less than 0.1 dB. For the analyzed system 8 bits are transmitted per

θmax1 Loss in dB

2005 0.4

2010 0.2

2015 0.05

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

Signal−to−noise ratio ES / N0

Fig. 5. Average number of iterations for variation of threshold θmax1 for mutual information metric

channel use. Yet the threshold θmin1 for the channel capacity is set to 9.5 which means that more blocks are stopped. The communications performance in Fig. 4 is more than 2dB from the outage capacity. Therefore, the threshold can be chosen higher without loss of communications performance.
Fig. 6 shows the average number of iterations resulting from each stopping condition. Magic Genie serves as a lower bound. For low signal-to-noise ratios (SNR) many blocks cannot be decoded correctly (compare Fig. 4). Therefore, Magic Genie needs on average less than one iteration. For high SNR, more than 80% of the blocks are corrected after the second iteration and the number of iterations needed on average is between 1 and 2 only. However, in the middle SNR region, several iterations are often needed to correct a received block and thus the maximum iterations are in this SNR region.
Except for the stopping condition based on the channel capacity, all analyzed stopping metrics show the same behavior as Magic Genie. They are able to effectively reduce the average number of iterations. Re-Encoding shows very good performance for high SNRs. As Mean-Reliability is an approximation of Mutual Information, they show very similar behavior. The newly presented Mutual Information metric outperforms all state-of-the-art metrics for middle and high SNRs.
The channel capacity is a good means to detect undecodable blocks in the low SNR regime. However, it cannot reduce the number of iterations for decodable blocks. A combination of channel capacity and mutual information would result in a low complexity over the whole SNR range.
To illustrate the efficiency of the presented iteration control two vertical lines are inserted in Fig. 6 at the SNR points for which an FER of 10% respectively 1% is achieved. For mutual information and a target FER of 1% less than 2 iterations are needed on average. The gain of decoding time can be used either to directly speed up the decoder or to save energy, which is of high importance in mobile devices.

TABLE III LOSS OF COMMUNICATIONS PERFORMANCE FOR VARIATION OF
THRESHOLD θmax1

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J2u4n5e 24,2026 at 03:08:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Stopping metric Cit
Sign-change Ratio SCRit Re-Encoding Δit Mutual Information Nc · Mit Mean-Reliability μit Channel Capacity C

θmin1
0 0 9.5

θmax1
40% 600 2013 30
-

θmin2
0 −0.25 -

θmax2
-

TABLE IV THRESHOLDS FOR DIFFERENT STOPPING METRICS

10

Magic Genie

9

SCR

Re−Encoding

Mean Reliability

8

Mutual Information

Capacity

7

Number of iterations

6

5

4

3

2

1

FER <10%

FER <1%

0

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

Signal−to−noise ration ES / N0

Fig. 6. Average number of iterations of different iteration control metrics versus signal-to-noise ratio

V. CONCLUSIONS
MIMO-BICM systems are a promising candidate for high data rate transmission on wireless channels. Their excellent performance is achieved by iterative decoding between MIMO detection and channel decoder, which comes along with high implementation costs in terms of throughput and energy.
To the best of our knowledge, we presented the first analysis of iteration control for MIMO-BICM systems. We have shown that low-complexity stopping metrics can effectively reduce the number of iterations between MIMO detector and channel decoder without decreasing the communications performance. Thereby, iteration control is an effective means to increase throughput or reduce the energy consumption of the receiver. The newly presented low-complexity stopping metric on Mutual Information outperforms existing stopping metrics for middle and high SNRs.

[6] R. Y. Shao, S. Lin, and M. C. P. Fossorier, “Two Simple Stopping Criteria for Turbo Decoding,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 47, no. 8, pp. 1117–1120, Aug. 1999.
[7] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative Decoding of Binary Block and Convolutional Codes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 429–445, Mar. 1996.
[8] A. Matache, S. Dolinar, and F. Pollara, “Stopping Rules for Turbo Decoders,” TMO Progress Report 42–142, Aug. 2000, http://tda.jpl.nasa.gov/progress report/, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California.
[9] F. Gilbert, F. Kienle, and N. Wehn, “Low Complexity Stopping Criteria for UMTS Turbo-Decoders,” in Proc. VTC 2003-Spring Vehicular Technology Conference The 57th IEEE Semiannual, Jeju, Korea, Apr. 2003, pp. 2376–2380.
[10] F. Kienle and N. Wehn, “Low Complexity Stopping Criterion for LDPC Code Decoders,” in Proc. VTC 2005-Spring Vehicular Technology Conference 2005 IEEE 61st, Stockholm, Schweden, May 2005, pp. 606– 609.
[11] T. Lehnigk-Emden and N. Wehn, “Enhanced Iteration Control for Ultra Low Power LDPC Decoding,” in Proc. 2008 ICT Mobile and Wireless Communications Summit (ICT-Mobile Summit 2008), Stockholm, Sweden, Jun. 2008.
[12] E. Zimmermann, S. Bittner, and G. Fettweis, “Complexity Reduction in Iterative MIMO Receivers Based on EXIT Chart Analysis,” Proceedings of the International Symposium on Turbo Codes & Related Topics (ISTC’06), 2006.
[13] C. E. Shannon, “A Mathematical Theory of Communication,” Bell System Technical Journal, vol. 27, pp. 379–423 and 623–656, July and October 1948. [Online]. Available: http://cm.bell-labs.com/cm/ms/what/ shannonday/paper.html
[14] I. Telatar, “Capacity of multi-antenna Gaussian channels,” European Transactions on Telecommunications, vol. 10, pp. 585–595, 1999.
[15] S. ten Brink, “Convergence behavior of iteratively decoded parallel concatenated codes,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 49, no. 10, pp. 1727–1737, 2001.
[16] I. Land, P. Hoeher, and S. Gligorevic, “Computation of Symbol-Wise Mutual Information in Transmission Systems with LogAPP Decoders and Application to EXIT Charts,” in Proceedings 5th Int. ITG Conf. on Source and Channel Coding (SCC), 2004, pp. 195–202.
[17] I. 802.16, Local and metropolitan area networks; Part 16: Air Interface for Fixed and Mobile Broadband Wireless Access Systems; Amendment 2:Physical and Medium Access Control Layers for Combined Fixed and Mobile Operation in Licensed Bands.

REFERENCES
[1] “3GPP LTE (Long Term Evolution) Homepage.” [Online]. Available: http://www.3gpp.org/Highlights/LTE/LTE.htm
[2] B. Hochwald and S. ten Brink, “Achieving near-capacity on a multipleantenna channel,” Communications, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 389–399, March 2003.
[3] H. Vikalo, B. Hassibi, and T. Kailath, “Iterative decoding for MIMO channels via modified sphere decoding,” Wireless Communications, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 2299–2311, Nov. 2004.
[4] M. J. Thul, T. Vogt, F. Gilbert, and N. Wehn, “Evaluation of Algorithm Optimizations for Low-Power Turbo-Decoder Implementations,” in Proc. 2002 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP ’02), Orlando, Florida, USA, May 2002, pp. 3101–3104.
[5] Y. Wu, B. D. Woerner, and W. J. Ebel, “A Simple Stopping Criterion for Turbo Decoding,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 4, no. 8, pp. 258–260, Aug. 2000.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J2u4n6e 24,2026 at 03:08:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

