LDPC Codes from Projective Algebraic Sets over Finite Fields

Wanbao Hu, Yanxia Wu, Zhen Wang, Huaping Cai
Department of Mathematics, Anqing teachers college Anqing, China
E-mail:huwanb@126.com

Abstract—Our main aim is to present a new construction of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes from projective algebraic sets over finite fields,where the sets are the intersection of a one-dimensional hyperplane with one hypersurface of homogeneous polynomial equation in projective n-space. In particular, for 2-dimensional case, the projective algebraic sets are the intersection of a line with one curve, and the parity-check matrices of the LDPC codes are the incidence matrices of the points and lines which we can see in some well-known papers.
Keywords- low-density parity-check (LDPC) code; projective algebraic set; finte field; projective plane
I. INTRODUCTION
LDPC codes are one of the hottest topics in coding theory today. Originally invented in the early 1960's[1], they have experienced an amazing comeback in the last few years. Unlike many other classes of codes, LDPC codes are already equipped with very fast (probabilistic) encoding and decoding algorithms. The question is that of the design of the codes such that these algorithms can recover the original codeword in the face of large amounts of noise. New analytic and combinatorial tools make it possible to solve the design problem. This makes LDPC codes not only attractive from a theoretical point of view, but also perfect for practical applications. Much later, many algebraic or geometric methods[2,3,4,5,6] can be applied in constructing structured LDPC codes. This paper gives a new construction of lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes from projective algebraic sets over finite fields where the sets are the intersection of a one-dimensional hyperplane with one hypersurface of homogeneous polynomial equation in projective n-space.
II. LDPC CODES FROM PROJECTIVE ALGEBRAIC SETS
A. LDPC Codes A linear code may be described in terms of a parity check
matrix H, which satisfies Hx = 0 for all codewords x. In 1962, Gallager reported work on binary codes defined in terms of low density parity check matrices. The matrix H was defined in a non-systematic form; each column of H had a small weight and the weight per row was also uniform; the matrix H

was constructed at random subject to these constraints. Gallager proved distance properties of these codes and described a probability-based decoding algorithm with promising empirical performance. However it appears that Gallager codes have been generally forgotten, the assumption perhaps being that concatenated codes were superior for practical purposes.
Late, a binary regular LDPC code is defined as the null space of a sparse parity-check matrix H over GF(2) with
constant column weight γ and constant row weight ρ , where γ and ρ are small, compared with the code length. An
LDPC code is said to be irregular if its parity-check matrix has varying column weights and varying row weights.
Much late, nonbinary LDPC codes are attracted by some mathematicians and engineers. The codes are defined as follows. Let GF(q) be a finite field with qψelements where qψ is a power of a prime. A q-ary regular LDPC code←is given by the null space over GF(q) of a sparse parity-check matrix H over GF(q). If the columns and/or rows of H have varying weights, then the null space of H gives an irregular LDPC code.
To construct structured LDPC codes, many methods can be considered. In 2001, Fossorier et al [5] experimented ith using incidence structures in finite geometries as generators of a class of codes and they found that these codes represented well-structured LDPC codes that performed quite well under iterative decoding. Since Fossorier’s work, mathematicians have created various other LDPC codes generated by incidence structures in discrete mathematics or geometry (see [2,3,4,5,6], for instance). In this paper, we introduce a new construction of LDPC codes by algebraic sets in algebraic geometry.
B. Projective algebraic sets
In geometry, a hypersurface is a generalization of the concept of hyperplane. Suppose an enveloping manifold M has n dimensions; then any submanifold of M of n• 1 dimensions is a hypersurface. Equivalently, the codimension of a hypersurface is one. In algebraic geometry, a hypersurface in projective space of dimension n is an algebraic set that is purely of dimension n• 1. It is then defined by a single equation F=0, a homogeneous polynomial in the homogeneous coordinates.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei9U7n8iv-.1D-4o2w4n4lo-a3d7e0d9o-n2/J1u0ne/$2245,2.00026©a2t 0031:000I:E48EUETC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

A hyperplane is a concept in geometry. It is a generalization of the concept of a plane into a different number of dimensions. Analogous with a plane which defines a two-dimensional subspace in a three-dimensional space, a hyperplane defines a k-dimensional subspace within an ndimensional space, where k<n. A line, for example, is a onedimensional hyperplane in a space with any number of dimensions.
When n =2, a projective hypersurface is just a projective plane curve.
Let Pn be a projective n-space over k. Let

be a homogeneous polynomial of degree d. It is not well-

defined to evaluate ƒ on points in Pn in homogeneous

coordinates. However, because ƒ is homogeneous,

f(λx , ..., λx ) = λdf(x , ..., x ),

0

n

0

n

so it does make sense to ask whether ƒ vanishes at a point

[x ,…,x ].

0

n

For each set S of homogeneous polynomials, define the

zero-locus of S to be the set of points in Pn on which the

functions in S vanish:

A subset V of Pn is called an projective algebraic set if V = Z(S) for some S. Moreover, an irreducible projective algebraic set is called a projective variety [7,8,9,10].
C. LDPC Codes from Projective algebraic sets
Consider the projective n-space Pn over finite field GF(q). Let the sign P represent a point of the space Pn. The number of the space is finite because of the finite field GF(q).
In the space, let f be a fixed homogeneous polynomial, G a set of homogeneous polynomials which determines a 1dimensional hyperplane, and SG ={f, G} the set of two homogeneous polynomials depending on g. Take the set VG = Z(SG) as our projective algebraic set. The LDPC codes from projective algebraic sets are constructed as follows.
We construct the parity-check matrix H over GF(2) with the column of all the pionts in the hypersurface f=0, and all the rows arranged through out all the different 1-dimensional hyperplanes G=0 of the space. And the entry h(G,f ) of the matrix H is 1 if the column-location point P∈VG for the rowlocation G, otherwise, 0.
Since each 1-dimensional hyperplane meet one hypersurface at few pionts in general for its lower dimension, the number of the pionts in a projective algebraic set VG is relatively small compared with the one in the hypersurface. This implies that the parity-check matrix may be sparse. And then the potential LDPC codes may be produced. To know the property of the algebraic sets we can see it in [7,8,9] in which They main concern with counting rational points of bounded height on projective algebraic sets. However, the deep background of algebraic-geometry is indispensable to read. So, we can consider it simply in the 2-demensional projective space, and then the hyperplane is a line, and the hypersurface is a curve in the space while the rich theory on algebraic curves we can understand in [10] and easily read its equavlent language of algebraic function fields in [11] . Next, we give a

very concise example in the following section in which we employ Hemitian curves as the curves in the variety.

III. AN EXAMPLE---- LDPC CODES FROM HEMITIAN
CURVES

The example is taken from the paper [12]. In the projective plane P2, consider the set Sψof triples x = (x,ψy, z) of elements of the finite field GF(q), where (x ψy ψ z) are not all zero. Sψhas q 3 −←1 members, but we identify

triples x and y if x = λy for some non-zero element λψ∈←

GF(q), and say that x and y are equivalent. Denote the equivalence class of x by [x]. Each equivalence class has qψ−←

1 members, corresponding to the qψ−←1 possible non-zero

values of λ, and so there are (q 3 −1) (qψ−1) = q 2 +qψ+1

different classes [x], which we take as the points of projective

2-space P2. Next define the blocks (or lines) as follows: If αψ

=(α ψα ψα ) is a triple of elements of GF(q), not all zero,

0

1

2

define the line g(α)ψto be the set of all points [x] such that

α xψ+ α yψ+ α zψ= 0.

0

1

2

By an argument similar to the one for points, there are q 2 + qψ

+ 1 lines. To see that there are qψ+ 1 points on each line,

consider the line [α] where αψ= (α ψα ψα ). Not all the

0

1

2

α ψare zero, so suppose for example that α ≠ 0. Then, if [x]

i

1

is on [α], x is uniquely determined by x and x , where x and

1

0

2

0

x cannot both be zero. There are q 2−1 choices of x and x , so

2

0

2

there are qψ2−1 vectors x ≠ 0 satisfying α xψ+ α yψ+ α zψ

0

1

2

= 0, and hence there are (q 2 −←1) (qψ−←1) = qψ+ 1

distinct points [x] on [α]. Take qψ=m2, Let f be Hermitian

homogeneous polynomial f=xm+1 + ym+1 + zm+1. The following

result on Hermitian curves is well-known. I. The number of points of Hermitian curve f=0 is m 3 + 1.

II. Every line of the projective plane meets the Hermitian curve in 1 or mψ+ 1 points. ψ
Let Sg(α) ={f, g(α)}, Vg(α) = Z(Sg(α)) as our projective algebraic set. We construct the parity-check matrix H over

GF(2) with the column of all the pionts in the Hermitian curve f, and all the rows arranged through out different line g(α)

excepting the line which intersect 1 point with the Hermitian curve. And the entry h(g(α),f) of the matrix H is 1 if the point

P of the curve belongs to the set V , g(α) otherwise 0. In the paper [12], We can see that the LDPC codes

constructed above of high-rate with Tanner graphs free of 4-

cycles, and in some cases with a large number of linearly

dependent parity checks as well. Moreover, simulation results

with the sum-product decoding algorithm demonstrate that the

codes from unital designs provide excellent decoding

performances.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by CNSF:60773128 and the open research fund of National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory, Southeast University.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:00:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

[1] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity-Check Codes. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1963.
[2] J. Xu, L. Chen, L.Q. Zeng, L. Lan, and S. Lin, Construction of LowDensity Parity-Check Codes by Superposition, IEEE Transactions on communications, VOL. 53, NO. 2, 2005, pp243-251
[3] H. Tang, J. Xu, Y. Kou, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “On algebraic construction of Gallager and circulant low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, 2004, pp. 1269--1279.
[4] L. Lan, L. Q. Zeng, Y. Y. Tai, L. Chen, and S. Lin, “Algebraic Construction of Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes - Part I: For AWGN and Binary Random Erasure Channels,’’ The proceedings of the 16th Applied Algebra, Algebraic Algorithms and Error-Correcting Codes, Las Vegas, Nevada, Feb.20-24, 2006, Springer-Verlag, 2006.
[5] Y. Kuo, S. Lin and M. P. C. Fossorier, Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: a rediscovery and new results, IEEE Trans. Inform.Theory, Vol. 47, No. 7, 2001, pp 2711–2736.

[6] Xiuli Li · Chen Zhang · Jun Shen, Regular LDPC Codes from Semipartial Geometries, Acta Appl. Math. ,VOL.102:, 2008, pp 25–35
[7] Robin Hartshorne, Algebraic Geometry. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 0-38790244-9, 1977
[8] David Cox; John Little, Don O'Shea, Ideals, Varieties, and Algorithms (second edition ed.). Springer-Verlag. ISBN 0-387-94680-2, 1997
[9] Browning, Timothy D., Quantitative Arithmetic of Projective Varieties, Progress in Mathematics, Vol. 277,2010.
[10] J.W.P. Hirschfeld, G. Korchmáros & F. Torres: Algebraic Curves over a Finite Field, Princeton University Press ,2008
[11] H. Stichtenoth, Algebraic Function Fields and Codes. Berlin: Springer, 1993
[12] S. J. Johnson and S. R. Weller, High-Rate LDPC Codes from Unital Designs GLOBECOM, pp 2036-2040, 2003

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:00:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

