2019 IEEE/CIC International Conference on Communications in China (ICCC)
Speeding up LDPC Decoder by Inter-Frame Pipeline for Wireless Laser Communications

Jipeng Zhang, Zhongyang Yu, Ji Zhang, Baoming Bai, Chao Chen, Fuwei Huang State Key Laboratory of ISN, Xidian University, P. R. China bmbai@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract—In order to meet the requirements of scenarios such as free space optical (FSO) communications using wireless laser, we need to improve the existing decoding structure of LDPC codes to achieve the goal of high throughput and high reliability. Aiming at solving a problem of idle time between layers in the column-serial layered decoder of LDPC codes, based on the dynamic multi-frame processing (DMFP) strategy we proposed a scheme called inter-frame pipeling (IFP) which can utilize the idle time for speeding up the decoder. Compared with the DMFP strategy the IFP has a doubled reduction of decoding delay. Taking a (4008,3507) LDPC code as an example, the fieldprogrammable gate array (FPGA) based implementation shows that the IFP scheme can increase throughput by at least 30%, approximately reaching to 2.5Gbps.
Index Terms—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, column-serial layered decoding, dynamic multi-frame processing, free space optical (FSO) communications
I. INTRODUCTION
Free space optical (FSO) communications have become received much attention in wireless communication systems in recent years. FSO communications refer to the replacement of the original optical fiber transmission by wireless laser, which has the advantage of far transmission distance compared with optical fiber communications. Compared with traditional radio frequency (RF) communications, FSO communications allow a huge increase in available bandwidth and data rate. Earlier experiments on FSO include have been done for a lot. In 2008, the European Space Agency (ESA) successfully achieved the world’s first low-orbit inter-satellite coherent laser communications at a rate of 5.62Gbps. In 2013, Lunar Laser Communications Demonstration (LLCD) in the United States achieved a down-link throughput of up to 622Mbps. On April 12, 2017, China launched the 13/Zhongxing-16 laser communications satellite, marking Chinese space laser communications into the experimental stage, and had completed the wireless laser communications experiment from the Geostationary Earth Orbit (GEO) to the ground station at a rate of 5Gbps [1]. In order to achieve reliable transmission of data, forward error correction (FEC) codes are commonly used, which include Hamming, BCH (Bose, Chaudhuri, Hocquenghem) and Reed-Solomon (RS) codes as typical examples [2]. Especially, RS (255, 239) codes have been recommended by ITU-T G.709 [3] and G.975 [4]. To obtain large coding gain, soft-decision based FEC codes such as LDPC codes are

used in FSO gradually. Now, it is a challenge to implement LDPC decoders with high throughput and coding gain.
LDPC codes [5] are a class of linear block codes with capacity-approaching performance, and they are characterized by sparse parity-check matrices and can be decoded iteratively based on message-passing algorithms. Due to its strong ability of error correction and anti-interference, LDPC codes have been adopted as a channel coding scheme by Digital Video Broadcasting Satellite-Second (DVB-S2) [7], Consultative Committee for Space Date Systems (CCSDS) [8], enhanced mobile broadband (eMBB) and ultra reliable low latency communications (URLLC) in fifth generation (5G) [9].
In recent years, the academic community has achieved a rapid progress in the hardware implementation of high-speed LDPC decoders. In 2007, Z. Cui proposed an efficient message passing architecture (EMPA) for LDPC decoder which had been quoted in [10] to save 54% outgoing wires per variable node unit and 90% outgoing wires per check node unit [11]. In 2009, H. Ding, et al. designed a specific structure-based LDPC decoder, and adopted layered decoding algorithm (LDA) to obtain a decoder with a throughput of 232.5 Mbps. Furthermore they integrated four such decoder cores into a FPGA chip, thus achieving a throughput of about 768Mbps [12]. In 2018, V. Pignoly and B.Le Gal utilized several LDPC codes suggested by DVB-S2 along with offset-min-sum algorithm (OMSA) to implement a high-speed decoder reaching a throughput of 1.5Gbps [13].
The progress of LDPC decoders is not only the throughput but also the structure of decoders. In 2015, S. Kumawat proposed a dynamic multi-frame processing (DMFP) schedule for the LDPC codes of IEEE 802.11n (WiFi) [14]. However, the DMFP schedule does not have a good applicability for some scenes such as wireless laser communications. The FEC codes to deal with optical impairments have a required error floor which is up to 10−12 at least in wireless laser communications [2]. The code rate of LDPC codes applied to this scenario is usually higher than 0.875 and column weight is smaller than the LDPC codes of WiFi discussed in [14]. The code lengths of LDPC codes is relatively large to consume a large number of resources and add a delay of the key route by using the structure of column-parallel. For this reason the structure of LDPC layered decoder are usually column-serial different from the column-parallel in [14]. The

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:04:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
556

DMFP schedule proposed in [14] has a problem which causes massive delays because of storing multi-frame information and it is unacceptable for wireless laser communications.
In this paper, aiming at solving the problem that the strategy proposed in [14] will cause massive delays, we proposed a structure of layered decoder which only need a storage of two frames of data to reduce the decoding delay. The structure is used to the column-serial LDPC layered decoder. Combining the pipeline structure [15] in hardware design and the strategy proposed in [14], a scheme called inter-frame pipeline (IFP) is proposed. The IFP scheme could remove the pipeline bubbles for the column-serial LDPC layered decoder. According to the structure of LDPC codes, the parallelism and seriality of the decoder in the design, the promotion effect of the proposed scheme is different. Experiments based on FPGA show that, taking the (4008, 3507) Quasi-Cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) code as an example, the IFP scheme can increase the throughput by 604 Mbps. The total throughput of the proposed LDPC decoder can reach a throughput of 2429Mbps.

II. ITERATIVE DECODERS FOR LDPC CODES

Several classical decoding algorithms for LDPC codes are based on the message-passing algorithm [16], such as sumproduct algorithm (SPA), min-sum algorithm (MSA), normalized MSA (NMSA), offset MSA (OMSA) and layered decoding algorithm (LDA). Among them, the SPA brings high complexity due to complex hyperbolic operations, while the MSA is a simplified version of the SPA, thus having low complexity and significant performance loss. Considering this performance loss, two modified algorithms, namely NMSA and OMSA, have been proposed. For the NMSA, a normalization factor is introduced into the check node update of the MSA; and for the OMSA an offset introduced has the same effect as the factor in the NMSA. Moreover, the LDA can integrate the vertical update into the horizontal update, thereby greatly reducing the average iterative numbers and further implementation complexity [17]. With the above advantages, an MSA-based Layered decoding scheme has been proposed for the implementation of the QC-LDPC decoder [18].
Consider a QC-LDPC coded BPSK system with NMSAbased LDA. Define Λn(0j)[k] as the input log-likelihood ratio (LLR), and rj(,ln) j [k] and Λn(lj)[k] as the outgoing message from check nodes and variable nodes, respectively. Thus, the corresponding descriptions for the above decoding scheme can be given by the following equations.

Λ(n0j)[k]

=

2y σ2 ,

(1)

qj(,ln) j [k] = Λ(nlj)[k] − rj(,ln) j [k](nj ∈ N (j)),

(2)

∏ rj(,ln+j1)[k] =

sign(qj(,ln) ′j [k])×

n′j ∈{N (j)\nj } {

}

(3)

min
n′j ∈{N (j)\nj }

α · |qj(,ln) ′j [k]| ,

Λ(nlj+1)[k] = qj(,ln) j [k] + rj(,ln+j1)[k],

(4)

where y is the received signal, σ2 is the variance of noise, N (j) is the set of check nodes that connect with nj, and n′j ∈ {N (j)\nj} denotes the node except for nj. Moreover, α , l and k denote the normalized factor, the number of iterations and layers, respectively. Eq. (1) represents the initialization of variable nodes, and Eq. (4) an end of an iteration.
Based on (1) ∼ (4), Fig. 1 show a structure of the columnserial QC-LDPC layered decoder. As shown, the subtraction module (SUB) and the additive module (ADD) perform the calculations in (2) and (4), respectively; the check node update module (CNU) and LLR storage module (LS) can complete the check node update in (3) and the initialization in (1). According to the sub-matrix quasi-cycle characteristic of the QC-LDPC code [19], the before-shifting module (BS) and the after-shifting module (AS) are designed aiming at the alignment of the data to be calculated. Thanks to the AS and BS, the addressing operation is not required to be executed according to the check matrix so that the calculation of the data stream is directly performed for the LDPC decoder. Finally, the iterative decoding control module (Control) will deal with the control of the timing and iteration numbers for the entire decoder.

Input LS
REC
CN

Delay AS
SUB CNU ADD BS
Output

Control Fig. 1. The Structure of the Column-Serial LDPC Layered Decoder.

III. INTER-FRAME PIPELINE
Inter-frame pipeline (IFP) is a pipeline operation between frame and frame for the column-serial LDPC layered decoder. So, the clock gaps waiting for data arrival during one single frame can be used to process the data from the second frame. Based on dynamic multi-frame processing, the proposed scheme, the IFP, is applied to an extend scenario where the column is serial and the LDPC code is special with a high code rate for wireless laser communications. Ref. [14] has shown the feasibility of the column-parallel LDPC layered decoder. However, the IFP scheme tells us that the decoder can also utilize the idle stage and thus greatly improve the throughput.
A. Problem of the Column-Serial LDPC Layered Decoder
Taking the structure shown in Fig.1 as an example, the decoder is column-serial and layer-parallel. Most of the clock consumption during serial processing stems from the CNU that searches for the minimum and the next minimum magnitude among the nc serial input data. Fig.2 shows timing diagram of the column-serial LDPC layered decoder, where all the signals denote the output from the last module, and the hexagon

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:04:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
557

denotes the valid information when every module is processing while the straight line denotes the invalid data.
As shown in Fig.2, the CNU consumes the most clocks. Specifically, the CNU takes Cc clock gaps, and the numbers of clocks required by the LS, AS, SUB, ADD, and BS are CL, CA, CS, CAD, and CB, respectively. Since the CNU outputs the value after it processes all of nc data, the layered decoder can not use the pipeline structure between modules in a frame, which means each processing module has some idle time. The number of clocks required to process one frame per layer is Call = nc + CL + CA + CS + CAD + CB. Clearly, during the nc + 1 ∼ Call clocks, every module except for the CNU will wait for the data from next layer. Thus, the update of every layer will waste Call − nc clocks. To solve this problem, the IFP scheme will be used here.

clk

input nc clocks

idle time

LS AS SUB CNU
min ADD
BS
Fig. 2. The Timing Diagram of the LDPC Decoder.

without IFP

IFP

LLR
input

LLR_1

LLR_2

first frame input

nc clocks
D

LS

RAM

Call clocks

CL clocks
Others

Call -nc-CL clocks

LS

RAM

nc clocks

CL clocks
Others

Call -nc-CL clocks

Fig. 4. The Working Flow Chart of the LS.

without IFP

work idle



nc

Call nc+Call 2Call Time (clk)

with IFP

B. Realization of the IFP scheme
The realization of the IFP scheme is to receive the LLR of two frames in the receiving ctrl (REC) module. After the LLR of the first frame enters the iterative loop of the decoder, the LLR of the second frame also enters the iteration loop of the decoder. The decoder will process two frames of data at the same time. The timing diagram of the LDPC decoder can be shown in Fig.3, where the hexagons with shadow are the data from the second frame. Every module processes the data from two frames when the data of the second frame enters the decoder. At this time, the clock gaps that every module uses will be used to process the data of next frame so that each module will have no idle time. Now, the number of clocks consumed per layer is 2nc.

clk
input nc clocks input nc clocks first frame second frame

LS AS SUB CNU ADD BS

min

min

Fig. 3. The Timing Diagram for the LDPC Decoder with IFP scheme.



nc 2nc 3nc 4nc Time (clk)

Fig. 5. The Working Status of modules.

Taking the LS as an example, the specific working flow chart is shown in Fig.4, where “nc clocks” denotes the number of clocks the last module consumes, “LLR 1” is the LLR from first frame and “LLR 2” is that of second frame. With the IFP scheme, the LS can not wait for other modules any more to update data which would be stored in “RAM”. Now, processing two frames will fully utilize the Call−nc clocks that are wasted when only one frame is processed. Thus that the result improves the throughput of LDPC decoder greatly since each clock of the decoder is used to process valid information. The working status of modules can be described in Fig.5, where the transverse axis represents time line where every module is going on and the vertical axis denotes the statu of modules in which the shadow represents the working state, while the blank represents the idle state. In the LDPC layered decoder, assume that the number of layers and the number of iterations are mL and mI , respectively. Hence it can save Cearn = (Call − nc) × mL × mI clocks. In the high-speed application scenario, the number of Cearn clocks will bring a huge increase of throughput. Let ∆ denote the number of additional control clocks required. Then, the total number of clocks during one frame is Cneed = nc × mL × mI + ∆.
Compared with the strategy proposed in [14], our proposed

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:04:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
558

IFP scheme only stores two serial frames to remove the pipeline bubbles. However, there may need to be stored three or more frames to multiply the decoding delay [14]. In the other hand, the IFP scheme is aiming at the column-serial LDPC layered decoder to obtain smaller decoding delay. Hence, it is not necessary to increase the logic part of processing the data while the cost is one-time consumption of the storage RAM resource. The specific additional consumption will be analyzed in detail in section V.
IV. STRUCTURE OF MODULES FOR THE DECODER
Fig.1 shows the structure of the column-serial LDPC layered decoder. Next, we will give a brief introduction of structure of each module. The receive module (REC) is receiving the LLR from the demodulate module and has a ping-pong operation. Thus the decoder can receive another frame information when it is working. The Delay module is actually a first-in-first-out (FIFO), whose function is a buffer of the output data from the SUB when the CNU is working.
In fact, the most complex module is the CNU that is used to update the message from check nodes to variable nodes which refer to Rcv. They are split into the smallest magnitude, the second smallest magnitude, the index of the smallest magnitude and the signs of them denoted as vmin, vsmin, vid and vsign 1∼nc , respectively. Besides, v’sign 1∼nc is the signs of input of “Min” and vs is the product of them. Fig. 6 shows the specific structure of the CNU, where “Min” denotes the module in order to find the smallest magnitude and the second smallest magnitude from “num 1” ∼ “num nc”. Recording the index of the smallest magnitude and multiplying the signs of input values are the functions of “Min”, as well. The “Sign” module for updating the signs can participate in pipeline without redundant delay of the updated value to next module. Moreover, the “ADD” and “SUB” have a special logic which is used to recovery the complete information of Rcv expect for the logic of addition and subtraction. If T represents the index of nc data, the pseudo code of recovering Rcv in the “ADD” and “SUB” is given by Algorithm 1.

num_1~ num_nc
Min
vs FIFO vasign_1~nc clk

vmin vsmin
vid

' 6(7 4 4 &/5

vsign_1 ~ nc

Sign

Fig. 6. The Structure of the CNU.

V. THE ADVANTAGE OF THE IFP SCHEME
With the IFP scheme, a (4008, 3507) LDPC code is taken as an example in this section. The base matrix size of the LDPC code is 3 × 24, where the maximum row weight is 24, the maximum column weight is 3, the code rate is 0.875, and the sub-matrix size is 167 × 167. Define n as the length of the LDPC code, f as the working frequency of the decoder,

Algorithm 1 Recovery of Rcv
Input: vsign i, vid, vmin, vsmin, T Output: Rcv
Initialization: Rcv ← 0 1: min f ← 0 2: i ← 0 3: if vid == T then 4: min f ← 1 5: end if 6: if {min f, vsign i} == 2’b00 then 7: Rcv ← {0, vmin} 8: end if 9: if {min f, vsign i} == 2’b01 then 10: Rcv ← {1, ∼ vsmin + 1} 11: end if 12: if {min f, vsign i} == 2’b10 then 13: Rcv ← {0, vmin} 14: end if 15: if {min f, vsign i} == 2’b11 then 16: Rcv ← {1, ∼ vsmin + 1} 17: end if 18: return Rcv

ncycle as the number of clocks during one iteration, niter as the number of iterations, and ∆ as the additional number of clocks performing a decoding process. The throughput and delay of the LDPC layered decoder are then calculated by (5) and (6), respectively.

n×f

Throughput =

(5)

ncycle × niter+∆

Td

=

(nc

×

mI

× f

mL

+

∆)

(6)

In the design, niter and ∆ are set to 5 and 3, respectively. Using the xcvu13p-fhgc2104-2L-e chip of Xilinx’s Virtex UltraScale+ series, f is up to 220MHz after placing and routing. After substituting the above values into (5) and (6), the calculated throughput and delay are about 2429Mbps and 3.28us, respectively.
Once without the IFP, the number of clocks each layer updates is 32, so the throughput of the LDPC layered decoder can be obtained by (5)

4008 × 220MHz Throughput = 32 × 3 × 5+3 ≈ 1825Mbps,
and the decoding delay is (32 × 5 × 3 + 3) × 4.55ns ≈ 2.20us. Clearly, the effect of the IFP scheme is raising the throughput rate of 604 Mbps while its cost is increasing the decoding delay of 1080 ns. In addition to the cost of decoding delay, 156 Block RAMs and 47 look-up-table (LUT) RAMs are used as shown in Table I. In the section III, the IFP scheme can double the used storage RAM resource. Thus, the cost of storage resources with the IFP scheme is 78 Block RAMs and 24 LUT RAMs. The FPGA implementation platform uses the abovementioned chips from Xilinx, and the version of software used is Vivado 2017.4. The resource usage after placing and routing is shown in Table I.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:04:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
559

TABLE I RESOURCE USAGE OF DECODER

Resource LUT
Flip-Flop LUTRAM Block RAM

Utilization 77062 38055 47 156

Proportion 4.46% 1.10% 0.01% 5.78%

VI. CONCLUSION
This paper proposed a scheme called IFP to speed up the column-serial LDPC layered decoder in the scenario of wireless laser communications by solving the problem that every module in the decoder would waste a few clocks to wait for data of next package per layer. The IFP scheme is an extended research result of “dynamic multi-frame processing schedule” proposed in [14]. For wireless laser communications, the IFP scheme can be applied to the LDPC codes which have a high code rate, large code length and smaller column weight. Compared with the strategy proposed in [14], the IFP scheme decrease the decoding delay by the time of storing data of frames. Taking a (4008, 3507) QC-LDPC code as an example, the experiments based on FPGA shown that the IFP scheme can raise the throughput of 604 Mbps and the decoder could achieve a throughput of 2429Mbps.

[10] Z. Wang, Z. Cui, and J. Sha, “VLSI design for low-density parity-check code decoding,” IEEE Circuits Syst. Mag., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 52C69, Feb. 2011.
[11] Z. Cui and Z. Wang, “Efficient message passing architecture for high throughput LDPC decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., May 2007, pp. 917C920.
[12] H. Ding, S. Yang, W. Luo, and M. Dong, “Design and implementation for high speed LDPC decoder with layered decoding,” in Proc. WRI Int. Conf. Commun. Mobile Comput., Jan. 2009, pp. 156C160.
[13] V. Pignoly and B. Le Gal, “High data rate and flexible hardware QCLDPC decoder for satellite optical communications,” in Proc. 10th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process., Hong Kong, China, Dec. 2018, pp. 1-5.
[14] S. Kumawat, R. Shrestha, N. Daga, and R. Paily, “High-throughput LDPC-decoder architecture using efficient comparison techniques and dynamic multi-frame processing schedule,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 62, no. 5, pp. 1421-1430, May 2015.
[15] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “High-throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 976C996, Dec. 2003.
[16] W. E. Ryan and S. Lin, Channel Codes: Classical and Modern. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2009.
[17] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788-1793, Aug. 2004.
[18] H. Zhang, J. Zhu, H. Shi, and D. Wang, “Layered approxi-regular LDPC: Code construction and encoder/decoder design,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 572C585, Mar. 2008
[19] X. Chen, S. Lin, and V. Akella, QSN-A simple circular shift network for reconfigurable quasi-cyclic LDPC decoders, IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 1549C7747, Oct. 2010.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61771364, and the Key Research and Development Project of Shaanxi Province under Grant 2018ZDCXL-GY-04-05, and the Research and Development Project in Key Areas of Guangdong Province under Grant 2018B010114001.

REFERENCES
[1] J. Ren, H. Sun, L. Zhang, and T. Zhang, “Development status of space laser communications and new method of networking,” Laser & Infrared, vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 143-150, Feb. 2019.
[2] G. Tzimpragos, C. Kachris, I. B. Djordjevic, M. Cvijetic, D. Soudris, and I. Tomkos, “A survey on FEC codes for 100 G and beyond optical networks,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 209-221, 1st Quart., 2016.
[3] “ITU-T recommendation G.709: General aspects of digital transmission system: Synchronous multiplexing structure,” Int. Telecommun. Union, Geneva, Switzerland, 1993.
[4] “ITU-T recommendation G.975: Forward error correction for submarine systems,” Geneva, Switzerland, Oct. 2000.
[5] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21-28, Jan. 1962.
[6] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory. vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399-431, Mar. 1999.
[7] European Standard, (Telecommunications Series): Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Second generation framing structure, channel coding and modulation systems for broadcasting, interactive services, news gathering and other broadband satellite applications, ETSI EN 302C307 V1.1.2 (2006-06).
[8] Low-density parity-check codes for Use in near-earth and deep space applications, Orange Book, Issue 2, Consulative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS) Experimental Specification 131.1-O-2, Sep. 2007.
[9] 3GPP TSG RAN WG1, “Multiplexing and channel coding (Release 15): 3GPP TS 38.212 V15.1.1-2018,” 3GPP, France, Oct. 2018.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:04:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
560

