2019 IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW)

On the Computational Complexity of Finding Bipartite Graphs with a Small Number of Short
Cycles and Large Girth

Ali Dehghan and Amir H. Banihashemi,
Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada

Abstract—The problem of finding bipartite (Tanner) graphs with given degree sequences that have large girth and few short cycles is of great interest in many applications including construction of good low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. In this paper, we prove that for a given set of integers α, β, and γ, and degree sequences π and π , the problem of determining whether there exists a simple bipartite graph with degree sequences (π, π ) that has at most α (β and γ) cycles of length four (six and eight, respectively) is NP-complete. This is proved by a two-step polynomial-time reduction from the 3-Partition Problem. On the other hand, using connections to linear hypergraphs, we prove that given the degree sequence π, a polynomial time algorithm can be devised to determine whether there exists a bipartite graph whose degree sequence on one side of the bipartition is π and has a girth of at least six.
I. INTRODUCTION
Bipartite graphs are often used to represent systems and to facilitate the description of inference algorithms. The nodes on one side of the bipartition represent the variables, and the nodes on the other side are representative of local constraints that involve their adjacent variables. Cycles are fundamental substructures of graphs and play an important role in the performance of the inference algorithms that are often described as message-passing algorithms over the bipartite graphs. A well-known example is the iterative algorithms commonly used for the decoding of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. The performance of LDPC codes under iterative message-passing algorithms is highly dependent on the number of short cycles, in general, and the girth of the code’s Tanner graph, in particular. Generally speaking, larger girth and fewer short cycles are desirable for good performance in both the waterfall [1], [2], and the error floor region [3], [4], [5]. The construction of LDPC codes with few short cycles and large girth has therefore been the subject of much research, see, e.g., [6].
It is well-known that the problem of maximizing the girth for a bipartite graph of a given size and degree distribution is generally hard, even for the cases where the graph has a quasi-cyclic structure [6]. To the best of our knowledge, however, no theoretical result on the computational complexity of this problem exists. Related to the problem of maximizing the girth are problems of finding graphs with sufficiently small number of short cycles. The computational complexity of such problems also has not been studied in the literature.

In this work, we consider two problems related to finding bipartite graphs with a small number of short cycles, and demonstrate that each is in one extreme of the computational complexity spectrum, i.e., one is NP-complete while the other is solvable in polynomial time. We prove that for given integers α , β, γ, and degree sequences (π, π ), determining whether there exists a simple bipartite graph G with degree sequences (π, π ) such that G has at most α (β and γ) cycles of length four (six and eight, respectively) is NP-complete. On the other hand, we devise a polynomial time algorithm to determine whether for a given degree sequence π, there exists a bipartite graph G with girth at least six such that the nodes on one side of G have degrees π. To prove the NP-completeness of the first problem, we use a two-step polynomial-time reduction starting from the well-known 3-Partition Problem. To devise the polynomial time algorithm for the second problem, we establish connections between the problem of our interest and linear hypergraphs.
II. DEFINITIONS AND NOTATIONS
For a given graph G, we denote the node set and the edge set of G by V (G) and E(G), respectively. We say a graph is simple if it has no loop or parallel edges. Throughout this paper, all graphs are simple, unless explicitly stated otherwise. A path of length c in the graph G is a sequence of distinct nodes v1, v2, . . . , vc+1 in V (G), such that {vi, vi+1} ∈ E(G), for 1 ≤ i ≤ c. A cycle of length c is a sequence of distinct nodes v1, v2, . . . , vc in V (G) such that v1, v2, . . . , vc form a path of length c − 1, and {vc, v1} ∈ E(G). We denote cycles of length k, also referred to as k-cycles, by Ck. We use Nk for |Ck|. The length of the shortest cycle(s) in a graph is called the girth of the graph and it is denoted by g. For any two nodes v and u, the distance between them, denoted by d(v, u), is the number of edges in the shortest path between v and u. The diameter of a graph G, denoted by diam(G), is the largest distance between any pair of nodes in G.
A graph G = (V, E) is called bipartite, if the node set V can be partitioned into two disjoint subsets U and W , i.e., V = U ∪ W and U ∩ W = ∅, such that every edge in E connects a node from U to a node from W . Tanner graphs of LDPC codes are bipartite graphs, in which U and W are referred to as variable nodes and check nodes, respectively. Parameters n and m in this case are used to denote |U | and |W |, respectively. Parameter n is the code’s block length. The

978-1-5386-690A0u-th6o/r1iz9e/d$l3ic1en.0se0d ©us2e 0lim1i9tedIEtoE:EYonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:11:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2019 IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW)

number of edges incident to a node v is called the degree of v, and is denoted by d(v). A bipartite graph G(U ∪ W, E) is called complete, and is denoted by K|U|,|W |, if every node in U is connected to every node in W . The notation Km is used for a complete (non-bipartite) graph with m nodes (in which every node is connected to all the other nodes). The degree sequences of a bipartite graph G are defined as the two monotonic non-increasing sequences of the node degrees on the two sides of the graph. For example, the complete bipartite graph K2,3 has degree sequences (3, 3) and (2, 2, 2). A graph G is connected, if there is a path between any two nodes of G. If the graph G is not connected, we say that it is disconnected. A connected component of a graph is a connected subgraph such that there are no edges between nodes of the subgraph and nodes of the rest of the graph.
In complexity theory, the class P problems are those that can be solved in polynomial time. On the other hand, the class NP (non-deterministic polynomial-time) problems contains all decision problems for which the instances where the answer is “yes” have proofs that are verifiable by deterministic computations that can be performed in polynomial time. More formally, a problem belongs to the class NP if it can be solved in polynomial time by a theoretical non-deterministic Turing machine. A problem is NP-hard if the existence of a deterministic polynomial time algorithm for the problem would imply the existence of deterministic polynomial time algorithms for every problem in NP. The hardest problems in NP, whose solutions are sufficient to deal with any other NP problem in polynomial time, are called NP-complete. A problem is said to be strongly NP-complete if it remains so even when all of its numerical parameters are bounded by a polynomial in the length of the input. We say a problem A is polynomial-time reducible to a problem B, if there is a polynomial-time algorithm for transforming instances of A into instances of B.
III. COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY OF FINDING SIMPLE BIPARTITE GRAPHS WITH FEW SHORT CYCLES
In this section, we study the computational complexity of two problems related to finding simple bipartite graphs with few short cycles. First, we consider the problem of minimizing the number of four, six and eight cycles in a bipartite graph with given degree sequences, and prove that this problem is NP-hard. Next, for a given sequence of positive integers π, we investigate the problem of determining whether there exists a simple bipartite graph G with girth at least six such that G has the (variable node) degree sequence π, and show that this problem is polynomial-time solvable.
A. Minimizing the number of short cycles is hard
To prove the NP-completeness of the decision problem associated with minimizing the short cycles in a graph, we use a two-step polynomial-time reduction from the following problem, known to be strongly NP-complete [7]: 3-Partition Problem. INSTANCE: A positive integer B ∈ Z+, and 3n, n ≥ 1, distinct

integers a1, . . . , a3n ∈ Z+, such that for each i, 1 ≤ i ≤ 3n,

we have1 B/4 < ai < B/2, and we have

3n i=1

ai

=

nB.

QUESTION: Can {a1, . . . , a3n} be partitioned into n disjoint

sets A1, . . . , An such that for each i, 1 ≤ i ≤ n, a = B?

a∈Ai
In the first step, we reduce the above problem to a version

restricted to odd numbers given below.

3-Partition of Odd Numbers Problem.

INSTANCE: An integer B ∈ Z+, and 3n distinct odd integers

a1, . . . , a3n ∈ Z+, such that for each i, 1 ≤ i ≤ 3n, B/4 <

ai < B/2, and we have

3n i=1

ai

=

nB.

QUESTION: Can {a1, . . . , a3n} be partitioned into n disjoint

sets A1, . . . , An, such that for each i, 1 ≤ i ≤ n, a = B?

a∈Ai

Theorem 1. The 3-Partition of Odd Numbers Problem is

strongly NP-complete.

Proof. We reduce the 3-Partition Problem to the 3-

Partition of Odd Numbers Problem in polynomial time. Let

(a1, . . . , a3n, B) be an instance of the 3-Partition Problem.

We construct an instance (a1, . . . , a3n, B ) of the 3-Partition of Odd Numbers Problem such that the instance (a1, . . . , a3n, B)

for the 3-Partition Problem has a positive answer if and only

if the instance (a1, . . . , a3n, B ) for the 3-Partition of Odd Numbers Problem has a positive answer.

For each i, let ai = 10ai + 1 and B = 10B + 3. Thus, all numerical parameters are bounded by a polynomial in the

length of the input. Next, we show that (a1, . . . , a3n, B ) is a valid instance for the 3-Partition of Odd Numbers Problem.

The numbers a1, . . . , a3n are distinct positive integers, and so

are a1, . . . , a3n. For each i, we have B/4 < ai < B/2, and

thus (10B + 3)/4 < 10ai + 1 < (10B + 3)/2, which means

B /4 < ai < B /2. Moreover,

3n i=1

ai

=

3n i=1

10ai

+

1

=

10nB+3n = nB . So, (a1, . . . , a3n, B ) is a valid instance for

the 3-Partition of Odd Numbers Problem. It is clear that there

is a one-to-one correspondence between any valid partitioning

of {a1, . . . , a3n} (one that corresponds to answer “yes”) and

a valid partitioning of {a1, . . . , a3n}.

Next, we reduce the 3-Partition of Odd Numbers Problem to our problem of interest, formulated below. Min-Short-Cycles Problem. INSTANCE: Integers α , β, γ, and degree sequences (π, π ). QUESTION: Does there exist a simple bipartite graph G with degree sequences (π, π ), such that G has at most α (β and γ) cycles of length four (six and eight, respectively)?

Theorem 2. The Min-Short-Cycles Problem is strongly NPcomplete.

Proof. Let (a1, . . . , a3n, B) be an instance of the 3-Partition of Odd Numbers Problem. Correspondingly, we construct an instance (π, π , α, β, γ) of the Min-Short-Cycles Problem. To construct π, for each ai, 1 ≤ i ≤ 3n, we include the number

1The version of the problem that was studied in [7] does not have the property that for each i, B/4 < ai < B/2. But, for a given instance (a1, . . . , a3n, B), we can simply convert it to (a1 + B, . . . , a3n + B, 4B), so that it has the desired property.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:11:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2019 IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW)

cu

1234
(a)

1234
(b)

Fig. 1. (a) an instance of graph G and (b) the corresponding semi-normal graph G .

Y

X

1

2

3

4

5

Y

X

6

7

8

9

10

Fig. 2. All possible types of structures of diameters one and two in G .

ai+1 in π. Also, we include n copies of the number B+1 in π.

To construct π , we include the number 4n, and nB copies of

the number 2. We also choose α = nB+

3n i=1

ai 2

,β =n

B 2

and γ = 0. Next, we show that the answer to the 3-Partition of

Odd Numbers Problem for a given instance (a1, . . . , a3n, B) is “yes” if and only if the answer to the corresponding instance

(π, π , α, β, γ) of the Min-Short-Cycles Problem is “yes.” (It

is clear that all numerical parameters of the Min-Short-Cycles

Problem are bounded by a polynomial in the length of the

input.)

Proof of “if part”. Let G be the graph corresponding to the

answer “yes” to the instance (π, π , α, β, γ) of the Min-Short-

Cycles Problem. In the following, we first transform G to

another graph G . Using the properties of G , we then show

that there is an instance (a1, . . . , a3n, B) of the 3-Partition of Odd Numbers Problem with answer “yes.”

Fact 1. There is a check node cu in G, called universal check node, which is adjacent to all variable nodes in G.

Proof of Fact 1. The graph G is a simple bipartite graph

with 4n variable nodes and a check node of degree 4n. This

check node must thus be connected to all variable nodes.

In G, except the universal check node cu, all the other check nodes have degree 2. From G, we now construct a new graph

G , called the semi-normal graph of G, by removing cu and its adjacent edges from G, and by replacing all the degree-2

check nodes and their two incident edges by a single edge.

(See Fig. 1.) There is a one-to-one correspondence between

G and G . Note that G can have several parallel edges (i.e.

it is not a simple graph), but it does not contain any loops.

Fact 2. The semi-normal graph G has n nodes of degree B

and for each i, 1 ≤ i ≤ 3n, it has exactly one node of degree

ai. Fact 3. The diameter of each connected component of G

is at most two.

Proof of Fact 3. To the contrary, assume that the diameter

of one of the connected components of G is at least three.

This implies there are two nodes v and v in G such that their

distance in G is three. Correspondingly, there is a path P of

length six in G between the nodes v and v such that it does

not pass through the universal node cu. The union of the path P and two edges vcu, v cu is a cycle of length eight in G. This is in contradiction with γ = 0.

The following fact follows from Fact 3.

Fact 4. Each connected component of G allows parallel

edges and is a triangle (i.e., K3) or a star (i.e., K1,r, for some r ∈ Z+).

We partition the nodes in G into two sets X and Y , where X is the set of nodes of degree B. The degrees of nodes in Y are {ai}, where each ai is an odd number satisfying B/4 < ai < B/2. Fig. 2 shows all the possible components of G with respect to this partitioning (note that diam(G ) ≤ 2). In Fig. 2, each edge can correspond to a few parallel edges.
Fact 5. The graph G cannot have a connected component of Type 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, or 10 (see Fig. 2).
Proof of Fact 5. In the following, we study each component type in Fact 5, and prove that it cannot exist in G . Type 1. In this case, there is exactly one node in Y (call it v) and two nodes in X (call them u and u ). The degree of both u and u is B. Thus, the number of edges between u and v is equal to the number of edges between u and v. Hence, the degree of v is an even number. But this is a contradiction because d(v) = ai, for some i, and is thus an odd number by the assumption. Type 2. In this case there is exactly one node, say v, in X and two nodes, say u and u , in Y . From the structure, clearly, d(u)+d(u ) > deg(v) = B. By the assumption about the node degrees of Y , however, we have d(u) + d(u ) = ai + aj < B, for some i and j, which is a contradiction. Type 4. In this case the connected component has exactly three nodes, say x, y and z, in Y . Let dxy (dxz and dyz) be the number of edges between nodes x and y (between x and z and between y and z, respectively). The degree of x is an odd number, and thus exactly one of the numbers dxy or dxz is odd. Without loss of generality, assume that dxy is odd and dxz is even. This together with the fact that d(z) = dxz + dyz is odd implies that dyz is odd. On the other hand, d(y) = dxy + dyz, and will be an even number. But this is a contradiction since d(y) = ai, for some i, and is an odd number by the assumption. Type 5. In this case all the nodes are in Y and the connected component is bipartite. The left partition has exactly one node, say v, and the right partition has at least two nodes, say u and u (note that by assumption, the numbers a1, . . . , a3n are distinct, and thus the right partition cannot have only one node). Now, counting the number of the edges of the component graph from the left, we have |E| = d(v) < B/2. Counting the number of the edges from the right, however, we have |E| ≥ d(u) + d(u ) > B/4 + B/4 = B/2. This is a contradiction. Type 6. In this case the connected component has exactly one node in Y and at least one node in X, and is bipartite.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:11:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2019 IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW)

Y

X

P1

P2

P3

Fig. 3. All the potentially possible structures of connected components of G.

(a)

(b)

Counting the number of edges from the Y side, we have |E| = ai < B/2, for some ai, while by counting from the X side, |E| ≥ B, which is a contradiction. Types 7 and 10. With a proof similar to that of Type 6, one can see neither type of structure is possible.
Fact 6. Fig. 3 shows all potentially possible types of connected components of G .
Proof of Fact 6. Based on Fact 5, the only potentially possible structures for connected components of G are those of Types 3, 8 and 9, shown in Fig. 2. Type 3 structure in Fig. 2 is the same as structure P 2 in Fig. 3. Type 8 structure in Fig. 2 is bipartite with exactly one node, say v, in X. Based on the degree constraints, it is easy to see that v must be connected to exactly three nodes in Y . This results in structure P 1 in Fig. 3. In Type 9 structure in Fig. 2, all nodes are in X, and the connected component is a bipartite graph with only one node on the right side of the bipartition. Since all the nodes in X have the same degree B, there must be also only one node on the left side of the bipartition. This results in structure P 3 in Fig. 3.
Next, we show that connected components of Types P 2 and P 3 are impossible to exist in G .
Fact 7. The graph G can only have connected components of Type P 1 (see Fig. 3).
Proof of Fact 7. Each of the 3n nodes in Y is in a connected component of Type P 1. On the other hand, we have |Y | = 3|X|. Thus, all the nodes in X are connected to nodes in Y within Type P 1 structures.
From Fact 7, it is clear that (a1, . . . , a3n, B) is a “yes” instance of the 3-Partition of Odd Numbers Problem.
Proof of “only if part”. Assume that the answer to the 3Partition of Odd Numbers Problem for a given instance (a1, . . . , a3n, B) is “yes.” We then show that for the corresponding instance (π, π , α, β, γ) of Min-Short-Cycles Problem, there exists a simple bipartite graph G with degree sequences (π, π ) such that G has at most α (β and γ) cycles of length four (six and eight, respectively).
We first construct G and then show that it satisfies the required cycle properties. Let A1, . . . , An be n disjoint sets such that for each i, i ∈ Nn = {1, . . . , n}, a∈Ai a = B. For each Ai = {aj, ak, al}, i ∈ Nn, assign a node x and three nodes y1, y2, y3, and then add aj (ak and al) parallel edges between x and y1 (y2 and y3, respectively). Call the resultant graph G , and consider it as the semi-normal graph of G. From G , construct the graph G.
Clearly the degree sequences of G are (π, π ). We now calculate N4, N6 and N8 in G, and demonstrate that N4 ≤ α,

(c)

(d)

Fig. 4. Different types of hypergraphs, (a) a hypergraph with parallel edges and loop, (b) 4-uniform hypergraph, (c) simple 4-uniform hypergraph, (d) linear 4-uniform hypergraph.

N6 ≤ β and N8 ≤ γ. Each 4-cycle has two variable nodes that

are adjacent to two common check nodes. We can partition the

4-cycles of G into two sets. In the first set, each 4-cycle has

the universal check node cu.To count the number of 4-cycles in this set, we need to select a check node c other than cu, then the check nodes c and cu with their two common variable

node neighbors form a 4-cycle. The number of ways to select

c is equal to the number of edges in the semi-normal graph

G , and is thus nB. A 4-cycle in the second set is formed by

any two parallel edges in G . The number of 4-cycles in this

set is thus

3n i=1

ai 2

. Adding up the 4-cycles in the two sets,

we have N4 = nB +

3n i=1

ai 2

= α.

By the structure of G, it is clear that each 6-cycle contains

the universal check node cu. The other two check nodes of a 6-cycle can be the check nodes corresponding to any two

non-parallel edges of any one of the connected components

of G . Since, we have n connected components in G , and

each connected component has at most

B 2

non-parallel edges,

N6

≤

n

B 2

= β. It is easy to see that G does not have any

8-cycle, i.e., N8 = 0 = γ.

B. Finding bipartite graphs with girth at least six is easy
In this section, we demonstrate that the problem of determining whether for a given sequence of integers π, there exists a simple bipartite graph G with (variable node) degree sequence π and girth at least six is polynomial-time solvable. To show this, we demonstrate that the hardness of this problem is similar to that of determining whether π can be the degree sequence for a loopless linear hypergraph. The latter problem is known to be solvable in polynomial time. In the following, we first provide an introduction to hypergraphs.
A hypergraph is a generalization of a graph in which an edge can join any number of nodes. A hypergraph G = (V, T ) consists of a node set V and an edge set T , where each edge is a non empty subset of the nodes in V . A loop in a hypergraph is an edge that is a subset of size one of the nodes, and repeated or parallel edges are edges with the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:11:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2019 IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW)

exact same set of nodes. A simple hypergraph is one with no parallel edges. (See Fig. 4.) For every k ≥ 2, a k-uniform hypergraph is a hypergraph such that every edge contains exactly k nodes. A loopless graph or 2-uniform hypergraph G = (V, T ) consists of a node set V and an edge set T , where each edge is a pair of distinct nodes in V . A hypergraph is linear if any two edges have at most one common node [8]. For any k ≥ 2, every linear k-uniform hypergraph is a simple k-uniform hypergraph but the reverse is not necessary correct. (See Fig. 4.) The degree sequence of a hypergraph is the sequence whose elements are the number of edges each node belongs to. For example, the degree sequence of the hypergraph shown in Fig. 4(a) is {3, 3, 2, 2, 2, 1, 1, 1, 0}.
The computational complexity of determining whether a given degree sequence is the degree sequence of a simple kuniform hypergraph is a longstanding open problem in graph theory [8]. Recently, in 2018, it was shown that deciding whether a given integer sequence is the degree sequence of a 3-uniform (not necessarily simple) hypergraph is NP-complete [9]. On the other hand, recognizing linear hypergraphs from their degree sequences can be done in polynomial time. Bhave et al. [10] gave the following Erdos-Gallai-type characterization of degree sequences of loopless linear hypergraphs.

Theorem 3. [10] A sequence [di]ni=1 of non-negative integers arranged in non-increasing order is the degree sequence of a

loopless linear hypergraph with n nodes if and only if

(i)

n i=1

di

is

an

even

number,

and

(ii) for every 1 ≤ j ≤ n,

j

n

di ≤ j(j − 1) +

min{di, j}.

i=1

i=j+1

It is clear that the above conditions can be checked in polynomial time. In the following, we use Theorem 3 to devise a polynomial time algorithm for our problem of interest.

Theorem 4. There is a polynomial time algorithm to decide whether, for a given degree sequence π, there exists a simple bipartite graph G with (variable node) degree sequence π, minimum check node degree two, and girth at least six.

Proof. To prove the result, we show that a graph G with the description of the theorem exists if and only if π is the degree sequence of a loopless linear hypergraph. Proof of “if part”. Let H be a loopless linear hypergraph with degree sequence π. In the following, we construct a simple bipartite graph G based on H and demonstrate that G has variable node degree sequence π and girth of at least 6. For each node x in H, we assign a variable node vx in G, and for each edge e in H, we assign a check node ce in G. We then connect a variable node vx to a check node ce if and only if the edge e that corresponds to ce contains the node x that corresponds to vx. (See Fig. 5.) It is clear by the construction that G is simple and that the degree sequence of variable nodes in G is π. (The fact that H is loopless implies that the minimum check node degree in G is 2.) Now, we show that the girth of G is at least 6. To the contrary, assume

e///
x

e

y

e//

w z
r
e/
H

vx vy vz vw vr

ce ce /

ce//

ce///

G

Fig. 5. A hypergraph H and its corresponding bipartite graph G.

that the girth of G is four. This implies that there are two variable nodes vx, vy and two check nodes ce, ce such that vxce, vxce , vyce, vyce ∈ E(G). This in turn means that in H, there are two edges e and e such that they have at least two common nodes (x and x ). This is, however, in contradiction with the linearity of H. Proof of “only if part”. Let G be a simple bipartite graph with variable node degree sequence π, dcmin ≥ 2, and g ≥ 6. We now construct a hypergraph H with degree sequence π, and show that it is loopless and linear. For each variable node v (check node c) in G, assign a node x (an edge e) in H. Also, for each edge vc in G, include the node x, corresponding to v, in the edge e, corresponding to c. (See Fig. 5.) It is easy to see that since dcmin (G) ≥ 2, then H is loopless, and since g(G) ≥ 6, then H is linear.
REFERENCES
[1] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[2] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Error rate estimation of low-density parity-check codes on binary symmetric channels using cycle enumeration,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1550–1555, Jun. 2009.
[3] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Efficient algorithm for finding dominant trapping sets of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 6942–6958, Nov. 2012.
[4] Y. Hashemi and A. H. Banihashemi, “New characterization and efficient exhaustive search algorithm for leafless elementary trapping sets of variable-regular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 62, no. 12, pp. 6713– 6736, Dec. 2016.
[5] Y. Hashemi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Characterization of elementary trapping sets in irregular LDPC codes and the corresponding efficient exhaustive search algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 64, no. 5, pp. 3411–3430, May 2018.
[6] A. Tasdighi, A. H. Banihashemi, and M.-R. Sadeghi, “Efficient search of girth-optimal QC-LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 1552–1564, 2016.
[7] H. Hulett, T. G. Will, and G. J. Woeginger, “Multigraph realizations of degree sequences: maximization is easy, minimization is hard,” Oper. Res. Lett., vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 594–596, 2008.
[8] S. Behrens, C. Erbes, M. Ferrara, S. G. Hartke, B. Reiniger, H. Spinoza, and C. Tomlinson, “New results on degree sequences of uniform hypergraphs,” Electron. J. Combin., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. Paper 14, 18, 2013.
[9] A. Deza, A. Levin, S. M. Meesum, and S. Onn, “Optimization over degree sequences,” SIAM J. Discrete Math., vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 2067– 2079, 2018.
[10] N. S. Bhave, B. Y. Bam, and C. M. Deshpande, “A characterization of degree sequences of linear hypergraphs,” J. Indian Math. Soc. (N.S.), vol. 75, no. 1-4, pp. 151–160 (2009), 2008.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:11:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

