IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 23, NO. 8, AUGUST 2019

1381

GatedNet: Neural Network Decoding for Decoding Over Impulsive Noise Channels

Yang Hu , Ling Zhao, Zhiyuan Yan, Senior Member, IEEE, Aryan Kaushik, Yi Hou, and John Thompson, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract— This letter proposes a novel neural network (NN) called GatedNet for decoding over-impulsive noise channels. To reduce the impact of impulsive noise, the neurons in the GatedNet are redesigned with control gates to achieve better performance and robustness. Furthermore, a partially connected layer (PCL) in the neural network design is proposed to reduce the computational complexity. Simulation results show that the proposed GatedNet decoder outperforms the belief propagation (BP) decoder for different impulsive noise channels. Furthermore, it achieves near-maximum likelihood (ML) performance with much shorter decoding time.
Index Terms— Deep learning, low-density parity-check codes, channel decoding, impulsive noise channels.
I. INTRODUCTION
I N RECENT years, exploiting deep learning methods for channel decoding has attracted significant research interest. Different neural network decoding (NND) approaches, such as those based on feed-forward neural networks (FNNs) [1], [2] and recurrent neural networks (RNNs) [3], [4], have been proposed. Most such decoders are designed and evaluated for an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel model. However, the actual noise is often non-Gaussian and impulsive in many practical communication systems, including machinetype communication and satellite communication [5]. Unfortunately, the decoder designs based on AWGN channels have performance degradation when used over impulsive noise channels [6].
In this letter, we focus on impulsive noise channels and propose the GatedNet decoder which achieves near maximum likelihood (ML) performance. Because of exponential training complexity, the proposed decoder is only feasible for codes with short block lengths. However, it is of interest for practical applications such as Internet of things (IoT) and satellite communication. Finally, we use low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes in performance evaluation of the proposed GatedNet decoder due to the wide applications of LDPC codes. Since
Manuscript received March 19, 2019; revised May 9, 2019; accepted May 23, 2019. Date of publication June 10, 2019; date of current version August 12, 2019. This work was supported by the Joint Fund of Pre-Research of Equipment and Ship Heavy Industry (6141B04050105) and by the Fund of China Scholarship Council (201806025002). The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was M. Baldi. (Corresponding author: Ling Zhao.)
Y. Hu, L. Zhao, and Y. Hou are with the School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China (e-mail: lucyyang@buaa.edu.cn; zhaoling@buaa.edu.cn; mokyy@buaa.edu.cn).
Z. Yan is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA 18015 USA (e-mail: zhy6@lehigh.edu).
A. Kaushik and J. Thompson are with the Institute for Digital Communications, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH8 9YL, U.K. (e-mail: a.kaushik@ed.ac.uk; j.s.thompson@ed.ac.uk).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2019.2920638

the GatedNet decoder does not rely on any property of LDPC codes, it is applicable to linear codes in general.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first published study of a machine learning-based decoder over impulsive noise channels. The main contributions of this work are:
• We propose a novel NND called GatedNet for decoding over impulsive noise channels, which achieves near ML performance for short codes.
• We redesign the neurons with control gates in long shortterm memory (LSTM) in order to reduce the impact of the impulsive noise to neural network decoders. The experimental results demonstrates the robustness of the proposed NND with control gates.
• Finally, we design a partially connected layer (PCL) in the network to reduce the number of the training parameters in the hidden layers and hence the computational complexity. Also, the PCL appears to result in a slight performance improvement for the GatedNet decoder. II. BACKGROUND

A. Symmetric Alpha-Stable Distribution

The symmetric alpha-stable (SαS) distribution, which is defined by its characteristic function φ(ω) = e|γω|α, is used to model impulsive noises [7]. The parameter α ∈ [1, 2] is the characteristic exponent which represents the degree of impulsive noise. Larger α means weaker impulsive noise and the special case α = 2 represents the AWGN. γ is the scale parameter which is a measure of the distribution width and ω is the random variable. The probability distribution function (PDF) of the SαS distribution is defined via the inverse Fourier transform:

f (x; α, γ) = 1

+∞
exp(−|γω|α)e−jωxdω.

(1)

2π −∞

For the SαS distribution, instead of signal-to-noise ratio,

we use geometric signal-to-noise ratio (GSNR), defined in [8]

2

as

GSNR

=

1 2Cg

A

1
Cgα

−1
γ

, where A = 1 and Cg ≈ 1.78.

B. Linear Block Codes
For a linear block code, let K denote the number of information bits and N be the length of a codeword. There is a generator matrix G ∈ FK2 ×N such that codeword x ∈ FN2 and message bits m ∈ F2K are related by x = mG. For a systematic code, G can be written as G = [IK |P ], where IK is the K ×K identity matrix. G represents the linear mapping between codewords and message bits, which is used to simplify the connections of the PCL design in subsection III-C.

1558-2558 © 2019 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:05:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1382

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 23, NO. 8, AUGUST 2019

Fig. 1. Schematics of a gate-controlled neuron and a normal neuron.

III. PROPOSED DEEP LEARNING APPROACH FOR DECODING

A. System Model

The system model consists of the transmitter and the

receiver. At the transmitter, message bits m of length K

are encoded to a binary codeword x of length N through

an encoder. We use random codewords rather than the

all-zero codeword for the encoding. As in [1], the modula-

tion and noise addition are designed as deterministic layers

to implement BPSK modulation and noise addition. At the

receiver, the received signal for the GatedNet decoder is given

by yi = xi +ni for i = 1, 2, . . . , N , where xi is the modulated symbol vector and ni ∼ f (n; α, λ) is the channel noise.

The task of the GatedNet decoder is to estimate the correct

information bits from the noisy version of the codewords yi.

The GatedNet consists of an input layer, three hidden layers,

and an output layer. The neurons in the hidden layers are

redesigned with control gates described in subsection III-B.

The input training set consists of the noiseless code-

words and the label represents the corresponding informa-

tion bits. The gradient descent method and back propagation

algorithm [9] are used to update the GatedNet to minimize

the mean square error (MSE) function which is defined as

LM S E

=

1 K

i (mi − mˆ i)2, where mi ∈ {0, 1} is the ith

target information bit and mˆ ∈ [0, 1] is the soft estimate

by GatedNet. To observe the simulation results, we generate

noisy codewords on different GSNR values as the GatedNet

inputs and calculate the bit error rate (BER) according to the

detection results.

B. Neuron With Control Gates
Experimental results in section IV show that the FNN decoder suffers from performance degradation over impulsive noise channels. This is because such channels are prone to more volatile noise, which makes it difficult for FNN to learn the appropriate network parameters due to these outliers. Therefore, we redesign the neurons in the hidden layers with control gates which helps the NN decoder to avoid such improper learning. A schematic of this novel neuron design is shown in Fig. 1.
LSTM was proposed to deal with the exploding and vanishing gradient problems for the RNN [10]. It introduces gate

units which can enforcing constant error flow. Motivated by this, we propose the gate-controlled neuron, which is much simpler to compute and implement for the FNN, to reduce the impact of outliers during the training. The forget gate and hidden states in gate units are deleted because they are unnecessary for the FNN. The input gates and output gates are also simplified on the connection. As a result, the design of the gate-controlled neuron features an input gate i, an output gate o, and a cell c. Let L be the number of neurons in a layer and M be the number of inputs. We define the following notations:
• Input vector: v ∈ RM • Input weights: Wi, Wc, Wo ∈ RL×M • Bias weights: bi, bc, bo ∈ RL
The gate-controlled neuron can be described by:

i = μg(Wiv + bi),

(2)

o = μg(Wov + bo),

(3)

c = i  μh(Wcv + bc),

(4)

y = o  μh(c),

(5)

where μg and μh are non-linear activation functions. The

logistic

sigmoid

(μg (x)

=

1 1+e−x

)

is

used

as

a

gate

activation

function, and the hyperbolic tangent (μh(x) =tanh(x)) is used

as a cell and output activation function. The symbol  denotes

point-wise multiplication of two vectors.

In comparison to the frequently used neuron as depicted

in Fig. 1, two additional gates regulate the data flow and

parameter passing. The primary function of input gate i is to

regulate the flow of the input data from the previous layer to

the cell. After training, if the value of i is close to 0, the input

is considered as improper and prevented from propagating.

The output gate o controls the flow of the output from the

cell and determines how much information should be passed

to the next layer. If its value is close to 1, the neuron output

will be propagated unaltered.

In section IV, we compare the proposed GatedNet and FNN

in different conditions and the results shows FNN cannot

achieve as good performance as the GatedNet over impulsive

noise channels for the same computational complexity.

Assuming full connections and the same number of neurons,

the GatedNet has better performance than FNN, at the expense

of higher computational complexity. The computational com-

plexity in turn depends on the number of training parameters,

which is roughly

d
O 3 · NinNh1 + 3 · Nhl−1 Nhl + 3 · Nhd Nout , (6)
l=2
where Nin and Nout are the numbers of inputs and outputs, respectively, and d is the depth (the number of hidden layers) and Nhi is the number of neurons in hidden layer hi. Usually, the proposed GatedNet has three hidden layers and Nh1 > Nh2  Nh3 ∼ Nin > Nout, so (6) can be approximated as O(3 · Nh1Nh2).

C. Partially Connected Layer
According to the complexity analysis above, Nh1 and Nh2 are the primary factors for the computational complexity, thus

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:05:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HU et al.: GATEDNET: NND FOR DECODING OVER IMPULSIVE NOISE CHANNELS

1383

Fig. 3. Parity check matrix for the LDPC code used in the simulation.

Fig. 2. Example structure of a GatedNet with the PCL. Black neurons are gate control neurons and white neurons are normal neurons.

TABLE I TRAINING SETTINGS

we reduce the connections between layers h1 and h2 via the PCL design. To alleviate performance degradation, instead of
randomly deleting connections we choose to remove connec-
tions according to the generator matrix G, which represents the relationship between message bits and correlative codewords. Without loss of generality we assume N |Nh1 and K|Nh2. We first divide h1 into N parts and h2 into K parts, which represents the codeword bits and message bits, respectively. Let hij be the jth part in hi and h1j − h2k denote that part h1j and h2k are fully connected. Then, we delete unimportant connections between different parts according to the generator
matrix G. For example, in Fig. 2, G12 = G13 = 0, which means the first message bit is not involved in generating the second and the third codeword bits. So we delete h12 −h21 and h13 − h21 accordingly. That means the neurons in h21 connect with those in h11 and h14 only, which are marked with a green line. Similarly, considering the value of G21 and G24, h12 − h22 and h13 − h22 are marked with a blue line.
The simulation results in section IV show that GatedNet
with PCL has a better performance than with FCL. This means
the PCL can extract the essential information from input data
more explicitly and effectively with partial connections. More
importantly, the number of training parameters is reduced to

O(3

·

G0

G1 +

G1

Nh1

Nh2

),

(7)

where G0 and G1 are the number of 0 and 1 entries in G, respectively. In the specific case, if using a systematic code,

the PCL can reduce the number of training parameters between

the hidden layer h1 and h2 case, (7) is equal to O(3 ·

by a fraction at least

1

−

K −1 N

Nh1 Nh2 ).

K −1 N

.

In

this

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
For performance evaluation, we use a systematic LDPC code with length N = 16 and rate r = 0.5, and its parity check matrix H is given in Fig. 3. The GatedNet structure employs one input layer, three hidden layers with gated neurons and one output layer. The PCL design is implemented between the hidden layer h1 and h2. Two variable training settings, the number of neurons in hi layer and the training epoch e, are denoted as {Nh1, Nh2, Nh3; e} together. The detailed parameters used for training are given in Table I.

Fig. 4. Performance comparison between GatedNet decoder and BP decoder for a (16, 8) LDPC code. GN in the legend is short for GatedNet.
We test the GatedNet decoder in four channels with different degrees of impulsive noise: no impulsive noise (AWGN, α = 2), weak (α = 1.8), medium (α = 1.5) and strong (α = 1.2). In every channel, we evaluate the GatedNet decoder over different GSNR values ranging from 0 dB to 8 dB. We compare the performance with two decoding methods: (a) ML decoder with equally likely transmitted codewords; (b) assuming the channel is known and the BP decoder computes the log likelihood ratio (LLR) from the channel observations. It should be noted that the intrinsic information of BP methods is generated based on the SαS model instead of the AWGN channel model and we run the BP decoder for 100 iterations to approach its best performance.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:05:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1384

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 23, NO. 8, AUGUST 2019

TABLE II DECODING TIME COMPARISON BETWEEN THE ML DECODER
AND THE GATEDNET FOR (16, 8) LDPC
Fig. 5. Performance comparison between GatedNet and FNN mentioned in [1] for a (16, 8) LDPC code.
The results in Fig. 4 show that our proposed GatedNet decoder achieves near ML performance with a gap of up to 0.1dB. In addition, the GatedNet decoder outperforms the BP decoder in both the AWGN channel and impulsive noise channels. And it shows more improvement when the impulsive noise is stronger. In a weak impulsive noise (α = 1.8) case, GatedNet can improve the decoding performance at least 0.8 dB in comparison to the BP decoder at BER = 10−3. And this value is up to approximately 1.3 dB in the stronger impulsive noise case (α = 1.2).
For decoding speed comparison, we test the GatedNet and the ML decoder on a i7@3.7GHz CPU with 32GB RAM and generate 25600 frames. The results of decoding time for 25600 frames are shown in Table. II. We find that the GatedNet takes much less time for decoding than the ML decoder over different channel modes. The ML decoding time over impulsive noise channels is mainly consumed in the calculation of the PDF of the SαS distribution. We also give the training time for the GatedNet with the training setting {256, 128, 32; 218} based on an Nvidia GTX 1080 Ti GPU. Although it needs some time for the model training, it is a one-time complexity. More importantly, when the code length is longer, the computational complexity of the ML decoder increases exponentially, but the decoding time of the GatedNet only depends on the number of neurons after the training.
We also compare the GatedNet with the FNN as used in [1]. For fair and full comparison, we increase the number of neurons and training epochs for FNN and other training settings

are unchanged. The training settings T1, T2, and T3 in the legend of Fig. 5 represent {256, 128, 32; 216}, {256, 128, 32; 218} and {512, 256, 64; 218}, respectively. The experimental results shown in Fig. 5 demonstrate that the GatedNet decoder has much better performance (at least 4 dB improvement at BER= 10−3) than the FNN over different degrees of impulsive noise. The experiments also show that FNN cannot get the same decoding performance as the GatedNet by increasing the number of neurons or training epochs.
We apply the PCL, FCL and randomly connected layer (RCL) to the GatedNet separately to show the extra performance benefit of PCL design. The PCL and RCL designs have the same number of connections. The training settings follow the same values as mentioned in Table I. When compared with the FCL, the PCL has a approximately 0.1 dB improvement at BER= 10−3 and the RCL shows performance losses. This means PCL can help the GatedNet decoder because of the particular connections.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this letter, we propose a novel neural network, GatedNet, for decoding over impulsive noise channels. We redesign the neurons with control gates to reduce the impact of impulsive noise. In addition, the proposed PCL design with specific connections reduces the number of training parameters and improves the decoding performance slightly, which cannot be achieved by random connections. The simulation results show that the proposed GatedNet decoder achieves near ML performance over different impulsive noise channels. The exponential training complexity remains a significant obstacle to adopting this decoder to longer codes, and we will focus on this issue in our future work.
REFERENCES
[1] T. Gruber, S. Cammerer, J. Hoydis, and S. ten Brink, “On deep learningbased channel decoding,” in Proc. CISS, 2017, pp. 1–6.
[2] S. Cammerer, T. Gruber, J. Hoydis, and S. ten Brink, “Scaling deep learning-based decoding of polar codes via partitioning,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, Singapore, Dec. 2017, pp. 1–6.
[3] H. Kim, Y. Jiang, R. Rana, S. Kannan, S. Oh, and P. Viswanath, “Communication algorithms via deep learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), 2018.
[4] E. Nachmani, E. Marciano, L. Lugosch, W. J. Gross, D. Burshtein, and Y. Be’ery, “Deep learning methods for improved decoding of linear codes,” J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 119–131, Feb. 2018.
[5] Y. Hou, R. Liu, B. Dai, and L. Zhao, “Joint channel estimation and LDPC decoding over time-varying impulsive noise channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 66, no. 6, pp. 2376–2383, Jun. 2018.
[6] H. Nakagawa, D. Umehara, S. Denno, and Y. Morihiro, “A decoding for low density parity check codes over impulsive noise channels,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Power Line Commun. Appl., 2005, pp. 85–89.
[7] J. Ilow and D. Hatzinakos, “Analytic alpha-stable noise modeling in a Poisson field of interferers or scatterers,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 46, no. 6, pp. 1601–1611, Jun. 1998.
[8] J. G. Gonzalez, J. L. Paredes, and G. R. Arce, “Zero-order statistics: A mathematical framework for the processing and characterization of very impulsive signals,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 54, no. 10, pp. 3839–3851, Oct. 2006.
[9] D. E. Rumelhart and J. L. McClelland, Parallel Distributed Processing: Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition: Foundations, vol. 1. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 1986, pp. 318–362.
[10] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
[11] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), 2014.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:05:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

