2019 22nd Euromicro Conference on Digital System Design (DSD)

Reliability Assessment of Flooded Min-Sum LDPC Decoders Based on Sub-Threshold Processing Units

Sergiu Nimara
University Politehnica Timisoara Timisoara, Romania
sergiu.nimara@cs.upt.ro

Abstract—This paper aims to evaluate the performance degradation of faulty flooded Min-Sum LDPC decoder architectures based on sub-threshold processing units, by performing hierarchical decomposition of combinational and sequential sub-blocks of processing units described at RTL level. Logic synthesis of the combinational sub-blocks is performed and faults are injected for each logic gate according to a delaydependent fault model for critical and non-critical paths of the design. The impact of the probabilistic behavior of sub-threshold gates on the error-correction performance of the decoder is analyzed in terms of bit error rate (BER) metrics for Binary Additive White Gaussian Noise (BiAWGN) communication channel model.
Index Terms—Forward error correction, LDPC, simulated fault injection, sub-threshold circuits, reliability assessment.
I. INTRODUCTION
Discovered by Robert G. Gallager in 1962 [1], during his studies at MIT, and prevailingly neglected until the work of D. J. MacKay in 1995 [2], Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes represent a class of capacity-approaching correcting codes, which became indispensable for modern applications, like high-density NAND flash memories [3], satellite broadcasting (DVB-S2, DVB-S2X), mobile WiMAX (IEEE 802.16), twisted pair cables Ethernet communication (10 GBASE-T IEEE 802.3an) or wireless LAN (Wi-Fi IEEE 802.11).
During the last decade we have assisted to a tremendous pursuit of lowering the supply voltage of the CMOS circuits, with the aim of reducing the dissipated power of nanometric semiconductor devices [4][5][6]. The power saving benefits of near-threshold and sub-threshold CMOS devices come, nonetheless, with a significant disadvantage: the logic gate will exhibit a probabilistic behavior, dependent on the working frequency [4][6].
Recent studies have analyzed the possibility to implement the encoder or the decoder of forward error-correction codes with sub-threshold noisy hardware [7][8][9][10]. This will lead to a shift in the usability of the traditional communication model from the error-prone communication link to error-prone encoder and decoder architectures. Usual communication models assume that the behavior of the error correction encoders and decoders is deterministic, while the behavior of the communication channel could be probabilistic, assuming that interference or noise could affect the correctness of the messages being transmitted. Injecting transient or timing errors in the decoders has proven that this type of digital

circuits is capable of tolerating the faults, providing similar performance [10][11] or, in some cases, even better performance than their fault-free counterparts.
The solution presented in [9] assumes that probabilistic errors occur only in the storage elements (flip-flops) of memory-centric flooded LDPC architectures. The degradation of error-correction capability is highlighted in terms of frameerror rate (FER) metrics for various timing constraints of the decoder. The results in [9] prove that LDPC decoders are capable of correcting errors affecting their own storage elements. Motivated by these considerations and results in the literature, we perform an analysis targeting the faulty subthreshold processing units of LDPC decoders.
This paper depicts reliability assessment simulation campaigns applied for flooded Min-Sum (MS) LDPC decoders based on probabilistic sub-threshold processing units, using hierarchical decomposition of the combinational and sequential RTL sub-blocks of the CNUs and VNUs and logic synthesis of the combinational ones. The accuracy of the methodology relies on the probabilistic gate level fault models developed in [4] for basic sub-threshold logic gates. Each gate belonging to the processing units has a realistic timing constraint associated, depending on its appurtenance to a critical or non-critical path.
This paper is organized as follows: Section II presents previous work regarding reliability analysis of LDPC decoding; Section III presents an overview of LDPC codes characteristics and LDPC decoder architectures; Section IV describes the proposed methodology, while the simulation results are depicted in Section V. The last section of this paper is dedicated to concluding remarks.
II. STATE-OF-THE-ART FAULT INJECTION METHODOLOGIES BASED ON PROBABILISTIC MODELS
Hardware description languages (HDL) Simulated Fault Injection (SFI) represents a powerful methodology for reliability assessment of circuits because it can be applied as soon as a system model is available in the design phase. A large range of digital circuits has been the subject of HDL SFI, i.e. binary adders [4], AES crypto-chips [14], one-step majority decoders [8], memory-centric LDPC decoders [9] or partially-parallel flooded LDPC decoders [15].
The methodology described in paper [14] consists in hierarchical block decomposition of the RTL design of combinational circuits, followed by logic synthesis of the resulted blocks, gate-level data dependent HDL SFI using mutants and probabilistic RTL SFI using saboteurs. Due to the

978-1-7281-2862-7/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE

620

DOI 10.1109/DSD.2019.00096

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:08:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

accuracy provided by the gate-level SFI and the low simulation overhead required by RTL SFI in [14], the principles of that methodology are applied in this paper for the combinational sub-blocks of the processing units of the targeted flooded MS LDPC decoder.
The authors in [16] investigate the behavior of an MS LDPC decoder relying on noisy hardware and their paper concentrates on the computation noise, which is modeled at the lower level of arithmetic and logic operations included in the decoding algorithm. However, the methodology described in this paper takes into account the probabilistic nature of the hardware of the decoder, which relies on sub-threshold logic gates.
III. OVERVIEW OF LDPC CODES AND LDPC DECODER ARCHITECTURES
The null space of a sparse parity check matrix H represents the basic concept on which the LDPC linear block codes rely. A vector c is a codeword if and only if it verifies the equation ܿ ‫ܪ  כ‬௧ ൌ Ͳ[12]. If the columns and/or rows of the paritycheck matrix H have multiple weights, than the null space of H will lead to an irregular LDPC code, while a quasi-cyclic LDPC code will be obtained if H is an array of sparse circulants of the same size [13].
The number of non-zero entries in a column of the H matrix is called the variable node degree, denoted as ݀௩ , while the number of non-zero entries in a row of the H matrix represents the check node degree, denoted as ݀௖. Furthermore, a bi-partite graph called Tanner graph can be elaborated, which has its nodes separated into two types (variable nodes, corresponding to codeword bits and the check nodes, corresponding to parity-check equations) and the edges may only link two nodes belonging to two different categories. The process of LDPC decoding usually relies on message-passing (MP) algorithms, which implies the permanent exchange of messages between the two types of nodes.
The flooding scheduling requires that all CNUs and all VNUs send the newly computed messages to their neighbours in the Tanner graph for each iteration. Min-Sum (MS) algorithm performs the decoding iterations using basic arithmetic and logic operations, like additions and comparisons on a small number of bits, so it represents the preferred candidate for hardware implementations. The flooded MS decoding receive the channel LLR messages (denoted as Ȗ) as inputs and compute the check node updates (denoted as ȕ), variable node updates (denoted as Į) and aposteriori updates.
The flooded MS LDPC decoder architecture, which has been the subject of the fault injection process in this paper, consists of:
- Processing units – the architecture contains a number of VNUs equal to the number of columns and a number of CNUs equal to the number of rows of the base matrix;
- Į, ȕ, Ȗ and hard-decoding (HD) memory blocks; Į messages are being stored in the Į memory blocks, ȕ messages are being stored in the ȕ memory blocks, Ȗ memory blocks are used for storing the input LLR messages, while HD memory blocks are used for storing the hard decision bits;

- Control unit – a module used for generating the control signals which are needed by the decoding process iterations.
Regarding the architecture of the processing units, each VNU processes its corresponding ȕ messages in a parallel manner, while the same applies for the Į messages processed by each CNU. A regular (3, 6) LDPC code means that ݀௩ ൌ3, so the VNUs will process 3 ȕ messages in parallel each clock cycle, while ݀௖ ൌ6, so the CNUs will process 6 Į messages in parallel each clock cycle.
IV. PROPOSED METHODOLOGY AND FAULT INJECTION SET-UP
The proposed flooded LDPC decoder architecture has been used for a (3, 6) regular LDPC code with a base B matrix of 12 rows and 24 columns and a circulant size of 54. The processing units used for the simulated fault injection campaigns are 12 CNUs and 24 VNUs.
The proposed methodology comprises the following steps:
1. The LDPC processing units (VNUs and CNUs) are divided into combinational and sequential sub-blocks; we considered that each pipeline stage represents a sequential sub-block, while the logic contained between two pipeline registers represent a combinational subblock.
2. The RTL combinational sub-blocks, described in Verilog HDL, are further subjected to a gate-level synthesis process, using Synopsys Design Compiler tool. The synthesis process provides two outputs: the gate-level netlist of each combinational sub-block, along with its corresponding timing reports.
3. The timing reports of each combinational sub-block obtained in the previous step are used to perform critical and non-critical path extraction. For a gate-level netlist, the critical path is defined as any path from a primary input of the module to a primary output, which has the maximum number of logic gates. The non-critical paths are the ones consisting of fewer gates than the critical path.
4. A delay constraint is considered for each processing unit type. According to this global delay value of a module, a corresponding delay can be deduced for each gate of the module, depending on its appurtenance to a critical path or a non-critical one. A C program is used for processing the timing reports and the fault-free netlist generated during step 2, in order to determine the faulty gate-level netlist, which contains one parametrizable mutant (a function of 3 variables: ܸௗௗ, delay and temperature) inserted for each gate of the design. The fault model used is the most accurate among the four models presented in [4], namely the Gate input switching probabilistic model (GISP), which considers different probabilities for each of the input switching combination, corresponding to the turn-on / turn-off of a different pair of NMOS / PMOS transistors [4]. The injected probabilities of failure are derived from the results of papers [4] and [6].

621 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:08:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5. Parallel simulations of the fault-free RTL or gate-level processing units and the faulty gate-level processing units are carried out, according to the process described in Fig. 1, using dedicated CNU and VNU System Verilog testbenches. The faults are injected only in the combinational sub-blocks, therefore a faulty combinational processing unit is composed of faulty combinational sub-blocks and fault-free sequential pipeline stages. Besides, the sub-block fault analysis and failure probability extraction are performed in order to be used by the next hierarchical level in the design. This is the reason why the propagation of faults from one combinational sub-block to the next is not being taken into account; therefore, the faulty combinational subblocks are receiving only correct inputs.
6. The probability of failure (denoted with PTF in Fig. 1) is computed for each bit of each primary output of all combinational sub-blocks of the processing unit. In order to obtain a relevant probabilistic result, the faulty LDPC decoding process is applied for a very large number of frames, in a Monte-Carlo manner.
7. Using the probabilities of failure obtained at step 6 for each processing unit, a saboteur is inserted for each output of each CNU and VNU in the original RTL faultfree design, in order to simulate the reliability impact of the sub-threshold processing units. The saboteur-based

faulty LDPC decoder architecture is simulated again in order to determine the BER / FER reliability metrics.
At step 1, the CNU processing unit has been divided into 4 combinational sub-blocks and the longest critical path among all 4 blocks belongs to the third one, consisting of 37 gates. A delay constraint of 100 ns on each CNU sub-block means a delay of 2.7 ns on each gate belonging to the longest critical path. According to [4], the probability of failure for a NAND gate supplied at 0.35 V, with a delay constraint of 2.7 ns, varies from 0.0017% to 0.0784%, depending on the input transition pattern. On the other hand, the VNU processing unit has been divided into 3 combinational sub-blocks.
The gate-level mutants inserted at step 4 in the fault-free design for each combinational sub-block of the processing units correspond to ܸௗௗ=0.35 V, a temperature of 50 ºC and a delay computed for 3 separate assumptions: a) operating frequency of 5 MHz (delay = 200 ns), b) frequency of 7,5 MHz (delay = 133 ns), c) frequency of 10 MHz (delay = 100 ns).
The simulation set-up for this flooded LDPC architecture is the same as the one considered in [9], for consistency purposes and it is based on Modelsim commercial simulator.
In order to extract the BER and FER metrics for the LDPC decoding process, the faulty resulted bits and frames must be identified. To this end, cross simulation must be performed,

Fig. 1 - Combinational and sequential sub-blocks division for CNU

Fig. 2 – MS LDPC Bit error rate for CNU fault injection

Fig. 3 – MS LDPC Bit error rate for VNU fault injection

Fig. 4 – MS LDPC Bit error rate for fault injection in both CNUs and VNUs

622 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:08:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

between a transmission chain C++ model and the RTL Verilog

design. A System Verilog framework and a DPI-C interface

are employed for cross simulation purposes. The C++

transmission chain model consists of the following

components: random word generator, LDPC encoder for

random word encoding, BiAWGN transmission channel error

model and results analyzer and probability computation

module.

Three distinct simulation campaigns have been performed,

for a number of 300,000 frames each:

i)

Faults have been injected only in the CNU;

ii)

Faults have been injected only in the VNU;

iii) Faults have been injected in both processing units

simultaneously.

V. SIMULATION RESULTS
In order to evaluate the robustness of the faulty LDPC decoder, we analyze the bit error rate (BER) performance which is plotted in Fig. 2, 3 and 4, according to the fault injection scenarios previously explained.
Fig. 2 shows the BER of the faulty flooded MS LDPC decoder under different delay constraints: 200 ns, 133 ns and 100 ns, respectively, compared with the BER of the error-free LDPC decoder. As seen from the graphs, the error correction capability degrades significantly when lowering the delay constraint from 200 ns to 100 ns.
Considering a BER value of ͳͲିଶ in the case of faulty CNU, with a constraint of 200 ns (Fig. 2), the error correction capability of the faulty LDPC decoder degrades with approximately 0.1 dB, with respect to the BER of the faultfree decoder. Thus, the BER curve of the LDPC decoder with faulty CNU is similar to the one of the fault-free decoder, considering an operating frequency of 5 MHz in the subthreshold region (ܸௗௗ=0.35 V). The degradation reaches about 0.3 dB for a constraint of 133 ns on the CNU and it increases to over 0.5 dB for a constraint of 100 ns. Thus, the error correction capability graceful degradation tendency follows the one found in the literature, in paper [16].
The results depicted in Fig. 3 reveal the fact that faults injected in the VNU affect the performance of the LDPC decoder in a different way. An error floor is obtained at a BER situated between ͳͲିଷand ͳͲିସ, for faulty VNUs with a time constraint of 200 ns (the violet curve in Fig. 3). Fig. 4 shows that the error floor induced by the faulty VNU keeps its pronounced form for the case of fault injection in both CNUs and VNUs.

VI. CONCLUSIONS
With the advent of a new generation of low-power nanometric semiconductor devices, reliability of sub-threshold designs becomes questionable. While the majority of digital circuits become less reliable in the presence of transient or timing faults induced by sub-threshold gates, some decoder designs perform well when faults are injected in their hardware.
This paper has shown how the reliability of a flooded MS LDPC decoder degrades when its processing units are targeted

by a simulated fault injection process, based on stochastic gate-level results previously determined. The BER metrics of the faulty LDPC decoder exhibit different impact on the decoding performance, depending on the type of processing unit being injected. With a frequency constraint of 5 MHz, the performance of the LPDC decoder with sub-threshold CNUs, supplied at ܸௗௗ=0.35 V, has the tendency of converging to the one of the fault-free decoder.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” 1963.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Good codes base on very sparse matrices,” Cryptography and Coding, 5th IMA Conference, dec. 1995.
[3] W. Lin et al., “A low power and ultra high reliability LDPC error correction engine with digital signal processing for embedded NAND flash controller in 40nm CMOS,” Symposium on VLSI Circuits Digest of Technical Papers, July 2014.
[4] A. Amaricai, S. Nimara, O. Boncalo, J. Chen and E. Popovici, "Probabilistic Gate Level Fault Modeling for Near and Sub-Threshold CMOS Circuits," 17th Euromicro Conference on Digital System Design (DSD), August 2014, pp. 473-479.
[5] X. Fan, J. Stuijt, B. Liu, T. Gemmeke, “Synthesizable memory arrays based on logic gates for subthreshold operation in IoT,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I, vol. 66, issue 3, March 2019.
[6] J. Chen, S. Cotofana, S. Grandhi, C. Spagnol, E. Popovici, “Inverse Gaussian distribution based timing analysis of sub-threshold CMOS circuits,” Microelectronics Reliability, vol. 55, issue 12, December 2015, pp. 2754-2761.
[7] S. Brkic, P. Ivanis and B. Vasic, “Guaranteed error correction of faulty bit-flipping decoders under data-dependent gate failures,” IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), July 2016.
[8] S. K. Chilappagari, M. Ivkovic, and B. Vasic, “Analysis of one step majority logic decoders constructed from faulty gates,” in 2006 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, July 2006, pp. 469– 473.
[9] A. Amaricai, S. Nimara, O. Boncalo, E. Popovici, “Reliability analysis of memory centric LDPC decoders under probabilistic storage failures,” IEEE International Conference on Electronics, Circuits and Systems (ICECS), dec. 2016.
[10] S. Brkic, O. Al Rasheed, P. Ivanis and B. Vasic, “On fault tolerance of the Gallager B decoder under data-dependent gate failures,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 19, issue 8, Aug. 2015.
[11] E. Dupraz, B. Vasic, D. Declercq, “Performance of Taylor-Kuznetsov memories under timing errors,” IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), July 2017.
[12] C. Spagnol, W. Marnane, E. Popovici, “Reduced complexity, FPGA implementation of quasy-cyclic LDPC decoder,“ Proceedings of the European Conference on Circuit Theory and Design, 2005.
[13] X. Chen, J. Kang, S. Lin, and V. Akella, “Memory system optimization
for FPGA-based implementation of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes decoders,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 58,
no. 1, pp. 98–111, Jan 2011. 
[14] S. Nimara, A. Alexandru, O. Boncalo, M. Popa, “Multi-Level Simulated Fault Injection for Data Dependent Reliability Analysis of RTL Circuit Descriptions,” Advances in Electrical and Computer Engineering, Volume 16, Issue 1, pp. 93-98, 2016.
[15] A. Amaricai, V. Savin, O. Boncalo, N. Cucu-Laurenciu, J. Chen, and S. Cotofana, “Timing error analysis of flooded LDPC decoders,” in Microwaves, Communications, Antennas and Electronic Systems (COMCAS), 2015 IEEE International Conference on, Nov 2015.
[16] C. L. K. Ngassa, V. Savin, E. Dupraz, D. Declercq, “Density evolution and functional threshold for the noisy min-sum decoder”, IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 63, issue 5, pp. 1497 – 1509, January 2015.

623 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:08:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

