2019 IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW)

Enhanced Quasi-Maximum Likelihood Decoding of Short LDPC Codes Based on Saturation

Peng Kang†, Yixuan Xie†, Lei Yang†, Chen Zheng∗, Jinhong Yuan†, and Yuejun Wei∗ †The University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia ∗Huawei Technology CO., LTD, Shanghai, China

Abstract—In this paper, we propose an enhanced quasimaximum likelihood (EQML) decoder for short LDPC codes. The proposed EQML decoder selects unreliable variable nodes (VNs) and performs the reprocessing if the first belief propagation (BP) decoding attempt fails. To improve the decoding error rate performance, we propose a novel node selection method based on the sign fluctuation of VNs’ extrinsic messages. We also present a partial pruning stopping (PPS) rule to reduce the decoding complexity by deactivating part of the decoding tests once a valid codeword is found. Simulation results show that the proposed PPS rule achieves 20% lower decoding complexity compared to the full list decoding without sacrificing the error rate performance. In addition, the proposed EQML decoder outperforms the augmented BP decoder for short LDPC codes and approaches the performance of the ML decoder within 0.3 dB in terms of the frame error rate.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] and their variations, e.g., [2], [3] have found wide application areas, such as wireless communications, optical communications and data storage, for their near capacity performance under belief propagation (BP) decoding for moderate to long block lengths. Recently, new services and applications, such as vehicle-toeverything and Internet of things, have been considered in the fifth generation (5G) mobile networks. These applications require ultra-reliability and low decoding complexity for massive low-cost devices, which have drawn significant research efforts for short codes [4], [5].
It is well-known that the maximum likelihood (ML) decoder achieves the minimum error probability with equiprobable input codewords. However, its decoding complexity becomes prohibitively high when the block length is larger than tens of bits. To reduce the decoding complexity, various simplified decoders [6]–[8] for LDPC codes and their variations were proposed. However, they are commonly designed for moderate to long block lengths.
For short LDPC codes, several quasi-ML (QML) decoders have been proposed in [9]–[12]. The most common strategy adopted in these works is to introduce the reprocessing after the failure of the conventional BP decoding. More specifically, during the reprocessing, the BP decoder is reinitialized with a list of different input sequences, where each input sequence is generated by modifying the channel output of the selected unreliable variable nodes (VNs). The conventional BP decoding is then conducted for each input sequence, and the decoding output is stored if it is a valid codeword. The ‘best’ codeword is chosen from the list of valid codewords as the decoder output according to a certain decision metric.

One of the earliest QML decoders is the ordered statistic

decoder (OSD) [9]. For a received signal, this decoder chooses

p most reliable bits and generates a list of

p q=1

p q

possible

error combinations for these bits. Each combination is re-

encoded into a codeword. In this way, a list of codewords

is obtained, and one of them is chosen as the decoder output.

Obviously, matrix transformation is required for different p

most reliable bits to obtain the generator matrix, which makes

the OSD unsuitable for hardware implementations. To avoid

matrix transformation, the augmented BP (ABP) decoder and

saturated min-sum (SMS) decoder were proposed in [10] and

[12], respectively. In addition, a single bit flip-aided decoder

based on multitree search for the unreliable VNs was proposed

in [11]. For these decoders, a conventional BP decoder is

evoked for several rounds to generate a list of codewords. Each

round of the decoder is fed with a different input sequence

derived from the same channel output sequence. Nevertheless,

for all these QML decoders, the performance gap to the ML

decoder is considerable for a small list size.

In this paper, we propose an enhanced QML (EQML)

decoder for short LDPC codes, aiming to outperform the ABP

decoder with a lower decoding complexity for a small list

size. By investigating the phenomenon of sign flips for VNs’

extrinsic messages in the BP decoding, we propose a novel

node selection method from edge perspective to improve the

accuracy of selecting unreliable VNs. To reduce the decoding

complexity, we further introduce a stopping rule, namely

partial pruning stopping (PPS) rule. The PPS rule effectively

terminates the decoding tests on the following sub-branches if

a valid codeword is obtained in the current branch. Simulation

results demonstrate that the EQML decoder outperforms both

the ABP decoder and min-sum (MS) decoder for short LDPC

codes. It can approach the frame error rate (FER) performance

of the ML decoder within 0.3 dB. Moreover, the proposed PPS

rule has a lower decoding complexity compared to the list

stopping rule (LDS) without sacrificing the FER performance.

II. THE CONVENTIONAL QML DECODERS
In this section, we briefly introduce the conventional QML decoders in [10] and [12], including the node selection method and the reprocessing. The general flow of these QML decoders is described as follows.
• Perform the conventional BP decoding. If a valid codeword is found then output the codeword. Otherwise, repeat the following steps up to the maximum number of reprocessing stage jmax:

978-1-5386-6A9u0th0o-r6iz/e1d9li/c$e3ns1e.d00use©li2m0ite1d9toIE: YEoEnsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:06:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2019 IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW)

a) Node selection: choose unreliable VNs according to a node selection method.

b) Reprocessing at each stage:

1) Create a list of decoder input sequences by satu-

rating the channel output of the unreliable VNs.

2) Perform the conventional BP decoding with each

decoder input sequence.

3) Collect all valid output codewords. • Select the best codeword as the decoding output based
on certain decision metric.

Note that the performance of a QML decoder is determined

by the selection of unreliable VNs for saturation. In addition,

the decoding complexity depends on the number of decoding

tests performed in the reprocessing. In the following, we first

define some notations and then present the node selection

methods as well as the reprocessing in [10] and [12].

Let H be a parity-check matrix of size M × N for an

LDPC code. Assume that c = (c1, c2, . . . cN ) is the codeword

transmitted through binary additive Gaussian noise (AWGN)

channels and y = (y1, y2, . . . yN ) is the received symbol

vector. Define r(vn) as the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) for a

node

vn,

where

r(vn)

=

log

Pr(yn Pr(yn

|cn |cn

=0) =1)

,

1

≤

n

≤

N.

A. Node-wise Selection (NWS) Method

For the decoding tests at the j-th stage, the ABP decoder

selects j unreliable VNs in total for saturation. Here the

saturation of a node vn means that r(vn) is set to the maximum (+S) or minimum (−S) value, which is determined by the

precision or quantization of the decoder. Define T as the index

of the decoding test in the reprocessing. Denote the set of VNs

saturated for the T -th decoding test by VS(T ). To determine VS(T ) for every T -th decoding test at stage j reprocessing (T = 2j −1, 2j, . . . , 2j+1 −2), the ABP decoder [10] chooses

a new unreliable VN, denoted by vs(T ), and (j − 1) unreliable

VNs which have been selected in the at stage (j − 1) reprocessing. Let T

T −1 2
=

-th decoding test

T −1 2

,

the

newly

saturated VN vs(T ) is selected based on the output of the T -th

decoding test at stage (j − 1) reprocessing. More specifically,

for a given output of the T -th decoding test, find all VNs connected to unsatisfied CNs, which is defined as V (T ). In

particular, when T = 0, the T -th decoding test refers to the

initial BP decoding. Note that an unsatisfied CN means its

associated syndrome is nonzero after the decoding. From all VNs in V (T ), we only consider the VN with the maximum

node degree to be the candidate node. If there are more than

one VN with the same maximum node degree, the VN with

the minimal magnitude of its channel output |r(vn)| is selected

with priority.

In [11], the proposed QML decoder computes the reliability

of each unsatisfied CN based on the log-likelihood. Starting

from the unsatisfied CN with the largest log-likelihood, two

least reliable VNs with the smallest |r(vn)| connected to the

CN are forced to flip their hard decision in a high priority. Note

that the SMS decoder in [12] chooses the unreliable VNs for

saturation solely based on |r(vn)|. It is notable that the node

selection methods in [10]–[12] determine the unreliable VNs

based on the node reliability |r(vn)|. Therefore, we call these node selection methods as NWS methods.

B. The Reprocessing

Denote M = {m1, m2, . . . , m2j } as the list of length-j LLR vectors for the saturated VNs at stage j reprocessing,

where mt∈ {+S, −S}j, t = 1, 2, . . . , 2j. The stage j reprocessing performs 2j BP decoding tests with the modified input

LLRs. For each BP decoding test at the j-th stage, the initial LLR values of VS(T ) are replaced by one mt from M, i.e., r(VS(T )) = mt, and the rest of VNs’ initial LLR values remain the same from the channel output. When all vectors mt in M are tested, the reprocessing moves to stage j + 1. It stops until

the maximum number of reprocessing stage jmax is reached.

Thus, there are total

jmax j=1

2j=2jmax+1−2

additional

decoding

tests need to be performed subsequently if the conventional

BP decoding fails. In the end, the ABP decoder outputs the

best codeword which has the minimum Euclidean distance to

the received sequence [10].

The SMS decoder in [12] simplifies the reprocessing in the

sense that all the jmax unreliable VNs are selected simultaneously. Therefore, only 2jmax input sequences are tested, which

reduces the decoding complexity. However, this degrades

the error rate performance since the number of tested input

sequences is reduced.

III. THE ENHANCED QML DECODER FOR LDPC CODES
It is shown in [10] that the performance of the ABP decoder can approach that of the ML decoder when the number of saturated VNs is relatively large, e.g., jmax = 11. However, for a small or moderate jmax, there is still considerable performance loss. To improve the error rate performance of the ABP decoder for small to moderate jmax with acceptable decoding complexity, we propose an EQML decoder in this section. In particular, we propose an edge-wise selection method to improve the error rate performance and a partial pruning stopping rule to reduce the decoding complexity.

A. The Edge-wise Selection (EWS) Method
In [10], the NWS method selects the unreliable VNs based on syndrome, which is a kind of hard information. In this paper, we would like to select the unreliable VNs directly based on the soft information exchanged during the conventional BP decoding and expect an improved error rate performance.
In the conventional BP decoding, the VNs collect the checkto-variable (C2V) messages from all the neighboring CNs and give back the variable-to-check (V2C) messages, through the edges in the Tanner graph. To measure the reliability of each VN in a more precise way, the evolution of the V2C messages could be used. To be more specific, instead of focusing on the hard information given by syndrome, the sign evolution of the V2C messages is investigated.
Fig. 1 shows the average number of sign flips for the V2C messages per VN with the increasing of iterations for a minsum (MS) decoder. We can see that the average number of sign flips behaves in completely different ways for successful

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:06:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2019 IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW)

0.2

The average number of sign flips

0.15 0.1

Success Failure

0.05

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Iterations
Fig. 1. The average number of sign flips for the V2C messages per VN at
different iterations for the (96, 48) LDPC code in [12] under AWGN channels.
The MS decoder is adopted and the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is 2.5 dB.

and unsuccessful decoding cases. For the successful decoding

case, this number diminishes to zero as iteration increases. In

contrast, it saturates to a constant value after a rapid increase

in the first few iterations for the unsuccessful decoding case.

Note that we observed similar behaviors for many other LDPC

codes, including the 5G LDPC codes and the Tanner (3, 5)

code. Due to space limitations, we do not present the results

here. Consequently, a VN is said to be unreliable if there exists

large number of the V2C messages having their sign flipped.

Motivated by this observation, we propose a novel node

selection method based on this sign flips phenomenon. Let

wk,n be the number of sign flips for the V2C message passed through the k-th edge of the n-th VN. Denoted by

w(vn) =

d(vn ) k=1

wk,n,

(1)

the total number of sign flips for the V2C messages of node

vn, where d(vn) refers to the degrees of vn.

At stage j reprocessing, the proposed node selection method

chooses a new unreliable VN according to w(vn), which is computed from the decoding tests at the (j−1)-th stage. Define w(T )(vn) as the number of sign flips for the V2C messages
of node vn obtained from the T -th decoding test. For the
T -th decoding test, only the node vn with the maximum number of sign flips w(T )(vn) is selected as the candidate node vs(T ). Then we have VS(T ) = VS(T ) ∪ vs(T ) . When

T = 0, w(0)(vn) is obtained from the initial BP decoding. To
avoid selecting the same VN in different reprocessing stages, we set w(T )(VS(T )) = 0 after the T -th decoding test.
Compared to the NWS method, the proposed node selection

method explores more diversities on measuring the reliability

of each VN since the selection criterion relies on the edge level

rather than the node level messages. Thus, we would like to

call this node selection method the EWS method. Since a few

punctured VNs in the codeword do not have associated channel

output, the NWS method in [10] cannot be directly applied to

the 5G LDPC codes. However, the EWS method estimates the

reliability of each VN by the VN’s extrinsic messages, which

do not rely on the existence of the channel output of a VN.

B. The Partial Pruning Stopping (PPS) Rule Define ˆr(T ) as the decoder input sequence for the T -th
decoding test, which is obtained by replacing r(VS(T )) by mt

on the channel output sequence. To collect all possible output codewords, 2jmax+1 − 2 possible input sequences need to be

tested. This stopping rule is called list stopping rule (LDS)

in [10]. Although the LDS rule guarantees the completion of

the output codewords, which is beneficial to the error rate

performance, it has a high decoding complexity. To reduce the

decoding complexity, we propose a PPS rule to avoid some decoding tests in the reprocessing efficiently. Define x(T ) and

X as the output codeword after the T -th decoding test and

the set of all valid codewords collected in the reprocessing, respectively. After the T -th decoding test, we save x(T ) in X

if it is a valid codeword and perform the PPS rule, which stops

the decoding tests on its associated sub-branches thereafter.

The decoding tests on other sub-branches continue until jmax is reached, or there is no more active decoding test.

Fig. 2 depicts the general branch tree of the proposed EQML

decoder with the PPS rule. A branch is considered to be

converged if there is a valid codeword found in that branch.

Compared to the LDS rule, the proposed PPS rule reduces the

decoding complexity by pruning the reprocessing on the sub-

branches followed by a converged branch, which is shown as

dash lines in Fig. 2.

start

VS(2) , rˆ (2) S

w(0) (vn )

V (1) S

,

rˆ (1)

S

j1

: w(2) (vn )

; w(1) (vn )

V (6) S

,

rˆ

(

6)

S
;

V (5) S

,

rˆ (5)

S
:

VS(4) , rˆ (4) S

VS(3) , rˆ (3) S

j2

w(6) (vn )

w(5) (vn )

w(4) (vn ) w(3) (vn )

j3

S

S

S

S

S

S

S

S

; : - Convergence - Non-convergence Fig. 2. The general branch tree of the EQML decoder with the PPS rule.
Note that an alternative stopping rule was proposed in [12], where the reprocessing stops once the number of output codewords exceeds a preset threshold. However, the threshold has to be optimized in advance by computer simulations in order to obtain the best performance. Compared to that, our proposed PPS rule can make a good balance between the decoding complexity and the error rate performance, which is desirable for practical applications.
C. The EQML Decoder
Set the maximum number of decoding iterations as Imax for all BP decoding process. By combining the EWS method and the PPS rule in the reprocessing, the proposed EQML decoder is summarized in Algorithm 1.
IV. NUMERICAL RESULT
In this section, we compare the performance of the proposed EQML decoder with some existing decoders in terms of FER performance and decoding complexity under AWGN channels. The following LDPC codes are used in our simulations:
• The (96,48) LDPC code [13]: A regular LDPC code with code rate 1/2 and block length N = 96. Binary phase shift keying modulation is adopted and Imax = 30.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:06:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2019 IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW)

Algorithm 1 The EQML Decoder

1: Perform BP decoding with Imax 2: if A valid codeword is found then

3: Output the codeword

4: 5:

else Initialize:

T

= 1, j

= 1, VS(0)

=∅

6: while j ≤ jmax do

7:

for t = 1 : 2j do

8:

T=

T −1 2

9:

for n = 1 : N do

10:

Compute w(T )(vn) according to Eq. (1)

11:

end for

12:

Select vs(T ) as vs(T ) = arg max w(T )(vn)

1≤n≤N

13:

Determine VS(T ) = {VS(T ) ∪ vs(T )}

14:

Generate M by enumerating r(VS(T )) to ±S

15:

Determine ˆr(T ) by setting r(VS(T )) = mt

16:

Perform BP decoding with ˆr(T ) and Imax

17:

Perform PPS rule

18:

T =T +1

19:

end for

20:

j =j+1

21: end while

22: 23:

if X = ∅ then Output xbest = arg min

N (r(vn) − xn(T ))2

24: else

x(T )∈X n=1

25:

Declare decoding failure.

26: end if

27: end if

• The 5G LDPC code [14]: An irregular LDPC code with code rate 1/5 and block length N = 280. Quadrature phase shift keying modulation is adopted and Imax = 50.
The MS algorithm is used for all BP decoding tests in the EQML decoder since it has a lower decoding complexity than the SPA.

A. The Error Rate Performance
In this section, we investigate the FER performance of the proposed EQML decoder with different stopping criteria and jmax for the above two LDPC codes. The FER performance of the MS decoder is shown in both Fig. 3 and Fig. 4. For a fair comparison, we set the maximum number of iterations for the MS decoder IMS the same as that can be used by the EQML decoder with the LDS rule, i.e., IMS = (2jmax+1 − 1) · Imax. For convenience, we represent IMS of the MS decoder by TF , where TF = 2jmax+1 − 1, refers to the number of the decoding tests to be conducted.
We can see in Fig. 3, for jmax = 4, the proposed EQML decoder with the PPS rule outperforms the MS decoder with TF = 31 by about 0.5 dB. For jmax = 6, the gain of the EQML decoder is 0.6 dB over the MS decoder with TF = 127. The FER performance of the ML decoder in [13] and the ABP decoder in [10] with the LDS rule are also plotted in Fig. 3. It shows about 0.4 dB gain for jmax = 4 by using the proposed EQML decoder with the PPS rule compared to the ABP

decoder with LDS rule at FER=10−4. More importantly, for jmax = 6, the EQML decoder with the PPS rule outperforms the ABP decoder with the LDS rule by about 0.6 dB and it can
approach the performance of the ML decoder within 0.3 dB at FER=10−4. Note that the ABP decoder adopts SPA while the
MS algorithm is used in the EQML decoder. In addition, we
also show the FER performance of the SMS decoder in [12]
with the LDS rule in Fig. 3, where the maximum number of decoding tests is TF = 129. We see that the EQML decoder with the PPS rule is better than the SMS decoder with TF = 129 even by using jmax = 4 in the high SNR region, where the required maximum number of decoding tests TF is only 31. Moreover, the EQML decoder with the PPS rule can achieve
almost identical FER performance compared to that of the LDS rule for both jmax = 4 and 6.

10-1 10-2 10-3

EQML-jmax=4-PPS EQML-jmax=4-LDS EQML-jmax=6-PPS EQML-jmax=6-LDS MS-TF=31 MS-TF=127 ABP-jmax=4-LDS ABP-jmax=6-LDS ML in [13] SMS-TF=129

FER

10-4

10-5 2
Fig. 3.

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

Eb/N0
FER performance of the (96,48) LDPC code.

10-1 10-2

EQML-jmax=4-PPS EQML-jmax=4-LDS EQML-jmax=6-PPS EQML-jmax=6-LDS MS-TF=31 MS-TF=127 PPV

FER

10-3

10-4
-3 -2.8 -2.6 -2.4 -2.2 -2 -1.8 -1.6 -1.4 -1.2 -0.9
Es/N0
Fig. 4. FER performance of the rate 1/5 LDPC code in 5G standard with block length N = 280.
Fig. 4 depicts the FER performance of the EQML decoder for decoding the 5G short LDPC code. For jmax = 4, the proposed EQML decoder outperforms the MS decoder with TF = 31 by about 0.3 dB. When jmax increases to 6, an additional 0.3 dB gain is obtained for the EQML decoder with the PPS rule in the low SNR region, i.e., −3.1 dB ∼ −1.9 dB. The EQML decoder with the PPS rule demonstrates about 0.4 dB gain in FER performance for jmax = 6 compared to the MS decoder with TF = 127. Note that the similar performance

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:06:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2019 IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW)

gain can be obtained by using the SPA in the EQML decoder. The Polyanskiy-Poor-Verdu´ (PPV) bound [15] for the code length N = 280 is also shown in Fig. 4, where the EQML decoder is about 0.6 dB away from the PPV bound. Similarly, the EQML decoder with the PPS rule can also have nearly the same FER performance compared to that of LDS rule for both jmax = 4 and 6.

B. Decoding Complexity Analysis

In this section, we compare the decoding complexity of the proposed EQML decoder with different stopping criteria and jmax. We use the average number of iterations used for decoding one codeword to evaluate the decoding complexity. Define Il,f as the number of iterations used during the l-th decoding test of the f -th received codeword. Particularly, I0,f refers to the number of iterations performed at the first time of decoding the f -th codeword. Let Iavg be the average number of iterations used for decoding one codeword. Then

1F

T

Iavg = F

f=1 (I0,f +

l=1 Il,f ),

(2)

where F represents the total number of codewords transmitted.

1200

1000 800 600

jmax=4-PPS jmax=4-LDS jmax=6-PPS jmax=6-LDS

Iavg

400

200

0 2
Fig. 5.

2.5

3

3.5

4

Eb/N0

The comparison of Iavg for the (96, 48) LDPC code.

3000

2500 2000 1500

jmax=4-PPS jmax=4-LDS jmax=6-PPS jmax=6-LDS

Iavg

1000

500

0 -3.1 -2.9 -2.7 -2.5 -2.3 -2.1 -1.9 -1.7 -1.5 -1.3 -1.1 -0.9
Es/N0
Fig. 6. The comparison of Iavg for the LDPC code in the 5G standard.
Fig. 5 shows the comparison of the average number of iterations Iavg for the (96, 48) LDPC code decoded by the EQML decoder with the LDS and PPS rules. It can be seen that our proposed EQML decoder with the PPS rule requires less number of Iavg for both jmax = 4 and 6. More specifically, there is about 15 % less Iavg used by the PPS rule for SNR range from 2 dB to 3.5 dB. Moreover, the reduction of the decoding complexity can be even more substantial when jmax is equal to 6. It can be seen from Fig. 5 that Iavg used by the

PPS rule is about 20 % less than that of the LDS rule for SNR
range from 2 dB to 3.5 dB. In Fig. 6, Iavg obtained by the EQML decoder with the PPS
rule for the rate-1/5 5G LDPC code is compared to that of the LDS rule. We can see similar behaviors on the reduction
of the decoding complexity as the (96, 48) LDPC code, where there is about 20 % less Iavg required for SNR from -2.7 dB to -1.5 dB.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed an EQML decoder for decoding
short LDPC codes. In particular, we proposed an EWS method
for the EQML decoder to improve the accuracy of selecting for
unreliable VNs. A PPS rule was also proposed for the EQML
decoder to reduce the decoding complexity. Simulation results
show that the proposed EQML decoder outperforms both the
ABP decoder and MS decoder for short LDPC codes and
approaches the FER performance of the ML decoder within 0.3 dB when jmax = 6. Furthermore, the proposed PPS rule can also achieve a lower decoding complexity compared to
the LDS rule without performance loss.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. on Inf. Theory, vol. 8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. G. M. Mitchell, M. Lentmaier, and D. J. Costello, “Spatially coupled LDPC codes constructed from protographs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, pp. 4866–4889, Sep. 2015.
[3] Y. Xie, L. Yang, P. Kang, and J. Yuan, “Euclidean geometry-based spatially coupled LDPC codes for storage,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 34, pp. 2498–2509, Sep. 2016.
[4] M. Shirvanimoghaddam, M. Sadegh Mohamadi, R. Abbas, A. Minja, C. Yue, B. Matuz, G. Han, Z. Lin, Y. Li, S. Johnson, and B. Vucetic, “Short Block-length Codes for Ultra-Reliable Low-Latency Communications,” ArXiv e-prints, Feb. 2018.
[5] X. Wu, L. Yang, J. Yuan, X. Cheng, and L. Wan, “Rate-Compatible TailBiting Convolutional Codes for M2M Communications,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 22, pp. 482–485, Mar. 2018.
[6] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, pp. 406–414, Mar. 2002.
[7] A. R. Iyengar, M. Papaleo, P. H. Siegel, J. K. Wolf, A. Vanelli-Coralli, and G. E. Corazza, “Windowed decoding of protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes over erasure channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, pp. 2303–2320, Apr. 2012.
[8] P. Kang, Y. Xie, L. Yang, and J. Yuan, “Reliability-based windowed decoding for spatially coupled ldpc codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 22, pp. 1322–1325, Jul. 2018.
[9] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Iterative reliability-based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 19, pp. 908– 917, May. 2001.
[10] N. Varnica, M. P. C. Fossorier, and A. Kavcic, “Augmented belief propagation decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, pp. 1308–1317, Jul. 2007.
[11] M. Ostojic and H. Loeliger, “Multitree decoding and multitree-aided LDPC decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Sympos. on Inf. Theory, pp. 779– 783, Jun. 2010.
[12] S. Scholl, P. Schla¨fer, and N. Wehn, “Saturated min-sum decoding: An afterburner for ldpc decoder hardware,” in 2016 Design, Automation Test in Europe Conference Exhibition (DATE), pp. 1219–1224, Mar. 2016.
[13] M. Helmling, S. Scholl, F. Gensheimer, T. Dietz, K. Kraft, S. Ruzika, and N. Wehn, “Database of Channel Codes and ML Simulation Results.” www.uni-kl.de/channel-codes, 2017.
[14] 3GPP, “NR; Multiplexing and channel coding,” Technical Specification (TS) 38.212, Release 15, 2017.
[15] Y. Polyanskiy, H. V. Poor, and S. Verdu, “Channel Coding Rate in the Finite Blocklength Regime,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, pp. 2307– 2359, May. 2010.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:06:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

