IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 23, NO. 8, AUGUST 2019

1285

Noise-Aided Belief Propagation List Decoding of Polar Codes
A. Çag˘rı Arlı and Orhan Gazi

Abstract— Noise can help weak information bearing signal to be detected in nonlinear systems by the use of stochastic perturbation. In this letter, we propose a novel belief propagation list (BPL) decoder that relies on artificial noise. The proposed decoder is constructed by using parallel independent BP decoders. Noise with different powers are added to different BP decoders that runs in parallel, and the output of the decoder that pass the early detection and termination criteria check is considered as the recovered data. Adding small amount of noise enables the decoder to handle un-converged errors. The obtained results show that the performance of noise-aided BPL decoder is much better than the performances of BP, successive cancelation (SC), and successive cancelation list (SCL) decoders, and it is a bit behind of cyclic redundancy check aided SCL in terms of bit-error rate performance.
Index Terms— Belief propagation, list decoding, polar coding, stochastic perturbation.

I. INTRODUCTION
N OISE in a system is usually considered as a negative phenomenon and countermeasures are taken into account to eliminate it. On the other hand, the concept of stochastic perturbation opens a new perspective to benefit from the adding virtually generated noise. Adding white noise to a non-linear system to reach a stable model is studied for the first time in [1]. Upon its presentation, stochastic perturbation in other words stochastic resonance is used as a beneficial phenomenon in weak electrical signal detection on EMG, EEG based measurements, signal detection on nano-scale devices like nano-wire FETs and CNT-FETs, object detection in images, and even for the explanation of neural transmission of human brain. In general, a stochastic perturbation system have three elements, and these elements are weak input signal, noise signal and a bistable nonlinear system.
Polar codes, which are the first mathematically proven error correcting codes achieving Shannon’s capacity, are introduced by E.Arıkan in [2]. After its introduction, polar codes are adopted to be used in uplink/downlink control channels of 5G framework of eMBB introduced by 3GPP group [3]. There are different decoding schemes for polar codes. The first decoding algorithm called SC decoding algorithm is introduced by Arıkan in [2] for general channels. In addition to SC decoding
Manuscript received April 19, 2019; accepted May 7, 2019. Date of publication May 27, 2019; date of current version August 12, 2019. A. Çag˘rı Arlı gratefully acknowledges the financial support from TÜBI˙TAK 2211-C. A. Çag˘rı Arlı and O. Gazi also acknowledge the support provided by Çankaya University. The associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was C. Feng. (Corresponding author: A. Çag˘rı Arlı.)
The authors are with the Electronic and Communication Engineering Department, Çankaya University, 06790 Ankara, Turkey (e-mail: cagriarli@ cankaya.edu.tr).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2019.2918535

Fig. 1. BER comparison between BP, BPL, SCL, Na-BPL, and SCL+CRC-16, for P (2048, 1024) code at BPSK modulated AWGN channel.
algorithm, other decoding methods such as Cyclic Redundancy Check (CRC) aided SC List (SCL) [4] decoding, belief propagation (BP) based decoding [5], stack decoding, and linear programming decoding are proposed by the researchers. It is shown that polar codes utilizing CRC-aided SCL decoding outperforms maximum likelihood bound of polar code with a large list size and so be able to compete low-density parity check (LDPC) codes [4]. However, SC and SCL decoders suffer from their serial decoding nature. In other words, to decode mth bit, all bits indexed from 1 to m − 1 must be decoded in order to successfully accomplish the decoding of current bit, i.e., mth bit. To overcome this drawback, BP based polar decoder is proposed by Arıkan [5]. The fundamental advantage of BP decoder is its decoder structure suitable for parallel processing operations. Although BP decoders have higher complexity over simple SC decoders, their throughput achievement is remarkable when compared with the state-ofart SC and SCL decoders.
Another advantage of BP polar decoder is its soft information flow. Unlike SC algorithm, output of mid-steps of BP decoder is also represented with soft values. Besides, soft message propagation through all decoding stages allows BP based structures to be used jointly with other well-known code schemes like LDPC and Reed-Solomon codes. List decoding concept is also applied to BP based decoding of polar codes [6] as it is done for SC decoder [4], but in a different manner. List concept in SCL is based on the doubling list size during decoding stages until reaching maximum list size. However, BPL decoder of [6] starts with L branches that works as independent BP decoders. In this scope, we also construct a

1558-2558 © 2019 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:10:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1286

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 23, NO. 8, AUGUST 2019

Fig. 3. Block diagram of belief propagation list polar decoder [6].

Fig. 2. Factor graph representation of polar code for N = 8.
BPL decoder that works independent from each other with the aid of virtually generated noise intensities at each parallel branch.

decoder is assumed to be converged, then a hard decision is performed to decide on the data bits uˆ from which we can calculate the codeword ˆx.
III. BELIEF PROPAGATION LIST DECODER DESIGN

II. POLAR CODES
Polar code construction is based on the polarization of channel capacities to 0 or 1. Channel combining and splitting are done in a sequential manner to achieve polarization. Polarized channels can be used as information bearing or frozen channels considering the polarized channel capacities.

A. Polar Encoder

Recursive channel combination of a polar code is achieved by using the generator matrix G, which is constructed as F⊗n

where F =

10 11

and F⊗n stands for nth Kronecker power

of F. Factor graph representation of a polar code for data length of 23 is depicted in Fig.2 where u and x represent the

dataword and codeword, respectively.

B. Belief Propagation Based Decoding of Polar Codes
Originally, iterative BP based decoding is proposed for LDPC codes. Iterative BP based decoding can also be utilized for polar codes, and it is firstly proposed by Arıkan [5]. The generator matrix of the polar codes satisfy G = G−1, and this property can be used for iterative decoding purposes. That is, we can do the decoding operation proceeding from left to right or right to left considering the structure shown in Fig. 2. Exchange of information between stages is accomplished by the right and left propagating messages. Right and left propagating messages are donated by Ri,n, Li,n, where 1 ≤ n ≤ log2N + 1 and 1 ≤ i ≤ N , respectively. For the updating of left propagating messages some predefined scheduling methods like flooding, round trip (RT), halfway and quarter way scheduling can be utilized. In flooding scheduling, right and left propagation messages propagate through factor graph at the same time whereas in round trip scheduling right propagation starts after left propagation is completed. Additionally, the initial values of right and left propagation messages are important. Initially, Ri,1 is initialized to the received values and Li,n+1 are initialized to frozen values that bear no information. When iterations are completed and the

List decoding concept is proposed [4] for SC decoders, and in this method best L decoding paths of decoded sequences are considered. CRC check is also employed to enhance the accuracy of decoding results [4] for further performance gain, actually passes the maximum likelihood bound of polar code. As a result, a comparable coding gain over LDPC codes is observed. Pursuing this idea, list decoding concept in a different manner can be applied to BP based polar decoder to enhance advantages of BP algorithm by eliminating its poor bit-error rate (BER) performance drawback.

A. BPL Decoding of Polar Codes
BP based list decoder [6] consists of differently permuted versions of the original factor graph stages [7], [8]. In [6], L different permuted factor graphs are chosen randomly, and n − 1 cyclic shifts of the original factor graph of polar code shown in Fig. 2 are used. In BPL approach, decoders run in parallel for a M number of iterations. However, most of the time the decoder can successfully converge before the number of iterations reaches M . To detect convergence of decoder, various early detection and termination methods are offered such as G-matrix based detection [9], log-likelihood ratio magnitude aided [9], CRC aided [10], and worst of information bits (WIB) [11]. Among them as shown in Fig.3, G-matrix based stopping criteria is used in [6] for early detection and termination method to aid belief propagation based list decoder. When early detection and termination criteria (EDTC) is satisfied for all branches, Euclidian distance is calculated between all estimated codewords, ˆxi and received signal y as in

xˆBPL = arg min ||y − xˆi||.

(1)

xˆi, i∈{1...L}

As a result, the path with minimum distance is selected. Fig. 3 shows the overall block diagram of the BPL decoder. It is important to state that the parallel decoders have different trellis structures. Different trellis structures are created by permuted stages of the original structure, [7, Fig.1].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:10:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ÇAG˘ RI ARLI AND GAZI: Na-BPL DECODING OF POLAR CODES

1287

Fig. 4. Block diagram Na-BPL polar decoder.

B. Noise-Aided BPL Decoding of Polar Codes
Noise injection into propagating messages of the general belief propagation concept is firstly proposed in [13] to avoid oscillating errors. One step further, noise injection into a belief propagation based decoder is mentioned in [14] to overcome the error floor caused by small log-likelihood ratio clipping values where clipping threshold on LLR values is decisive on the complexity of the decoder. Moreover, adding perturbation/noise as a post processing method to improve coding gain of BP based polar decoding is proposed in [15]. Proposed post processing operations take place when CRC check fails and after guessing/detecting error type as false converged error, oscillation error and unconverged error. Three different algorithms are applied for each of the cases. Algorithms inherit randomly sign changes of the problematic converged results for further coding gain. Apart from these, we propose a novel artificial noise injection method that boosts polar decoder’s performance significantly.
In Noise-aided Belief Propagation based List (Na-BPL) decoding of polar codes, the size of the list is decided by the number of noise levels used. Besides, differently from permuted factor graph-based decoding algorithm of [6], all parallel BP decoders have the same structure. Fig. 4 illustrates the proposed idea of this letter, where y is channel output, n is artificial noise and ˜y represents the artificial noise added channel output. Artificial noise, in other words, zero mean additive Gaussian noise with standard deviation starting from 0 with 0.0125 incremental steps is added to the received signal, y, at each branch of the list decoder. Equation (2) is used for the generation of artificial noise. In (2) normally distributed random numbers are multiplied with standard deviation σi where the mean value μi is set to zero, and the function wgn(x) generates zero mean and unity variance Gaussian noise samples.

ni(x) = μi + σi × wgn(x)

(2)

In (2), i is bounded by the list size of the operation, i.e., 1 ≤ i ≤ L. Artificial noise added to the channel output

should be too small compared to channel SNR. For instance, in our trials noise standard deviation values always change between 0 and 0.3875, while increment rate changes according to list size. Artificial noise intensity level in terms of dB can be calculated by using

ni = −10 × log10(2 × σi2).

(3)

The power of the added noise is negligible when compared to the power of the channel noise. For instance, if we take into account only the artificial noise, then the SNR varies between 11 dB and 35 dB, on the other hand, if we take into account only the channel noise, then the SNR varies between 1 dB and 3.5 dB.
After each iteration of BP decoder, the EDTC is checked. If EDTC is satisfied in any branch then decoding is assumed to be successful, and estimated uˆ and xˆ can be used for further processing if needed. In this study, G-matrix based and CRC aided early detection and termination methods are used considering that they are the most reliable ones.
On the other hand, proposed Na-BPL structure suffers from latency generated due to iterative processing till achieving full convergence, applied scheduling technique is important to lower average number of iterations. For this reason, RT scheduling [12] is employed in our proposed structure. In RT scheduling, although duration of an iteration is doubled by calculating Li,1 and Li,n values firstly, and then calculating messages from Ri,2 to Ri,n+1, faster convergence is achieved due to rapid information exchange between forward and backward propagating paths [12]. In addition to the check nodes of a Tanner graph, new check nodes are inserted into left hand side of the decoder to keep frozen nodes constant. Aim of keeping frozen nodes constant is to avoid the falsely convergence of the frozen nodes through iterations and to achieve faster convergence. It is also important to state that we do not use any post decision process when EDTC is met. If one of branches satisfies the EDTC then we assume that decoding is successful. Our observations showed that there is no need a post decision mechanism like calculation of minimum Euclidian distance with respect to y as shown in Fig.3, in our proposed decoder.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
Simulations are performed on binary phase shift keying (BPSK) modulated zero mean additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) bearing channel to observe performance of polar code P (2048, 1024) and P (1024, 512). All the polar codes that are subject to Na-BPL are constructed for 1 dB SNR using [2]. Fig. 1 compares the polar codes that are decoded with list concept. Our Na-BPL approach with list size 32, maximum iteration number of 200 and G-matrix based EDTC, is 0.3 dB away from SCL+CRC-16 decoder at 105 BER when P (2048, 1024) is utilized. Besides, two different maximum iteration are studied for Na-BPL where M equals 50 and 200. Overall, both of the cases achieves comparable results with SCL [4] and BPL [6] in terms of BER after a certain channel SNR.
BLER measurements are also decisive to determine decoders’ performance. Fig. 5 compares Na-BPL’s BLER

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:10:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1288

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 23, NO. 8, AUGUST 2019

measure for a BP based decoder. It can be inspected from the Fig.6 that average number of needed iterations are much higher than a SMS BP decoder until 2.75 dB because of the used list size. However, after 2.75 dB no significant difference is observed.

Fig. 5. BLER comparison between SMS BP, PBP, and Na-BPL for P (1024, 512) code at BPSK modulated AWGN channel.

V. CONCLUSION
In this letter, a novel approach that uses noise as a BER/BLER performance booster in a subject of coding theory is presented. Artificially generated noise with different intensities are added to the received signal to avoid false convergence in a BP based decoder. Further study will be held on for the implementation of our approach to other coding schemes.
REFERENCES

Fig. 6. Average number of iteration comparison between SMS BP and proposed Na-BPL variants for P (1024, 512) code at BPSK modulated AWGN channel.
performance with well-known scaled min-sum approximated (SMS) BP based decoder [16] and CRC aided permuted factor graph based BP decoder [8]. Since, study [8] focuses on CRC based early detection/termination method and permutation of factor graph of original scheme as shown in Fig.2, it is a good candidate for comparison. In Fig. 5, BLER based simulation results, which demonstrate the effect of CRC sequence length in Na-BPL, are depicted. As expected, longer CRC leads to better BLER performance. However, using G-matrix based EDTC gives poor BLER outcomes when compared CRC based EDTC is utilized. One of the main advantages of BP based decoders over SC based decoders is its parallel decoding capability which enables the decoding of all the bits at the same time when the decoder is converged. In this way, throughput of BP based decoders are much higher than SC based polar decoders. Latency that is inversely proportional to the throughput can be lowered further by applying EDTC techniques that decide whether decoder is converged or not. In this scope, average number of iteration is an important

[1] A. Sutera, “Stochastic perturbation of a pure convective motion,” J. Atmos. Sci., vol. 37, pp. 245–249, Jan. 1980.
[2] E. Arikan, “Channel polarization: A method for constructing capacityachieving codes for symmetric binary-input memoryless channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 3051–3073, Jul. 2009.
[3] 3rd Generation Partnership Project; Technical Specification Group Radio Access Network; NR; Multiplexing and Channel Coding (Release 15), Version 15.0.0, document TS 38.212, 3GPP, Dec. 2017.
[4] I. Tal and A. Vardy, “List decoding of polar codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 2213–2226, May 2015.
[5] E. Arikan, “Polar codes: A pipelined implementation,” in Proc. 4th Int. Symp. Broadband Commun. (ISBC), Jul. 2010, pp. 11–14.
[6] A. Elkelesh, M. Ebada, S. Cammerer, and S. ten Brink, “Belief propagation list decoding of polar codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 22, no. 8, pp. 1536–1539, Aug. 2018.
[7] A. Elkelesh, M. Ebada, S. Cammerer, and S. ten Brink, “Belief propagation decoding of polar codes on permuted factor graphs,” Apr. 2018, arXiv:1801.04299. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1801.04299
[8] N. Doan, S. A. Hashemi, M. Mondelli, and W. J. Gross, “On the decoding of polar codes on permuted factor graphs,” Jun. 2018, arXiv:1806.11195. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.11195
[9] B. Yuan and K. K. Parhi, “Early stopping criteria for energy-efficient low-latency belief-propagation polar code decoders,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 62, no. 24, pp. 6496–6506, Dec. 2014.
[10] Y. Ren, C. Zhang, X. Liu, and X. You, “Efficient early termination schemes for belief-propagation decoding of polar codes,” in Proc. IEEE 11th Int. Conf. ASIC (ASICON), Nov. 2015, pp. 1–4.
[11] C. Simsek and K. Turk, “Simplified early stopping criterion for beliefpropagation polar code decoders,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 20, no. 8, pp. 1515–1518, Aug. 2016.
[12] J. Xu, T. Che, and G. Choi, “XJ-BP: Express journey belief propagation decoding for polar codes,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Dec. 2015, pp. 1–6.
[13] C. Knoll, M. Rath, S. Tschiatschek, and F. Pernkopf, “Message scheduling methods for belief propagation,” in Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases (Lecture Notes in Computer Science), vol. 9285, A. Appice, P. Rodrigues, V. S. Costa, J. Gama, A. Jorge, and C. Soares, Eds. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2015.
[14] A. Elkelesh, S. Cammerer, M. Ebada, and S. ten Brink, “Mitigating clipping effects on error floors under belief propagation decoding of polar codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Wireless Commun. Syst., Aug. 2017, pp. 384–389.
[15] S. Sun, S.-G. Cho, and Z. Zhang, “Post-processing methods for improving coding gain in belief propagation decoding of polar codes,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf., Dec. 2017, pp. 1–6.
[16] B. Yuan and K. K. Parhi, “Architecture optimizations for BP polar decoders,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process., May 2013, pp. 2654–2658.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:10:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

