 
 
Learning PHY Layer Parameters via SNR-Value 
Network 
Ahmed Abotabl, Member, IEEE, Jung Hyun Bae, Member, IEEE, and Kee-Bong Song, Member, IEEE 
                  
Abstract— In a typical communications system design such as 
5G cellular system, the optimal closed-form solutions are often 
available under certain assumptions of idealities. However, such 
optimal solutions frequently incur implementation complexity 
issues and are also susceptible to non-idealities. On the other hand, 
approximate solutions designed to handle such issues typically 
involve certain algorithmic parameters which cannot be 
determined in a closed-form, and an exhaustive effort is required 
for optimization of such parameters in a typical system design 
stage. In this paper, we propose a framework in which such 
optimization can be automated by continuously adapting signal-
to-noise ratio (SNR) and parameters to be optimized for physical 
layer simulation on various randomly sampled environments. We 
show that this framework can also be explained by a theory of 
reinforcement learning (RL), which provides a guideline for 
detailed operation of running the framework. As a specific 
application, we discuss a problem of low-density, parity-check 
(LDPC) decoder offset optimization and demonstrate that learned 
values perform close to the ones found by the exhaustive effort. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
    When designing an algorithm for a communications 
system equipped with a well-defined channel model such as 
a typical cellular communications system, we are often 
interested in finding the optimal solutions in a closed-form. 
A few examples of such solutions are maximum likelihood 
(ML) multiple-input, multiple-output (MIMO) detector or 
sum-product (SP) algorithm for iterative low-density, parity-
check (LDPC) decoding. However, such optimal solutions 
are often difficult to be implemented especially in a small 
form-factor devices such as cellular modem and are also 
susceptible to non-idealities. In such cases, we typically come 
up with approximate solutions such as various sub-optimal 
MIMO detectors [1] and various forms of offset-min-sum 
(OMS) LDPC decoding algorithms [2]. While such 
approximate algorithms may provide performance close to its 
optimal counterparts, one of the main issues is that they 
typically require parameter optimization which does not have 
a closed-form solution and frequently requires an exhaustive 
effort. 
Let us consider a specific example of offset determination 
of OMS LDPC decoding algorithm. Assuming that we have 
a simulator which can provide reasonable approximate real-
life performance of the algorithm, optimizing the offset 
typically involves obtaining the relationship between the 
performance metric, usually the block error rate (BLER), and 
the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) for different offset values as 
shown in Fig. 1. To do this, a designer would first need to 
find a reasonable range of SNR which provides BLER range 
of interest and come up with appropriate quantization of SNR  
 
Samsung Semiconductors Inc., SOC Lab, 9868 Scranton Road, San 
Diego, CA, 92121, USA. 
 
Fig. 1. BLER versus SNR with different offset values for some LDPC code  
 
Fig. 2. Operating SNR at 10% BLER for a range of offset values 
and offset values for simulation to balance the optimization 
quality and complexity. To make matters worse, there 
typically are large amount of transmission scenarios, each of 
which may require different offset value. Furthermore, any 
significant modification in the overall processing pipeline 
may require new optimization. The challenge of exhaustive 
effort can also be explained through Fig. 2 that shows the 
underlying relationship between the SNR required to give a 
certain BLER (10% in the figure) and different values of the 
parameter to be optimized (offset value in the figure). 
Generating this figure may require the generation of the 
curves in Fig. 1. 
In this paper, we present a new framework which 
efficiently replaces the aforementioned exhaustive effort 
(sweeping) by continuously adapting (learning) SNR and 
parameters to be optimized. Such adaptation is done using a 
series of physical layer simulations on various randomly 
sampled transmission environments. One of the main 
2020 International Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications (ICNC): Machine Learning for 
Communication and Networking
978-1-7281-4905-9/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE
614
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:45:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
advantages of this framework is that a designer does not need 
to be involved once the learning procedure initiates, and 
hence, any potential re-optimization of parameters can also 
easily be done by simply re-running the procedure. In our 
framework, we utilize neural networks to represent the 
continuously adapted SNR and optimization parameters for 
each transmission environment, and such continuous 
adaptation and use of neural networks are similar to well-
known deep RL approaches [10]. Neural networks for SNR 
and optimization parameters, which are termed SNR-value 
network and policy network respectively are continuously 
trained during the learning procedure, and we also show that 
this framework can indeed be explained by the theory of RL. 
Use of RL has been applied in wireless communications 
systems as also briefly summarized in [3]. In fact, an 
approach similar to our proposed framework was recently 
discussed in [4], which also utilizes a simulator to perform 
learning of parameters. One of the main differences between 
[4] and our framework is that we identify SNR as an important 
performance metric which needs to be properly controlled 
and optimized under normal operating condition, e.g. 10% 
BLER. As described in Section 3, we build the state space 
mainly based on SNR such that steady-state SNR can 
eventually be trained for proper operating point in our 
framework. As mentioned before, our main target is to 
replace the exhaustive sweeping of parameters which happen 
in many areas of algorithm design for communications 
system, and our focus on SNR control is the main reason why 
we can achieve such an objective.   
In Section 2, the proposed framework is presented, in 
Section 3, the RL formulation is shown and in Section 4 an 
example of optimizing the offset value in offset min-sum 
algorithm is presented as an application scenario. Finally, 
Section 5 concludes the paper. 
II. FRAMEWORK DESCRIPTION 
The proposed framework is described by Fig. 3, and we 
provide description of its building blocks below:  
1) Transmission environments are inputs to this 
framework. Transmission environments are used to 
determine the appropriate SNR value and the 
parameter values that are stored in the SNR-value 
network and the policy network, respectively and all 
these are used to provide the appropriate simulation 
setting. 
2) A simulator is assumed to be built to model the real 
transmission environment accurately. The input to the 
simulator is the SNR value at which it will operate, the 
values of the parameters to be optimized and the 
transmission environment. 
 
 
Fig. 3. The proposed framework for parameter optimization 
3) An SNR-value network is a neural network that takes 
the environment parameters as input and outputs the 
appropriate SNR that should result in an operating 
target BLER which is set by the designer.  
4) A policy network is a neural network that takes the 
environment parameters as input and outputs the 
optimal parameter values that should result in the 
operating target BLER at the appropriate SNR value 
mentioned above. 
   The environment in Fig. 3 includes various factors that can 
affect parameters to be optimized such as channel profile, 
modulation order, transmission rank, data rate etc. Including 
all the possible factors is not efficient therefore, the factors 
that participate in the optimization problem should be chosen 
carefully as will be shown in Section 4. 
A. Training stage 
During the training stage, we randomly sample 
transmission environments and update the SNR-value 
network and the policy network by utilizing the observed 
error events from the simulator. For each transmission 
environment, we consider the following update rule for the 
SNR value (𝑆𝑁𝑅) and the parameter value (𝜃).  
 
𝑆𝑁𝑅𝑛𝑒𝑤= 𝑆𝑁𝑅𝑜𝑙𝑑+ 𝛼1(𝑃𝑒,𝑜−𝑃𝑒,𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡), 
(1) 
 
𝜃𝑛𝑒𝑤= 𝜃𝑜𝑙𝑑−𝛼2(𝑎−𝜃𝑜𝑙𝑑)(𝑃𝑒,𝑜−𝑃𝑒,𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡), 
(2) 
where 𝛼1 and 𝛼2 are some positive learning rates, 𝑃𝑒,𝑜 is the 
simulator output BLER, and 𝑃𝑒,𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 is the target operating 
BLER. The variable 𝑎 requires more careful explanation which 
will be provided shortly. 
    Before describing full training procedure, let us first look at 
the SNR update rule provided in (1). Intuitively speaking, if the 
output BLER of the simulator is higher than intended, the 
SNR value should increase. On the other hand, the SNR value 
should decrease if the output BLER of the simulator is lower 
than intended. It can be easily seen that the SNR update rule 
in (1) has such a behavior. Note that our update rule only 
utilizes the observed BLER based on observed error events 
from the finite number of data packet transmissions, which is 
not necessarily the true statistics. 
   Let us now look at the parameter update rule in (2). As 
mentioned earlier, the policy network provides 𝜃 for each 
transmission environment. During the training stage, we 
prefer to explore different parameter values around 𝜃 such 
that we can learn if there are better parameter values than the 
current one. To do that, we consider 𝜃 as a mean of a 
Gaussian random variable with a small variance we choose, 
and we select random realization 𝑎 of the aforementioned 
Gaussian random variable every time we run the simulation. 
In the update rule in (2), a value 𝑎 which is either smaller or 
larger than 𝜃 is tried, and 𝜃 is updated towards 𝑎 if we 
observe smaller error probability than the current operating 
BLER assuming that 𝜃 provides the target BLER. If the 
observed BLER is higher than the target BLER, then 𝜃 is 
updated against 𝑎. Note that using the Gaussian random 
variable for exploration is a well-known approach in RL [5] 
with the name of Gaussian policy, and we will provide more 
details in Section 3. 
   The above SNR-value and the parameter update is 
described assuming a single transmission environment, but 
we utilize a batch, e.g., size of 100, of transmission 
environments at the same time to update the aforementioned 
2020 International Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications (ICNC): Machine Learning for 
Communication and Networking
615
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:45:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
two neural networks similar to a typical deep RL [10]. In this 
case, the update portion 𝛼1(𝑃𝑒,𝑜−𝑃𝑒,𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡)  and −𝛼2(𝑎−
𝜃𝑜𝑙𝑑)(𝑃𝑒,𝑜−𝑃𝑒,𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡) are averaged over a batch to perform 
a typical gradient-based neural network update [10]. 
   We are now ready to describe the full training procedure. 
 
Algorithm 1: Training procedure of the proposed 
framework 
Initialize SNR and parameter (policy) networks 
while stopping condition is not satisfied do 
1) Randomly 
select 
a 
batch 
of 
transmission 
environments 
2) For each transmission environment: 
a. 
Generate outputs of SNR-value and policy 
networks 
b. Randomly generate parameter values using the 
policy network output 
c. 
Run simulation and obtain BLER 
3) Update the SNR-value and the policy networks  
end while 
 
   Stopping condition mentioned above can be a predefined 
number of iterations, performance on a validation set etc. To 
evaluate performance of our framework, a test set that 
represents a variety of environment parameters is generated 
and for each realization in this test set, the optimal value of 
the parameters to be optimized is obtained via exhaustive 
sweeping of the parameters as in a traditional approach. Then, 
we define mean square error (MSE) for the purpose of 
evaluation as below 
 
𝑀𝑆𝐸= 1
𝑛∑(𝑆𝑁𝑅𝑚,𝑖
(𝑡) −𝑆𝑁𝑅(𝑡)(𝑃(ℎ𝑖)))
2
𝑛
𝑖=1
, 
 
(3) 
where 𝑆𝑁𝑅𝑖
(𝑡)(𝑃(ℎ)) is the SNR value required to operate at 
a target BLER when the output of the policy network is 𝑃(ℎ) 
for a given environment ℎ and 𝑆𝑁𝑅𝑚,𝑖
(𝑡) = min
x {𝑆𝑁𝑅𝑖
(𝑡)(𝑥)}. 
The function 𝑆𝑁𝑅𝑖
(𝑡)(𝑥)  is what is generated via the 
exhaustive sweeping mentioned earlier (see Fig. 2).  
   Note that the size of the test set should be small enough 
such that we can reduce the amount of the exhaustive effort 
for finding 𝑆𝑁𝑅𝑖
(𝑡)(𝑥), but it needs to be large enough such 
that MSE on the test set provides reasonable performance 
reference. The test set is generated by a wide variety of 
transmission environments while taking into considerations 
practical aspects. For example, the combination of low code 
rate with high modulation order is neither common nor 
interesting and hence, can be eliminated from the test set. 
   The aforementioned MSE can also be considered as a cost 
function of our framework, and stopping condition utilizing 
performance on a validation set can be based on this. In this 
case, an appropriate validation set of transmission 
environments needs to be constructed. 
   It is worth noting that the simulator and the operating SNR 
are 
completely 
under 
control 
unlike 
conventional 
reinforcement learning problems at which the control over the 
world is very limited. This control allows us to learn the 
optimal parameters more efficiently than exploring an actual 
transmission environment where we have very limited 
control. 
Remark 1: A lookup table (LUT) is one way to store and 
update the SNR and the parameter values for different 
transmission conditions but it can be unpractical when the 
environment parameters space is large. Moreover, a LUT can 
only be used for the environment parameters that are realized 
in the LUT. On the other hand, a neural network can learn the 
underlying relationship between the environment and the 
SNR and parameters value.  
Remark 2: Conventionally, the error of a given neural 
network is calculated by comparing its output directly with a 
test set. However, in our approach we compare with the SNR 
since different values of the parameters under optimization 
can lead to the same minimum SNR value which leads to 
different optimal parameter values. 
B. Application stage 
 
Once the training is done, the only thing necessary at the 
application stage is the policy network. During the actual 
transmission, the transmission environment is provided as an 
input to the policy network which generates parameter values 
as an output. Traditionally, a LUT stores the optimal 
parameter value for each transmission environment. Given the 
functional similarities between a LUT and a neural network as 
in Remark 1 above, the operation at application stage in our 
framework is similar to the one in the traditional sweeping 
approaches while our framework naturally utilizes a more 
powerful neural network rather than a LUT. 
III. RL FORMULATION 
In this Section, we explain our framework especially the 
training stage in terms of the theory of RL. The main point is 
to define a Markov decision process (MDP) with an average 
reward formulation in which an agent which is in a certain 
state takes an action and learns from the reward [5].  
A. MDP formulation 
The MDP at time 𝑡 is defined by a state 𝑠𝑡= (ℎ, 𝑆𝑁𝑅𝑡), an 
action 𝑎𝑡 as a realization of the parameter to be optimized, 
and a reward 𝑟𝑡= −𝑆𝑁𝑅𝑡 with state transition 
 
(ℎ, 𝑆𝑁𝑅𝑡+1) = (ℎ, 𝑆𝑁𝑅𝑡+ 𝛿(𝑠𝑡, 𝑎𝑡)), 
(4) 
where ℎ is a transmission environment, and 
 
𝛿(𝑠𝑡, 𝑎𝑡) = 𝛥(𝑃𝑒,𝑜(𝑠𝑡, 𝑎𝑡) −𝑃𝑒,𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡). 
(5) 
𝑃𝑒,𝑜(𝑠𝑡, 𝑎𝑡) is an observed BLER from simulation at state 𝑠𝑡 
when action 𝑎𝑡 is taken. 𝑃𝑒,𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 is the target BLER, and 𝛥 is a 
small positive constant. Note that 𝑎 was used in the previous 
section as the experienced value. This does not contradict with 
its definition in this section since the action is nothing but the 
experienced value. Clearly, the next state depends only on the 
current state and not on the history of previously visited states. 
    In RL, a policy 𝜋(𝑎|𝑠) which provides action 𝑎 in state 𝑠 
is defined. A policy can either be deterministic which means 
that there is only one action 𝑎 in state 𝑠 or be stochastic 
which means that 𝜋(𝑎|𝑠) is a probability distribution of 𝑎. In 
this paper, we use a stochastic policy to explore different 
options of the parameters under optimization. To describe the 
objective of RL, let us define the average reward as in [6]. 
 
𝜌(𝜋, ℎ) = lim
𝑛→∞ 
1
𝑛𝐸{𝑟1 + 𝑟2 + ⋯+ 𝑟𝑛|𝜋 }
 
 
 
(6) 
2020 International Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications (ICNC): Machine Learning for 
Communication and Networking
616
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:45:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
 
    = ∑𝑑𝜋,ℎ(𝑠) ∑𝜋(𝑎|𝑠)𝑅𝑠
𝑎
𝑎
𝑠
, 
(7) 
 
where 𝑑𝜋,ℎ(𝑠) is the stationary distribution of the states under 
the policy 𝜋 and the transmission environment and 𝑅𝑠
𝑎 is the 
expected reward for taking action 𝑎 at state 𝑠 which is 
formally defined as 
 
 
𝑅𝑠
𝑎= 𝐸{𝑟𝑡+1|𝑠𝑡= 𝑠, 𝑎𝑡= 𝑎 }. 
 
(8) 
   The objective of the RL problem we have is then to design 
a policy which maximize 𝜌(𝜋, ℎ)  for each transmission 
environment ℎ. Note that the average reward given in [6] is 
independent of the initial state, which is one of the key points 
in the average reward formulation. In our case, SNR should 
be considered as such an initial state whose dependency is 
lost, and we can think of this as an impact of the SNR 
adaptation to eventually operate at a given target BLER. The 
dependency of the average reward in (6) on the transmission 
environment ℎ is a natural consequence of the state transition 
rule (4) since both the previous and the future states have the 
explicit element ℎ. From now on, we remove the dependency 
on ℎ for simpler notation in the rest of the paper. 
   A designer perspective to run exhaustive simulations to 
obtain curves similar to the ones in Fig. 1 explains how the 
designer is interested in finding the optimal parameter value 
at the steady state SNR. In other words, the majority of 
physical layer parameter optimization is about the long term 
average performance, which provides justification for the 
average reward formulation. 
B. Policy gradient: Actor-critic approach 
   In this paper, we utilize a policy gradient approach to train 
a policy network that outputs the policy parameters 𝜃(ℎ) as a 
function of the environment ℎ. To provide necessary 
background for derivation of our framework, we briefly 
summarize below the original derivation of actor-critic policy 
gradient approach [6].  
   Actor-critic policy gradient requires calculation of the 
gradient of the average reward with respect to the policy 
parameters as follows: 
∇𝜃𝜌
= 𝐸𝑠~𝑑𝜋(𝑠)(𝐸𝑎~𝜋𝜃(𝑎|𝑠)(∇𝜃log(𝜋𝜃(𝑎|𝑠)) 𝐴𝜋(𝑠, 𝑎))) 
(9) 
where 𝐴𝜋(𝑠, 𝑎) is the advantage function given by 
 
𝐴𝜋(𝑠, 𝑎) = 𝑄𝜋(𝑠, 𝑎) −𝑉𝜋(𝑠) 
 
(10) 
where 𝑄𝜋(𝑠, 𝑎) is the action-value function and 𝑉𝜋(𝑠) is the 
value function. The main components of the actor-critic 
approach is a critic which estimates the value function and 
the actor which updates the policy in the direction suggested 
by the critic. 
 Using the definition of the reward function, one can find that 
 
𝐴𝜋(𝑠, 𝑎) = 𝑅𝑠
𝑎−𝜌(𝜋) + ∑𝑃𝑠𝑠′
𝑎𝑉𝜋(𝑠′) − 𝑉𝜋(𝑠)
𝑠′
, 
(11) 
where 𝑃𝑠𝑠′
𝑎 is state transition given in (4) with 𝑆𝑁𝑅𝑡+1 = 𝑠′, 
𝑆𝑁𝑅𝑡= 𝑠 and 𝑎𝑡= 𝑎. 
Since the model of this process is not perfectly known (e.g. 
𝑃𝑠𝑠′
𝑎), the above expression cannot be evaluated. Therefore, 
sampling is necessary to estimate 𝐴𝜋(𝑠, 𝑎). By sampling at 
state 𝑠, an action 𝑎 is taken and a transition to a new state 𝑠′ 
occurs. Accordingly, the sampled advantage function is 
 
 
𝐴𝜋(𝑠, 𝑎) ≈𝑟(𝑠, 𝑎) −𝜌(𝜋) + 𝑉𝜋(𝑠′) −𝑉𝜋(𝑠) 
 
(12) 
𝑟(𝑠, 𝑎) is the sampled reward when taking action 𝑎 while 
being in state 𝑠. Now, by setting 𝑠= 𝑠∗ where 𝑠∗= −𝜌(𝜋), 
we have 𝑟(𝑠∗, 𝑎) = 𝜌(𝜋) −𝛿(𝑠∗, 𝑎) and from the definition 
of 𝑉𝜋(𝑠), 𝑉𝜋(𝑠∗) = 0. Therefore, 
 
 
𝐴𝜋(𝑠∗, 𝑎) ≈−𝛿(𝑠∗, 𝑎) + 𝑉𝜋(𝑠′) 
 
(13) 
   Finally, by assuming that the SNR fluctuations during the 
learning process is moving at a linear part of the underlying 
BLER-SNR curve and that the SNR loop gain is small, which 
is formally stated by:  
 
𝑃𝑒(𝑠, 𝜋) = 𝐸𝑎~𝜋(𝑃𝑒(𝑠, 𝑎)) is a monotonically decreasing 
function of SNR (dB) 
 
𝑃𝑒(𝑠∗, 𝜋) = 𝑃𝑒,𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 
 
𝑃𝑒(𝑠, 𝜋) is concave for 𝑠< 𝑠𝑙, linear in the range [𝑠𝑙, 𝑠𝑟] 
and convex for 𝑠> 𝑠𝑟 
 
 0 < Δ < 1/|𝑃𝑒
′(𝜌(𝜋), 𝜋)| 
we can find a small enough value of Δ which ensures that 
𝑉𝜋(𝑠′) always has the same sign as 𝛿(𝑠, 𝑎) and hence, 
 
 
𝐴𝜋(𝑠∗, 𝑎) ≈−𝛿(𝑠∗, 𝑎) 
 
(14) 
A proof for this step is provided in Appendix A. 
  Now, 
the 
last 
remaining 
step 
is 
to 
calculate ∇𝜃log(𝜋𝜃(𝑎|𝑠)). This depends on the selection of 
the policy. A reasonable choice is a Gaussian policy with a 
fixed variance and a mean that is given by the policy network. 
This approach is practical in terms of exploration since the 
experienced parameter value which is normally distributed 
around the policy network output and the output error event 
of the simulator control how the average of the network shall 
be updated. 
   Under Gaussian policy given by 
 
 
𝜋𝜃(𝑎|𝑠) = 𝛽exp(−
(𝑎−𝜃)2
2𝜎2 ), 
(15) 
we have 
 
 
∇𝜃log(𝜋𝜃(𝑎|𝑠)) = 𝛼(𝑎−𝜃). 
(16) 
By substitution in (9), the gradient of the average reward is 
given by 
 
 
∇𝜃𝜌≈−𝛼(𝑎−𝜃)𝛿(𝑠, 𝑎) 
 
(17) 
under the assumption that the system is operating at  𝑠∗=
−𝜌(𝜋) which is approximated by the SNR-value network. 
   Note that the actor-critic approach derived in this section is 
for each transmission environment ℎ. In a deep RL approach 
[11], a batch of such transmission environments are typically 
used at the same time, and neural networks are utilized to 
store and generate 𝜌(𝜋) and 𝜃. Given that, the final actor 
critic approach is summarized as below, and each step of the 
algorithm has one-to-one correspondence to each step of the 
training procedure of the proposed framework in Section 2.1. 
2020 International Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications (ICNC): Machine Learning for 
Communication and Networking
617
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:45:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
 
Algorithm 2. The procedure of the actor-critic algorithm 
Initialize SNR and policy networks 
Repeat: 
1) Randomly 
select 
a 
batch 
of 
transmission 
environments 
2) For each transmission environment: 
a. Generate outputs of SNR-value and policy 
networks 
b. Randomly generate action using the policy 
network output 
c. 
Observe a reward at the state given by the 
SNR-value after taking the action generated in 
b 
3) Update the SNR-value and the policy networks  
IV. APPLICATION SCENARIO 
As an example of applying the proposed framework, the 
offset value in the offset-min-sum (OMS) LDPC decoding 
algorithm [2] is considered for optimization in this section. 
Optimizing the offset value is not a novel problem in this 
paper, and deep learning tools have been used to find the 
optimal offset value of the OMS algorithm [7],[8],[11]. The 
main drawbacks of these techniques is that they require an 
immense training effort to find the optimal offset value under 
a given transmission condition such as the code rate. For a 
variety of transmission conditions, the training has to be 
performed individually under every single transmission 
condition which is a very complex operation which we 
address in this paper. 
For these results, we use the 5G LDPC codes [9,12]. These 
LDPC codes are Quasi-cyclic codes that can be generated by 
lifting one of two possible protographs with a limited set of 
lifting sizes. The limitations imposed by the new radio (NR) 
standard on the modulation size and code rate are also taken 
into account to guarantee the optimization of codes that are 
used in practical situations. 
In this example, we rely on empirical observations that 
showed some dependence between certain environment 
parameters and the optimized offset and accordingly define 
the transmission environment as 
 
 
ℎ= [𝑐ℎ  𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑘  𝑄  𝑅  𝐵𝐺  𝑍  𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑚] 
 
(18) 
where 𝑐ℎ is the channel type which can be either AWGN, 
EPA or EVA channel, Rank is the transmission rank which is 
1 or 2, 𝑄 is the modulation order which is 4/16/64/256 QAM, 
𝑅 is the code rate, 𝐵𝐺 is the base graph which can be either 
base graph 1 or base graph 2, 𝑍 is the lifting size and 𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑚 is 
the maximum number of decoder iterations. 
   The SNR-value network is constructed with two hidden 
layers with 200 nodes each. The activation of the hidden 
layers is a ReLu activation while the activation of the output 
layer is a linear activation. The policy network is constructed 
with two hidden layers with 50 nodes each. A ReLu 
activation is used for the hidden layers and a sigmoid 
activation is used for the output layer. 
  In order to test the quality of the learned offset value, a test 
set is generated by exhaustively finding the SNR at 10% 
BLER, which is the target BLER, for a given range of the 
 
Fig. 4. MSE evolution of the policy network 
 
Fig. 5. Learning from experience move the (policy network output, SNR-
value network output) towards an optimal point. 
 
Fig. 6. SNR (dB) loss CDF with respect to the best offset  
offset value for 500 different cases with different 
transmission environment ℎ. The 500 test cases are generated 
to be representative and of practical relevance. We applied 
uniform sampling for channel type, transmission rank, and 
the maximum number of decoder iterations. For remaining 
parameters, we randomly selected lifting size with larger 
probability on larger sizes, and randomly selected code rate, 
base graph, and modulation order imposing the constraints to 
satisfy NR specification [9]. 
   Fig. 4 shows the MSE evolution with the learning iterations. 
2020 International Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications (ICNC): Machine Learning for 
Communication and Networking
618
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:45:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
For a given transmission environment, Fig. 5 shows the 
relationship, obtained via exhaustive simulations, between 
the SNR at 10% BLER and the offset value. On top of this 
curve, the figure displays two points for before and after the 
training. The x-axis of the point gives the policy network 
output and the y-axis gives the SNR-value network output. 
As shown, with training, the point moves towards the optimal.  
By defining the SNR loss as the difference between the 
minimum SNR achieved via exhaustive effort and the SNR 
achieved via the proposed framework, Fig. 6 shows the 
cumulative distribution function of the SNR loss when the 
system operates at 10% target BLER. It can be seen that, with 
90% probability, the learned offsets have less than 0.15dB 
SNR gap compared with the best ones found exhaustively. 
V. CONCLUSION 
This paper presented a new automated framework which 
simplifies physical layer parameter optimization. The 
framework can be explained by a well-known reinforcement 
learning idea. The proposed learning procedure provides 
close to the best achievable performance which typically 
requires tedious exhaustive effort. This opens great 
possibility 
of 
expediting 
algorithm 
design 
in 
a 
communications system such as 5G which involves large 
amount of parameters to be optimized.  
VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank Homa Esfahanizadeh for 
her validation of the SNR-value network. 
Appendix A 
 In this appendix, it is shown that 𝑉𝜋(𝑠′) has the same sign 
as  𝛿(𝑠, 𝑎). We assume that 𝛿(𝑠∗, 𝑎) < 0  and other cases 
follow similarly. At 𝑡= 0, by definition: 
 
 
−𝑅0 = 𝑠′ = −𝜌(𝜋) + 𝛿(𝑠∗, 𝑎) 
 
(19) 
Therefore, 
 
 
𝜖0 = −𝑅0 + 𝜌(𝜋) = 𝛿(𝑠∗, 𝑎) 
 
(20) 
has the same sign as 𝛿(𝑠∗, 𝑎). Now, for 𝑡> 0, similarly 
define 
 
 
𝜖𝑡= −𝑅𝑡+ 𝜌(𝜋) 
 
(21) 
and suppose that 𝜖𝑡 has the same sign as 𝛿(𝑠∗, 𝑎). This means 
that either 𝜖𝑡< 0 or 𝑅𝑡> 𝜌(𝜋). This leads to the following: 
 
−𝑅𝑡+1 = 𝐸𝑠𝑡~𝑑𝑡
𝜋(𝑠𝑡+ 𝐸𝑎𝑡~𝜋(𝐸(𝛿(𝑠𝑡, 𝑎𝑡)))) 
 
(22) 
= 𝐸𝑠𝑡~𝑑𝑡
𝜋(𝑠𝑡+ 𝐸𝑎𝑡~𝜋(Δ𝑆𝑁𝑅(𝑃𝑒(𝑠𝑡, 𝑎𝑡) −𝑃𝑒,𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡))) 
 
(23) 
= −𝑅𝑡+ Δ𝑆𝑁𝑅(𝐸𝑠𝑡~𝑑𝑡
𝜋(𝑃𝑒(𝑠𝑡, 𝑎𝑡) −𝑃𝑒,𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡)) 
(24) 
< −𝑅𝑡+ Δ𝑆𝑁𝑅(𝑃𝑒(𝑠𝑡, 𝜋) −𝑃𝑒,𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡) 
 
(25) 
The last inequality comes from the concavity and linearity 
assumptions on the support of 𝑑𝑡
𝜋 when 𝑠< −𝜌(𝜋). 
 Now, from the monotonicity assumption of 𝑃𝑒(𝑠, 𝜋),  
 
 
|𝑃𝑒(𝑠∗, 𝜋)| ≥|𝑃𝑒(𝑠𝑡, 𝜋) −𝑃𝑒,𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡
𝑠−𝜌(𝜋)
| 
 
(26) 
For an s such that 𝑑𝑡
𝜋(𝑠|𝑠0) > 0. Then, 
 
−𝑅𝑡+1 < −𝑅𝑡+ Δ𝑆𝑁𝑅(𝑃𝑒(𝑅𝑡, 𝜋) −𝑃𝑒,𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡) 
 
(27) 
< −𝑅𝑡+
1
|𝑃𝑒(𝑠∗, 𝜋)|(𝑃𝑒(𝑅𝑡, 𝜋) −𝑃𝑒,𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡) 
 
 
(28) 
< −𝑅𝑡+ |
𝑅𝑡−𝜌(𝜋)
𝑃𝑒(𝑅𝑡, 𝜋) −𝑃𝑒,𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡
| (𝑃𝑒(𝑅𝑡, 𝜋)
−𝑃𝑒,𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡) 
 
(29) 
= −𝜌(𝜋) 
 
(30) 
The last equality comes from the fact that 𝑅𝑡< 𝜌(𝜋)  , 
𝑃𝑒(𝑠, 𝜋)  is a monotonic decreasing function of s and 
𝑃𝑒(𝜌(𝜋), 𝜋) = 𝑃𝑒,𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡. 
Therefore, it follows that 𝜖𝑡+1 = −𝑅𝑡+1 + 𝜌(𝜋) < 0. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Rahmati, D. Bai, and J. Lee, “Low complexity soft detection of high 
order QAM with prior information,” in IEEE 82nd Vechicular 
Technology Conference (VTC2015-Fall), 2015, pp. 1-5. 
[2] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. P. Fossorier, and X. –Y. Hu, 
“Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE tran. on 
communications, vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288-1299, 2005. 
[3] C. Jiang, H. Zhang, Y. Ren, Z. Han, K. C. Chen, and L. Hanzo, 
“Machine learning paradigms for next-generation wireless networks,” 
IEEE wireless communications, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 98-105, 2016. 
[4] S. Joseph, R. Misra, and S. Katti, “Towards self-driving radios: 
Physical layer control using deep reinforcement learning,” in 
Proceedings of the 20th International workshop on Mobile Computing 
Systems and Applications, pp. 69-74, 2019. 
[5] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement learning: An introduction. 
MIT press, 2018. 
[6] R. S. Sutton, D. A. McAllester, S. P. Singh, and Y. Mansour, “Policy 
gradient 
methods 
for 
reinforcement 
learning 
with 
function 
approximation,” in Advances in neural information processing 
systems, 2000, pp. 1057–1063. 
[7] L. Lugosch and W. J. Gross, “Neural offset min-sum decoding,” in 
International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT). IEEE, 2017, 
pp. 1361–1365. 
[8] E. Nachmani, E. Marciano, L. Lugosch, W. J. Gross, D. Burshtein, and 
Y. Be’ery, “Deep learning methods for improved decoding of linear 
codes,” Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing, vol. 12, no. 1, 
pp. 119–131, 2018. 
[9] TS 38.313, “Multiplexing and channel coding,” 3GPP technical 
specification v15.4.0, 2018. 
[10] S. 
Levine, 
“cs294-112 
deep 
reinforcement 
learning,” 
http://rail.eecs.berkeley.edu/deeprlcourse, accessed: 2010-09-30. 
[11] A. Abotabl, J. H. Bae, K-B. Song, “Offset min-sum optimization for 
general decoding scheduling: A deep learning approach,” in Vehicular 
Technology Conference (VTC). IEEE, 2019. 
[12] J. H. Bae, A. Abotabl, H.-P. Lin, K.-B. Song, and J. Lee, “An overview 
of channel coding for 5G NR cellular communications,” APSIPA trans. 
on Signal and Information Processing, vol. 8, 2019.
 
2020 International Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications (ICNC): Machine Learning for 
Communication and Networking
619
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:45:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
