898

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

Lifting the Fundamental Cone and Enumerating the Pseudocodewords of a Parity-Check Code
Wittawat Kositwattanarerk and Gretchen L. Matthews, Member, IEEE

Dedicated to the memory of Ralf Koetter (1963–2009)

Abstract—The performance of message-passing iterative decoding and linear programming decoding depends on the Tanner graph representation of the code. If the underlying graph contains cycles, then such algorithms could produce a noncodeword output. The study of pseudocodewords aims to explain this noncodeword output. We examine the structure of the pseudocodewords and show that there is a one-to-one correspondence between graph cover pseudocodewords and integer points in a lifted fundamental cone. This gives a simple proof that the generating function of the pseudocodewords for a general parity-check code is rational (a fact first proved by Li, Lu, and Wang (Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 5557, 2009) via other methods). Our approach yields algorithms for producing this generating function and provides tools for studying the irreducible pseudocodewords. Specifically, Barvinok’s algorithm and the Barvinok-Woods projection algorithm are applied, and irreducible pseudocodewords are found via a Hilbert basis for the lifted fundamental cone.
Index Terms—Fundamental cone, irreducible pseudocodewords, iterative decoding, linear programming (LP) decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) code, pseudocodewords.
I. INTRODUCTION
C ODING theory allows messages to be transmitted and information to be stored and retrieved without suffering from loss and alteration of data. A decoding algorithm seeks to uncover the original message when a possibly erroneous message is received. In this paper, we focus on linear programming (LP) decoding. For low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, the performance of LP decoding is near that of iterative message-passing algorithms. In fact, Koetter and Vontobel [33] provide a link between LP decoding and iterative message-passing algorithms via graph cover decoding. While LP decoding may correct beyond half the minimum distance of the code, it may output an illegitimate codeword. There have been many attempts to study the behavior of iterative decoders and their noncodeword outputs [10], [20]–[23]. In [23], Koetter and Vontobel introduce an object called the fundamental cone which contains all (scaled linear programming,
Manuscript received April 14, 2010; revised August 19, 2010; accepted October 26, 2010. Date of current version January 19, 2011. This work was supported by NSF DMS-0901693.
This paper is part of the special issue on “Facets of Coding Theory: From Algorithms to Networks,” dedicated to the scientific legacy of Ralf Koetter.
The authors are with the Department of Mathematical Sciences, Clemson University, Clemson, SC 29634-0975 USA (e-mail: wkositw@clemson.edu; gmatthe@clemson.edu).
Communicated by G. D. Forney, Jr., Associate Editor for the special issue on “Facets of Coding Theory: From Algorithms to Networks.”
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2010.2095071

or, equivalently, nonscaled graph cover) pseudocodewords. In [21] and [22], Koetter, Li, Vontobel, and Walker characterize all the pseudocodewords within this cone and prove that the pseudocodewords of a cycle code correspond to the monomials appearing (with nonzero coefficient) in an expansion of a rational function, specifically the edge zeta function of the normal graph of the code. In addition, they suggest as a goal determining such a rational function for a general parity-check code.
In this paper, methods from discrete geometry are exploited to give a rational generating function for the pseudocodewords of a general parity-check code and to provide tools to study pseudocodewords. We introduce a lifted fundamental cone ; the fundamental cone mentioned above is a projection of . The lifted cone has the advantage that its integer points are precisely the pseudocodewords. This gives a simple proof that the generating function of the pseudocodewords of a general parity-check code is rational, a fact first proved by Li et al. [27]. Our approach differs from that of [27] in that we use the lifted fundamental cone and appeal to monomial substitution methods of Barvinok and Woods [5] while they rely on generators of the fundamental cone with even entries. The methods presented here yield algorithms for producing this generating function; moreover, the input into these algorithms is the lifted fundamental cone described in terms of inequalities rather than by its extreme rays. In particular, Barvinok’s algorithm, a breakthrough polynomial-time algorithm to count lattice points in a rational polytope of a given dimension [2], is utilized here. Because Barvinok’s algorithm (and subsequent improvements) have been implemented in software such as LattE [12], Barvinok 0.27 [31], and LattE macchiato [24], this perspective gives rise to computational tools to study pseudocodewords. In addition, the lifted fundamental cone provides a framework for studying the irreducible pseudocodewords. Irreducible pseudocodewords are found via a Hilbert basis for ; such pseudocodewords are especially important as the pseudoweight of any pseudocodeword is bounded below by the minimum pseudoweight of its irreducible pseudocodeword components.
This paper is organized as follows. This section concludes with a summary of notation. Section II provides a brief discussion of pseudocodewords of binary linear codes. The lifted fundamental cone is introduced in Section III. In Section IV, generating functions for the pseudocodewords and irreducible pseudocodewords are investigated; Barvinok’s algorithm and the Barvinok-Woods projection algorithm are applied. The paper concludes with examples in Section V and final discussion in Section VI.

0018-9448/$26.00 © 2011 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KOSITWATTANARERK AND MATTHEWS: LIFTING THE FUNDAMENTAL CONE AND ENUMERATING THE PSEUDOCODEWORDS OF A PARITY-CHECK CODE 899

Notation: The finite field with two elements is denoted

. The set of real numbers is denoted

is the set of

integers, and is the set of rational numbers. The set of all

matrices with entries in is denoted

, and

. Similarly,

denotes the set of all

matrices (that is,

vectors) with entries in . Given a

matrix

denotes the entry of in the th

row and th column,

denotes the th row of , and

denotes the transpose of . The th coordinate of a vector

is denoted . Given

, the vector is defined

as

.

We adopt the usual coding theory terminology and notation.

A binary linear code of length and dimension is a sub-

space of of dimension ; we use the term code to mean bi-

nary linear code as this paper only considers such codes. Ele-

ments of are called codewords. A parity-check matrix for the

code is a binary matrix

such that is then the null

space of ; that is, an element

is a codeword of if

and only if

. A parity-check matrix of a code

is not unique. Since the performance of message-passing itera-

tive decoding depends on the choice of parity-check matrix, we

use the notation

to emphasize that the code is given by

the parity-check matrix .

An algorithm is said to be polynomial time provided its run-

ning time is upperbounded by a polynomial in the input size of

the algorithm. The input size of

, denoted by , is the

number of bits needed to express in binary. In keeping with

the references used throughout this paper, one may take

to be approximately

. However, to also take into ac-

count the number of bits required to describe

, it may be

more desirable to take to be

.

All complexity estimates in this paper will be given in terms of

. Here and throughout the paper, the logarithm is taken base

2.

II. PRELIMINARIES

In this paper, we assume a memoryless binary-input sym-

metric-output channel. The maximum likelihood (ML) de-

coding problem for a code of length can be stated as

follows: Given a received word , find

that maximizes

, the probability that is received given that is

the transmitted codeword. This can be rephrased as a linear

program (LP). To do so, consider the code as implicitly

embedded in and let

denote the log-likelihood ratio at the coordinate. Then the ML decoding problem is equivalent to

Unfortunately, solving this linear program is not practical for

codes of reasonable block length; the description of the con-

straints determined by

is (typically) exponential in the

block length. In an effort to make this problem more computa-

tionally feasible, Feldman, Wainwright, and Karger [14] replace

the codeword polytope with a relaxed polytope

which is the intersection of the codeword polytopes of the

simple parity-check codes defined by the rows of a parity-check

matrix

of . Then

and

has a more tractable representation than the original

codeword polytope. This yields a relaxation of the original LP

to what is called the Linear Code Linear Program

The associated decoder is called an LP decoder. It may be that

in which case the LP decoder is suboptimal. Indeed, this de-

coding rule may yield a vertex of

that is not in

,

meaning a word that is not a codeword of

. Hence,

the vertices of

are called LP pseudocodewords.

Pseudocodewords may also be described in terms of graph

covers. Given a binary code

, the binary matrix also

defines a bipartite graph

which is the graph with biadja-

cency matrix . The graph

, which is the bipartite repre-

sentation of , is called the Tanner graph due to [30]. The vertex

set of

is

, where

is the set of

bit nodes and

is the set of check nodes; one

may think of the vertex as corresponding to the th column

of and the vertex as corresponding to the th row of .

The edge set of

is

Notice that

is a codeword of

if and

only if the binary value assignment

to the bit

nodes of the Tanner graph

makes the binary sum of the

values at the neighbors of every check node zero. A finite cover

denote the codeword polytope of , meaning the convex hull of of

is a bipartite graph such that there exists an integer

the codewords of . Let

so that for each vertex

, there is a set of vertices

of with

for all

and

for every edge

there are edges from the vertices

in

to the vertices in

connected in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

900

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

a 1–1 manner. A graph cover pseudocodeword of

is a

vector

such that there is a finite cover

of

which has as a codeword and

, where

are the values assigned to the copies of the bit

node in the cover of

.

Given a code

, each LP pseudocodeword of

is

a (scaled) graph cover pseudocodeword of

, and each

(scaled) graph cover pseudocodeword is a rational point in

[33]. Here, we use the term pseudocodeword to refer to a

graph cover pseudocodeword. Throughout,

denotes the

set of pseudocodewords of the code

. Lastly, a nonzero

pseudocodeword is said to be irreducible provided it cannot be

written as a sum of two or more nonzero pseudocodewords. We

denote by

the set of all irreducible pseudocodewords

of

. It is known that irreducible pseudocodewords are

the building blocks for

in that any pseudocodeword

can be written as a sum of irreducible pseudocodewords.

Characterizing them immediately provides much information

about

[1], [20]. Irreducible pseudocodewords are not

to be confused with minimal pseudocodewords. The minimal

pseudocodewords of a code

are typically taken to be

those such that

is an edge of the

fundamental cone

which has a compact rational form, give methods to yield this form, and provide tools for investigating the pseudocodewords. To do this, we introduce the lifted fundamental cone in the next section.

III. THE LIFTED FUNDAMENTAL CONE

In this section, we define the lifted fundamental cone of a parity-check code and relate it to the fundamental cone and the set of irreducible pseudocodewords.

Definition 3.1: Given

of

is

, the lifted fundamental cone

Notice that the use of the vector in Definition 3.1 is similar

to that in the reformulation of ML decoding as an integer pro-

gramming problem in [8].

To relate the lifted cone

to the fundamental cone

, define the projection

(1)

We make the relationship between the lifted fundamental cone and the pseudocodewords precise in the following proposition.

Proposition 3.2: Let one-to-one and

. The projection

is

The set

contains a multiple of each minimal pseudocode-

word of

, but not every irreducible pseudocodeword arises

in this way.

In [22], the authors characterize the pseudocodewords of a

code

as those integer points within the fundamental cone

which satisfy the parity-check conditions imposed by the

rows of . More formally, their result may be stated as follows.

Proposition 2.1: ([22, Theorem 4.4]) Let

. Given

, the following are equivalent:

1) is a pseudocodeword of the code

;

2)

and

.

In this same paper, it is shown that the pseudocodewords of

a cycle code, meaning a code given by a parity-check matrix

having exactly two nonzero entries in each column, are precisely

the exponent vectors of monomials appearing with nonzero co-

efficient in the Taylor series expansion of a certain rational func-

tion. More precisely, they prove the following result.

Furthermore

In other words,

is a cone in

whose projection is

, and its integer points correspond precisely to the pseu-

docodewords of

.

Proof: Suppose that

where

. Then

and

We can then conclude that injective.
Now

. Hence,

is

Proposition 2.2: ([22, Theorem 5.9]) Let

be a

matrix with exactly two nonzero entries in each column. Then

the following are equivalent:

1) is a pseudocodeword of the code

;

2) appears with nonzero coefficient in

, the edge

zeta function of the normal graph of

.

It is left open to determine a similar function for a general

parity-check code. Here, we set out to show that the generating

function for the pseudocodewords of a general parity-check where the last equality follows from the definition of funda-

code is a rational function (a fact originally proved in [27]) mental cone.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KOSITWATTANARERK AND MATTHEWS: LIFTING THE FUNDAMENTAL CONE AND ENUMERATING THE PSEUDOCODEWORDS OF A PARITY-CHECK CODE 901

Let

be an integer point in

. Then

for some nonzero pseudocodewords and of

Proposition 3.2,

and

. It then follows that

. By where

and

implying that

. By Proposi-

tion 2.1,

is a pseudocodeword of

. On the

other hand, let

. Then is an integer vector in

such that

. Since

for some

. Then

im-

plies

. We conclude that

.

The lifted fundamental cone is certainly a rational cone; a

rational cone is the solution space of a system of finitely many

linear inequalities with integer coefficients such that

for all

and

. A rational cone is called pointed if it

has a vertex at the origin. The set of integer vectors in a pointed

rational cone forms an additive semigroup. The minimal set of

generators of this semigroup is finite [15] and unique [11];

is called the Hilbert basis of the cone. More precisely, given

a pointed rational cone

, the Hilbert basis of is the

minimal set of vectors

with the property that

contradicting the minimality of . Therefore,

ducible, and

.

is irre-

IV. ENUMERATING PSEUDOCODEWORDS

The lifted fundamental cone was introduced in the previous

section. In this section, we use the lifted fundamental cone

to study

, the generating function for the pseu-

docodewords of the code

, as well as

, the

generating function for the irreducible pseudocodewords of

.

A. The Generating Function for Pseudocodewords
We begin this subsection by addressing a question from [22]. Our approach relies on the lifted fundamental cone; for an alternate proof, see [27, Theorem 13].

We relate the Hilbert basis of

and the irreducible pseu-

docodewords of

in the following proposition.

Proposition 3.3: Let

docodewords of

is

. The set of irreducible pseu-

Theorem 4.1: Let

. The generating function of the

pseudocodewords of

is a rational function.

Proof: It is well-known that the generating function of a

pointed rational cone is rational ([29, Theorem 4.6.11]). Thus,

the generating function for the integer points in the lifted fun-

damental cone

where is the Hilbert basis of

; that is, the set of irre-

ducible pseudocodewords of

is a projection of the Hilbert

basis of the lifted fundamental cone of

.

Proof: Let

be the Hilbert basis of

.

Let

be an irreducible pseudocodeword of

. It follows from Proposition 3.2 that

for

some

. Since is a Hilbert basis for

for some

with

. Clearly

is rational. Here,

.

Since

is not a pole of any fraction ap-

pearing in the rational expression of (see [29, Proposition

4.6.10, Theorem 4.6.11]), it follows that:

According to Proposition 3.2, each

is a pseudocode-

word. Being irreducible, cannot be written as a sum of two is rational where

.

or more nonzero pseudocodewords. Thus,

for some

and

for all . Therefore,

and

.

Now consider where

. Then

.

Hence, is a pseudocodeword by Proposition 3.2. Suppose

The proof of Theorem 4.1 employs the rational form of the generating function of the integer points in the lifted fundamental cone. Alternatively, one may appeal to the method of monomial substitution (or, specialization of rational functions) due to Barvinok and Woods detailed below. The significance of

this approach is that such a substitution may be carried out effi-

ciently.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

902

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

Lemma 4.2: ([5, Theorem 2.6]) Given a rational function

Let

be linearly independent integer vectors.

The simple rational cone generated by

is the set

(2)

where is a finite set, all and a monomial map

, and

for

(3)

where

such that the image of does not lie

entirely in the set of poles of , there is a polynomial time

algorithm which computes

in the form

If , then is said to be full-dimensional; if , then is

called lower-dimensional. The vectors

are called the

generators of . The fundamental parallelepiped of

is the set

where

is a finite set,

for all .

As in the proof of Theorem 4.1, let

, and

We sometimes write

to mean the fundamental paral-

lelepiped of the given generators of . The index of a simple

rational cone , denoted

, is the number of integer

points in . It can be easily proved that the index of is

the same as the volume of

(see, for instance, [3, Theorem

2]). The following lemma describes the generating function for

the integer points in a simple rational cone.

Lemma 4.4: ([29, Corollary 4.6.8]) For a simple rational cone

with generators

, we have

be the generating function of the integer points in the lifted fun-

damental cone

where

. Then one may apply

Lemma 4.2 to obtain

. Take

where

is the vector with 1 in the th

coordinate and 0’s elsewhere. Then

The notion of a triangulation is especially useful in investi-

gating the rational form of the generating function of the pseu-

docodewords. A triangulation of a pointed rational cone is a

finite set

of simple rational cones satisfying:

1)

;

2) if

, then every face of is an element of ; and

3) for all

is a common face of and

.

may be found according to Lemma 4.2.
Remark 4.3: The algorithm in Lemma 4.2 takes as input the rational function expressed as in (2) and the monomial map as in (3). The input size of is approximately

Theorem 4.5: Given a binary matrix erating function of the pseudocodewords of pressed as

, the genmay be ex-

where

are integer vectors and is a polynomial.

Proof: The lifted fundamental cone

is clearly a

and the input size of is approximately

pointed rational cone. According to [29, Lemma 4.6.1] (or [6,

Theorem 3.2]), the lifted fundamental cone can be triangulated

into a finite union of simple rational cones using no new gener(4) ators, meaning that the generators of each simple rational cone

are among the generators of

. Hence, there exist simple

where

with

.

rational cones

such that

Notice that Theorem 4.1 gives no information concerning the

rational form of the generating function of the pseudocodewords

other than its existence. To gain more insight into the rational and the generators for each

form of this generating function, we may apply standard tools

of

. Given

from discrete geometry. We recall these here for easy reference;

are among the generators , let

for more background, see [4], [6], and [29].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KOSITWATTANARERK AND MATTHEWS: LIFTING THE FUNDAMENTAL CONE AND ENUMERATING THE PSEUDOCODEWORDS OF A PARITY-CHECK CODE 903

Then is a simple rational cone, because the intersection of simple rational cones resulting from a triangulation is a simple rational cone (according to the definition of trianglation; see also [6, Exercise 3.2]). Hence, the generating function for the integer points of each follows from Lemma 4.4. Applying inclusionexclusion and Lemma 4.4, we obtain the generating function for the integer points of the lifted fundamental cone

where

are generators of . Since for each subset , it follows that

where is a polynomial. Now, as in the proof of Theorem 4.1, set
Then use Lemma 4.2 to obtain

where

is a polynomial and

.

for all

Remark 4.6:

1) The discussion in the proof of Theorem 4.5 is similar in

spirit to that of [27, Theorem 13]. However, we apply this

analysis to the lifted fundamental cone whereas they ma-

nipulate generators of the fundamental cone so that the en-

tries are all even. Both approaches involve inclusion-ex-

clusion; we exhibit the application of inclusion-exclusion

explicitly above.

2) Consider the argument in the proof of Theorem 4.5

without the application of inclusion-exclusion. The result

is a rational function whose expansion contains a mono-

mial

with nonzero coefficient if and only if is a

pseudocodeword. This is demonstrated below.

Let

. Let

be a triangulation of

as in the proof of Theorem 4.5. Let

Applying Lemma 4.4 gives

Clearly,

is a rational function, and inclusion-ex-

clusion is not required to produce this form. Moreover,

a monomial with exponent vector

appears with

nonzero coefficient in a Taylor expansion of if and

only if is a pseudocodeword of

. Strictly speaking,

is not a generating function for the pseudocodewords

of

, because the expansion of

may contain

nonzero coefficients that are integers other than 1. How-

ever, it is reminiscent of the edge zeta function related

to a cycle code in Proposition 2.2. Allowing coefficients

other than 0 and 1 has also proven useful in contexts such

as [32]; there, a connection is established between the

coefficients of the edge zeta function of a cycle code and

the Bethe entropy. In the general case discussed here,

no mathematical significance has been established. A

function similar to is mentioned in [27, Remark 1],

though without the use of the lifted fundamental cone.

While Theorem 4.5 gives a specific form of the rational func-

tion guaranteed by Theorem 4.1, this approach is still lacking

in some sense. Namely, it involves enumerating all the integer

points in the fundamental parallelepipeds

; according to

the discussion following [3, Theorem 1], the sums resulting

from Lemma 4.4 while finite may be large. Moreover, direct ap-

plication of inclusion-exclusion can be quite costly. In an effort

to circumvent these difficulties (or deal with them more effi-

ciently), we apply Barvinok’s algorithm and its improvements.

Introduced in 1994, Barvinok’s algorithm is a polynomial time

algorithm for counting the number of lattice points in a convex

polyhedron in a fixed dimension [2]. It has seen applications in

optimization, statistics, and algebra; here, we apply it to the enu-

meration of pseudocodewords of a general parity-check code.

Barvinok’s algorithm was inspired by the fact that a long

polynomial or infinite series can sometimes be written as a much

shorter rational function. Consider, for instance

While

involves an infinite number of monomials, it

can be written as which involves only three monomials. Be-

cause there are a number of excellent surveys of Barvinok’s al-

gorithm, its applications, and subsequent improvements [3]–[5],

[7], [12], [25], [26], [31], we only mention those elements that

seem relevant to the study of pseudocodewords.

A simple rational cone is said to be unimodular if and only

if

. Notice that if is unimodular, then is the

unique integer point in . According to Lemma 4.4, if is

unimodular, then

(5)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

904

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

where cone

are generators of . The dual of a rational is

Hence, the dual of a rational cone is a rational cone, and

Proof: The proof is a straightforward application of

Barvinok’s algorithm with Brion’s polarization trick (noted in

the seminal paper [9]) to the lifted fundamental cone.

First, triangulate the dual of the lifted fundamental cone

to obtain simple rational cones

. Next, apply

the signed decomposition of Lemma 4.7 to each . For each

, this gives

(8)

according to the Bipolar Theorem. Given a set

, the

indicator function of is

Generating functions of integer points in rational cones respect

linear identities of their indicator functions [4, Theorem 3.1]

as do the indicator functions of their duals [4, Corollary 2.8];

more precisely, given rational cones

and

Note that the index of is less than that of for each index .
We claim that the lower-dimensional simple rational cones , may be safely discarded with no effect on the gen-
erating function of the integer points in . To see this, polarize Equation (8) back. Applying (7) gives
Now, according to (6)

(6)

(7)

If a cone

contains a straight line, then we make the

standard convention that

.

Barvinok’s algorithm provides an efficient method for de-

composing a simple rational cone into simple rational cones

with smaller indices, as detailed in the following lemma.

as the dual of a lower-dimensional simple rational cone contains a straight line and so

Lemma 4.7: ([2, Theorem 5.4]) Fix . Given a simple rational

cone

described in terms of rational inequalities, there

exists a polynomial time algorithm which computes a signed

decomposition

for each

. Hence, the claim holds and there is no need to

keep track of the cones with

(or their duals).

Iterate this procedure, applying Lemma 4.7 next to the

with

. Each time, the indices of the simple rational cones

obtained decrease (doubly exponentially [4]). Continue until a

decomposition

where

is a simple rational cone, and

–

for all

. Moreover, in this decomposition, the cones

, are full-dimensional whereas the cones

,

are lower-dimensional.

Theorem 4.8: Fix

. Given

, there ex-

ists a polynomial time algorithm which computes the generating

function of the pseudocodewords of

as a finite sum

is obtained with all unimodular. Then
(9)
and all are unimodular being duals of unimodular cones [4]. It follows that

where

and the are integer vectors for all .
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KOSITWATTANARERK AND MATTHEWS: LIFTING THE FUNDAMENTAL CONE AND ENUMERATING THE PSEUDOCODEWORDS OF A PARITY-CHECK CODE 905

where each cone and (5) imply that

, is unimodular. Then Equations (6)

where

are generators of .

Finally, to extract the generating function for the pseudocode-

words of

, set

and use Lemma 4.2 to obtain

where

for all and

.

Remark 4.9:

1) Barvinok’s algorithm takes as input a pointed rational cone

described in terms of rational inequalities. Hence, one does

not have to determine the extreme rays of the cone which

are not typically available a priori.

2) The complexity of Barvinok’s algorithm applied as de-

scribed in the proof of Theorem 4.8 is

, where is

the input size of

. The input size is approximately

proper faces. This strategy avoids inclusion-exclusion

entirely.

4) Köppe’s work also gives the option of stopped decomposi-

tions. This allows one to specify an integer and terminate

the decomposition procedure in the proof of Theorem 4.8

when all simple rational cones in (9) are of index at

most (rather than being of index 1, i.e., unimodular). The

integer points in the associated fundamental parallepipeds

of simple rational cones are then enumerated via Smith

normal forms [25]. This may avoid what is often consid-

ered the bottleneck of Barvinok’s algorithm.

Presently, the computational limitations of this approach arise

from the size of the triangluations, specifically the number of

cones in the triangluation and the indices of those cones. Avail-

able software can handle general cones in dimensions up to say

35, meaning

. However, one may analyze partic-

ular codes in say dimension 50 or higher more easily than some

codes of lower dimension due to their structure. More relevant

than dimension (or code length) is the size of the triangulation

involved. We hope that by providing this framework, we can

identify codes which are easier to analyze and use this to shed

light on more general situations.

As Barvinok’s algorithm and integer point enumeration are

relevant to a wide range of applications, it is reasonable to ex-

pect further refinements to available computational tools (and

perhaps new ones). Problems currently out of reach may be rea-

sonable in the near future. Thus, it is relevant to provide this

framework for the study of pseudocodewords.

B. Irreducible Pseudocodewords

Recall that a nonzero pseudocodeword is irreducible if and

only if it cannot be written as a sum of two or more nonzero

pseudocodewords. Proposition 3.3 relates irreducible pseu-

where denotes the maximum number of nonzero entries

in each row of the parity check matrix . The number of

cones associated with each set is at most

. The

monomial substitution may also be done in polynomial

time according to Lemma 4.2. Note that Barvinok’s algo-

docodewords to the Hilbert basis of the lifted fundamental cone via the projection . In this subsection, we apply an element of the Barvinok-Woods projection algorithm to find the generating function for the irreducible pseudocodewords of a general parity-check code.

rithm is polynomial with respect to the input size assuming Definition 4.10: Given

, the -value of the Tanner

the dimension is fixed. However, as the dimension of the graph of , denoted , is the maximum value that a coordinate

lifted fundamental cone grows with the length of the code of an irreducible pseudocodeword of

can have; that is

and the size of the parity check matrix, the algorithm is not

polynomial with respect to the length of the code. While

these complexity results (in particular, the dependence on

) may be disheartening, several improvements to the al- According to Proposition 3.3, the set of irreducible pseu-

gorithm make it a practical tool in certain situations; we docodewords of

is finite as the Hilbert basis of is finite

mention these below. Efficient methods for performing the [15]. It follows that the generating function of the irreducible

tasks mentioned in the proof of Theorem 4.8 are detailed in pseudocodewords is always a rational function; in fact, it is a

[13]. Barvinok’s algorithm has been implemented in com- polynomial. Even so, producing such a polynomial directly is

puter software by at least two groups, resulting in LattE tantamount to listing all irreducible pseudocodewords. The fol-

[12] and Barvinok 0.27 [31].

lowing two results from Barvinok and Woods [5] yield a rational

3) Recently, Köppe’s primal irrational Barvinok algorithm form for this polynomial without explicitly enumerating all the

has been implemented in LattE macchiato [24], providing irreducible pseudocodewords. The first result concerns the pro-

speedups of “large factors” [25]. Irrational decomposi- jection of integer points of a rational polytope. The second result

tions, introduced by Beck and Sottile [7], employ a shift enables one to obtain the generating function for a set

vector so that the shift of a simple rational cone has the from the generating functions of finite sets and of integer

same integer points but contains no integer points on its vectors; of course, this is only of interest when

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

906

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

Lemma 4.11: ([5, Theorem 1.7]) Fix . There exists a number We claim that the set of irreducible pseudocodewords of

and a polynomial time algorithm which, given a ra- is given by

tional polytope

and a linear transformation

such that as

, expresses the generating function for

To prove the claim, first note that

by Propo-

sition 3.2. Let

be an irreducible pseudocodeword of

. Then

by the construction of . However,

since cannot be written as a sum of two or more nonzero pseu-

docodewords. Therefore,

. Hence

where

and

are integer vectors for all .

Lemma 4.12: ([5, Corollary 3.7]) Fix . Let

Now consider

be finite sets. There exists a polynomial time algorithm which, is a pseudocodeword of

given the generating functions for and in the form

. According to Proposition 3.2, . Suppose

where and are nonzero pseudocodewords. It follows that . By Proposition 3.2,

where

and

are integer vectors for all

, expresses the generating function for

as

for some . This implies

. Since . It follows that

where .

, and

are integer vectors for all

Theorem 4.13: Fix

. Given

, there ex-

ists a polynomial time algorithm which computes the generating

function of the irreducible pseudocodewords,

, as

a rational function.

Proof: We apply a technique similar to [5, Theorem 7.1].

Let

contradicting the assumption that

. Therefore, is

irreducible. This proves the claim.

Applying Lemma 4.11 to and gives rational forms

for the generating functions of and . If necessary, these

expressions may be manipulated, multiplying terms by expres-

sions of the form

as needed, so that as in Lemma 4.12

is obtained. Finally, an application of Lemma 4.12 to determine

completes the proof as

where set of map

is the -value of the Tanner graph of . Note that the contains all the irreducible pseudocodewords
where is the projection defined in (1). Consider the

Remark 4.14: Similar to Lemma 4.7, the complexity of

Lemmas 4.11 and 4.12 is polynomial with respect to number

of bits needed to describe the input assuming the dimension is

fixed. In Lemma 4.11, the input size of the linear transformation

is

; the input size of the polytope defined by

rational inequalities

, is

Let

The input size in Lemma 4.12 is the input size of the rational

forms of the generating functions of and , each of which

is found as in (4).

While the Barvinok-Woods algorithm may be a promising

tool for studying the set of irreducible pseudocodewords, the al-

gorithm involves complicated routines such as algorithmic flat-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KOSITWATTANARERK AND MATTHEWS: LIFTING THE FUNDAMENTAL CONE AND ENUMERATING THE PSEUDOCODEWORDS OF A PARITY-CHECK CODE 907

ness theory and iterated Boolean combinations of rational generating functions; we do not know of any implementation of the algorithm in the literature. Enumerating the irreducible pseudocodewords (and the Hilbert basis in general) remains a generally hard task. Nevertheless, the Hilbert basis can be efficiently computed in some circumstances. A project-and-lift algorithm by Hemmecke [16] has been implemented in the software 4ti2 [17].

Here, one may note that

, and

ular cones.

Example 5.2: Consider the code matrix

are all shifts of unimodgiven by parity-check

V. EXAMPLES

This section contains examples illustrating the ideas in

Section IV.

Barvinok 0.27 computes

Example 5.1: Let

. Then the

simple rational cone and the fundamental parallelepiped

generated by and are as shown below.

It is interesting to see that the above rational form for implies that

Then
Barvinok 0.27 computes the generating function of the integer points in to be

are the only irreducible pseudocodewords of

.

The code

is also studied in [21], [22] where the edge

zeta function of the normal graph of

is found. While the

rational form of the generating function above is simpler than

that of [21], [22], it lacks the combinatorial connection of the

edge zeta function.

Example 5.3: In this example, we consider the

sim-

plex code with two different choices for parity-check matrix.

Let

The above rational form results from noting that the integer points in are the same as those in

where is the first quadrant, is the rational cone generated by (1, 0) and (3, 1) with a vertex at (1, 0), and is the rational cone generated by (0, 1) and (1, 2) with a vertex at (0, 1) as shown below.

Note that and differ only in the last row. The last row of

is the binary sum of the last two rows of .

The irreducible pseudocodewords of

and

are

found using 4ti2 [17]. The irreducible pseudocodewords of

which are not codewords of

are the following:

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

908

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

Since the parity-check matrices and are nearly iden-

tical, one may expect the pseudocodewords of

and the

pseudocodewords of

to be mostly the same. On the con-

trary, while there are only 20 irreducible pseudocodewords for

, 4ti2 finds 39 irreducible pseudocodewords for

.

Moreover

This implies

One may infer that the

simplex code represented by

is more prone to error than the same code represented by .

It is interesting to note that the irreducible pseudocodewords

of

coincide with the minimal pseudocodewords of

found in [28].

The choice of the parity-check matrix is important to mes-

sage-passing iterative and LP decoders, and to better understand

this we need information on the pseudocodewords. While sev-

eral of the algorithms mentioned have been implemented in soft-

ware, there are still limitations to the size of the problem the

software can handle. Even so, new approaches are resulting in

great speed-ups. For now, it may be the case that some of the

ideas described here provide theoretical tools for the study of

pseudocodewords and code representation. Perhaps these will

be helpful in making a more combinatorial connection between

the generating function of the pseudocodewords and a graphical

representation of the code, as in the cycle code case.

VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduce the lifted fundamental cone as a tool for studying the pseudocodewords of a binary linear code. The approach taken here yields a rational function that enumerates the pseudocodewords of a general parity-check code and provides new tools to aid in the study of pseudocodewords (and irreducible pseudocodewords). Applying Barvinok’s algorithm to the lifted fundamental cone yields a polynomial time algorithm for producing the generating function for the pseudocodewords. Moreover, the set of irreducible pseudocodewords is simply a projection of the Hilbert basis for the cone. This makes it possible to use computational tools and their software implementations to study the pseudocodewords of a parity-check code.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the reviewers for their helpful comments and suggestions, as well as R. Hemmecke and M. Köppe for their useful insights.

REFERENCES
[1] N. Axvig, D. Dreher, K. Morrison, E. Psota, L. C. Perez, and J. L. Walker, “Analysis of connections between pseudocodewords,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 4099–4107, Sep. 2009.
[2] A. Barvinok, “A polynomial time algorithm for counting integral points in polyhedra when the dimension is fixed,” Math. Oper. Res., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 769–779, 1994.
[3] A. Barvinok, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, “Lattice points, polyhedra, and complexity, geometric combinatorics, 19–62,” IAS/Park City Math., ser. 13, 2007.

[4] A. Barvinok and J. Pommersheim, “An algorithmic theory of lattice points in polyhedra, new perspectives in algebraic combinatorics (Berkeley, CA, 1996–97,” in Math. Sci. Res. Inst. Publ.. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1999, vol. 38, pp. 91–147.
[5] A. Barvinok and K. Woods, “Short rational generating functions for lattice point problems,” J. Amer. Math. Soc., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 957–979, 2003.
[6] M. Beck and S. Robins, Computing the Continuous Discretely: IntegerPoint Enumeration in Polyhedra. New York: Springer, 2007.
[7] M. Beck and F. Sottile, “Irrational proofs for three theorems of Stanley,” Eur. J. Combin., vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 403–409, 2007.
[8] M. Breitbach, M. Bossert, R. Lucas, and C. Kempter, “Letter soft-decision decoding of linear block codes as optimization problem,” Eur. Trans. Telecommun., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 289–293, 1998.
[9] M. Brion, “Points entiers dans les polyèdres convexes,” (in French) Ann. Sci. École Norm. Sup. (4), vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 653–663, 1988, [Lattice points in convex polyhedra].
[10] T. D. Coleman, Pseudocodewords Presentation Cambridge, MA, MIT Tech. Rep., 2003.
[11] J. G. van der Corput, “Uber Systeme von linear-homogenen Gleichungen und Ungleichungen,” in Proc. Koninklijke Akademie van Wetenschappen te Amsterdam, 1931, vol. 34, pp. 368–371.
[12] J. A. De Loera, D. Haws, R. Hemmecke, P. Huggins, J. Tauzer, and R. Yoshida, “A user’s guide for LattE v1.1,” 2003, software package LattE is available at [Online]. Available: http://www.math.ucdavis.edu/ ~latte/
[13] J. A. De Loera, R. Hemmecke, J. Tauzer, and R. Yoshida, “Effective lattice point counting in rational convex polytopes,” J. Symbol. Comput., vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 1273–1302, 2004.
[14] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. R. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 954–972, Mar. 2005.
[15] P. Gordan, “Über die Auflösung linearer Gleichungen mit reellen Coefficienten,” Math. Ann., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 23–28, 1873.
[16] R. Hemmecke, “On the computation of Hilbert bases of cones,” in Proc. 1st Int. Congr. Mathematical Software, Beijing, China, 2002.
[17] R. Hemmecke, M. Köppe, P. Malkin, and M. Walter, “4ti2—A software package for algebraic, geometric and combinatorial problems on linear spaces,” [Online]. Available: http://www.4ti2.de
[18] M. Henk and R. Weismantel, “On Hilbert bases of polyhedral cones,” Results in Math., vol. 32, pp. 298–303, 1997.
[19] R. Kannan, “Lattice translates of a polytope and the Frobenius problem,” Combinatorica, vol. 12, pp. 161–177, 1992.
[20] C. Kelley and D. Sridhara, “Pseudocodewords of Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 4013–4038, Nov. 2007.
[21] R. Koetter, W.-C. W. Li, P. O. Vontobel, and J. Walker, “Pseudo-codewords of cycle codes via zeta functions,” in Proc. IEEE Information Theory Workshop, San Antonio, TX, 2004, pp. 7–12, IEEE.
[22] R. Koetter, W.-C. W. Li, P. O. Vontobel, and J. Walker, “Characterizations of pseudo-codewords of (low-density) parity-check codes,” Adv. Math., vol. 213, no. 1, pp. 205–229, 2007.
[23] R. Koetter and P. O. Vontobel, “Graph covers and iterative decoding of finite-length codes,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes & Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 1–5, 2003, pp. 75–82.
[24] M. Köppe, LattE Macchiato Version 1.2-mk-0.9.3, available at [Online]. Available: http://www.math.ucdavis.edu/~mkoeppe
[25] M. Köppe, “A primal Barvinok algorithm based on irrational decompositions,” SIAM J. Discrete Math., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 220–236, 2007.
[26] M. Köppe, S. Verdoolaege, and K. Woods, “An implementation of the Barvinok-Woods integer projection algorithm,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Information Theory and Stat. Learning, 2008, pp. 53–59.
[27] W.-C. W. Li, M. Lu, and C. Wang, “Recent developments in low-density parity-check codes,” Lecture Notes in Comput. Sci., vol. 5557, pp. 107–123, 2009.
[28] R. Smarandache and P. O. Vontobel, “Pseudo-codeword analysis of Tanner graphs from projective and Euclidean planes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 2376–2393, Jul. 2007.
[29] R. P. Stanley, Enumerative Combinatorics, Vol. 1, Corrected Reprint of the 1986 Original, Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1997, vol. 49.
[30] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low-complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[31] S. Verdoolaege, K. Woods, M. Bruynooghe, and R. Cools, Computation and Manipulation of Enumerators of Integer Projections of Parametric Polytopes CW Report, 2005, vol. CW392 [Online]. Available: http://www.kotnet.org/~skimo/barvinok/

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KOSITWATTANARERK AND MATTHEWS: LIFTING THE FUNDAMENTAL CONE AND ENUMERATING THE PSEUDOCODEWORDS OF A PARITY-CHECK CODE 909

[32] P. O. Vontobel, “Connecting the Bethe entropy and the edge zeta function of a cycle code,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Austin, TX, Jun. 13–18, 2010, pp. 704–708.
[33] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Graph-cover decoding and finite-length analysis of message-passing iterative decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, to be published.
Wittawat Kositwattanarerk received the B.A. degrees in mathematics and economics from the University of Virginia, Charlottesville, in 2006. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in mathemetical sciences at Clemson University, Clemson, SC.
His research interests are in algebraic coding theory, including error control coding and belief propagation on graphs.

Gretchen L. Matthews received the B.S. degree in mathematics from Oklahoma State University, Oklahoma City, in 1995 and the Ph.D. degree in mathematics from Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, in 1999.
Following postdoctoral work at the University of Tennessee, she joined the faculty in the Department of Mathematical Sciences, Clemson University, Clemson, SC, where she is currently an Associate Professor. Her research interests include algebra and its applications.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

