IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 58, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

429

On the Use of Soft-Decision Error-Correction Codes in NAND Flash Memory
Guiqiang Dong, Student Member, IEEE, Ningde Xie, and Tong Zhang, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—As technology continues to scale down, NAND Flash memory has been increasingly relying on error-correction codes (ECCs) to ensure the overall data storage integrity. Although advanced ECCs such as low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes can provide significantly stronger error-correction capability over BCH codes being used in current practice, their decoding requires soft-decision log-likelihood ratio (LLR) information. This results in two critical issues. First, accurate calculation of LLR demands fine-grained memory-cell sensing, which nevertheless tends to incur implementation overhead and access latency penalty. Hence, it is critical to minimize the fine-grained memory sensing precision. Second, accurate calculation of LLR also demands the availability of a memory-cell threshold-voltage distribution model. As the major source for memory-cell threshold-voltage distribution distortion, cell-to-cell interference must be carefully incorporated into the model. However, these two critical issues have not been ever addressed in the open literature. This paper attempts to address these open issues. We derive mathematical formulations to approximately model the threshold-voltage distribution of memory cells in the presence of cell-to-cell interference, based on which the calculation of LLRs is mathematically formulated. This paper also proposes a nonuniform memory sensing strategy to reduce the memory sensing precision and, thus, sensing latency while still maintaining good error-correction performance. In addition, we investigate these design issues under the scenario when we can also sense interfering cells and hence explicitly estimate cell-to-cell interference strength. We carry out extensive computer simulations to demonstrate the effectiveness and involved tradeoffs, assuming the use of LDPC codes in 2-bits/cell NAND Flash memory.
Index Terms—Cell-to-cell interference, low-density parity check (LDPC), NAND Flash, nonuniform sensing, reverse programming, soft-decision error-correction code (ECC).
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE STEADY bit-cost reduction over the past decade enabled the NAND Flash memory to enter increasingly diverse applications, from consumer electronics to personal and enterprise computers. In particular, this trend has made it economically viable to implement solid-state drives (SSDs) using NAND Flash memory, which is expected to fundamentally
Manuscript received May 03, 2010; revised June 26, 2010; accepted August 01, 2010. Date of publication November 11, 2010; date of current version January 28, 2011. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCF-0937799. This paper was recommended by Associate Editor M. Laddomada.
G. Dong and T. Zhang are with the Department of Electrical, Computer, and Systems Engineering, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI), Troy, NY 121803590 USA (e-mail: dongguiqiang@gmail.com; tong.zhang@ieee.org).
N. Xie is with Intel Corporation, Hillsboro, OR 97124 USA (e-mail: ningdexie@gmail.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2010.2071990

change the memory and storage hierarchy in future computing systems. The continuous bit-cost reduction of NAND Flash memory mainly relies on aggressive technology scaling, e.g., NAND Flash memory chips at sub-30-nm technology nodes have been recently announced by major NAND Flash manufacturers such as Samsung, Toshiba, and Micron. Aside from technology scaling, the multilevel-per-cell (MLC) technique, i.e., storing more than 1 bit in each memory cell (or floating-gate MOS transistor) by programming the cell threshold voltage into one of several voltage windows, has been widely used to further improve effective storage density and hence reduce the bit cost of NAND Flash memory. Because of its obvious advantages in terms of storage density and, hence, bit cost, MLC NAND Flash memory now largely dominates the global Flash memory market. In the current design practice, most MLC NAND Flash memories store 2 bits/cell, while 3- and even 4-bits/cell NAND Flash memories have been recently reported in the open literature [1]–[5].
Like any other data storage technologies such as magnetic and optical recording, NAND Flash memory must use error-correction codes (ECCs) to ensure the system-level data storage integrity, where BCH codes with classical hard-decision decoding algorithms [6] are being widely used in current design practice. As the industry continues to push the technology scaling envelope and pursue aggressive use of MLC storage, the raw storage reliability of NAND Flash memory inevitably continues to degrade, which could make current design practice inadequate and hence naturally demand the search for more powerful ECCs (e.g., see [7]). Because of their well-proven superior error-correction capability with reasonably low decoding complexity, advanced ECCs, such as low-density parity-check (LDPC) code [8], [9], Reed–Solomon codes with soft-decision decoding algorithms [10], [11], and Turbo code [12], appear to be promising candidates. For example, LSI Corporation, one of leading hard-disk-drive chip vendors, recently announced that LDPC codes have been used in their latest hard-disk-drive readchannel chips at the 40-nm technology node (see [13]), which undoubtedly sheds light on the potential of using LDPC codes in future SSDs.
These advanced ECCs are soft decision in nature, i.e., their decoding demands the log-likelihood-ratio (LLR) information of each bit and their error-correction performance heavily depends on the quality and accuracy of LLRs. As a result, NAND Flash memory chips must carry out fine-grained soft-decision memory-cell sensing (e.g., the threshold voltage of each cell in 2-bits/cell memory is quantized into 4 bits, corresponding to 15 sensing levels). Compared with the current design practice with hard-decision memory sensing, fine-grained soft-decision

1549-8328/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

430

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 58, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

memory sensing clearly leads to a longer on-chip memory by injecting a certain amount of charges into the floating gate.

sensing latency and longer Flash-to-controller data transfer Hence, data storage in a -level-per-cell NAND Flash memory is

latency. In addition, since sensed data should be temporarily realized by programming the threshold voltage of each memory

stored in an on-chip page buffer, fine-grained memory sensing cell into one of nonoverlapping voltage windows. Before one

also results in a larger on-chip page buffer and, hence, higher memory cell can be programmed, it must be erased (i.e., remove

silicon cost. Therefore, when using these advanced ECCs the charges in the floating gate, which sets its threshold voltage

in future NAND Flash memory, it is critical to minimize the to the lowest voltage window). Due to inevitable process vari-

fine-grained sensing precision (i.e., the number of memory ability, the threshold voltage of erased memory cells tends to

sensing levels) while still achieving sufficient error-correction have a wide Gaussian-like distribution [18]. Hence, we model

performance. Aside from higher memory sensing precision, the threshold-voltage distribution of the erased state as

accurate calculation of LLRs also demands the availability

of a sufficiently accurate memory-cell threshold-voltage sta-

tistical distribution model. It has been well recognized that,

(1)

as the technology continues to scale down, cell-to-cell inter-

ference is the increasingly dominant source for memory-cell threshold-voltage distribution distortion [14]–[17]. Hence, it is important to derive a reasonably accurate threshold-voltage statistical distribution model for memory cells in the presence of cell-to-cell interference. However, to the best of our knowledge, the aforementioned critical issues on the use of advanced ECCs in future NAND Flash memory has not been ever addressed in the open literature.
This paper attempts to fill such a missing link. First, based upon NAND Flash memory erase-and-programming characteristics, we derive mathematical formulations to approximately model threshold-voltage distribution of memory cells in the presence of cell-to-cell interference. We further discuss the calculation of LLRs based on such a mathematical model. Second, we present a nonuniform memory sensing strategy to reduce the memory sensing precision while still maintaining good error-correction performance, compared with straightforward uniform memory sensing. The key is to mainly focus the memory sensing around the boundary of adjacent memory-cell storage states where the entropy tends to be relatively high. Lastly, we investigate how to reformulate the memory-cell threshold-voltage distribution model and LLR calculation when we can also sense the threshold-voltage shift of interfering cells and hence explicitly estimate cell-to-cell interference strength. Using a hypothetical 2-bits/cell NAND

where and are the mean and standard deviation of the

erased-state threshold voltage.

When memory cells are programmed, a tight threshold-

voltage control is typically realized by using incre-

mental-step-pulse program, i.e., all the memory cells on

the same word line are recursively programmed using a pro-

gram-and-verify approach with a staircase program word-line

voltage

[19], [20]. Let

denote the incremental

program step voltage. Under such a program-and-verify pro-

gramming strategy, each programmed state (except the erased

state) associates with a verify voltage that is used in the

verify operations. Denote the verify voltage of the th pro-

grammed state as . During each program-and-verify cycle,

the floating-gate threshold voltage is first boosted by up

to

and then compared with the corresponding verify

voltage. If memory-cell threshold voltage is still lower than the

verify voltage, the program-and-verify iteration continues; oth-

erwise, the corresponding bit line is configured so that further

programming of this cell is disabled. Therefore, the threshold

voltage of the th programmed state tends to have a uniform

distribution over

with the width of

[21]. Denote and

for the th programmed state

as

and . We can model the ideal threshold-voltage

distribution of the th programmed state as

Flash memory and rate-19/20 LDPC code as a test vehicle, we

carry out extensive computer simulations to evaluate the effectiveness of the developed techniques and involved tradeoffs.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II

if

(2)

else.

reviews the basics of NAND Flash memory and cell-to-cell in- We note that certain device and circuit noises, particularly

terference. In Section III, we derive the mathematical formu- random telegraph noise [21], [22], may introduce exponentially

lation for approximately modeling the threshold-voltage distri- decreasing tails at both sides of the uniform distribution. As

bution of memory cells in the presence of cell-to-cell interfer- well discussed in the open literature [14]–[17], cell-to-cell

ence, study the corresponding LLR calculation, and present the interference may most severely distort the threshold-voltage

nonuniform memory sensing strategy. In Section IV, we rein- distribution of programmed cells.

vestigate these design issues under the scenario when a certain degree of cell-to-cell interference information is known. Con- B. Cell-to-Cell Interference

clusions are drawn in Section V.

In NAND Flash memory, the threshold-voltage shift of one

II. BACKGROUND

floating-gate transistor can influence the threshold voltage of its neighboring floating-gate transistors through parasitic capac-

A. Memory-Cell Programming

itance-coupling effect [23]. Such cell-to-cell interference has been well recognized as the major noise source in NAND Flash

Each NAND Flash memory cell is a floating-gate transistor memory and, hence, the most critical barrier hindering future

whose threshold voltage can be configured (or programmed) NAND Flash memory scaling [14]–[17].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DONG et al.: ON THE USE OF SOFT-DECISION ERROR-CORRECTION CODES IN NAND FLASH MEMORY

431

Fig. 1. Illustration of the all-bit-line structure and parasitic coupling capacitances among adjacent cells.

The threshold-voltage shift of a victim cell caused by cell-tocell interference from neighbor interfering cells which are programmed after this victim cell can be estimated as [23]

(3)

where

represents the threshold-voltage shift of one in-

Fig. 2. Simulated threshold-voltage distributions before and after cell-to-cell interference in 2-bits/cell NAND Flash memory when cell-to-cell coupling strength factor s is 1.5.

terfering cell which is programmed after the victim cell and the

coupling ratio is defined as

sure that the integration of this bounded Gaussian distribution

equals to one. We set

and

in all the

(4) simulations. According to [4], [15], we set the ratio between the means of and as 0.08:0.006, i.e., vertical cell-to-cell in-

where is the parasitic capacitance between the interfering

cell and the victim cell and

is the total capacitance of the

victim cell.

Cell-to-cell interference significance also depends on NAND

Flash memory bit-line structure. In current design practice,

there are two different bit-line structures, including conven-

tional even/odd bit-line structure [17], [24] and emerging

all-bit-line structure [25], [26]. In even/odd bit-line structure,

memory cells on one word line are alternatively connected to

even and odd bit lines and they are programmed at different

times. An even cell is influenced by five neighboring cells

which are programmed after this selected even cell, and an odd

cell is influenced by three neighboring cells on the next word

line. Therefore, even and odd cells experience largely different

amounts of cell-to-cell interference [27]. In the all-bit-line

terference with tends to play a dominating role. To study a

wide range of cell-to-cell coupling strength, we introduce a pa-

rameter called cell-to-cell coupling strength factor and have

the mean of equal 0.08 s and the mean of equal 0.006 s.

Example 2.1: Let us consider the 2-bits/cell NAND Flash

memory. We set the normalized and of the erased state

as 0.35 and 1.2, respectively. For the three programmed states,

we set the normalized program step voltage

as 0.3 and

the normalized verify voltages as 2.55, 3.0, and 3.45 V,

respectively. The cell-to-cell coupling strength factor is set

as 1.5. We carry out computer simulations to obtain the cell

threshold-voltage distribution before and after the occurrence of

cell-to-cell interference, as shown in Fig. 2, where the coupling

ratios are modeled as bounded Gaussian variables, as discussed

previously.

structure, all the memory cells on the same word line are programmed at the same time; therefore, one cell is mainly influenced by three neighboring cells on the adjacent word line, as shown in Fig. 1. Clearly, the all-bit-line structure induces less significant worst-case cell-to-cell interference. In addition, as pointed out in [26], the all-bit-line structure can most effectively support high-speed current sensing to improve the memory read-and-verify speed. Therefore, throughout the remainder of this paper, we mainly consider NAND Flash memory with the all-bit-line structure.
For the cell-to-cell interference modeling in this work, we assume that both the vertical coupling ratio and diagonal coupling ratio are random variables with bounded Gaussian distributions

III. USING SOFT-DECISION ECCS
This paper studies the use of soft-decision ECCs such as LDPC codes in NAND Flash memory. As pointed out earlier, current NAND Flash memories use hard-decision ECCs such as BCH codes, compared with which the use of soft-decision ECCs incurs two critical issues.
1) NAND Flash chips should support fine-grained soft-decision memory-cell threshold-voltage quantization (e.g., the threshold voltage of each cell in 2-bits/cell memory is quantized into 4 bits). This will directly result in a longer on-chip memory sensing latency, larger on-chip page buffer, and longer Flash-to-controller data transfer latency. Suppose each memory cell in 2-bits/cell NAND Flash memory is sensed with an -bit precision, compared with

if

the hard-decision memory sensing, the on-chip sensing

(5)

latency approximately increases by

times be-

else

cause of the fully sequential NAND Flash memory sensing

where and are the mean and standard deviation, rep-

operations, the on-chip page buffer size increases by

resents the bounded distribution region, and is chosen to en-

times, and the Flash-to-controller data transfer latency

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

432

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 58, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

increases by times. Clearly, it is highly desirable to minimize the memory-cell sensing precision while still maintaining sufficiently good ECC decoding performance. 2) The fine-grained memory-cell sensing results should be translated to LLR for each bit as the input to soft-decision ECC decoders. The calculation of LLR strongly depends on the threshold-voltage statistical distributions of all the states. In most communication and data storage systems, because of the use of sophisticated equalization and noise whitening before ECC decoding, LLR is typically calculated by assuming noise as random Gaussian variables, which can largely simplify the LLR calculation. However, threshold-voltage distribution in NAND Flash memory is not necessarily close to a Gaussian distribution (e.g., see Fig. 2 in Example 2.1). Therefore, we should particularly investigate how to more accurately calculate LLR given the fine-grained memory sensing results. Clearly, better LLR calculation quality can further contribute to the minimization of memory-cell sensing precision. In this section, we will first derive the mathematical formulation for calculating LLR based upon the NAND Flash threshold-voltage distribution and cell-to-cell interference model presented in Section II, and then, we will present a nonuniform memory sensing strategy that can reduce the memory sensing precision while maintaining good error-correction performance.
A. Mathematical Formulation of LLR Calculation
Let represent the sensed threshold voltage of one memory cell, and we simply assume that each bit in a cell has a priori probability of 0.5 being 0 or 1, i.e., all the storage states in one memory cell have equal a priori probability. Therefore, the LLR of the th bit stored in one cell is

(6)

Let represent the number of bits stored in each NAND Flash

memory cell; hence, there are

storage states. Let

denote the probability density function of the threshold

voltage of the th storage state, where

and the

state 0 corresponds to the erased state and state

corre-

sponds to the state with the highest threshold voltage. Let

denote the set of states whose th bit is 1. Hence, given the

threshold voltage of a cell, we can calculate the LLR of each

bit as

cells. Let and denote the threshold voltage of the th interfering cell before and after being programmed, and let denote the coupling ratio between the th interfering cell and the victim cell. The overall cell-to-cell interference can be expressed as

(8)

As discussed earlier, the threshold voltage of the erased state

has a Gaussian distribution. Hence, all the ’s are random

Gaussian variables, and

is still a Gaussian

variable

, where

(9)

Let

denote the probability density function of the

Gaussian variable . After a cell is programmed, its threshold

voltage ideally follows a uniform distribution, as discussed

earlier. Hence, each

can be simplified as a scaled uni-

form distribution. Let

, and assuming that

each is a constant, we can obtain its probability density

function

using the results presented in [28] that derives

a closed form for the probability density function of the sum

of independent nonidentically distributed uniform random

variables. Hence, the probability density function of the overall

cell-to-cell interference strength

can be estimated

as

(10)

After obtaining the cell-to-cell interference strength, the last step is to estimate the distribution of victim-cell threshold-voltage shift induced by cell-to-cell interference. If the victim cell stays in the erased state, its threshold-voltage distribution in the presence of cell-to-cell interference can be expressed as
(11)

If the victim cell is programmed to the th programmed state, its threshold-voltage distribution in the presence of cell-to-cell interference can be expressed as
(12)

(7) In the following, we further elaborate on the scenario when

the all-bit-line structure is being used. In this context, as dis-

Clearly, LLR calculation demands the knowledge of the proba- cussed previously, one victim cell has three interfering cells,

bility density functions of all the states. Based on the discus- one along the vertical direction with and two along the two

sions in Section II, LLR calculation is trivial if cell-to-cell inter- diagonal directions with . According to [4] and [15],

ference has not occurred yet. Hence, we only consider LLR cal- is one order of magnitude less than . Hence, to simplify the

culations for cells in the presence of cell-to-cell interference. In following mathematical derivations, we ignore the cell-to-cell

this context, we should first know the probability density func- interference from the two diagonal directions and also simply

tion of cell-to-cell interference, denoted as

. Suppose a fix as a constant. We note that we still take into account of

victim cell suffers cell-to-cell interference from interfering the cell-to-cell interference from the two diagonal directions and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DONG et al.: ON THE USE OF SOFT-DECISION ERROR-CORRECTION CODES IN NAND FLASH MEMORY

433

is the error function. Given the probability density function of threshold voltage shift of one interfering cell and the
corresponding coupling ratio , the cell-to-cell interference experienced by the victim cell can be obtained as

(15)
If a cell should stay in the erased state, it will not experience threshold voltage shift from programming operation, and thus will not induce cell-to-cell interference to its neighbors, therefore the corresponding interference can be modeled as
(16)
where represents the Dirac delta function. Assuming that the interfering cells have the same probability
to be programmed to each state (i.e., each state has a probability of ), the overall distribution of cell-to-cell interference can be modeled as

Fig. 3. Using 2-bits/cell memory as an example to illustrate the procedure for estimating victim-cell threshold-voltage distribution in the presence of cell-tocell interference.

model the coupling ratios as bounded Gaussian variables for all

the computer simulations presented throughout this paper.

Let

represent the threshold-voltage shift when one

interfering cell is being programmed to the th state, and let

represent the probability density function of

. As

shown in Fig. 3, in the following, we first derive

and

then

, based on which we derive

for calculating

LLR according to (7).

When the interfering cell is being programmed to the state

(where

), the probability density function of its

threshold-voltage shift can be obtained as

(17)
We can then estimate the overall victim-cell threshold-voltage distribution after the occurrence of cell-to-cell interference. If the victim cell is in the erased state, its threshold-voltage distribution after the occurrence of cell-to-cell interference can be modeled as

where

(13)

(18)

where

.

(14) If the victim cell is in the th programmed state, its threshold-

voltage distribution after the occurrence of cell-to-cell interfer-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

434
ence can be modeled as

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 58, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

(19)

Fig. 4. Simulated PER versus cell-to-cell coupling strength factor s when LDPC and BCH codes are being used.
Ideally, given the previously obtained distribution functions

and the sensed threshold voltage of memory cells in the presence of cell-to-cell interference, we can use (7) to calculate coupling strength factor , where it is observed that the LDPC the corresponding LLR. In practice, threshold-voltage sensing code offers obvious performance gain over BCH.

is realized by the comparison with a series of reference voltages. Assume that the threshold voltage falls into the range
(where and are two adjacent reference voltages), we can estimate the corresponding LLR of the th bit as

B. Proposed Nonuniform Memory Sensing
As pointed out earlier, it is highly desirable to reduce the number of memory sensing levels in order to reduce the implementation and latency overhead when soft-decision ECCs

are being used. This section investigates the potential of

(20) using nonuniform memory sensing to achieve this objective. Conventional design practice tends to simply use a uniform

fine-grained soft-decision memory sensing strategy, as shown

In the aforementioned mathematical formulation, we assume

that the erased-state distribution parameters and are

known and we treat the coupling ratio as a known constant.

As pointed out earlier, is essentially a random variable;

hence, we should use the average value of in practice. In

addition, given all these parameters, we can precalculate all

the possible LLRs, and hence, we only need to carry out table

lookup in the run time to obtain the LLR. Let denote the

number of reference voltages being used in memory sensing,

the LLR lookup table only contains

entries for

in Fig. 5, where the soft-decision sensing reference voltages uniformly distribute within each pair of hard-decision reference voltages [30]. Intuitively, since most overlaps between two adjacent states occur around the corresponding hard-decision reference voltage (i.e., the boundary of two adjacent states), as shown in Fig. 5, it may be desirable to sense such region with a higher precision and leave the remainder region with less sensing precision or even no sensing. This naturally leads to a nonuniform memory sensing strategy. Given a sensed threshold voltage , its entropy can be obtained as

-bit/cell NAND Flash memory.

(21)

Example 3.1: Let us consider the use of LDPC code in 2-bits/

cell NAND Flash memory with the all-bit-line structure and 4-kB page. We set the normalized and of the erase state as 0.35 where

and 1.2, respectively. For the three programmed states, we set

the normalized verify voltages as 2.55, 3.0, and 3.45, respec-

(22)

tively, and the normalized program step voltage

as 0.3. We

construct a rate-19/20 (34 520, 32 794) quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC

code [29] with column weight 4 and girth 6. Min-sum decoding Given the of a Flash memory cell, there is always just one or

algorithm is used to carry out LDPC code decoding. We use two items being dominating among all the

the standard gray code mapping, i.e., we map “11,” “10,” “00,” items for the calculation of

. Outside of the dominating

and “01” to the states 0, 1, 2, and 3, respectively. We sense the overlap region, there is only one dominating item very close to

cell threshold voltages with floating point precision and quantify 1 with all the other items being almost 0; hence, the entropy will

each LLR to 6 bits. For the purpose of comparison, we also con- be very small. On the other hand, within the dominating overlap

sider a rate-19/20 (32 767, 31 133, 109) binary BCH code. Fig. 4 region, there are two relatively dominating items among all the

shows the simulated page error rate (PER) versus cell-to-cell

items, and both of them are close to 0.5

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DONG et al.: ON THE USE OF SOFT-DECISION ERROR-CORRECTION CODES IN NAND FLASH MEMORY

435

Fig. 5. Illustration of the straightforward uniform soft-decision memory sensing. Note that soft-decision reference voltages are uniformly distributed between any two adjacent hard-decision reference voltages.
Fig. 7. Performance of LDPC code when using the nonuniform and uniform sensing schemes with various sensing level configurations.
TABLE I COMPARISON BETWEEN REFERENCE VOLTAGES IN 15-LEVEL UNIFORM AND
NONUNIFORM SENSING SCHEMES

Fig. 6. Illustration of the proposed nonuniform sensing strategy. The dominating overlap region is around hard-decision reference voltage, and all the sensing reference voltages only distribute within those dominating overlap regions.

if locates close to the hard-decision reference voltage, i.e.,

the boundary of two adjacent states, which will result in a rela-

tively large entropy value

. Clearly, the region with large

entropy tends to demand a higher sensing precision. Therefore,

it is intuitive to apply a nonuniform memory sensing strategy,

as shown in Fig. 6. Associated with each hard-decision refer-

ence voltage at the boundary of two adjacent states, we define a

so-called dominating overlap region and we carry out uniform

memory sensing only within each dominating overlap region.

Selection of the dominating overlap region clearly involves a

design tradeoff: If we reduce the size of each dominating overlap

region, we can accordingly reduce the memory sensing levels,

which nevertheless may result in soft-decision ECC decoding

performance degradation. Given the sensed of a memory

cell, the value of entropy

, as in (21), is mainly deter-

mined by two largest probability items, and this translates into

the ratio between the two largest probability items. Therefore,

such a design tradeoff can be adjusted by a probability ratio ,

We note that, since each dominating overlap region contains one hard-decision reference voltage and two borders, at least
sensing levels should be used in nonuniform sensing. Example 3.2: Using the same memory parameters and same rate-19/20 (34 520, 32 794) QC-LDPC code as in Example 3.1, we carry out computer simulations to evaluate the previously presented nonuniform memory sensing approach in 2-bits/cell NAND Flash memory, where at least nine nonuniform sensing levels is required. We set the probability ratio as 512 when determining the dominating overlap region. For the purpose of comparison, we also evaluate the use of conventional uniform sensing scheme. Fig. 7 shows the simulated BER performances of both sensing schemes under various memory sensing pre-

i.e., by letting

denote the dominating overlap region cisions. We can observe that 15-level nonuniform sensing

between two adjacent states and border and by solving

, we can determine the provides almost the same performance as 31-level uniform sensing, corresponding to about 50% sensing latency reduction,

and nine-level nonuniform sensing performs very closely to

15-level uniform sensing, corresponding to about 40% sensing (23) latency reduction. To further show the difference between

uniform and nonuniform sensing, Table I lists the normalized

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

436

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 58, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

sensing levels for 15-level uniform sensing and nonuniform presence of cell-to-cell interference can be obtained as sensing used in this example.

IV. LLR ESTIMATION WITH KNOWN INTERFERENCE INFORMATION

As pointed out in Section II-B, cell-to-cell interference is caused by threshold-voltage shift of interfering cells adjacent to the cells being read. In the mathematical formulation presented in Section III, the threshold-voltage shift of each interfering cell is completely unknown, and hence, we simply assume that each interfering cell has an equal probability to stay in any one of the total states. Intuitively, if we can obtain certain information about the threshold-voltage shift of interfering cells, we should accordingly adjust the victim-cell threshold-voltage distribution model [27], which can lead to more accurate LLR estimation and hence further improve ECC decoding performance. This is conceptually similar to the signal equalization [31]–[33] being widely used in digital communication. In this section, we study the scenarios when memory sensing is also carried out on interfering cells, and hence, a certain degree of cell-to-cell interference information becomes known.

(26)
If the victim cell is in the th programmed state, its thresholdvoltage distribution after the occurrence of cell-to-cell interference can be modeled as

A. Refined Mathematical Formulation for LLR Calculation

As discussed in Section III, since diagonal coupling ratio

is much less than vertical coupling ratio , we only consider

the interference from one cell that is vertically adjacent to the

victim cell and programmed after the victim cell. If memory

sensing shows that the interfering cell is still in the erased state,

cell-to-cell interference does not occur and we can imply use the

original cell threshold-voltage distributions shown in (1) and (2)

to calculate the LLRs. If memory sensing shows that the inter-

fering cell is programmed and its threshold voltage falls into the

range

, we simply assume that the threshold voltage of

the interfering cell uniformly distributes over

, and its

threshold-voltage shift distribution becomes

(27)

Suppose memory sensing shows that the threshold voltage of

the victim cell falls into the range of

, the LLR of the

th bit in the victim cell can be estimated as

(28)

Similar to the discussion in Section III, we can precalculate all

(24)

where

. Hence, the probability density func-

tion of the corresponding cell-to-cell interference experienced

by the victim cell can be obtained as

the possible LLRs and use table lookup in the run time. Let

and denote the number of reference voltages being used for

sensing each interfering cell and victim cell, respectively. The

LLR lookup table should have

entries for

-bit/cell NAND Flash memory.

To support the previously refined LLR estimation with known

interference information, interfering pages should also be read,

which nevertheless increases the memory sensing latency, in-

curs energy consumption overhead in both Flash memory chips

and controllers, and increases the load of the chip-to-chip link

between Flash memory chips and controllers [27]. Therefore,

we should always try to minimize the overall sensing levels. In

(25) addition, it is very intuitive that we should employ a multistep progressive memory sensing strategy, i.e., in the first step, we

only read the target page, based on which we carry out soft-deci-

where

. If the victim cell should stay sion ECC decoding, and only when the decoding fails do we fur-

in the erased state, its threshold-voltage distribution in the ther read the interfering page. In addition, we may progressively

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DONG et al.: ON THE USE OF SOFT-DECISION ERROR-CORRECTION CODES IN NAND FLASH MEMORY

437

Fig. 8. PER performance of LDPC code under various sensing schemes, where we use nonuniform sensing on the selected page and uniform sensing on the interfering page.

Fig. 9. Simulated PER performance when all the pages are read with nonuniform sensing in the case of consecutive page read.

increase the sensing precision for the target page and/or inter- B. A Special Case: Read of Consecutive Pages fering page in order to further reduce the average-case sensing

precision.

Let “

” sensing represent the memory sensing scheme

in which we carry out -level nonuniform memory sensing for

the target page and -level uniform sensing for its interfering

page. Note that we use uniform sensing for the interfering page

since it can better reveal the threshold-voltage-shift range of the

interfering cell. We use the following example to demonstrate

the previous discussions.

Example 4.1: We use the same memory parameters and same

rate-19/20 (34 520, 32 794) QC-LDPC code as in Example 3.1.

We set the probability ratio as 512 when determining the

dominating overlap region in nonuniform memory sensing. We

carry out computer simulations over various sensing configura-

tions, as shown in Fig. 8, where the “ ” sensing means that

we only carry out nine-level nonuniform sensing for the target

page without sensing its interfering page at all. First, we note

that, the “ ” sensing, compared with the “ ” sensing, does

not achieve any noticeable decoding performance gain and that

“ ” and “ ” sensing, although with more sensing levels

and, thus, more sensing latency than “ ” sensing, perform

worse than “ ” sensing.

This suggests that the sensing precision of the interfering

page should be appropriately chosen according to the target page

sensing precision, in order to achieve a noticeable performance

gain. The simulation results shown in Fig. 8 can be used to deter-

mine the corresponding multistep progressive sensing configu-

ration. For example, when the coupling strength factor is 1.2,

we may set “ ” sensing as the first step, which leads to the

LDPC code decoding failure rate of 0.12. Once LDPC decoding

fails, we can carry out a “ ” sensing (i.e., we only need to in-

crease the interfering page sensing precision), which can bring

the decoding failure rate down to 0.0059, and the last step can be

In this paper, we further consider the scenario when a cer-

tain number of consecutive pages are being read. In fact, due

to the use of garbage collection and wear-leveling at the Flash

transaction layer, it is common that NAND Flash memory carries

out consecutive page write and read in practice. In addition, the

storage of multimedia files such as videos and images clearly

tends to incur consecutive page read. Clearly, when consecutive

pages are being read, information on the interfering pages be-

come inherently available; hence, we can capture the cell-to-cell

interference on the fly during the read operations.

In the previous discussions in Section IV-A, the interfering

page is read with uniform sensing and is only used to help the de-

coding of the victim page. In the case of consecutive page read,

all the pages are read with nonuniform sensing and each page

is the interfering page to the previous page and, meanwhile, is

the victim page of the next page. Clearly, we can still employ a

multistep progressive sensing strategy, i.e., we employ nonuni-

form sensing with less precision on all the pages in the first step,

and finer grained sensing will be carried out only for those pages

(and possibly their interfering pages) when ECC decoding fails.

Example 4.2: Using the same system configurations as in

aforementioned examples, we carry out simulations of multi-

step progressive sensing strategy where pages are read and de-

coded using nine-level nonuniform sensing scheme first and

then 15-level nonuniform sensing scheme if the first LDPC de-

coding fails. Fig. 9 shows the simulated PER performance under

a range of cell-to-cell coupling strength factor . These simula-

tion results can be used to determine the corresponding multi-

step progressive sensing configuration. For example, nine-level

sensing should be accordingly set as the first step if

and 15-level sensing as the first step if

. When

set as “ ” sensing. This can reduce the average-case sensing is 1.2, nine-level sensing could reduce the LDPC decoding

latency by 43%, compared with only using the “ ” sensing failure rate to

, compared with the failure rate of 0.12

configuration.

from “ ” sensing as the first step in the scenario considered

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

438

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 58, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

in Section IV-A, and as a result, the sensing latency can be further reduced by more than 27%.
Finally, we note that pages are generally programmed and read both in the same order, i.e., a page with lower index is programmed and read prior to a page with higher index. As a result, one victim page is read before its interfering page is read; hence, it will induce extra read latency if we need to estimate cell-to-cell interference strength in order to successfully decode the victim page. To eliminate this extra read latency, we can use a simple reverse programming scheme. The basic idea is very intuitive: We simply reverse the order of programming pages to the descending order, i.e., pages with lower index are programmed later; meanwhile, we still read pages in ascending order. Clearly, when we read those consecutive pages, after one page is read, it can naturally serve to compensate cell-to-cell interference for the page being read next.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we are concerned with the practical use of soft-decision ECCs in future NAND Flash memory. The decoding of these ECCs requires soft-decision LLR information, which demands fine-grained soft-decision memory sensing and the availability of a memory-cell threshold-voltage distribution model. Since fine-grained memory-cell sensing tends to incur significant implementation overhead and access latency penalty, it is critical to minimize the fine-grained memory sensing precision. In addition, since cell-to-cell interference dominantly contributes to memory-cell threshold-voltage distribution distortion, it must be carefully incorporated into the memory-cell threshold-voltage distribution model. In this paper, we have derived mathematical formulations to approximately model the threshold-voltage distribution of memory cells in the presence of cell-to-cell interference and discussed the corresponding LLR calculation. Moreover, we propose a nonuniform memory sensing strategy that can effectively reduce the memory sensing precision and, in the meantime, still maintain good error-correction performance. Since cell-to-cell interference can be explicitly estimated by reading interfering memory cells, we further consider the scenario when interfering cells can also be read and accordingly investigate the LLR calculation and memory sensing issues.
REFERENCES
[1] G. Marotta, A. Macerola, A. D’Alessandro, A. Torsi, C. Cerafogli, C. Lattaro, C. Musilli, D. Rivers, E. Sirizotti, F. Paolini, G. Imondi, G. Naso, G. Santin, L. Botticchio, L. De Santis, L. Pilolli, M. L. Gallese, M. Incarnati, M. Tiburzi, P. Conenna, S. Perugini, V. Moschiano, W. Di Francesco, M. Goldman, C. Haid, D. Di Cicco, D. Orlandi, F. Rori, M. Rossini, T. Vali, R. Ghodsi, and F. Roohparvar, “A 3 bit/cell 32 Gb NAND flash memory at 34 nm with 6 MB/s program throughput and with dynamic 2 b/cell blocks configuration mode for a program throughput increase up to 13 MB/s,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf., 2010, pp. 444–445.
[2] T. Futatsuyama, N. Fujita, N. Tokiwa, Y. Shindo, T. Edahiro, T. Kamei, H. Nasu, M. Iwai, K. Kato, Y. Fukuda, N. Kanagawa, N. Abiko, M. Matsumoto, T. Himeno, T. Hashimoto, Y.-C. Liu, H. Chibvongodze, T. Hori, M. Sakai, H. Ding, Y. Takeuchi, H. Shiga, N. Kajimura, Y. Kajitani, K. Sakurai, K. Yanagidaira, T. Suzuki, Y. Namiki, T. Fujimura, M. Mui, H. Nguyen, S. Lee, A. Mak, J. Lutze, T. Maruyama, T. Watanabe, T. Hara, and S. Ohshima, “A 113 mm 32 Gb 3 b/cell NAND flash memory,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf., Feb. 2009, pp. 242–243.

[3] S. Lee, Y. Fong, F. Pan, T.-C. Kuo, J. Park, T. Samaddar, H. T. Nguyen, L. Mui, K. Htoo, T. Kamei, M. Higashitani, E. Yero, G. Kwon, P. Kliza, J. Wan, T. Kaneko, H. Maejima, H. Shiga, M. Hamada, N. Fujita, K. Kanebako, E. Tam, A. Koh, I. Lu, C.-H. Kuo, T. Pham, J. Huynh, Q. Nguyen, H. Chibvongodze, M. Watanabe, K. Oowada, G. Shah, B. Woo, R. Gao, J. Chan, J. Lan, P. Hong, L. Peng, D. Das, D. Ghosh, V. Kalluru, S. Kulkarni, R.-A. Cernea, S. Huynh, D. Pantelakis, C.-M. Wang, and K. Quader, “A 16 Gb 3-bit per cell (X3) NAND flash memory on 56 nm technology with 8 MB/s write rate,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 195–207, Jan. 2009.
[4] H. Maejima, K. Isobe, K. Iwasa, M. Nakagawa, M. Fujiu, T. Shimizu, M. Honma, S. Hoshi, T. Kawaai, K. Kanebako, S. Yoshikawa, H. Tabata, A. Inoue, T. Takahashi, T. Shano, Y. Komatsu, K. Nagaba, M. Kosakai, N. Motohashi, K. Kanazawa, K. Imamiya, H. Nakai, M. Lasser, M. Murin, A. Meir, A. Eyal, and M. Shlick, “A 70 nm 16 Gb 16-Level-Cell NAND flash memory,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 929–937, Apr. 2008.
[5] N. Shibata, T. Nakano, M. Ogawa, J. Sato, Y. Takeyama, K. Isobe, B. Le, F. Mooga, N. Mokhlesi, K. Kozakai, P. Hong, T. Kamei, K. Iwasa, J. Nakai, T. Shimizu, M. Honma, S. Sakai, T. Kawaai, S. Hoshi, J. Yuh, C. Hsu, T. Tseng, J. Li, J. Hu, M. Liu, S. Khalid, J. Chen, M. Watanabe, H. Lin, J. Yang, K. McKay, K. Nguyen, T. Pham, Y. Matsuda, K. Nakamura, K. Kanebako, S. Yoshikawa, W. Igarashi, A. Inoue, T. Takahashi, Y. Komatsu, C. Suzuki, K. Kanazawa, M. Higashitani, S. Lee, T. Murai, K. Nguyen, J. Lan, S. Huynh, M. Murin, M. Shlick, M. Lasser, R. Cernea, M. Mofidi, K. Schuegraf, and K. Quader, “A 5.6 MB/s 64 Gb 4 b/Cell NAND flash memory in 43 nm CMOS,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf., Feb. 2009, pp. 246–247.
[6] R. E. Blahut, Algebraic Codes for Data Transmission. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2003.
[7] S. Li and T. Zhang, “Improving multi-level NAND flash memory storage reliability using concatenated BCH-TCM coding,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 18, no. 10, pp. 1412–1420, Oct. 2010.
[8] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[9] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[10] V. Guruswami and M. Sudan, “Improved decoding of Reed–Solomon and algebraic-geometry codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 1757–1767, Sep. 1999.
[11] R. Koetter and A. Vardy, “Algebraic soft-decision decoding of Reed–Solomon codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 11, pp. 2809–2825, Nov. 2003.
[12] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” in Proc. ICC, Geneve, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[13] LSI Delivers Industrys First 40 nm Read Channel to Hard Disk Drive Manufacturers [Online]. Available: http://www.lsi.com/news/ product_news/2009/2009_06_23.html Jun. 2009
[14] K. Kim, “Future memory technology: Challenges and opportunities,” in Proc. Int. Symp. VLSI Technol., Syst., Appl., Apr. 2008, pp. 5–9.
[15] K. Prall, “Scaling non-volatile memory below 30 nm,” in Proc. IEEE 2nd Non-Volatile Semicond. Memory Workshop, Aug. 2007, pp. 5–10.
[16] H. Liu, S. Groothuis, C. Mouli, J. Li, K. Parat, and T. Krishnamohan, “3D simulation study of cell-cell interference in advanced NAND flash memory,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Microelectron. Electron Devices, Apr. 2009, pp. 1–3.
[17] K.-T. Park, M. Kang, D. Kim, S.-W. Hwang, B. Y. Choi, Y.-T. Lee, C. Kim, and K. Kim, “A zeroing cell-to-cell interference page architecture with temporary LSB storing and parallel MSB program scheme for MLC NAND flash memories,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, no.
V 4, pp. 919–928, Apr. 2008.
[18] K. Takeuchi, T. Tanaka, and H. Nakamura, “A double-level- select gate array architecture for multilevel NAND flash memories,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 602–609, Apr. 1996.
[19] K.-D. Suh, B.-H. Suh, Y.-H. Lim, J.-K. Kim, Y.-J. Choi, Y.-N. Koh, S.-S. Lee, S.-C. Kwon, B.-S. Choi, J.-S. Yum, J.-H. Choi, J.-R. Kim, and H.-K. Lim, “A 3.3 V 32 Mb NAND flash memory with incremental step pulse programming scheme,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 30, no. 11, pp. 1149–1156, Nov. 1995.
[20] R. Bez, E. Camerlenghi, A. Modelli, and A. Visconti, “Introduction to flash memory,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 91, no. 4, pp. 489–502, Apr. 2003.
[21] C. M. Compagnoni, M. Ghidotti, A. L. Lacaita, A. S. Spinelli, and A. Visconti, “Random telegraph noise effect on the programmed threshold-voltage distribution of flash memories,” IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 30, no. 9, pp. 984–986, Sep. 2009.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DONG et al.: ON THE USE OF SOFT-DECISION ERROR-CORRECTION CODES IN NAND FLASH MEMORY

439

[22] A. Ghetti, C. M. Compagnoni, F. Biancardi, A. L. Lacaita, S. Beltrami, L. Chiavarone, A. S. Spinelli, and A. Visconti, “Scaling trends for random telegraph noise in deca-nanometer flash memories,” in IEDM Tech. Dig., 2008, pp. 1–4.
[23] J.-D. Lee, S.-H. Hur, and J.-D. Choi, “Effects of floating-gate interference on NAND flash memory cell operation,” IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 264–266, May 2002.
[24] Y. Kameda, S. Fujimura, H. Otake, K. Hosono, H. Shiga, Y. Watanabe, T. Futatsuyama, Y. Shindo, M. Kojima, M. Iwai, M. Shirakawa, M. Ichige, K. Hatakeyama, S. Tanaka, T. Kamei, J.-Y. Fu, A. Cernea, Y. Li, M. Higashitani, G. Hemink, S. Sato, K. Oowada, S.-C. Lee, N. Hayashida, J. Wan, J. Lutze, S. Tsao, M. Mofidi, K. Sakurai, N. Tokiwa,
0 H. Waki, Y. Nozawa, K. Kanazawa, and S. Ohshima, “A 56-nm CMOS
99 m 8-Gb multi-level NAND flash memory with 10-MB/s program throughput,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 219–232, Jan. 2007. [25] S. Lee, Y. Fong, F. Pan, T.-C. Kuo, J. Park, T. Samaddar, H. Nguyen, M. Mui, K. Htoo, T. Kamei, M. Higashitani, E. Yero, G. Kwon, P. Kliza, J. Wan, T. Kaneko, H. Maejima, H. Shiga, M. Hamada, N. Fujita, K. Kanebako, A. Koh, I. Lu, C. Kuo, T. Pham, J. Huynh, Q. Nguyen, H. Chibvongodze, M. Watanabe, K. Oowada, G. Shah, B. Woo, R. Gao, J. Chan, J. Lan, P. Hong, L. Peng, D. Das, D. Ghosh, V. Kalluru, S. Kulkarni, R. Cernea, S. Huynh, D. Pantelakis, C.-M. Wang, and K. Quader, “A 16 Gb 3 b/cell NAND flash memory in 56 nm with 8 MB/s write rate,” in Proc. IEEE ISSCC, Feb. 2008, pp. 506–632. [26] L. Pham, F. Moogat, S. Chan, B. Le, Y. Li, S. Tsao, T.-Y. Tseng, K. Nguyen, J. Li, J. Hu, J.H. Yuh, C. Hsu, F. Zhang, T. Kamei, H. Nasu, P. Kliza, K. Htoo, J. Lutze, Y. Dong, M. Higashitani, J. Yang, H.-S. Lin, V. Sakhamuri, A. Li, F. Pan, S. Yadala, S. Taigor, K. Pradhan, J. Lan, J. Chan, T. Abe, Y. Fukuda, H. Mukai, K. Kawakami, C. Liang, T. Ip, S.-F. Chang, J. Lakshmipathi, S. Huynh, D. Pantelakis, M. Mofidi, and K. Quader, “A 34 MB/s MLC write throughput 16 Gb NAND with all bit line architecture on 56 nm technology,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 186–194, Jan. 2009. [27] G. Dong, S. Li, and T. Zhang, “Using data postcompensation and predistortion to tolerate cell-to-cell interference in MLC NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 2718–2728, Oct. 2010. [28] S. M. Sadooghi-Alvandi, A. R. Nematollahi, and R. Habibi, “On the distribution of the sum of independent uniform random variables,” Stat. Papers, vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 171–174, Jan. 2009. [29] H. Zhong and T. Zhang, “Block-LDPC: A practical LDPC coding system design approach,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 766–775, Apr. 2005. [30] I. Alrod and M. Lasser, “Fast, low-power reading of data in a flash memory,” U.S. Patent 2 009 031 987 2A1, Dec. 24, 2009. [31] E. A. Lee and D. G. Messerschmidt, Digital Communication. Norwell, MA: Kluwer, 1994. [32] J. Chen, Y. Gu, and K. K. Parhi, “Novel FEXT cancellation and equalization for high speed ethernet transmission,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 56, no. 6, pp. 906–912, Jun. 2009.

[33] T. M. Hollis, D. J. Comer, and D. T. Comer, “Mitigating ISI through self-calibrating continuous-time equalization,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 53, no. 10, pp. 2234–2245, Oct. 2006.
Guiqiang Dong (S’09) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees from the University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China, in 2004 and 2008, respectively. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in the Department of Electrical, Computer, and Systems Engineering, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY.
His research interests include coding theory, signal processing for data storage systems, and system design for various digital memory.
Ningde Xie received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in radio engineering from Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in 2004 and 2006, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in the Department of Electrical, Computer, and Systems Engineering, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, in 2010.
He has been with the Storage Technology Group, Intel Corporation, Hillsboro, OR, since 2010. His research interests include system and architecture design for high-performance low-power communication and storage systems. Currently, he is working on error control coding and signal processing in NAND-based solid-state drives as well as system design in phase-change memories.
Tong Zhang (M’02–SM’08) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical engineering from Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in 1995 and 1998, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, in 2002.
He is currently an Associate Professor with the Department of Electrical, Computer, and Systems Engineering, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY. His research activities span over circuits and systems for various data storage and computing applications. Dr. Zhang currently serves as an Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II and the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:09:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

