IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PARALLEL AND DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

309

Massively LDPC Decoding on Multicore Architectures
Gabriel Falcao, Student Member, IEEE, Leonel Sousa, Senior Member, IEEE, and Vitor Silva

Abstract—Unlike usual VLSI approaches necessary for the computation of intensive Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) code decoders, this paper presents flexible software-based LDPC decoders. Algorithms and data structures suitable for parallel computing are proposed in this paper to perform LDPC decoding on multicore architectures. To evaluate the efficiency of the proposed parallel algorithms, LDPC decoders were developed on recent multicores, such as off-the-shelf general-purpose x86 processors, Graphics Processing Units (GPUs), and the CELL Broadband Engine (CELL/B.E.). Challenging restrictions, such as memory access conflicts, latency, coalescence, or unknown behavior of thread and block schedulers, were unraveled and worked out. Experimental results for different code lengths show throughputs in the order of 1 $ 2 Mbps on the general-purpose multicores, and ranging from 40 Mbps on the GPU to nearly 70 Mbps on the CELL/B.E. The analysis of the obtained results allows to conclude that the CELL/B.E. performs better for short to medium length codes, while the GPU achieves superior throughputs with larger codes. They achieve throughputs that in some cases approach very well those obtained with VLSI decoders. From the analysis of the results, we can predict a throughput increase with the rise of the number of cores.
Index Terms—LDPC, data-parallel computing, multicore, graphics processing units, GPU, CUDA, CELL, OpenMP.
Ç

1 INTRODUCTION

ORIGINALLY proposed by Robert Gallager in 1962 [1] and code decoders. However, hardware represents nonflexible rediscovered by Mackay and Neal in 1996 [2], Low- and nonscalable dedicated solutions [7], [8], which may

Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes have recently been involve many resources and require long and expensive

adopted by new emerging standards for digital communica- development. More flexible solutions for LDPC decoding

tion and storage applications, such as the DVB-S2 standard, using Digital Signal Processors (DSPs) or Software Defined

WiMAX (802.16e), Wifi (802.11n), 10 Gbit Ethernet (802.3an), Radio (SDR) programmable hardware platforms [9] have

and others. LDPCs are linear ðN; KÞ block codes defined by already been proposed.

parity-check sparse binary H matrices of dimension M Â N,

The integration of multiple cores into a single chip has

with M ¼ N À K. They are usually represented by bipartite become the new trend to increase processor performance.

graphs formed by Bit Nodes (BNs) and Check Nodes (CNs) Multicore architectures [10] have evolved from dual- or

and linked by bidirectional edges, also called Tanner graph quad-core to many-core systems, supporting multithread-

[3]. LDPC decoding is based on the belief propagation of ing, a powerful technique to hide memory latency, while at

messages between connected nodes as indicated by the the same time provide larger Single Instruction Multiple

Tanner graph, which demands very intensive computation Data (SIMD) units for vector processing. The general-

running the Sum-Product Algorithm (SPA), or its simplified variants, namely the Logarithmic-SPA (LSPA) and the MinSum Algorithm [4].
Therefore, to achieve real-time processing, VLSI hardware processors are used, which usually apply the algorithm based on integer arithmetic operations [5]. In one of the first publications in the area [6], Blanksby and Howland describe a VLSI full-parallel architecture that achieves LDPC decoding with excellent throughput, which compares favorably against LDPC competitors, namely the Turbo

purpose multicore processors replicate a single core in a homogeneous way, typically with a x86 instruction set, and provide shared memory hardware mechanisms. They support multithreading and share data at a certain level of the memory hierarchy, and can be programmed at a high level by using different software technologies [11]. OpenMP [12] provides an effective and relatively straightforward approach for programming general-purpose multicores and was selected under the context of this work.
Mainly due to the demands for visualization technology in the games industry, the performance of graphics processing

units (GPUs) has undergone increasing performances over

. G. Falcao and V. Silva are with the Instituto de Telecomunicac¸o˜es and the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Coimbra, 3030-290 Coimbra, Portugal. E-mail: {gff, vitor}@co.it.pt.
. L. Sousa is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Instituto Superior Te´cnico, Technical University of Lisbon, and INESC-ID, Rua Alves Redol, 9, 1000-029 Lisboa, Portugal. E-mail: las@inesc-id.pt.

the last decade. With many cores driven by a considerable memory bandwidth, recent GPUs are targeted for computationally intensive, multithreaded, highly parallel computation, and researchers in high-performance computing fields are applying GPUs to general-purpose applications (GPGPU)

Manuscript received 26 Nov. 2008; revised 28 Dec. 2009; accepted 15 Feb. [13], [14], [15], [16]. However, to apply GPUs to general-

2010; published online 31 Mar. 2010.

purpose applications, we need to manage very detailed code

Recommended for acceptance by H. Jiang. For information on obtaining reprints of this article, please send e-mail to: tpds@computer.org, and reference IEEECS Log Number TPDS-2008-11-0466.

to control the GPU’s hardware. To hide this complexity from the programmer, several programming interface tools [17],

Digital Object Identifier no. 10.1109/TPDS.2010.66.

such as the Compute Unified Device Architecture (CUDA)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1045-9219/11/$26.00 ß 2011 IEEE Published by the IEEE Computer Society

310

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PARALLEL AND DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

from NVIDIA [18], or the Close to the Metal (CTM) interface

(replaced by the ATI Stream SDK) from AMD/ATI [19], or

even the Caravela platform [20], have been developed. CUDA

provides a new hardware and software architecture for

managing computations on NVIDIA Tesla series’ GPUs, and

was selected as the programming interface in the work

reported in this paper.

Also pushed by audiovisual needs in the industry of

games emerged the Sony, Toshiba, and IBM (STI) CELL

Broadband Engine (CELL/B.E.) Architecture (CBEA) [21],

[22]. It is characterized by a heterogeneous vectorized SIMD

multicore architecture composed by one main PowerPC

Processor Element (PPE) that communicates very efficiently with eight Synergistic Processor Elements (SPEs).
Motivated by the evolution of these multicore architec-

Fig. 1. A QMR-DT example showing the use of inference to obtain the maximum a posteriori probability (MAP) of a disease given all known symptoms [25].

tures, we propose novel approaches for the computationally intensive processing of LDPC decoding. The main objectives of this paper are the investigation of efficient parallel algorithms for LDPC decoding, namely the intensive SPA; the development of compact and regular data structures to represent the Tanner graph, which are suitable for parallel computing; and the assessment of the performance of distinct multicore architectures for real-time LDPC decoding, namely by considering the obtained throughputs.
In this work, the proposed parallel algorithms, based on the multicodeword decoding principle, were programmed

Graphs are often used to denote the interrelationships among elements in a set, and in particular, bipartite graphs, can apply probabilistic techniques to bound the deviation of a random variable from its expected value. Given a probability graph, the belief propagation algorithm is based on the fact that vertices Yj and Ui need to pass between them the messages X;Yj ðxÞ and Ui;XðxÞ, respectively, for vertex X, so that it has enough information to calculate the belief ðxÞ of X. These messages can be recursively calculated from messages Yj and Ui received from their neighboring nodes, where a neighbor denotes a node

in different architectures, such as x86 general-purpose connected to another node by an edge. All vertices in the

multicores, GPUs, and the CELL/B.E. Experimental results graph make a contribution passing messages to their

show interesting throughputs, namely for short and neighbors, to update the beliefs in the graph, iteration after

medium length codes on the CELL/B.E., which are iteration. This message passing is also called propagation of

comparable with VLSI-dedicated solutions [23]. By using evidence, a synonym of belief propagation.

the multithreaded data-parallel processing units of GPUs [13], software LDPC decoders can be expected to achieve a performance more than an order of magnitude higher than modern multicore CPUs. Moreover, since general-purpose multicores, GPUs, and the CELL/B.E. are able to perform floating-point arithmetic operations, better accuracy and a lower Bit Error Rate (BER) can be expected regarding to VLSI LDPC decoders [5].
This paper is organized into six sections. Section 2 describes belief propagation and a case study: the SPA used in LDPC decoding. Section 3 describes the parallel features of the architectures used and how to exploit data parallelism for LDPC decoding. Section 4 shows details of the parallelization approaches for the considered architectures and Section 5 reports experimental results and compares their performances. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.

2.1 LDPC Decoding
By considering a set of bits, or codeword, that we wish to transmit over a noisy channel, the theory of graphs applied to error correcting codes has fostered codes to performances extremely close of the Shannon limit [26]. In bipartite graphs with a large number of neighbors, the certainty of an information bit can be spread over several bits of a codeword, allowing in certain circumstances, in the presence of noise, to recover the correct value of a bit on the decoder side. In a graph representing a linear block error correcting code, reasoning algorithms exploit probabilistic relationships between nodes imposed by parity-check conditions that allow inferring the most likely transmitted codeword. One such algorithm is the belief propagation or SPA mentioned before, which finds the maximum a posteriori probability (MAP) of vertices in a graph [24].

In this paper, we parallelize the belief propagation

2 BELIEF PROPAGATION
Belief propagation, also known as the SPA, is an iterative algorithm [24] for the computation of joint probabilities on graphs commonly used in information theory (e.g., channel coding), artificial intelligence, and computer vision (e.g., stereo vision). It has proved to be an efficient algorithm for inference calculation and it is used in numerous applications including Low-Density Parity-Check codes, Turbo

algorithm applied to LDPC decoding of regular codes. In particular, the computationally demanding SPA is used for LDPC decoding. A bipartite Tanner graph represents adjacent connections between N BNs and M CNs (see Fig. 2 with N ¼ 8 and M ¼ 4) and is defined by a paritycheck sparse binary H matrix of dimension M Â N. The SPA applied to LDPC decoding operates in the probabilistic domain [1], exchanging and updating messages between neighbors over successive iterations, until stop conditions

codes, stereo vision applied to robotics, or in Bayesian occur. Given an ðN; KÞ binary LDPC code, we assume BPSK

networks such as the QMR-DT (a decision-theoretic modulation which maps a codeword c ¼ ðc0; c1; c2; . . . ; cnÀ1Þ

reformulation of the Quick Medical Reference (QMR) model into a sequence x ¼ ðx0; x1; x2; . . . ; xnÀ1Þ, according to xi ¼

[25]) depicted in Fig. 1.

ðÀ1Þci . Then, x is transmitted through an additive white

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FALCAO ET AL.: MASSIVELY LDPC DECODING ON MULTICORE ARCHITECTURES

311

Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, producing a received sequence y ¼ ðy0; y1; y2; . . . ; ynÀ1Þ with yi ¼ xi þ ni, and where ni represents AWGN with zero mean and variance 2. The SPA applied to LDPC decoding is illustrated in
Algorithm 1 and is mainly composed of two different
horizontal and vertical intensive processing blocks defined,
respectively, by (1), (2), and (3), (4). Equations (1) and (2)
calculate the message update from CNm to BNn, considering accesses to H in a row-major basis—the horizontal proces-
sing—and indicate the probability of BNn being 0 or 1. In Fig. 2, BN0, BN1, and BN2 are updated by CN0 as indicated in the first row of H. From the second until the fourth row of
H, it can be seen that the subsequent BNs are updated by their neighboring CNs. For each iteration, rmðitnÞ values are updated according to (1) and (2), as defined by the Tanner
graph [27] illustrated in Fig. 2. Similarly, the latter pair of
equations (3) and (4) computes messages sent from BNn to CNm, assuming accesses to H in a column-major basis—the vertical processing. In this case, qnðimtÞ values are updated according to (3) and (4) and the edges connectivity indicated
in the Tanner graph.

Fig. 2. An example of the Tanner graph and some messages being exchanged between nodes CNm and BNn.

represents the number of nonnull elements of H). Depend-

ing on the size of the codeword and channel conditions

(SNR), the minimal throughput necessary for an LDPC

decoder to accommodate an application’s requirements can

imply a substantial number of (arithmetic and memory

access) operations per second, which justifies the investiga-

tion of new parallelism strategies for LDPC decoding.

In Table 1, we present the computational complexity in

terms of the number of floating-point add, multiply, and

division operations required for both the horizontal and

vertical steps in the SPA LDPC decoding algorithm. We

also present the number of memory accesses required. For

both cases, the complexity expressed as a function of wc

and wb is quadratic. The decoding complexity can, however, be significantly

reduced by using the efficient Forward and Backward

recursions [28] that minimize the number of memory

accesses and operations necessary to update (1) to (4) in

Algorithm 1. In Table 2, the number of operations required

by the Forward and Backward algorithm adopted in this

work shows linear complexity (as a function of wc and wb)

with a significant reduction in the number of arithmetic

operations. An even more significant decrease in memory

access operations is registered, which contributes to in-

crease the ratio of arithmetic operations per memory access,

defined as arithmetic intensity. This property suits multi-

core architectures conveniently, which often have their

performance limited by memory accesses. For a regular

Finally, (5) and (6) compute the a posteriori pseudoprobabilities, and in (7), the hard decoding is performed at
the end of an iteration. The iterative procedure is stopped if the decoded word ^c verifies all parity-check equations of the code ð^c HT ¼ 0Þ, or if the maximum number of iterations ðIÞ

code

with

rate

¼

1 2

,

where

N

¼

2M ,

wc

¼

2wb,

wc

!

2,

and

wb ! 2, the arithmetic intensity SPA for the SPA is

À

ÁÀ

Á

SP A ¼

3wÀc2 À wc MÁ þ w2c þ wc M

2wÀb2 þ 4wb Áþ 1 þ 2wb2 þ 2 N

N

%

2;

ð8Þ

while the arithmetic intensity FBA for the Forward and

is reached.

Backward algorithm can be obtained by

Let us consider an H matrix with M CNs (rows) and N

BNs (columns), a mean row weight wc and a mean column weight wb of H, with wc ! 2 and wb ! 2 (the weight

F BA

¼

ð9wc À 8ÞM þ ð9wb À 4ÞN 3wcM þ ð3wb þ 1ÞN

%

3:

ð9Þ

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

312

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PARALLEL AND DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

TABLE 1 Number of Arithmetic and Memory Access Operations per
Iteration for the SPA

3 DATA STRUCTURES AND PARALLEL COMPUTING MODELS
This section proposes compact data structures to represent the H matrix that are adequate to design new parallel algorithms suiting the considered data parallelism and the stream processing model. It also addresses the main features of the parallel architectures selected to support this work.
3.1 Data Structures
The H matrix of an LDPC code defines the Tanner graph, whose edges represent the bidirectional flow of messages exchanged between BNs and CNs. We propose to separately code the information about H in two independent data streams, HBN and HCN, suitable for processing kernel 1 (horizontal processing) and kernel 2 (vertical processing), respectively, in the SPA described in Algorithm 1.
The example in Fig. 2 translated into the edge connections shown in Fig. 3 can be used to describe the transformation performed to H in order to produce the compact stream data structures. HBN codes information

Fig. 3. Data stream structures representing the example in Fig. 2. Due to the random nature of LDPC codes, BN and CN messages associated with the same rmn or qnm equation are read from contiguous blocks in memory and stored in noncontiguous positions.
about edge connections used in each parity-check equation (horizontal processing). This data structure is generated by scanning the H matrix in a row-major order and by sequentially mapping only the BN edges associated with non-null elements in H used by each CN equation (in the same row). These edges are collected and stored in consecutive memory positions inside HBN. Each element of the data structure records the address of the corresponding value of rmn obtained from (1) and (2). By grouping related data into consecutive memory positions and using the Forward and Backward algorithm, it is possible to efficiently update all the BNs connected to a single CN with a higher level of parallelism.
A similar principle can be applied to code the information necessary for kernel 2 (vertical processing). HCN can be defined as a sequential representation of the edges associated with non-null elements in H connecting every BN to all its neighboring CNs (in the same column). Each element of the HCN data structure records the address of the corresponding qnm value.

3.2 Parallel Computational Models

TABLE 2 Number of Arithmetic and Memory Access Operations per

General-purpose x86 microprocessors support the Multiple Program Multiple Data (MPMD) programming model. At

Iteration for the Optimized Forward and Backward Algorithm hardware level, these systems have a relatively reduced

number of cores that are able to exploit the instruction-level

parallelism (ILP) for efficient single thread execution. This

can be exploited to either parallelize the processing of a

single kernel, or in alternative, to simultaneously launch the

execution of distinct kernels.

The Single Program Multiple Data (SPMD) and/or SIMD

approaches exploit data parallelism to achieve parallel

processing. This data-parallel processing can be applied to

multicodeword LDPC decoding, where multiple code-

words are decoded simultaneously. In fact, this is possible

because the Tanner graph structure is common to all data

under parallel decoding. Also, intrinsic instructions for

operating in the SIMD-within-a-register (SWAR) mode, an

extension of SIMD where several data elements are kept

and operated in parallel inside special registers (typically in

the order of 128-bit), support additional parallelism. Within

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FALCAO ET AL.: MASSIVELY LDPC DECODING ON MULTICORE ARCHITECTURES

313

a 128-bit register, depending on the resolution adopted,

several codewords can be packed and processed together,

which increases the arithmetic intensity of the program.

In vector processing, SIMD parallelism is applied to data

elements, but the memory bandwidth is exploited in a

relatively inefficient way. Stream processing minimizes this

inefficiency by increasing the arithmetic intensity. In fact,

the stream processing model applies kernels rather than

single instructions to a collection of data. A kernel can have

many instructions and perform a large number of opera-

tions per memory access. As the evolution of processing

speed has been much superior to the increase of memory

bandwidth, the stream programming model suits better

modern architectures, such as GPUs.

Multithreading is the parallel programming paradigm

used for multicore systems. The scheduling of multiple

threads can be done by software or hardware, but

scheduling is not usually under the control of the

programmer. Kernel 1, kernel 2, and the data structures that represent the Tanner graph were carefully designed in order to minimize the workload unbalancing. For this

Fig. 4. The compute unified 8800 GTX GPU architecture and its 128 SPs.

reason, we investigated regular codes. Although the streambased data structures here developed also support irregular codes, their adoption would be possible at the expense of unbalancing the workload.

shared memory that also allows to efficiently exploit data parallelism. Data-parallel processing is exploited with the CUDA by executing in parallel multiple threads.
The execution of a kernel on CUDA is distributed

3.3 Parallel Features of the General-Purpose Multicores
The reduced number of cores of general-purpose multicores typically ranges from 2 to 16 and includes different levels of hardware-managed cache memory [29]. In this memory hierarchy, the last cache level on the chip is in most cases shared by all the cores, and cache coherency is provided to support the shared-memory parallel programming model. Moreover, the internal cache shared by all cores allows efficient data transfers and synchronization between them.

according to a grid of thread blocks with adjustable dimensions. In this platform, each multiprocessor has several cores as depicted in Fig. 4, and can control more than one block of threads. Each block controls a maximum of 512 threads that execute the kernel synchronously with threads organized in warps: the warp size is 32 threads and each multiprocessor time-slices the threads in a warp among its eight stream processors. The number of threads per block has to be programmed according to the specificities of the algorithm and the number of registers available on the GPU. Moreover, to achieve efficient execution on the GPU, the

For these processors, parallel programming can be achieved programmer has to be aware of the memory hierarchy in

using POSIX Threads (pthreads) or, at a higher level, by order to avoid the slow accesses to global memory and to

using the OpenMP programming interface [12].

take advantage of the faster coalesced accesses to memory.

Parallelizing an application by using OpenMP resources A model to predict the throughput T of the parallel LDPC

often consists in identifying the most costly loops, and decoder on the GPU is presented in (11), where T h denotes

provided that the loop iterations are independent, paralle- the total number of threads running on the GPU, MP the

lize them via the #pragma omp parallel for directive. Based on number of multiprocessors, and SP the corresponding

a profile analysis, it is relatively straightforward to number of stream processors per multiprocessor. Each thread

parallelize a sequential code, since LDPC decoding com- is expected to access memory with latency L per memory

putes intensive loop-based kernels. Another possibility for access, with a total of Mop memory accesses. NDop=iter

OpenMP consists of using the #pragma omp parallel section represents the number of cycles for nondivergent instructions

launching the execution of independent kernels into distinct performed per iteration within a kernel, while Dop=iter

cores. This different approach suits simultaneous multi- represents divergent instructions. Finally, Niter defines the

codeword decoding in all cores.

number of iterations, N is the size of the codeword, and fop the

3.4 Parallel Features of the GPU
The GPU used in this work is based on a CUDA [18], (a streaming computing platform from NVIDIA, where geometry, pixel, and vertex programs share common stream processors (SPs). The GPU has 16 multiprocessors,

frequency of operation of a stream processor. The processing

Tproc time is





Tproc

¼

Niter

Th MP

Â

þ D NDop=iter
SP

op=iter

fop

þ T h Â Mop Â L :

each one consisting of eight processors, which makes a total

ð10Þ

of 128 stream processors available, with 8,192 dedicated registers per multiprocessor [18] as depicted in Fig. 4. Also,

Then, the global throughput can be obtained by

the complexity involved in controlling all the GPU hardware resources has been masked by modern programming interfaces [18], [19], [20]. The GPU platform used provides

P ÂN T ¼ Thost!gpu þ Tproc þ Tgpu!host ½bps;

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ð11Þ

314

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PARALLEL AND DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

and Tspe!ppe represent data transfer times between PPE and SPE:

NSPEs Â 4 Â N

T

¼

Tppe!spe

þ Nop=iterÂNiter
fop

þ Tspe!ppe

½bps:

ð12Þ

4 PARALLELIZING THE KERNELS EXECUTION

The parallelization approach proposed for the LDPC

decoder is explained first in a context that suits processing

on general-purpose x86 architectures exploiting OpenMP

pragmas. Then, it is given the perspective of a multi-

Fig. 5. Parallelization model for an LDPC decoder on the CELL/B.E. architecture.

threaded-based approach for GPUs using CUDA that hides latency problems, and finally, we address parallelism in the context of a heterogeneous CELL/B.E. architecture that

where P defines the parallelism (number of codewords being simultaneously decoded). Thost!gpu and Tgpu!host represent data transfer times between host and device.

exploits data locality and also SIMD. Data structures rmn and qnm from Fig. 3 hold the
messages exchanged between BNs and CNs. As mentioned before, BNs update CNs and vice versa. Each data structure

3.5 Parallel Features of the CELL/B.E.
The heterogeneous nature of the CELL/B.E. is composed by a 64-bit PPE that communicates with eight SPEs, as depicted in Fig. 5. An SPE has 256 Kbytes of local storage (LS) memory for data and source code, and a 128-bit wide vectorized SWAR-oriented architecture. Data transfers between the PPE

possesses an array with the corresponding addresses (or indices) of the elements in the other array that it is going to update (here, represented by HBN and HCN). A detailed view of their common dependencies can be found in Fig. 3. In each kernel, data elements can be read sequentially but have to be stored in nonconsecutive positions, which defines expensive random memory accesses. These costly

(that accesses main memory) and SPE are performed by write operations demand special efforts to the programmer

programming efficient Direct Memory Accesses (DMAs) that in order to efficiently accommodate them in parallel

relieve the processors of the time-consuming task of moving architectures with distinct levels of memory hierarchy.

data. In the CELL/B.E., data are loaded from the main
memory into the LS of each SPE, and each SPE must efficiently exploit data locality.
The parallel LDPC decoder explores SPMD and SIMD data-parallel approaches, by also applying the same algorithm to different codewords on each SPE. When data and code environments do not fit completely into the LS of a single SPE, the processing has to be performed in successive partitions of the Tanner graph, which causes the number of data communications between the PPE and SPEs to rise significantly. The DMA latency can have a critical role in the performance, and a possible solution to reduce the impact of this problem in the performance consists of using a double buffering technique. In the CELL/B.E., each SPE has two pipelines executing independently, one for arithmetic and the other for load and store operations. The parallel algorithm for LDPC decoding implemented herein exploits this double buffering property by overlapping processing and data accesses.
The number of SPEs available NSP Es and the number of instructions per iteration Nop=iter have a major impact on the overall performance of the decoder on the CELL/B.E., where

4.1 The Multicores Using OpenMP
Operations (1)-(4) in Algorithm 1 represent the most intensive processing in the SPA, which ideally should be performed in parallel. For programming general-purpose x86 multicores, an initial approach consists of exploiting OpenMP directives. Both horizontal and vertical kernels are based on nested loops. Considering the parallel resources allowed in the OpenMP execution, the selected approach consisted of parallelizing the outermost loop of the costly operations defined in (1)-(4), thus, reducing the parallelization overheads, as depicted in Algorithm 2. The loop data accesses were analyzed in order to identify shared and private variables in each iteration. This approach uses the #pragma omp parallel for directive to separately parallelize the processing of kernels 1 and 2 from Algorithm 1. An alternative approach uses the #pragma omp parallel section directive to launch several decoders in parallel, which allows to achieve multicodeword LDPC decoding, as represented in Algorithm 3. In this case, the different cores do not need to share data, but they must be synchronized upon completion of the execution of all kernels.

the throughput performance can be described according to the model defined in (12) for an LDPC code that fits on the LS. Different from what happens in the GPU, where a thread is responsible for decoding only a part of the Tanner graph, in the CELL/B.E. approach, each SPE performs the complete processing of the Tanner graph, as described in Algorithm 1, independently from the other SPEs. Each SPE processes in the SWAR mode 4 codewords in parallel. The LDPC decoder supports peak data transfers between the SPE and main memory of approximately 4 GB/s [30], and consequently, its

Algorithm 2. SPA kernels executing on general-purpose x86 multicores using OpenMP 1: {Initialization.} 2: while (^c HT 6¼ 0 ^ it < I) {c-decoded word; I-Max. no. of iterations.} do 3: {Compute all the messages associated to all CNs.} 4: #pragma omp parallel for 5: sharedð. . .Þprivateð. . .Þ

performance is limited by the number of SPEs that are 6: Processing kernel 1

simultaneously trying to access the main memory. Tppe!spe 7: {Compute all the messages associated to all BNs.}
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FALCAO ET AL.: MASSIVELY LDPC DECODING ON MULTICORE ARCHITECTURES

315

8: #pragma omp parallel for 9: sharedð. . .Þprivateð. . .Þ 10: Processing kernel 2 11: end while

Algorithm 3. Multicodeword LDPC decoding on generalpurpose x86 multicores using OpenMP
1: {launch decoder #1.} 2: #pragma omp parallel section 3: LDPC_decoder#1(); 4: . . . 5: {launch decoder #N.} 6: #pragma omp parallel section 7: LDPC_decoder#N();
4.2 The GPU Using CUDA
The computationally intensive two kernels in Algorithm 1 justify the usage of a high-performance specific computing engine, preferably a highly parallel programmable device. This approach is followed by considering a many-core system with a programming model based on multithreads, as the one supported by the NVIDIA 8 series’ GPUs using CUDA.
4.2.1 Programming the Grid Using a Thread per Node Approach
In the beginning of a new computation, data to be processed (HBN; HCN; rmn, and qnm data structures) are distributed over a predefined number of blocks on a grid. Each block contains tx Â ty elements that represent threads, which are independent of the threads in other blocks, as shown in Fig. 6. Threads are grouped in warps and dispatched by blocks in one of the 16 multiprocessors according to the structure of the algorithm and the thread scheduler, as mentioned before. In the horizontal processing step, each thread updates all the BNs associated with a CN (an entire row of H). Rather than moving data from global to fast (but complex) shared memory, an efficient processing strategy can also be obtained by moving data directly to the registers of the core. The number of registers available on the GPU is sufficiently high to accommodate all the input data and corresponding data structures, as long as we keep enough registers per thread to compile. Fig. 6 depicts the internal processing inside a block for a random example. The update of every BN message

Fig. 6. Detail of tx Â ty threads executing on the GPU grid inside a block for kernel 1 (three examples shown in Fig. 3 update all the BNs associated with CN0, CN1, and CN2).
represented by rmn inside of the block is calculated according to the structure previously identified in HBN.
A similar principle applies to the update of qnm messages, or vertical processing. Here, each thread updates all the CNs associated with a BN (an entire column of H).
4.2.2 Coalesced Memory Accesses
In the 8 series GPUs from NVIDIA, the global memory is not cached. The latency can be up to 400-600 cycles and is likely to become a performance bottleneck. One way to turn around this problem and increase performance significantly entails the use of coalescence. Instead of performing 16 individual memory accesses, all the 16 threads of a halfwarp (maximum fine-grain level of parallelism on the G80x family) can access the global memory of the GPU in a single coalesced read or write access, but elements have to lie on a contiguous memory block, where the kth thread accesses the kth data element, and data and addresses have to obey, respectively, to specific size and alignment requirements. Fig. 7 shows the activity of half-warps 0 and 1 captured at two different instants, where 16 threads (t0-t15) read data on a single coalesced memory transaction from the GPU’s slow global memory. However, HBN, HCN, rmn, and qnm data structures shown in Fig. 3 have to be properly disposed in a contiguous mode (from a thread perspective) in order to allow the coalesced accesses to be performed in a single operation as shown in Fig. 7. A permutation has to be previously applied to data elements in order to allow such

Fig. 7. Transformations applied to data structures to support coalesced memory read operations performed by the 16 threads of a half-warp on a single memory access.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

316

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PARALLEL AND DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

procedure. For regular codes, (13)-(16) represent the 4.3.2 Large Single-SPE Model

necessary transformation for kernel 1, where

In some situations, however, data and code environments

newAddr ¼ j Ã p þ k div wc þ ðk mod wcÞ Ã 16; with

ð13Þ do not fit completely into the LS inside a single SPE. This is the case of the larger matrices under test, also detailed in Table 4. The approach followed in this case is described in

p ¼ wc Ã 16; j ¼ i div p; k ¼ i mod p;

Algorithms 4 and 5 and consists of having the PPE’s control process managing the kernels execution and data transfers.

and 0 i Edges À 1. Then,

Communications mainly control DMA transfers, and as in

qnc mðiÞ ¼ qnmðnewAddrÞ;

ð14Þ

the previous case, are also set up using mailboxes. However, the number of data transfers between the PPE

and the new memory addresses become

and SPEs is substantially higher in the large single-SPE

e ¼ HCN ðnewAddrÞ; H cCN ðiÞ ¼ j Ã p þ k div wb þ ðk mod wbÞ Ã 16;

model because a complete iteration is processed sequenð15Þ tially on partitions of the Tanner graph. ð16Þ Algorithm 4. CELL/B.E. PPE side of the algorithm

with p ¼ wb Ã 16, j ¼ e div p, and k ¼ e mod p. The permutations necessary for kernel 2 are described from (17) to (20), where
newAddr ¼ j Ã p þ k div wb þ ðk mod wbÞ Ã 16; ð17Þ

1: Allocate rsbuff, rubuff, qsbuff and qubuff buffers 2: for th ctr ¼ 1 to NSPEs: do 3: Create th ctr thread 4: Send rsbuff, rubuff, qsbuff and qubuff addresses to the
thread

with p ¼ wb Ã 16, j ¼ i div p, k ¼ i mod p, and rmc nðiÞ ¼ rmnðnewAddrÞ:

5: end for
6: repeat ð18Þ 7: work ¼ true

The new permuted memory addresses become

8: Receives yn from the channel and calculates pn probabilities

e ¼ HBN ðnewAddrÞ; H cBN ðiÞ ¼ j Ã p þ k div wc þ ðk mod wcÞ Ã 16;

ð19Þ 9: Send msg NEW_WORD to all SPEs ð20Þ 10: Sort pn to buffer qsbuff
11: Send msg SYNC to all SPEs

where p ¼ wc Ã 16, j ¼ e div p, and k ¼ e mod p.

12: while work do

4.3 The CELL/B.E.
Following an alternative parallel approach, the design of a software LDPC decoder on the CELL/B.E. processor is also proposed in this work. This approach is based on an asymmetric threaded runtime programming model. The PPE controls the main tasks, offloading the intensive processing to the SPEs. Each SPE runs independently from the other SPEs, executing a predefined task by reading and writing data, respectively, from and to the main memory, through DMA. Synchronization between the PPE and the SPEs of the CELL/B.E. is performed using mailboxes. This approach explores data parallelism and data locality while performing the partitioning and mapping of the algorithm and data structures over the architecture, and at the same time, minimizes delays caused by latency and synchronization.

13: for i ¼ 1 to NSPEs: do

Ensure:

Wait until mail is received

(SPE[i].mailboxcount > 0)

14:

msg ¼ SPE[i].mailbox

15:

if msg ¼ CHECK_BLOCK then

16:

Sort block rubuff to rsbuff

17:

if buffer is sorted then

18:

Send msg SYNC to SPE[i]

19:

end if

20:

end if

21:

if msg ¼ BIT_BLOCK then

22:

Sort block qubuff to qsbuff

23:

if buffer is sorted then

24:

Send msg SYNC to SPE[i]

25:

end if

26:

end if

27:

if all msg ¼ END_DECODE then

4.3.1 Small Single-SPE Model

28:

work ¼ false

Depending on the algorithm and on the size of data to be 29:

break for loop

processed, some tasks are small enough to fit into a 256-Kbyte 30:

end if

LS of a single SPE. This single task environment is sufficient 31: end for

for many dedicated workloads, as it is the case of LDPC 32: end while

decoders processing matrices A, B, and C shown in Table 4. 33: until true

Here, the DMA data transfers will take place only twice

during the entire computation: at the beginning, before the Algorithm 5. CELL/B.E. SPE side of the algorithm

processing starts; and after data decoding is concluded. In 1: Allocate stdbyin, readbuf, writebuf and stdbyout buffers

the single-SPE model, the number of communications 2: repeat

between PPE and SPEs is minimum and the PPE is relieved Ensure: Read mailbox (waiting a NEW_WORD mail

from the costly task of reorganizing data (sorting procedure

from PPE)

in Algorithm 4) between data transfers to the SPE.

3: Get pn probabilities

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FALCAO ET AL.: MASSIVELY LDPC DECODING ON MULTICORE ARCHITECTURES

317

4: for i ¼ 1 to N_Iter: do

transfers. When the buffers are created, a number of threads

Ensure: 5:
Ensure: 6: 7: 8: 9:
Ensure:
10: 11: 12: 13: 14: 15: 16: 17: 18: Ensure: 19: Ensure:

Read mailbox (waiting a SYNC from PPE) Get qblock from qsbuff
Wait until DMA transfer finalizes Get qblock from qsbuff for j ¼ 1 to N_CheckNodes_BLOCKS: do
Compute rmn if is last CheckNode of block then
Wait until all pending DMA transfers finalize Put stdbyout if Not first block then Send msg CHECK_BLOCK end if if Not last 2 blocks then Get qsbuff to stdbyin end if end if end for Wait until last DMA concludes Send msg CHECK_BLOCK Read mailbox (waiting a SYNC from PPE)

equal to the number of SPEs are also created and the addresses of the different locations to be copied are passed to them. All the buffers to be transferred by DMA are aligned in memory on a 128-bit boundary.
For every chunk of data to be processed, two actions must be completed: 1) a subblock of the rmn or qnm data is sorted and loaded into the buffers to be transmitted to the SPE and 2) the processed data, BN or CN alternately updated, are sent from the SPE back to the PPE. The actions are synchronized on both sides of the PPE and SPE. After completing action 1, mails are sent to signal the threads on the SPEs, while after completing, confirmation mails are awaited from the SPEs.
When data are loaded into the buffers, two types of mails are used to start DMA transfers: for the first subblock of data, a NEW_WORD mail is sent to the SPE to make the thread start loading the qsbuff buffer, and when the transfer is completed, to initiate the load of the next data buffer. A SYNC mail informs the SPE to start transferring a new block of data from the qsbuff or rsbuff buffer.
Algorithm 4 shows the synchronization point on the PPE side after step 13, indicating that all the old information

20:

Get rblock from rsbuff

present in the SPE buffers has already been loaded and

Ensure:

Wait until DMA transfer finalizes

21:

Get rblock from rsbuff

that it needs to sort a new subblock with rmn or qnm data. Here, the PPE expects mails from the SPEs notifying it that

22:

for j ¼ 1 to N_BitNodes_BLOCKS: do

there are new data available in the rubuff or qubuff buffer to

23:

Compute qnm

be sorted.

24:

if is last BitNode of block then

Finally, when all the iterations are completed, the SPEs

Ensure:

Wait until all pending DMA transfers send END_DECODE messages to the PPE to conclude the

finalize

current decoding process and get ready to start processing a

25:

Put stdbyout

new word.

26:

if Not first block then

SPE. The SPEs are used for the intensive processing task

27:

Send msg BIT_BLOCK

of updating all BNs and CNs by executing kernel 1 and

28:

end if

kernel 2 alternately, during each iteration of the LDPC

29:

if Not last 2 blocks then

30:

Get rsbuff to stdbyin

31:

end if

32:

end if

33:

end for

Ensure:

Wait until last DMA concludes

34:

Send msg BIT_BLOCK

35: end for

36: Send msg END_DECODE

37: until true

decoder. The SPE pseudocode is presented in Algorithm 5. Get operations were adopted to represent a communication PPE ! SPE, while Put operations are used to communicate in the opposite direction.
First, buffers stdbyin, readbuf, writebuf, and stdbyout are allocated. All the corresponding DMA addresses for these buffers are registered during this initial phase. Then, we initialize the process and start an infinite loop, waiting for communications to arrive from the PPE. The two types of messages expected from the PPE are NEW_WORD and SYNC mails. At first, when a NEW_WORD message is

PPE. In the large model, the part of the algorithm that received, the SPE loads the pn probabilities and waits for a executes on the PPE side is presented in Algorithm 4. SYNC mail to arrive. After that, the first horizontal block of

Mainly, it controls the overall execution mechanism on the qnm is read into the readbuf buffer. After the DMA transfer

SPE as well as data sorting on the buffers to be transmitted completes, a new one is immediately started into the stdbyin

to the SPE. Four main buffers are used to manage the data buffer. The next transfer of a vertical block of rmn, or a flow over the several steps of the algorithm: rsbuff, rubuff, horizontal block of qnm, will be performed in parallel with

qsbuff, and qubuff. These buffers are used to manage the bit the execution of data previously loaded on the SPE. When a

streams received at the input of the LDPC decoder in order new SYNC mail is received, the SPE starts a new type of

to be sent to the SPE, and also the results received from each processing, for either BN or CN updating. When it

SPE. rubuff and qubuff denote buffers with unsorted data completes, the SPE updates the buffers with the new data

that, when sorted, are placed in rsbuff and qsbuff buffers, and then starts a new transfer.

respectively, before being sent to each SPE. The sorting

After completing the processing of a kernel, it waits for

procedure consists of organizing BNs or CNs associated the previous DMA transfer from rsbuff or qsbuff to complete

with the same equation in contiguous data blocks of and then performs a new DMA transfer to send data in the

memory, as shown in Fig. 3, to accelerate DMA data results buffer writebuf to main memory, placing it in rubuff
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

318

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PARALLEL AND DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

TABLE 3 Experimental Setup

or qubuff. At this point, the next processing output can already start being placed in stdbyout. When the transfer is concluded, a confirmation mail is sent to the PPE indicating that the new data in the rubuff or qubuff buffer are available and can be sorted by the PPE in order to proceed with the next processing.
The computation terminates when the number of iterations is reached and an END_DECODE mail is sent by all SPEs to the PPE.
5 EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
The following parallel processing platforms were selected to evaluate the performance of the proposed parallel stream-based LDPC decoders: 1) 8 core Intel Xeon Nehalem 2x-Quad E5530 multiprocessor running at 2.4 GHz with 8 Mbytes of L2 cache memory; 2) NVIDIA 8800 GTX GPU with 128 SPs each running at 1.35 GHz and 768 Mbytes of VRAM memory; and 3) CELL/B.E., where the PPE and each SPE run at 3.2 GHz and have 256 Mbytes and 256 Kbytes of main and fast local memory, respectively. The CELL/B.E. is included in a PlayStation 3 (PS3) platform, which restricts the number of SPEs available to 6 from a total of 8. The experimental setup is depicted in Table 3 and matrices under test are presented in Table 4. The general-purpose x86 multicores were programmed using OpenMP 3.0 directives and compiled with the Intel C++ Compiler (version 11.0). The GPU was programmed using the C language and the CUDA programming interface (version 2.0b). The CELL/B.E. was programmed also in C using the CELL SDK compiler (version 2.1) running on a Fedora Core release, in accordance with both the small and large single-SPE models.
TABLE 4 Parity-Check Matrices under Test

5.1 LDPC Decoding on the General-Purpose x86 Multicores Using OpenMP
The results presented in Table 5 were achieved using Algorithm 2. However, it should be noticed that using Algorithm 3 for multicodeword decoding only improves the results, on average, 20 percent. From the analysis of the results, it can be concluded that relatively low throughputs are achieved regarding those obtained for the CELL/B.E. and the GPU. The complex superscalar architecture of the individual cores is not suitable to exploit conveniently the data parallelism presented in the LPDC decoder.
However, it can be noticed that the proposed parallel approach for implementing LDPC decoders on generalpurpose multicores with OpenMP shows to be scalable. For example, for Matrix F shown in Table 5, by varying the number of used cores in the range 2, 4, 6, and 8, we see the speedups raising consistently. Changing the parallel execution of the LDPC decoder in two cores to a different level of parallelism that uses four cores shows a speedup of 1.7. Compared with the same two cores execution, the parallelization with eight cores shows a speedup of approximately 3, but providing throughputs lower than a modest 2.6 Mbps value for 10 iterations.
5.2 LDPC Decoding on the CELL/B.E.
The model proposed in (12) makes it difficult to predict the execution time, not only because the number of instructions Nop=iter generated by the CELL SDK 2.1 compiler is unknown, but rather due to the dual pipeline that performs memory accesses independently from arithmetic operations and whose behavior cannot be accurately predicted, due to branch misprediction penalties that force emptying the pipeline. To show that this model is accurate, upper and lower bounded processing times were considered, respectively, for worst- and best case working conditions. The worst
TABLE 5 LDPC Decoding Throughputs (Megabits per Second) for
OpenMP and x86 Multicores

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FALCAO ET AL.: MASSIVELY LDPC DECODING ON MULTICORE ARCHITECTURES

319

TABLE 6 LDPC Decoding Throughputs (Megabits per Second)
for a CELL/B.E. Programming Environment in the Small Single-SPE Model

codewords simultaneously. The CELL/B.E. takes approxi-

mately 353:6 s to decode 24 codewords on the six SPEs

(14:7 s per codeword) for matrix C running 10 iterations,

against 244:9 s per codeword on the serial version.

Fig. 8. Model bounds for LDPC decoding execution times obtained on Observing Table 6, we conclude that the decoding capacity

the CELL/B.E. for the small model.

per bit is high and approximately constant for all matrices

scenario assumes processing and memory accesses being performed without parallelism, and a misprediction branch after every instruction (a very unrealistic condition). The best case scenario (lower bound) assumes that no branch mispredictions exist and that there is full parallelism between memory accesses and computation. As expected, the paralle-

under test, providing throughputs as high as 69.5 Mbps. Comparing this throughput with the one obtained in the serial approach, the speedup achieved surpasses 16. Experimental evaluation also shows that regarding the same algorithm applied only to one SPE, decoding four codewords, the full version that uses six SPEs, decoding 24 codewords, achieves a speedup only 14 percent below the

lism supported by the dual-pipeline CELL/B.E. architecture maximum (6). In fact, the number of data transfers is low in

exploited the LDPC decoder near the optimal case, as shown this model, which means that the overhead in communica-

in Fig. 8. In the small model, the measured experimental tions introduced by using a higher number of SPEs would

values are, on average, only 6 percent worse than in the best be marginal.

scenario and the algorithm executes very near the maximum performance the CELL/B.E. can provide. Experimental 5.2.2 Large Single-SPE Model

values and lower bound almost overlap in Fig. 8.

In this case, the 256 Kbytes of LS memory in the SPE is not

5.2.1 Small Single-SPE Model

enough to accommodate the complete data structures and the program. Therefore, the processing is performed in

Fig. 9 presents the decoding times of a codeword for consecutive partitions of the Tanner graph, with the number

matrices A-C, under the small single-SPE model described of data transfers and mailbox synchronizations degrading

in Section 4.3.1. The sequential LDPC decoder was the performance. Matrix C was also tested in this model

programmed using only the PPE with SIMD and dual (described in Section 4.3.2) to allow relatively assessing the

thread execution (it decodes concurrently eight codewords). two computational models. Since several data transactions

In the parallel version, the CELL/B.E. performs concurrent have to be performed during a single iteration, data

processing on the six SPEs, each using SIMD to process four transfers between each SPE and the main memory suddenly

become the most significant part of the global processing

time. Also the intensive sorting procedure performed by the

PPE, and the large number of data transactions involving

the slow main memory, can cause some processors to

temporarily idle. This is the main reason why in this case the

throughput decreases to 9 Mbps for 10 iterations, which

represents a throughput seven times lower than the one

obtained using the small single-SPE model.

Matrices D-G are also too large to fit into a single SPE and

have to be processed on a subblock by subblock basis, using

this model. They all achieve throughputs inferior to 9 Mbps,

which led to the conclusion that the CELL processor is not

efficient for LDPC decoding with large H matrices.

Increasing the number of SPEs used in the architecture

would cause the throughput to rise, but not exactly by the

same percentage as in the small model. This is explained by

the fact that the use of more SPEs further increases data

Fig. 9. LDPC decoding times on the sequential and parallel modes on communications and the effect of data sorting, which

the CELL/B.E. for the small single-SPE model.

clearly become the bottleneck in the large model.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

320

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PARALLEL AND DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

5.3 LDPC Decoding on the GPU Using CUDA The model defined in (10) can be further detailed in order to

TABLE 7 LDPC Decoding Throughputs (Megabits per Second) for a

allow the prediction of numerical bounds that can help

CUDA Programming Environment

describing the computational behavior of the LDPC decoder

on the CUDA. One iteration executes kernel 1 and kernel 2,

while memory accesses can be decomposed into coalesced

and noncoalesced read and write operations, each one

imposing different workloads. The CUDA Visual Profiler

tool was used in order to obtain the number of instructions

and memory accesses per kernel. Considering, for example,

the code for matrix G, which has a workload large enough to

fully occupy 157 blocks of the grid with a maximum of more threads per block would have been possible, but it

128 threads per block (#T h ¼ 157 Â 128), an average number would lower the number of simultaneous active blocks

of cycles per kernel (excluding load and store operations) similar in both kernels and equal to NDop=iter ¼ 3867, and having less than 0.5 percent of divergent threads which allow us to approximate Dop=iter % 0, (10) can be rewritten as

below 16, and in that case, the 16 multiprocessors wouldn’t be fully occupied, decreasing parallelism and performance. For matrix D, 128 threads per block and 39 blocks are considered, while for matrix F, 63 blocks and 128 threads per block, and for matrix G, 157 blocks and also 128 threads per

Tproc

¼

2Niter

Â

Th MP

Â

fop

N Dop=iter SP

þ

T h Â Mop Â L |fflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflf{ozpfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl}

:

block are adopted. The number of blocks used is imposed by ð21Þ the size of the LDPC code. At the same time, it also depends
on the number of threads per block, which are limited in the

TM emAccess

LDPC decoder to 128 due to the high number of registers

TMemAccess defines all memory access operations and can be decomposed in memory accesses to CNs and BNs, respectively:

required per multiprocessor. Table 7 presents the overall measured decoding throughputs for execution on an 8800 GTX GPU from NVIDIA, considering 32 and 8-bit precision data elements. Experimental results in the table show that the

TMemAccess ¼ TMemAccBNs þ TMemAccCNs:

ð22Þ GPU-based solution can be faster than the CELL-based one for LDPC codes with dimensions above matrix C. For codes

TMemAccBNs defines time spent doing memory access to above matrix C, the CELL/B.E. presents 9 Mbps or less,

update CNs (accessing BNs):

against the values in Table 7. The GPU-based implementa-

tion shows significantly higher throughputs for intensive

TM emAccBN s

¼

Niter

M

Â

wc

Â

L

þM fop

Â

2wc

Â

L=16 ;

ð23Þ

computation on large quantities of data. It is, however, likely that beyond a certain dimension of an LDPC code, the

and TMemAccCNs represents the time necessary to update

bottleneck will lie in the memory bandwidth between the host main memory and the VRAM on the GPU. A

BNs (accessing CNs):

throughput above 18.3 Mbps is achieved for matrix F

TM emAccCN s

¼

Niter

N

Â

wb

Â

L

þ

N

Â ð2wb fop

þ

1Þ

Â

L=16

:

ð24Þ

executing 10 iterations, while it decreases to 11.3 Mbps for the larger matrix G. In the latter, the size of the data structures does not fit into the 64 Kbytes of constant memory used in smaller codes (F and below), which degrades the

The last partials in (23) and (24) show memory read operations, which are divided by 16 to model the parallelism obtained with the introduction of coalesced reading operations. In spite of the latency L can be up to 400-600 cycles, we believe that the thread scheduler operates very efficiently, producing effectively faster memory accesses. Apparently, the scheduler is good enough to maintain the cores occupied hiding the memory latency because our model predicts the processing time quite well, with an error inferior to 12.2 percent for L < 5 (L ¼ 4 in this case). Transferring data between host and device, and transferring processed data back to the host, represents an increase of 8.9 percent in the global processing time. The accuracy of the proposed model best fits programs with large workloads that completely occupy the grid on the GPU.

performance. For small codes and small number of iterations, better results are achieved with fewer threads per block, although the decoding time difference is not significant. However, when decoding larger codes with a higher number of iterations, the reported speedups are higher when a larger number of threads per block are used.
Fig. 10 shows the importance of memory accesses in the overall processing time as the size of the LDPC code increases. The random nature of LDPC codes does not allow to simultaneously read and write contiguous data blocks in memory; one of these two operations has to be performed using noncontiguous accesses. We chose to perform noncontiguous write operations. Reports obtained for matrices C-G running on the GPU show that the time spent in coalesced memory reads is approximately constant (in percentage) for all matrices, while more expensive and often conflicting noncoalesced memory write accesses can

5.3.1 Experimental Results on the CUDA

represent a bottleneck after a certain dimension of the LDPC code. For matrix G, noncoalesced write operations

All matrices under test were run on blocks with a varying occupy nearly 50 percent of the total decoding time, against

number of threads ranging from 64 to 128. Only the best only 24 percent in the case of matrix C.

results achieved are reported in Table 7. Matrix C was

We also tested the LDPC decoder using data with only

programmed to use 16 blocks and 64 threads per block. Using 8-bit precision, instead of the original 32-bit precision,
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FALCAO ET AL.: MASSIVELY LDPC DECODING ON MULTICORE ARCHITECTURES

321

graph of an LDPC decoder. These data structures are suitable

for parallel computing and allow a significant reduction of

both the memory space and processing time necessary for

LDPC decoding. Parallel LDPC decoders were developed on

GPUs using CUDA and on the CELL/B.E., and significant

throughputs were achieved in both platforms. The CELL/

B.E. performed better than the GPU for small to medium

LDPC codes, reporting throughputs above 68 Mbps, while

the GPU deals better with larger codes, achieving through-

puts between 10 and 40 Mbps. LDPC decoders have also been

developed on general-purpose x86 multicores using

OpenMP, but experimental results show that the achieved

throughputs are low regarding the other considered multi-

core architectures. The solutions proposed in this paper seem

to be scalable to the next generations of these architectures,

regarding the increasing in the number of cores and the

Fig. 10. Thread execution times for LDPC decoding on the GPU.

resources in each core, namely the size of local memory. They

provide low-cost and flexible software-based multicore

which allowed us to pack 16 elements into 128-bit data alternatives with performances that compare well to the

elements. In this case, using an 8-bit precision solution, the expensive, long time-to-market, and hardware-dedicated

throughputs obtained for 10 iterations in matrices C-G typical VLSI LDPC decoder approaches. range from 14.6 Mbps up to 40.1 Mbps. The reason for this

improvement is mainly related with the reduction of
memory accesses performed per arithmetic operation. On REFERENCES

the GPU side, data are unpacked and processed, causing [1] R.G. Gallager, “Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,” IRE Trans.

one memory access to read/write 16 elements at a time. Even considering the increase in arithmetic operations, the GPU still performs faster. Here, the limitation in performance is imposed mainly by memory accesses. The highest throughput is achieved for matrices F and G, which

Information Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21-28, Jan. 1962. [2] D.J.C. Mackay and R.M. Neal, “Near Shannon Limit Performance
of Low Density Parity Check Codes,” IEE Electronics Letters, vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645-1646, Aug. 1996. [3] R. Tanner, “A Recursive Approach to Low Complexity Codes,” IEEE Trans. Information Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533-547, Sept.

provide throughputs superior to 40 Mbps. Due to the use of the efficient Forward and Backward algorithm [28] that minimizes the number of memory accesses and the number of add and multiply operations, the experimental results here reported are much superior to the ones

1981. [4] J. Chen and M.P.C. Fossorier, “Near Optimum Universal Belief
Propagation Based Decoding of Low-Density Parity Check Codes,” IEEE Trans. Comm., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406-414, Mar. 2002. [5] L. Ping and W.K. Leung, “Decoding Low Density Parity Check Codes with Finite Quantization Bits,” IEEE Comm. Letters, vol. 4,

obtained in [13].

no. 2, pp. 62-64, Feb. 2000. [6] A.J. Blanksby and C.J. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, Rate-

5.4 Discussion

1/2 Low-Density Parity-Check Code Decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State

Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404-412, Mar. 2002.

Even by exploiting fast cache memory shared by multiple [7] T. Zhang and K. Parhi, “Joint (3,k)-Regular LDPC Code and

cores in parallel algorithms specifically developed for

Decoder/Encoder Design,” IEEE Trans. Signal Processing, vol. 52,

computation on general-purpose x86 multicores, we realized that the throughputs achieved are far from those requested by real-time applications. By exploiting data locality to

no. 4, pp. 1065-1079, Apr. 2004. [8] J. Dielissen, A. Hekstra, and V. Berg, “Low Cost LDPC Decoder
for DVB-S2,” Proc. Conf. Design, Automation and Test in Europe (DATE ’06), Mar. 2006.

minimize memory access conflicts and by using several SPEs, which support SIMD and a dual pipelined architecture, the CELL/B.E. performs better for small to medium LDPC codes. Here, the limitation in performance is imposed by the

[9] S. Seo, T. Mudge, Y. Zhu, and C. Chakrabarti, “Design and Analysis of LDPC Decoders for Software Defined Radio,” Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Processing Systems, pp. 210-215, Oct. 2007.
[10] G. Blake, R.G. Dreslinski, and T. Mudge, “A Survey of Multicore Processors,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 26, no. 6, pp. 26-

size of the LS memory on the SPEs. When decoding medium to large LDPC codes, the GPU solution achieves better results. In this case, the bottleneck is imposed by conflicting

37, Nov. 2009. [11] H. Kim and R. Bond, “Multicore Software Technologies,” IEEE
Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 26, no. 6, pp. 1-10, Nov. 2009. [12] B. Chapman, G. Jost, and R. Van Der Pas, Using OpenMP: Portable

memory accesses and it is minimized using coalesced read operations that significantly improve the performance of the algorithm. The adoption of specific parallelization techniques for the last two platforms here described, produced

Shared Memory Parallel Programming. The MIT Press, 2008. [13] G. Falcao, L. Sousa, and V. Silva, “Massive Parallel LDPC
Decoding on GPU,” Proc. 13th ACM SIGPLAN Symp. Principles and Practice of Parallel Programming (PPoPP ’08), pp. 83-90, Feb. 2008.

throughputs that approach well hardware solutions such as [14] J.D. Owens, D. Luebke, N. Govindaraju, M. Harris, J. Kruger, A.E.

the recent ones described in [9] and [31].

Lefohn, and T.J. Purcell, “A Survey of General-Purpose Computation on Graphics Hardware,” Computer Graphics Forum, vol. 26,

no. 1, pp. 80-113, 2007.

6 CONCLUSIONS

[15] I. Buck, T. Foley, D. Horn, J. Sugerman, K. Fatahalian, M. Houston, and P. Hanrahan, “Brook for GPUs: Stream Computing on

This paper proposes novel parallel algorithms for multicodeword LDPC decoding on multicore architectures. Compact and vectorized data structures were designed to represent the exchanged messages between connected nodes on the Tanner

Graphics Hardware,” ACM Trans. Graphics, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 777-786, 2004. [16] N. Goodnight, R. Wang, and G. Humphreys, “Computation on Programmable Graphics Hardware,” IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 12-15, Sept. 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

322

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PARALLEL AND DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

[17] M. McCool, “Scalable Programming Models for Massively Multicore Processors,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 96, no. 5, pp. 816-831, May 2008.
[18] CUDA Homepage, http://developer.nvidia.com/object/cuda. html, 2010.
[19] CTM Homepage, http://ati.amd.com/companyinfo/researcher, 2010.
[20] S. Yamagiwa and L. Sousa, “Caravela: A Novel Stream-Based Distributed Computing Environment,” Computer, vol. 40, no. 5, pp. 70-77, May 2007.
[21] Int’l Business Machines Corporation, “CELL Broadband Engine Architecture,” 2006.
[22] H. Hofstee, “Power Efficient Processor Architecture and the Cell Processor,” Proc. 11th Int’l Symp. High-Performance Computer Architectures (HPCA), pp. 258-262, 2005.
[23] G. Falcao, V. Silva, and L. Sousa, “High Coded Data Rate and Multicodeword WiMAX LDPC Decoding on Cell/BE,” IET Electronics Letters, vol. 44, no. 24, pp. 1415-1417, Nov. 2008.
[24] S.B. Wicker and S. Kim, Fundamentals of Codes, Graphs, and Iterative Decoding. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2003.
[25] J.B. Lemaire, J.P. Schaefer, L.A. Martin, P. Faris, M.D. Ainslie, and R.D. Hull, “Effectiveness of the Quick Medical Reference as a Diagnostic Tool,” Canadian Medical Assoc. J. (CMAJ), vol. 161, no. 6, pp. 725-728, 1999.
[26] S. Chung, G. Forney, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the Design of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon Limit,” IEEE Comm. Letters, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58-60, Feb. 2001.
[27] S. Lin and D.J. Costello, Error Control Coding, second ed. Prentice Hall, 2004.
[28] D.J.C. Mackay, “Good Error-Correcting Codes Based on Very Sparse Matrices,” IEEE Trans. Information Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399-431, Mar. 1999.
[29] S. Kumar, C.J. Hughes, and A. Nguyen, “Architectural Support for Fine-Grained Parallelism on Multi-Core Architectures,” Intel Technology J., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 217-226, Aug. 2007.
[30] J. Abella´n, J. Ferna´ndez, and M. Acacio, “CellStats: A Tool to Evaluate the Basic Synchronization and Communication Operations of the Cell BE,” Proc. 16th Euromicro Int’l Conf. Parallel, Distributed and Network-Based Processing (PDP ’08), Feb. 2008.
[31] C.-H. Liu, S.-W. Yen, C.-L. Chen, H.-C. Chang, C.-Y. Lee, Y.-S. Hsu, and S.-J. Jou, “An LDPC Decoder Chip Based on Self-Routing Network for IEEE 802.16e Applications,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 684-694, Mar. 2008.

Gabriel Falcao received the graduate degree from the University of Porto (FEUP), Portugal, in 1997, where he also received the MSc degree in the area of digital signal processing in 2002. He is a researcher at the Instituto de Telecomunicac¸o˜ es and also performs a collaboration with INESC-ID under his PhD research activities. In 2003, he became a teaching assistant in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Coimbra (FCTUC), Portugal. His scientific interests include parallel computing, VLSI architectures, LDPC codes, and digital signal processing. He is a student member of the IEEE.
Leonel Sousa received the PhD degree in electrical and computer engineering from the Instituto Superior Te´ cnico (IST), Universidade Te´ cnica de Lisboa, Portugal, in 1996. He is currently an associate professor in the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department at IST and a senior researcher at INESC-ID. His research interests include VLSI architectures and parallel and distributed computing. He has contributed to more than 150 papers in journals and international conferences. He is currently a member of the HiPEAC and an associate editor of the Eurasip Journal on Embedded Systems. He is a senior member of the IEEE and a member of the ACM.
Vitor Silva received the graduation diploma and PhD degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Coimbra, Portugal, in 1984 and 1996, respectively. He is currently an auxiliary professor in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Coimbra, where he lectures digital signal processing and information and coding theory. His research activities in signal processing, image and video compression, and coding theory are mainly carried out at the Instituto de Telecomunicac¸o˜ es, Coimbra, Portugal. He published more than 70 papers and successfully supervised several postgraduation theses.
. For more information on this or any other computing topic, please visit our Digital Library at www.computer.org/publications/dlib.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

