IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

887

LP Decoding of Regular LDPC Codes in Memoryless Channels
Nissim Halabi, Student Member, IEEE, and Guy Even, Member, IEEE

Dedicated to the memory of Ralf Koetter (1963–2009)

Abstract—We study error bounds for linear programming

decoding of regular low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. For

memoryless binary-input output-symmetric channels, we prove

bounds on the word error probability that are inverse doubly

exponential in the girth of the factor graph. For memoryless

binary-input AWGN channel, we prove lower bounds on the

threshold for regular LDPC codes whose factor graphs have

logarithmic girth
lower bound of 

u=nd0e:r73L5P(-udpepceordibnogu. nSdpeocfifiNEcball=y,

2w:e67pdroBv)eona

the threshold of (3, 6)-regular LDPC codes whose factor graphs

have logarithmic girth. Our proof is an extension of a recent

paper of Arora, Daskalakis, and Steurer [STOC 2009] who pre-

sented a novel probabilistic analysis of LP decoding over a binary

symmetric channel. Their analysis is based on the primal LP

representation and has an explicit connection to message passing

algorithms. We extend this analysis to any MBIOS channel.

Index Terms—Additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, channel coding, error bounds, factor graphs, low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes, linear programming decoding, memoryless binary-input output-symmetric (MBIOS) channel, thresholds.

I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes were invented by Gallager [1] in 1963. Gallager also invented the first type of message-passing iterative decoding algorithm, known today as the sum-product algorithm for a posteriori probability (APP) decoding. Until the 1990s, iterative decoding systems were forgotten with a few exceptions such as the landmark paper of Tanner [2] in 1981, who founded the study of codes defined by graphs. LDPC codes were rediscovered [3] after the discovery of turbo-codes [4]. LDPC codes have attracted a lot of research attention since empirical studies demonstrate excellent decoding performance using iterative decoding methods. Among the main results is the density-evolution technique for analyzing and designing asymptotic LDPC codes [5]. A density-evolution analysis computes a threshold for the noise. This means that if the noise in the channel is below that threshold, then the decoding error diminishes exponentially

as a function of the block length. The threshold results of [5] hold for a random code from an ensemble of LDPC codes.
Feldman et al. [6], [7] suggested a decoding algorithm for linear codes that is based on linear programming. Initially, this idea seems to be counter-intuitive since codes are over
, whereas linear programming is over . Following ideas from approximation algorithms, linear programming (LP) is regarded as a fractional relaxation of an integer program that models the problem of decoding. One can distinguish between integral solutions (vertices) and nonintegral vertices of the LP. The integral vertices correspond to codewords, whereas the nonintegral vertices are not codewords and are thus called pseudocodewords. This algorithm, called LP-decoding, has two main advantages: 1) it runs in polynomial time; and 2) when successful, LP-decoding provides an ML-certificate, i.e., a proof that its outcome agrees with maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding.
Koetter and Vontobel showed that LP-decoding is equivalent to graph cover decoding [8]. Abstractly, graph cover decoding proceeds as follows. Given a received word, graph cover decoding considers all possible -covers of the Tanner graph of the code (for every integer ). For every -cover graph, the variables are assigned copies of the received word. ML decoding is applied to obtain a codeword in the code corresponding to the -cover graph. The “best” ML-decoding result is selected among all covers. This lifted codeword is then projected (via averaging) to the base Tanner graph. Obviously, this averaging might yield a nonintegral solution, namely, a pseudocodeword as in the case of LP-decoding. Graph cover decoding provides a combinatorial characterization of LP-decoding and pseudocodewords.
LP-decoding has been applied to several codes, among them: RA codes, turbo-like codes, LDPC codes, and expander codes. Decoding failures have been characterized, and these characterizations enabled proving word error bounds for RA codes, LDPC codes, and expander codes (e.g., see [9]–[15]). Experiments indicate that message-passing decoding is likely to fail if LP-decoding fails [6], [8].

Manuscript received March 25, 2010; revised October 28, 2010; accepted November 10, 2010. Date of current version January 19, 2011. The material in this paper was presented at the International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT 2010), Austin, TX, June 2010.
This paper is part of the special issue on “Facets of Coding Theory: From Algorithms to Networks,” dedicated to the scientific legacy of Ralf Koetter.
The authors are with the School of Electrical Engineering, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv 69978, Israel (e-mail: nissimh@eng.tau.ac.il; guy@eng.tau.ac.il).
Communicated by F. R. Kschischang, Associate Editor for the special issue on “Facets of Coding Theory: From Algorithms to Networks.”
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2010.2094830

A. Previous Results

Feldman et al. [13] were the first to show that LP-decoding

corrects a constant fraction of errors for expander codes over

an adversarial bit flipping channel. For example, for a specific

family of rate LDPC expander codes, they proved that LP-de-

coding can correct

errors. This kind of analysis is

worst-case in its nature, and the implied results are quite far

from the performance of LDPC codes observed in practice over

binary symmetric channels (BSC). Daskalakis et al. [14] initi-

ated an average-case analysis of LP-decoding for LDPC codes

0018-9448/$26.00 © 2011 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:07:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

888

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

over a probabilistic bit flipping channel. For a certain family of

LDPC expander codes over a BSC with bit flipping probability

, they proved that LP-decoding recovers the transmitted code-

word with high probability up to a noise threshold of

.

This proved threshold for LP-decoding is rather weak compared

to thresholds proved for belief propagation (BP) decoding over

the BSC. For example, even for (3, 6)-regular LDPC codes, the

BP threshold is

, and one would expect LDPC ex-

pander codes to be much better under LP-decoding. Both of the

results in [13] and [14] were proved by analysis of the dual LP

solution based on expansion arguments. Extensions of [13] to a

larger class of channels (e.g., truncated AWGN channel) were

discussed in [16].

Koetter and Vontobel [11] analyzed LP-decoding of regular

LDPC codes using girth arguments and the dual LP solution.

They proved lower bound on the threshold of LP-decoding

for regular LDPC codes whose Tanner graphs have loga-

rithmic girth over any memoryless channel. This bound on the

threshold depends only on the degree of the variable nodes.

The decoding errors for noise below the threshold decrease

doubly exponentially in the girth of the factor graph. This was

the first threshold result presented for LP-decoding of LDPC

codes over memoryless channels other than the BSC. When

applied to LP-decoding of (3, 6)-regular LDPC codes over

a BSC with crossover probability , they achieved a lower

bound of

on the threshold. For the binary-input

additive white Gaussian noise channel with noise variance

(BI-AWGN ), they achieved a lower bound of

on the threshold (equivalent to an upper bound of

dB). The question of closing the gap to

(1.7 dB) [17],

which is the threshold of max-product (min-sum) decoding

algorithm for the same family of codes over a BI-AWGNC ,

remains open.

Recently, Arora et al. [15] presented a novel probabilistic

analysis of the primal solution of LP-decoding for regular LDPC

codes over a BSC using girth arguments. They proved error

bounds that are inverse doubly exponential in the girth of the

Tanner graph and lower bounds on thresholds that are much

closer to the performance of BP-based decoding. For example,

for a family of (3, 6)-regular LDPC codes whose Tanner graphs

have logarithmic girth over a BSC with crossover probability

, they proved a lower bound of

on the threshold

of LP-decoding. Their technique is based on a weighted de-

composition of every codeword and pseudocodeword to a fi-

nite set of structured trees. They proved a sufficient condition,

called local-optimality, for the optimality of a decoded code-

word based on this decomposition. They use a min-sum process

on trees to bound the probability that local-optimality holds. A

probabilistic analysis of the min-sum process is applied to the

structured trees of the decomposition, and yields error bounds

for LP-decoding.

In a following work, Vontobel [18] generalized the geomet-

rical aspects presented by Arora et al. [15] to any code de-

fined by a factor graph. Vontobel considered the general setup of

factor graphs with: 1) nonuniform node degrees; 2) with other

types of constraint function nodes; and 3) with no restriction

on the girth. Vontobel constructed a weighted decomposition of

every codeword and pseudocodeword to a finite set of structured

combinatorial entities.

B. Our Contribution

In this paper, we extend the analysis in [15] from the BSC

to any memoryless binary-input output-symmetric (MBIOS)

channel. We prove bounds on the word error probability that

are inverse doubly exponential in the girth of the factor graph

for LP-decoding of regular LDPC codes over MBIOS channels.

We also prove lower bounds on the threshold of

-reg-

ular LDPC codes whose Tanner graphs have logarithmic girth

under LP-decoding in binary-input AWGN channels. Note that

regular Tanner graphs with logarithmic girth can be constructed

explicitly (e.g., see [1]). Specifically, in a finite length analysis

of LP-decoding over BI-AWGN , we prove that for (3,

6)-regular LDPC codes the decoding errors for

(

dB) decrease doubly exponentially in the girth of

the factor graph. In an asymptotic case analysis, we prove a

lower bound of

(upper bound of

dB) on

the threshold of (3, 6)-regular LDPC codes under LP-decoding,

thus decreasing the gap to the BP-based decoding asymptotic

threshold.

In our analysis we utilize the combinatorial interpretation of

LP-decoding via graph covers [8] to simplify some of the proofs

in [15]. Specifically, using the equivalence of graph cover de-

coding and LP-decoding in [8], we obtain a simpler proof that

local-optimality suffices for LP optimality.

Our main result is as follows.

Theorem 1: Let denote a

-regular bipartite graph

with girth , and let

denote the low-density

parity-check code defined by . Let

be a codeword.

Consider the BI-AWGNC , and suppose that

is the

word obtained from the channel given . Then

1) [finite length bound] For

and

(

dB), is the unique optimal solution to the LP

decoder with probability at least

for some constant

.

2) [asymptotic bound] For

and

sufficiently large, is the unique op-

timal solution to the LP decoder with probability at least

for some constant

, provided

that

(

dB).

3) For any

is the unique optimal solution to the

LP decoder with probability at least

for

some constant

, provided that

where

and

denote the pdf and cdf of a

Gaussian random variable with zero mean and standard

deviation , respectively.

Theorem 1 generalizes to MBIOS channels as follows.

Theorem 2: Let denote a

with girth

, and let

-regular bipartite graph denote the low-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:07:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HALABI AND EVEN: LP DECODING OF REGULAR LDPC CODES

889

density parity-check code defined by . Consider an MBIOS

channel, and suppose that

is the word obtained from

the channel given

. Let

denote the log-likeli-

hood ratio of the received channel observations, and let

and

denote the pdf and cdf of , respectively. Then,

LP-decoding succeeds with probability at least

for some constant

, provided that

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II provides some background on low-density parity check codes and linear programming decoding over memoryless channels. Section III presents combinatorial characterization of a sufficient condition of LP-decoding success for regular LDPC codes in memoryless channels. In Section IV we use the combinatorial characterization to bound the error probability of LP-decoding and provide lower bounds on the threshold. Thus proving Theorems 1 and 2. We conclude with a discussion in Section V.
II. PRELIMINARIES
A. Low-Density Parity Check Codes and Factor Graph Representation

for alent to

. For a linear code , ML decoding is equiv(1)

where

denotes the convex hull of the set , where is

considered to be embedded in in the natural way.

Solving in general the optimization problem in (1) for linear

codes is intractable. Furthermore, the decision problem of ML

decoding remains NP-hard even for the class of left-regular

LDPC codes [19]. Feldman et al. [6], [7] introduced a linear

programming relaxation for the problem of ML decoding of

linear codes. Given a factor graph , for every

, denote

by the set of binary sequences that satisfy parity check

constraint

Let

denote the fundamental poly-

tope [6]–[8] of a factor graph . For LDPC codes whose Tanner

graphs have constant bounded right degree and a linear number

of edges, the fundamental polytope can be defined by a linear

number of constraints. Given an LLR vector for a received

word , LP-decoding consists of solving the following optimiza-

tion problem:

A code with block length over is a subset of . Vec-

(2)

tors in are referred to as codewords. An

binary linear

code is a -dimensional vector subspace of the vector space .

A parity-check matrix for an

binary linear code is an

matrix with rank

whose rows span

the space of vectors orthogonal to .

The factor graph representation of a code is a bipartite

graph that represents the matrix . The factor graph is

over variable nodes

and check nodes

. An edge connects variable node and check

node if

. The variable nodes correspond to bits of

the codeword and the check nodes correspond to the rows of

which can be solved in time polynomial in using linear

programming.

Let us denote by BI-AWGNC the binary input additive

white Gaussian noise channel with noise variance . The

channel input at time is an element of

since we

map a bit

to

. Given , the channel outputs

where

. For BI-AWGNC

. Note that the optimal ML and LP solutions are

invariant under positive scaling of the LLR vector .

. Every bipartite graph defines a parity check matrix. If the

bipartite graph is , then it defines a
(LDPC) code.

-regular1 for some constants and -regular low-density parity-check

III. ON THE CONNECTIONS BETWEEN LOCAL OPTIMALITY, GLOBAL OPTIMALITY, AND LP OPTIMALITY

Let

denote a codeword and

denote an

B. LP Decoding Over Memoryless Channels

Let

and

denote random variables

that correspond to the th transmitted symbol (channel input)

and the th received symbol (channel output), respectively.

A memoryless binary-input output-symmetric (MBIOS)

channel is defined by a conditional probability density func-

tion

that satisfies

. The log-likelihood ratio

(LLR) vector

for a received word

is defined by

LLR vector for a received word

. Following [15], we

consider two questions: 1) does equal

? and 2) does

equal

and is it the unique solution? Arora et al. [15]

presented a certificate based on local structures both for

and

over a binary symmetric channel. In this section

we present modifications of definitions and certificates to the

case of memoryless binary-input output-symmetric (MBIOS)

channels.

Notation: Let

denote the received word. Let

denote the LLR vector for . Let

be a candidate

for

and

. is a

-regular bipartite factor

graph. For two vertices and , denote by

the distance

between and in . Denote by

the set of neighbors of

1That is, a bipartite graph with left vertices of degree d and right vertices of a node , and let

degree d .

most from .

denote the set of vertices at distance at

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:07:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

890

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

Following Arora et al. we consider neighborhoods

channels that local-optimality implies LP optimality (Theorem

where

and

girth . Note that the induced graph 8). We first show how to extend the proof that local-optimality

on

is a tree.

implies global optimality in the case of MBIOS channels.

Definition 3: (Minimal Local Deviation, [15]). An assign-

ment

is a valid deviation of depth at

or, in short, a -local deviation at , if

and satisfies

all parity checks in

A -local deviation at is minimal if

for every

, and every check node in

has at most

two neighbors with value 1 in . A minimal -local deviation at

can be seen as a subtree of

of height rooted at ,

where every variable node has full degree and every check node

has degree 2. Such a tree is called a skinny tree. An assignment

is a minimal -local deviation if it is a minimal

-local deviation at some . Note that given there is a unique

such root .

If

is a weight vector and is

a minimal -local deviation, then denotes the -weighted

deviation

Theorem 6: (local-optimality is sufficient for ML). Let

girth and

. Let

denote the log-likeli-

hood ratio for the received word, and suppose that

is a

-locally optimal codeword in

for . Then is

also the unique ML codeword for .

The proof for MBIOS channels is a straightforward mod-

ification of the proof in [15]. We include it for the sake of

self-containment.

Proof of Theorem 6: We want to show that for every code-

word

. Since

is a code-

word, by [15, Lemma 1] there exists a distribution over minimal

-local deviations such that

. Let

be the affine linear function defined by

. Then

by local-optimality of

linearity of and by Lemma

if root

and

otherwise

The following definition expands the notion of addition of codewords over to the case where one of the vectors is real.

Definition 4: ([6]). Given a codeword , the relative point .
Note that

and a point is defined by

if if

Hence, for a fixed

is an affine linear function

in . It follows that for any distribution over vectors

,

we have

.

Given a log-likelihood ratio vector , the cost of a -weighted

minimal -local deviation is defined by

. The fol-

lowing definition is an extension of local-optimality from BSC

to LLR.

Definition 5: (local-optimality following [15]). A codeword

is

-locally optimal for

if for all

minimal -local deviations

which implies that

as desired.

In order to prove a sufficient condition for LP optimality, we consider graph cover decoding introduced by Vontobel and Koetter [8]. We use the terms and notation of Vontobel and Koetter [8] in the statement of Lemma 7 and the proof of Theorem 8 (see Appendix A). The following lemma shows that local-optimality is preserved after lifting to an -cover. Note that the weight vector must be scaled by the cover degree .

Lemma 7: Let

girth and

.

Let denote any -cover of . Suppose that

is

a

-locally optimal codeword for

. Let

and

denote the -lifts of and ,

respectively. Then is a

-locally optimal codeword

for .

Proof: Assume that

is not a

-locally

optimal codeword for

. Then, there exists a minimal

-local deviation

such that

(3)

Since

, we consider only weight vectors

Note that for

and its projection

,

. Koetter and Vontobel [11] proved for

that it holds that

a locally optimal codeword for is also globally optimal, i.e.,

the ML codeword. Moreover, they also showed that a locally op-

(4)

timal codeword for is also the unique optimal LP solution

given . Arora et al. [15] used a different technique to prove that

(5)

local-optimality is sufficient both for global optimality and LP

optimality with general weights in the case of a binary sym- where is the support of the projection of onto the base graph.

metric channel. We extend the results of Arora et al. [15] to It holds that is a -local deviation because

girth

the case of MBIOS channels. Specifically, we prove for MBIOS girth . From (3), (4), and (5) we get that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:07:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HALABI AND EVEN: LP DECODING OF REGULAR LDPC CODES

891

, contradicting our assumption on the

-local opti-

mality of . Therefore, is a

-locally optimal code-

word for in .

Arora et al. [15] proved the following theorem for a BSC

and

. The proof can be extended to the case of

MBIOS channels with

using the same technique

of Arora et al. A simpler proof is achieved for

for

some finite . The proof is based on arguments utilizing prop-

erties of graph cover decoding [8], and follows as a corollary of

Theorem 6 and Lemma 7.

Theorem 8: (local-optimality is sufficient for LP optimality).

For every factor graph , there exists a constant such that, if

1)

girth ,

2)

, and

3) is a

-locally optimal codeword for

,

then is also the unique optimal LP solution given .

Proof: Suppose that is a

-locally optimal code-

word for

. Vontobel and Koetter [8] proved that for

every basic feasible solution

of the LP, there exists

an -cover of and an assignment

such that

and

, where is the image of the scaled

projection of in (i.e., the pseudocodeword associated with

). Moreover, since the number of basic feasible solutions is fi-

nite, we conclude that there exists a finite -cover such that

every basic feasible solution of the LP admits a valid assignment

in .

Let denote an optimal LP solution given . Without loss

of generality is a basic feasible solution. Let

denote the assignment in the -cover that corresponds

to

. By the equivalence of LP-decoding and graph

cover decoding [8], (4), and the optimality of it follows that

is a codeword in

that minimizes

for

,

namely

.

Let

denote the -lift of . Note that because

is a codeword, i.e.,

, there is a unique pre-image

of in , which is the -lift of . Lemma 7 implies that is

a

-locally optimal codeword for , where

. By Theorem 6, we also get that

. More-

over, Theorem 6 guarantees the uniqueness of an ML optimal

solution. Thus,

. By projection to , since

, we

get that

and uniqueness follows, as required.

The following lemma gives a structural characterization for the

event of LP-decoding failure if

.

Lemma 9: Let

girth . Assume that the all-zero

codeword was transmitted, and let

denote the log-like-

lihood ratio for the received word. If the LP decoder fails to

decode to the all-zero codeword, then for every

there

exists a minimal -local deviation such that

.

Proof: Consider the event where the LP decoder fails to

decode the all-zero codeword, i.e., is not a unique optimal

LP solution. Theorem 8 implies that there exists a constant

such that, for every

, the all-zero codeword

is not the

-locally optimal codeword for . That is, there

exists a minimal -local deviation such that

.

Let

. Therefore

is also nonpositive,

as required.

We therefore have for a fixed

girth and

that the probability that LP-decoding fails is at most

such that

(6)

A. Bounding Processes on Trees

Arora et al. [15] suggested a recursive method for bounding

the probability

such that

for a

BSC. We extend this method to MBIOS channels and apply it

to a BI-AWGN channel.

Let be a

-regular bipartite factor graph, and fix

girth . Let denote the subgraph induced by

for a variable node . Since

girth , it

follows that is a tree. We direct the edges of so that it is

an out-branching directed at the root (i.e., a rooted spanning

tree with directed paths from the root to all the nodes). For

, denote by the set of vertices of at

height (the leaves have height 0 and the root has height ).

Let

denote the vertex set of a skinny tree rooted

at .

Definition 10: ( -Process on a

-Tree, [15]).

Let

denote a weight vector. Let denote an assign-

ment of real values to the variable nodes of , we define the

-weighted value of a skinny tree by

From this point, let denote the constant whose existence is guaranteed by Theorem 8.

IV. PROVING ERROR BOUNDS USING LOCAL OPTIMALITY

In order to simplify the probabilistic analysis of algorithms

for decoding linear codes over symmetric channels, one can

assume without loss of generality that the all-zero codeword

was transmitted, i.e.,

. Note that the correctness of the

Namely, the sum of the values of variable nodes in weighted according to their height.
Given a probability distribution over assignments , we are interested in the probability
(7)

all-zero assumption depends on the employed decoding algo-

rithm. Although this assumption is trivial for ML decoding be- In other words,

is the probability that the min-

cause of the symmetry of a linear code , it is not imme- imum value over all skinny trees of height rooted in some

diately clear in the context of LP-decoding. Feldman et al. [6], variable node in a

-bipartite graph is nonpositive.

[7] noticed that the fundamental polytope

is highly sym- For every two roots and the trees and are isomor-

metric, and proved that for binary-input output-symmetric chan- phic, it follows that

does not depend on the root

nels, the probability that the LP decoder fails is independent .

of the transmitted codeword. Therefore, one can assume that Since is a random assignment of values to variable nodes

when analyzing LP-decoding failure for linear codes. in , Arora et al. refer to

as a random

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:07:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

892

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

process. With this notation, we apply a union bound utilizing Lemma 9, as follows.

Lemma 13: ([15]). For

, we have

Lemma 11: Let be a

-regular bipartite graph and

be a weight vector with

girth . Suppose that

is the log-likelihood ratio of the word received from

the channel. Then, the transmitted codeword

is

-locally optimal for

with probability at

least

where

and with at least the same probability,

is also the unique

optimal LP solution given .

Note the two different weight notations: 1) denotes weight

vector in the context of weighted deviations, and 2) de-

notes weight vector in the context of skinny subtrees in the

-Process. A one-to-one correspondence between these

two vectors is given by

for

. From this

point on, we will use only .

Following Lemma 11, it is sufficient to estimate the proba-

bility

for a given weight vector , a distribution

of a random vector , and degrees

. We overview the re-

cursion presented in [15] for estimating and bounding the prob-

ability of the existence of a skinny tree with nonpositive value

in a

-process.

Let denote an ensemble of i.i.d. random variables. Define

random variables

and

with the fol-

lowing recursion:

(8)

(9)

(10)

Based on these bounds, in the following subsection we

present concrete bounds on

for BI-AWGN

channel.

B. Analysis for BI-AWGN Channel

Consider the binary input additive white Gaussian noise

channel with noise variance denoted by BI-AWGNC .

In the case that the all-zero codeword is transmitted,

the channel input is BI-AWGNC

for every . Hence,

where

.

Since

is invariant under positive scaling of

the vector , we consider in the following analysis the scaled

vector in which

with

.

Following [15], we apply a simple analysis for

BI-AWGNC with uniform weight vector . Then, we

present improved bounds by using a nonuniform weight vector.

1) Uniform Weights: Consider the case where

. Let

and

, and define

.

By substituting notations of and in Lemmas 12 and 13,

Arora et al. [15] proved that if , then

To analyze parameters for which need to compute and as functions of that

, we and . Note

The notation

and

denotes mu-

tually independent copies of the random variables and , re-

spectively. Each instance of

, uses an independent

instance of a random variable .

Consider a directed tree

of height , rooted at node

. Associate variable nodes of at height with copies of ,

and check nodes at height

with copies of , for

. Note that any realization of the random variables to

variable nodes in can be viewed as an assignment . Thus, the

minimum value of a skinny tree of equals

. This

implies that the recursion in (8)–(10) defines a dynamic pro-

gramming algorithm for computing

. Now,

let the components of the LLR vector be i.i.d. random vari-

ables distributed identically to , then

where

Denote by

and

the pdf and cdf of a Gaussian

random variable with zero mean and standard deviation , re-

spectively. We therefore have

and

The above calculations give the following bound on .

Lemma 14: If

and

satisfy the condition

(11)

Given a distribution of and a finite “height” , it is pos-

sible to compute the distribution of and according to the

recursion in (8)–(10) using properties of a sum of random vari-

ables and a minimum of random variables. The following two

lemmas play a major role in proving bounds on

.

Lemma 12: ([15]). For every

then for

and

, we have

Let

and

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:07:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HALABI AND EVEN: LP DECODING OF REGULAR LDPC CODES

893

For (3,6)-regular graphs, we obtain by numeric calculations the following corollary.

Corollary 15: Let there exists a constant

, and such that for every

. Then, and

TABLE I
COMPUTED VALUES OF  FOR FINITE s IN COROLLARY 17, AND THEIR
CORRESPONDING SNR MEASURE IN DECIBELS

Note that

decreases doubly exponentially as a

function of .

2) Improved Bounds Using Nonuniform Weights: The fol-

lowing lemma implies an improved bound for

using a nonuniform weight vector .

Lemma 16: Let

and

some

and some weight vector

. Suppose that for

(12)

Let

denote the concatenation of the vector

and the vector

. Then, for every

exist constants

and

such that

there

Proof: By Lemma 13, we have

Note that the first components of are nonuniform while

the other components are uniform.

For a given , and , and for a concrete value we can

compute the distribution of using the recursion in (8)–(10).

Moreover, we can also compute the value

.

Computing the distribution and the Laplace transform of

is not a trivial task in the case where the components of

have a continuous density distribution function. However, since

the Gaussian distribution function is smooth and most of its

volume is concentrated in a defined interval, it is possible to

“simulate” the evolution of the density distribution functions of

the random variables and for . We use a numerical

method based on quantization in order to represent and eval-

uate the functions

, and

. This

computation follows methods used in the implementation of

density evolution technique (e.g., see [20]). A specific method

for computation is described in Appendix B and exemplified

for (3,6)-regular graphs.

For (3,6)-regular bipartite graphs we obtain the following

corollary.

Note that . By setting

is minimized when , we obtain

Corollary 17: Let

, and

. For the

following values of and in Table I it holds that there exists

a constant

such that for every

Note that for a fixed , the probability

de-

creases doubly exponentially as a function of . Since it’s re-

quired that

, Corollary 17 applies only to codes whose

Tanner graphs have girth larger than .

Let

. By (12),

. Let Theorem 1 follows from Lemma 11, Lemma 14, and Corol-

, then

lary 17 as follows. The first part, that states a finite-length re-

sult, follows from Lemma 11 and Corollary 17 by taking

girth which holds for any Tanner graph .

The second part, that deals with an asymptotic result, follows

Using Lemma 12, we conclude that

from Lemma 11 and Corollary 17 by fixing sufficiently large such that

and taking

girth . It therefore provides a lower bound on the threshold

of LP-decoding. The third part, that states a finite-length result

and the lemma follows.

for any

-regular LDPC code, follows from Lemma 11

and Lemma 14. Theorem 2 is obtained in the same manner after

Arora et al. [15] suggested using a weight vector with com- a simple straightforward modification of Lemma 14 to MBIOS

ponents

. This weight vector has the effect that if channels.

assigns the same value to every variable node, then every level

in a skinny tree contributes equally to

. For

,

consider a weight vector

defined by

Remark: Following [15], the contribution

of the root

of is not included in the definition of

. The effect

of this contribution to

is bounded by a multi-

if

plicative factor, as implied by the proof of Lemma 12. The mul-

if

tiplicative factor is bounded by

, which may be re-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:07:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

894

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

garded as a constant since it does not depend on the code pa-

rameters (in particular the code length ). Therefore, we can

set

without loss of generality for these asymptotic

considerations.

V. DISCUSSION

We extended the analysis of Arora et al. [15] for LP-decoding

over a BSC to any MBIOS channel. We proved bounds on the

word error probability that are inverse doubly exponential in

the girth of the factor graph for LP-decoding of regular LDPC

codes over MBIOS channels. We also proved lower bounds on

the threshold of regular LDPC codes whose Tanner graphs have

logarithmic girth under LP-decoding in the binary-input AWGN

channel.

Although thresholds are regarded as an asymptotic result, the

analysis presented by Arora et al. [15], as well as its extension

presented in this paper, exhibits both asymptotic results as well as finite-length results. An interesting tradeoff between these

X Y d ; d ;  : Fig. 1. pdf’s of and for (

) = (3 6) and = 0 7.

two perspectives is shown by the formulation of the results. We

regard the goal of achieving the highest possible thresholds as

an asymptotic goal, and as such we may compare the achieved

thresholds to the asymptotic BP-based thresholds. Note that the

obtained lower bound on the threshold increases up to a certain

ceiling value (which we conjecture is below the LP threshold)

as the assumed girth increases. Thus, an asymptotic result is

obtained.

However, in the case of finite-length codes, the analysis

cannot be based on an infinite girth in the limit. Two phe-

nomena occur in the analysis of finite codes: 1) the size of the

interval

for which the error bound holds increases as

function of the girth (as shown in Table I), and 2) the decoding

error probability decreases exponentially as a function of the

gap

[as implied by Fig. 5(b)]. We demonstrated the

power of the analysis for the finite-length case by presenting

error bounds for any (3,6)-regular LDPC code as function of the

girth of the Tanner graph provided that

X l ; ; ; d ; d ;  : . Assuming Fig. 2. pdf’s of for = 0 . . . 4 (

) = (3 6) and = 0 7.

that the girth of the Tanner graph is greater than 88, an error

bound is presented provided that

. This proof also

shows that 0.735 is a lower bound on the threshold in the

asymptotic case.

In the proof of LP optimality (Lemma 7 and Theorem 8)

we used the combinatorial interpretation of LP-decoding via

graph covers [8] to infer a reduction to conditions of ML op-

timality. That is, the decomposition of codewords presented by

Arora et al. [15] leads to a decomposition for fractional LP solu-

tions. This method of reducing combinatorial characterizations

of LP-decoding to combinatorial characterizations of ML de-

coding is based on graph cover decoding.

The technique for proving error bounds for BI-AWGN

channel described in Section IV and in Appendix B is based

on a min-sum probabilistic process on a tree. The process is

characterized by an evolution of probability density functions.

Computing the evolving densities in the analysis of AWGN

channels is not a trivial task. As indicated by our numeric computations, the evolving density functions in the case of

Y l ; ; ; d ; d ;  : Fig. 3. PDFs of for = 0 . . . 4 (

) = (3 6) and = 0 7.

the AWGN channel visually resemble Gaussian probability

density functions (see Figs. 2 and 3). Chung et al. [21] pre-

sented a method for estimating thresholds of belief propagation technique to our analysis may result in analytic asymptotic

decoding according to density evolution using Gaussian ap- approximate thresholds of LP-decoding for regular LDPC

proximation. Applying an appropriate Gaussian approximation codes over AWGN channels.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:07:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HALABI AND EVEN: LP DECODING OF REGULAR LDPC CODES

895

Feldman et al. [16] observed that for high SNRs truncating LLRs of BI-AWGNC surprisingly assist LP-decoding. They proved that for certain families of regular LDPC codes and large enough SNRs (i.e., small ), it is advantageous to truncate the LLRs before passing them to the LP decoder. The method presented in Appendix B for computing densities evolving on trees using quantization and truncation of the LLRs can be applied to this case. It is interesting to see whether this unexpected phenomenon of LP-decoding occurs also for larger values of (i.e., lower SNRs).

able is defined by the recursion in (8)–(10). Let denote

an ensemble of i.i.d. continuous random variable with proba-

bility density function (pdf)

and cumulative distribution

function (cdf)

.

We demonstrate the method for computing

for the case where

, and

where

. In this case

APPENDIX A GRAPH COVER DECODING—BASIC TERMS AND NOTATION

Vontobel and Koetter introduced in [8] a combinatorial con-

cept called graph-cover decoding (GCD) for decoding codes on

graphs, and showed its equivalence to LP-decoding. We use the

characterization of graph cover decoding in the statement of

Lemma 7 and the proof of Theorem 8. In the following, we de-

fine some basic terms and notations with respect to graph covers

and graph-cover decoding.

Let and be finite graphs and let

be a graph

homomorphism, namely,

. A homomorphism is a covering map

if for every

the restriction of to neighbors of is

a bijection to the neighbors of . The pre-image

of

a node is called a fiber and is denoted by . It is easy to see

that all the fibers have the same cardinality if is connected.

This common cardinality is called the degree or fold number of

the covering map. If

is a covering map, we call

the base graph and a cover of . In the case where the fold

number of the covering map is , we say that is an -cover

of .

We now define assignments to variable nodes in an -cover

of a Tanner graph. The assignment is induced by the covering

map and an assignment to the variable nodes in the base graph.

where

denotes the error function.

The actual computation of the evolution of density functions

via the recursion equations requires a numeric implementa-

tion. Finding an efficient and stable such implementation is

nontrivial. We follow methods used in the computation of the

variable-node update process in the implementation of density

evolution analysis (e.g., see [20]).

In the following, we show a method for computing a proper

representation of the probability density function of for the

purpose of finding

.

A. Computing Distributions of and
The base case of the recursion in (8)–(10) is given by . Let denote the pdf of the scaled random variable , i.e.,

(14)

Then, the pdf of is simply written as

(15)

In the case where

, (15) simplifies to

Definition 18: (lift, [8]). Consider a bipartite graph

and an arbitrary -cover

of . The

-lift of a vector

is an assignment

to the

nodes in that is induced by the assignment

to the

nodes in and the covering map

as follows: every

is assigned by the value assigned to by . The

-lift of a vector is denoted by .

Definition 19: (pseudocodeword, [8]). The (scaled) pseu-

docodeword

associated with binary vector

of length

is the rational vector

defined by

(16)

(17)

Let

denote the -fold convolution of a function ,

i.e., the convolution of function

with itself times. By

properties of minimum and sum of random variables, the recur-

sion equations for the pdf and cdf of and are given by

(18) (19)

(20) (13)

(21)

where the sum is taken in (not in ).

Since we cannot analytically solve (18)–(21), we use a

APPENDIX B COMPUTING THE EVOLUTION OF PROBABILITY
DENSITIES OVER TREES

numeric method based on quantization in order to represent and

evaluate the functions

, and

.

As suggested in [20], we compute a uniform sample of the

functions, i.e., we consider the functions over the set ,

In this Appendix, we present a computational method for es- where denotes the quantization step size. Moreover, due to

timating

for some concrete . The random vari- practical reasons we restrict the functions to a finite support,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:07:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

896

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

Fig. 4. ln( e

) as a function of t for s = 4; 6; 8; 10; 12; (d ; d ) =

(3; 6) and  = 0:7. (b) is an enlargement of the rectangle depicted in (a).

namely,

for some integers

. We denote the

set

by

. Obviously, the choice of , and

determines the precision of our target computation.

A Gaussian-like function (bell-shaped function) is bounded

Fig. 5. (a) Region for which 5e

e

< 1 as a function of t and  for

(d ; d ) = (3; 6). Note that the maximal value of  contained in that region

results to the estimate of  = 0:685 in the entry s = 4 in Table I. (b) Constant

c in Corollary 17 as a function of  in the case where s = 4 and t = 0:11, i.e.,

the value of c over the cut of the (t; )-plane in (a) at t = 0:11 (depicted by a

thick solid line).

and continuous, and so are its derivatives. The area beneath its

tails decays exponentially and becomes negligible a few stan-

dard deviations away from the mean. Thus, Gaussian-like func-

tions are amenable to quantization and truncation of the tails.

We therefore choose to zero the density functions outside the

interval

. The parameters and are symmetric

around the mean, and together with are chosen to make the

error of a Riemann integral negligible. As we demonstrate by

computations, the density functions

and

are in-

deed bell-shaped, justifying the quantization. Fig. 1 illustrates

the pdf of (here equals to the minimum of

in-

and

decrease with . This property allows us to double2

the quantization step as increases by one. Thus, the size of the

support used for

and

does not grow. Specifically,

the interval

doubles but the doubling of keeps the

number of points fixed. This method helps keep the computation

tractable while keeping the error small.

Note that when is a discrete random variable with a bounded

support (as in [15]), a precise computation of the probability

distribution function of is obtained by following (18)–(21).

stances of ). Note that by definition, is a Gaussian random

variable.

Computing

given

requires the convolution

of functions. However, the restriction of the density functions to

B. Estimating

After obtaining a proper discretized representation of the pdf

of we approximate

for a given by

a restricted support

is not invariant under convolution.

That is, if the function is supported by

, then

is supported by

. In the quantized computations

of

and

, our numeric calculations show that the

mean and standard deviation of the random variables and

increase exponentially in as illustrated in Figs. 2 and 3.

We then estimate the minimum value by searching over values

of . Fig. 4 depicts

as a function of

Therefore, the maximal slopes of the density functions

2Doubling applies to the demonstrated parameters, i.e., d = 3 and ! = 2 .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:07:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HALABI AND EVEN: LP DECODING OF REGULAR LDPC CODES

897

for

. The numeric calculations show that as

grows from zero, the function

decreases to a minimum

value, and then increases rapidly. We can also observe that both

the values

and

decrease as

a function of .

Following Lemma 16, we are interested in the maximum

value of for which (12) holds for a given . That is

(22)

Note that if the set in (22) is not empty, then it is an open interval

. Fig. 5(a) illustrates the region in the

plane,

for which (12) holds with

.

Let denote the value of that achieves the supremum .

For every

, we may set the value of the constant in

Corollary 17 as

Fig. 5(b) illustrates the value of the constant in Corollary 17

as a function of in the case where

.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank P. O. Vontobel and the anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments and detailed suggestions that improved the paper. They thank F. R. Kschischang for devoted and efficient handling of the paper.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low-complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[3] D. J. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low-density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 33, pp. 457–458, Mar. 1997.
[4] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Commun. (ICC’93), Geneva, Switzerland, 1993, vol. 2, pp. 1064–1070.
[5] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[6] J. Feldman, “Decoding Error-Correcting Codes Via Linear Programming,” Ph.D. dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, MA, 2003.
[7] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. R. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 954–972, Mar. 2005.
[8] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Graph-cover decoding and finite-length analysis of message-passing iterative decoding of LDPC codes,” [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/cs.IT/0512078
[9] J. Feldman and D. R. Karger, “Decoding turbo-like codes via linear programming,” J. Comput. Syst. Sci., vol. 68, no. 4, pp. 733–752, Jun. 2004.

[10] N. Halabi and G. Even, “Improved bounds on the word error probability of RA(2) codes with linear-programming-based decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 265–280, Jan. 2005.
[11] R. Koetter and P. O. Vontobel, “On the block error probability of LP decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. Inaugur. Workshop of the Center for Inf. Theory and its Appl., La Jolla, CA, Feb. 2006.
[12] J. Feldman and C. Stein, “LP decoding achieves capacity,” in Proc. Symp. Discrete Algorithms (SODA’05), Vancouver, Canada, Jan. 2005, pp. 460–469.
[13] J. Feldman, T. Malkin, R. A. Servedio, C. Stein, and M. J. Wainwright, “LP decoding corrects a constant fraction of errors,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 82–89, Jan. 2007.
[14] C. Daskalakis, A. Dimakis, R. Karp, and M. Wainwright, “Probabilistic analysis of linear programming decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 3565–3578, Aug. 2008.
[15] S. Arora, C. Daskalakis, and D. Steurer, “Message passing algorithms and improved LP decoding,” in Proc. 41st Ann. ACM Symp. Theory of Comput. (STOC’09), Bethesda, MD, USA, May 31–Jun. 02 2009, pp. 3–12.
[16] J. Feldman, R. Koetter, and P. O. Vontobel, “The benefit of thresholding in LP decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT’05), Adelaide, Australia, Sep. 2005, pp. 307–311, 49.
[17] X. Wei and A. Akansu, “Density evolution for low-density parity-check codes under Max-Log-MAP decoding,” Electron. Lett., vol. 37, no. 18, pp. 1125–1126, Aug. 2001.
[18] P. Vontobel, “A factor-graph-based random walk, and its relevance for LP decoding analysis and Bethe entropy characterization,” in Proc. Inf. Theory and Appl. Workshop, Univ. Calif. San Diego, La Jolla, Jan. 31–Feb. 5 2010.
[19] W. Xu and B. Hassibi, “On the complexity of exact maximum-likelihood decoding for asymptotically good low density parity check codes: A new perspective,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Tahoe City, CA, Sep. 26, 2007, pp. 150–155.
[20] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. New York: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2008.
[21] S.-Y. Chung, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Analysis of sum-product decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 657–670, Feb. 2001.
Nissim Halabi (S’10) received the B.Sc. degree in electrical engineering and computer science in 2002, and the M.Sc. degree in electrical engineering in 2003, both from Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel.
He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree at the School of Electrical Engineering, Tel-Aviv University. His current fields of interest include codes on graphs and decoding algorithms.
Guy Even (M’98) received the B.Sc. degree in 1988 in mathematics and computer science from the Hebrew University. Received the M.Sc. and D.Sc. degrees in computer science from the Technion, Israel, in 1991 and 1994, respectively.
He spent his postdoctoral years with the University of the Saarland during 1995–1997. Since 1997, he has been a faculty member with the School of Electrical Engineering, Tel-Aviv University. He is interested in algorithms and their applications in various fields. He has published papers on the theory of VLSI, approximation algorithms, computer arithmetic, online algorithms, frequency assignment, scheduling, packet-routing, and linear-programming decoding of LDPC codes.
Dr. Even is currently on the editorial board of Integration, the VLSI Journal and Theory of Computing Systems.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:07:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

