IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

835

Deriving Good LDPC Convolutional Codes from
LDPC Block Codes
Ali E. Pusane, Member, IEEE, Roxana Smarandache, Member, IEEE, Pascal O. Vontobel, Member, IEEE, and Daniel J. Costello, Jr., Life Fellow, IEEE

Dedicated to the memory of our dear friend and colleague Ralf Koetter (1963–2009)

Abstract—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) convolutional codes are capable of achieving excellent performance with low encoding and decoding complexity. In this paper, we discuss several graph-cover-based methods for deriving families of time-invariant and time-varying LDPC convolutional codes from LDPC block codes and show how earlier proposed LDPC convolutional code constructions can be presented within this framework. Some of the constructed convolutional codes significantly outperform the underlying LDPC block codes. We investigate some possible reasons for this “convolutional gain,” and we also discuss the—mostly moderate—decoder cost increase that is incurred by going from LDPC block to LDPC convolutional codes.
Index Terms—Block codes, convolutional codes, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, message-passing iterative decoding, pseudocodewords, pseudoweights, quasi-cyclic codes, unwrapping, wrapping.
I. INTRODUCTION
I N the last 15 years, the area of channel coding has been revolutionized by the practical realization of capacityapproaching coding schemes, initiated by the invention of
Manuscript received April 25, 2010; revised August 18, 2010; accepted September 21, 2010. Date of current version January 19, 2011. The work of A. E. Pusane and D. J. Costello, Jr. was supported in part by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grants CCR-0205310 and CCF-0830650, and by NASA under Grant NNX09AI66G. The work of A. E. Pusane was also supported by a Graduate Fellowship from the Center for Applied Mathematics, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN. The work of R. Smarandache was supported by the NSF under Grants DMS-0708033 and CCF-0830608, and in part by the NSF under Grant CCR-0205310. The material in this paper was presented in part at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Nice, France, June 2007.
This paper is part of the special issue on “Facets of Coding Theory: From Algorithms to Networks,” dedicated to the scientific legacy of Ralf Koetter.
A. E. Pusane was with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556 USA. He is now with the Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Bogazici University, Bebek, Istanbul 34342, Turkey (e-mail: ali.pusane@boun.edu.tr).
R. Smarandache is with the Department of Mathematics and Statistics, San Diego State University, San Diego, CA 92182 USA (e-mail: rsmarand@sciences.sdsu.edu).
P. O. Vontobel is with Hewlett-Packard Laboratories, Palo Alto, CA 94304 USA (e-mail: pascal.vontobel@ieee.org).
D. J. Costello, Jr. is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556 USA (e-mail: costello.2@nd.edu).
Communicated by G. D. Forney, Jr., Associate Editor for the special issue on "Facets of Coding Theory: From Algorithms to Networks."
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2010.2095211

turbo codes and their associated decoding algorithms in 1993 [1]. A few years after the invention of the turbo coding schemes, researchers became aware that Gallager’s low-density parity-check (LDPC) block codes and message-passing iterative decoding, first introduced in [2], were also capable of capacity-approaching performance. The analysis and design of these coding schemes quickly attracted considerable attention in the literature, beginning with the work of Wiberg [3], MacKay and Neal [4], and many others. An irregular version of LDPC codes was first introduced by Luby et al. in [5], [6], and analytical tools were presented in [7] and [8] to obtain performance limits for graph-based message-passing iterative decoding algorithms, such as those suggested by Tanner [9]. For many classes of channels, these tools have been successfully employed to design families of irregular LDPC codes that perform very well near capacity [10], [11]. Moreover, for the binary erasure channel these tools have enabled the design of families of irregular LDPC codes that are not only capacity-approaching but in fact capacity-achieving (see [12] and references therein).
The convolutional counterparts of LDPC block codes are LDPC convolutional codes. Analogous to LDPC block codes, LDPC convolutional codes are defined by sparse parity-check matrices, which allow them to be decoded using iterative message-passing algorithms. Recent studies have shown that LDPC convolutional codes are suitable for practical implementation in a number of different communication scenarios, including continuous transmission and block transmission in frames of arbitrary size [13]–[15].
Two major methods have been proposed in the literature for the construction of LDPC convolutional codes, two methods that in fact started the field of LDPC convolutional codes. The first method was proposed by Tanner [16] (see also [17] and [18]) and exploits similarities between quasi-cyclic block codes and time-invariant convolutional codes. The second method was presented by Jiménez-Feltström and Zigangirov [19] and relies on a matrix-based unwrapping procedure to obtain the paritycheck matrix of a periodically time-varying convolutional code from the parity-check matrix of a block code.
The aims of this paper are threefold. First, we show that these two LDPC convolutional code construction methods, once suitably generalized, are in fact tightly connected. We establish this connection with the help of so-called graph

0018-9448/$26.00 © 2011 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

836

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

...

...

...

(1)

...

...

...

...

...

...

covers.1 A second aim is to discuss a variety of LDPC convolutional code constructions. Although the underlying principles are mathematically quite straightforward, it is important to understand how they can be applied to obtain convolutional codes with good performance and attractive encoder and decoder architectures. A third aim is to make progress towards a better understanding of where the observed “convolutional gain” comes from, and what its costs are in terms of decoder complexity.
The paper is structured as follows. After some notational remarks in Section I-A, we discuss the basics of LDPC convolutional codes in Section II. In particular, in that section, we give a first exposition of the LDPC convolutional code construction methods due to Tanner and due to Jiménez-Feltström and Zigangirov. In Section III, we discuss two types of graph-cover code constructions and show how they can be used to connect the code construction methods due to Tanner and due to JiménezFeltström and Zigangirov. Based on these insights, Section IV presents a variety of LDPC convolutional code constructions (along with simulation results), and in Section V, we mention some similarities and differences of these constructions compared to other recent code constructions in the literature. Afterwards, in Section VI, we analyze some aspects of the constructed LDPC convolutional codes and discuss some possible reasons for the “convolutional gain,” before we conclude the paper in Section VII.

By and

, we mean, respectively, a row vector

over of length and a row vector over

of length

. In the following, if is some matrix, then

denotes

the entry in the th row and th column of . Note that we use

the convention that indices of vector entries start at (and not

at ), with a similar convention for row and column indices of

matrix entries. (This comment applies also to semi-infinite ma-

trices, which are defined such that the row and column index sets

equal .) The only exception to this convention are bi-infinite

matrices, where the row and column index sets equal . Finally,

will denote the Kronecker product of the matrices

and .

II. LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES
This section defines LDPC convolutional codes and discusses why they are interesting from an implementation perspective. Afterwards, we review two popular methods of obtaining LDPC convolutional codes by unwrapping block codes. Later in this paper, namely in Section III, we will use graph covers to show how these two methods are connected, and in Section IV we will see how these two methods can be implemented and combined to obtain LDPC convolutional codes with very good performance.
A. Definition of LDPC Convolutional Codes

A. Notation

We use the following sets, rings, and fields: is the ring

of integers; is the set of nonnegative integers; is the

field of size two;

is the ring of polynomials with coef-

A semi-infinite binary parity-check matrix as in (1), shown

at the top of the page, defines a convolutional code

as

follows. Namely, it is the set of semi-infinite sequences given

by

ficients in and indeterminate ; and

is the

ring of polynomials in

modulo

, where is a pos-

itive integer. We also use the notational shorthand .

for where denotes the transpose of a vector or of a matrix. We comment on several important aspects and properties of

1Note that graph covers have been used in two different ways in the LDPC code literature. On the one hand, starting with the work of Tanner [20], they have been used to construct Tanner graphs [9] of LDPC codes, and therefore parity-check matrices of LDPC codes. Codes constructed in this way are nowadays often called proto-graph-based codes, following the influential work of Thorpe [21], who formalized this code construction approach. On the other hand, starting with the work of Koetter and Vontobel [22], [23], finite graph covers have been used to analyze the behavior of LDPC codes under messagepassing iterative decoding. In this paper, we will use graph covers in the first way, with the exception of some comments on pseudocodewords.

the code

and its parity-check matrix

.

• If the submatrices

, have

size

with

, then

is said to have

(design) rate

.

• The parameter that appears in (1) is called the syndrome

former memory. It is an important parameter of

be-

cause the maximal number of nonzero submatrices per

block row of

is upper bounded by

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PUSANE et al.: DERIVING GOOD LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES FROM LDPC BLOCK CODES

837

• The quantity

is called the constraint length

of . It measures the maximal width (in symbols) of

the nonzero area of

.2

• We do not require that for a given

the

submatrices

are independent of , and so

is in general a time-varying convolutional code.

• If there is a positive integer such that

for all

and all

, then

is called the period of

, and

is periodically

time-varying.

• If the period equals 1, then

is called time-in-

variant, and the parity-check matrix can be simply written

as

by considering only periodically time-varying or time-invariant codes. The code construction problem is therefore reduced to designing just one period of the parity-check matrix. For decoding, the most obvious approach is to terminate the encoder and to employ message-passing iterative decoding based on the complete Tanner graph representation of the parity-check matrix of the code. Although this would be straightforward to implement using a standard LDPC block code decoder, it would be wasteful of resources, since the resulting (very large) block decoder would not be taking advantage of two important aspects of the convolutional structure: namely, that decoding can be done continuously without waiting for an entire terminated block to be received and that the distance between two variable nodes

that are connected to the same check node is limited by the size

...

...

...

of the syndrome former memory. In order to take advantage of the convolutional nature of the
parity-check matrix, a continuous sliding window message-

passing iterative decoder that operates on a window of size

...

...

...

variable nodes, where is the number of decoding iterations to be performed, can be implemented, similar to a

(2) Viterbi decoder with finite path memory [27]. This window size

• If the number of ones in each row and column of

is

small compared to the constraint length , then

is

an LDPC convolutional code.

• An LDPC convolutional code

is called

-regular if, starting from the zeroth column,

has ones in each column, and, starting from the

th row,

has ones in each row.

If, however, there are no integers

, and such that

is

-regular, then

is called irregular.

Of course, there is some ambiguity in the above definition.

Namely, a periodically time-varying LDPC convolutional code

with parameters , and can also be considered to be a pe-

riodically time-varying LDPC convolutional code with param-

eters

, and

for

any integer that divides . In particular, for

we con-

sider the code to be a time-invariant LDPC convolutional code

with parameters

and

.

is chosen since, in a single iteration, messages from variable

(or check) nodes can be passed across a span of only one

constraint length. Thus, in iterations, messages can propagate

only over a window of size constraint length. [See also the

recent paper by Papaleo et al. [28], which investigates further

reducing the window size for codes operating on a binary

erasure channel (BEC).] Another simplification is achieved

by exploiting the fact that a single decoding iteration of two

variable nodes that are at least

time units apart can be

performed independently, since the corresponding bits cannot

participate in the same parity-check equation. This allows the

parallelization of the iterations by employing independent

identical processors working on different regions of the parity-

check matrix simultaneously, resulting in the parallel pipeline

decoding architecture introduced in [19]. The pipeline decoder

outputs a continuous stream of decoded data after an initial

decoding delay of received symbols. The operation of this

B. Implementation Aspects of LDPC Convolutional Codes
An advantage of LDPC convolutional codes compared to their block code counterparts is the so-called “fast encoding” property. As a result of the diagonal shape of their parity-check matrices, many LDPC convolutional codes enjoy simple shift register based encoders. Even randomly constructed LDPC convolutional codes can be formed in such a way as to achieve this feature without any loss in performance (see, e.g., [19] and [24]). On the other hand, in order to have a simple encoding procedure for LDPC block codes, either the block code must have some sort of structure [25] or the parity-check matrix must be changed to a more easily “encodable” form [26].
The difficulty in constructing and decoding LDPC convolutional codes is dealing with the unbounded size of the paritycheck matrix. This is overcome at the code construction step
2Strictly speaking, the above formula for  gives only an upper bound on the maximal width (in symbols) of the nonzero area of H , but this upper bound will be good enough for our purposes.

decoder on the Tanner graph of a simple time-invariant rate-

convolutional code with

and

is illustrated in

Fig. 1.3

Although the pipeline decoder is capable of fully parallelizing

the iterations by using independent identical processors, em-

ploying a large number of hardware processors might not be

desirable in some applications. In such cases, fewer processors

(even one processor) can be scheduled to perform subsets of

iterations, resulting in a serial looping architecture [29] with

reduced throughput. This ability to balance the processor load

and decoding speed dynamically is especially desirable when

very large LDPC convolutional codes must be decoded with

limited available on-chip memory. Further discussion on the

implementation aspects of the pipeline decoder can be found

in [30].

3For LDPC convolutional codes the parameter  is usually much larger than typical values of  for “classical” convolutional codes. Therefore, the value  = 9 of the convolutional code shown in Fig. 1 is not typical for the codes
considered in this paper.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

838

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

Fig. 1. Tanner graph of a rate-1=3 convolutional code and an illustration of pipeline decoding. Here, y (t); y (t); y (t) denote the stream of channel output symbols, and v^ (t); v^ (t); v^ (t) denote the stream of decoder code bit decisions.

C. Unwrapping Techniques due to Tanner and due to Jiménez-Feltström and Zigangirov (JFZ)

In this section, we discuss two approaches for deriving convo-

lutional codes from block codes, in particular for deriving LDPC

convolutional codes from LDPC block codes. The first tech-

nique will be the unwrapping due to Tanner and the second will

be the unwrapping due to Jiménez-Feltström and Zigangirov

(JFZ). In Section III, we will see, with the help of graph covers,

how these two—seemingly different—unwrapping techniques

are connected with each other.

The term unwrapping, in particular unwrapping a

quasi-cyclic block code to obtain a time-invariant convolu-

tional code, was first introduced in a paper by Tanner [17] (see

also [16]). That paper describes a link between quasi-cyclic

block codes and time-invariant convolutional codes and shows

that the free distance of the unwrapped convolutional code

cannot be smaller than the minimum distance of the underlying

quasi-cyclic code. This idea was later extended in [31] and [32].

Consider the quasi-cyclic block code

defined by the

polynomial parity-check matrix

of size

, i.e.,

that the exponents appearing in the polynomials in

between and

inclusive.]

It can easily be seen that any codeword

in

to a codeword

in through

are maps

a process which was described in [17] as the wrapping around of a codeword in the convolutional code into a codeword in the quasi-cyclic code. The inverse process was described as unwrapping.
Having introduced the unwrapping technique due to Tanner, we move on to discuss the unwrapping technique due to JFZ [19], which is another way to unwrap a block code to obtain a convolutional code. The basic idea is best explained with the help of an example.
Example 1: Consider the parity-check matrix

Here the polynomial operations are performed modulo

.

The Tanner unwrapping technique is simply based on dropping

these modulo computations. More precisely, with a quasi-cyclic

block code we associate the convolutional code

with size

, of a rate- block code. As indicated

above, we can take a pair of scissors and “cut” the parity-check

matrix into two pieces, whereby the cutting pattern is such that

with polynomial parity-check matrix

we repeatedly move

units to the right and then

unit down. Having applied this “diagonal cut,” we repeatedly

(3) copy and paste the two parts to obtain the bi-infinite matrix

shown in Fig. 2. This new matrix can be seen as the parity-check

Here the change of indeterminate from to indicates the lack matrix of (in general) a periodically time-varying convolutional

of the modulo

operations. [Note that in (3) we assume code (here the period is

). It is worth observing that this

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PUSANE et al.: DERIVING GOOD LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES FROM LDPC BLOCK CODES

839

Fig. 2. Deriving a rate R = 1=2 periodically time-varying convolutional code with b = 1; c = 2; m = 4;  = 10, and T = 5 from a rate-1=2 block code of
length 10.

new matrix has the same row and column weights as the matrix where that we started with.4

This example can be formalized easily. Namely, starting with

an

parity-check matrix of some block code, let

. Then, the “diagonal cut” is performed by alternately

moving

units to the right and then

units

down (i.e.,

. The resulting convolutional code

has rate

, syndrome former memory

,

constraint length

, and period

.

Analogous to the comment at the end of Section II-A, it

is also possible to cut the matrix in larger step sizes, e.g.,

moving

units to the right and

units

down, for any integer that divides

, thereby obtaining

a periodically time-varying convolutional code with rate

, syndrome former memory

,

constraint length

, and period

. (See also the discussion in Section IV-B.)

In the rest of this paper, the term “JFZ unwrapping technique”

will also stand for the following generalization of the above pro-

cedure. Namely, starting with a length- block code defined

by some size-

parity-check matrix , i.e.,

...

...

...

... ... ... ...

Referring to the notation introduced in Section II-A, the matrix

is the parity-check matrix of a time-invariant convolu-

tional code. However, depending on the decomposition of

and the internal structure of the terms in that decomposition,

the matrix

can also be (and very often is) viewed as the

parity-check matrix of a time-varying convolutional code with

nontrivial period .

In order to illustrate the generalization of the JFZ unwrapping

technique that we have introduced in the last paragraph, observe

that decomposing from Example 1 as

(in )

with

we write as the sum

(in ) of a collection

of matrices

. The convolutional code

is then de-

fined to be

(4)

4In practice, the codewords start at some time, so the convolutional parity-

 0 1 check matrix has effectively the semi-infinite form of (1), and the row weights

of the first

rows are reduced.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

840

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

yields a convolutional code with parity-check matrix whose bi-infinite version equals the matrix shown in Fig. 2.

III. TANNER GRAPHS FROM GRAPH COVERS

Having formally introduced LDPC convolutional codes in the previous section, we now turn our attention to the main tool of this paper, namely graph covers.

Definition 2 (see, e.g., [33]): A cover of a graph with vertex

set and edge set is a graph with vertex set and edge

set , along with a surjection

which is a graph

homomorphism (i.e., takes adjacent vertices of to adjacent

vertices of ) such that for each vertex

and each

, the neighborhood

of is mapped bijectively to

. A cover is called an -cover, where is a positive

integer, if

for every vertex in .5

These graph covers will be used for the construction of new Tanner graphs from old Tanner graphs, in particular for the construction of Tanner graphs that represent LDPC convolutional codes.
More specifically, this section starts by discussing two simple methods to specify a graph cover, which will be called graphcover construction 1 (GCC1) and graph-cover construction 2 (GCC2). Although they yield isomorphic Tanner graphs, and therefore equivalent codes, it is convenient to have both methods at hand.6 As we will see, interesting classes of Tanner graphs can be obtained by repeatedly applying these graph-cover constructions, by mixing them, and by suitably shortening the resulting codes. Moreover, these two graph-cover constructions will allow us to exhibit a connection between the Tanner and the JFZ unwrapping techniques.

• For some positive integer , let

be a collection

of size- permutation matrices. For example, for every

, the matrix is such that it contains one “ ” per

column, one “ ” per row, and “ ”s otherwise.

Based on the collection of matrices

and the collection

of matrices

, there are two common ways of defining

a graph cover of the Tanner graph . (In the following ex-

pressions, is the identity matrix of size .)

• Graph-cover construction 1 (GCC1). Consider the inter-

mediary matrix

whose Tanner graph

consists of disconnected

copies of . This is an -fold cover of , albeit a

rather trivial one. In order to obtain an interesting -fold

graph cover of , for each

, we replace

by

, i.e., we define

• Graph-cover construction 2 (GCC2) Consider the intermediary matrix

whose Tanner graph

consists of disconnected

copies of . This is an -fold cover of , albeit a

rather trivial one. In order to obtain an interesting -fold

graph cover of , for each

, we replace

by

, i.e., we define

A. Graph-Cover Constructions

Let be an

matrix over . With such a matrix we If all the matrices

are circulant matrices, then the graph

can associate a Tanner graph , where we draw variable covers

and

will be called cyclic covers of .

nodes, check nodes, and where there are

edges from

the th variable node to the th check node.7 Given the role that

the matrix will play subsequently, we follow [21] and call the

matrix a proto-matrix and the corresponding graph

a

proto-graph.

The next definition introduces GCC1 and GCC2, two ways

One can verify that the two graph-cover constructions in Def-

inition 3 are such that the matrix , after a suitable reordering

of the rows and columns, equals the matrix .9 This implies

that

and

are isomorphic graphs; nevertheless, it is

helpful to define both types of constructions.

to specify graph covers that will be used throughout the rest of the paper.8

Definition 3: For some positive integers and , let

be a proto-matrix. We also introduce the following

objects.

• For some finite set , let

be a collection of ma-

trices such that

, and such that

(in ).

M 5The number is also known as the degree of the cover. (Not to be confused
with the degree of a vertex.)

6For a formal definition of code equivalence, see, for example, [34].

7Note that we use a generalized notion of Tanner graphs, where parallel edges are allowed and are reflected by corresponding integer entries in the associated matrix.

8We leave it as an exercise for the reader to show that the graphs constructed in GCC1 and GCC2 are indeed two instances of the graph cover definition in Definition 2.

B. Graph-Cover Construction Special Cases
The following examples will help us to better understand how GCC1 and GCC2 can be used to obtain interesting classes of Tanner graphs, and, in particular, how the resulting graph-cover constructions can be visualized graphically. Although these examples are very concrete, they are written such that they can be easily generalized.
Example 4 (Cyclic Cover): Consider the proto-matrix

(5)

A 
 P 9Indeed, a possible approach to show this is to use the fact that

and

P 
A are permutation equivalent, i.e., there is a pair of permutation matrices

Q; Q A 
P Q 1 P 
A 1 Q ( ) such that

=(

) . Of course, for this to work,

Q; Q ` 2 L the pair ( ) must be independent of

, i.e., dependent only on the

fA g fP g Q; Q size of the matrices

and

. Such a ( ) pair can easily be

found.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PUSANE et al.: DERIVING GOOD LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES FROM LDPC BLOCK CODES

841

• Using GCC2, we obtain the matrices

(7)

whose Tanner graphs

and

, respectively, are

shown in Fig. 3(c). Note that all the block rows and all the

block columns sum (in ) to . (This observation holds in

general, not just for this example.)

Fig. 3. Proto-graph and graph-covers for the graph-cover constructions discussed in Example 4. (Compare with the corresponding graphs in Fig. 4.) (a)
A A B B Proto-graph ( ). (b) GCC1 based on ( ). Top: ( ). Bottom: ( ). A B B (c) GCC2 based on ( ). Top: (  ). Bottom: (  ).

with

and

, and whose Tanner graph

is shown in Fig. 3(a). Let

, and let the

collection of matrices

be given by

, where for

each

and each

the matrix

is defined as follows:

if otherwise.

We would like to add two comments with respect to the above

example.

First, instead of defining to be an times left-shifted iden-

tity matrix of size

, we could have defined to be an

times right-shifted identity matrix of size . Compared to the

matrices and graphs described above, such a change in defini-

tion would yield (in general) different matrices but isomorphic

graphs.

Second, we note that GCC2 was termed the “copy-and-per-

mute” construction by Thorpe et al. This terminology stems

from the visual appearance of the procedure: namely, in going

from Fig. 3(a) to (c)(top), we copy the graph several times,

and in going from Fig. 3(c)(top) to (c)(bottom), we permute the

edges of the graph, where the permutations are done within the

sets of edges that have the same preimage in Fig. 3(a).

Remark 5 (Quasi-Cyclic Codes): Consider again the matrices

that were constructed in Example 4, in particular the matrix

in (5) and its -fold cover matrix in (6). Because all matrices

in the matrix collection

are circulant,

represents

a cyclic cover of . Clearly, when seen over , the matrix

is the parity-check matrix of a quasi-cyclic binary

linear block code

Moreover, let , and let the collection of matrices

be given by

, where

, and where is an

times left-shifted identity matrix of size .

• Using GCC1, we obtain the matrices

Using the well-known isomorphism between the addition and

multiplication of circulant matrices over and the addition and

multiplication of elements of the ring

, this code can be

written equivalently as

with (6)

whose Tanner graphs

and

, respectively, are As noted above, the graphs

and

that are con-

shown in Fig. 3(b).

structed in Definition 3 are isomorphic. Applying this observa-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

842

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

tion to Example 4, the matrix

with from (7) is

therefore the parity-check matrix of a binary linear block code

that is equivalent to , i.e., the codewords of can be

obtained from the codewords of by a suitable reordering

of the codeword components. In terms of the matrices

,

which also appear in the matrix in (7), one can verify that

the polynomial parity-check matrix

can be written as

.

Besides defining finite graph covers, we can also define infinite graph covers, as illustrated in the following examples. These infinite graph covers will be crucial towards defining Tanner graphs of convolutional codes.

Example 6 (Bi-Infinite Toeplitz Covers): We continue Ex-

ample 4. However, besides keeping the proto-matrix and the

collection of matrices

, we consider a different collec-

tion of matrices

. Namely, we set

. Here

is a bi-infinite Toeplitz matrix with zeros everywhere ex-

cept for ones in the th diagonal below the main diagonal, i.e.,

if

and

otherwise. For example

... ... ... ... ...

...

...

...

...

...

... ... ... ...

where for clarity we have underlined the entries of the main

diagonal.

• Using GCC1, we obtain the matrices

and

(8)

The Tanner graph

, which is depicted in

Fig. 4(b)(top), is similar to the corresponding Tanner

graph in Fig. 3(b)(top), but with bi-infinitely many in-

Fig. 4. Proto-graph and graph-covers for the graph-cover constructions discussed in Example 6. (Compare with the corresponding graphs in Fig. 3.)
A A B (a) Proto-graph ( ). (b) GCC1 based on ( ). Top: ( ). Bottom: B A B B ( ). (c) GCC2 based on ( ). Top: (  ). Bottom: (  ).

dependent components. Analogously, the Tanner graph

, which is depicted in Fig. 4(b)(bottom), is similar to

the Tanner graph shown in Fig. 3(b)(bottom), but instead

of cyclically wrapped edge connections, the edge connec-

tions are infinitely continued on both sides.

• Using GCC2, we obtain the matrices

and

(9), shown at the bottom of the page. The Tanner graph

... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

(9)

...

...

...

...

...

... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PUSANE et al.: DERIVING GOOD LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES FROM LDPC BLOCK CODES

843

, which is depicted in Fig. 4(c)(top), is similar to

the corresponding Tanner graph in Fig. 3(c)(top), but

with bi-infinitely many independent components. Anal-

ogously, the Tanner graph

, which is depicted in

Fig. 4(c)(bottom), is similar to the Tanner graph shown in

Fig. 3(c)(bottom), but instead of cyclically wrapped edge

connections, the edge connections are infinitely continued

on both sides.

Although it is tempting to replace in Example 6 the

bi-infinite Toeplitz matrices (whose row and column index

sets equal ) by semi-infinite Toeplitz matrices (whose row

and column index sets equal ), note that the resulting

Tanner graphs

and

would then in general not

be graph covers of

. This follows from the fact that

semi-infinite Toeplitz matrices are not permutation matrices

(except for ), and so some vertex degrees of

and

would not equal the corresponding vertex degrees in

.10

Remark 7: It turns out that the Tanner graphs in Fig. 4 are

infinite graph covers of the Tanner graphs in Fig. 3. More

precisely, the Tanner graphs

in

Fig. 4 are graph covers of the corresponding Tanner graphs

in Fig. 3. For the Tanner graphs

in Figs. 3(b)(top) and 4(b)(top) and the Tanner graphs

in Figs. 3(c)(top) and 4(c)(top), this statement is easily

verified by inspection.

To verify that the Tanner graph

in Fig. 4(c)(bottom) is a

graph cover of

in Fig. 3(c)(bottom), we apply GCC2 with

proto-matrix , with resulting matrix , with the set , with

the collection of matrices

, and with the collection of

permutation matrices

as follows. Namely, we let the

proto-matrix be the matrix from (7) (there denoted by ), we

let the resulting matrix be the matrix in (9) (there denoted by

), we define

, we select

(10)

(11)

and we select

and

Example 6. Clearly,

, where was defined in (in ).11 With this we have

... ... ... ...

...

...

...

...

...

...

... ... ... ...

and one can verify that this matrix equals the matrix in (9) (there

denoted by ), which means that

is indeed an infinite

cover of . We remark that, interestingly, in this process we

have shown how a certain GCC2 graph cover of a proto-matrix

can be written as a GCC2 graph cover of a certain GCC2 graph

cover of that proto-matrix.

Finally, a similar argument shows that the Tanner graph

in Fig. 4(b)(bottom) is a graph cover of the Tanner graph in

Fig. 3(b)(bottom), also denoted by .

There are many other ways of writing a proto-matrix as

a sum of a collection of matrices

. The next example

discusses two such possibilities.

Example 8: Consider the proto-matrix

that is shown in Fig. 5(a), and that also appeared in Example 1.

Its Tanner graph

is -regular, i.e., all variable nodes

have degree and all check nodes have degree . Let

, and consider the collection of matrices

with

and

, where the matrices and are de-

fined as in Example 6. In the following, we look at two different

choices of the collection of matrices

.

• Fig. 5(c) shows a typical part of the matrix that is ob-

tained when GCC2 is used to construct a graph cover of

with the collection of matrices

defined as shown

in Fig. 5(a).

• Fig. 5(d) shows a typical part of the matrix when GCC2

is used to construct a graph cover of with the collection

of matrices

defined as shown in Fig. 5(b).

Overall, because of the choice of the collection

, the

support of both matrices possesses a banded diagonal struc-

ture. Moreover, the different choices of the collection

leads to a somewhat narrower banded diagonal structure in the

first case compared to the second case.

10As will be clear from the discussion later on, in this paper we take an approach where in a first step we construct bi-infinite Tanner graphs that are “proper” graph covers and where in a second step we obtain semi-infinite Tanner graphs by applying a “shortening” procedure to these bi-infinite Tanner graphs. Alternatively, one could also choose an approach based on “improper” graph covers. Both approaches have their advantages and disadvantages; we preferred to take the first approach.

The next example makes a crucial observation; namely, it shows that the above graph-cover constructions can be applied repeatedly to obtain additional interesting classes of Tanner graphs.
A A 11Note that a nonzero block diagonal of would be put in .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

844

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

A A A Fig. 5. Matrices appearing in Example 8. (See main text for details.) (a) First decomposition of the matrix into the matrices and . (b) Second decompoA A A B A B sition of the matrix into the matrices and . (c) Part of the matrix  based on the first decomposition of . (d) Part of the matrix  based on the second A decomposition of .

Example 9 (Iterated Graph-Cover Construction): Starting

ered to be a proto-matrix by itself; cf. Fig. 6(b). Based on

with the proto-matrix from Example 4, we consider two it-

the “cutting line” shown in Fig. 6(b), we define the matrices

erated graph-cover constructions. In the first case, we apply

and as follows: the nonzero part of equals

GCC1 and then GCC2, and in the second case we apply GCC2

twice.

• Consider the matrix obtained from the matrix using

GCC1, like in Example 4. The resulting matrix is shown

in (6) and will be called in this example, since it is con-

sidered to be a proto-matrix by itself; cf. Fig. 6(a). Based on

the “cutting line” shown in Fig. 6(a), we define the matrices

and as follows: the nonzero part of equals

the nonzero part of the lower triangular part of and the

nonzero part of equals the nonzero part of the upper

triangular part of . (Clearly,

.) Ap-

plying the procedure from Example 8, Fig. 6(c) shows a

typical part of the matrix that is obtained when GCC2

is used to construct a graph cover of .

• Consider the graph-cover obtained from using GCC2,

like in Example 4. The resulting matrix is shown in (7)

and will be called in this example, since it is consid-

the nonzero part of the lower triangular part of and the

nonzero part of equals the nonzero part of the upper

triangular part of . (Clearly,

.) Ap-

plying the procedure from Example 8, Fig. 6(d) shows a

typical part of the matrix that is obtained when GCC2

is used to construct a graph cover of .

We observe a large difference in the positions of the nonzero

entries in and .

• In the first case, the two graph-cover constructions are “in-

compatible” and the positions of the nonzero entries in

follow a “nonsimple” or “pseudorandom” pattern. As

we will see in Example 18 with the help of simulation re-

sults, such Tanner graphs can lead to time-varying LDPC

convolutional codes with very good performance.

• In the second case, the two graph-cover constructions are

“compatible” in the sense that can be obtained from

the proto-matrix by applying GCC2 with suitable matrix

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PUSANE et al.: DERIVING GOOD LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES FROM LDPC BLOCK CODES

845

A A B B Fig. 6. Matrices appearing in Example 9. (See main text for details.) (a) Matrix , (b) Matrix , (c) Part of matrix  , (d) Part of matrix  .

collections

and

. As such, the positions

of the nonzero entries of follow a relatively “simple”

or “nonrandom” pattern, which leads to a time-invariant

LDPC convolutional code.

binary code . We say that the lengthby shortening at position if

code is obtained

The above procedure of obtaining two matrices that add up to a matrix is called “cutting a matrix.” Actually, we will also use this term if there is no simple cutting line, as in the above examples, and also if the matrix is written as the sum of more than two matrices (cf. Example 1 and the paragraphs after it).

In terms of parity-check matrices, a possible parity-check matrix

of is obtained by deleting the th column of . In terms

of Tanner graphs, this means that the Tanner graph

is

obtained from

by removing the th variable node, along

with its incident edges. In the following, we will also use the

term “shortening” to denote this graph modification procedure. C. Revisiting the Tanner and the JFZ Unwrapping Techniques Now, to explain the Tanner unwrapping technique in terms of

In Section II-C, we introduced two techniques, termed the graph covers, consider the quasi-cyclic block code defined

Tanner and the JFZ unwrapping techniques, to derive convolu- by the polynomial parity-check matrix

of size

tional codes from block codes. In this subsection we revisit these , i.e.,

unwrapping techniques. In particular, we show how they can be

cast in terms of graph covers and how the two unwrapping tech-

niques are connected.

Because of the importance of the coding-theoretic notion of where the polynomial operations are performed modulo

shortening [34] for this subsection, we briefly revisit this con- (see also Remark 5). As already mentioned in Section II-C, the

cept. Let be a parity-check matrix that defines some length- Tanner unwrapping technique is simply based on dropping these

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

846

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

modulo computations. More precisely, with a quasi-cyclic block parity-check matrix of some block code as the sum

code , we associate the convolutional code

(in ) of a collection of matrices

. The con-

volutional code is then defined to be

(12)

with polynomial parity-check matrix

where

Again, the change of indeterminate from to indicates the

lack of modulo

operations.

In the following we will give, with the help of an example, two

interpretations of the Tanner unwrapping technique in terms of

graph covers.

Example 10: Unwrapping the quasi-cyclic block code that was considered in Remark 5, we obtain a rate- timeinvariant convolutional code

...

...

...

... ... ... ... (13)
With the help of an example, we now explain how the JFZ unwrapping technique can be cast in terms of graph-covers.

with polynomial parity-check matrix

Consider now the infinite graph covers that were constructed

in Example 6 using GCC1, in particular . Let

be the set of codewords defined by the Tanner graph

.

Then, the convolutional code

is a shortened version of

where all codeword bits corresponding to negative

time indices have been shortened. Therefore, the Tanner graph

of

is given by the Tanner graph in Fig. 4(b)(bottom),

where all bit nodes with negative time indices, along with their

incident edges, are removed. Clearly, this bit-node and edge re-

moval process implies decreasing the degrees of some check

nodes. In fact, some check nodes become obsolete, because their

degree is decreased to zero.

Therefore, one interpretation of the Tanner unwrapping technique in terms of graph covers is that the Tanner graph of the convolutional code is obtained by taking a suitable graph cover of the same proto-graph that was used to construct the quasicyclic LDPC code, along with some suitable shortening.

Example 12: Consider the infinite graph covers that were

constructed using GCC2 in Example 6, in particular . Let

be the set of valid assignments to the Tanner graph

. Moreover, let

, and let

be defined as in

(12). Then, the code

is a shortened version of

,

where all codeword bits corresponding to negative time indices

have been shortened. Therefore, the Tanner graph of

is

given by the Tanner graph in Fig. 4(c)(bottom), where all the bit

nodes with negative time indices are shortened.

In order to connect the unwrapping techniques due to Tanner and due to JFZ, we show now, with the help of an example, that in fact the unwrapping technique due to Tanner can be seen as a special case of the unwrapping technique due to JFZ.12

Example 13: Consider the quasi-cyclic block code defined

by the parity-check matrix

, where was defined

in (7). Applying the JFZ unwrapping technique with the matrix

decomposition

(in ), with defined in (10)

and defined in (11),

turns out to equal a submatrix of

in (9), namely the submatrix of where the row and column

index set are equal to . However, the code defined by

is equivalent to the code defined by the Tanner unwrapping tech-

nique applied to the quasi-cyclic code defined by .

Example 11: We continue Remark 5 and Example 10. Therefore, the unwrapping technique due to JFZ is more gen-

Clearly, in the same way as the block code

is equivalent eral. In fact, whereas the Tanner unwrapping technique leads to

to the block code , we can define a code

(with

parity-check matrix

) that is equivalent to

. The

observations in Remark 7 and Example 10 can then be used to

show that the Tanner graph of

equals a graph cover of

the Tanner graph , along with some suitable shortening.

Therefore, the second interpretation of the Tanner unwrapping in terms of graph covers is that the Tanner graph of the convolutional code is obtained by taking a suitable graph cover of the Tanner graph of the quasi-cyclic code, along with some suitable shortening.
Now turning our attention to the JFZ unwrapping technique, recall from Section II-C that this method is based on writing a

time-invariant convolutional codes, the unwrapping technique due to JFZ can, depending on the parity-check matrix decomposition and the internal structure of the terms in the decomposition, lead to time-varying convolutional codes with nontrivial period.13
Despite the fact that the unwrapping technique due to Tanner is a special case of the unwrapping technique due to JFZ, it is nevertheless helpful to have both unwrapping techniques at
12We leave it as an exercise for the reader to show the validity of this connection beyond this specific example.
13Of course, if the underlying quasi-cyclic block code is suitably chosen, then also the Tanner unwrapping technique can yield a time-varying convolutional code; however, we do not consider this option here.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PUSANE et al.: DERIVING GOOD LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES FROM LDPC BLOCK CODES

847

hand, because sometimes one framework can be more conve-

nient than the other. We will use both perspectives in the next

section.

We conclude this section with the following remarks.

• Although most of the examples in this section have regular

bit node degree and regular check node degree , there

is nothing special about this choice of bit and check node

degrees; any other choice would work equally well.

• Although all polynomial parity-check matrices that ap-

pear in this section contain only monomials, this is not re-

quired, i.e., the developments in this section work equally

well for polynomial parity-check matrices containing the

zero polynomial, monomials, binomials, trinomials, and

so on.

• It can easily be verified that if the matrix in Definition

3 contains only zeros and ones, then the graph covers con-

structed in GCC1 and GCC2 never have parallel edges. In

particular, if is the parity-check matrix of a block code

(like in most examples in this paper), then the constructed

graph covers never have parallel edges. However, if con-

tains entries that are larger than one, then there is the poten-

tial for the constructed graph covers to have parallel edges;

if parallel edges really appear depends then critically on

the choice of the decomposition

(in ) and

the choice of the permutation matrices

. An ex-

ample of such a case is the Tanner graph construction in

Section V-C, where

and where

and

are chosen such that parallel edges are avoided

in the constructed graph cover. We note that in the case

of iterated graph-cover constructions it can make sense to

have parallel edges in the intermediate graph covers. How-

ever, in the last graph-cover construction stage, parallel

edges are usually avoided, because parallel edges in Tanner

graphs typically lead to a weakening of the code and/or of

the message-passing iterative decoder.

of 100 iterations, with the block code decoders employing a syndrome-check based stopping rule. For comparing the performance of unwrapped convolutional codes with their underlying block codes we will use the following metric.
Definition 14: For a convolutional code constructed from an underlying block code, we define its “convolutional gain” to be the difference in SNR required to achieve a particular BER with the convolutional code compared to achieving the same BER with the block code.
The rest of this section is structured as follows. First, we discuss the construction of some time-invariant LDPC convolutional codes based on the Tanner unwrapping technique. In this context, we make a simple observation about how the syndrome former memory can sometimes be reduced without changing the convolutional code. Second, we present a construction of timevarying LDPC convolutional codes based on iterated graphcover constructions. An important subtopic here will be an investigation of the influence of the “diagonal cut” (which is used to define a graph cover) on the decoding performance.
A. Construction of Time-Invariant LDPC Convolutional Codes Based on the Tanner Unwrapping Technique
In this section, we revisit a class of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes and their associated convolutional codes that were studied in [36]. As we will see, they are instances of the quasi-cyclic code construction in Example 4 and Remark 5, and the corresponding convolutional code construction based on Tanner’s unwrapping technique in Example 10.
Example 15: Consider the regular proto-matrix
(14)

with

and

. We apply GCC1, as in Example

IV. GRAPH-COVER-BASED CONSTRUCTIONS OF LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES
Although the graph-cover constructions and unwrapping

4 and Remark 5, with an interesting choice of permutation matrices first suggested by Tanner [37] that yields the parity-check matrix

techniques that were discussed in Sections II and III are

mathematically quite straightforward, it is important to under-

(15)

stand how they can be applied to obtain LDPC convolutional

codes with good performance and attractive encoder and decoder architectures. To that end, this section explores a variety of code design options and comments on some practical issues. It also proposes a new “random” unwrapping technique which

where as before matrix of size parity-check is

is an times left-circularly shifted identity

and

. The corresponding polynomial

leads to convolutional codes whose performance compares

favorably to other codes with the same parameters. Of course,

other variations than the ones presented here are possible,

in particular, by suitably combining some of the example

constructions.

The resulting quasi-cyclic

-regular LDPC block codes

The simulation results for the codes in this section plot have block length

. In particular, for

,

the decoded bit error rate (BER) versus the signal-to-noise and

, we obtain codes of length 155, 240, and 400,

ratio (SNR)

and were obtained by assuming binary respectively, whose simulated BER performance results are

phase-shift keying (BPSK) modulation and an additive white shown in Fig. 7. The choice

yields the well-known

Gaussian noise channel (AWGNC). All decoders were based on length-155 quasi-cyclic block code that was first introduced by

the sum-product algorithm [35] and were allowed a maximum Tanner [37] (see also the discussion in [18]).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

848

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

Fig. 7. Performance of three (3; 5)-regular quasi-cyclic LDPC block codes and their associated time-invariant and time-varying LDPC convolutional codes. (Note that the small gaps that appear between the second, third, and fourth curves for high signal-to-noise ratios are caused by a slight difference in code rates due to the existence of redundant rows in the block code parity-check matrices.)

Unwrapping these codes by the Tanner unwrapping technique • The permutation matrices (more precisely, the circulant

as in Example 10, we obtain a rate- time-invariant convolu-

matrices) that were used for constructing the quasi-cyclic

tional code with

defined by the polynomial parity-

codes in this example were not chosen to optimize the

check matrix

Hamming distance or the pseudoweight properties of the

code. In particular, a different choice of circulant matrices

may result in better high-SNR performance, i.e., in the

so-called “error floor” region of the BER curve. For choices

of codes with better Hamming distance properties, we refer

Its decoding performance is also shown in Fig. 7 under the label

“

time-invariant conv. code with

.” We con-

clude this example with a few remarks.

the reader to [38]. • The remaining curves in Fig. 7 will be discussed in Ex-
ample 18.

• Fig. 7 shows that the convolutional code exhibits a “convo- We conclude this section with some comments on the syn-

lutional gain” of between 0.5 and 0.7 dB compared to the drome former memory of the convolutional codes obtained

quasi-cyclic LDPC block code at moderate BERs by the Tanner unwrapping technique, in particular how this syn-

and that the gain remains between 0.15 and 0.3 dB at lower drome former memory can sometimes be reduced without

BERs.

changing the convolutional code.

• Note that the polynomial parity-check matrix

Assume that we have obtained a polynomial parity-check ma-

that is obtained by the Tanner unwrapping technique trix

from

according to the Tanner method.

is independent of the parameter of the polynomial Clearly, the syndrome former memory is given by the largest

parity-check matrix

, as long as is strictly exponent that appears in

. In some instances there is a

larger than the largest exponent appearing in

.

Moreover, for

, the Tanner graph of

is

closely related to the Tanner graph of

, and so

it is not surprising to see that, for larger , the decoding

performance of quasi-cyclic LDPC block codes based on

tends to the decoding performance of the LDPC

simple way of reducing without changing the convolutional

code. Namely, if is the minimal exponent that appears in the

polynomials of a given row of

, then the polynomials

in this row of

can be divided by . We illustrate this

syndrome former memory reduction for the small convolutional

code that appeared in Example 10.

convolutional based on

, as illustrated by the Example 16: Applying the Tanner unwrapping tech-

two curves labeled “

QC code” and “

nique to the polynomial parity-check matrix

of the

QC code” in Fig. 7.

quasi-cyclic LDPC code with

in Remark 5, we obtain

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PUSANE et al.: DERIVING GOOD LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES FROM LDPC BLOCK CODES

849

4) Finally, looking at as the parity-check matrix of a bi-infinite convolutional code, we obtain the parity-check matrix of a convolutional code by shortening the code bit positions corresponding to negative time indices.
Here, Steps 3 and 4 can be seen as an application of the JFZ unwrapping method.

The following example shows how this construction can be applied to obtain LDPC convolutional codes with excellent performance. (In the example, where suitable, we will refer to the analogous matrices of Example 9 and Fig. 6 that were used to illustrate the iterated graph-cover construction.)

Fig. 8. Parts of the scalar parity-check matrices [see (2)] corresponding to the

m = 6 m = 3 two equivalent LDPC convolutional codes with syndrome former memories (a)

and (b)

.

of a rate- time-invariant LDPC convolutional

code, as shown in Example 10, with syndrome former memory

. Following the procedure discussed in the paragraph

above, the first and second rows of

can be divided by

and , respectively, to yield an equivalent convolutional

code with syndrome former memory

and polynomial

parity-check matrix

(16)

Fig. 8 shows parts of the corresponding scalar parity-check ma-

trix

for

, together with the original scalar parity-

check matrix for

, and illustrates the equivalence of the

two matrices in the sense that only the ordering of the rows is

different, which does not affect the corresponding convolutional

code. In this example, the order of the even-numbered rows stays

the same, while the odd-numbered rows are shifted by four po-

sitions. The equivalence of the two parity-check matrices can be

seen by noting that the parity-check matrix, outside of the diag-

onal structure, is filled with zeros.

B. Construction of Time-Varying LDPC Convolutional Codes Based on Iterated Graph-Cover Constructions
As was seen in Example 9, interesting graph covers can be obtained by combining GCC1 with GCC2, or vice versa. Inspired by that example, this subsection considers iterated graph-cover constructions for constructing Tanner graphs of LDPC convolutional codes, in particular of time-varying LDPC convolutional codes.

Definition 17: Based on a combination of GCC1 and GCC2,

and the code-shortening concept introduced in Section III-C,

we propose the following construction of LDPC convolutional

codes.

1) We start with a proto-matrix of size

.

2) We apply GCC1 to with finite-size permutation matrices

and obtain the matrix .

3) We apply GCC2 to with permutation matrices that are

bi-infinite Toeplitz matrices and obtain the matrix .

Example 18: Based on Definition 17, we construct an LDPC

convolutional code by performing the following steps.

1) We start with the same regular proto-matrix as in Ex-

ample 15, for which

and

.

2) We apply GCC1 to with permutation matrices that are

circulant matrices of size and obtain the parity-check

matrix

shown in (15), which is the analogue of

in Fig. 6(a).

3) We apply GCC2 to

with permutation ma-

trices that are bi-infinite Toeplitz matrices and obtain a

new parity-check matrix . This is analogous to the tran-

sition of the matrix in Fig. 6(a) to the matrix

in Fig. 6(c). The “diagonal cut” is obtained by alternately

moving

units to the right and then

units

down.

4) Finally, we obtain the desired convolutional code by short-

ening the code bit positions corresponding to negative time

indices.

For the choices

, this construction results in

rate- time-varying convolutional codes with syndrome

former memory

, respectively, and with

constraint length

, respec-

tively. The label “time-varying” is indeed justified because the

convolutional codes constructed here can be expressed in the

form of the parity-check matrix in (1) with a suitable choice

of syndrome former memory , nontrivial period , and

submatrices

.

The decoding performance of these codes is shown in Fig. 7,

labeled “

time-varying conv. code with

.” As

originally noted in [39], we observe that these three LDPC con-

volutional codes achieve significantly better performance at a

BER of

than the other codes shown in this plot, namely

with “convolutional gains” of 2.0 dB for the

convo-

lutional code, 2.4 dB for the

convolutional code, and

2.8 dB for the

convolutional code, compared to the

three respective underlying LDPC block codes.

In order to compare these codes based on a given decoding

processor (hardware) complexity, we consider a block code of

length

(see [40] and [41]). The above time-varying

convolutional code for

has constraint length

, and hence approximately the same pro-

cessor complexity as the quasi-cyclic block code of length

in Fig. 7 and the time-invariant convolutional code with

in Fig. 7, but it achieves large gains compared to

both of these codes. We note, in addition, that the performance

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

850

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

Fig. 9. Performance of a family of irregular proto-graph-based LDPC block codes and the associated time-varying LDPC convolutional codes.

of the time-varying convolutional code with constraint length

tional gain.” The next example is an illustration of this

is quite remarkable, since, at a BER of , it per-

point.

forms within 1 dB of the iterative decoding threshold of 0.965

dB, while having the same processor complexity as a block code

of length only

. In Section VI-C, we discuss some pos-

sible reasons for these “convolutional gains,” along with their

associated implementation costs in terms of decoder memory

and decoding delay.

We make the following observations with respect to the above

definition and example.

• The LDPC code construction in the above example yields

time-varying LDPC convolutional codes with syndrome

former memory

and period

. Most im-

portantly, varying in the above construction leads to dif-

ferent LDPC convolutional codes. This is in contrast to the

Tanner unwrapping technique discussed in Section IV-A,

where the obtained LDPC convolutional code is indepen-

dent of the parameter , as long as is strictly larger than

the largest exponent in

.

• As mentioned previously in Example 9, the iterated graph-

cover construction based on the combination of GCC1 and

GCC2 yields Tanner graphs that have a “pseudorandom”

structure, a structure that seems to be beneficial as indi-

cated by the above simulation results. (We remark that the

improved performance of the time-varying LDPC convo-

lutional codes obtained by unwrapping a randomly con-

structed LDPC block code was first noted by Lentmaier et

al. [42].)

• Instead of constructing a first parity-check matrix as in

Step 2 of Definition 17, one can also start with any other

(randomly or nonrandomly constructed, regular or irreg-

Example 19: As was done in [41], one can replace the paritycheck matrix that was constructed in Step 2 of Definition 17 by an irregular LDPC block code with optimized iterative decoding thresholds. In particular, one can start with the parity-check matrix of the rate- irregular proto-graph-based code from [43] with an iterative decoding threshold of 0.63 dB, and several of its punctured versions. Fig. 9 shows simulation results for the obtained block and convolutional codes. Each simulated block code had a block length of about 2500, with code rates ranging from to . We see that “convolutional gains” ranging from 0.6 to 0.9 dB at a BER of were obtained.
Similarly, it was shown in [24] that an LDPC convolutional code derived from a randomly constructed rate- irregular LDPC block code with block length 2400 outperformed the underlying code by almost 0.8 dB at a BER of . The degree distribution of the underlying LDPC block code was fully optimized and had an iterative decoding threshold of 0.3104 dB [11].

Of course, there are other ways of applying the “diagonal cut”

in Step 3 of Example 18, and so it is natural to investigate the

influence of different “diagonal cuts” on the decoding perfor-

mance. We will do this in the next few paragraphs by extending

the discussion that was presented right after Example 1.

We start by assuming that the matrix after Step 2 of Definition

17 has size

, and define

. Then, for any

positive integer that divides , we can perform a “diagonal

cut” where we alternately move

units to the

right and then

units down [i.e.,

ular) parity-check matrix, and still achieve a “convolu-

]. With this, the obtained convolutional code is a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PUSANE et al.: DERIVING GOOD LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES FROM LDPC BLOCK CODES

851

Fig. 10. Performance of a family of LDPC convolutional codes obtained from a (3; 6)-regular LDPC block code using different step sizes.

periodically time-varying LDPC convolutional code with rate chosen that results in a convolutional code with

. The

, syndrome former memory

variable nodes corresponding to the all-zero columns are not

, period

, and transmitted, i.e., they are punctured, so that the rate corresponds

constraint length

. (Note that the to the size of the original parity-check matrix.

syndrome former memory depends on , but the constraint For the “diagonal cut” LDPC convolutional code construc-

length is independent of .)

tions discussed above, the unwrapped convolutional codes have

Example 20: Here we simulate the performance of some

LDPC convolutional codes obtained according to the above

generalization of the “diagonal cut.” Namely, we start with a

randomly-constructed

-regular LDPC block code based

on a parity-check matrix of size 1024 2048. Therefore

, and

. (Note that

and

in this

case.) Fig. 10 shows the performance of the resulting family

of LDPC convolutional codes, where varies in powers of 2

from 1 to 1024, each with constraint length

. We

make the following observations. First, the case

is

not interesting because it results in

, i.e., it is a trivial

concatenation of copies of the block code, and so the BER is the

same as for the underlying block code. Secondly, for all other

the minimum possible constraint length , which is equal to the block length of the underlying block code. Although this is a desirable property for practical implementation, we do not need to limit ourselves to diagonal cuts in general.
Inspired by the graph-cover construction of Fig. 5(b) and (d) in Example 8, instead of a “diagonal cut” we now consider a “random cut,” which we define as a partition of the parity-check matrix into two matrices that add up (over ) to the paritycheck matrix. Despite the randomness of this approach, several of the key unwrapping properties of the “diagonal cut” are preserved. For example, the computational complexity per decoded bit does not change, since the degree distributions of the resulting codes are all equal.14 However, the LDPC convolutional codes based on a “random cut” typically require larger decoding processor sizes as a result of increased code constraint lengths.

choices of , the constructed codes perform very similarly, each exhibiting a sizable “convolutional gain” compared to the block code, although the syndrome former memory is different in each case.

Example 21: We continue Example 20; however, instead of

performing “diagonal cuts,” we perform “random cuts.” Fig. 11

shows the performance of five such LDPC convolutional codes,

each with rate and constraint length

, compared

A special case of the above code construction deserves men- to the underlying block code and the LDPC convolutional code

tion. When

, i.e., and are relatively prime, the only constructed in Example 20 (with parameters

possible step size is obtained by choosing

, which , and

). We note that the increase in constraint length

results in the above-mentioned uninteresting case of trivial from

to

due to the “random cut” results

concatenations of copies of the block code. However, all-zero

columns can be inserted in the parity-check matrix such that

a value of

is obtained, which allows a step size to be

14This is guaranteed by choosing a random partition of the block code paritycheck matrix and then using this partition to construct one period of the timevarying convolutional code parity-check matrix.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

852

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

Fig. 11. Performance of “randomly unwrapped” LDPC convolutional codes obtained from a (3; 6)-regular LDPC block code using random partitions.

in a small additional coding gain in exchange for the larger decoding processor size.

Finally, we note that, for a size

sparse parity-check ma-

trix with nonzero entries, there are a total of possible

ways of choosing a random cut. However, due to the sparsity,

there are only distinct random cuts, where

.

V. CONNECTIONS TO OTHER LDPC CODES BASED ON GRAPH-COVER CONSTRUCTIONS
In this section, we briefly discuss some other graph-coverbased LDPC code constructions proposed in the literature, namely by Ivkovic et al. [44], Divsalar et al. [43], [45], Lentmaier et al. [46], [47], and Kudekar et al. [48].

A. LDPC Code Construction by Ivkovic et al.

The LDPC code construction by Ivkovic et al. [44] can

be seen as an application of the graph-cover construction in

Figs. 5(b) and (d) in Example 8. Namely, in terms of our

notation, Ivkovic et al. [44] start with a parity-check matrix ,

choose the set

, a collection of zero-one matrices

such that

(in ), and the collection

of permutation matrices

Most importantly, the decomposition of into and is done such that trapping sets that were present in the Tanner graph of are not present in the Tanner graph of the new parity-check matrix. In addition, Ivkovic et al. give guarantees on the relationship between the minimum Hamming distances of the old and new code.15

B. LDPC Code Construction by Divsalar et al.
One of the LDPC code constructions by Divsalar et al. [43], [45] is the so-called rate- AR4JA LDPC code construction, which was also considered earlier in Example 19. A particularly attractive, from an implementation perspective, version of this code construction is obtained by an iterated graph-cover construction procedure, where each graph-cover construction is based on a cyclic cover, as in the application of GCC1 in Example 4. Although cyclic covers result in simplified encoding and decoding circuitry, codes based on cyclic covers are known to have the disadvantage that the minimum Hamming distance is upper bounded by a number that is a function of the proto-graph structure [49], [50]. However, because the cyclic cover of a cyclic cover of the proto-graph is not necessarily a cyclic cover of the proto-graph, such disadvantages are avoided to a certain extent in the AR4JA LDPC code construction. Nevertheless, ultimately the minimum Hamming distance of such codes will also be upper bounded by some number; however, these bounds usually become relevant only beyond the code length of interest.16

C. LDPC Code Construction by Lentmaier et al. and Kudekar et al.

The LDPC code constructions by Lentmaier et al. [46], [47]

and Kudekar et al. [48] can also be seen as iterated graph-cover

constructions. We now describe a specific instance of this con-

struction.

• It starts with a proto-matrix

.

• The first graph-cover construction is very similar to the

bi-infinite graph-cover construction in Example 6 and

Fig. 4. Namely, in terms of our notation, we define the set

, the collection of matrices

15See also the discussion of similar results in [49, Appendix J].

16For this statement we assume that the degree of the first cover is fixed.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PUSANE et al.: DERIVING GOOD LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES FROM LDPC BLOCK CODES

853

with

and

,

and the collection of permutation matrices

with

, where as before is a bi-infinite Toeplitz matrix

with zeros everywhere except for ones in the th diagonal

below the main diagonal.

• The second graph-cover construction is a random graph-

cover construction of cover-degree .

• The code is shortened. Namely, for some positive integer

all codeword indices corresponding to values outside the

range

are shortened.17

We now point out some differences between this code construc-

tion and the LDPC convolutional code construction in Defini-

tion 17. Namely, the LDPC code ensemble constructed above

has the following properties.

• The first graph-cover construction is based on bi-infinite

Toeplitz permutation matrices, and the second graph-cover

construction is based on finite-size permutation matrices.

• The analysis focuses on the case where and go to

infinity (in that order), i.e., for a fixed the parameter

tends to infinity. Afterwards, tends to infinity.

• The number of check nodes with degree smaller than in

the Tanner graph is proportional to .

• In [48], for the binary erasure channel, when and go

to infinity (in that order), Kudekar et al. prove that the sum-

product algorithm decoding threshold for a slight variation

of the above-mentioned ensemble of codes equals the max-

imum a-posteriori decoding threshold for the ensemble of

-regular LDPC codes. This is a very remarkable prop-

erty. (In [51], using density evolution methods, Lentmaier

et al. give numerical evidence that this statement might also

hold for binary-input output-symmetric channels beyond

the binary erasure channel.)

On the other hand, the codes constructed in Definition 17 have

the following properties. [We assume that the underlying block

code is a -regular LDPC code.]

• The first graph-cover construction is based on finite-size per-

mutation matrices, and the second graph-cover construction

is based on bi-infinite Toeplitz permutation matrices.

• In a typical application of this construction, is fixed.

• The number of check nodes with degree smaller than

in the Tanner graph of the LDPC convolutional code is

proportional to .

• For a binary-input output-symmetric channel, the per-

formance of the unterminated LDPC convolutional code

under the continuous sliding window sum-product algo-

rithm decoding discussed in Section II-B improves with

increasing (see, e.g., Fig. 7), but the ultimate asymptotic

threshold of such unterminated decoding is unknown.18

17Although this code construction method could be presented such that the shortening is done between the two graph-cover construction steps, namely by
0shortening all codeword indices that correspond to values outside the range
[ L; L], we have opted to present the code construction such that the shortening
is done after the two graph-cover construction steps. In this way, the structure of the code construction description matches better the description in Definition 17.
18Lentmaier et al. have shown in [46] and [47] that properly terminated LDPC convolutional codes become equivalent to the LDPC block codes constructed by Kudekar et al. in [48] and inherit their excellent asymptotic threshold properties, but whether this is true for unterminated LDPC convolutional codes is still an open question.

The differences between these two code families come mainly

from the fact that the codes constructed by Lentmaier et al. and

Kudekar et al. are essentially block codes, although sophisti-

cated ones, whereas the codes in Definition 17 are convolutional

codes, along with their advantages and disadvantages. In partic-

ular, the way the limits of the parameters are taken, there is a

significant difference in the fraction of check nodes with degree

strictly smaller than . Namely, in the case of the codes by Lent-

maier et al. and Kudekar et al. this fraction is a fixed nonzero

function of (here we assume fixed and

), whereas

in the case of the codes considered in this paper, this fraction is

zero (here we assume fixed and an unterminated convolutional

code).

We conclude this section with the following remarks. Namely,

although the convolutional codes in Definition 17 may not enjoy

the same asymptotic thresholds as the block code constructions

by Lentmaier et al. and by Kudekar et al., they lend themselves to

a continuous decoding architecture, as described in Section II-B,

which can be advantageous in certain applications, such as

data streaming, without a predetermined frame structure. More

importantly, however, it is very encouraging that the simulation

results reported in this paper indicate that sizable “convolutional

gains” are already visible for very reasonable constraint/code

lengths. In the next section, we discuss some possible reasons for

these gains. Finally, it is worth noting that, as the block lengths

and associated constraint lengths of the constructions presented

in this section become larger, the observed “convolutional gains”

will become smaller since the block code results will approach

their respective thresholds.

VI. ANALYSIS OF DERIVED LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES
This section collects some analytical results about LDPC convolutional codes. In particular, we compare the existence/nonexistence of cycles in LDPC block and LDPC convolutional codes, we present some properties of pseudocodewords, and we discuss the—mostly moderate—cost increase in decoder complexity that is incurred by going from LDPC block to LDPC convolutional codes.
A. Graph-Cycle Analysis
It is well known that cycles in the Tanner graph representation of a sparse code affect message-passing iterative decoding algorithms, with short cycles generally pushing the performance further away from optimum. (Indeed, attempts to investigate and minimize these effects have been made in [52] and [53], where the authors propose LDPC code construction procedures to maximize the connectivity of short cycles to the rest of the graph, thus also maximizing the independence of the messages flowing through a cycle.) Hence it is common practice to design codes that do not contain short cycles, so as to obtain independent messages in at least the initial iterations of the decoding process.
Avoiding cycles in Tanner graphs also has the benefit of avoiding pseudocodewords.19 To see this, let the active
19Here and in the following, pseudocodewords refer to pseudocodewords as they appear in linear programming (LP) decoding [54], [55] and in the graphcover-based analysis of message-passing iterative decoding in [22], [23]. For other notions of pseudocodewords, in particular computation tree pseudocodewords, we refer to the discussion in [56].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

854

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

TABLE I
N ` AVERAGE (PER BIT NODE) NUMBER  OF CYCLES OF LENGTH FOR THE n TANNER GRAPHS OF THE BLOCK CODES (BCS) OF BLOCK LENGTH AND  CONVOLUTIONAL CODES (CCS) OF CONSTRAINT LENGTH DISCUSSED IN
EXAMPLE 22. (ALL TANNER GRAPHS HAVE GIRTH 8.)

TABLE II
N ` AVERAGE (PER BIT NODE) NUMBER  OF CYCLES OF LENGTH FOR THE n TANNER GRAPHS OF THE BLOCK CODES (BCS) OF BLOCK LENGTH AND  CONVOLUTIONAL CODES (CCS) OF CONSTRAINT LENGTH DISCUSSED IN
EXAMPLE 23. (ALL TANNER GRAPHS HAVE GIRTH 4.)

part of a pseudocodeword be defined as the set of bit nodes corresponding to the support of the pseudocodeword, along with the adjacent edges and check nodes. With this, it holds that the active part of any pseudocodeword contains at least

Example 23: Table II shows the cycle analysis results for the rate- proto-graph-based codes that were discussed in Example 19 and whose BER performance was plotted in Fig. 9.

one cycle and/or at least one bit node of degree one. And so, given that the typical Tanner graph under consideration in this paper does not contain bit nodes of degree one, the active part of a pseudocodeword must contain at least one cycle. Therefore, avoiding cycles implicitly means avoiding

From Examples 22 and 23, we see that many of the short cycles in the Tanner graphs of the LDPC block codes are “broken” to yield cycles of larger length in the Tanner graphs of the derived LDPC convolutional codes.

pseudocodewords.20

Let and be two parity-check matrices such that

is a graph cover of

. It is a well-known result that any

cycle in

can be mapped into a cycle in

. This has

several consequences. In particular, the girth of

is at least

as large as the girth of

, and more generally,

contains

fewer short cycles than

.21 For the codes constructed in this

paper, this means that the unwrapping process (from block code

to convolutional code) can “break” some cycles in the Tanner

graph of the block code.

We now revisit some codes that were discussed in earlier sec-

B. Pseudocodeword Analysis

This section collects some comments concerning the pseu-

docodewords of the parity-check matrices under consideration

in this paper.

We start by observing that many of the statements that were

made in [36] about pseudocodewords can be extended to the

setup of this paper. In particular, if some parity-check matrices

and are such that

is a graph cover of

, then

a pseudocodeword of can be “wrapped” to obtain a pseu-

docodeword of , as is formalized in the next lemma.

tions and analyze their graph cycle structure using a brute-force search algorithm.22 Note that, in order to accurately compare the graph cycle distributions of two codes with different block/constraint lengths, we compute the total number of cycles of a given cycle length per block/constraint length, and divide this number by the block/constraint length.23

Lemma 24: Let the parity-check matrices and be such

that

is an -fold graph cover of

. More precisely,

let

for some set , for some collection

of parity-check matrices

such that

(in

), and for some collection of

permutation matrices

. Moreover, let be the set of column indices of

Example 22: Consider the LDPC block and convolutional and let

with

codes that were constructed in Examples 15 and 18 and whose column indices of . With this, if

BER performance was plotted in Fig. 7. Table I shows the av- pseudocodeword of , then

be the set of is a
with

erage number of cycles of certain lengths for the Tanner graphs

of the quasi-cyclic block codes, for the Tanner graph of the

(17)

corresponding time-invariant convolutional code, and for the

Tanner graph of the time-varying convolutional codes.

is a pseudocodeword of .

20Note that the support of any pseudocodeword is a stopping set [22], [23],

Proof: (Sketch.) There are different ways to verify this

[57].

statement. One approach is to show that, based on the fact that

21This observation has been used in many different contexts over the past ten years in the construction of LDPC and turbo codes; in particular, it was used in [42], where the authors dealt with bounding the girth of the resulting LDPC convolutional codes.
M 22The search technique that we used is based on evaluating the diagonal en-
tries of the powers of the matrix defined in [33, eq. (3.1)]. Note that this search technique works only for counting cycles of length smaller than twice the girth of the graph. For searching longer cycles, more sophisticated algorithms are needed.
23For LDPC convolutional codes, we have made use of the periodicity of the parity-check matrices in order to complete the search in a finite number of steps.

satisfies the inequalities that define the fundamental polytope

of [22], [23], [54], [55], satisfies the inequalities that define

the fundamental polytope of . (We omit the details.) Another

approach is to use the fact that pseudocodewords with rational

entries are given by suitable projections of codewords in graph

covers [22], [23]. So, for every pseudocodeword of with

rational entries, there is some graph cover of

with a code-

word in it, which, when projected down to , gives . How-

ever, that graph cover of

is also a graph cover of

,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PUSANE et al.: DERIVING GOOD LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES FROM LDPC BLOCK CODES

855

and so this codeword, when projected down to

, gives no two variable nodes that are more than positions apart can

as defined in (17). (We omit the details; see [36] for a similar, participate in the same check equation. The constraint lengths of

but less general, result.)

the LDPC convolutional codes derived from LDPC block codes

One can then proceed as in [36] and show that the AWGNC, the BSC, and the BEC pseudoweights [3], [22], [23], [54], [55], [58] of will be at least as large as the corresponding pseudoweights of . As a corollary, the minimum AWGNC, BSC, and BEC pseudoweights of are, respectively, at least as large as the corresponding minimum pseudoweights of . Similar results can also be obtained for the minimum Hamming distance.
Because the high-SNR behavior of linear programming decoding is dominated by the minimum pseudoweight of the relevant parity-check matrix, the high-SNR behavior of linear programming decoding of the code defined by is at least as good as the high-SNR behavior of linear programming decoding of the code defined by .24
In general, because of the observations made in Section VI-A about the “breaking” of cycles and the fact that the active part of a pseudocodeword must contain at least one cycle, it follows that the unwrapping process is beneficial for the pseudocodeword properties of an unwrapped code, in the sense that many pseudocodewords that exist in the base code do not map to pseudocodewords in the unwrapped code. It is an intriguing challenge to better understand this process and its influence on the low-to-medium SNR behavior of linear programming and message-passing iterative decoders, in particular, to arrive at a better analytical explanation of the significant gains that are visible in the simulation plots that were shown in Section IV. To this end, the results of [46] and [48] with respect to some related code families (see the discussion in Section V) will be very helpful, since they indicate that some of the features of the fundamental polytope deserve further analysis.

of length satisfy

. Therefore, the convolutional codes

have a processor size less than or equal to that of the underlying

block code.

On the other hand, the fully parallel pipeline decoding

architecture penalizes LDPC convolutional codes in terms of

decoder memory requirements (and decoding delay/latency) as

a result of the iterations being multiplexed in space rather than

in time. The pipeline decoder architecture of Fig. 1 consists of

identical processors of size performing decoding iter-

ations simultaneously on independent sections of a decoding

window containing constraint lengths of received symbols.

This requires times more decoder memory elements than an

LDPC block code decoder that employs a single processor of

size

performing decoding iterations successively on

the same block of received symbols. Therefore, the decoder

memory requirements and the decoding delay of the pipeline

decoder are proportional to , whereas the block decoder’s

memory and delay requirements are only proportional to .

Another way of comparing the two types of codes, preferred by

some researchers, is to equate the block length of a block code

to the memory/delay requirements, rather than the processor

size, of a convolutional code, i.e., to set

. In this

case the block code, now having a block length many times

larger than the constraint length of the convolutional code, will

typically (depending on ) outperform the convolutional code,

but at a cost of a much larger hardware processor. Finally, as

noted in Section II, the parallel pipeline decoding architecture

for LDPC convolutional codes can be replaced by a serial

looping decoding architecture, resulting in fewer processors but

a reduced throughput along with the same memory and delay

C. Cost of the “Convolutional Gain”

requirements. In summary, the convolutional gain achieved by LDPC

In this section, we investigate the cost of the convolutional convolutional codes derived from LDPC block codes comes at

gain by comparing several aspects of decoders for LDPC block the expense of increased decoder memory requirements and

and convolutional codes. In particular, we consider the com- decoding delays. Although this does not cause problems for

putational complexity, hardware complexity, decoder memory some applications that are not delay-sensitive (e.g., deep-space

requirements, and decoding delay. More details on the various communication), for other applications that are delay-sensitive

comparisons described in this section can be found in [30], [40], (e.g., real-time voice/video transmission), design specifications

and [41].

may be met by deriving LDPC convolutional codes from

LDPC block code decoders and LDPC convolutional code shorter LDPC block codes, thus sacrificing some coding gain,

decoders have the same computational complexity per decoded but reducing memory and delay requirements, or by employing

bit and per iteration since LDPC convolutional codes derived a reduced window size decoder, as suggested in the recent

from LDPC block codes have the same node degrees (row and paper by Papaleo et al. [28], with a resulting reduction in the

column weights) in their Tanner graph representations, which “convolutional gain.”

determines the number of computations required for message-

passing decoding.

VII. CONCLUSION

We adopt the notion of processor size to characterize the hardware complexity of implementing the decoder. A decoder’s processor size is proportional to the maximum number of variable nodes that can participate in a common check equation. This is the block length for a block code, since any two variable nodes in a block can participate in the same check equation. For a convolutional code, this is the constraint length , since

In this paper, we showed that it is possible to connect two known techniques for deriving LDPC convolutional codes from LDPC block codes, namely the techniques due to Tanner and due to Jiménez-Feltström and Zigangirov. This connection was explained with the help of graph covers, which were also used as a tool to present a general approach for constructing interesting classes of LDPC convolutional codes. Because it is

24We neglect here the influence of the multiplicity of the minimum pseu- important to understand how the presented code construction

doweight pseudocodewords.

methods can be used—and in particular combined—we then

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

856

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

discussed a variety of LDPC convolutional code constructions,
along with their simulated performance results.
In the future, it will be worthwhile to extend the presented
analytical results, in particular to obtain a better quantitative un-
derstanding of the low-to-medium SNR behavior of LDPC con-
volutional codes. In that respect, the insights in the papers by
Lentmaier et al. [46], [47] and Kudekar et al. [48] on the be-
havior of related code families will be valuable guidelines for
further investigation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank C. Jones, M. Lentmaier,
D. Mitchell, R. M. Tanner, and K. Zigangirov for their valu-
able discussions and comments. They also acknowledge the
constructive comments made by the reviewers.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error correcting coding and decoding: Turbo codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[2] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[3] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Electr. Eng., Linköping Univ., Linköping, Sweden, 1996.
[4] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.
[5] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, D. A. Spielman, and V. Stemann, “Practical loss-resilient codes,” in Proc. 29th Annu. ACM Symp. Theory Comput., 1997, pp. 150–159.
[6] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 585–598, Feb. 2001.
[7] S. Y. Chung, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Analysis of sumproduct decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 657–670, Feb. 2001.
[8] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[9] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[10] S. Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, Jr., T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[11] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[12] P. Oswald and A. Shokrollahi, “Capacity-achieving sequences for the erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 12, pp. 3017–3028, Dec. 2002.
[13] S. Bates, D. Elliot, and R. Swamy, “Termination sequence generation circuits for low-density parity-check convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 53, no. 9, pp. 1909–1917, Sep. 2006.
[14] S. Bates, Z. Chen, and X. Dong, “Low-density parity check convolutional codes for Ethernet networks,” in Proc. IEEE Pacific Rim Conf. Commun. Comput. Signal Process., Victoria, BC, Canada, Aug. 2005, pp. 85–88.
[15] S. Bates, L. Gunthorpe, A. E. Pusane, Z. Chen, K. Sh. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Decoders for low-density parity-check convolutional codes with large memory,” in Proc. 12th NASA Symp. VLSI Design, Coeur d’Alene, ID, Oct. 2005.
[16] R. M. Tanner, “Error-correcting coding system,” U.S. Patent # 4 295 218, Oct. 1981.
[17] R. M. Tanner, “Convolutional codes from quasi-cyclic codes: A link between the theories of block and convolutional codes,” Univ. California, Santa Cruz, CA, Tech Rep. UCSC-CRL-87-21, Nov. 1987.
[18] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984, Dec. 2004.
[19] A. Jiménez-Feltström and K. Sh. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181–2191, Sep. 1999.

[20] R. M. Tanner, “On quasi-cyclic repeat-accumulate codes,” in Proc. 37th Allerton Conf. Commun. Control Comput., Monticello, IL, Sep. 22–24, 1999, pp. 249–259.
[21] J. Thorpe, “Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from protographs,” JPL INP Progr. Rep., Aug. 2003, pp. 42–154.
[22] R. Koetter and P. O. Vontobel, “Graph covers and iterative decoding of finite-length codes,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 1–5, 2003, pp. 75–82.
[23] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Graph-cover decoding and finite-length analysis of message-passing iterative decoding of LDPC codes,” Dec. 2005 [Online]. Available: http://www.arxiv.org/abs/cs.IT/0512078
[24] A. E. Pusane, K. Sh. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Construction of irregular LDPC codes with fast encoding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Istanbul, Turkey, Jun. 11–15, 2006, vol. 3, pp. 1160–1165.
[25] L. Zongwang, C. Lei, Z. Lingqi, S. Lin, and W. H. Fong, “Efficient encoding of quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 71–81, Jan. 2006.
[26] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 638–656, Feb. 2001.
[27] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Jr., Error Control Coding, 2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2004.
[28] M. Papaleo, A. R. Iyengar, P. H. Siegel, J. Wolf, and G. Corazza, “Windowed erasure decoding of LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Cairo, Egypt, Jan. 6–8, 2010, pp. 78–82.
[29] S. Bates, Z. Chen, L. Gunthorpe, A. E. Pusane, K. Sh. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “A low-cost serial decoder architecture for low-density parity-check convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 1967–1976, Aug. 2008.
[30] A. E. Pusane, A. Jiménez-Feltström, A. Sridharan, M. Lentmaier, K. Sh. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Implementation aspects of LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 1060–1069, Jul. 2008.
[31] Y. Levy and D. J. Costello, Jr., “An algebraic approach to constructing convolutional codes from quasi-cyclic codes,” in Coding and Quantization, ser. DIMACS Series in Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science. Providence, RI: AMS, 1993, vol. 14, pp. 189–198.
[32] M. Esmaeili, T. A. Gulliver, N. P. Secord, and S. A. Mahmoud, “A link between quasi-cyclic codes and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 431–435, Jan. 1998.
[33] H. M. Stark and A. A. Terras, “Zeta functions of finite graphs and coverings,” Adv. Math., vol. 121, no. 1, pp. 124–165, Jul. 1996.
[34] F. J. MacWilliams and N. J. A. Sloane, The Theory of Error-Correcting Codes. New York: North-Holland, 1977.
[35] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[36] R. Smarandache, A. E. Pusane, P. O. Vontobel, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Pseudo-codeword performance analysis of LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 2577–2598, Jun. 2009.
[37] R. M. Tanner, “A [155, 64, 20] sparse graph (LDPC) code,” presented at the IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Sorrento, Italy, Jun. 2000.
[38] F. Hug, I. Bocharova, R. Johannesson, B. Kudryashov, and R. Satyukov, “New low-density parity-check codes with large girth based on hypergraphs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Austin, TX, Jun. 13–18, 2010, pp. 819–823.
[39] A. E. Pusane, R. Smarandache, P. O. Vontobel, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “On deriving good LDPC convolutional codes from QC LDPC block codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Nice, France, Jun. 24–29, 2007, pp. 1221–1225.
[40] D. J. Costello, Jr., A. E. Pusane, S. Bates, and K. Sh. Zigangirov, “A comparison between LDPC block and convolutional codes,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop, San Diego, CA, Feb. 6–10, 2006.
[41] D. J. Costello, Jr., A. E. Pusane, C. R. Jones, and D. Divsalar, “A comparison of ARA- and protograph-based LDPC block and convolutional codes,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop, San Diego, CA, Jan. 29–Feb. 2 2007, pp. 111–119.
[42] M. Lentmaier, D. V. Truhachev, and K. Sh. Zigangirov, “On the theory of low-density convolutional codes II,” Probl. Inf. Transm. (Problemy Peredachy Informatsii), vol. 37, pp. 288–306, Oct.–Dec. 2001.
[43] D. Divsalar, C. R. Jones, S. Dolinar, and J. Thorpe, “Protograph based LDPC codes with minimum distance linearly growing with block size,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., St. Louis, MO, Nov. 28—Dec. 5 2005, vol. 3, DOI: 10.1109/GLOCOM.2005.1577834.
[44] M. Ivkovic, S. K. Chilappagari, and B. Vasic, “Eliminating trapping sets in low-density parity-check codes by using Tanner graph covers,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 3763–3768, Aug. 2008.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PUSANE et al.: DERIVING GOOD LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES FROM LDPC BLOCK CODES

857

[45] The Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS), “Low density parity check codes for use in near-earth and deep space applications,” Experimental Specification CCSDS 131.1-O-2, Sep. 2007 [Online]. Available: http://public.ccsds.org/publications/archive/131x1o2e2.pdf
[46] M. Lentmaier, G. P. Fettweis, K. Sh. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Approaching capacity with asymptotically regular LDPC codes,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop, San Diego, CA, Feb. 8–13, 2009, pp. 173–177.
[47] M. Lentmaier, D. G. M. Mitchell, G. P. Fettweis, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Asymptotically regular LDPC codes with linear distance growth and thresholds close to capacity,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop, San Diego, CA, Jan. 31–Feb. 5 2010, DOI: 10.1109/ITA.2010.5454141.
[48] S. Kudekar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Threshold saturation via spatial coupling: Why convolutional LDPC ensembles perform so well over the BEC,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, Feb. 2011.
[49] R. Smarandache and P. O. Vontobel, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes: Influence of proto- and Tanner-graph structure on minimum Hamming distance upper bounds,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory Jan. 2009 [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/0901.4129, submitted for publication
[50] B. K. Butler and P. H. Siegel, “On distance properties of quasi-cyclic protograph-based LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Austin, TX, Jun. 13–18, 2010, pp. 809–813.
[51] M. Lentmaier, A. Sridharan, D. J. Costello, Jr., and K. S. Zigangirov, “Iterative decoding threshold analysis for LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 5274–5289, Oct. 2010.
[52] T. Tian, C. R. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPC code construction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1242–1247, Aug. 2004.
[53] A. Ramamoorthy and R. D. Wesel, “Analysis of an algorithm for irregular LDPC code construction,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Chicago, IL, Jun. 27–Jul. 2 2004, DOI: 10.1109/ISIT.2004.1365107.
[54] J. Feldman, “Decoding error-correcting codes via linear programming,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Electr. Eng. Comput. Sci., Massachusetts Inst. Technol., Cambridge, MA, 2003.
[55] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. R. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 954–972, Mar. 2005.
[56] N. Axvig, D. Dreher, K. Morrison, E. Psota, L. C. Perez, and J. L. Walker, “Analysis of connections between pseudocodewords,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 4099–4107, Sep. 2009.
[57] C. A. Kelley and D. Sridhara, “Pseudocodewords of Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 4013–4038, Nov. 2007.
[58] G. D. Forney, Jr., R. Koetter, F. Kschischang, and A. Reznik, “On the effective weights of pseudocodewords for codes defined on graphs with cycles,” in Codes, Systems, and Graphical Models, B. Marcus and J. Rosenthal, Eds. New York: Springer-Verlag, 2001, vol. 123, pp. 101–112.
Ali E. Pusane (S’99–M’08) received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in electronics and communications engineering from Istanbul Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey, in 1999 and 2002, respectively, and the M.Sc. degree in electrical engineering, the M.Sc. degree in applied mathematics, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, in 2004, 2006, and 2008, respectively.
He was a Visiting Assistant Professor at the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Notre Dame, during 2008–2009, after which he joined the Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey, as an Assistant Professor. His research is in coding theory.
Roxana Smarandache (S’96–A’01–M’04) completed her undergraduate studies in mathematics at the University of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania, in 1996, with a B.S. thesis on number theory, and received the Ph.D. degree in mathematics from the University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, in July 2001. Her dissertation was in coding theory, with the subject of algebraic convolutional codes.
She is an Associate Professor at the Department of Mathematics and Statistics, San Diego State University, San Diego, CA. During the academic year

1999–2000, she was for six months a visiting scholar at the Department of Communication Systems, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland. During the academic year 2005–2006, she was on a leave at the University of Notre Dame, on a visiting assistant professor position in the Department of Mathematics. During 2008–2009, she was on sabbatical leave in which she visited partly the Mathematics Department at the University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, and partly the Mathematics and Electrical Engineering Departments at the University of Notre Dame. Her research topics are mainly related to coding theory. Her recent interests include low-density parity-check codes, iterative and linear programming decoding, and convolutional codes.
Pascal O. Vontobel (S’96–M’97) received the Diploma degree in electrical engineering, the Post-Diploma degree in information techniques, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from ETH Zurich, Switzerland, in 1997, 2002, and 2003, respectively.
From 1997 to 2002, he was a Research and Teaching Assistant at the Signal and Information Processing Laboratory, ETH Zurich. After being a Postdoctoral Research Associate at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, the University of Wisconsin—Madison, Madison (Visiting Assistant Professor), and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, he joined the Information Theory Research Group, Hewlett-Packard Laboratories, Palo Alto, CA, in summer 2006 as a Research Scientist. His research interests lie in information theory, communications, and signal processing.
Dr. Vontobel is an Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY and has been on the technical program committees of several international conferences. Recently, he has co-organized a BIRS workshop in Banff on “Applications of matroid theory and combinatorial optimization to information and coding theory” and a workshop at Tel Aviv University on “Linear programming and message-passing approaches to high-density parity-check codes and high-density graphical models.” He has been three times a plenary speaker at international information and coding theory conferences and has been awarded the ETH medal for his Ph.D. dissertation.
Daniel J. Costello, Jr. (S’62–M’69–SM’78–F’86–LF’08) was born in Seattle, WA, on August 9, 1942. He received the B.S.E.E. degree from Seattle University, Seattle, WA, in 1964 and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, in 1966 and 1969, respectively.
He joined the faculty of the Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, in 1969, as an Assistant Professor of Electrical Engineering. He was promoted to Associate Professor in 1973, and to Full Professor in 1980. In 1985, he became Professor of Electrical Engineering at the University of Notre Dame, and from 1989 to 1998, served as Chair of the Department of Electrical Engineering. His research interests are in the area of digital communications, with special emphasis on error control coding and coded modulation. He has numerous technical publications in his field, and he coauthored a textbook entitled Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1983), the second edition of which was published in 2004.
Dr. Costello was selected, in 1991, as one of 100 Seattle University alumni to receive the Centennial Alumni Award in recognition of alumni who have displayed outstanding service to others, exceptional leadership, or uncommon achievement. In 1999, he received a Humboldt Research Prize from the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation in Germany. In 2000, he was named the Leonard Bettex Professor of Electrical Engineering at Notre Dame. He was a member of the Information Theory Society Board of Governors (BoG) in 1983–1988, 1990–1995, 2005–2010, and in 1986 he served as President of the BoG. He has also served as Associate Editor for Communication Theory for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, and Co-Chair of the IEEE International Symposia on Information Theory in Kobe, Japan (1988), Ulm, Germany (1997), and Chicago, IL (2004). In 2000, the IEEE Information Theory Society selected him as a recipient of a Third-Millennium Medal. He was corecipient of the 2009 IEEE Donald G. Fink Prize Paper Award, which recognizes an outstanding survey, review, or tutorial paper in any IEEE publication issued during the previous calendar year.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

