858

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

Enumerators for Protograph-Based Ensembles of LDPC and Generalized LDPC Codes
Shadi Abu-Surra, Member, IEEE, Dariush Divsalar, Fellow, IEEE, and William E. Ryan, Fellow, IEEE

Dedicated to the memory of Ralf Koetter (1963–2009)

Abstract—Protograph-based LDPC and generalized LDPC (G-LDPC) codes have the advantages of a simple design procedure and highly structured encoders and decoders. The design of such “protograph-based codes” relies on what is effectively a computer-based search. As such, following Gallager, it is prudent to restrict the search to a “good ensemble,” for example, an ensemble whose minimum distance grows linearly with codeword length. A good ensemble can also mean one with good stopping set, trapping set, or pseudocodeword properties. In this paper, ensemble codeword weight enumerators for finite-length LDPC and G-LDPC codes based on protographs were derived, and then the asymptotic case was considered. The asymptotic results allow us to determine whether or not the typical relative minimum distance in the ensemble grows linearly with codeword length. Then, the codeword weight enumerator technique is adapted to yield ensemble stopping set, trapping set, and pseudocodeword enumerators for protograph LDPC and G-LDPC codes. In this case, the asymptotic results allow us to determine whether or not the typical relative smallest stopping set size, trapping set size, and pseudoweight grows linearly with codeword length. Trapping set enumerators for G-LDPC code ensembles represent a more complex problem which we do not consider here.
Index Terms—Asymptotic enumerators, finite-length enumerators, lDPC codes, protograph, pseudoweight enumerators, stopping set enumerators, trapping set enumerators, weight enumerators.
I. INTRODUCTION
C ODEWORD weight enumerators for specific codes are useful for bounding or estimating the performance of maximum-likelihood (ML) decoders of channel codes. As
Manuscript received March 24, 2010; revised October 30, 2010; accepted November 08, 2010. Date of current version January 19, 2011. This work was supported in part by the NASA Goddard Space Flight Center under Grants NNX07AF38G and NNX08AQ93G. This work was carried out at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, under a contract with NASA. The material in this paper was presented at the UCSD Workshop on Information Theory and Its Applications, February 2007, at the IEEE Global Telecommunication Conference GLOBECOM, 2007, and the Allerton Conference on Communications, Control, and Computing, 2007.
This paper is part of the special issue on “Facets of Coding Theory: From Algorithms to Networks,” dedicated to the scientific legacy of Ralf Koetter.
S. Abu-Surra was with the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721 USA. He is now with Samsung Telecommunications America, Richardson, TX 75082 USA (e-mail: sasurra@sta.samsung.com).
D. Divsalar is with the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA 91109 USA (e-mail: Dariush.Divsalar@jpl.nasa.gov).
W. E. Ryan is with the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721 USA (e-mail: ryan@ece.arizona.edu).
Communicated by A. Vardy, Associate Editor for the special issue on “Facets of Coding Theory: From Algorithms to Networks.”
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2010.2094819

noted by Gallager in his seminal monograph on LDPC codes [1], it is generally impractical to calculate the weight enumerator for a specific code. Given this, Gallager and others have calculated the average enumerators for ensembles of codes, from which the average performance of ML decoders may be estimated. In many cases, it is often easier to calculate the asymptotic weight enumerators, that is, the weight enumerators for code ensembles with code length tending to infinity. The asymptotic results allow us to make statistical statements about the distance properties of code ensembles (particularly, the minimum distance) and on the minimum operable signal-to-noise ratio (i.e., SNR threshold) for maximum-likelihood decoders. For example, a “good ensemble” is one for which the minimum distance grows linearly with code length. In the design of codes, it is useful to know beforehand whether or not the design space resides within a good ensemble of codes.
Gallager derived asymptotic codeword weight enumerators for the “Gallager ensembles” of regular LDPC codes in [1]. This result was extended to the irregular LDPC code ensembles in [2]–[5]. In [6] and [7], ensemble weight enumerators for serially concatenated codes and turbo-like codes were derived. Asymptotic weight enumerators for ensembles of protograph-based LDPC codes were computed in [8] and [9]. In the latter paper, Divsalar first derived the ensemble weight enumerators for finite-length protograph-based LDPC codes [10] and then obtained the asymptotic results by letting the code length go to infinity. Divsalar et al. also extended the enumerator technique in [9] to stopping set enumerators in [11]. Analogous to the role of ensemble weight enumerators in determining average code performance on a Gaussian channel with ML decoding, stopping set enumerators determine the performance of LDPC codes under iterative decoding on the binary erasure channel (BEC) [12]–[14] and the burst-erasure channel. A generalization of the notion of a stopping set, called a generalized stopping set, was introduced in [15] and used to evaluate the performance of G-LDPC codes with a single constraint type.
Whereas stopping sets may cause error-rate floors for iterative decoders on the BEC, trapping sets do likewise for the AWGN channel [16]–[20]. In [16], Richardson established the notion of trapping sets and suggested a two-step technique for predicting the performance of specific LDPC codes in the error-floor region. The authors of [17] and [18] used a similar technique to predict the floor of several LDPC codes on the binary symmetric channel (BSC). In [19], the authors derived the average asymptotic behavior of trapping set enumerators over random, regular and irregular, LDPC code ensembles.
In an attempt to explain the deviation of iterative decoders from optimal decoders for LDPC codes, Wiberg [21] and Frey

0018-9448/$26.00 © 2011 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:06:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ABU-SURRA et al.: ENUMERATORS FOR PROTOGRAPH-BASED ENSEMBLES

859

et al. [22], [23] introduced the notion of a pseudocodeword. Then Forney et al. in [24] suggested that an iterative decoder’s performance can be predicted using the pseudoweight [we should mention at this point that the notion of pseudoweights for AWGN channel was already introduced by Wiberg (see [21, Ch. 6], “generalized weight”)] enumerators of the code rather than codeword weight enumerators. They also computed the effective weight of pseudocodewords for the AWGN, BEC, and BSC channels. Moreover, Koetter and Vontobel. [25], [26] used the idea of a graph cover to show how pseudocodewords determine iterative decoder convergence to noncodeword patterns, and how an iterative decoder cannot distinguish between the graph and its covers. These authors made significant contribution to the understanding of pseudocodewords. More recently, Kelley and Sridhara provided in [27] a detailed study of pseudocodewords of Tanner graphs. Kelley and Sridhara also derived upper bounds on the minimum pseudoweight of a specific LDPC code for the AWGN, BEC, and BSC channels. In [28], the author computed the pseudoweight enumerators for regular LDPC code ensembles. Also, Chertkov and Stepanov [29] proposed a pseudocodeword search algorithm to estimate the pseudoweight enumerator of a specific LDPC code.
Generalized LDPC (G-LDPC) codes, for which more complex constraints than single parity-check (SPC) constraints are permissible, were first proposed by Tanner [30]. G-LDPC codes based on protographs were studied in [31]–[35] where certain advantages are demonstrated, such as a simpler graphical structure that is less prone to cycles and their impact on iterative decoding.
In this paper, we first present a straightforward technique for obtaining codeword weight enumerators for protograph-based G-LDPC codes for both finite-length and infinite-length ensembles. The asymptotic results allow us to determine whether or not the typical relative minimum distance in the ensemble grows linearly with codeword length. We then show that it is a simple matter to adapt the codeword weight enumerator technique to yield stopping set enumerators for protograph-based G-LDPC code ensembles. In this case, the asymptotic results allow us to determine whether or not the typical relative smallest stopping set size grows linearly with codeword length. Next, we show that one may again leverage the weight enumerator technique to obtain finite-length ensemble trapping set enumerators for protograph-based LDPC codes. The asymptotic results are also derived, which allow us to determine whether or not the typical relative smallest trapping set size grows linearly with codeword length. We do not provide trapping set enumerators for G-LDPC code ensembles as this is a more complex problem which does not fit well with the rest of the paper. Lastly, we derived the finite-length and the asymptotic ensemble pseudoweight enumerators for protograph-based G-LDPC code ensembles. The asymptotic result indicates whether or not the typical relative pseudoweight grows linearly with codeword length. In this paper, we consider pseudocodewords based on
-covers with finite . In the asymptotic case, the code length goes to infinity and stays finite. The results in this paper allow us to identify good G-LDPC and LDPC code ensembles, particularly for erasure and AWGN channels, as demonstrated by several examples.

This paper proceeds as follows: In Section II, the notation used in the paper is defined, and ensemble codeword weight enumerators for protograph-based LDPC and G-LDPC codes are derived for both finite-length and infinite-length code ensembles. In Section III, the stopping set enumerator technique for protograph-based LDPC and G-LDPC codes is presented. In Section IV, trapping set enumerators for protograph-based LDPC codes ensemble is derived. In Section V, ensemble pseudocodeword G-LDPC code enumerators are derived. Illustrative examples are included in each of these sections. Finally, a summary and conclusion are given in Section VI.

II. ENSEMBLE WEIGHT ENUMERATORS FOR PROTOGRAPH-BASED G-LDPC CODES

A protograph

[10], [36], [37] is a relatively

small bipartite graph, containing a set

of

variable nodes (VNs), a set

of general-

ized constraint nodes (CNs), and a set

of edges from which a larger graph can be obtained by the fol-

lowing copy-and-permute procedure. The protograph is copied

times and the edge copies are re-connected between VN and

CN copies to obtain an expanded graph, as follows. The

copies of protograph VN will be said to be of type- , the

copies of protograph CN will be said to be of type- ,

and the copies of a protograph edge connecting to

will be said to be of distinct type-

or simply of

type- . Edges of the same type (copies of each distinct type- ,

, edge are of the same type) among the proto-

graph replicas are permuted and reconnected to obtain a single,

large graph. Parallel edges are allowed in the protograph, and

even in the derived graph, although in practice parallel edges in

the derived graph are avoided.

Note that the copy-and-permute procedure just described can

be simply represented by replacing each node in the protograph

with a vector of nodes of the same type and replacing each edge

in the protograph with a bundle of (permuted) edges of the same

type. This “vectorized” protograph is depicted in Fig. 1, where

represents an -vector of type- VNs and similarly for .

The boxes along each -edge in Fig. 1 represents a per-

mutation or adjacency matrix. For LDPC codes, the constraint

nodes are simple SPC constraints, for G-LDPC codes the con-

straints may be more complex, such as Hamming constraints. It

should be obvious from Fig. 1 that if the permutation matrices

are circulant, then the matrix for the corresponding LDPC

code is an array of circulant permutation matrices, so the code

is quasi-cyclic. Conversely, if an LDPC code is quasi-cyclic

and has an matrix that is an array of circulant permutation

matrices, then the code is a protograph-based LDPC code. A

similar comment holds for G-LDPC codes [35], but it is not as

readily seen.

In this section, a method for finding finite-length weight enu-

merators for protograph-based G-LDPC code ensembles is first

derived. The ensembles we consider are those characterized by

the diagram in Fig. 1. From the finite-length enumerators results,

asymptotic results are then obtained. Because G-LDPC codes

contain LDPC codes as a special case, these results are directly

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:06:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

860

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

of the

codewords will select one of the

code-

words of with probability

and so there are on av-

erage

weight- SCC codewords corresponding

to weight- SCC encoder inputs and weight- -encoder in-

puts. Thus, summing over all , the number of weight- SCC

codewords produced by weight- SCC encoder inputs with a

length- uniform interleaver is given by (1) with

.

Fig. 1. Vectorized protograph (referenced in Section II).

applicable to protograph-based LDPC codes and we provide examples of both LDPC and G-LDPC codes.

A. Finite-Length Ensemble Weight Enumerators

Consider again a G-LDPC code protograph,

,

where

is the set of VNs,

is the set of CNs, and is the

set of edges. Denote by the degree of variable node

and by the degree of constraint node . Also, let be

the set of transmitted VNs and let be the set of punctured

VNs. Now consider the G-LDPC code ensemble constructed

from a protograph by making replicas of and using

uniform interleavers [6], [7], each of size , to permute the

edges among the replicas of the protograph. Recall that a

length- uniform interleaver [6] is a probabilistic device that

maps each Hamming weight- interleaver input into the

distinct permutations of it with equal probability,

This

approach allows ensemble average weight1 enumerators to be

derived for various types of concatenated codes [6], [7]. As

shown in [9], by exploiting the uniform interleaver concept,

the average weight enumerator for a protograph-based LDPC

code ensemble can be obtained. To do so, the VNs and CNs

are treated as constituent codes in a serial concatenated code

(SCC) scheme as explained further below.

To apply this result to the G-LDPC code case, the group of

VNs of type in the vectorized protograph is considered to be

a constituent (repetition) code with a weight- input of length

and length- outputs. Further, the group of CNs of

type is considered to be a constituent code with inputs,

each of length , and a fictitious output of weight zero. Define

a weight-vector

,

, to be

a pattern of weights corresponding to the length- VN

inputs satisfying the protograph constraints. Now let

be

the average (over the ensemble) number of codewords having

weight-vector , that is, the weight-vector enumerator for the

ensemble of codes of length

described by the protograph.

Employing the Kronecker delta notation, let us further define

•

enumerator for the type- (VN) constituent code for a

weight- input, where

is a

weight vector describing the constituent code’s output, and

•

enumerator for the type-

(CN) constituent code and

,

where

if the th edge of CN is the th edge

of VN .

The SCC result (1) is applied to each of the multiple concate-

nations that exist in the G-LDPC code protograph to obtain the

average protograph weight-vector enumerator as follows (see

also [7])

Lemma 1: [6] Consider two serially concatenated constituent

codes, and , separated by a length- uniform interleaver.

(2)

Then, the average number of weight- codewords created by

weight- inputs in the SCC ensemble is given by

where the summation in the first line is over all weights

, where (1) , where

is the weight along the th edge of VN

and

. The vector

is a weight vector which describes

where is the number of weight- codewords in corre-

sponding to weight- -encoder inputs and is the number

of weight- codewords in corresponding to weight- -en-

coder inputs.

Proof: Let constituent code have length and dimen-

sion ,

For constituent code , the possible

the weights of the -bit words on the edges connected to CN

produced by the VNs neighboring . The elements of

comprise a subset of the elements of .

The average number of codewords of weight in the en-

semble, denoted by , equals the sum of

over all for

which

. Notationally

weight- encoder inputs produce

weight- outputs. For

(3)

constituent code , the weight- encoder inputs produce

weight- outputs. Now consider concatenating with

through a length- uniform interleaver

. Each under the constraint

To evaluate in

1Until we reach our discussion of pseudocodewords, throughout the paper (3), one first needs to compute the weight-vector enumerators,

“weight” will mean ”Hamming weight.”

, for the constraint nodes , as seen in (2). This was

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:06:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ABU-SURRA et al.: ENUMERATORS FOR PROTOGRAPH-BASED ENSEMBLES

861

done for SPC nodes in [9]. In this section, we extend this computation to constraint nodes which correspond to any linear block code.

Theorem 2: Consider the constituent ( , ) linear block code

at a constraint node of interest in the protograph, of which

copies will be made. Let

be the number of codewords

in , let be the number of occurrences of the th codeword

among the copies of the constraint node of interest, and let

. Further, let be the

matrix with

the codewords of as its rows, with the all-zeros codeword in

the first row. The weight-vector enumerator

for , where

is the weight vector at the input to the

constraint node in the expanded graph of Fig. 1, is given by

(4)

where given by

is the multinomial coefficient,

will appear as a common factor in all of the

terms that are associated with these solutions. This explains the

presence of the second summation in (8). But the generating

function of

is

(10) Finally, comparing (10) and (8) leads to (4).
Example 1: Consider the degree-4 SPC constraint node. The codeword set is

and so

.

(a) Consider

protograph copies and the weight-vector

. From

and the associated

constraints on , it is easy to see that

(5)

and is the set of integer-vector solutions to

,

with

and

. (Appendix A

presents a method for finding such integer solutions.)

Proof: Following [9], the weight-vector enumera-

tors

may be easily found as the coefficients of

a (multidimensional) generating function of

.

The generating function of a single constraint node is

where the ’s are indeterminate

bookkeeping variables and

,

,

is a codeword in . The generating function for copies of

this constraint node in the expanded graph is

(6)

From this,

[via (4)].

(b) When

and

and so

(c) When

, and

,

.

, . is empty and so

Example 2: Consider the protograph with a single (7, 4)

Hamming constraint node and 7 degree-1 VNs, all transmitted.

Noting that the denominator in (2) is unity (since

for

all ) and the numerator is

(since

), we will

compute for

, 1, 2, 3, assuming

copies of the

protograph. The Hamming code is generated by

The direct application of the multinomial theorem on the RHS of (6) gives
(7) Then (7) can be written as
(8)

from which the matrix may be obtained; we assume the

codewords are listed in the natural binary order with respect to

the 16 input words. From (2) and (3), with

and

,

under the constraint

.

Thus,

.

under the constraint

, but

any such must result in empty. Consequently,

.

Similarly, one finds

. With

such that

, is in

where is the set of integer solutions to

, under

the constraints

and

. To see

the last step, note that the product in (7) can be manipulated as

follows:

Each yields only one solution to the equation

. Each solution has

together with

where

(9) corresponds to a row in containing one of the 7 weight-3

codewords. Note, the other ’s that achieve

result in

where

,

. Also, if

has more than one solution for , the term

empty. Using (2), (3), and (4), .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:06:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

862

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

Special Case: Protograph-Based LDPC Codes: Now we obtain weight-vector enumerators for protograph-based LDPC codes as a special case of G-LDPC codes. First we compute
for a check (SPC) with degree 3. In this case

and we are interested in the integer solutions to

Fig. 2. Check split method to compute enumerators for checks nodes with higher degrees. (Referenced in Section II-A.)

for a given weight vector

. Clearly, the first codeword

does not contribute to the weight vector

, and so we

have the unique solution

with

Note

that here we have used the inverse of the lower 3 3 submatrix

of . Defining

, note

that

,

,

. If

is even and

, then using (4) with

the single solution above gives

a degree-( ) check into a degree- check and a degree-3

check connected by a degree-2 variable node. Note that the

normalized set of weights, which satisfy the inequalities

,

for and

, and

, forms the convex hull of a degree-3 single

parity-check code. A similar result applies to higher degree

checks [26]. The fundamental polytope of a Tanner graph of

a LDPC code is then given by taking the intersection of the

convex hulls of all the subcodes in the graph2. These results can

be further extended to GLDPC codes.

Computation of

for a check with degree 4 can be

obtained from the result for a check with degree 3 by concate-

nation. For example

can be obtained as

(12)

otherwise that for normalized weights

(11) . It is interesting to note
, the inequality

is equivalent to the

set of inequalities

, for

all

, odd, and representing the index set of the

single parity check code. For this example,

and

degree of the check is

. This set relates to cocircuit in-

equalities in matroid theory [25], [26]. For normalized weights,

, the cocircuit inequalities generalize in a natural way to

higher-order checks [26]. For a check with degree , the set

of inequalities can be written equivalently as

, or

,

or

, for all

,

odd. This can be proved by induction, simply by splitting

The weight enumerators for higher degree checks can be ob-

tained in a similar way. This method of weight enumerator com-

putation for check nodes suggests that, for a check with degree

, one can split the check into

checks each with degree 3

that are connected by

degree 2 untransmitted (punctured)

variable nodes, as shown in Fig. 2 for

.

Thus, for the purpose of weight enumeration we can modify

the original protograph to a protograph with

degree 3 check nodes and

variable

nodes; that is, an additional

untransmitted degree

2 variable nodes are added to the number of variable nodes in

the original protograph. This, (2), and (11) suggest the weight-

vector enumerator can be presented in the closed form shown in

(13) at the bottom of the page.

2This connection of the existence of (normalized) weight vectors to the fundamental polytope was first pointed out in [8].

(13)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:06:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ABU-SURRA et al.: ENUMERATORS FOR PROTOGRAPH-BASED ENSEMBLES

863

B. Asymptotic Ensemble Weight Enumerators
In the asymptotic case, following Gallager [1],3 let us define the normalized logarithmic asymptotic weight enumerator (we will simply call it the asymptotic weight enumerator)

and

. For a generic constituent CN code

enumerator is defined as

, this (19)

(14)

where

(recall is the number of transmitted variable

nodes in the code). Following [9], because the formulas in the

previous section involve the number of copies, , instead of

we define the function

(15)

where

. Note that

and so (16)

We define

and we similarly de-

fine

when more than two variables are involved. Then,

from (3), we have

where

.

We may obtain a simple expression for

using the

method of types [39, Ch. 12]. We define the type as the rela-

tive proportion of occurrences of each codeword of constituent

CN code in a sequence of codewords. In other words,

is the empirical probability distribution

of the codewords in given a sequence of such code-

words, where

and is the number of occurrences

of the th codeword. Then the type class of ,

, is the set

of all length- sequences of codewords in , each containing

occurrences of the th codeword in , for

.

Observe that

. From [39,

Th. 12.1.3]

, as

, where

. Consequently, as

we

rewrite (4) as

(20)

under the constraint that
, with
from (19) and (20) that (17)

is the set of solutions to

and

. It follows

(21)

under the constraint

. The second line holds

when is large because, when and are large and distinct

(so that and are vastly different)

The third line follows by invoking (2). Letting

and

taking the limit as

and applying the result (from

Stirling’s formula)

, we obtain

under the same constraints on

and

men-

tioned for (20). These are the asymptotic equivalents of the con-

straints mentioned after (4). Note that Fogal et al. [8] and [41]

link (21) to the formalism of (Gibbs) free energy. Vontobel [42]

links (18) to the formalism of Bethe free energy, cf. [40]. Note

that although Fogal et al. [8] also have expressions like (18),

there does not seem to be a link to the Bethe free energy in their

paper.

Let be the minimum distance of a linear block code. In

[1] it was shown that

(22)

where

is the probability that a particular sequence of

(18) weight is a codeword in the ensemble. (Here and below, to avoid cumbersome notation, we assume is an integer.) Let

be the second zero crossing of (the first crossing is

under the constraint

. In (18),

is the

asymptotic weight-vector enumerator of the constraint node ,

3Note that Gallager defined the asymptotic weight enumerator using what is called the combinatorics approach in [38]. An alternative approach based on statistical physics is presented in [38].

). Assuming exists, it is called the typical relative

minimum distance if

for all

[9]. If

for any

as becomes large, then

, so that with

probability near one,

is close to or greater than

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:06:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

864

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

(See Appendix B for a proof of this result for protograph-based

LDPC ensembles. Appendix C describes graphical constraints

necessary for protograph-based GLDPC ensembles to have

a typical relative minimum distance.) That is, the minimum

distances of virtually all of the members of the code ensemble

increase linearly with . (Note,

is not defined to be

, in contrast to other normalized variables that

are used in this paper.)

Note that we are using Gallager’s definition [1] of typical rel-

ative minimum distance, which is “for large , most codes in

the ensemble have minimum distance either close to or greater

than times the typical relative minimum distance.” However,

Montanari [38], [43] defines typical relative minimum distance

as “for large , most codes in the ensemble have minimum dis-

tance close to times the typical relative minimum distance.”

Montanari’s definition is more precise. Thus, for the latter defi-

nition, if we randomly choose a code in an ensemble with typical

relative minimum distance , the code will have relative min-

imum distance with high probability as goes to infinity.

Also, note that the ensembles in this paper are based on using

random permutations. However, within each of these random

ensembles there is a vanishingly small subset of codes based on

circulant permutations. The use of a circulant permutation on

each protograph edge limits the minimum distance, no matter

how large we choose the block length [44], [45]. Nevertheless,

cyclic covers (circulants) are widely used to construct LDPC

codes. Certain issues that hamper performance can be avoided

by using a two-step cyclic cover procedure, as was done for the

CCSDS/AR4JA codes [46].

Now the asymptotic ensemble weight-vector enumerator for

protograph based LDPC code can be obtained by using the

finite-length result for the weight-vector enumerator

in

(13), resulting in

= 7 Fig. 3. Protograph of the Rate-1/7 G-LDPC code (with n

), or the

= 15 Rate-7/15 G-LDPC code (with n

). (Referenced in Examples 3 and 5.)

Fig. 4. Asymptotic codeword weight enumerator for the rate-1/7 and rate-1/6 G-LDPC code ensembles. Note that we are using the natural logarithm in the asymptotic enumerators expressions, and so in all asymptotic enumerators examples the vertical axes are in “nats” and not in “bits.” (Referenced in Example 3.)

column of

, and the seventh column of is the fifth

column of A code constructed per this protograph has

design rate 1/7 since each CN represents three redundant bits.

We associate the normalized weights

with the

variable nodes , , , . The asymptotic weight enumer-

ator is

, where

(25)

(23)
Before presenting some examples, note that the ensemble of all rate- (“random”) linear codes (whose parity-check matrix entries are i.i.d. uniform) has the asymptotic weight enumerator [1]
(24)

such that

, and where

and

. We also evaluated the asymp-

totic weight enumerator for the rate-1/6 G-LDPC code which

results from puncturing one of the VNs. The result is presented

in Fig. 4. Note that this ensemble has a relatively large .

Consequently, a long code based on this protograph has, with

probability near one, a large minimum distance.

which corresponds to the asymptotic Gilbert-Varshamov bound. Example 4: We evaluate the asymptotic weight enumer-

The asymptotic weight enumerators in the following examples ator for the rate-1/6 HD-LDPC code ensemble presented in

will be compared to that given by (24).

[32]–[34], and [47], which is based on the protograph in Fig. 5

Example 3: Consider the protograph in Fig. 3, where the (

). The constraint node marked by

parity-check matrix corresponds to the (7, 4) Hamming is a (6, 3) shortened Hamming code with parity check matrix

code generated by of Example 2. The parity-check matrix

corresponds to the following column-permutation of :

(26)

. That is, the first column of is the sixth

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:06:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ABU-SURRA et al.: ENUMERATORS FOR PROTOGRAPH-BASED ENSEMBLES

865

Fig. 5. Rate-1/6 HD-LDPC code protograph. (Referenced in Example 4.)

Associate the vector of normalized weights

with the vector of variable nodes

, and

label the columns of by

, in accordance

with Fig. 5. Note that the two SPC nodes have the same neigh-

borhood, and so they have the same weight-vector numerator.

Under this setup, because

the asymptotic weight

enumerator is given by

, where

Fig. 6. Asymptotic codeword weight enumerator for the rate-1/6 and rate-1/5 HD-LDPC code ensembles. (Referenced in Example 4.)

(27)

such that

, and where

and

. The asymptotic weight enumerator

is shown in Fig. 6. The figure shows that there is no typical rel-

ative minimum distance for this code (or

so

that for this code ensemble does not grow linearly with

. We also evaluated the asymptotic weight enumerator for the

case when the variable node is punctured. Equation (27) still

holds but the constraint becomes

. The result is rep-

resented by the rate-1/5 HD-LDPC curve in Fig. 6, where again

we see that for the ensemble does not grow linearly with

. (In spite of this, we have found via simulation that codes de-

signed according to this protograph provide good performance

in both the waterfall and the floor region [32]–[34], [47].)

CN code can themselves be partitioned into bit subsets in ac-

cordance with their membership in the VN subsets. Now, de-

fine the subset-weight vector (SWV) of a CN codeword as the

vector whose components are the weights of bit subsets of the

CN codeword. As an example, let

be a code-

word of a length-7 CN code and let the CN code’s bit subsets be

; then

. Also, define

the SWV enumerator as the number of CN codewords that have

the same SWV.

Next, several examples were examined, all of which led to the

following conjecture: In the maximization in (21), the optimal

point occurs when codewords of equal SWV have the same pro-

portion of occurrence in the constituent CN code. The implica-

tion is that many of the elements of

are

identical and so the maximization in (21) is over a vastly re-

duced number of distinct variables.

This conjecture is used with some simple linear algebra to

rewrite (21) as

(28)

C. On the Complexity of Computing Asymptotic

Ensemble Enumerators

under the constraint that

is the set of solutions to

The drawback of the method described in Section II-B in evaluating the asymptotic enumerators can be seen from (21): the number of the maximization arguments equals the number of the codewords in the CN code . As an example, for the (15, 11) Hamming code, the maximization is over
variables. To alleviate this issue of having to maximize over a large number of variables, the following steps are considered. First,

,

and

, where

is a vector of the distinct ’s in ,

is a vector of the SWV enumerators of ,

and is constructed from by adding the rows of

having the same SWV. Note that it is possible to have identical

columns in . This implies that the corresponding ’s in

are equal. Finally,

is related to

as follows:

the protograph’s VNs are partitioned into subsets based on their

neighborhoods. That is, two VNs belong to the same subset if

and only if they have the same type-neighborhood, meaning,

they are connected to an identical distribution of CN types. (Two

CNs are of the same type if their codes are identical.) Given this

partitioning of the set of VNs into subsets, the bits for a given

(29)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:06:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

866

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

Fig. 8. Rate-1/3 G-LDPC code protograph. (Referenced in Example 6.)

Fig. 7. Asymptotic codeword weight enumerator for the rate-7/15 and rate-1/2 G-LDPC code ensembles. (Referenced in Example 5.)
Example 5: Consider again the protograph in Fig. 3, but with (15, 11) Hamming codes for the constraints and [32]–[34], where

Note that there are

codewords in each constituent

code, so it would be difficult to evaluate (21) for this code. But,

applying the conjecture, all VNs in this protograph have the

same type-neighborhood. Also, after finding , one finds that

all of its columns are identical. Consequently, the VNs have the

same normalized weight . The asymptotic weight enumerator

is

where

(15 of them). Now, to find

, define

as the proportion of occurrence of a codeword of weight

in the constituent CN code, and so

Fig. 9. Asymptotic codeword weight enumerator for the rate-1/3 G-LDPC code ensemble. Note that the quantization of the -axis is the cause of the nonsmoothness of the curve. (Referenced in Example 6.)

one bit in the protograph. Note that, for both cases,

for

the ensemble increases linearly with .

Example 6: Consider the rate-1/3 G-LDPC code protograph

in Fig. 8. The different subsets of VNs, according to their

type-neighborhoods, are

.

From the matrices of the CNs, we noticed that VNs in the

same subset have the same normalized weight. So we associate

the normalized weights

with the VNs of the sets.

The asymptotic weight enumerator is given by

,

where

(31)

and Consequently

. such that
where

, and and

(30)

,

are

the vectors of the associated normalized weights. The result

under the constraint is the set of solutions to

,

, for all in , and

. Clearly, under these

assumptions, the computation of

hence

is vastly

appears in Fig. 9, which shows that

. Thus, the

minimum distance for this code ensemble increases linearly

with .

simplified. The result appears in Fig. 7. Also included in Example 7: In this example we used our proposed method

the figure is for a rate-1/2 code obtained by puncturing to evaluate the asymptotic weight enumerators for several re-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:06:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ABU-SURRA et al.: ENUMERATORS FOR PROTOGRAPH-BASED ENSEMBLES

867

Fig. 10. Protographs for several rate-1/2 LDPC code ensembles: (a) (6, 3) regular LDPC code ensemble (decoding threshold is 1.11 dB). (b) Precoded (6, 3) regular LDPC code ensemble (decoding threshold is 0.87 dB). (c) RJA LDPC code ensemble (decoding threshold is 1.00 dB). (d) ARJA LDPC code ensemble (decoding threshold is 0.62 dB). (Note: the shaded VNs represent punctured nodes.) (Referenced in Example 7.)

III. ENSEMBLE STOPPING SET ENUMERATORS

In the context of iterative decoding of LDPC codes on the

BEC, a stopping set is a subset of the set of VNs whose neigh-

boring SPC nodes are connected to at least twice [12]. The im-

plication of this definition is that if all of the bits in a stopping

set are erased, the iterative erasure decoder will never resolve the

values of those bits. For single-CN-type G-LDPC codes [15], a

generalized stopping set, , is a subset of the set of VNs, such

that all neighbors of are connected to at least times,

where

is the guaranteed erasure-correction capability of

the neighboring CNs.

In this work, in addition to single-CN-type G-LDPC codes,

we consider multi-CN-type G-LDPC codes, where a mixture

of CN types are permissible. We assume the use of a standard

iterative erasure decoding tailored to the Tanner graph of the

code, with bounded-distance algebraic decoders employed at

the CNs. That is, CN can correct up to

erasures.

Fig. 11. Asymptotic codeword weight enumerators for the rate-1/2 protographbased LDPC code ensembles in Fig. 10. (Referenced in Example 7.)

A set of erased VNs will fail to decode exactly when all of the neighboring CNs see more erasures than they are capable of resolving. Consequently, we introduce a new definition for the

generalized stopping set as follows: A generalized stopping set,

lated protograph-based LDPC code ensembles. In particular, we

first consider the (6, 3) regular LDPC code ensemble, which has

the protograph in Fig. 10(a). (We remark that the simplest (6,

3) protograph has two degree-3 VNs connected to a single de-

gree-6 CN, but we use the form in Fig. 10(a) so that we may

build upon it in the rest of the figure.) Its asymptotic weight

enumerator curve appears in Fig. 11, which shows that this en-

semble has

. Similar results for the (6, 3) LDPC

code ensemble appears in [1], [2], and [9]. We also computed

the asymptotic weight enumerator for a precoded version of the

(6, 3) ensemble. The protograph of this ensemble is shown in

Fig. 10(b), and the computation results are given in Fig. 11,

which shows that precoding increased from 0.023 to 0.028.

Note that this agrees with the result in [48].

Second, we consider the RJA and the ARJA (precoded

, of a G-LDPC code is a subset of the set of VNs such that

every neighboring CN of is connected to at least

times, for all in the neighborhood of . Here is the set of

’s for the CNs that are neighbors of . Hereafter, we will

use the term stopping set to refer to a generalized stopping set.

Note that the use of bounded-distance decoding at the CNs

is slightly nonstandard in iterative decoding. But, it leads to

some simplifications because the enumerators are then more

symmetric. On the other hand, if the maximum-likelihood de-

coder is used at the CNs, then the definition above should be

adjusted to reflect the fact that some of the erasure patterns with

weight greater than or equal to can be corrected. In this

case, some of the elements in

(as defined above) should

be removed. Consequently, the enumeration method in this sec-

tion still can be used. Moreover, the stopping set enumerators

RJA) LDPC codes presented in [48] which have the pro- with bounded-distance decoder at the CNs presents an upper

tographs in Fig. 10(c) and (d), respectively. We computed the bound on that with maximum-likelihood decoder at the CNs.

asymptotic weight enumerators for their ensembles, which The method for finding weight enumerators for protograph-

appear in Fig. 11. The figure shows that the RJA ensemble has based G-LDPC code ensembles can be leveraged to obtain stop-

and the ARJA has

, which agrees ping set enumerators for these same ensembles. To see how, let

with what was obtained using the method in [9].

us consider the mapping from the set of stopping sets

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:06:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

868

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

to defined as

, where

,

if and only if the corresponding VN in the Tanner graph is

in the stopping set . Note that the set of all binary words

corresponding to a Tanner graph need not form a

linear code. We call the (nonlinear) code

induced by

the set of stopping sets of under the mapping a stopping set

code and we denote it by . Also note that the weight of

equals the size of , and so the weight enumerator for the stop-

ping set code is identical to the stopping set enumerator for

. For example, in a graph with a single CN , where is

a

linear block code of minimum distance , the stop-

ping set code is

.

Thus the stopping set enumerator for this simple graph is ex-

actly the weight enumerator for . This simple example also

lets us speak of a stopping set code for a single CN , which is

.

In the case of a nontrivial G-LDPC code Tanner graph , we

first find the stopping set codes for each of the CNs . We

then form a new graph, , from by replacing CN in by

, for all . The stopping set enumerator for is then given

by the weight enumerator for , which is given by

. In summary,

the ensemble stopping set enumerator for a protograph-based

G-LDPC code with graph is identically the ensemble weight

enumerator for the graph formed from by replacing the

CNs in with their corresponding stopping set code constraint

nodes.

In light of the foregoing discussion, we may follow the

weight enumerator techniques of Section II to derive stop-

ping set enumerators for G-LDPC codes. We will use the

superscript for quantities associated with stopping sets

to distinguish them from weight enumerator quantities.

For example, we use

and

for finite-length and

asymptotic stopping set enumerators, respectively. More-

over,

is the stopping set number (also called stopping

number, or stopping distance), i.e., the size of the smallest,

nonempty, stopping set of the G-LDPC code’s graph, and

is the typical relative stopping set number. Recall that

we are interested in codes with a large stopping set number

because small stopping sets dominate the iterative decoding

performance on the BEC. If exists, the average stopping

set number over the code ensemble increases linearly with

(or,

). To complete our notation, we will

use to denote the matrix whose rows are the codewords

of a CN’s stopping set code. For example, for a CN ,

corresponding to a

linear block code of minimum dis-

tance , is the

matrix, whose rows are the

-bit words of weight equal 0 or weight at least

where

. The weight-zero word corresponds

to the empty set in

and means that the CN is not a

neighbor of a stopping set.

Example 8: Consider the computation of

and

for a degree-3 SPC code. The stopping set code is

. Now use (4) to compute

as follows. First, construct the 5 3 matrix from

the words of

. Then, find the nonnegative integer solution

to the system of equations

with

.

These equations are

Solving this set of equations we get

,

, and

where

. Since

If

is even, then

(32)
, ,
, this implies that .

where

( even). If

(33) is odd, then

where

( odd).

In the asymptotic case, we use (21) to evaluate

gives

(34) , which

(35)

where

such that

.

Unfortunately, the check-split method, described at the end

of Section II-A, does not apply to enumerate the stopping sets

for SPC codes with higher degree. The check-split method over-

counts and can only serve as an upper bound.

Example 9: Consider the protograph-based LDPC code

ensembles in Example 7. Using the method described in this

section with the techniques in Section II, we computed the

asymptotic stopping set enumerators for their ensembles,

which appear in Fig. 12. The figure shows that the (6, 3) LDPC

code ensemble has

, the precoded version of

the (6, 3) ensemble has

, the RJA ensemble has

, and the ARJA ensemble has

.

In Fig. 13, we compared the results computed using the

check-split method to the exact asymptotic stopping set enu-

merators for the RJA code ensemble. The figure demonstrates

that the check-split method overcounts.

Example 10: To find the asymptotic stopping set enumerator for the rate-1/7 protograph-based G-LDPC code ensemble in Example 3, first note that all VNs in this protograph have the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:06:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ABU-SURRA et al.: ENUMERATORS FOR PROTOGRAPH-BASED ENSEMBLES

869

Fig. 12. Asymptotic stopping set enumerators for the protograph-based LDPC Fig. 14. Asymptotic stopping set enumerator for the rate-1/7 and the rate-7/15

code ensembles in Fig. 10. (Referenced in Example 9.)

G-LDPC code ensemble. (Referenced in Example 10.)

Fig. 13. Check-split method results and asymptotic stopping set enumerators for the RJA code ensemble in Fig. 10(c). (Referenced in Example 9.)

Fig. 15. Asymptotic stopping set enumerator for the rate-1/6 G-LDPC code ensemble. (Referenced in Example 11.)

same type-neighborhood. Also, after finding from as described in Section II-C, one finds that all of its columns are identical. Consequently, the protograph’s VNs have the same normalized weight . The asymptotic stopping set enumerator is

Example 11: We now evaluate the asymptotic stopping

set enumerator for the rate-1/6 G-LDPC code ensemble in

Example 4. The asymptotic stopping set enumerator is given

by

, where

(37) (36)

such that

. In (37),

and

where

. This result is presented in Fig. 14.

. Following Section II-C, in this protograph

Note that this ensemble has

, indicating that the each CN has three bit subsets, where the only set with more

stopping number for the ensemble increases linearly with . than one element is

. Moreover, after constructing

We also evaluated the stopping set enumerator for the

for the Hamming CN, we found that

. The

rate-7/15 G-LDPC code in Example 5. As seen in Fig. 14, asymptotic stopping set enumerator is shown in Fig. 15. The

there is no typical relative stopping set number for this code figure shows that there is no typical relative stopping set number

ensemble.

for this code ensemble.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:06:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

870

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

Fig. 17. Modified vectorized protograph with auxiliary VNs along the top and the original VNs along the bottom. (Referenced in Section IV-A.)

Fig. 16. Asymptotic stopping set enumerator for the rate-1/3 G-LDPC code ensemble. (Referenced in Example 12.)

Example 12: Consider the rate-1/3 G-LDPC code ensemble

in Example 6. The asymptotic stopping set enumerator is given

by

, where

(38)

such that

, where and are the vectors

of the associated normalized weights. This result is plotted in

Fig. 16 which shows that

. Thus, the stopping set

number for this code ensemble increases linearly with .

IV. ENSEMBLE TRAPPING SET ENUMERATORS

An

general trapping set [16] is a set of VNs of

size which induce a subgraph with exactly odd-degree check

nodes (and an arbitrary number of even-degree check nodes).

We use the qualifier “general” to make the distinction from ele-

mentary trapping sets to be defined later. Note the relationship of

an

general trapping set to a near codeword [49]: an

near codeword is a weight- , length- binary word resulting in

unsatisfied checks (with small, such that an iterative decoder

is susceptible to being trapped on such a word). Thus, the sup-

port of an

near codeword is an

trapping set.

A. Finite-Size Trapping Set Enumerators

if they are a trapping set, and so we set the values of the VNs

of interest to “1” and the values of the remaining VNs to “0.”

With the VNs so fixed, we are now interested in which CNs

“see” odd weight among its neighboring VNs, for the number

of such CNs is the corresponding parameter . Such odd-weight

CNs can be identified by the addition of auxiliary “flag” VNs to

each CN (see protograph in Fig. 17), where the value of an

auxiliary VN equals “1” exactly when its corresponding original

CN sees odd weight. The number of auxiliary VNs equal to “1”

is precisely the parameter for the set of VNs that were set to

“1.” Thus, to obtain the trapping set enumerator for the original

protograph , one may apply the codeword weight enumerator

technique to , partitioning the set of VNs into the original set

(

) and auxiliary flag set ( ), much like we had earlier

partitioned the set of VNs into subsets of transmitted and punc-

tured VNs.

Note that the set

(the VNs at the bottom of Fig. 17)

accounts for the weight and the set (the VNs at the top of

Fig. 17) accounts for the weight . Also note that, in counting the

number of trapping sets, we do not distinguish between trans-

mitted and punctured VNs (refer to the trapping set definition).

However, in evaluating the failure rate of a trapping set, one

should make this distinction, although this is not considered in

this paper.

Based on the above discussion and (3), the trapping set enu-

merator is given by

(39)

Our method for determining trapping set enumerators for an

LDPC code ensemble characterized by a given protograph is under the constraint

and

similar to our strategy used to find stopping set enumerators in

, where

Section III. That is, we create a modified protograph from the

original protograph and then determine the codeword weight

(40)

enumerator for the modified protograph, from which the trap-

ping set enumerators may be obtained. We describe the tech-

nique as follows. Assume we are interested in trapping sets of Notice the use of instead of in (40) to indicate that the

weight in the graph in Fig. 1. The value of the companion weight-vector enumerators in (40) are the CNs in . Those

parameter depends on which VNs are being examined to see weight-vector enumerators can be evaluated using (4).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:06:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ABU-SURRA et al.: ENUMERATORS FOR PROTOGRAPH-BASED ENSEMBLES

871

B. Asymptotic Trapping Set Enumerators

As in Section II, define the normalized logarithmic asymp-

totic trapping set enumerator (we will simply call it the asymp-

totic trapping set enumerator),

, as

(41)

where

and

(recall

is the

transmit code length). The derivation of an expression for (41)

from (39) uses the same steps used in deriving (14) from (3)

(see Section II). Thus, we omit the derivation and present the

final result

(42)

where we have (43), shown at the bottom of the page, under

the constraint

, and

. The asymptotic weight-vector enumerator,

, can be

evaluated using (21). (To avoid ambiguity, note the use of

to refer to the asymptotic weight-vector enumerator, and the use

of to refer to the size of the

trapping set.)

To establish an analogy to the typical relative minimum dis-

tance in the weight enumerator problem, let

,

. Then classify the trapping sets as

(44)

Now, for each , define

to be the -trapping set

number, which is the size of the smallest, nonempty, trap-

ping set in . Further, let

be the typical relative

-trapping set number, which is the value of at the second

zero-crossing of the

-versus- curve (

is the

first zero-crossing). Note that, from this definition, as ranges

from 0 to , the points (

,

) trace out what

we call the zero-contour curve:

As for

the codeword weight enumerator problem, if

exists,

then the average -trapping set number over the code ensemble

increases linearly with (or,

). Thus,

we are interested in codes with large -trapping set numbers

because small trapping sets dominate iterative decoding perfor-

mance in the error-floor region.

Fig. 18 shows the zero-contour curves for two different hy-

pothetical ensembles. The solid curve and the dashed curve cor-

respond to Ensemble 1 and Ensemble 2, respectively. We see in

Fig. 18 the utility of the ordered pair

The

line containing these points (and the origin) intersect a given

zero-contour curve exactly when the abscissa of the intersec-

tion point is

. Note, for any given , the -trapping set

Fig. 18. Zero-contour curves of the asymptotic trapping set enumerators for two different ensembles. The zero-contour curves corresponding to Ensemble 1 and Ensemble 2 are the solid and the dashed curves, respectively. (Referenced in Section IV-B.)

number for Ensemble 2 is greater than that for Ensemble 1, a consequence of the fact that the Ensemble 2 zero-contour curve resides above the Ensemble 1 zero-contour curve. Therefore, a code drawn from Ensemble 2 is expected to have a lower floor than a code drawn from Ensemble 1.

C. Elementary Trapping Set Enumerators

An elementary

trapping set [19] is a set of VNs

which induce a subgraph with only degree-one and degree-two

check nodes, and exactly of the CNs have degree one. It was

observed that, in the error-floor region, after running extensive

Monte Carlo simulations most of the error patterns correspond

to elementary trapping sets [16]–[18], [20]. Some examples of

elementary trapping sets are the (12, 4) trapping set in the (2640,

1320) Margulis code, and the (4, 4) and (5, 3) trapping sets in

the (1008, 504) and (816, 408) MacKay codes [18]. As a result,

it is desired to compute trapping set enumerators for just the

elementary trapping sets in the code ensembles.

To find elementary trapping set enumerators, note that the

only difference between the elementary and the general trapping

set is the constraints on the degrees of the CNs in the induced

subgraph. But this can be taken care of by choosing a proper ma-

trix in (4) and (21) when evaluating the weight-vector enu-

merators in (40) and the asymptotic weight-vector enumerators

in (43). Consequently, the discussion regarding general trapping

set enumerators is valid for elementary trapping set enumerators

after redefining .

To find for the case of elementary trapping sets, note that

when the bits of an elementary trapping set are set to “1” with

all other bits in set to “0,” the CNs in can see only certain

bit patterns. Specifically, the set of patterns that can be seen by

a degree- CN in are the all-zeros word, the weight-1

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:06:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(43)

872

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

Fig. 19. Asymptotic trapping set enumerators for regular (6, 3) LDPC code ensemble. (Referenced in Example 13.)
Fig. 21. Asymptotic trapping set enumerators for different (6, 3) LDPC code ensemble. (Referenced in Example 13.)

in the regular

Fig. 20. Asymptotic trapping set enumerators as a function of  parametrized Fig. 22. Zero-contour curves of the asymptotic trapping set enumerators for by  for the regular (6, 3) LDPC code ensemble. (Referenced in Example 13.) different protograph-based LDPC code ensembles. (Referenced in Example 13.)

words, and the weight-2 words. This implies that the pos- and, if there is a second zero-crossing, then a typical relative

sible patterns for its corresponding degree-

CN in

-trapping set number exists. Observe that the typical relative

are the all-zeros pattern and the

patterns of weight two. -trapping set numbers decrease as increases. This demon-

Therefore, contains the all-zeros pattern and all possible strates the benefit of partitioning the trapping sets into the sets

weight-2 patterns.

.

Example 13: We consider trapping set enumerator results In Fig. 22 we compare the regular (6, 3) protograph and the

for the rate-1/2 LDPC code ensembles in Example 7. In precoded (6, 3) protograph by drawing the zero-contour curves

Figs. 19–21, asymptotic general trapping set enumerators for of their asymptotic trapping set enumerators. The figure shows

the regular (6, 3) LDPC code ensemble are presented. Fig. 19 that the precoded (6, 3) LDPC code ensemble has larger typical

presents a three-dimensional plot of the asymptotic trapping set relative -trapping set numbers for the values of between

enumerator

. More illuminating is the two-dimensional 0 and 0.1674 (for

). The zero-contour curve of the

plot of

in Fig. 20 which is parameterized by . Note RJA protograph also appears in Fig. 22 to demonstrate the fact

that, by our setup earlier in this section, the

curve cor- that the (6, 3) protograph outperforms the RJA protograph in the

responds to the weight-enumerator for the original protograph sense of having higher typical relative -trapping set numbers

(since this implies ). Observe that in the figure, with fixed for all . The zero-contour curves for the RJA and the ARJA

,

increases with increasing . This indicates that, for ensembles are presented in Fig. 23. It is observed that the ARJA

this ensemble, the number of near codewords of a given weight code ensemble has larger typical relative -trapping set num-

exceeds that of the true codewords of the same weight.

bers for the values of between 0 and 0.05 (for

).

In Fig. 21,

is evaluated for several values of . Fig. 24 shows the asymptotic elementary trapping set enu-

Note in Fig. 21, for a given , the first zero-crossing is at

merators for the (6, 3) protograph. We found that the zero-con-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:06:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ABU-SURRA et al.: ENUMERATORS FOR PROTOGRAPH-BASED ENSEMBLES

873

cannot correct more than

errors, noncodewords, or

the failure of a certain number of check nodes within the con-

straint node (in this case we need one output per check node

connected to a degree one variable node). We also know that

the definition of trapping sets for G-LDPC codes depends on

the type of decoder and channel. 3) An (a, b) absorbing set [50],

[51] is a special (a, b) trapping set with the additional condi-

tion that each VN in the trapping set has more even-degree than

odd-degree neighbors. Unfortunately, it is not straightforward

to capture this additional constraint on the VNs by our method.

V. ENSEMBLE PSEUDOWEIGHT ENUMERATORS

In this section, we develop a method for computing pseu-

Fig. 23. Zero-contour curves of the asymptotic trapping set enumerators for doweight enumerators for protograph-based G-LDPC code en-

the RJA and the ARJA code ensembles. (Referenced in Example 13.)

sembles. Once again, this method leverages off of the method

presented in Section II for computing codeword weight enu-

merators. We will first require some basic definitions related to

pseudocodewords and a description of how pseudoweight enu-

merators are computed for a specific G-LDPC code.

Consider the Tanner graph with VNs. Then a de-

gree- cover of [25], [26] is a Tanner graph

which is obtained by replicating, times, each node

of and then introducing edges so that the local adja-

cency is preserved among the replicated nodes. Now, let

be a codeword

of . Then the vector

is a pseu-

docodeword of , where

using

integer addition,

.

In [25] and [26], it was shown that the set of normalized pseu-

docodewords for a graph can be described by a graph-cover

Fig. 24. Asymptotic elementary trapping set enumerators for the (6, 3) regular LDPC code ensemble. (Referenced in Example 13.)

polytope (or, fundamental polytope). Here, we instead define the graph pseudocodewords using the notation established in Section II. The key point is to compare the degree- cover of the

graph and a protograph-based code derived from copies of

tour curves for the asymptotic elementary trapping set enumerators are approximately the same as those for the general trapping set enumerators and so we omit these. The reason they are approximately the same is that, for small values and , the majority of the trapping sets are of the elementary type. Finally, we reproduced, using our proposed method, the regular (6, 3) trapping set enumerator results in [19].

treated as a protograph: they are identical. (This is true even if

is itself derived from a protograph, which is the case we con-

sider. Thus, the degree- cover of is the -fold expansion of

a graph that is the -fold expansion of a protograph4.) Con-

sequently, a vector is a pseudocodeword of if and only if

, where

is given by (2) when it has been applied

to , treated as a protograph. (For distinction from the codeword

weight vector , we use for the pseudoweight vector.) Now,

We would like to make the following remarks: 1) The re-

can be obtained directly from the definition of a pseu-

sults for enumerators for

trapping sets can be used as docodeword by noticing that is the weight vector of a code-

input-output weight enumerators

for protograph-based word in the graph cover (of degree ) and

implies

low-density generator matrix (LDGM) codes where corre- that there is at least one (pseudo)codeword in the graph cover

sponds to the input weight and to the output weight (or vice with weight vector . It is important to note that

versa). An LDGM code can be used as a precoder to a pro- (i.e., is a pseudocodeword of ) if and only if each subset

tograph-based LDPC code (a special case is an accumulator of “seen” by a given CN is a pseudocodeword of that CN.

that we used as a precoder to improve the iterative decoding This can be understood from (2) (with replaced by ) where

threshold in ARJA code) or as an outer code with inner accumu-

if and only if

for at least one CN ,

lator in the irregular repeat accumulate (IRA) protograph codes. where

is the pseudocodeword enumerator for CN .

2) Our method (modifying the original protograph for counting We denote the set of pseudocodewords for CN by .

check nodes) can also be applied to G-LDPC codes provided we have a definition for trapping sets for G-LDPC codes. For example, we can count the constraint nodes that fail, those that

4One reviewer suggested that we discuss instead graph covers of graph covers, but we prefer our approach of a graph cover of a protograph-based code, the latter being equivalent to a cover.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:06:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

874

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

gree-20 cover of the code’s graph, where any

takes at

most the value 3. The results obtained are identical to those in

[27, Fig. 20].

A. Finite-Length Ensemble Pseudoweight Enumerators

Fig. 25. Pseudoweight enumerators over AWGN channel for the degree-3 covers of the (7, 4) Hamming code. (Referenced in Example 14.)

Now, let us denote the set of pseudocodewords of by

and the number of pseudocodewords of weight by

.

Then

(45)

where the function

gives the pseudoweight of the

vector , dependent on the channel model as follows [24], [27],

[52]:

AWGN channel:

(46)

BEC channel:

(47)
BSC channel:
if (48)
if

Following the outline of the previous section, in order to

leverage the weight enumerator technique of Section II, we

consider a degree- cover

of a G-LDPC code graph ,

where

is an -fold expansion of , and is treated

as a protograph. But, because we consider protograph-based

G-LDPC codes here, is itself an -fold expansion of some

protograph . (Again, an alternative interpretation is that

is a graph cover of a graph cover.) Further, just as we

considered in Section II a weight-vector

for the graph derived from copies of the protograph ,

we consider a weight-vector for the graph

derived

from copies of . Moreover, while the elements of

take values from

, the elements

of take

values from

.

Now, following the technique for finding codeword weight

enumerators, the VNs and the CNs of graph are treated as

constituent codes in a concatenated scheme. Specifically, the

group of VNs of type in is considered to be a single

constituent code with symbols at its input. And, since each

of these VNs were copied times, each pseudocodeword

symbol belongs to the set

. Moreover, these

pseudocodeword symbols are characterized by the distribution

vector

, where is the number of -valued

pseudocodeword symbols among the pseudocodeword sym-

bols at the input of VN . In a similar manner, the group of

CNs of type is considered to be a constituent code with

-symbol inputs.

Recall that a pseudocodeword on the graph has to satisfy

the constraints of all of the CNs in , which means any CN

in has to see a pseudocodeword from (note the analogy to

a codeword on ). Given this and the foregoing discussion, one

can mimic the derivation in Section II to obtain a pseudocode-

word enumerator from a code ensemble described by . To do

so, one must first transform the nonbinary pseudocodewords to

binary words. One then obtains for the ensemble average vector

pseudoweight enumerator [compare to (2)]

(49)

where

and is the smallest set of indices satisfying: .

Example 14: Consider the (7, 4) Hamming code described by

where

,

,

is a vector of the distributions

which describe the -symbol words on the edges connected

to CN , and where

is the pseudocodeword weight-

vector enumerator for the type- constituent code. This vector

enumerator is given by

(50) Using (45), we compute the pseudoweight enumerators for the

AWGN channel in the degree-3 covers of the code’s graph.

The results are presented in the histogram of Fig. 25. We also where

, is the set of integer solutions to

computed these enumerators for the AWGN channel in the de-

with

and

,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:06:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ABU-SURRA et al.: ENUMERATORS FOR PROTOGRAPH-BASED ENSEMBLES

875

and

is the binary matrix whose rows are obtained as fol-

lows. Each row is related to a given CN pseudocodeword

by the nonbinary-to-binary mapping defined as

, where

, if

, otherwise

. Note that

acts as a type

of incidence vector so that the location of a 1 in

indicates

the presence of the corresponding value in . Finally, the av-

erage pseudoweight enumerator can be computed as

(51)

enumerator for LDPC code ensembles does not give exact results. The check-split method overcounts (see Example 9) and can only be used as an upper bound.
B. Asymptotic Ensemble Pseudoweight Enumerator
Similar to what was done in Section II for codeword weight enumerators, one can obtain the asymptotic ensemble pseudoweight enumerator (APWE). Here asymptotic ensembles means ensembles with infinite code length and finite cover degree . The expression obtained for a given is

under the channel-dependent constraints:

(55)

AWGN channel:

where

(52)

BEC channel:

(53)

(56)

BSC channel: if if

under the channel-dependent constraint [normalized versions of the constraints (52)–(54)] :
AWGN channel:
(54)
(57)

where

is the smallest number such that

and

is an integer between 0 and

. (Note that for finding

the smallest possible one first selects within the allowed

range, then one selects

within the allowed range, and so

on.)

The constraint (52) is derived from (46) as follows: The

VNs of any realization in the ensemble are divided into types.

Assume that the pseudocodeword components

,

, are associated with the VNs of type . Then

one can write

as

. Now from

the definition of above, it is clear that

and the

. The

constraint (53) is directly derived from (47) by noticing that

BEC channel: (58)

BSC channel:

(59)

where

is the smallest number such

that

and

. In (56),

,

,

, is the entropy function, and

is the

asymptotic vector pseudoweight enumerator of the constraint

node . This enumerator is computed as

(60)

But,

is exactly

. under the constraint that

is the set of solutions to

To derive (54) from (48), note that a pseudocodeword, which

, with

,

achieves the distribution , has exactly

components

with value for

. Consequently, the constraint

and

.

under (54) is equivalent to that under (48).

Example 15: Consider the rate-1/7 G-LDPC code ensemble

Note, to find the exact pseudoweight enumerator for an LDPC in Fig. 3, where the parity-check matrix corresponds to

code ensemble one needs to use the method proposed in this sec- the (7, 4) Hamming code in Example 14. The parity-check

tion. Using the check-split method to compute the pseudoweight matrix corresponds to the following column-permutation

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:06:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

876

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

of :

That is, the first column of is

the sixth column of

, and the seventh column of

is the fifth column of Now, let us evaluate its asymptotic

pseudoweight enumerator over AWGN channel in the degree-2

cover. First, associate the vector of normalized distributions

to the vector of VNs

,

where

. The asymptotic pseudoweight

enumerator is given by

, where

(61)

such that evaluating

and , one will see that

, where . While consists of 129

Fig. 26. Asymptotic pseudoweight enumerators over AWGN channel for the rate-1/7 G-LDPC code ensembles with degree-2 and degree-3 covers. (Referenced in Example 15.)

pseudocodewords. For example,

and

its corresponding pattern in

is

. And so, even for the de-

gree-2 cover, the optimization in (61) has a large number

of arguments. However, the results of this example showed

that the conjecture in Section II is still valid after defining

how to find the SWV of a pattern in

. To define this,

note that each VN in the protograph is associated with

columns in

. Accordingly, a row (or, pattern) in

can be viewed as

-bits symbols. Now, the SWV defi-

nition in Section II is applied to the th bit of every symbol.

In this example, the pattern

can be viewed as

, and so

, or simply

. (Recall that in this example all VNs have the same type.)

Applying the conjecture, the number of rows in

is 12

(compared to 129 rows in

), and from the columns of

one can see that

, for

.

The asymptotic pseudoweight enumerator (APWE) curve for

this code ensemble for degree-2 and degree-3 covers assuming the AWGN channel are shown in Fig. 26. Also included in the figure is the asymptotic codeword weight enumerator for the

Fig. 27. Asymptotic pseudoweight enumerators over the BEC for the rate-1/7 G-LDPC code ensemble with degree-2 and degree-3 covers. (Referenced in Example 15.)

same ensemble. Note that the asymptotic ensemble weight enu-

merator (AEWE) curve gives a lower bound on the asymptotic

pseudoweight numerator curves. This makes sense as any code-

word of an LDPC code has a corresponding pseudocodeword

in the code’s degree- cover, for any value

. Fur-

ther, the pseudoweight of this pseudocodeword equals the Ham-

minimum weight decreases when moving into a cover of higher degree.
Analogous curves were computed for the BEC and are presented in Fig. 27. Similar observations may be made.

ming weight of the corresponding codeword. This means that Example 16: We evaluate the asymptotic pseudoweight enu-

pseudoweight enumerators of any realization from the code en- merator for the regular LDPC code ensemble with degree-3

semble have to be greater than or equal to the weight enumera- VNs and degree-6 CNs. We consider degree-2 and the degree-3

tors of the realization. Consequently, the average pseudoweight covers on the AWGN channel. The results appear in Fig. 28.

enumerators of the code ensemble have to be greater than or Note that all three curves intersects the zero axis at the same

equal to the average weight enumerator of the ensemble. Also, value,

. This implies that the typical relative min-

note that both curves have positive zero crossings. Thus, it may imum distance and the typical relative minimum pseudoweights

be concluded that the typical relative minimum pseudocode- for the degree-2 and the degree-3 covers are identical. Conse-

word weight increases linearly with code length in both the de- quently, one can say that, asymptotically, with probability close

gree-2 and the degree-3 covers. Moreover, the typical relative to one all of the ensemble pseudocodewords in the degree-2

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:06:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ABU-SURRA et al.: ENUMERATORS FOR PROTOGRAPH-BASED ENSEMBLES

877

the trapping set technique can be extended to protograph-based

G-LDPC code ensembles, although this is an open problem.

The difficulty is that trapping sets for G-LDPC codes have

never been defined or studied in the literature.

Throughout this paper, several examples for protograph

LDPC and G-LDPC code ensembles were presented. Code-

word weight enumerators, stopping set enumerators, trapping

set enumerators, and pseudocodeword enumerators were eval-

uated and examined in terms of their typical relative minimum

distances, typical relative stopping set numbers, typical rel-

ative -trapping set numbers, and typical relative minimum

pseudoweight. In general, the asymptotic enumerators for these

ensembles indicated that a code drawn from one of these ensem-

bles will have good performance properties. For most of these

examples, instances from the considered protographs were

studied in earlier publications [32]–[34], [48] by evaluating

Fig. 28. Asymptotic pseudoweight enumerators over AWGN for the (6, 3) LDPC code ensemble with degree-2 and degree-3 covers. (Referenced in Example 16.)

their error rate performance curves via simulation. The error rate curves in these publication showed that these protograph codes are characterized by good performance in both waterfall

and error-floor regions, which agrees with the predictions

and degree-3 covers are good pseudocodewords. A good pseudocodeword here is a pseudocodeword with weight greater than or equal to the code’s minimum distance.
Note that [25] and [26] showed that the minimum AWGN channel pseudoweight grows sublinearly for any -regular LDPC code, with . This does not contradict the results in this example. In the analysis in [25] and [26], the cover degree goes to infinity first. However, in our analysis, the cover degree is fixed and the code length goes to infinity.

from their enumerators. Also, to show the universality of this

method in evaluating weight enumerators for protograph-based

LDPC code ensembles, regular LDPC code ensembles, and

irregular LDPC code ensembles (along with the G-LDPC code

ensembles), we used this method to successfully regenerate the

enumerator results in [9], [11], and [19].

Future work can utilize these results with other tools (e.g.,

EXIT chart) in the design of G-LDPC codes with good prop-

erties: large , large , large

, large

, and

good iterative decoding threshold. Also, these results can be ex-

VI. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

tended to include multiedge-type LDPC (G-LDPC) codes [53]. In some cases, the asymptotic enumerator results failed to pre-

In this paper a method for finding codeword weight enumerators for G-LDPC code protograph ensembles is derived for finite-length and infinite-length code ensembles. The method is relatively simple for CNs with small dimensionality and it allowed us to show which G-LDPC code ensembles under con-

dict whether the ensemble has good properties or not (see Example 4 and Example 11). Consequently, future work may provide an approximation for our results in the finite case, similar to the work in [54], which we expect will enable us to compare a larger number of protographs.

sideration had the property that grows linearly with code length. To reduce the computational complexity for finding the

APPENDIX A

asymptotic codeword weight enumerator, when the CNs in the In this appendix, we describe a method for solving the folprotograph have large dimensionality , a simplified procedure lowing Diophantine system which was shown to be crucial in

based on a conjecture is suggested.

Section II. We are given a

binary matrix and a 1

We have also presented methods for finding stopping set vector of nonnegative integers . Then we are to find the solu-

enumerators, trapping set enumerators, and pseudocodeword tion to

enumerators for protograph-based G-LDPC code ensembles

for both finite and infinite code lengths. (The trapping set case

(62)

was restricted to LDPC codes.) The methods are conceptually simple and leverage the weight enumeration technique by transforming the stopping set, trapping set, pseudocodeword enumerator problem into a codeword weight enumerator problem. The asymptotic stopping set enumeration allows us

where

and

are non-negative in-

tegers. Note that by adjoining an all-ones column to the left side

of matrix to form a new matrix , the above system can be

rewritten as

to show which G-LDPC code ensembles have a typical relative

(63)

stopping set number, i.e., have minimum stopping set size

that grows linearly with code length. Additionally, to obtain As

, there are possibilities to search, which is

analogous results for the asymptotic trapping set enumerators, generally impractical. Let the rank of be . The problem then

the parameter -trapping set number was introduced and then is to find a transformation matrix such that

,

used to compare various LDPC code ensembles. We believe where is the

identity matrix. Then, from the vector

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:06:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

878

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

system

, find the particular solution of the as

elsewhere.

(64)

Thus, the general solution is

(65)

The problem is now to find all vectors

which

give a vector of non-negative integers . But from (64) and (65)

ensemble increases linearly with the code length. This was first

shown by Gallager [1] for regular LDPC code ensembles. The

layout of the proof is as follows: First, find an upper bound on

the finite length weight enumerator, . Then, use this bound to

show that

as

. Finally, show that

this implies that

as

.

To obtain a bound on from (3), let us define the shorthand

notation

and

. Also, the

following inequalities from [1] will be used in this derivation:

the Stirling approximation

(66)

Consequently, each is a non-negative integer, and so the

search domain cardinality is reduced to

.

The search domain can be further reduced by finding upper

bounds on the ’s as follows. Any element in has the value

of either “0’ or “1.’ Focusing on the th column of , from (62),

the sum of the ’s which correspond to “1” in this column is

. This means that any of these ’s have to be less than or

equal to . Now, as there are several columns in , more than

one bound on each may exist. From these bounds, one selects

the smallest. This is summarized as

(67)

where is the element in the th row and the th column of

. This bound greatly reduces the search domain, particularly

when most of the components satisfy

. Consider

when most of these components satisfy

. Again, fo-

cusing on the th column of , from (62), the sum of the ’s

which correspond to “1” in this column is , and so the sum

of the ’s which correspond to “0’ in this column is

This means that any of these ’s have to be less than or equal

to

. Consequently

(70) and the following useful result that is a consequence of (70):

(71)

for

. Now, from (71) we have (72), shown at the

bottom of the page, where

. Also

(73)

where is the number of codewords in the code corresponding to CN . From (70)
(74)

Moreover, because

write

as

, one can . But

(68)

Combining the two bounds one gets

From (66), the above bounds on bounds on .

(69) directly translate into

APPENDIX B

where

,

In this appendix we prove that if the protograph-based code may write (74) as

ensemble has a typical relative minimum distance, then with

probability close to one the minimum distance of a code in the

(75) . Consequently, we
(76)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:06:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(72)

ABU-SURRA et al.: ENUMERATORS FOR PROTOGRAPH-BASED ENSEMBLES

879

From (73) and (76) one obtains the following bound on

: is a

for some suitable (polynomial in

large ).

(77) Next, using (81)

for sufficiently

Furthermore, in (77)

(78) (79)
(83) (80) where

where

, and

, i.e.,

. To explain the inequality in (80), first note

from (21) that

. Second, let be a vector of

ones, then define

, for any

. This means that any

can take at most

values. Consequently,

. Also as

, then

. Combining the bounds in (72), (77), and (80) one gets (81), shown at the bottom of the page, where

(84)

and from (18) (85)

Also in (83),

because the RHS of the equa-

tion is the number of partitions of into values. Note that

, and so it is polynomial

in . From (83) note that

if

. This implies

that if has a typical relative minimum distance , then

. Finally, recall Markov’s inequality, which states that if is a random variable on nonnegative values, then

(86)

for . Now, define the random variable as the number of

(82) codewords of weight in a code drawn from the code ensemble.

Note

and denote the probability that a weight-

(81)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:06:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

880

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

codeword exists by

. By Markov’s in- of , and from them. Denote the updated versions as

equality,

. As a result

, and . Note that only contains the newly satisfied

CNs at iteration . The set of all satisfied CNs up to iteration

is

, and for

,

. Repeat this

process, increasing the iteration index by 1. If at the end of

As

, then

this process and for some are empty sets, then the

(87) protograph-based GLDPC code belongs to .

.

As an example, consider a special case of GLDPC, namely,

APPENDIX C

a protograph-based LDPC code. Each check node in this proto-

graph code has

. Thus no type 2 degree-2 nodes are

In this appendix, we investigate the existence of a typical rel- allowed based on the constraint

. This con-

ative minimum distance for protograph-based GLDPC codes. straint implies that only type 1 degree-2 nodes are allowed, pro-

We first upper bound the ensemble weight enumerators for fi- vided that no loop exists in the graph between degree-2 nodes

nite-length GLDPC codes based on protographs, and then we and the checks connected to these nodes (such a loop would

consider the sum of weight enumerators. The results allow us to mean no typical relative minimum distance exists).

determine whether or not the typical relative minimum distance Note that for each CN of type we have

.

in the ensemble grows linearly with codeword length. Note that the technique described in this appendix can be also used to prove the existence of typical relative trapping sets, stopping sets, and pseudocodewords. We provide conditions on the connections between degree-2 variable nodes and constraint nodes

This equation implies that

, where

(

is the number of type- codewords).

For any

,

. Thus, for any CN of type

we have

(short block codes) to have typical relative minimum distance.

These conditions are related to the minimum distances of the

(88)

constraint nodes.

Consider a class of protograph-based GLDPC codes with no degree-1 VNs where the connections between degree-2 VNs and CNs in the protograph have certain restrictions to be defined. We call this class the degree-2-constrained class of protograph-based GLDPC codes, . Consider a CN node of type
with minimum distance . Define two types of degree-2 variable nodes as follows. Type 1 degree-2 nodes have only one

Let be the smallest nonzero weight of the valid configuration in the base protograph. Note that can be as small as 1 if there are parallel edges in the base protograph.
Now we will prove that ensembles of protograph-based GLDPC codes in have a typical relative minimum distance (as defined by Gallager [1]). We first prove that there exists a

edge of each node connected to , with the other edge con-

such that

as

, where the

nected to another CN node, say . If is a satisfied CN (to block size be defined shortly), then this type 1 degree-2 node is called a sat- show

. Then using Markov’s inequality we can

as

.

isfied variable node. Let be the number of type 1 degree-2

Proof: First we obtain an upper bound on

for large

unsatisfied nodes connected to . Type 2 degree-2 nodes have but finite . Then we obtain an upper bound on . In doing

both edges of each node connected to . Let be the number of type 2 degree-2 nodes connected to . A CN node of type is called a satisfied CN node if the number of degree-2 unsatisfied variable nodes connected to satisfy (similar to the number of errors and erasures that can be corrected by a linear block code with a given minimum distance).

so, we treat the weight of degree-2 nodes separate from the weight of higher-degree nodes. Then we maximize the upper bound over the total weight of degree-2 nodes. The obtained upper bound can be expressed in terms of the total weight . To obtain an upper bound on , we upper bound the cardinality of in terms of . Finally, we upper bound the summation

If the CN node of type is satisfied, then all degree-2 vari-

. There are two regions for . For the first region,

able nodes connected to this CN are updated to satisfied nodes. grows sublinearly in . For this region, the obtained upper For example, if we only have type 2 degree-2 variable nodes bound decreases polynomially in . For the second region,

for , then this node is a satisfied CN if the nodes satisfy grows linearly in . For this region the obtained upper bound

. Or, if we only have type 1 degree-2 unsatis-

fied variable nodes for , then this CN is satisfied if the

nodes satisfy

. Initially define the set of all

unsatisfied CNs connected to degree-2 nodes by

.

Similarly define the set of all degree-2 nodes connected to un-

satisfied CNs by

. At the first iteration, , find

decreases exponentially in . Thus, we need to keep both the polynomial and the exponential terms in the upper bound derivation before performing the summation above. We show that this summation decreases to zero polynomially as goes to infinity. This enables us to prove the existence of a typical relative minimum distance for the ensembles of protograph-based GLDPC codes in .

all CNs in that can be satisfied by members of . De- From (4)

note this set of satisfied CNs by

, and the set of

all degree-2 nodes connected to the members of by .

(89)

Update the and by removing the respective members

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:06:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ABU-SURRA et al.: ENUMERATORS FOR PROTOGRAPH-BASED ENSEMBLES

881

where satisfies

. Note that

Using (70) we have

of

, takes one value

. We get

pos-

sibilities for

. Thus

(90)

(98)

The last exponent in (91) can be written as

It is easy to show that this bound can be upper bounded by

(91)

. Rather than using this bound we de-

rive a simpler bound. Note that

. Using

,

, and

, we obtain

(92)

We upper bound the first term on the RHS of (92) as

(93) Set

, then

The third exponent in (91) can be upper bounded as (99)

(94) and set

; then

Thus the terms in the summation (89) can be upper bounded as

To further upper bound (95), note that After using (96), we get

(95)

(100)

where CNs of type

are adjacent to vari-

(96) able node (neighbors of ). The above result can be upper bounded as

(97)

In the upper bound we used

, and

.

In order to upperbound (89) we need to obtain an upper bound

on . We can rewrite

as

. Note that for each value

Let

and

, we further upper bound

as

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:06:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(101) . Since
(102)

882

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

Suppose the protograph-based GLDPC ensemble has variable

nodes of degree 2 and

nodes of degree 3 or higher. Let us

rename the weights of the degree-2 nodes as and the weights

of the other nodes as . Then

nodes that are connected to , and let

for

, (88) can be rewritten as

. Then,

(106)

Let us apply also the upper bound will show later that over the region of interest,

(103) and for
. We , we have

we have

where will be defined shortly. Then with this inequality, the slope of

(107)

with respect to

and we can upper bound

as

is strictly negative

Let and

(104)

and

. Also note that

. Then we obtain

where the index set

corresponds to the variable nodes

with weights , degree-3 and higher, and adjacent to the

CN node (neighborhood of ). We assumed all weights

are known, or have upper bounds in terms of a weighted

sum of

, where belongs to some index

set of already satisfied CNs. Note that

is indepen-

dent of index and

represents the total

number of edges connected to on one end and type 1 degree-2 nodes that are connected to on the other end. Also

.

where

(105)

Summing (106) over all , and summing (107) over all
sum by , we get

and denoting this sum by and denoting this

(108)

At this point we want to obtain an upper bound on before and

further upper bounding (105). Using (88) we can show

,

where is a constant to be defined shortly. Let us rewrite (88) for

CN node using and as weights for type 1 and type 2

degree-2 nodes respectively, assuming that a certain number of

CN nodes are already satisfied in our update process. Define this

set of satisfied CNs for now as , where

. Let the index

set

represent all type 1 degree-2 nodes that are connected

to . Let the index set

represent all already satisfied type Solving this set of equations yields

1 degree-2 nodes that are connected to . Define an indicator

function

. This indicator function is 1 if there is a type 1

degree-2 node with index

that connects the CN node

to the CN node ; otherwise the indicator function is

0. Let the index set

, and let

. Let the index set

represent all type 2 degree-2

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:06:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(109) (110)

ABU-SURRA et al.: ENUMERATORS FOR PROTOGRAPH-BASED ENSEMBLES

883

and

We could also take a suitable linear combination of instances of

(106) and (107) to get (117). Also note that

, and define

and

. Then

(111)

provided that the following constraint is satisfied:

(112)

(118)

Using (110) and (111) in (106) and (107), where appear as sums, we also obtain
and

and (113)

For this special case when

, the parameter is defined

as

.

Now suppose there are some unsatisfied CN nodes left, i.e.,

. The weights of the degree-2 nodes connected to sat-

isfied CN nodes are bounded by (113) and (114) for the first

iteration, where the set should be replaced by . Now

consider a CN of type

. For the second iteration, we

use the looser bounds in (115) and (116) to get

(119)

Since (113) and (114) as

and (114)

(120)

, we can further upper bound Now if we use the upper bounds in (115) and (116) (

)

for the first iteration in (119) and (120), we get

(115)

(121)

and

and

(116)

(122)

With above introduction, we are ready to describe the update process and obtain an upper bound on . First assume is empty, namely all CNs connected to degree-2 nodes are satis-

fied in the first iteration. Consider a CN of type

.

We can use (110), and (111). Note that

is empty. Thus,

the term

does not exists in

these inequalities.

For this case

and represents the total

number of type 1 degree-2 variable nodes connected to . In

this case all CN nodes should satisfy (112). Summing (110) and

(111) over all and noting that the weight of each type 1 de-

gree-2 node in the sum of (110) is counted twice, the total weight

of the degree-2 nodes can be upper bounded as follows:

As we see, the upper bounds on and are weighted

sums of

for the currently and previously satisfied

CN nodes. For clarity, the extended versions of the bounds for

the third iteration for the CN of type

can be written

as

(123) and

(117)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:06:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(124)

884

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

Similarly, we can continue in the same way until the last iteration is reached where all of the CNs are satisfied. For the last iteration, the upper bounds on and will still be a weighted

sum of

. When all CNs are satisfied, we sum

and to get an upper bound on . Denote the largest weight

in the weighted sum of

in the upper bound on by

. Then we can redefine for general case as

. Thus,

the total weight still can be bounded as

, but with a

different and perhaps a larger . For a given protograph-based

GLDPC, where all connections between variable nodes and CN

nodes are specified, one might get a tighter bound on if we

know that all CN nodes are satisfied, and we already recorded

the newly satisfied

sets in each iteration. Note that in

each iteration the newly satisfied can be a subset of .

In this case, the set of inequalities given by (106) and (107) for

all values of can be written as

, where is the

weight vector of degree-2 variable nodes. The solution of this

set of inequalities if all constraints are satisfied may provide a

better bound on and thus a better bound on

, where

is the all-ones vector.

Note that

implies that

.

Now we go back to (105). Note that the first derivative of the

function

with respect to is

. For

, the second derivative is

. Thus the function is convex. At this point we

need to compare both boundary values at

and

.

As aforementioned, we are interested in the region

( to

be defined shortly). We will show that

. Therefore we proved

and

. The weight-vector enumerator can

thus be upper bounded as

(125)

The weight enumerator now can be computed as

(126)

Fig. 29. Upper bounding by two straight lines. (Referenced in Appendix C.)

Define define

and and . Then

, where , where

. . Also

(128)

We note that for

the function

is convex, is

negative, and has a minimum at

. The minimum value

at this point is

. For

,

with

. Henceforth, we

assume

.

For

or equivalently

, we have

. However,

. Thus the condition

define

is satisfied as it was required to show. Now .

. Since

, then

.

Thus

.

Using the fundamental inequality

, we get as it was

required to show. Now we upper bound

with two straight lines (see

Fig. 29). One line connects the point

to the

point

. Denote this line by

,

We can show that
where we used the fundamental inequality the upper bound on can be written as

The exponent in the upper bound

as

, where

. We have
, . Now

where

(127)
can be written and

and

. Then

for

. The other line connects the point

to the point

. Denote this line by

, where for

, and . Then

. Thus,

For a protograph-based GLDPC code with no degree-2 nodes set . For the special case of protograph-based LDPC codes,
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:06:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(129)

ABU-SURRA et al.: ENUMERATORS FOR PROTOGRAPH-BASED ENSEMBLES

885

Now, for any

, we have

We used

and

Choose

(130)
in the above equation. . Then

Therefore the total sum is

(131)

and this upper bound goes to zero as

.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Prof. C. Kelley for providing them with her results of Example 14. They would also like to thank the reviewers, particularly Reviewer A, who generously provided innumerable comments which led to a greatly refined presentation.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] S. Litsyn and V. Shevelev, “On ensembles of low-density parity-check codes: Asymptotic distance distributions,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 4, pp. 887–908, Apr. 2002.
[3] S. Litsyn and V. Shevelev, “Distance distributions in ensembles of irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 12, pp. 3140–3159, Dec. 2003.
[4] R. Ikegaya, K. Kasai, T. Shibuya, and K. Sakaniwa, “Asymptotic weight and stopping set distributions for detailedly represented irregular LDPC code ensembles,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Chicago, IL, Jun.-Jul. 27–2, 2004, p. 208.
[5] D. Burshtein and G. Miller, “Asymptotic enumeration methods for analyzing LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1115–1131, Jun. 2004.
[6] S. Benedetto, D. Divsalar, G. Montorsi, and F. Pollara, “Serial concatenation of interleaved codes: Performance analysis, design, and iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 909–926, May 1998.
[7] D. Divsalar, H. Jin, and R. McEliece, “Coding theorems for “turbolike” codes,” in Proc. 36th Allerton Conf. Commun., Contr., Comput., Monticello, IL, Sep. 23–25, 1998, pp. 201–210.
[8] S. L. Fogal, R. McEliece, and J. Thorpe, “Enumerators for protograph ensembles of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. on Inf. Theory, Adelaide, Australia, Sep. 4–9, 2005, pp. 2156–2160.

[9] D. Divsalar, “Ensemble weight enumerators for protograph LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Seattle, WA, Jul. 9–14, 2006, pp. 1554–1558.
[10] J. Thorpe, Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) Codes Constructed from Protographs IPN Progress Rep., Tech. Rep. 42-154, 2003.
[11] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, and C. Jones, “Protograph LDPC codes over burst erasure channels,” in Proc. IEEE Military Commun. Conf., Wash., DC, Oct. 23–25, 2006, pp. 1–7.
[12] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. E. Telatar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[13] J. Zhang and A. Orlitsky, “Finite length analysis of LDPC codes with large left degrees,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, Jun.-Jul. 30–5, 2002, p. 3.
[14] A. Orlitsky, K. Viswanathan, and J. Zhang, “Stopping set distribution of LDPC code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 929–953, Mar. 2005.
[15] N. Miladinovic and M. Fossorier, “Generalized LDPC codes with Reed-Solomon and BCH codes as component codes for binary channels,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., St. Louis, MO, Nov.-Dec. 28–2, 2005, p. 6.
[16] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41th Ann. Allerton Conf. Commun., Contr., Comput., Monticello, IL, Oct. 1–3, 2003.
[17] S. K. Chilappagari, S. Sankaranarayanan, and B. Vasic, “Error floors of LDPC codes on the binary symmetric channel,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Istanbul, Turkey, Jun. 11–15, 2006, pp. 1089–1094.
[18] S. Sankaranarayanan, S. K. Chilappagari, R. Radhakrishnan, and B. Vasic, “Failures of the Gallager B decoder: Analysis and applications,” in Proc. UCSD Workshop on Inf. Theory and Its Appl., San Diego, CA, Feb. 6–10, 2006.
[19] O. Milenkovic, E. Soljanin, and P. Whiting, “Asymptotic spectra of trapping sets in regular and irregular LDPC code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 39–55, Jan. 2007.
[20] S. Ländner and O. Milenkovic, “Algorithmic and combinatorial analysis of trapping sets in structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Wireless Networks, Commun. and Mobile Comput., Maui, HI, Jun. 16, 2005, vol. 1, pp. 630–635.
[21] N. Wiberg, “Codes and Decoding on General Graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Linköping Univ., Linköping, Sweden, 1996.
[22] B. J. Frey, R. Koetter, and A. Vardy, “Skewness and pseudocodewords in iterative decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Cambridge, MA, Aug. 16–28, 1998, p. 148.
[23] B. J. Frey, R. Koetter, and A. Vardy, “Signal-space characterization of iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 766–781, Feb. 2001.
[24] G. D. Forney Jr., R. Koetter, F. R. Kschischang, and A. Reznik, “On the effective weights of pseudocodewords for codes defined on graphs with cycles,” Codes, Syst. Graph. Models, pp. 101–112, 2001.
[25] R. Koetter and P. O. Vontobel, “Graph-covers and iterative decoding of finite length codes,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Rel. Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 1–5, 2003, pp. 75–82.
[26] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Graph-cover decoding and finite length analysis of message-passing iterative decoding of LDPC codes,” 2005 [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/cs/0512078
[27] C. A. Kelley and D. Sridhara, “Pseudocodewords of Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 4013–4038, Nov. 2007.
[28] M. F. Flanagan, “Exposing pseudoweight layers in regular LDPC code ensembles,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Taormina, Italy, Oct. 11–16, 2009, pp. 60–64.
[29] M. Chertkov and M. G. Stepanov, “An efficient pseudocodeword search algorithm for linear programming decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 1514–1520, Apr. 2008.
[30] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[31] G. Liva and W. E. Ryan, “Short low-error-floor Tanner codes with Hamming nodes,” in Proc. IEEE Military Commun. Conf., Atlantic City, NJ, Oct. 17–20, 2005, pp. 208–213.
[32] G. Liva, W. E. Ryan, and M. Chiani, “Design of quasi-cyclic Tanner codes with low error floors,” in Proc. 4th Int. Symp. on Turbo Codes and Rel. Topics, Munich, Germany, Apr. 3–7, 2006.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:06:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

886

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

[33] S. Abu-Surra, G. Liva, and W. E. Ryan, “Design and performance of selected classes of Tanner codes,” in Proc. UCSD Workshop on Inf. Theory and Its Appl., San Diego, CA, Feb. 6–10, 2006.
[34] S. Abu-Surra, G. Liva, and W. E. Ryan, “Low-floor Tanner codes via Hamming-node or RSCC-node doping,” in Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag, Jan. 2006, vol. 3857, pp. 245–254.
[35] G. Liva, W. E. Ryan, and M. Chiani, “Quasi-cyclic generalized LDPC codes with low floors,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 49–57, Jan. 2008.
[36] R. M. Tanner, “On quasi-cyclic repeat-accumulate codes,” in Proc. 37th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, and Comput., Monticello, IL, Sep. 22–24, 1999.
[37] S. Lin, J. Xu, I. Djurdjevic, and H. Tang, “Hybrid construction of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 40th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, and Comput., Monticello, IL, Oct. 2–4, 2002.
[38] C. Di, A. Montanari, and R. Urbanke, “Weight distributions of LDPC code ensembles: Combinatorics meets statistical physics,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Chicago, IL, Jun.-Jul. 27–2, 2004, p. 102.
[39] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory. New York: Wiley, 1991.
[40] J. S. Yedidia, W. T. Freeman, and Y. Weiss, “Constructing free energy approximations and generalized belief propagation algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 2282–2312, Jul. 2005.
[41] S. M. Aji, S. L. Fogal, R. J. McEliece, and B. Wang, Constrained Entropy, Free Energy, and the Legendre Transform 2005 [Online]. Available: http://www.systems.caltech.edu/EE/Faculty/rjm/
[42] P. O. Vontobel, “Counting, counting, counting (or, finite-length analysis of the sum-product algorithm),” in Plenary Talk at IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Taormina, Italy, Oct. 2009.
[43] A. Montanari, Personal Communication 2010. [44] R. Smarandache and P. O. Vontobel, “Quasi cyclic LDPC codes: In-
fluence of proto- and Tanner-graph structure on minimum Hamming distance upper bounds,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, accepted for publication. [45] B. K. Butler and P. H. Siegel, “On distance properties of quasi-cyclic protograph-based LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Austin, TX, Jun. 13–18, 2010. [46] “Low density parity check codes for use in near-Earth and deep space applications,” Experimental specification, CCSDS 131.1-O-2, Sep. 2007. [47] S. Abu-Surra, G. Liva, and W. E. Ryan, “Design of generalized LDPC codes and their decoders,” in Proc. IEEE Commun. Theory Workshop, Sedona, AZ, May 2007. [48] D. Divsalar, C. Jones, S. Dolinar, and J. Thorpe, “Protograph based LDPC codes with minimum distance linearly growing with block size,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., St. Louis, MO, Nov.-Dec. 28–2, 2005, pp. 1152–1156. [49] D. MacKay and M. Postol, “Weaknesses of Margulis and Ramanujan-Margulis low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Notes Theoret. Comput. Sci., vol. 74, pp. 97–104, Oct. 2003. [50] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic´, V. Anantharam, and M. Wainwright, “Investigation of error floors of structured low-density parity-check codes via hardware simulation,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., San Francisco, CA, Nov.-Dec. 27–1, 2006, pp. 1–6. [51] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic´, “Analysis of absorbing sets for array-based LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Glasgow, U.K., Jun. 24–28, 2007, pp. 6261–6268. [52] R. Smarandache and P. O. Vontobel, “Pseudo-codeword analysis of Tanner graphs from projective and Euclidean planes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 2376–2393, Jul. 2007. [53] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Multi-edge type LDPC codes,” presented at the Workshop Honoring Prof. Bob McEliece on His 60th Birthday, Pasadena, May 2002. [54] K. Fu and A. Anastasopoulos, “Stopping set enumerator approximations for finite-length protograph LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Nice, France, Jun. 24–29, 2007, pp. 2946–2950.

Shadi Abu-Surra (S’07–M’10) received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in electrical engineering from Jordan University of Science and Technology, Irbid, Jordan, in 2001, and 2003, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from the University of Arizona, Tuscon, in 2009. During his graduate study period, he was in research and teaching assistant positions at both universities.
Currently, he is a Senior Standards Engineer with Samsung Telecommunications America, Richardson, TX. His research interests include digital communications and channel coding with emphasis on the design of LDPC codes and their decoders.
Dariush Divsalar (S’76–M’78–SM’90–F’97) received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), in 1978.
Since then, he has been with the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), California Institute of Technology (Caltech), Pasadena, where he is a Principal Scientist. At JPL, he has been involved with developing state-of-the-art technology for advanced deep-space communications systems and future NASA space exploration. Since 1986, he has taught graduate courses in communications and coding at UCLA and Caltech. He has published more than 150 papers, coauthored a book entitled An Introduction to Trellis Coded Modulation with Applications, contributed to two other books, and holds 15 U.S. patents in the above areas.
Dr. Divsalar was a corecipient of the 1986 paper award of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY. He was also a corecipient of the joint paper award of the IEEE Information Theory and IEEE Communication Theory societies in 2008. The IEEE Communication Society has selected one of his papers for inclusion in a book entitled The Best of the Best: Fifty Years of Communications and Networking Research, containing the best 56 key research papers ever published in the Society’s 50-year history. He has received over 38 NASA Tech Brief awards and a NASA Exceptional Engineering Achievement Medal in 1996. He served as an Area Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS from 1989 to 1996.
William E. Ryan (S’83–M’84–SM’01–F’11) received the B.S. degree from Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, in 1981, and the M.S. the Ph.D. (in electrical engineering) degrees from the University of Virginia, Charlottesville, in 1984 and 1988, respectively.
After receiving the Ph.D. degree, he held positions in industry for five years, first at The Analytic Sciences Corporation, then at Ampex Corporation, and finally at Applied Signal Technology. From 1993 to 1998, he was an Assistant Professor and then Associate Professor in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces. From 1998 to present, he has been on the faculty of the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, first as an Associate Professor and then as Full Professor. He has over 100 publications in the leading conferences and journals in the area of communication theory and channel coding. He is the author (with Shu Lin) of Channel Codes: Classical and Modern (Cambridge University Press, 2009). His research interests are in coding and signal processing with applications to magnetic data storage and wireless data communications.
Prof. Ryan was an Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS from 1998 through 2005. He was the General Chair of the 2003 Communication Theory Workshop (Superstition Springs, AZ) and the 2007 Information Theory Workshop (Lake Tahoe, CA).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:06:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

