910

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

On the Number of Errors Correctable with Codes on Graphs
Alexander Barg, Fellow, IEEE, and Arya Mazumdar, Student Member, IEEE

Dedicated to the memory of Ralf Koetter (1963–2009)

Abstract—We study ensembles of codes on graphs (generalized low-density parity-check, or LDPC codes) constructed from random graphs and fixed local constrained codes, and their extension to codes on hypergraphs. It is known that the average minimum distance of codes in these ensembles grows linearly with the code length. We show that these codes can correct a linearly growing number of errors under simple iterative decoding algorithms. In particular, we show that this property extends to codes constructed by parallel concatenation of Hamming codes and other codes with small minimum distance. Previously known results that proved this property for graph codes relied on graph expansion and required the choice of local codes with large distance relative to their length.
Index Terms—Graph codes, hypergraph codes, iterative decoding, parallel concatenation of codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
C ONSIDERABLE attention in recent years was devoted to the study of error correction with codes on graphs. In this paper we are interested in estimating the number of errors correctable with codes on graphs constructed as generalizations of LDPC codes. LDPC codes are constructed on a bipartite graph
by associating code’s coordinates with the vertices in one part of , replicating the values of each vertex on the edges incident to it, and imposing a parity-check constraint at each vertex of the other part of . The generalization that we have in mind is concerned with replacing the repetition and single-parity-check codes as local codes at the graph’s vertices with other error-correcting codes.
Error correction with codes on graphs has been studied along two lines, namely, by computing the average number of errors correctable with some decoding algorithm by codes from a certain random ensemble of graph codes, or by examining
Manuscript received November 17, 2009; revised July 31, 2010; accepted July 31, 2010. Date of current version January 19, 2011. This work was supported in part by the NSF by grants CCF0830699, CCF0635271, DMS0807411, and CCF0916919. The material in this paper was presented at the 2009 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Seoul, South Korea, July 2009.
This paper is part of the special issue on “Facets of Coding Theory: From Algorithms to Networks,” dedicated to the scientific legacy of Ralf Koetter.
A. Barg is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and with the Institute for Systems Research, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742 USA, and also with the Institute for Problems of Information Transmission, Moscow, Russia (e-mail: abarg@umd.edu).
A. Mazumdar is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and with the Institute for Systems Research, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742 USA (e-mail: arya@umd.edu).
Communicated by G. D. Forney, Jr., Associate Editor for the special issue on “Facets of Coding Theory: From Algorithms to Networks.”
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2010.2094812

explicit code families whose construction involves graphs with a large spectral gap. The first direction originates in the works of Gallager [7] and Zyablov and Pinsker [15] who showed that random LDPC codes of growing length can correct a nonvanishing fraction of errors. Recently the decoding algorithm of [15] was studied by Burshtein [6] who derived an improved estimate of the number of correctable errors compared to [15] and by Zyablov et al. [14] who provided estimates of the number of errors under the assumption of local single error-correcting (Hamming) codes. The second line of work, initiated in Tanner’s paper [12] and in Sipser and Spielman’s [10], pursues estimates of error correction with codes on regular graphs with a small second eigenvalue and ensuing expansion properties. Presently it is known that such codes under iterative decoding can correct the number of errors equal to a half of the designed distance of graph codes [2]. This estimate fits in a series of analogous results for various “concatenated” coding schemes and has prompted a view of graph codes as parallel concatenations of the local codes [2]. However, this result relies on certain restrictive assumptions discussed later.
An extension of Tanner’s construction from graphs to hypergraphs was proposed by Bilu and Hoory [4] who showed that such codes (for high code rates) can have minimum distance greater than the best known bipartite-graph constructions. Interestingly, the codes considered in [4] are a direct extension of a construction in [7] in the same way as Tanner’s graph codes extend LDPC codes.
As is well known, graphs with high expansion and random graphs share many properties that can be used to prove estimates of error correction. This similarity in the coding theory context was emphasized in our recent work [1] where we showed that ensembles of codes on random graphs and explicit expanderlike constructions share many common features such as properties of the minimum distance and weight distribution.
Regarding the proportion of errors corrected by graph codes under iterative decoding, we note one difference between (generalized) LDPC codes on random graphs and explicit constructions based on the graph spectrum. The explicit constructions based on regular graphs depend on the difference between the largest and the second largest eigenvalue of the graph (the “spectral gap”). For this reason, one is forced to rely on local codes with rather large minimum distance , for instance, greater than the square root of the degree of the graph. Even though in the construction of [10] and later works is kept constant, this effectively rules out of consideration local codes with small minimum distance such as the Hamming codes and the like. The square root restriction is implied by the spectral

0018-9448/$26.00 © 2011 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:10:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BARG AND MAZUMDAR: NUMBER OF ERRORS CORRECTABLE WITH CODES ON GRAPHS

911

gap of regular bipartite graphs, and is the best possible owing to the Alon-Boppana bound for graph spectra [9]. The purpose of the present work is to lift this limitation on the distance by switching from graphs with a large spectral gap to random graphs.
In this paper we obtain new estimates of the number of correctable errors for random ensembles of bipartite-graph and hypergraph codes under iterative decoding. The first part of the paper is devoted to codes on regular bipartite graphs. To construct long graph codes, we assume that the degree of the graph is fixed and the number of vertices in both parts approaches infinity. Assuming that local constraint codes are used to correct 2 or more errors, we show that almost all codes in the ensemble of graph codes are capable of correcting all error patterns of weight that forms a constant fraction of the code length. This is a much less restrictive assumption on the local codes than the one taken in earlier works on decoding of graph codes [2], [13]. The proof of this result employs some ideas of [1] introduced there for the analysis of the weight distribution of graph codes.
We then observe that if the degree of the graph is allowed to increase then graph codes with local codes of constant distance do not correct a linearly growing number of errors under the proposed iterative decoding. This motivates us to study graph codes with long local codes correcting a growing number of errors that forms a fixed proportion of the degree. The results obtained in this case parallel earlier theorems for product codes and graph codes based on the spectral gap.
In the second part of the paper we establish similar results for codes on hypergraphs, showing that a constant proportion of errors is corrected by an iterative decoding algorithm that combines some ideas of [1] with the results proved for codes on bipartite graphs in the first part of the paper. Constructing the code ensemble based on regular hypergraphs of a fixed degree, we show that they contain codes capable of correcting a constant proportion of errors. The proof involves no assumptions on the distance of the local codes; in particular, we show that networks of Hamming codes correct a fixed proportion of errors under iterative decoding. This fact was previously proved by Tanner [12] under the assumption that the underlying graph is a tree. This assumption is not needed in our results. As in the case of the graph ensemble, we also perform the analysis of the decoding algorithm for the case of growing degree, finding the proportion of errors correctable with hypergraph codes based on long local codes.
This paper is dedicated to the memory of Ralf Koetter. The first-named author discussed the problem of estimating the performance of codes on graphs with Ralf in the beginning of 2004. Ralf’s idea at that point was to investigate the error correcting capability of codes defined on some distance-regular graph, with local constraints imposed at the vertices of the graph. Presently it is understood that the setting most amenable to analysis is that of codes defined on a regular bipartite graph. Ralf himself made an initial attempt to analyze such codes in a joint paper with Xiangyu Tang [11]. The emphasis in [11] is on the estimation of the largest channel error rate tolerated by graph codes under such decoding. In the present paper, similarly to [10], [13], and later works, the local codes are decoded up to their correction radius guaranteed by the minimum distance.

II. CODE ENSEMBLES

An

binary linear code is a linear subspace of

of dimension . To construct an

binary linear graph

code consider an -regular bipartite graph

where the set of vertices consists of two disjoint parts

of size each, all the edges are of the form

and the degree of every vertex in is . Let

be a linear binary code of length called the local

code below. We identify the coordinates of with the set and

for a vertex

denote by

the projection of

a vector

on the edges incident to . A

graph code

is defined as follows:

(1)

The ensemble of codes

is constructed by associating

a code

with a graph sampled from the set of graphs

defined by a random permutation on elements which estab-

lishes how the edges originating in are connected to the ver-

tices in .

Generalizing this construction, consider an -partite -reg-

ular uniform hypergraph

, i.e., a finite set

where

and a collection

of -subsets (hyperedges) of such that every

inter-

sects each

by exactly one element and each vertex

appears in exactly different subsets of . Aiming at

constructing an

binary linear code by imposing local

constraints at the vertices, we again identify the coordinates of

with the (hyper)edges of . By definition, the code is

formed of the vectors that satisfy (1) for every vertex in .

The ensemble of codes

in this case is constructed

by sampling a random hypergraph from the set of hypergraphs

defined by

independent random permutations on ele-

ments. For

the th permutation accounts

for the placement of edges between parts and of . Of

course,

becomes

for .

The following is known about the parameters of codes in the

graph and hypergraph ensembles considered here. It is easy to

see that the rate of the codes

satisfies

. Denote by

the average value of the minimum distance of codes in the hypergraph ensemble and let

(2)

A way to bound the value of below using the distribution of distances in the local code was suggested in [5] and [8]. More explicit results in this direction were obtained in [1], [3]. In par-

ticular, [1] shows that

if the local distance satis-

fies

. For the bipartite graph ensemble

(i.e., for

) this implies that

, i.e., with high prob-

ability codes in ensemble are asymptotically good (have non-

vanishing rate and relative distance) when the local codes cor-

rect one or more errors. For hypergraphs with

or more

parts any local codes (without repeated vectors) account for

an asymptotically good ensemble. An explicit lower bound for

that depends only on and is given by [1], see The-

orem 5.5. For the case when is large and

, a lower

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:10:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

912

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

D e ; ; e ; e l i = . . . deg( ) = Fig. 1. Alternate construction of the hypergraph code: The set

f

g where

for all , represents the coordinates of the code (hy-

H V ; ; V ; V m j H v ; i l; j m . . . = 1 1 peredges of ); the sets

where j j

for all , represent the vertices of the hypergraph . Each vertex

    carries a

A n codeword of the local code of length .

estimate of

is given by the solution for of the following between decoding all the vertices in parts and in parallel

equation [1, Cor. 6]:

using some decoding algorithm of the code . Let

be a code. For the ease of analysis, we assume that the local

(3) codes are decoded to correct up to errors, where

is an

integer that satisfies

and is the distance of the

Finally, if the local codes are chosen randomly as opposed to a fixed code used at every vertex of then the codes in the (hyper)graph ensemble match the best known linear codes, i.e., reach the asymptotic Gilbert-Varshamov bound on the minimum distance [1].
Remarks: 1. An equivalent description of the bipartite code

code . Formally, define a mapping

such that

if is the unique codeword that

satisfies

and

otherwise. Let be

the estimate of the transmitted vector before the th iteration,

where

is the received vector. The next steps are

repeated for a certain number of iterations.

ensemble is obtained by considering an edge-vertex incidence

graph of the graph

, i.e., a bipartite graph

Algorithm I

where

each vertex in is

• odd: for all

put

connected to one vertex in and to one vertex in and there

• even: for all

put

.

are no other edges in . Thus, for all

and for all

. The local code constrains B. Decoding for the Ensemble

are imposed on the vertices in . By increasing the number of parts in from two to , we then obtain the hypergraph codes defined earlier. This gives an alternate description of the hypergraph code presented in Fig. 1.
The ensemble of hypergraph codes with local constraints given by single parity-check codes was introduced by Gallager [7, p. 12]. The proportion of errors correctable with these codes using the so-called “flipping” algorithm was estimated in [15]. Several generalizations of this ensemble were studied in [1], [4].
2. The derivations of this paper are not specific to binary codes: any local linear codes such as Reed-Solomon codes can be used in the construction with no conceptual changes to the analysis and the conclusions.

For the hypergraph ensemble

we use the de-

coding algorithm proposed in [1]. It proves to be the best choice

in terms of the number of correctable errors among several

possible algorithms for these codes such as the one in [4] and

procedures analogous to Algorithm I.

Let

be a code and let

be the graph associated with it. For every

we will define an th subprocedure that decodes

the local code on every vertex in the part . Suppose that

a vector

is associated with the edges

.

Let

be the vertices in the part of and let

be the subvectors

obtained from upon permuting its coordinates according

to the order of edges in and projecting it on the vertices

III. DECODING ALGORITHMS FOR GRAPH (GENERALIZED LDPC) CODES

. In other words, the vector is obtained from using the permutation that establishes edge connections between parts and . The th subpro-

Even though the ensemble

forms a particular case of

the ensemble

in our analysis we employ different

decoding algorithms for the cases

and . The reason

for this is that edge-oriented procedures commonly used for bi-

partite-graph codes do not generalize well to hypergraphs.

cedure replaces the vector

with the vector

.

The algorithm proceeds in iterations. Let

be the

received vector. Denote by the set of estimates of the trans-

mitted codeword (i.e., the set of -vectors) stored at the vertices

of before the th iteration

. After each iteration,

A. Decoding for the Ensemble

this set is formed as the union of the vectors obtained upon de-

coding of the vertices in the th part,

. Decoding be-

In our estimates of the number of correctable errors for the gins with setting

. After the first iteration, we obtain

ensemble we rely upon the algorithm of [13] which iterates potentially different vectors (one for each subprocedure) which

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:10:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BARG AND MAZUMDAR: NUMBER OF ERRORS CORRECTABLE WITH CODES ON GRAPHS

913

form the current estimates of the transmitted vector. These vec-

tors form the sets

. In the next iteration each

subprocedure will have to be applied to each of the outcomes

of the preceding iteration. Proceeding in this way, we observe

that

.

This algorithm, called Algorithm II, will only be applied for

a constant number of iterations until we can guarantee that

at least one subprocedure has reduced the number of errors to

a specified proportion, say from to some

.

We then let another algorithm take over and decode all the

candidates. Any low-complexity decoder of graph codes that

removes an arbitrarily small positive fraction of errors will

do at this stage. This is because taking the proportion of errors

from to

can be accomplished in a constant number

of steps, so the number of candidates that this decoder has to

handle is at most and does not depend on .

For the case of local codes correcting

errors we let this

algorithm to be the decoding algorithm of bipartite-graph codes

(Algorithm I), making sure that is below the proportion of

errors that are necessarily corrected by this algorithm for the

ensemble

. This is possible because, leaving any two

parts of the original hypergraph to form a bipartite graph ,

we obtain a random code from the ensemble

which

with high probability (over the ensemble) will remove all the

residual errors from at least one candidate estimate. For

this approach fails for the reasons discussed in the next section,

so we resort to a procedure in [14] that corrects a small linear

fraction of errors for single-error-correcting Hamming codes.

Upon performing the described procedure we obtain a list of at most candidate codewords of the code . The final de-

coding result is found by choosing the codeword from this list

closest to by the Hamming distance.

Though the last step of the decoding algorithm described is

different from [1], the main idea is similar to that paper, so we

refer to it for a more detailed description and a discussion of the

algorithm.

Define

(4)

where

is found from

(5)

Let

be the

-di-

mensional probability simplex.

The main result of this section is given by the next theorem.

Theorem 4.2: Let

be the local code, let

, and let

. All codes in the ensemble

except for an exponentially small (in ) proportion of them

correct any combination of errors of weight in

iterations of Algorithm I, where

and is the

smallest positive root of

Remark: The case of local codes with

is excluded

from this theorem because with high probability contains a

large number of 4-cycles, which means that correcting single

error at every vertex does not ensure overall convergence of the

decoding. Indeed, if two vertices are affected by two errors each,

and the corresponding 4 edges form a cycle, then the decoder

will loop indefinitely without approaching the correct decision.

The theorem is still valid in this case, but gives

.

Proof: We need to verify the assumption of Proposition

4.1. Let

and let

. Clearly

IV. NUMBER OF CORRECTABLE ERRORS FOR THE

ENSEMBLE

Let us compute the probability (over the choice of ) that

Let

be a code and let

be the graph

. Let

associated with it. For a given subset of vertices

nonnegative integer components, let

be a vector with

and a vertex denote by

the number of edges between

and . Let

where

is an integer.

Below denotes the entropy of the probability vector

. In the particular case of

we write instead of

.

Let be any integer such that

. The calculation and let

in this section is based on the following simple observation.

Proposition 4.1: Suppose that for all

denote the number of choices of subsets of size out of a set of size . We have

there exists

such that

. Then any

errors will be corrected by

Algorithm I in

iterations.

Proof: Suppose that no more than errors occurred in

(6)

the channel. Let be the set of vertices that are decoded in- Let

denote the event that contains a subset

correctly in iteration of Algorithm I. The assumption of the for which

. We have

proposition implies that

so

iterations suffice to remove all the errors.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:10:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

914

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

and Denote by

an analogous event with respect to

. Then

Slightly more formally, note that is the unique stationary

point of the function , and that this function is strictly con-

cave in . Therefore, is a unique maximum of on , and

the function grows in the direction

for any

.

Step 2. Suppose that

. Observe that

where is a

binomial

random variable. This probability is monotone increasing on

for

and

. Thus for

where

is the smallest positive root of

we have

(7)

Letting to be the logarithm of the left-hand side (LHS) divided

by and omitting

terms, we obtain the estimate

where

and so the point

. Our claim will follow if we

show that

. This is indeed the case because for

where

and

.

The rest of the proof is concerned with the evaluation of the

above maximum. Define

On the other hand,

. This establishes that the

maximum of on

is attained on the hyperplane

.

Step 3. To compute the maximum of on let us form

the Lagrangian

(8)

for all

Setting

and

we find that

As long as

the probability of not being able to cor-

rect errors with a random code from the considered en-

semble approaches zero. Thus, we need to find the maximum

for all

. The proof will be accom-

plished in the next three steps. Since will be assumed arbi-

trarily small, we will omit it from our considerations and write

instead of .

1. We find the point that gives the maximum of

without the constraint

.

2. Next we show that for

the point

and,

therefore, the maximum over i.e., we can replace with

is attained on the boundary,

if if where we have denoted
Adding these equations together, we find conditions for and

3. Finally we compute the value of the maximum.

Step 1. Without the constraint

the maximum

is easily computed. Indeed, the proportion of edges incident to

the vertices in out of the edges of is so the frac-

tion of vertices with -degree should be close to

. Thus, the coordinates of the maximizing

Once is eliminated from the last two equations, we obtain (5)

for . Finally, substituting the found values of

into we find that the maximum evaluates to

given

in (4) (and, therefore,

. Since we seek to obtain a value

the boundary condition for the proportion of correctable

errors is obtained by setting

. This concludes the proof.

point

are

and

Example 1: Using Theorem 4.2 together with (4) we can

compute the proportion of errors corrected by codes in the en-

semble

for several choices of the local code

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:10:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BARG AND MAZUMDAR: NUMBER OF ERRORS CORRECTABLE WITH CODES ON GRAPHS

915

. For instance, taking to be the binary Golay code of length

we find

and therefore, the propor-

tion of correctable errors is

. Similarly, for the

2-error-correcting

BCH code we find

and

.

To underscore similarities with the results obtained for

product codes and their later variations including graph codes

(e.g., [13]) we compute the proportion of errors correctable

with codes from the ensemble

in the case of large .

Proposition 4.3: Let contains codes that correct
is given by

. Then the ensemble

errors for any

where

where

.

Proof: Referring to the notation of the previous proof, let

us evaluate the asymptotic behavior of the exponent of the

probability in (7). Since

we have

Next

Let

then for any

we have

of direct product codes. As in the case of product and expander

codes (e.g., [2]), the proportion of correctable errors can be im-

proved from

by using a more powerful de-

coding algorithm.

V. NUMBER OF CORRECTABLE ERRORS FOR THE ENSEMBLE

In this section we first state a sufficient condition for the

existence of at least one subprocedure within each step of

Algorithm II that reduces the number of errors, and then per-

form the analysis of random hypergraphs to show that with high

probability this condition is satisfied. Overall this will show

that the number of errors in at least one of the candidates in the

list generated after a few iterations is reduced to a desired level.

Denote by

the set of edges incident to a vertex

.

Let

be a code and let

be its associated

graph. Let

be the set of errors at the start of some iteration

of the algorithm. The next set of arguments will refer to this

iteration. Let

be the set

of vertices such that each of them is incident to no more than

edges from (such errors will be corrected upon one decoding).

Let

be the set of vertices

that can introduce errors after one decoding iteration. Note that

each of such vertices introduces at most errors.

The main condition for successful decoding is given in the

next lemma.

Lemma 5.1: Assume that for every

there

exists

such that

where

is the set of edges of incident to the vertices

of and

. Then for any

Algorithm II will

reduce any errors in the received vector to at most errors

in

iterations where is a constant independent of .

Proof: We need to prove that at least one of the subproce-

dures will find a vector with no more than errors after a con-

stant number of iterations. In any given iteration by the assump-

tion of the lemma there exists a component for which the

th subprocedure will decrease the count of errors by

. Thus, in each iteration there exists a subprocedure

that reduces the number of errors by a positive fraction.

The function on the right-hand side of this inequality is concave.

Its global maximum equals

and is attained for

.

Thus, assuming that

we conclude that the constrained

maximum occurs for

which gives the following bound

on

:

Next we show that the assumption of Lemma 5.1 holds with high probability over the ensemble. Consider the function

where in this section the region

will be as follows:

As long as the right-hand side of the this inequality is negative,

the previous proof implies that the code corrects all errors of

(9)

multiplicity up to .

From the expression of this proposition we observe that (as ) the value of approaches so the ensemble con-

Lemma 5.2: Let

and let

tains codes that correct up to a proportion of errors, where

is the error-correcting capability of the code . This

result parallels the product bound on the error-correcting radius

(10)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:10:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

916

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

A hypergraph from the ensemble of -partite uniform -regular

hypergraphs with probability

has the property that

for all

and some

, the inequality

holds for at least one

.

Proof: Let

. Let

. Clearly

and

. We have

and thus for

where is the smallest positive root of

the point

. Let

We note that for all

On the other hand,

. This implies that

and so for all

the point

. Thus the

region in the maximization can be replaced with (and ).

where

This lemma establishes that the number of errors in at least one of the candidates in the list generated after a few iterations is reduced to a desired level. After that the residual errors can be removed by another procedure as described above. In this situation we say that the errors are correctable by Algorithm II, without explicitly mentioning the second stage.
In the next theorem, which is the main result of this section, refers to the lower estimate of the average relative distance of
the hypergraph code ensemble from Theorem 5.5 below.

Denote by

the event that for a given subset

no part of satisfies the assumption of Lemma 5.1. Then

and

Letting to be the logarithm of the left-hand side of this in-

equality divided by and omitting

terms, we obtain

(11)

where is defined in (8)

and

(as in the previous section, we have omitted

which can be made arbitrarily small).

The proof will be complete if we show that the optimiza-

tion region can be replaced by . For that we follow the

logic of the second part of the proof of Theorem 4.2. As be-

fore, the maximum of without the constraint

is attained at the point

where

Theorem 5.3: Let

be the number of errors correctable

by the local code . Algorithm II corrects any combination of

up to

errors for any code

except for a proportion of codes that declines exponentially with

the code length

.

Proof: With high probability over the ensemble of hyper-

graphs considered, for a given hypergraph

a constant

number of iterations of the algorithm will decrease the weight

of error from to any given positive proportion for at least

one of the candidates in the list

. Take

where

is the quantity given by Theorem 4.2. Next consider the bi-

partite graph

where

are the parts of

and where

if

for some edge

.

By the previous section, with high probability these

er-

rors can be corrected with

iterations of Algorithm I.

Finally, the correct codevector will be selected from the list of

candidates because the proportion of errors is assumed not to

exceed

.

The complexity of this decoding is

where the

implicit constant depends on the code .

In the following theorem we extend the results of this section

to the case of being a perfect single-error correcting Hamming

code of length

for some

. In this case the

maximum on in the above proof can be computed in a closed

form. As remarked above, in this case in the last part of the error

correction procedure we use the decoding algorithm of [14] to

remove residual errors from the candidate vectors.

We need to show that as long as

the point

. By concavity of the objective function and the op-

timization region, this will imply that the maximum is on the

boundary. As before, it is possible to show that in the neighbor-

hood of

Theorem 5.4: Suppose that the local codes are taken to be

one-error-correcting Hamming codes and let

be the

relative average distance (2) of the ensemble

. Then

almost all codes in the ensemble

can be decoded to

correct

errors, where is given by (10) and

(12)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:10:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BARG AND MAZUMDAR: NUMBER OF ERRORS CORRECTABLE WITH CODES ON GRAPHS

917

where is the only positive root of

Example 2:

Proof: It is obtained by maximizing the function over

the region

It is also of interest to compute the values of for code rate

.

The Lagrangian takes the form

where

and

and

is an arbitrary multiplier. Setting the partial derivatives to

zero, we find the value to satisfy

where is given

above. The calculations are tedious but straightforward and will

be omitted.

The last theorem enables us to find the proportion of cor-

rectable errors for the case when is the Hamming code of

length

. Since the examples below rely on

the value of the ensemble-average distance, we quote the corre-

sponding result from [1].

Theorem 5.5: [1, Th.5] Let

be the asymptotic av-

erage relative distance of codes in the -hypergraph ensemble

constructed from the local code of length and distance .

Then

These estimates are at least an order of magnitude better than the corresponding results in [6], [14] obtained for LDPC codes and their generalizations based on the “flipping” algorithm of [15].
The case of large . As in the previous section, it is interesting to examine the case of long local codes because it reveals some parallels with the analysis of the decoding algorithm in the case of nonrandom hypergraphs [1]. We begin with the observation that the proportion of correctable errors for the ensemble
computed above is a function of the number of errors that each local code corrects in each iteration.

Lemma 5.6: Let contains codes that correct where

. The ensemble errors for any

where

is the positive solution of

and

.

Proof: Referring to the proof of Lemma 5.2, we aim at

establishing conditions for the exponent of the event

to be negative as approaches infinity. We assume that

(otherwise our estimates do not imply that the convergence

condition of Lemma 5.1 holds with high probability over the

graph ensemble).

From (11), (8) we have

For instance, for the case

this theorem gives

the value of the relative distance

(the rate where

of codes

). Performing the calculation in (12), we

is defined in (9). Next, write

find that the average code from the ensemble

the

(13)

proportion of errors correctable by codes in the ensemble using

Algorithm II to be at least

.

We include some more examples. In the following table

where we have denoted

. In

.

addition let us put

then the values of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:10:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

918

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

sums

and

over each of the three intervals

where the variables are constrained as follows: for any

can be found

from the following table:

The variables introduced above depend on the point and satisfy the following natural constraints: for any
(14)

(16) (17)

Since is a restriction of to a hyperplane, it is still concave.

Now notice that

and that the point

does

not satisfy (16) and the left of (17). Repeating the above argu-

ment, we claim that the function in (15) can be further re-

stricted to the intersection of the planes

and

. Altogether this gives

Proceeding as in (13), we can estimate the sum on in as

follows:

Let us substitute these values into the expression for and

(15) rewrite (15) as follows: for any

where

(18)

Thus if the condition in the statement is fulfilled then

.

This concludes the proof.

Our plan is to prove that some of the inequalities in (14) can be

replaced by equalities, thereby expressing the variables

as functions of . We will rely on the fact that the function

is concave in its domain, proved in the end of this section.

Note that for all

the sum

Remark: The main part of the proof is estimating the solution of the following linear program:

and that it equals at the point such that

for

and

elsewhere. Also note that since

the

point is outside the region

and thus, by concavity

where the variables define a probability distribution on

. It is clear from concavity that the maximum is

attained at the point where among all the indices

at most

one value is nonzero, and the same applies to and . We

have shown that the value of the program is bounded above by

the RHS of (18). The following point gives this value and is,

therefore, a maximizing point:

Let be the point at which this maximum is attained, and let

be the corresponding point for the arguments

of . By construction, the point satisfies the inequalities of

(14). At the same time, consider the function on the line

. As the variables approach 0 along this line, the

value

approaches .

To summarize, we have found two points, and

that are located on different sides of the hyperplane

such that

. Invoking concavity of the

function we now conclude that there is a feasible point on

this hyperplane such that

.

Therefore, put

and write

where

otherwise . Since

this shows that the worst-case allocation of errors to vertices in

a given part of the graph assigns no edges to vertices that are

neither good nor bad. This also confirms the intuition suggested

by Lemma 5.1 that bad vertices (vertices assumed to add errors)

should each be assigned the smallest possible number of error

edges

.

The next proposition is now immediate.

Proposition 5.7: The ensemble

with long local

codes contains codes that can be decoded using Algorithm II to

correct all error patterns whose weight is less than where

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:10:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(19)

BARG AND MAZUMDAR: NUMBER OF ERRORS CORRECTABLE WITH CODES ON GRAPHS

919

Estimating the number of correctable errors for the ensemble

from Proposition 5.7 analytically is difficult be-

cause it involves optimization on (generally, the local codes

should be used to correct a smaller than proportion of er-

rors). We note that in the particular case of

the proof

of Lemma 5.6 can be considerably simplified, although the re-

sulting value of is not always optimal.

Example 3: Let

. Using local codes with

we can construct hypergraph codes of rate

. From

[1, Cor. 6], the ensemble-average relative distance is at least

and the proportion of errors correctable by Algorithm II

is found from (19) to be

.

Example 4: Let

and

. In this case, we find

from [1, Cor. 6] the value of the relative distance

.

The code rate satisfies

. Performing the computations

in (19) and Lemma 5.6 we find the estimate of the proportion of

correctable errors to be

.

Proof That

Is Concave: First we prove that the

function

is concave (not necessarily in the strict sense) for . For that, let us compute its Hessian matrix:

The eigenvalues of are

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors are grateful to J. Justesen and to an anonymous
reviewer for useful comments on this work.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Barg, A. Mazumdar, and G. Zémor, “Weight distribution and decoding of codes on hypergraph,” Adv. Math. Commun., vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 433–450, 2008.
[2] A. Barg and G. Zémor, “Concatenated codes: Serial and parallel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, pp. 1625–1634, 2005.
[3] A. Barg and G. Zémor, “Distance properties of expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 78–90, 2006.
[4] Y. Bilu and S. Hoory, “On codes from hypergraphs,” Eur. J. Combinator., vol. 25, pp. 339–354, 2004.
[5] J. Boutros, O. Potier, and G. Zémor, “Generalized low-density (Tanner) codes,” in Proc. IEEE ICC, Vancouver, Canada, 1999, pp. 441–445.
[6] D. Burshtein, “On the error correction of regular LDPC codes using the flipping algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 517–530, 2008.
[7] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1963.
[8] M. Lentmaier and K. Sh. Zigangirov, “On generalized low-density parity-check codes based on Hamming component codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 3, no. 8, pp. 248–250, 1999.
[9] A. Nilli, “On the second eigenvalue of a graph,” Discrete Math., vol. 91, no. 2, pp. 207–210, 1991.
[10] M. Sipser and D. A. Spielman, “Expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1710–1722, 1996.
[11] X. Tang and R. Koetter, “Performance of iterative algebraic decoding of codes defined on graphs: An initial investigation,” in Proc. 2007 IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Lake Tahoe, CA, Sep. 2–6, 2007, pp. 254–259.
[12] M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low-complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 1710–1722, 1981.
[13] G. Zémor, “On expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 835–837, 2001.
[14] V. V. Zyablov, R. Johannesson, and M. Loncˇar, “Low-complexity error correction of Hamming-code-based LDPC codes,” Probl. Inf. Trans., vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 95–109, 2009.
[15] V. V. Zyablov and M. S. Pinsker, “Estimation of the error-correcting complexity of Gallager low-density codes,” Probl. Inf. Trans., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 18–28, 1975.

so

and so is concave. Next observe that the function

can be obtained from by a linear change of variables

and therefore is also concave. Finally, the functions

and

are also concave, and thus so is the func-

tion

.

VI. CONCLUSION We have estimated the proportion of errors correctable by

Alexander Barg (M’00-SM’01-F’08) received the M.Sc. degree in applied mathematics. He received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering (information theory) from the Institute for Information Transmission Problems (IPPI) Moscow, Russia, in 1987.
He has been a Senior Researcher with the IPPI since 1988. He spent 1995–1996 with the Technical University of Eindhoven, Eindhoven, the Netherlands. During 1997–2002, he was a Member of Technical Staff of Bell Labs, Lucent Technologies. Since 2003, he has been a Professor with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and Institute for Systems Research, University of Maryland, College Park. His research interests include coding and information theory and its links with computer science and mathematics.
Dr. Barg served as Associate Editor for Coding Theory of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY during 1997–2000. He was the Technical Program Co-Chair of the 2006 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory. He is presently a member of the Board of Governors of the Information Theory Sociery and serves on the Editorial Board of several journals including Problems of Information Transmission, SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics, and Advances in Mathematics of Communications.

codes from ensembles defined by random -partite graphs,

. In contrast to the case of expander codes [10], [13], [2], [4], [1] our calculations cover the case of local codes of arbitrary given length and distance, including small values of the distance. The behavior of code ensembles considered here was examined from a different perspective in [1] where we computed estimates of the expected distance and weight distribution of these codes. The paper [1] and the present work together provide answers to the set of basic questions regarding random networks of short linear binary codes and extend our perspective of concatenated code constructions to the case of sparse regular graphs.

Arya Mazumdar (S’05) received the B.E. degree in electronics and telecommunication engineering and the M.Tech. degree in electrical engineering, from Jadavpur University, India, in 2003, and the Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, in 2005.
He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Maryland, College Park. During the summers of 2008 and 2010, he visited the Hewlett-Packard Laboratories, Palo Alto, CA, and IBM Research as a research intern. His research interests include coding theory, information theory, and combinatorics.
Mr. Mazumdar is a recipient of the IEEE ISIT 2010 Student Paper Award and a ECE Fellowship award at the University of Maryland. He was awarded scholarships from the Ministry of Human Resource and Development and National Council for Educational Research and Training in India during his graduate and undergraduate studies, respectively.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:10:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

