IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

803

Threshold Saturation via Spatial Coupling: Why Convolutional LDPC Ensembles Perform So Well over the BEC
Shrinivas Kudekar, Member, IEEE, Thomas J. Richardson, Fellow, IEEE, and Rüdiger L. Urbanke

Dedicated to the memory of Ralf Koetter (1963–2009)

Abstract—Convolutional low-density parity-check (LDPC) ensembles, introduced by Felström and Zigangirov, have excellent thresholds and these thresholds are rapidly increasing functions of the average degree. Several variations on the basic theme have been proposed to date, all of which share the good performance characteristics of convolutional LDPC ensembles. We describe the fundamental mechanism that explains why “convolutional-like” or “spatially coupled” codes perform so well. In essence, the spatial coupling of individual codes increases the belief-propagation (BP) threshold of the new ensemble to its maximum possible value, namely the maximum a posteriori (MAP) threshold of the underlying ensemble. For this reason, we call this phenomenon “threshold saturation.” This gives an entirely new way of approaching capacity. One significant advantage of this construction is that one can create capacity-approaching ensembles with an error correcting radius that is increasing in the blocklength. Although we prove the “threshold saturation” only for a specific ensemble and for the binary erasure channel (BEC), empirically the phenomenon occurs for a wide class of ensembles and channels. More generally, we conjecture that for a large range of graphical systems a similar saturation of the “dynamical” threshold occurs once individual components are coupled sufficiently strongly. This might give rise to improved algorithms and new techniques for analysis.
Index Terms—Belief-propagation (BP) decoder, capacityachieving codes, convolutional low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, density evolution (DE), EXIT curves, maximum a posteriori (MAP) decoder, protographs.
I. INTRODUCTION
I N this paper, we consider the design of capacity-approaching codes based on the connection between the belief-propagation (BP) and maximum a posteriori (MAP)
Manuscript received April 15, 2010; revised July 21, 2010; accepted August 20, 2010. Date of current version January 19, 2011. The work of S. Kudekar was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation under Grant 200020113412.
This paper is part of the special issue on “Facets of Coding Theory: From Algorithms to Networks,” dedicated to the scientific legacy of Ralf Koetter.
S. Kudekar was with the École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne CH-1015, Switzerland. He is now with the New Mexico Consortium and CNLS, Los Alamos National Laboratory and the New Mexico Consortium, Los Alamos, NM 87544 USA (e-mail: skudekar@lanl.gov).
T. J. Richardson is with Qualcomm, Flarion Technologies, Bridgewater, NJ 08807 USA (e-mail: tjr@qualcomm.com).
R. Urbanke is with the School of Computer and Communication Sciences, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne CH-1015, Switzerland (e-mail: ruediger.urbanke@epfl.ch).
Communicated by G. D. Forney, Jr., Associate Editor for the special issue on "Facets of Coding Theory: From Algorithms to Networks."
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2010.2095072

threshold of sparse graph codes. Recall that the BP threshold

is the threshold of the “locally optimum” BP message-passing

algorithm. As such it has low complexity. The MAP threshold,

on the other hand, is the threshold of the “globally optimum”

decoder. No decoder can do better, but the complexity of the

MAP decoder is in general high. The threshold itself is the

unique channel parameter so that for channels with lower

(better) parameter decoding succeeds with high probability

(for large instances) whereas for channels with higher (worse)

parameters decoding fails with high probability. Surprisingly,

for sparse graph codes there is a connection between these two

thresholds; see [1] and [2].1

We discuss a fundamental mechanism, which ensures that

these two thresholds coincide (or at least are very close). We call

this phenomenon “threshold saturation via spatial coupling.” A

prime example where this mechanism is at work are convolu-

tional low-density parity-check (LDPC) ensembles.

It was Tanner who introduced the method of “unwrapping”

a cyclic block code into a convolutional structure [3], [4]. The

first low-density convolutional ensembles were introduced by

Felström and Zigangirov [5]. Convolutional LDPC ensembles

are constructed by coupling several standard

-regular

LDPC ensembles together in a chain. Perhaps surprisingly, due

to the coupling, and assuming that the chain is finite and prop-

erly terminated, the threshold of the resulting ensemble is con-

siderably improved. Indeed, if we start with a -regular en-

semble, then on the binary erasure channel (BEC) the threshold

is improved from

to roughly

(the capacity for this case is ). The latter number is the

MAP threshold

of the underlying -regular

ensemble. This opens up an entirely new way of constructing

capacity-approaching ensembles. It is a folk theorem that for

standard constructions improvements in the BP threshold go

hand in hand with increases in the error floor. More precisely, a

large fraction of degree-two variable nodes is typically needed

in order to get large thresholds under BP decoding. Unfortu-

nately, the higher the fraction of degree-two variable nodes, the

more low-weight codewords (small cycles, small stopping sets,

etc.) appear. Under MAP decoding on the other hand these two

1There are some trivial instances in which the two thresholds coincide. This is, e.g., the case for so-called “cycle ensembles” or, more generally, for irregular LDPC ensembles that have a large fraction of degree-two variable nodes. In these cases, the reason for this agreement is that for both decoders the performance is dominated by small structures in the graph. But for general ensembles these two thresholds are distinct and, indeed, they can differ significantly.

0018-9448/$26.00 © 2011 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:08:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

804

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

quantities are positively correlated. To be concrete, if we con-

sider the sequence of

-regular ensembles of rate one-

half, by increasing we increase both the MAP threshold as

well as the typical minimum distance. It is therefore possible

to construct ensembles that have large MAP thresholds and low

error floors.

The potential of convolutional LDPC codes has long been

recognized. Our contribution lies therefore not in the introduction of a new coding scheme, but in clarifying the basic mecha- Fig. 1. Protograph of a standard (3; 6)-regular ensemble.

nism that make convolutional-like ensembles perform so well.

There is a considerable literature on convolutional-like LDPC

ensembles. Variations on the constructions as well as some anal-

ysis can be found in [6]–[9]. In [10] and [11], Sridharan et al.

consider density evolution (DE) for convolutional LDPC en-

sembles and determine thresholds for the BEC. The equiva-

lent observations for general channels were reported by Lent-

maier et al. [11], [12]. The preceding two sets of works are

perhaps the most pertinent to our setup. By considering the

resulting thresholds and comparing them to the thresholds of the underlying ensembles under MAP decoding (see, e.g., [13]) it becomes quickly apparent that an interesting physical effect

Fig. 2. A chain of (2L + 1) protographs of the standard (3; 6)-regular ensembles for L = 9. These protographs do not interact.

must be at work. Indeed, in a recent paper [14], Lentmaier and

Fettweis followed this route and independently formulated the A. The

Ensemble

equality of the BP threshold of convolutional LDPC ensembles and the MAP threshold of the underlying ensemble as a conjecture. They attribute this numerical observation to G. Liva.
A representation of convolutional LDPC ensembles in terms of a protograph was introduced by Mitchell et al. [15]. The corresponding representation for terminated convolutional LDPC ensembles was introduced by Lentmaier et al. [16]. A pseudocodeword analysis of convolutional LDPC codes was performed by Smarandache et al. [17], [18]. In [19], Papaleo et al. consider windowed decoding of convolutional LDPC codes on the BEC to study the tradeoff between the decoding latency and the code performance.
In what follows, we will assume that the reader is familiar with basic notions of sparse graph codes and message-passing decoding, and in particular with the asymptotic analysis of LDPC ensembles for transmission over the BEC as it was accomplished in [20]. We summarized the most important facts that are needed for our proof in Section III-A, but this summary is not meant to be a gentle introduction to the topic. Our notation follows for the most part the one in [13].

To start, consider a protograph of a standard -regular

ensemble (see [21] and [22] for the definition of protographs).

It is shown in Fig. 1. There are two variable nodes and there is

one check node. Let denote the number of variable nodes at

each position. For our example,

means that we have

50 copies of the protograph so that we have 100 variable nodes

at each position. For all future discussions, we will consider the

regime where tends to infinity.

Next, consider a collection of

such protographs as

shown in Fig. 2. These protographs are noninteracting and so

each component behaves just like a standard -regular com-

ponent. In particular, the BP threshold of each protograph is just

the standard threshold, call it

(see Lemma

4 for an analytic characterization of this threshold). Slightly

more generally: start with an

-regular ensemble

where is odd so that

.

An interesting phenomenon occurs if we couple these compo-

nents. To achieve this coupling, connect each protograph to 2

protographs “to the left” and to protographs “to the right.”

This is shown in Fig. 3 for the two cases

II. CONVOLUTIONAL-LIKE LDPC ENSEMBLES

and

. In this figure, extra check nodes are

added on each side to connect the “overhanging” edges at the

The principle that underlies the good performance of convo-

lutional-like LDPC ensembles is very broad and there are many

degrees of freedom in constructing such ensembles. In what fol-

lows, we introduce two basic variants. The

-ensemble

is very close to the ensemble discussed in [16]. Experimentally,

it has a very good performance. We conjecture that it is capable

of achieving capacity.

We also introduce the ensemble

. Experimen-

tally, it shows a worse tradeoff between rate, threshold, and

blocklength. But it is easier to analyze and we will show that

it is capacity achieving. One can think of as a “smoothing pa-

boundary.

There are two main effects resulting from this coupling.

1) Rate reduction: Recall that the design rate of the un-

derlying standard

-regular ensemble is

. Let us determine the design rate of the

corresponding

ensemble. By design

rate we mean here the rate that we get if we assume that

every involved check node imposes a linearly indepen-

dent constraint.

The variable nodes are indexed from to so that

in total there are

variable nodes. The check

rameter” and we investigate the behavior of this ensemble when 2If we think of this as a convolutional code, then 2d^ is the syndrome former

tends to infinity.

memory of the code.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:08:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: THRESHOLD SATURATION VIA SPATIAL COUPLING: WHY CONVOLUTIONAL LDPC ENSEMBLES PERFORM SO WELL OVER THE BEC

805

. For check nodes at the boundary the number of sockets is decreased linearly according to their position. The probability distribution of the ensemble is defined by choosing a random permutation on the set of all edges for each check node position.
The next lemma, whose proof can be found in Appendix I, asserts that the minimum stopping set distance of most codes in this ensemble is at least a fixed fraction of . With respect to the technique used in the proof we follow the lead of [15], [18] and [17], [22] that consider distance and pseudodistance analysis of convolutional LDPC ensembles, respectively.

Lemma 1 (Stopping Set Distance of

Consider the

-ensemble with

and

. Define

-Ensemble):

,

,

= 7 Fig. 3. Two coupled
(top) and L and

(cdhai=ns

7o;fdpro=tog1r4a)ph(bs owttiothmL),

= 9 and (d
respectively.

=

3;

d

= 6)

nodes are indexed from

to

, so that in

total there are

check nodes. We see

that, due to boundary effects, the design rate is reduced

to

where the first term on the right-hand side represents

the design rate of the underlying standard

-regular ensemble and the second term represents Let denote the unique strictly positive solution of the equation

the rate loss. As we see, this rate reduction effect van-

and let

. Then, for any

ishes at a speed .

2) Threshold increase: The threshold changes dra-

matically from

to something close to

(the MAP threshold of the underlying where

standard

-regular ensemble; see Lemma 4). This code .

denotes the minimum stopping set distance of the

phenomenon (which we call “threshold saturation”) is

much less intuitive and it is the aim of this paper to

explain why this happens.

So far we have considered

-regular ensembles.

Let us now give a general definition of the

-ensemble

that works for all parameters

so that is odd. Rather

than starting from a protograph, place variable nodes at posi-

tions

. At each position there are such variable nodes.

Place check nodes at each position

. Con-

nect exactly one of the edges of each variable node at position

to a check node at position

.

Note that at each position

, there are

exactly

check node sockets.3 Exactly of

those come from variable nodes at each position

3 3Sockets are connection points where edges can be attached to a node. For
example, if a node has degree then we imagine that it has three sockets. This terminology arises from the so-called configuration model of LDPC ensembles. In this model, we imagine that we label all check-node sockets and all variablenode sockets with the set of integers from one to the cardinality of the sockets. To construct then a particular element of the ensemble we pick a permutation on this set uniformly at random from the set of all permutations and connect variable-node sockets to check-node sockets according to this permutation.

Discussion: The quantity

is the relative weight

(normalized to the blocklength) at which the exponent of the

expected stopping set distribution of the underlying standard

-regular ensemble becomes positive. It is perhaps not

too surprising that the same quantity also appears in our con-

text. The lemma asserts that the minimum stopping set distance

grows linearly in . But the stated bound does not scale with

. We leave it as an interesting open problem to determine

whether this is due to the looseness of our bound or whether

our bound indeed reflects the correct behavior.

Example 2

: An explicit calcu-

lation shows that

and

. Let

be the blocklength. If we assume that

,

, then

. Lemma 1

asserts that the minimum stopping set distance grows in the

blocklength at least as

.

B. The

Ensemble

In order to simplify the analysis we modify the ensemble by adding a randomization of the edge connections.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:08:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

806

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

For the remainder of this paper we always assume that

, Lemma 3 (Design Rate): The design rate of the ensemble

so that the ensemble has a nontrivial design rate.

, with

, is given by

We assume that the variable nodes are at positions

,

. At each position there are variable nodes,

.

Conceptually, we think of the check nodes to be located at all

integer positions from

. Only some of these positions

actually interact with the variable nodes. At each position there

Proof: Let be the number of variable nodes and be

are

check nodes. It remains to describe how the connec- the number of check nodes that are connected to at least one

tions are chosen.

of these variable nodes. Recall that we define the design rate as

Rather than assuming that a variable at position has exactly

.

one connection to a check node at position

, There are

variables in the graph. The check

we assume that each of the connections of a variable node nodes that have potential connections to variable nodes in the

at position is uniformly and independently chosen from the range

are indexed from to

. Consider the

range

, where is a “smoothing” parameter.

check nodes at position . Each of the edges of each

In the same way, we assume that each of the connections of a such check node is chosen independently from the range

check node at position is independently chosen from the range

. The probability that such a check node has at least

. We no longer require that is odd.

More precisely, the ensemble is defined as follows. Con-

sider a variable node at position . The variable node has

outgoing edges. A type is a -tuple of nonnegative integers,

, so that

. The operational

meaning of is that the variable node has edges that connect

to a check node at position . There are

types. As-

sume that for each variable we order its edges in an arbitrary but

fixed order. A constellation is an -tuple,

with elements in

. Its operational significance is that

if a variable node at position has constellation then its th

edge is connected to a check node at position

. Let

one connection in the range

is equal to

.

Therefore, the expected number of check nodes at position

that are connected to the code is equal to

.

In a similar manner, the expected number of check nodes at po-

sition

,

, that are connected to the code

is equal to

. All check nodes at posi-

tions

are connected. Further, by symmetry,

check nodes in the range

have an identical

contribution as check nodes in the range

.

Summing up all these contributions, we see that the number of

check nodes, which are connected, is equal to

denote the type of a constellation. Since we want the position

of each edge to be chosen independently we impose a uniform

distribution on the set of all constellations. This imposes the

following distribution on the set of all types. We assign the Discussion: In the above lemma, we have defined the de-

probability

sign rate as the normalized difference of the number of variable

nodes and the number of check nodes that are involved in the

ensemble. This leads to a relatively simple expression, which is

suitable for our purposes. But in this ensemble there is a nonzero

Pick so that

is a natural number for all types . For probability that there are two or more degree-one check nodes

each position pick

variables that have their edges as- attached to the same variable node. In this case, some of these

signed according to type . Further, use a random permutation degree-one check nodes are redundant and do not impose con-

for each variable, uniformly chosen from the set of all permuta- straints. This effect only happens for variable nodes close to the

tions on letters, to map a type to a constellation.

boundary. Since we consider the case where tends to infinity,

Under this assignment, and ignoring boundary effects, for this slight difference between the “design rate” and the “true

each check position , the number of edges that come from vari- rate” does not play a role. We therefore opt for this simple defi-

ables at position ,

, is . In other words, nition. The design rate is a lower bound on the true rate.

it is exactly a fraction of the total number of sockets at position . At the check nodes, distribute these edges according C. Other Variants

to a permutation chosen uniformly at random from the set of all There are many variations on the theme that show the same

permutations on letters, to the

check nodes at this qualitative behavior. For real applications these and possibly

position. It is then not very difficult to see that, under this dis- other variations are vital to achieve the best tradeoffs. Let us

tribution, for each check node each edge is roughly indepen- give a few select examples.

dently chosen to be connected to one of its nearest “left”

1) Diminished rate loss: One can start with a cycle (as is the

neighbors. Here, “roughly independent” means that the corre-

case for tailbiting codes) rather than a chain so that some

sponding probability deviates at most by a term of order

of the extra check nodes, which we add at the boundary,

from the desired distribution. As discussed beforehand, we will

can be used for the termination on both sides. This re-

always consider the limit in which first tends to infinity and

duces the rate loss.

then the number of iterations tends to infinity. Therefore, for any

2) Irregular and structured ensembles: We can start with

fixed number of rounds of DE the probability model is exactly

irregular or structured ensembles. Arrange a number

the independent model described above.

of graphs next to each other in a horizontal order.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:08:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: THRESHOLD SATURATION VIA SPATIAL COUPLING: WHY CONVOLUTIONAL LDPC ENSEMBLES PERFORM SO WELL OVER THE BEC

807

Couple them by connecting neighboring graphs up to

some order. Empirically, once the coupling is “strong”

enough and spreads out sufficiently, the threshold is

“very close” to the MAP threshold of the underlying

ensembles. See also [23] for a study of such ensembles.

The main aim of this paper is to explain why coupled LDPC

codes perform so well rather than optimizing the ensemble.

Therefore, despite the practical importance of these variations,

we focus on the ensemble

. It is the simplest to

analyze.

III. GENERAL PRINCIPLE
As mentioned before, the basic reason why coupled ensembles have such good thresholds is that their BP threshold is very close to the MAP threshold of the underlying ensemble. Therefore, as a starting point, let us review how the BP and the MAP threshold of the underlying ensemble can be characterized. A detailed explanation of the following summary can be found in [13].

A. The Standard

-Regular Ensemble: BP Versus MAP

Consider DE of the standard

-regular ensemble. More

precisely, consider the fixed point (FP) equation

(1)

Fig. 4. Left: The EBP EXIT curve h of the (d = 3; d = 6)-regular ensemble. The curve goes “outside the box” at the point (1; x (1)) and tends to infinity. Right: The BP EXIT function h (). Both the BP as well as the MAP threshold are determined by h ().

“C” shape. It starts at the point

for

and then moves

downwards until it “leaves” the unit box at the point

and extends to infinity. The right-hand side of Fig. 4 shows the

BP EXIT curve (dashed line). It is constructed from the EBP

EXIT curve by “cutting off” the lower branch and by completing

the upper branch via a vertical line.

The BP threshold

is the point at which this

vertical line hits the -axis. In other words, the BP threshold

is equal to the smallest -value, which is taken on

along the EBP EXIT curve.

where is the channel erasure value and is the average erasure probability flowing from the variable node side to the check node side. Both the BP as well as the MAP threshold of the
-regular ensemble can be characterized in terms of solutions (FPs) of this equation.

Lemma 4 (Analytic Characterization of Thresholds): Con-

sider the

-regular ensemble. Let

denote its

BP threshold and let

denote its MAP threshold.

Define

Lemma 7 (Lower Bound on ensemble

): For the

-regular

Proof: that
root of

Consider the polynomial

. Note

for

. Since

, the positive

is a lower bound on the positive root of

.

But the positive root of is at

.

This in turn is lower bounded by

.

To construct the MAP threshold

, integrate the

BP EXIT curve starting at

until the area under this curve is

equal to the design rate of the code. The point at which equality

is achieved is the MAP threshold (see the right-hand side of

Fig. 4).

Let

be the unique positive solution of the equation

and let

be the unique positive solution of

the equation

. Then,

and

. We remark that above, for ease of

notation, we drop the dependence of and

on and

.

Example 5 (Thresholds of (3, 6)-Ensemble): Explicit com-

putations show that

and

.

Lemma 8 (MAP Threshold for Large Degrees): Consider the

-regular ensemble. Let

denote the

design rate so that

. Then, for fixed and increasing,

the MAP threshold

converges exponentially fast

(in ) to .

Proof: Recall that the MAP threshold is determined by the

unique positive solution of the polynomial equation

, where

is given in Lemma 4. A closer look at this

equation shows that this solution has the form

Lemma 6 (Graphical Characterization of Thresholds): The

left-hand side of Fig. 4 shows the so-called extended BP (EBP)

EXIT curve associated to the -regular ensemble. This is

the curve given by

,

. For

all regular ensembles with

this curve has a characteristic

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:08:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

808

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

We see that the root converges exponentially fast (in ) to . Further, in terms of this root we can write the MAP threshold as

Lemma 9 (Stable and Unstable FPs [13]): Consider the stan-

dard

-regular ensemble with

. Define

(2)

Then, for

, there are exactly two strictly

positive solutions of the equation

and they are both in

the range .

Let

be the larger of the two and let

be the smaller

of the two. Then,

is a strictly increasing function in and

is a strictly decreasing function in . Finally,

.

Discussion: Recall that represents the change of the erasure probability of DE in one iteration, assuming that the system has current erasure probability . This change can be negative (erasure probability decreases), it can be positive, or it can be zero (i.e., there is an FP). We discuss some useful properties of
in Appendix II.

Fig. 5. EBP EXIT curves of the ensemble (d = 3; d = 6; L)

for L = 1; 2; 4; 8; 16; 32; 64; and 128. The BP/MAP thresholds are



(3; 6; 1) = 0:714309=0:820987, 

(3; 6; 2) =

0:587842=0:668951, 

(3; 6; 4)

=

0:512034=0:574158,



(3; 6; 8) = 0:488757=0:527014, 

(3; 6; 16) =

0:488151=0:505833, 

(3; 6; 32) = 0:488151=0:496366,



(3; 6; 64) = 0:488151=0:492001, 

(3; 6; 128) =

0:488151=0:489924. The light/dark gray areas mark the interior of

the BP/MAP EXIT function of the underlying (3; 6)-regular ensemble,

respectively.

As the notation indicates, corresponds to a stable FP

whereas corresponds to an unstable FP. Here stability

means that if we initialize DE with the value

for a

sufficiently small then DE converges back to .

B. The

Ensemble

Consider the EBP EXIT curve of the

ensemble.

To compute this curve we proceed as follows. We fix a desired

“entropy” value (see Definition 15), call it . We initialize DE

with the constant . We then repeatedly perform one step of DE,

Fig. 6. EBP EXIT curve for the (d = 3; d = 6; L = 32) ensemble. The circle shows a magnified portion of the curve. The horizontal magnification is 10 , and the vertical one is 1.

where in each step we fix the channel parameter in such a way

that the resulting entropy is equal to . This is equivalent to the values of , where the rate of the ensemble is close to

,

procedure introduced in [24, Sec. VIII], to compute the EBP this dramatic increase in the threshold is still true. Empirically,

EXIT curve for general binary-input memoryless output-sym- we see that, for increasing, the EBP EXIT curve approaches

metric channels. Once the procedure has converged, we plot its the MAP EXIT curve of the underlying

-reg-

EXIT value versus the resulting channel parameter. We then re- ular ensemble. In particular, for

the EBP

peat the procedure for many different entropy values to produce EXIT curve drops essentially vertically until it hits zero. We will

a whole curve.

see that this is a fundamental property of this construction.

Note that DE here is not just DE for the underlying ensemble. Due to the spatial structure we in effect deal with a multiedge C. Discussion

ensemble [25] with many edge types. For our current casual A look at Fig. 5 might convey the impression that the tran-

discussion the exact form of the DE equations is not important, sition of the EBP EXIT function is completely flat and that

but if you are curious please fast forward to Section V.

the threshold of the ensemble

is exactly equal to

Why do we use this particular procedure? By using forward the MAP threshold of the underlying

-regular ensemble

DE, one can only reach stable FPs. But the above procedure when tends to infinity.

allows one to find points along the whole EBP EXIT curve, i.e., Unfortunately, the actual behavior is more subtle. Fig. 6

one can in particular also produce unstable FPs of DE.

shows the EBP EXIT curve for

with a small section

The resulting curve is shown in Fig. 5 for various values of . of the transition greatly magnified. As one can see from this

Note that these EBP EXIT curves show a dramatically different magnification, the curve is not flat but exhibits small “wiggles”

behavior compared to the EBP EXIT curve of the underlying en- in around

. These wiggles do not vanish as

semble. These curves appear to be “to the right” of the threshold tends to infinity but their width remains constant. As we will

. For small values of one might be led discuss in much more detail later, area considerations imply

to believe that this is true since the design rate of such an en- that, in the limit as diverges to infinity, the BP threshold is

semble is considerably smaller than

. But even for large slightly below

. Although this does not play a role

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:08:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: THRESHOLD SATURATION VIA SPATIAL COUPLING: WHY CONVOLUTIONAL LDPC ENSEMBLES PERFORM SO WELL OVER THE BEC

809

Then, in the limit as tends to infinity, and for

we have

Fig. 7. EBP EXIT curve for the (d = 3; d = 6; L = 16; w) ensemble.

Left: w = 2. The circle shows a magnified portion of the curve. The horizontal

(3)

magnification is 10 , and the vertical one is 1. Right: w = 3. The circle shows

a magnified portion of the curve. The horizontal magnification is 10 , and the

vertical one is 1.

in the remainder of the paper, let us remark that the number of

wiggles is (up to a small additive constant) equal to .

Where do these wiggles come from? They stem from the fact

that the system is discrete. If, instead of considering a system

with sections at integer points, we would deal with a continuous

(4)

system where neighboring ”sections” are infinitesimally close, then these wiggles would vanish. This “discretization” effect is

In the limit as

, , and

(in that order) tend to infinity

well known in the physics literature. By letting tend to infinity

we can in effect create a continuous system. This is in fact our

main motivation for introducing this parameter.

(5)

Empirically, these wiggles are very small (e.g., they are of

width for the

ensemble), and further,

these wiggles tend to when is increased. Unfortunately this

is hard to prove.

We therefore study the ensemble

. The wiggles

(6)

for this ensemble are in fact larger; see, e.g., Fig. 7. But, as men-

tioned above, the wiggles can be made arbitrarily small by let- Discussion:

ting (the smoothing parameter) tend to infinity. For example,

1) The lower bound on

is the main re-

in the left-hand side of Fig. 7,

, whereas in the right-hand

sult of this paper. It shows that, up to a term, which

side, we have

. We see that the wiggle size has decreased

tends to zero when tends to infinity, the threshold of

by more than a factor of .

the chain is equal to the MAP threshold of the under-

lying ensemble. The statement in the theorem is weak.

IV. MAIN STATEMENT AND INTERPRETATION

As pointed out in the introduction, numerical experiments

indicate that there is a large class of convolutional-like LDPC

ensembles that all have the property that their BP threshold is

“close” to the MAP threshold of the underlying ensemble. Un-

fortunately, no general theorem is known to date that states when

this is the case. The following theorem gives a particular in-

stance of what we believe to be a general principle. The bounds

stated in the theorem are loose and can likely be improved con-

siderably. Throughout the paper we assume that

.

As we discussed earlier, the convergence speed with re-

spect to (w.r.t.) is most likely exponential. We prove

only a convergence speed of . We pose it as an open

problem to improve this bound. We also remark that, as

seen in (6), the MAP threshold of the

en-

semble tends to

for any finite when

tends to infinity, whereas the BP threshold is bounded

away from

for any finite .

2) We right away prove the upper bound on

. For the purpose of our proof,

we first consider a “circular” ensemble. This ensemble

A. Main Statement

is defined in an identical manner as the ensemble except that the positions are now from

Theorem 10 (BP Threshold of the

Ensemble):

to

and index arithmetic is performed modulo

Consider transmission over the

using random elements

. This circular ensemble has design rate equal to

from the ensemble

. Let

denote

. Set

. The original ensemble is

the BP threshold and let

denote the design rate

recovered by setting any consecutive

positions to

of this ensemble.

zero. We first provide a lower bound on the conditional

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:08:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

810

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

entropy for the circular ensemble when transmitting

over a BEC with parameter . We then show that setting

sections to , does not significantly decrease this

entropy. Overall this gives an upper bound on the MAP

threshold of the original ensemble.

It is not hard to see that the BP EXIT curve4 is the

same for both the

-regular ensemble and the

circular ensemble. Indeed, the forward DE (see Def-

Fig. 8. Unimodal FP of the (d = 3; d = 6; L = 16; w = 3) ensemble with small values towards the boundary, a fast transition, and essentially constant values in the middle.

inition 13) converges to the same FP for both ensem-

bles. Consider the

-regular ensemble and let

. The conditional entropy when

transmitting over a BEC with parameter is at least

equal to

minus the area under the BP EXIT

curve between (see [13, Th. 3.120]). Call this area

. Here, the entropy is normalized by , where

is the length of the circular ensemble and denotes

the number of variable nodes per section. Assume now

that we set

consecutive sections of the circular

ensemble to 0 in order to recover the original ensemble.

As a consequence, we “remove” an entropy (degrees of

freedom) of at most

from the circular system.

The remaining entropy is therefore positive (and hence

we are above the MAP threshold of the circular en-

semble) as long as

.

Thus, the MAP threshold of the circular ensemble

is given by the supremum over all such that

. Now note that

, so that the above condi-

tion becomes

.

But the BP EXIT curve is an increasing function in

so that

. We get the stated

upper bound on

by lower bounding

by .

3) According to Lemma 3,

. This immediately im-

plies the limit (5). The limit for the BP threshold

follows from (4).

4) According to Lemma 8, the MAP threshold

of the underlying ensemble quickly

approaches the Shannon limit. We therefore see

that convolutional-like ensembles provide a way

of approaching capacity with low complexity.

For example, for a rate equal to one-half, we

get

,

,

,

,

.

some steps are quite generic, whereas other steps require a rather

detailed analysis of the particular chosen system.

1) Existence of FP: “The” key to the proof is to show the

existence of a unimodal FP

, which takes on an

essentially constant value in the “middle,” has a fast

“transition,” and has arbitrarily small values towards the

boundary (see Definition 12). Fig. 8 shows a typical such

example. We will see later that the associated channel

parameter of such an FP, , is necessarily very close to

.

2) Construction of EXIT curve: Once we have established

the existence of such a special FP we construct from it a

whole FP family. The elements in this family of FPs look

essentially identical. They differ only in their “width.”

This width changes continuously, initially being equal

to roughly

until it reaches zero. As we will see,

this family “explains” how the overall constellation (see

Definition 12) collapses once the channel parameter has

reached a value close to

: starting from the

two boundaries, the whole constellation “moves in” like

a wave until the two wave ends meet in the middle. The

EBP EXIT curve is a projection of this wave (by com-

puting the EXIT value of each member of the family).

If we look at the EBP EXIT curve, this phenomenon

corresponds to the very steep vertical transition close to

.

Where do the wiggles in the EBP EXIT curve come

from? Although the various FPs look “almost” identical

(other than the place of the transition) they are not ex-

actly identical. The value changes very slightly (around

). The larger we choose the smaller we can make the

changes (at the cost of a longer transition).

When we construct the above family of FPs it is math-

ematically convenient to allow the channel parameter

to depend on the position. Let us describe this in more

detail.

We start with a special FP as depicted in Fig. 8. From

this we construct a smooth family

, param-

eterized by ,

, where

and where

B. Proof Outline
The proof of the lower bound in Theorem 10 is long. We therefore break it up into several steps. Let us start by discussing each of the steps separately. This hopefully clarifies the main ideas. But it will also be useful later when we discuss how the main statement can potentially be generalized. We will see that

. The components of the vector are essen-

tially constants (for fixed). The possible exceptions are

components towards the boundary. We allow those com-

ponents to take on larger (than in the middle) values.

From the family

we derive an EBP EXIT

curve and we then measure the area enclosed by this

curve. We will see that this area is close to the design

4The BP EXIT curve is the plot of the extrinsic estimate of the BP decoder versus the channel erasure fraction (see [13] for details).

rate. From this we will be able to conclude that .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:08:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: THRESHOLD SATURATION VIA SPATIAL COUPLING: WHY CONVOLUTIONAL LDPC ENSEMBLES PERFORM SO WELL OVER THE BEC

811

3) Operational meaning of EXIT curve: We next show that

the EBP EXIT curve constructed in step 2) has an opera-

tional meaning. More precisely, we show that if we pick

a channel parameter sufficiently below then forward

DE converges to the trivial FP.

4) Putting it all together: The final step is to combine

all the constructions and bounds discussed in the pre-

vious steps to show that

converges to

when and tend to infinity.

(7) for

. As a short hand we then say that

is an

FP. We say that

is a non-trivial FP if is not identically

zero. More generally, let

where

for

. We say that

forms an FP if (10)

V. PROOF OF THEOREM 10
This section contains the technical details of Theorem 10. We accomplish the proof by following the steps outlined in the previous section. To enhance the readability of this section we have moved some of the long proofs to Appendixes I–V.

Definition 13 (Forward DE and Admissible Schedules): Con-

sider DE for the

ensemble. More precisely, pick

a parameter

. Initialize

. Let be

the result of rounds of DE. For example,

is generated

from by applying the DE (7) to each section

A. Step 1): Existence of FP

Definition 11 (DE of

Ensemble): Let ,

, denote the average erasure probability, which is emitted by

variable nodes at position . For

we set

. For

the FP condition implied by DE is

(7)

If we define (8)

We call this the parallel schedule.
More generally, consider a schedule in which in each step an arbitrary subset of the sections is updated, constrained only by the fact that every section is updated in infinitely many steps. We call such a schedule admissible. Again, we call the resulting sequence of constellations.
In what follows, we will refer to this procedure as forward DE by which we mean the appropriate initialization and the subsequent DE procedure. For example, in the next lemma we will discuss the FPs, which are reached under forward DE. These FPs have special properties and so it will be convenient to be able to refer to them in a succinct way and to be able to distinguish them from general FPs of DE.

then (7) can be rewritten as

Lemma 14 (FPs of Forward DE): Consider forward DE for

the

ensemble. Let denote the sequence of con-

stellations under an admissible schedule. Then converges to

an FP of DE and this FP is independent of the schedule. In par-

ticular, it is equal to the FP of the parallel schedule.

Proof: Consider first the parallel schedule. We claim that

In what follows, it will be handy to have an even shorter form the vectors are ordered, i.e.,

(the

for the right-hand side of (7). Therefore, let

ordering is pointwise). This is true since

,

whereas

. It now follows

by induction on the number of iterations that the sequence

(9)

is monotonically decreasing. Since the sequence is also bounded from below it con-

verges. Call the limit . Since the DE equations are contin-

Note that

uous it follows that is an FP of DE (7) with parameter . We call the forward FP of DE.

That the limit (exists in general and that it) does not depend

on the schedule follows by standard arguments and we will be

where the right-hand side represents DE for the underlying brief. The idea is that for any two admissible schedules the cor-

-regular ensemble.

responding computation trees are nested. This means that if we

The function

in all its arguments

,

follows, it is understood that

is allowed to take values in .

defined in (8) is decreasing . In what
. The channel parameter

look at the computation graph of schedule let us say one at time then there exists a time so that the computation graph under
schedule is a superset of the first computation graph. To be able to come to this conclusion we have crucially used the fact that for an admissible schedule every section is updated infin-

Definition 12 (FPs of DE): Consider DE for the

itely often. This shows that the performance under schedule is

ensemble. Let

. We call the constellation. at least as good as the performance under schedule . The con-

We say that forms an FP of DE with parameter if fulfills verse claim, and hence equality, follows by symmetry.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:08:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

812

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

Definition 15 (Entropy): Let be a constellation. We define the (normalized) entropy of to be

Discussion: More precisely, we should call the average message entropy. But we will stick with the shorthand entropy in the remainder of the paper.

Lemma 16 (Nontrivial FPs of Forward DE): Consider the

ensemble

. Let be the FP of forward DE for the

parameter . For

and

, if

(11)

Fig. 9. A proper one-sided FP (; x) for the ensemble (d = 3; d = 6; L = 16; w = 3), where  = 0:488151. As we will discuss in Lemma 23, for sufficiently large L, the maximum value of x, namely x , approaches the stable value x (). Further, as discussed in Lemma 26, the width of the transition is of order O , where  > 0 is a parameter that indicates, which elements of the constellation we want to include in the transition.

Solving for and simplifying the inequality by upper bounding

by and lower bounding

by leads

to (11).

then

.

Proof: Let

be the design rate of the

ensemble as stated in Lemma 3. Note that the

design rate is a lower bound on the actual rate. It follows that

the system has at least

degrees of

freedom. If we transmit over a channel with parameter then

in expectation at most

of these degrees of

freedom are resolved. Recall that we are considering the limit

in which diverges to infinity. Therefore, we can work with

averages and do not need to worry about the variation of the

quantities under consideration. It follows that the number of

degrees of freedom left unresolved, measured per position and

normalized by , is at least

.

Let be the forward DE FP corresponding to parameter .

Recall that is the average message, which flows from a vari-

able at position towards the check nodes. From this we can

compute the corresponding probability that the node value at

position has not been recovered. It is equal to

. Clearly, the BP decoder cannot be better than the MAP decoder. Further, the MAP decoder cannot resolve the unknown degrees of freedom. It follows that we must have

Not all FPs can be constructed by forward DE. In particular, one can only reach (marginally) “stable” FPs by the above procedure. Recall from Section IV-B, step 1), that we want to construct an unimodal FP, which “explains” how the constellation collapses. Such an FP is by its very nature unstable.
It is difficult to prove the existence of such an FP by direct methods. We therefore proceed in stages. We first show the existence of a “one-sided” increasing FP. We then construct the desired unimodal FP by taking two copies of the one-sided FP, flipping one copy, and gluing these FPs together.

Definition 17 (One-Sided DE): Consider the tuple

. The FP condition implied by one-sided DE

is equal to (7) with

for

and

for .

Definition 18 (FPs of One-Sided DE): We say that is a

one-sided FP (of DE) with parameter and length if (7) is

fulfilled for

, with

for

and

for

.

In the same manner as we have done this for two-sided FPs,

if

, then we define one-sided FPs with respect

to .

We say that is nondecreasing if

for

.

Definition 19 (Entropy): Let be a one-sided . We define the (normalized) entropy of to be

Note that

so that

. We conclude that

Assume that we want a constellation with entropy at least .

Using the expression for

from Lemma 3, this

leads to the inequality

Definition 20 (Proper One-Sided FPs): Let

be a non-

trivial and nondecreasing one-sided FP. As a short hand, we

then say that

is a proper one-sided FP.

A proper one-sided FP is shown in Fig. 9.

Definition 21 (One-Sided Forward DE and Schedules): Similar to Definition 13, one can define the one-sided forward DE by initializing all sections with and by applying DE according to an admissible schedule.

(12) Lemma 22 (FPs of One-Sided Forward DE): Consider an

ensemble and let

. Let

and let denote the result of applying steps of one-sided

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:08:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: THRESHOLD SATURATION VIA SPATIAL COUPLING: WHY CONVOLUTIONAL LDPC ENSEMBLES PERFORM SO WELL OVER THE BEC

813

forward DE according to an admissible schedule (cf., Defini-

tion 21). Then, we have the following.

1) converges to a limit, which is an FP of one-sided

DE. This limit is independent of the schedule and the

limit is either proper or trivial. As a short hand we say

that

is a one-sided FP of forward DE.

2) For

and

, if

fulfills (11) then

.

Proof: The existence of the FP and the independence of the

schedule follows along the same line as the equivalent statement

for two-sided FPs in Lemma 14. We hence skip the details. As-

sume that this limit is nontrivial. We want to show that it

is proper. This means we want to show that it is nondecreasing.

We use induction. The initial constellation is nondecreasing. Let

us now show that this property stays preserved in each step of

DE if we apply a parallel schedule. More precisely, for any sec-

tion

where

and

denote the stable and unstable nonzero

FP associated to , respectively.

Proof: We start by proving that

. Assume

to the contrary that

. Then

a contradiction. Here, the last step follows since

and

.

Let us now consider the claim that

.

The proof follows along a similar line of arguments. Since

, both

and

exist and are strictly

positive. Suppose that

or that

. Then

a contradiction. A slightly more careful analysis shows that
in fact we have strict inequality, namely skip the details.

, so that . We

Lemma 24 (Basic Bounds on FP): Let sided FP of length . Then, for all

be a proper one-

where follows from the monotonicity of duction hypothesis that is nondecreasing.
Let us now show that for

and the inand

, if fulfills (11) then

.

First, recall from Lemma 16 that the corresponding two-sided

FP of forward DE has entropy at least under the stated

conditions. Now compare one-sided and two-sided DE for the

same initialization with the constant value and the parallel

schedule. We claim that for any step the values of the one-sided

constellation at position ,

, are larger than or equal

to the values of the two-sided constellation at the same position

. To see this we use induction. The claim is trivially true for

the initialization. Assume therefore that the claim is true at a

particular iteration . For all points

it is then

trivially also true in iteration , using the monotonicity of

the DE map. For points

, recall that the one

sided DE “sees” the value for all positions , , and that

is the largest of all -values. For the two-sided DE on the

other hand, by symmetry,

for all . Again

by monotonicity, we see that the desired conclusion holds.

To conclude the proof, note that if for a unimodal two-sided

constellation we compute the average over the positions

then we get at least as large a number as if we compute it over the

whole length

. This follows since the value at position

is maximal.

i) ii) iii) iv)

Proof: We have

Let

,

. We have

. Since

,

is convex. Let

Let us establish some basic properties of proper one-sided

FPs.

Since

is convex, using Jensen’s inequality, we obtain

Lemma 23 (Maximum of FP): Let , proper one-sided FP of length . Then,

, be a and

which proves claim i).
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:08:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

814

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

The derivation of the remaining inequalities is based on the Let denote the weighted average

following identity:

Then, for any

(13)

For

this gives rise to the following inequalities:

Proof: Represent both as well as

(14) DE (10). Taking the difference

(15)

(16)

Let [recall the definition of iii)

, so that from (8)]. Using (15), this proves

Apply the identity

where we set

. in terms of the
(17) (18)

If we use (16) instead then we get ii). To prove iv), we use (14) Note that

. Thus

Since is increasing, Hence

.

In step i), we used the fact that

for all ,

so that

substitution

. Thus

implies

. In step ii), we made the

. Since

,

Lemma 25 (Spacing of FP): Let , one-sided FP of length . Then for

, be a proper

Consider the term , where

Using again (18)

. Set . Note that

and and

,

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:08:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: THRESHOLD SATURATION VIA SPATIAL COUPLING: WHY CONVOLUTIONAL LDPC ENSEMBLES PERFORM SO WELL OVER THE BEC

815

Explicitly

or has entropy bounded by

and channel parameter

.

which gives us the desired upper bound. By setting all

,

we obtain the second, slightly weaker, form.

To bound the spacing for the weighted averages, we write

and explicitly

Discussion: We will soon see that, for the range of parameters of interest, the second alternative is not possible either. In the light of this, the previous theorem asserts for this range of parameters the existence of a proper FP of entropy . In what follows, this FP will be the key ingredient to construct the whole EXIT curve.

B. Step 2): Construction of EXIT Curve

Definition 28 [EXIT Curve for

-Ensemble]: Let

,

, denote a proper one-sided FP of length

and entropy . Fix

.

The proof of the following lemma is long. Hence we relegate it to Appendix III.

Lemma 26 (Transition Length): Let

. Let ,

, be a proper one-sided FP of length . Then, for all

The interpolated family of constellations based on

is

denoted by

. It is indexed from to .

This family is constructed from the one-sided FP

. By

definition, each element

is symmetric. Hence, it suffices

to define the constellations in the range

and then to set

for

. As usual, we set

for

. For

and

define

where and .

is a strictly positive constant independent of

Let us now show how we can construct a large class of onesided FPs, which are not necessarily stable. In particular, we will construct increasing FPs. The proof of the following theorem is relegated to Appendix IV.

Theorem 27 (Existence of One-Sided FPs): Fix the param-

eters

and let

. Let

,

where

where for

The constellations function of , with
.

are increasing (componentwise) as a and with

Remark: Let us clarify the notation occurring in the definition

of the term

above. The expression for

consists of

the product of two consecutive sections of , indexed by the

subscripts

and

. The erasure values at the two sections are first raised

to the powers

and

, before taking their product. Here,

represents real numbers in the interval .

Discussion: The interpolation is split into four phases. For

, the constellations decrease from the constant value

to the constant value . For the range

, the con-

There exists a proper one-sided FP of length that either has stellation decreases further, mainly towards the boundaries, so

entropy and channel parameter bounded by

that at the end of the interval it has reached the value at po-

sition (hence, it stays constant at position ). The third phase

is the most interesting one. For

we “move in” the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:08:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

816

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

Consider, e.g., the top figure corresponding to phase i). The constellation in this case is completely flat. Correspondingly, the local channel values are also constant, except at the left boundary, where they are slightly higher to compensate for the “missing” -values on the left.
The second figure from the top shows a point corresponding to phase ii). As we can see, the -values close to have not changed, but the -values close to the left boundary decrease towards the solution . Finally, the last figure shows a point in phase iii). The constellation now “moves in.” In this phase, the values are close to , with the possible exception of values close to the right boundary (of the one-sided constellation). These values can become large.
The proof of the following theorem can be found in Appendix V.

Theorem 30 (Fundamental Properties of EXIT Curve): Con-

sider the parameters

. Let

,

, de-

note a proper one-sided FP of length and entropy

.

Then, for

, the EXIT curve of Definition 28 has the

following properties.

i) Continuity: The curve

is continuous for

and differentiable for

except for a

finite set of points.

ii) Bounds in phase i): For

Fig. 10. Construction of EXIT curve for (3; 6; 6; 2)-ensemble. The figure shows three particular points in the interpolation, namely the points  = 0:781 [phase i)],  = 0:61 [phase ii)], and  = 0:4 [phase iii)]. For each parameter both the constellation x as well as the local channel parameters  are shown in the figure on left. The right column of the figure illustrates a projection of the EXIT curve. For example, we plot the average EXIT value of the constellation versus the channel value of the zeroth section. For reference, also the EBP EXIT curve of the underlying (3; 6)-regular ensemble is shown (gray line).

iii) Bounds in phase ii): For
where iv) Bounds in phase iii): Let

and .

constellation by “taking out” sections in the middle and inter-

polating between two consecutive points. In particular, the value

is the result of “interpolating” between two consecutive

(19)

values, call them and , where the interpolation is

done in the exponents, i.e., the value is of the form

.

Let

. For

Finally, in the last phase all values are interpolated in a linear

fashion until they have reached .

Example 29 [EXIT Curve for

-Ensemble]: Fig. 10

shows a small example, which illustrates this interpolation for

the

-ensemble. We start with

an FP of entropy

for

. This constellation has

and

For

and

Note that, even though the constellation is quite short, is

close to

, and is close to

. From

, we create an EXIT curve

v) Area under EXIT curve: The EXIT value at position is defined by

for

. The figure shows three particular points of the inter-

polation, one in each of the first three phases.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:08:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: THRESHOLD SATURATION VIA SPATIAL COUPLING: WHY CONVOLUTIONAL LDPC ENSEMBLES PERFORM SO WELL OVER THE BEC

817

Let denote the area of the EXIT integral. Then

that

is a nonincreasing function in . This fol-

lows by comparing DE for two constellations, one, say, of length

and one of length ,

. It therefore suffices to prove

(4) for the limit of tending to infinity.

Let

be fixed with

, where

vi) Bound on : For

where

C. Step 3): Operational Meaning of EXIT Curve

Lemma 31 [Stability of

]: Let

denote the EXIT curve constructed in

Definition 28. For

, let

Consider forward DE (cf., Definition 13) with parameter ,

. Then, the sequence (indexed from to ) converges

to an FP, which is pointwise upper bounded by .

Proof: Recall from Lemma 14 that the sequence con-

verges to an FP of DE, call it . We claim that

.

We proceed by contradiction. Assume that is not point-

wise dominated by . Recall that by construction of

the components are decreasing in and that they are contin-

uous. Further,

. Therefore

Our strategy is as follows. We pick (length of constellation)

sufficiently large (we will soon see what “sufficiently” means)

and choose an entropy, call it . Then, we apply Theorem 27.

Throughout this section, we will use and to denote the FP

and the corresponding channel parameter guaranteed by The-

orem 27. We are faced with two possible scenarios. Either there

exists an FP with the desired properties or there exists an FP

with parameter

and entropy at most . We will then show

(using Theorem 30) that for sufficiently large the second al-

ternative is not possible. As a consequence, we will have shown

the existence of an FP with the desired properties. Using again

Theorem 30 we then show that is close to

and that

is a lower bound for the BP threshold of the coupled code en-

semble.

Let us make this program precise. Pick

and “large.” In many of the subsequent steps we require spe-

cific lower bounds on . Our final choice is one, which obeys

all these lower bounds. Apply Theorem 27 with parameters

and . We are faced with two alternatives.

Consider first the possibility that the constructed one-sided

FP has parameter

and entropy bounded by

For sufficiently large this can be simplified to

is well defined. By assumption

. Note that there must exist

at least one position

so that

.5 But

since

and since

is monotone in its components

(20)

Let us now construct an EXIT curve based on

for a

system of length ,

. According to Theorem 30,

it must be true that

a contradiction.
D. Step 4): Putting it All Together We have now all the necessary ingredients to prove Theorem
10. In fact, the only statement that needs proof is (4). First note

(21) We claim that by choosing sufficiently large and by choosing
appropriately we can guarantee that
(22)

5It is not hard to show that under forward DE, the constellation x is unimodal and symmetric around 0. This immediately follows from an inductive

where is any strictly positive number. If we assume this claim

argument using Definition 13.

for a moment, then we see that the right-hand side of (21) can

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:08:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

818

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

be made strictly less than . Indeed, this follows from

(hypothesis of the theorem) by choosing sufficiently

small (by making large enough) and by choosing to be

proportional to (we will see how this is done in the remainder

of the paper). This is a contradiction, since by assumption

. This will show that the second alternative must apply.

Let us now prove the bounds in (22). In what follows, we say

that sections with values in the interval are part of the tail,

that sections with values in

form the transition,

and that sections with values in

represent

the flat part. Recall from Definition 15 that the entropy of a

constellation is the average (over all the

sections) erasure

fraction. The bounds in (22) are equivalent to saying that both

the tail as well as the flat part must have length at least . From

Lemma 26, for sufficiently small , the transition has length at

most

(i.e., the number of sections with erasure value,

, in the interval

), a constant independent of .

Informally, therefore, most of the length consists of the tail

or the flat part.

Let us now show all this more precisely. First, we show that

the flat part is large, i.e., it is at least a fixed fraction of . We

argue as follows. Since the transition contains only a constant

number of sections, its contribution to the entropy is small. More

precisely, this contribution is upper bounded by

. Fur-

ther, the contribution to the entropy from the tail is small as well,

namely at most . Hence, the total contribution to the entropy

stemming from the tail plus the transition is at most

.

To obtain the above expression, we take to be sufficiently

large in order to bound the term in

, which con-

tains . We also use (22) and choose to be sufficiently small

to bound the corresponding terms. We also replace

by

in

.

To summarize, we conclude that for an entropy equal to

, for sufficiently large , must be a proper

one-sided FP with parameter bounded as above.

Finally, let us show that

is a lower bound

on the BP threshold. We start by claiming that

To prove the above claim we just need to check that

[see bounds in phase ii) of Theorem 30] is

greater than the above infimum. Since in the limit of

,

, for sufficiently large the claim is true.

From the hypothesis of the theorem, we have

.

Hence,

. Apply forward DE (cf., Defi-

nition 13) with parameter

and length

. Denote the FP by (with indices belonging to

).

From Lemma 31, we then conclude that is pointwise upper

bounded by . But for

, we have

However, the entropy of the FP is equal to

. As a con-

sequence, the flat part must have length, which is at least a frac-

tion

of . This fraction is strictly

positive if we choose small enough and large enough.

By a similar argument we can show that the tail length is also a

strictly positive fraction of . From Lemma 23,

.

Hence, the flat part cannot be too large since the entropy is equal

to

, which is strictly smaller than . As a conse-

quence, the tail has length at least a fraction

where we make use of the fact that can be chosen arbitrarily

small. Thus,

for all

. Consider a

one-sided constellation with

for all

. Recall that for a one-sided constellation

for all and as usual

for

. Clearly,

.

Now apply one-sided forward DE to with parameter (same

as the one we applied to get ) and call its limit . From

part i) of Lemma 22, we conclude that the limit is either

proper or trivial. Suppose that is proper (implies nontrivial).

of . As before, this fraction is also strictly positive if we choose small enough and large enough. Hence, by choosing to be the lesser of the length of the flat part and the tail, we conclude that the bounds in (22) are valid and that

Clearly,

for all

. But from Lemma 23,

we have that for any proper one-sided FP

,

a contradiction. Hence, we conclude that must be trivial and

so must be .

can be chosen arbitrarily large (by increasing ). Consider now the second case. In this case, is a proper one-

VI. DISCUSSION AND POSSIBLE EXTENSIONS

sided FP with entropy equal to

and with parameter

. Now, using again Theorem 30, we can

show

A. New Paradigm for Code Design
The explanation of why convolutional-like LDPC ensembles perform so well given in this paper gives rise to a new paradigm

in code design.

In most designs of codes based on graphs one encounters a

tradeoff between the threshold and the error floor behavior. For

example, for standard irregular graphs an optimization of the

threshold tends to push up the number of degree-two variable

nodes. The same quantity, on the other hand, favors the existence

of low weight (pseudo)codewords.

For convolutional-like LDPC ensembles the important op-

erational quantity is the MAP threshold of the underlying en-

semble. As, e.g., regular LDPC ensembles show, it is simple

to improve the MAP threshold and to improve the error-floor

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:08:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: THRESHOLD SATURATION VIA SPATIAL COUPLING: WHY CONVOLUTIONAL LDPC ENSEMBLES PERFORM SO WELL OVER THE BEC

819

performance—just increase the minimum variable-node degree. Within our framework it is clear that at many places the con-

From this perspective one should simply pick as large a vari- stants could be improved at the cost of a more involved proof.

able-node degree as possible.

It is therefore likely that a more careful analysis following the

There are some drawbacks to picking large degrees. First, same steps will give improved convergence speeds.

picking large degrees also increases the complexity of the More importantly, for mathematical convenience we con-

scheme. Second, although currently little is known about the structed an “artificial” EXIT curve by interpolating a particular

scaling behavior of the convolutional-like LDPC ensembles, it FP and we allowed the channel parameter to vary as a function

is likely that large degrees imply a slowing down of the con- of the position. In the proof we then coarsely bounded the

vergence of the performance of finite-length ensembles to the “operational” channel parameter by the minimum of all the

asymptotic limit. This implies that one has to use large block individual channel parameters. This is a significant source

lengths. Third, the larger we pick the variable-node degrees for the looseness of the bound. A much tighter bound could

the higher the implied rate loss. Again, this implies that we be given if it were possible to construct the EXIT curve by

need very long codes in order to bring down the rate loss to direct methods. As we have seen, it is possible to show the

acceptable levels. It is tempting to conjecture that the minimum existence of FPs of DE for a wide range of EXIT values. The

rate loss that is required in order to achieve the change of difficulty consists in showing that all these individual FPs form

thresholds is related to the area under the EXIT curve between a smooth 1-D manifold so that one can use the Area Theorem

the MAP and the BP threshold. For example, in Fig. 5, this is and integrate with respect to this curve.

the light gray area. For the underlying ensemble this is exactly the amount of guessing (help) that is needed so that a local D. Extensions to BMS Channels and General Ensembles

algorithm can decode correctly, assuming that the underlying channel parameter is the MAP threshold.
Due to the above reasons, an actual code design will therefore try to maintain relatively small average degrees so as to keep this gray area small. But the additional degree of freedom can be used to design codes with good thresholds and good error floors.

Preliminary numerical evidence suggests that the behavior of the convolutional-like LDPC ensembles discussed in this paper is not restricted to the BEC channel or to regular ensembles but is a general phenomenon. We will be brief. A more detailed discussion can be found in the two recent papers [26], [27]. Let us quickly discuss how one might want to attack the more general setup.

B. Scaling Behavior

We have seen that the proof consists essentially of three steps. 1) Existence of FP: As long as we stay with the BEC, a sim-

In our design there are three parameters that tend to infinity.

The number of variables nodes at each position, called , the

length of the constellation , and the length of the smoothing

window . Assume we fix and we are content with achieving

a threshold slightly below the MAP threshold. How should we

scale with respect to so that we achieve the best perfor-

mance? This question is of considerable practical importance.

Recall that the total length of the code is of order

. We

would therefore like to keep this product small. Further, the rate

loss is of order (so should be large) and should be

chosen large so as to approach the performance predicted by

DE. Finally, how does the number of required iterations scale

as a function of ?

Also, in the proof we assumed that we fix and let tend

to infinity so that we can use DE techniques. We have seen that

in this limit the boundary conditions of the system dictate the

performance of the system regardless of the size of (as long

as is fixed and tends to infinity). Is the same behavior still

true if we let tend to infinity as a function of ? At what

scaling does the behavior change?

ilar procedure as the one used in the proof of Theorem 27 can be used to show the existence of the desired FP for more general ensembles. General BMS channels are more difficult to handle, but FP theorems do exist also in the setting of infinite-dimensional spaces. The most challenging aspect of this step is to prove that the constructed FP has the essential basic characteristics that we relied upon for our later steps. In particular, we need it to be unimodal, to have a short transition period, and to approach the FP density of the underlying standard ensemble. 2) Construction of EXIT curve and bounds: Recall that in order to create a whole EXIT curve, we started with an FP and interpolated the value of neighboring points. In order to ensure that each such interpolated constellation is indeed an FP, we allowed the local channel parameters to vary. By choosing the interpolation properly, we were then able to show that this variation is small. As long as one remains in the realm of BEC channels, the same technique can in principle be applied to other ensembles. For general channels the construction seems more chal-

C. Tightening of Proof

lenging. It is not true in general that, given a constellation, one can always find “local” channels that make this

As mentioned already in the introduction, our proof is

constellation an FP. It is therefore not clear how an inter-

weak—it promises that the BP threshold approaches the MAP

polation for general channels can be accomplished. This

threshold of the underling ensemble at a speed of

.

is perhaps the most challenging hurdle for any potential

Numerical experiments indicate that the actual convergence

generalization.

speed is likely to be exponential and that the prefactors are very

3) Operational interpretation: For the operational interpre-

small. Why is the analytic statement so loose and how can it be

tation we relied upon the notion of physical degradation.

improved?

We showed that, starting with a channel parameter of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:08:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

820

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

a channel, which is upgraded w.r.t. to any of the local channels used in the construction of the EXIT curve, we do not get stuck in a nontrivial FP. For the BEC, the notion of degradation is very simple, it is the natural order on the set of erasure probabilities, and this is a total order. For general channels, an order on channels still exists in terms of degradation, but this order is partial. We therefore require that the local channels used in the construction of the EXIT curve are all degraded w.r.t. a channel of the original channel family (e.g., the family of Gaussian channels) with a parameter, which is only slightly better than the parameter, which corresponds to the MAP threshold.

E. Extension to General Coupled Graphical Systems
Codes based on graphs are just one instance of graphical systems that have distinct thresholds for “local” algorithms (what we called the BP threshold) and for “optimal” algorithms (what we called the MAP threshold). To be sure, coding is somewhat special—it is conjectured that the so-called replica-symmetric solution always determines the threshold under MAP processing for codes based on graphs. Nevertheless, it is interesting to investigate to what extent the coupling of general graphical systems shows a similar behavior. Is there a general class of graphical models in which the same phenomenon occurs? If so, can this phenomenon either be used to analyze systems or to devise better algorithms?

APPENDIX I PROOF OF LEMMA 1

We proceed as follows. We first consider a “circular” en-

semble. This ensemble is defined in an identical manner as the

ensemble except that the positions are now from 0

to

and index arithmetic is performed modulo . This

circular definition symmetrizes all positions, which in turn sim-

plifies calculations.

As we will see shortly, most codes in this circular ensemble

have a minimum stopping set distance, which is a linear fraction

of . To make contact with our original problem we now argue

as follows. Set

. If, for the circular ensemble, we

take

consecutive positions and set them to then this

“shortened” ensemble has length

and it is in one-to-one

correspondence with the

ensemble. Clearly, no new

stopping sets are introduced by shortening the ensemble. This

proves the claim.

Let

denote the expected number of stop-

ping sets of weight of the “circular” ensemble. Let denote

a code chosen uniformly at random from this ensemble.

Recall that every variable node at position connects to a

check node at positions

, modulo . There

are variable nodes at each position and

check nodes

at each position. Conversely, the edges entering the check

nodes at position come equally from variable nodes at position

. These edges are connected to the check

nodes via a random permutation.

Let ,

,

, denote the weight

at position , i.e., the number of variable nodes at position

that have been set to . Call

the type.

We are interested in the expected number of stopping sets for a

particular type; call this quantity

. Since the

parameters

are understood from the context, we

shorten the notation to . We claim that (23), shown at the

bottom of the page, holds, where

. This ex-

pression is easily explained. The variable nodes at position

that are set to can be distributed over the variable nodes

in

ways. Next, we have to distribute the

ones among the

check nodes in such a way that every

check node is fulfilled (since we are looking for stopping sets,

“fulfilled” means that a check node is either connected to no

variable node with associated value “ ” or to at least two such

nodes). This is encoded by

.

Finally, we have to divide by the total number of possible

connections; there are

check node sockets at position

and we distribute

ones. This can be done in

ways. To justify step (a) note that

(23)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:08:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: THRESHOLD SATURATION VIA SPATIAL COUPLING: WHY CONVOLUTIONAL LDPC ENSEMBLES PERFORM SO WELL OVER THE BEC

821

Note that, besides the factor

, which is negligible, each

term in the product (23) has the exact form of the average stop-

ping set weight distribution of the standard

-ensemble of

length and weight

. (Potentially this weight is

nonintegral but the expression is nevertheless well defined.)

We can therefore leverage known results concerning

the stopping set weight distribution for the underlying

-regular ensembles. For the

-regular ensem-

bles we know that the relative minimum distance is at least

with high probability [13, Lemma D.17]. There-

fore, as long as

, for all

,

is strictly negative and so most

codes in the ensemble do not have stopping sets of this

type. The claim now follows since in order for the condition

to be violated for at least one

position we need

to exceed

.

APPENDIX II BASIC PROPERTIES OF
Recall the definition of from (2). We have the following.

Lemma 32 [Basic Properties of ]: Consider the

-regular ensemble with

and let

.

i)

and

;

for

.

ii) There exists a unique value

so that

, and there exists a unique value

so that

.

iii) Let

Fig. 11. Pictorial representation of the various quantities, which appear in
0 0 0 Lemma 32. We use the (3; 6) ensemble to transmit over a BEC with erasure
probability  = 0:44. The function h(x) = 0:44(1 (1 x) ) x is
represented in the figure by the smooth bold curve. The roots of h(x) = 0
 or, equivalently, the FPs of DE are given by 0, x (0:44) 0:2054, and  x (0:44) 0:3265. There are only two stationary points of h(x), i.e., only  two points at which h (x) = 0. They are given by x (0:44) 0:0697 and  x (0:44) 0:2673. Along with the curve h(x), the figure contains three
dashed lines representing the tangents at the points 0, x (0:44), and x (0:44).
0 The slopes of the tangents at 0, x (0:44) and x (0:44) are h (0) = 1, 0 h (x ) = 0:1984, and h (x ) = 0:2202, respectively. Also shown are
the four lines, which bound h(x) in the various regions. These lines are given
f g f g (their endpoints) by: (0; 0); (x ; h(x )) , (x ; h(x )); (x (0:44); 0) , f g f g (x (0:44); 0); (x ; h(x )) , and (x ; h(x )); (x (0:44); 0) and have 0 0 slopes 0:4191; 0:2157; 0:1048; and 0:1098, respectively. Thus, we
have  (0:44) = 0:1048,  (0:44) = 0:1098,  (0:44) = 0:4191, and
 (0:44) = 0:1984.

Example 33 [ -Ensemble]: Consider transmission

using a code from the

ensemble over a BEC with

. The FP equation for the BP decoder is given by

The quantities , , , and

are nonneg-

ative and depend only on the channel parameter and the

degrees

. In addition,

is strictly positive for

all

.

iv) For

The function

is shown in

Fig. 11. The equation

has exactly three real roots,

namely,

and

. Further

properties of are shown in Fig. 11.

Let us prove each part separately. In order to lighten our no-

tation, we drop the dependence for quantities like , , ,

or .

i) Note that

for all

, with equality

at the two ends. This implies that

and that

. With respect to the derivative, we have

v) For

ii) We claim that . We have

has exactly one real solution in

vi) If we draw a line from with slope , then lies

below this line for If we draw a line from

. with slope , then lies

(24)

below this line for all

.

Thus,

for

only at

If we draw a line from

with slope , then lies

above this line for

.

(25)

Finally, if we draw a line from with slope , then

lies above this line for all

.

Since

, the above solution is in .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:08:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

822

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

Since

, we know from Rolle’s

theorem that there must exist an

and an

, such that

.

Now suppose that there exists a

,

,

such that

, so that vanishes at three distinct

places in . Then, by Rolle’s theorem, we conclude

that

has at least two roots in the interval ,

a contradiction.

iii) To check that the various quantities in part iii) are strictly

positive, it suffices to verify that

and

. But we know from Lemma 9 that

has exactly

two solutions, namely and , and neither of them is

equal to or since

.

iv) From (24), for all

, we can upper bound

by

As a consequence

and

hence we get the last inequality. Now we can further lower bound the right-hand side above by evaluating it at any

element of

.

We pick of inequalities, we get

. Continuing the chain

(26)

Note that

and, by definition,

,

so that

. Consider the function ,

. From the continuity of the function and,

using the mean-value theorem, we conclude that there ex-

ists an

such that

. But

from (26), we know that

. It follows that

.

v) To get the universal lower bound on

note that the

dominant (i.e., smaller) term in the definition of

is

. (The second term,

, is .) Recall that

is the point where

takes on the minimum value in

the range

. We can therefore rewrite

in the

form

. To get a lower bound on

we use the trivial upper bound

. It there-

fore remains to lower bound

. No-

tice that

is a decreasing function of for every

. Thus, inserting , we get

Since

we have

and

. Hence,

we obtain .

vi) Let us prove that for all

,

is strictly

above the line, which contains the point

and has

slope . Denote this line by . More precisely, we

have

. Suppose to the contrary that

there exists a point

such that

.

In this case, we claim that the equation

must have at least four roots.

This follows from a)

, b)

,

c)

, d)

, and, finally, e)

, where

. If all these inequalities

are strict then the four roots are distinct. Otherwise, some

roots will have higher multiplicities.

But if

has at least four roots then

has at least two roots. Note that

, since is a linear function. This leads to

a contradiction, since, as discussed in part ii),

has

only one (single) root in .

The other cases can be proved along similar lines.

APPENDIX III PROOF OF LEMMA 26

Let us see how we derived the last inequality. First, we

claim that for

we have

. Indeed, this can be easily

seen by using the identity

and

. Then, we use

for all

. Finally, we

use

so that

We split the transition into several stages. Generically, in each

of the ensuing arguments we consider a section with associated

value just above the lower bound of the corresponding interval.

We then show that, after a fixed number of further sections, the

value must exceed the upper bound of the corresponding in-

terval. Depending on the length and the entropy of the con-

stellation there might not be sufficiently many sections left in

the constellation to pass all the way to

. In this case,

the conclusion of the lemma is trivially fulfilled. Therefore, in

what follows, we can always assume that there are sufficiently

many points in the constellation.

In the remainder of the paper,

and

are the specific

quantities for a particular , whereas and are the strictly

positive universal bounds valid for all , discussed in Lemma

32. We write and instead of and to emphasize

their operational meaning.

i) Let

. Then, there are at most

sections

(27)

with value in the interval

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:08:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: THRESHOLD SATURATION VIA SPATIAL COUPLING: WHY CONVOLUTIONAL LDPC ENSEMBLES PERFORM SO WELL OVER THE BEC

823

Let be the smallest index so that

. If

, then the claim is trivially fulfilled.

Assume therefore that

. Using the

monotonicity of

This implies

This is equivalent to

exists then there are at most

points in the interval

, and the statement is correct a fortiori.

From (28), we know that we have to lower bound

. Since by assumption

, it follows that

, so that every contri-

bution in the sum

is positive. Further,

by (the spacing) Lemma 25,

. Hence

(29)

Since by assumption and by definition
cording to Lemma 32 part iii), . Hence

, it follows that . Finally, acfor

More generally, using the same line of reasoning

as long as

.

We summarize. The total distance we have to cover is

and every

steps we cover a distance of at least

as long as we have not surpassed . Therefore,

after

steps, we have either passed

or we must be strictly closer to than

. Hence, to

cover the remaining distance, we need at most

extra

steps. The total number of steps needed is therefore upper

bounded by

, which, in turn,

is upper bounded by

. The final claim fol-

lows by bounding

with and

by .

ii) From

up to

it takes at most

sections.

Recall that is defined by

.

From Lemma 24 part i),

. Sum this inequality over all sections from to

Writing ranging terms

in terms of the , for all , and rear-

(30)

The inequality in (30) follows since there must exist a sec-

tion with value greater than and smaller than .

Indeed, suppose, on the contrary, that there is no section

with value between

. Since

,

we must then have that

. But by the

spacing Lemma 25 we have that

. This

would imply that

. In other words,

.

Using the universal lower bound on

from Lemma

32 part iv), we conclude that

, a contradiction

to the hypothesis of the lemma.

Combined with (28) this implies that

We summarize. The total distance we have to cover is

and every

steps we cover a dis-

tance of at least

as long as we have not

surpassed . Allowing for

extra steps to

cover the last part, bounding again

by , bounding

by and replacing

and

by their

universal lower bounds, proves the claim.

iii) From

to

it takes at most

sections.

Let be the smallest index so that

.

It follows that

. Let be the

largest index so that

. From the previous

line we deduce that

, so that

. We use again (28). Therefore, let us

bound

. We have

Let us summarize (28)

From i) and our discussion at the beginning, we can

assume that there exists a section so that

We obtain as follows. There are two sums, one from

. Consider sections

,

to and another from

to . Let us begin with

so that in addition

. If no such

the sum from to . First, we claim that

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:08:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

824
Indeed, suppose of

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

. Then, using the definition

where we have used the fact that, by assumption, .
From these four steps, we see that we need at most

But from (the spacing) Lemma 25,

,

a contradiction, since from the hypothesis of the lemma

. Using (29) and (30) with the integral from to

we get the first expression in . Note that the in-

tegral until

suffices because either

or,

following an argument similar to the one after (30), there

must exist a section with value between

.

We now focus on the sum from to . From the defini-

tion of , for all

,

.

Indeed, recall from Lemma 32 that

for

. In particular, this implies that the line with

slope going through the point

lies above

for

. Further,

. Finally, using

, we get

the second expression in .

From (28), we now conclude that

which is equivalent to

sections in order to reach

once we reach . This con-

stant depends on

but it is independent of and .

APPENDIX IV PROOF OF THEOREM 27

To establish the existence of with the desired properties,

we use the Brouwer FP theorem: it states that every continuous

function from a convex compact subset of a Euclidean space

to itself has an FP.

Let denote the one-sided forward DE FP for parameter

. Let the length be chosen in accordance with the statement of

the theorem. By assumption

. Using Lemma 22 part

ii), we conclude that

, i.e., is nontrivial. By

Lemma 22 part i), it is therefore proper, i.e., it is nondecreasing.

Suppose that

. In this case, it is easy to verify that the

second statement of the theorem is true. So in the remainder of

the proof we assume that

.

Consider the Euclidean space

. Let be the sub-

space

The final claim follows by replacing again

and

by their universal lower bounds and .

iv) From

to

it takes at most

steps, where

From step iii), we know that within a fixed number of steps

we reach at least

above . On the other

hand, we know from Lemma 23 that

. We con-

clude that

. From Lemma 9,

we know that

and that this distance

is strictly increasing for

. Therefore, there exists a

unique number, call it ,

, so that

First note that

is nonempty since is nontrivial and has

entropy at least . We claim that

is convex and compact.

Indeed, convexity follows since is a convex polytope (de-

fined as the intersection of half spaces). Since

and

is closed,

is compact.

Note that any constellation belonging to

has entropy

and is increasing, i.e., any such constellation is proper. Our

first step is to define a map , which “approximates” the

DE equation and is well-suited for applying the Brouwer FP

theorem. The final step in our proof is then to show that the FP

of the map

is in fact an FP of one-sided DE.

The map

is constructed as follows. For

, let

be the map

if and only if

. As defined above, let

Define

to be the map

Since

, both and are strictly

positive. Using similar reasoning as in step i), we con-

clude that in order to reach from

where

otherwise

to

it takes at most

steps,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:08:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: THRESHOLD SATURATION VIA SPATIAL COUPLING: WHY CONVOLUTIONAL LDPC ENSEMBLES PERFORM SO WELL OVER THE BEC

825

Let us show that this map is well defined. First, consider the

case

. Since

,

(componentwise).

By construction, it follows that

, where the

last step is true since is the forward FP of DE for

.

We conclude that

. Further, by construction

. It is also easy to check that

is

nonnegative and that it is nondecreasing. It follows that in this

case

.

Consider next the case

. As we have seen,

so that

. Together with

this shows that

. Further, the choice of

guarantees that

. It is easy to check that

is increasing and bounded above by . This shows that also in

this case

.

We summarize that maps into itself.

In order to be able to invoke Brouwer’s theorem we need to

show that is continuous. This means we need to show that

for every

and for any , there exists a

such

that if

then

.

First, note that and are continuous maps on .

As a result,

, which is the composition of two contin-

uous maps, is also continuous.

Fix

. We have three cases: i)

, ii)

, and iii)

.

We start with i). Let

and fix . From the

continuity of

we know that there exists a ball

of radius

so that if

then

, so that

. It follows that for those ,

.

For a subsequent argument we will need also a tight bound

on

itself. Let us therefore choose

, . And let us choose so that if

then

, so that

.

Further, since is continuous, there exists

such

that for all

,

. Choose

. Then, for all

Consider claim iii). In this case

, which implies

that

. As before, there exists

such that

for all

,

. Let

. Since we assumed that

, we have

. Furthermore, there exists

such that for all

,

. Choose

. Consider

. Assume first that

. Thus, as before

Now let us assume that

. Then, we have

where above we used: i)

, ii)

, and iii)

(when we explicitly write

).

We can now invoke Brouwer’s FP theorem to conclude that

has an FP in , call it .

Let us now show that, as a consequence, either there ex-

ists a one-sided FP of DE with parameter

and entropy

bounded between

and , or it-

self is a proper one-sided FP of DE with entropy . Clearly,

either

or

. In the first case, i.e., if

, then

. Combined with

the nontriviality of , we conclude that is a proper one-sided

FP with entropy and the channel parameter (given by

)

less than or equal to . Also, from Lemma 23, we then conclude

that the channel parameter is strictly greater than

.

Assume now the second case, i.e., assume that

.

This implies that

But since

As a result,

. We will now show that this implies

the existence of a one-sided FP of DE with parameter

and with entropy bounded between

and .

Let

and define

,

. By as-

sumption,

, i.e.,

. By induction this im-

plies that

, i.e, the sequence is monotonically

decreasing. Since it is also bounded from below, it converges to

an FP of DE with parameter , call it .

where above we used the bound

.

We want to show that is nontrivial and we want to give a

Using similar logic, one can prove ii).

lower bound on its entropy. We do this by comparing with a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:08:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

826

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

constellation that lower bounds DE to a nontrivial FP.
We claim that at least the last
nents of are above

and which converges under compo-

Lemma 22 we know that for a length

and a channel parameter has entropy at least

the resulting FP of forward DE

where on the right-hand side we assume (worst case) that the

last components have height and the previous

components have height

. If we solve the inequality for

we get

.

Consider standard DE for the underlying regular

en-

semble and . We claim that it takes at most

Above,

follows from the first assumption on in the hy-

pothesis of the theorem. It follows that has (unnormalized)

entropy at least equal to

and therefore normalized en-

tropy at least

.

Since

, we conclude that

is a

one-sided FP of DE for parameter

with entropy bounded

between

and .

DE steps to go from the value

to a value above .

The proof idea is along the lines used in the proof of Lemma

26. Consider the function

as defined in (2) for

.

Note that

and that

.

Further, the function is unimodal and strictly positive in

the range

and is equal to the change in ,

which happens during one iteration, assuming that the current

value is . If

then the statement is trivially

true. Otherwise, the progress in each required step is at least

equal to

APPENDIX V PROOF OF THEOREM 30

i) Continuity: In phases i), ii), and iv), the map is differen-

tiable by construction. In phase iii), the map is differen-

tiable in each “period.” Further, by definition of the map,

the (sub)phases are defined in such a way that the map is

continuous at the boundaries.

ii) Bounds in phase i): Consider

. By construction

of the EXIT curve, all elements ,

, are the

same. In particular, they are all equal to

. Therefore,

all values ,

, are identical, and

equal to .

For points close to the boundary, i.e., for

, some of the inputs involved in

the computation of

are instead of

. There-

fore, the local channel parameter

has to be strictly

bigger than

in order to compensate for this. This

explains the lower bound on .

iii) Bounds in phase ii): Let

and

. Then

We use Lemma 32 part vi) to get the last inequality. The claim now follows by observing that the total distance that has to be covered is no more than .
Consider the constellation , which takes the value for

and the value

for

. By construc-

tion,

. Define

,

.

By monotonicity, we know that

(and hence

). In particular, this is true for

. But note

that at least the last

positions of are above .

Also, by the choice of ,

.

Define the constellation , which takes the value for

and the value

for

. Define

, . Again, observe that by definition

This gives the lower bound

.

iv) Bounds in phase iii): Let

and

.

Note that

but that

. The

range

is therefore split into

“periods.” In

each period, the original solution is “moved in” by

one segment. Let

denote the current

period we are operating in. In what follows, we think of

as fixed and consider in detail the interpolation in this

period. To simplify our notation, we reparameterize the

interpolation so that if goes from to , we moved in the

original constellation exactly by one more segment. This

alternative parametrization is only used in this section. In

part vi), when deriving bounds on , we use again the

original parametrization.

Taking this reparameterization into account, for

, according to Definition 28

and

, hence we have

. From

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:08:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: THRESHOLD SATURATION VIA SPATIAL COUPLING: WHY CONVOLUTIONAL LDPC ENSEMBLES PERFORM SO WELL OVER THE BEC

827

We remark that

decreases with . Thus, we have for

any ,

. By symmetry,

for

.

We start by showing that if

and

then

. For

,

define

By assumption we have This is equivalent to
As a consequence

. But from the monotonicity,

. Thus,

.

(32)

Further, define

Note that the values in the last definition are the values

of the one-sided FP. In particular, this means that for

we have

.

From the definition of the EXIT curve, we have

(31)

By monotonicity

the promised upper bound.

Let us now derive the lower bounds. First, suppose that

. For

, we can use again mono-

tonicity to conclude that

This proves that

Note that this sequence of inequalities is true for the whole

range

. Since

, we

have

and using (32), we have

As a consequence

In the first step, we used the fact that and the second step is true by definition.
Substituting this into the denominator of (31) results in

It remains to consider the last case, i.e., we assume that . From Lemma 24 part iv), we have

where we defined

. If we plug the

upper bound on

due to (the spacing) Lemma

25 into this expression, we get

and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:08:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

828

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

We start with (31). Write

in the numerator explicitly

as

and bound each of the two terms

by the above expressions. This yields

Suppose that

. Then, from the

above inequality, we conclude that

Applying steps, similar to those used to prove Lemma 24 part ii), to the above denominator, we get

where we set to zero all the terms smaller than

. Upper bounding

by

,

we get

But this is contrary to the hypothesis of the theorem,

. Hence, we must have

.

Therefore

Combining all these bounds and canceling common terms yields

where we replace and the remaining

by values by . Thus, we have

Using

and combining everything, we get

(33)

v) Area under EXIT curve7: Consider the set of variable

nodes at position ,

. We want to compute

Applying Holder’s inequality6 we get

their associated EXIT integral, i.e., we want to compute . We use the technique introduced in [2].

We consider the set of computation trees of height

rooted in all variable nodes at position ,

. For

each such computation tree there are check nodes and

variable nodes. Each of the leaf variable

Putting everything together, we now get

nodes of each computation tree has a certain position in

the range

. These positions differ for

each computation tree. For each computation tree, assign

to its root node the channel value , whereas each

(34)

By assumption

. Again from monotonicity, we

have

. Thus,

. Combining

this with Lemma 24 part iii) and (19) in the hypothesis of

the theorem, we obtain

leaf variable node at position “sees” the channel value

.

In order to compute

, we proceed as fol-

lows. We apply the standard area theorem [13, Th. 3.81],

to the simple codes represented by these computa-

tion trees. Each such code has length

and

(linearly independent) check nodes. As we will discuss

shortly, the standard area theorem tells us the value of the

sum of the

individual EXIT integrals asso-

6For any two n-length real sequences (a ; a ; . . . ; a ) and
(b ; b ; . . . ; b ) and two real numbers p, q 2 (1; 1) such that + = 1,
Holder’s inequality asserts that

ja b j  ja j

jb j :

ciated to a particular code. This sum consists of the EXIT

integral of the root node as well as the

EXIT

7A slightly more involved proof shows that the area under the EXIT curve (or more precisely, the value of the EXIT integral) is equal to the design rate, assuming that the design rate is defined in an appropriate way (see the discussion on page 5). For our purpose it is sufficient, however, to determine the area up to
bounds of order w=L. This simplifies the expressions and the proof.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:08:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: THRESHOLD SATURATION VIA SPATIAL COUPLING: WHY CONVOLUTIONAL LDPC ENSEMBLES PERFORM SO WELL OVER THE BEC

829

integrals of the leaf nodes. Assume that we can determine

the contributions of the EXIT integrals of the leaf nodes

for each computation tree. In this case, we can subtract the

average such contribution from the sum and determine the

average EXIT integral associated to the root node. In the

ensuing argument, we consider a fixed instance of a com-

putation tree rooted in . We then average over the ran-

domness of the ensemble. For the root node the channel

value stays the same for all instances, namely,

as

given in Definition 28 of the EXIT curve. Hence, for the

root node the average, over the ensemble, is taken only

over the EXIT value. Then, exchanging the integral (w.r.t.

) and the average and using the fact that each edge as-

sociated to the root node behaves independently, we con-

clude that the average EXIT integral associated to the root

node is equal to

, the desired quantity. Let

us now discuss this program in more detail.

For

, we claim that the average

sum of the EXIT integrals associated to any such compu-

tation tree is equal to

. This is true since for

in this range, the positions of all leaf nodes are in the range

. Now applying the area theorem8 one can con-

clude that the average sum of all the

EXIT

integrals associated to the tree code equals the number

of variable nodes minus the number of check nodes:

.

For

, the situa-

tion is more complicated. It can happen that some of the

leaf nodes of the computation tree see a perfect channel

for all values since their position is outside

.

These leaf nodes are effectively not present in the code

and we should remove them before counting. Although

it would not be too difficult to determine the exact av-

erage contribution for such a root variable node we only

need bounds—the average sum of the EXIT integrals as-

sociated to such a root node is at least and at most

.

We summarize: If we consider all computation trees

rooted in all variable nodes in the range

and apply the standard area theorem to each such

tree, then the total average contribution is at least

and at most

. From these bounds,

we now have to subtract the contribution of all the leaf

nodes of all the computation trees and divide by in

order to determine bounds on

.

Consider the expected contribution of the

EXIT

integrals of each of the computation trees rooted at ,

. We claim that this contribution

is equal to

. For computation trees rooted

in

, on the other hand,

this contribution is at least and at most

.

8To be precise, the proof of the area theorem given in [13, Th. 3.81] assumes
! that the channel value of the root node, call it  (), stays within the range [0; 1].
This does not apply in our setting; for  0,  () becomes unbounded. Nevertheless, it is not hard to show, by explicitly writing down the sum of all EXIT integrals, using integration by parts and finally using the fact that (x(); ()) is an FP, that the result still applies in this more general setting.

Let us start with computation trees rooted in ,

. Fix . It suffices to consider in de-

tail one “branch” of a computation tree since the EXIT

integral is an expected value and expectation is linear. By

assumption the root node is at position . It is connected

to a check node, let us say at position ,

,

where the choice is made uniformly at random. In turn,

this check node has

children. Let the positions of

these children be

, where all these indices

are in the range

, and all choices are inde-

pendent and are made uniformly at random.

Consider now this check node in more detail and apply

the standard area theorem to the corresponding parity-

check code of length . The message from the root node

is

, whereas the messages from the leaf nodes are

,

, respectively. We know from the

standard area theorem applied to this parity-check code of

length that the sum of the EXIT integrals is equal to

. So the average contribution of one such EXIT inte-

gral is

, and the average of

randomly

chosen such EXIT integrals is

. Recalling

that so far we only considered one out of branches and

that there are computation trees, the total average con-

tribution of all leaf nodes of all computation trees rooted

in should therefore be

.

Let us now justify why the contribution of the leaf

nodes is equal to the “average” contribution. Label the

edges of the check node from to , where “ ”

labels the root node. Further, fix , the position of the

check node. As we have seen, we get the associated

channels

if we root the tree in position

, connect to check node , and then connect further to

. This particular realization of this branch

happens with probability

(given that we start in )

and the expected number of branches starting in that

have exactly the same “type”

equals

. Consider a permutation of

and keep fixed. To be concrete, let us say we consider

the permutation

. This situation occurs

if we root the tree in , connect to check node , and

then connect further to

. Again, this happens

with probability

and the expected number of such

branches is

. It is crucial to observe that all

permutations of

occur with equal prob-

ability in these computation trees and that all the involved

integrals occur for computation graphs that are rooted in

a position in the range

. Therefore, the “average”

contribution of the

leaf nodes is just a fraction

of the total contribution, as claimed. Here,

we have used a particular notion of “average.” We have

averaged not only over various computation trees rooted

at position but also over computation trees rooted, let

us say, in position ,

. Indeed, we have

averaged over an equivalence class given by all permu-

tations of

, with , the position of the

check node held fixed. Since

,

all these quantities are also in the range

, and so

they are included in our consideration.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:08:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

830

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

It remains to justify the “average” contributions that we get for computation trees rooted in
. The notion of average is the same as we have used it above. Even though we are talking about averages, for each computation tree, it is clear that the contribution is nonnegative since all the involved channel values
are increasing functions in . This proves that the average contribution is nonnegative. Further, the total uncertainty that we remove by each variable leaf node is at most . This proves the upper bound. We can now summarize. We have

For

, define as

Further, let

Clearly,

.

We claim that for

vi) Bound on : Consider the EXIT function constructed ac-

cording to Definition 28. Recall that the EXIT value at

position

is defined by

(35) and the area under the EXIT curve is given by

If we assume these bounds for a moment, and simplify the expressions slightly, we see that for

(36)

As we have just seen, this integral is close to the design

rate

, and from Lemma 3, we know that

this design rate converges to

for any fixed

Now using the bound in part v) on the area under the EXIT curve, we get

when tends to infinity.

The basic idea of the proof is the following. We will

show that

is also “close” to

where

, where

is the polynomial defined

in Lemma 4. In other words,

must be “almost” a

zero of

. But

has only a single positive

root and this root is at

.

More precisely, we first find upper and lower bounds on

by splitting the integral (36) into four

phases. We will see that the main contribution to the area

comes from the first phase and that this contribution is

close to

. For all other phases,

From this we can derive a bound on as follows. Using

we will show that the contribution can be bounded by a

Taylor’s expansion, we get

function, which does not depend on

and which

tends to if let and tend to infinity.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:08:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: THRESHOLD SATURATION VIA SPATIAL COUPLING: WHY CONVOLUTIONAL LDPC ENSEMBLES PERFORM SO WELL OVER THE BEC

831

where

denotes the derivative w.r.t. and

. From Lemma 4, one can verify that

for all

. Thus

, as well as for all the positions in phase

iv), we use the following crude but handy bounds, valid

for

:

Now using theorem of calculus, we have

and the fundamental

Further, for a

-regular ensemble, we have

where we recall that

.

Next, from Lemma 23, we have that

. Thus,

. Also,

. As a consequence,

and

for all in the interval of the above integral.

Combining everything, we get

Define

Then, using

and

, the final result is

(37)
(38) To prove (37), use integration by parts to write

Now note that

and that

is an increasing

function in by construction. The second term on the

right-hand side of the above equality is therefore negative

and we get an upper bound if we drop it. We get the further

bounds by inserting the explicit expressions for and

and by noting that as well as are upper bounded by .

To prove (38), we also use integration by parts, but now we

drop the first term. Since

is an increasing function

in and it is continuous, it is invertible. We can therefore

write the integral in the form

. Now note

that

, where

we used the fact that

[recall the definition of

from (35)]. This shows that

. We

conclude that

The bounds on , , and are straightforward applica-

tions of (38) and (37). For example, to prove that

,

note that there are

positions that are involved. For

each position, we know from (37) that the integral is upper

bounded by . The claim now follows since

.

To obtain , we use that

is an FP of stan-

dard DE for channel parameter . Also, we use

to get .

It remains to verify the bounds on the six integrals. Our

strategy is the following. For

,

Using (38) leads to the lower bound. Exactly the same line

of reasoning leads to both the bounds for .

For the upper bound on , we use the second inequality

in (37). We then bound

and use

; cf., (35). Next, we bound each term in the

we evaluate the integrals directly in phases i), ii), and iii),

sum by the maximum term. This maximum is

.

using the general bounds on the quantities . For the

This term can further be upper bounded by

boundary points, i.e., for

and

. Indeed, replace all the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:08:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

832

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

values in

by their maximum,

. The lower

bound follows in a similar way using the penultimate in-

equality in (38).

Let us continue with . Note that for

and

,

and

that

. A direct calculation

shows that

. Again using integration by parts, and upper bounding both and
by , we conclude that

Note that the right-hand side is independent of so that this bound extends directly to the sum, i.e.,

Let us now compute bounds on . Using (37), we get

For the lower bound we can proceed in a similar fashion. We first apply integration by parts. Again using (39), the first term corresponding to the total derivative can be written as

To obtain the second inequality, we use . Using the second inequality of (38), we
lower bound as follows. We have

We write the other term in the integration by parts as fol-

lows. For every section number

,

let correspond to the smallest number in

such

that

. Recall the definition of from part iv)

of Theorem 30. If for any section number ,

,

then is well defined and

for all

.

Indeed, this follows from the continuity and the mono-

tonicity of

w.r.t. . On the other hand, if

, we set

. Then, we can write the second term as

To obtain the second inequality, we use

and

.

It remains to bound . For

,

consider

(39)

where we have made use of the fact that for

and

,

. To get an upper bound on write

We now lower bound the two integrals as follows. For

, we use the upper bound on

valid in

phase iii) from Theorem 30. This gives us the lower bound

where above we used the fact that

.

For

, we use the universal bound

[on

] stated in (38).

Since Theorem 30], we get

, using the lower bound on [in phase iii) of

Here we have used the lower bounds on in phase iii) from Theorem 30 and the fact that
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:08:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUDEKAR et al.: THRESHOLD SATURATION VIA SPATIAL COUPLING: WHY CONVOLUTIONAL LDPC ENSEMBLES PERFORM SO WELL OVER THE BEC

833

Above we use
and together

, replace

by

by

. Putting everything

Since

, the final result is

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank N. Macris for his help in choosing the title and sharing his insights and the reviewers for their thorough reading and numerous suggestions. They would also like to thank D. J. Costello, Jr., P. Vontobel, and A. R. Iyengar for their many comments and very helpful feedback on an earlier draft. Last but not least, they would like to thank G. D. Forney, Jr. for handling this paper.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Méasson, A. Montanari, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Life above threshold: From list decoding to area theorem and MSE,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, San Antonio, TX, 2004 [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/cs/0410028
[2] C. Méasson, A. Montanari, and R. Urbanke, “Maxwell construction: The hidden bridge between iterative and maximum a posteriori decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 5277–5307, Dec. 2008.
[3] R. M. Tanner, “Error-correcting coding system,” U.S. Patent #4,295,218, 1981.
[4] R. M. Tanner, “Convolutional codes from quasi-cyclic codes: A link between the theories of block and convolutional codes,” Univ. California, Santa Cruz, CA, Tech. Rep. UCSC-CRL-87-21, 1987.
[5] A. J. Felström and K. S. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181–2190, Sep. 1999.
[6] K. Engdahl and K. S. Zigangirov, “On the theory of low density convolutional codes I,” Problemy Peredachi Informatsii, vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 295–310, 1999.
[7] K. Engdahl, M. Lentmaier, and K. S. Zigangirov, “On the theory of low-density convolutional codes,” in Proc. 13th Int. Symp. Appl. Algebra Algebraic Algorithms Error-Correcting Codes, London, U.K., 1999, pp. 77–86.
[8] M. Lentmaier, D. V. Truhachev, and K. S. Zigangirov, “To the theory of low-density convolutional codes. II,” Probl. Inf. Transm., vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 288–306, 2001.
[9] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984, Dec. 2004.
[10] A. Sridharan, M. Lentmaier, D. J. Costello Jr., and K. S. Zigangirov, “Convergence analysis of a class of LDPC convolutional codes for the erasure channel,” in Proc. Allerton Conf. Commun. Control Comput., Monticello, IL, Oct. 2004, pp. 953–962.
[11] M. Lentmaier, A. Sridharan, K. S. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello Jr., “Iterative decoding threshold analysis for LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 5274–5289, Oct. 2010.

[12] M. Lentmaier, A. Sridharan, K. S. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Terminated LDPC convolutional codes with thresholds close to capacity,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Adelaide, Australia, Sep. 2005, pp. 1372–1376.
[13] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2008.
[14] M. Lentmaier and G. P. Fettweis, “On the thresholds of generalized LDPC convolutional codes based on protographs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Austin, TX, 2010, pp. 709–713.
[15] D. G. M. Mitchell, A. E. Pusane, K. S. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, Jr, “Asymptotically good LDPC convolutional codes based on protographs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Toronto, ON, Canada, Jul. 2008, pp. 1030–1034.
[16] M. Lentmaier, G. P. Fettweis, K. S. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Approaching capacity with asymptotically regular LDPC codes,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop, San Diego, CA, 2009, pp. 173–177.
[17] R. Smarandache, A. Pusane, P. Vontobel, and D. J. Costello, Jr, “Pseudo-codewords in LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Seattle, WA, Jul. 2006, pp. 1364–1368.
[18] R. Smarandache, A. Pusane, P. Vontobel, and D. J. Costello, Jr, “Pseudocodeword performance analysis for LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 2577–2598, Jun. 2009.
[19] M. Papaleo, A. Iyengar, P. Siegel, J. Wolf, and G. Corazza, “Windowed erasure decoding of LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Cairo, Egypt, Jan. 2010, pp. 78–82.
[20] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, D. A. Spielman, and V. Stemann, “Practical loss-resilient codes,” in Proc. 29th Annu. ACM Symp. Theory Comput., 1997, pp. 150–159.
[21] J. Thorpe, “Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from protographs,” Jet Propulsion Lab., Pasadena, CA, INP Progress Rep. 42-154, 2003.
[22] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, and C. Jones, “Constructions of protograph LDPC codes with linear minimum distance,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Seattle, WA, Jul. 2006, pp. 664–668.
[23] D. G. M. Mitchell, M. Lentmaier, and D. J. Costello, Jr, “New families of LDPC block codes formed by terminating irregular protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Austin, TX, Jun. 2010, pp. 824–828.
[24] C. Méasson, A. Montanari, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “The generalized area theorem and some of its consequences,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 4793–4821, Nov. 2009.
[25] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Multi-edge type LDPC codes,” in The Workshop Honoring Prof. Bob McEliece on his 60th Birthday, Pasadena, CA, 2002.
[26] M. Lentmaier, D. G. M. Mitchell, G. P. Fettweis, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Asymptotically good LDPC convolutional codes with AWGN channel thresholds close to the Shannon limit,” in Proc. 6th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process., Sep. 2010, pp. 324–328.
[27] S. Kudekar, C. Méasson, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Threshold saturation on BMS channels via spatial coupling,” in Proc. 6th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process., Sep. 2010, pp. 309–313.
Shrinivas Kudekar (S’06–M’10) received the B.Tech. degree from the Electrical Engineering Department, Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay, India, in 2003 and the Ph.D. degree from the School of Computer and Communication Sciences, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland, in June 2009.
Currently, he is pursuing his postdoctoral research at the New Mexico Consortium and CNLS, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM.
Thomas J. Richardson (S’01–SM’02–F’07) received the Ph.D. degree from the Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, in 1990. His undergraduate and Masters work was done at the University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
From 1990 to 2000, he was a member of the Mathematical Research Center in Bell Laboratories, Lucent Technologies (originally AT& T Bell Labs). From 2000 until 2006, he was at Flarion Technologies where he held the title of Vice President and Chief Scientist. Since 2006, he has been employed by Qualcomm Inc., Bridgewater, NJ, through the acquisition of Flarion.
Dr. Richardson is a corecipient of the 2002 IEEE Information Theory Society Best Paper Award and a corecipient of the 2011 IEEE Koji Kobayashi Award.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:08:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

834

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011

Rüdiger L. Urbanke received the Diplomingenieur degree from the Vienna Institute of Technology, Vienna, Austria, in 1990 and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, in 1992 and 1995, respectively.
From 1995 to 1999, he held a position at the Mathematics of Communications Department, Bell Labs. Since November 1999, he has been a faculty member at the School of Computer and Communication Sciences, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland. He is a

coauthor of the book Modern Coding Theory (Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2008).
Dr. Urbanke is a recipient of a Fulbright Scholarship. From 2000 to 2004, he was an Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY and he is currently on the board of the series Foundations and Trends in Communications and Information Theory. He is a corecipient of the IEEE Information Theory Society 2002 Best Paper Award, and a corecipient of the 2011 IEEE Koji Kobayashi Award.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:08:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

