Triggering Wave-Like Convergence of Tail-biting Spatially Coupled LDPC Codes
Sebastian Cammerer∗, Vahid Aref†, Laurent Schmalen†, and Stephan ten Brink∗ ∗ Institute of Telecommunications, University of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany † Bell Laboratories, Alcatel-Lucent, Stuttgart, Germany

arXiv:1507.01970v2 [cs.IT] 15 Dec 2015

Abstract—Spatially coupled low-density parity-check (SCLDPC) codes can achieve the channel capacity under lowcomplexity belief propagation (BP) decoding, however, there is a non-negligible rate-loss because of termination effects for practical finite coupling lengths. In this paper, we study how we can approach the performance of terminated SC-LDPC codes by random shortening of tail-biting SC-LDPC codes. We find the minimum required rate-loss in order to achieve the same performance than terminated codes. We additionally study the use of tail-biting SC-LDPC codes for transmission over parallel channels (e.g., bit-interleaved-coded-modulation (BICM)) and investigate how the distribution of the coded bits between two parallel channels can change the performance of the code. We show that a tail-biting SC-LDPC code can be used with BP decoding almost anywhere within the achievable region of MAP decoding. The optimization comes with a mandatory buffer at the encoder side. We evaluate different distributions of coded bits in order to reduce this buffer length.
I. INTRODUCTION
Their excellent performance under low-complexity belief propagation (BP) decoding renders spatially coupled LDPC codes (SC-LDPC) attractive for error correction subsystems in upcoming communication systems such as, e.g., longhaul optical fiber transceivers [1]. It was proven in [2]–[5] that SC-LDPC codes can achieve the capacity of binaryinput, memoryless, symmetric-output (BMS) channels under BP decoding. In particular, it was proven that the BP threshold of an SC-LDPC ensemble asymptotically converges to the threshold of the underlying LDPC ensemble under maximuma-posteriori (MAP) decoding. This phenomenon is called threshold saturation.
The idea of spatial coupling is to replicate L 1 copies of an LDPC code along a spatial dimension and connecting the individual LDPC codes by swapping edges in a way that the local graphical structure of the original code is preserved. Terminating the replicas in an effective way triggers a “decoding wave” [6] and threshold saturation occurs. Termination is usually performed by setting all code bits of a few LDPC copies at the boundaries of the spatial chain to zero [3], [7], reducing the total encoding rate. Although this rate-loss vanishes as L → ∞, it is not negligible for practical finite values of L.
Using tail-biting SC-LDPC codes [8] is a promising way to mitigate the rate-loss for a practical finite L. Threshold saturation occurs if there are enough reliably received code bits in just a few spatial positions. First, these reliable code bits are decoded and then, the decoder progresses successively along

the spatial dimension. These reliable code bits can be obtained by shortening, as suggested (however without analysis) in [9].
If transmission takes place over different parallel channels, the required reliable code bits can be provided without shortening (and rate-loss) by carefully interleaving the code bits among channels with different entropies. Examples of parallel channels include bit-interleaved coded-modulation (BICM) for high spectral efficiency modulation formats and multicarrier transmission, such as orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM) or transmission over two polarizations, frequently occurring in optical communications. This approach has been first proposed in [10], [11] where optimized bit interleavers for BICM have been numerically derived based on a Gaussian approximation of log-likelihood ratio (LLR) densities of channels and a P-EXIT approximation [12] for density evolution.
In this paper, we study both above approaches in a unified framework. We also investigate the effect of an additional practical constraint, the encoding buffer size required for interleaving. We use the technique of density evolution (DE) over a BEC to minimize the total amount of shortening. We show that the results almost immediately carry over to a binary additive white Gaussian noise (BAWGN) channel. In a second part, we consider the scenario of parallel channels. Using DE, we numerically find the achievable region of two BECs under BP decoding. As a more practical case, we revisit the practical application of BICM over the AWGN channel. In comparison to [10], [11], we apply a more precise numerical method for DE [13, App. B] and no Gaussian approximation of channel densities. One noteworthy observation is that the tail-biting SC-LDPC code with an optimized bit-interleaving outperforms the terminated SC-LDPC codes with the same parameters and the same energy per bit. However, it is not clear if this generally applies for all tail-biting SC-LDPC codes. Finally, we show how the performance is degraded and how the optimal interleaving needs to be modified if accounting for a size-constrained encoding buffer.
II. TAIL-BITING SPATIALLY COUPLED LDPC CODES
To construct tail-biting SC-LDPC codes, we first lay out a set of spatial positions indexed by integers z ∈ [0, L) on a circle, where L denotes the replication factor. We fix a “smoothing parameter” w ∈ N. To each position z, we assign n code bits and m parity check constraints (hence in total N = Ln code bits and M = Lm parity constraints). We

assign a variable node to each code bit and assign a check
node to each parity constraint.
To construct a random instance of the tail-biting SCLDPC(dv, dc, L, w, n) ensemble, we connect the variable nodes and the check nodes in the following manner: Each variable node at position z is connected randomly to dv check nodes lying within the range (([z, z + w − 1]))L, where ((x))L returns the remainder of the integer division of x by L (“x modulo L”). Equivalently, each check node at position z is connected randomly to dc variable nodes in the range (([z − w + 1, z]))L. For additional details, we refer the reader to [3], [14]. If all code bits in positions z ∈ [0, w − 2] are fixed to be zero, the code ensemble becomes a (terminated)
SC-LDPC ensemble [3]. When n → ∞, it is common to use density evolution
(DE) [13] to evaluate the asymptotic performance of the code
ensemble under BP decoding. This method estimates how the
empirical distribution of the LLRs of code bits at each position z evolves iteratively during BP decoding, given the empirical distribution of the received bits’ LLRs. The DE equations for
SC-LDPC codes over a BMS channel are detailed in [3]. For
the case of BICM and BAWGN channels, we use the numerical
DE method in [13, App. B]. For transmission over BECs, the
LLR distribution can be represented by a scalar value, the
erasure probability, and the DE equation turns into a scalar
update recursion [2]. In that case, the update equation becomes

x(zt+1)

=

εz

 1− 

1 w


w−1
1−

1 w

w−1

dc −1 dv −1

x(((t)z+i−j))L

 

i=0

j=0

where εz denotes the average erasure probability of code bits at spatial position z and xz(t) denotes the average erasure
probability of the outgoing messages from code bits in position z and at iteration t. We initialize xz(0) = 1 for all z ∈ [0, L).
For details, see [2].

III. OPTIMAL SHORTENING OVER A BMS

Consider the tail-biting SC-LDPC(dv, dc, L, w) ensemble. It is known that the BP threshold and the MAP threshold of this
ensemble are equal to the BP threshold and the MAP threshold of the underlying LDPC(dv, dc) ensemble [3]. With a properly selected shortening, the BP threshold of the spatially coupled
ensemble saturates to the MAP threshold. We shorten the code
by setting some code bits to zero, as indicated in Fig. 1 by
red variable nodes. We thus inject some prior knowledge that can be used to trigger BP decoding. Let αz be the fraction of randomly shortened code bits (i.e., they are fixed to zero) for z ∈ [0, L). For example, we recover the terminated SCLDPC(dv, dc, L, w) ensemble for αz = 1 for 0 ≤ z ≤ w − 2 and αz = 0 otherwise. This random shortening decreases the design rate of the code from R = 1 − dv/dc to

R(α) = 1 − dv · L − dc

L−1 1 z=0 w
L−

w−1 j=0

α((z−j))L

dc

L−1 z=0

αz

, (1)

Fig. 1. Tanner graph of a tail-biting SC-LDPC(dv = 2, dc = 4, L = 12, w = 2, n = 10) code. Red variable nodes show shortened code bits.

where α = (α0, . . . , αL−1). For simplicity, we explain our optimization method for transmission over a BEC with erasure probability ε. In this case, the average fraction of code bits erased by the channel at position z is εz = (1 − αz)ε. Equivalently, the code bits at position z ”see” a BEC with erasure probability εz. Let Pe(α, T ) denote the bit erasure probability of BP decoding after T iterations.
Let εBP and εMAP denote the BP threshold and the MAP threshold of the uncoupled LDPC(dv, dc) ensemble. For any ε ∈ (εBP, εMAP), our goal is to find α which maximizes R(α)
under successful BP decoding, i.e.,

α (ε) OPT

=

arg

max{R(α)
α

|

lim
T →∞

Pe(α,

T

)

=

0}.

(2)

For numerical computation, we relax this maximization:

(i) For a given α, define Tδ(α) as the smallest iteration t

such

that

1 L

L−1 z=0

|xz(t−1)

−

x(zt)|

<

δ.

(ii) We find

α∗(ε)

=

arg

max{R(α)
α

|

Pe(α,

Tδ (α))

<

δ}.

(3)

We fix δ = 10−7 throughout the paper. To find α∗(ε), we apply two sub-optimal algorithms: (i) For small L, an
exhaustive search is carried out over the discretized space of α. Each αz is quantized with resolution ∆ = 10−3. (ii) The sub-optimal differential evolution algorithm [15] is also used for large L which is generally much faster than an
exhaustive search. We observe a good consistency between
the results of both algorithms. For example, the optimized α∗ = (0.324, 0.149, 0.350, 0, . . . , 0) is obtained for the tailbiting SC-LDPC(dv = 3, dc = 6, L = 50, w = 3) ensemble used over a BEC with ε = 0.48. We also consider a simpler
scheme denoted “uniform shortening”, defined as

αuni(B) =

αz = α, αz = 0,

0≤z<B otherwise

(4)

where 0 ≤ B < L. Similarly, we can find

α∗uni(ε)

=

arg

max {R(α)
B ,αuni (B )

|

Pe(α,

Tδ (α))

<

δ}.

(5)

The above optimization is much simpler. For each B, it

is a one-dimensional optimization over a bounded interval. The BP performance is monotonic in α, and thus, we can

0.50 0.495

R(α∗) for α∗(ε) RRS(αC−u∗nLiD) PfoCr αu∗ni(ε)

R(α)

0.49 0.485

R(α∗) = 0.491637 R(αu∗ni) = 0.491633 RSC−LDPC = 0.4810

0.48

0.43 0.44 0.45 0.46 0.47 0.48 ε

Fig. 2. The design rate R(α) of the tail-biting SC-LDPC(3, 6, 50, 3) ensemble shortened according to either (i) the optimized α∗(ε) (blue curve) or (ii) αu∗ni(ε) (red curve). These curves are compared with the design rate of the terminated SC-LDPC(3, 6, 50, 3) ensemble (green curve).

simply use algorithms such as the bisection method to find the best αuni(B). Then we change B to find α∗uni(ε). Fig. 2 illustrates the optimization results for the tail-biting SCLDPC(3, 6, 50, 3) ensemble. The maximum design rate is computed for both α∗(ε) and αu∗ni(ε), and for ε ∈ (εBP, εMAP). We observe that both optimized shortenings reduce the rateloss by more than 50%. Moreover, there is only a very small difference between the rate of α∗(ε) and α∗uni(ε). We observe the same behavior for tail-biting ensembles of LDPC(4, 8) and LDPC(5, 10) codes. Note that the error probability of BP decoding is monotonically increasing in terms of ε. Therefore, α∗(εMAP) is also feasible for ε ≤ εMAP. This α∗(εMAP) can be universally used for all ε ∈ (εBP, εMAP) with more than 50% rate-loss gain, even though it is not the best α for ε < εMAP.
Fig. 3 shows the average bit erasure probability Pe under BP decoding for the tail-biting SC-LDPC(3, 6, 50, 3) code shortened by α∗(εMAP). For comparison, we also plot the erasure probability curve of the terminated SC-LDPC(3, 6, 50, 3) code, and the tail-biting code (without shortening). For all codes, n = 2000. We observe that the terminated SC-LDPC code has much smaller Pe than the tail-biting SC-LDPC code as the BP threshold of SC-LDPC code is increased to the MAP
threshold. With shortening, not only the performance of the
tail-biting SC-LDPC code improves to the performance of the
terminated SC-LDPC code but also the shortened tail-biting
SC-LDPC code has a larger rate than the SC-LDPC code. We
also plot the performance of these codes over a binary additive
white Gaussian noise (BAWGN) channel in Fig. 4. The left
sub-plot shows the bit error rate (BER) in terms of signal-tonoise (SNR) ratios Es/N0. We observe the similar behavior as for BEC in Fig. 3. In order to see the gain in coding rate, the same BER values are plotted in terms of Eb/N0 = Es/(RN0) in the right sub-plot. It shows that the larger rate leads to an additional net coding gain of ≈ 0.1 dB.
IV. BIT INTERLEAVING OVER TWO PARALLEL CHANNELS
In this section, we consider the transmission over two inde-
pendent parallel channels. We show that carefully interleaving
code bits of tail-biting SC-LDPC code between channels leads

Bit Erasure Probability

100 10−1 10−2 10−3 10−4 10−5
0.46

0.465

shortened tail-biting code terminated SC code tail-biting code
0.47 ε 0.475 0.48 0.485

Fig. 3. BP performance in terms of channel erasure probability ε for a shortened tail-biting SC-LDPC code (blue curve), a terminated SC-LDPC code (red curve), and a tail-biting SC-LDPC code (green curve). For all codes, (dv, dc, L, w, n) = (3, 6, 50, 3, 2000).

Bit Error Probability

100

10−1

10−2

10−3

10−4 10−5

shortened tail-biting terminated SC code tail-biting code

−2.4 −2.3 −2.2 −2.1 −2 Es/N0[dB]

0.8 0.9

1 1.1

Eb/N0[dB]

Fig. 4. BP performance in the BAWGN channel for a shortened tail-biting
SC-LDPC code (blue curve), a terminated SC-LDPC code (red curve), and a tail-biting SC-LDPC code (green curve). For All codes, (dv, dc, L, w, n) = (3, 6, 50, 3, 2000). Left: BER over Es/N0. Right: BER over Eb/N0.

to significantly improved BP decoding performance without rate-loss. The results can be extended to more than two parallel channels in a straightforward manner.

A. Parallel BECs

We explain our optimization method using two independent

parallel BECs with erasure probabilities ε1 and ε2 and where both channels shall be used an equal number of times. In this

case, the low complexity of DE analysis allows us to evaluate

the complete achievable region of (ε1, ε2) under BP decoding and find the optimal bit interleaving.

We assume that the transmitter knows the channel param-

eters ε1 and ε2 and w.l.o.g. that ε1 ≤ ε2. The code bits

are transmitted over either the first or the second channel.

If exactly half of the code bits in each spatial position are

passed through each channel, this is equivalent to transmitting

over

a

BEC

with

erasure

probability

1 2

(ε1

+

ε2).

In

this

case,

without termination, the tail-biting SC-LDPC ensemble cannot

be

decoded

successfully

unless

1 2

(ε1

+ ε2)

<

εBP.

We show that we can exceed this bound if we carefully

interleave the code bits of different spatial positions between

channels. Let βz denote the fraction of code bits in spa-

2εMAP 2εBP
ε1 εBP

L = 25 L = 50 L = 100

Fig. 5. Interleaving the code bits of different spatial positions between two parallel independent BECs such that for the average it holds µ1 < µ2.

tial position z transmitted over the BEC with ε1. Clearly,

L−1 z=0

βz

=

L/2.

The

average

erasure

probability

at

position

z is εz = βzε1 + (1 − βz)ε2. Now, the problem of finding

optimal βz becomes similar to the best shortening optimization

presented in Section III. We already observed in Fig. 2 that

there is a very small difference between uniform shortening

and non-uniform shortening. Due to its simplicity, we employ

an approach similar to uniform shortening and consider the

setup illustrated in Fig. 5:

βuni(B) =

β0, 0 ≤ z < B

L 2

−Bβ0

L−B

,

z≥B

⇒ εz

=

µ1, µ2,

0≤z<B z≥B

for some B < L/2. It becomes now equivalent to the

shortened code over a single BEC with erasure probability

µ2 with uniform shortening α = µ1/µ2 in Eq. (4) . It is easy

to check µ2

≤

(ε1 +ε2 )/2−(B /L)ε1 (1−B/L)

and ε1

≤ µ1. If we know

all the feasible 3-tuples (µ1, µ2, B), we can determine the

achievable region (ε1, ε2). The idea is as follows: if µ1 < εBP

and B is large enough, the BP algorithm can decode some code

bits lying in the range z < B. In particular, the “computation

graph” of some code bits has enough non-erased variable

nodes for the BP algorithm to recover them. Those recovered

code bits then play the role of the effective termination for

the coupled ensemble if µ2 is small enough (i.e., µ2 < εMAP). Note that successful BP decoding is not attained by merely

interleaving if either ε2 ≥ ε1 ≥ εBP or ε1 + ε2 ≥ 2εMAP. For a given (µ2, B), let f (µ2, B) denote the largest µ1 for
which BP decoding succeeds (see (5)). We have ε1 ≤ εBP and

2

1

−

B L

µ2 ≤

1

−

2B L

ε1 + ε2

ε1

+

ε2

≤

2B L

f

(µ2,

B)

+

2

1

−

B L

µ2

(6)

One can show that the DE equation is monotonically
increasing in terms of εz. Therefore, if (ε1, ε2) is achievable under BP decoding, then for all ε1 ≤ ε1 and ε2 ≤ ε2, (ε1, ε2) is also achievable under BP decoding (with different (µ1, µ2, B)). Using (6), we can numerically calculate the maximal achievable region of (ε1, ε2) which can be
decoded successfully in the limit of the code-length. We
plot this achievable region in Fig. 6 for the tail-biting SC-
LDPC(3, 6, L, 3) ensemble with L = 25, 50 and 100. The

0

εBPε2

2εBP2εMAP

Fig. 6. The achievable region under BP decoding for the tail-biting SCLDPC(3, 6, L, 3) ensemble via suitable channel interleaving. The region is plotted for L = 25, 50 and 100.

achievable region under MAP decoding is ε1 + ε2 ≤ 2εMAP. We observe that by suitable interleaving, the achievable region under BP decoding almost covers the entire MAP achievable region except for a small triangular region in which ε1 ≥ εBP and ε2 ≥ εBP. As L grows, the coverage saturates to the MAP achievable region (except for ε1 ≥ εBP and ε2 ≥ εBP).
B. 4-ASK BICM over the AWGN Channel
Bit-interleaved coded-modulation (BICM) scheme is a practical pragmatic scheme to approach the constellation constrained capacity of the AWGN channels with higher order modulation formats [16]. In BICM over a real-valued channel, we map k (possibly interleaved) code bits to 2k symbols of an Amplitude Shift-Keying (ASK) constellation {±1, ±3, . . . , ±(2k−1 + 1)} using a Gray map. The LLRs of the transmitted k code bits are computed using a so-called bit-metric decoder: The LLRs are generally different for each code bit and some of the bits may be more reliable than others, depending on the mapping used. Interleaving is used to break the correlation between the different bits.
For a tail-biting SC-LDPC code, this interleaving can be carried out separately in each spatial position. Assuming uncorrelated LLRs, we will have k parallel channels with different LLR distributions [16]. It has been shown in [17], [18] that we can approach the BICM capacity using only a single (terminated) SC-LDPC code. A suitable interleaving scheme can significantly improve the BP performance of tail-biting SC-LDPC codes over such parallel channels with different reliability as occurring in BICM. More interestingly, such a code can outperform the terminated SC-LDPC code with the same design parameters and with the same energy per transmitted bits, as we will show below. Note that generally speaking, we need to consider two distinct interleaving schemes, which are however usually combined in practice: One is required to remove the correlation for BICM, and the

other one, which we consider, enables threshold saturation.

Here we focus on the 4−ASK modulation scheme1 over

an AWGN channel with SNR η = Es/N0. BICM yields two binary parallel channels, namely c1(η) and c2(η), with

different LLR distributions. To use DE, the channels must be

symmetric, which can be ensured by “channel adaptation” as

detailed in [19].

Recall that βz is the fraction of code bits in spatial position

z transmitted over c1(η) (with constraint

L−1 z=0

βz

=

L/2).

Let Pe(β, T ) denote the error probability of BP decoding after

T iterations. We define

βopt

=

arg

min{η
β

|

lim
T →∞

Pe(β,

T)

=

0}.

(7)

Similar as in Section III, we relax the optimization problem by introducing a new condition Pe(β, T ) < 10−8 for T < 1000 iterations. We consider two distinct setups, first uniform
interleaving with

βuni(B) =

β0,

L 2

−Bβ0

L−B

,

0≤z<B z≥B

and second non-uniform interleaving with β =

(β0, β1, ..., βL−1) and find the minimum η for both setups. For uniform interleaving, we select the minimum

η over all 0 < B < L. For non-uniform interleaving, we

use the technique of differential evolution to find the best sub-optimal β∗, similarly to [10]. To evaluate Pe(β, T ), we numerically compute the LLR distributions of c1(η) and c2(η) for each η and then use quantized DE analysis (uniformly

quantizing the LLR range [−20, 20] with 1000 levels). This

method is more accurate than the P-EXIT method and

Gaussian approximation of channel’s LLR distributions used

in [10], [11] and may potentially lead to improved results,

however, with a significantly increased (offline optimization)

complexity.

As an example, consider the tail-biting SC-LDPC(3,6,50,3)

ensemble.

Without

interleaving

(βz

=

1 2

),

the

BP

threshold

is η = 3.399 dB while the BP threshold of the terminated

ensemble is η = 2.658 dB. By a uniform interleaving, the BP

threshold of tail-biting ensemble improves to η = 2.809 dB

and it is even slightly more improved to η = 2.804 dB by the

best non-uniform interleaving we have found.

Since the terminated ensemble has a smaller rate, it is more

fair to compare the BP thresholds in terms of Eb/N0. The rate of tail-biting ensemble is 1/2 and thus, Eb/N0 = Es/N0. However, the rate of the terminated ensemble is 0.481 and

thus its BP threshold is Eb/N0 = 2.826 dB, larger than the BP threshold of tail-biting ensemble with optimal interleav-

ing. This superior performance can be also seen in Fig. 7

comparing the averaged BP performance of actual codes with

finite n = 2000. In terms of Eb/N0, we observe a net coding gain of ≈ 0.04 dB in this simulation.

14-ASK modulation represents one quadrature component in a 16-QAM modulation, the results discussed here therefore directly apply to 16-QAM.

100

10−2

BER

10−4

10−6

terminated SC-LDPC tail-biting SC-LDPC opt. tail-biting SC-LDPC
2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 Es/N0 [dB]

2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 Eb/N0 [dB]

Fig. 7. BP performance of the 4-ASK BICM scheme over the AWGN channel
using an optimized tail-biting SC-LDPC code (blue curve), a terminated SC-
LDPC code (red curve), and a tail-biting SC-LDPC code (green curve). For all codes, (dv, dc, L, w, n) = (3, 6, 50, 3, 2000). Left: BER values in terms of Es/N0. Right: BER values in terms of Eb/N0.

V. ENCODING QUEUE FOR BIT INTERLEAVING
The convolutional structure of SC-LDPC codes (including tail-biting codes) enables sequential encoding of information bits as they are produced with a structure akin to shift registers. In particular, the code bits in spatial position z are generated from the code bits in position [z − w, z].2 On the other hand, the windowed BP decoder enables sequential decoding of code bits as they arrive at the receiver. These features make SC-LDPC codes particularly attractive for high-speed, latency sensitive applications [1].
If we assume that the parallel channels should be used an equal amount of time, i.e., the gross transmission rate of the channels is identical, code-bit interleaving between spatial positions violates the equal fraction of code bits targeted for different channels. For example, in BICM, we always require an equal amount of all channels to be used in every frame to generate the modulation symbols. Therefore, some code bit must be stored in a buffer and transmitted later. This drawback causes queuing of code bits in the encoder and decoder and ultimately leads to an increase in transmission latency.3
In this section, we consider the size of this encoding queue as an additional constraint when optimizing the channel interleaving. For a given pair of channels, there are usually many β leading to practically the same “quasi-optimal” BP performance. Our goal is to find the one that leads to the encoding queue of minimum size.
For simplicity, we focus here on two parallel BECs but the results can be carried immediately over to other channel models, such as BICM as shown above. We assume that the code bits are generated sequentially from position z = 0 to z = L − 1 with a constant speed. We assume that the encoder processed each spatial position as a block. Recalling that βz
2The range of required information bits may change for different encoders. It is important that its size is O(w) L.
3Note that we do not include the additional buffering required for tail-biting in our considerations here, as this amount stays constant irrespective of the interleaving.

Quni

4n

Q(β∗ )
min

2n

0.9
0.5 52%
0.1

β∗ min

Qenc

0 0.3

0.32

0.34

0.36

ε1

0.38

0.40

0.4

t=1

x(zt)

t = 40 t = 80 t = 120
t = 280

Fig. 8. The encoding queue length Q(β) of a tail-biting SC-LDPC(3,6,50,3)

0.2

ensemble over BECs (ε1, ε2 = 0.55) and ε1 ∈ (0.3, 0.39).

is the fraction of code bits in position z to be transmitted over the first channel, then it is clear that only n · min(βz, 1 − βz) bits can be forwarded to the parallel channels to be mapped onto modulation symbols and the remaining n|1 − 2βz| bits need to be stored in the queue, waiting further processing. Let Q(z) = n zi=0(2βi − 1) denote the length (in bits) of the encoding queue after encoding spatial positions up to z, where Q(z) > 0 denotes an excess of first channel bits and Q(z) < 0 an excess of second channel bits. The total required memory size for the queue is Q(β) = maxz |Q(z)| which also shows the extra encoding latency.
Consider now a pair of BECs (ε1, ε2) in the achievable region of Fig. 6. Our objective is to minimize the queue, i.e.,

βmin

=

arg

min{Q(β)|
β

lim
T →∞

Pe(β,

T)

=

0}.

(8)

We relax the above optimization similarly as in (3) and we consider again both the uniform interleaving βmin(B), and the non-uniform interleaving in which we use the differential evolution to find β∗min with the smallest queue. For uniform interleaving, we choose the minimum queue βmin,uni(B) over all B. The optimization results for the tail-biting SCLDPC(3,6,50,3) ensemble are depicted in Fig. 8. For the sake of a clear presentation, we fix ε2 = 0.55 and find the minimum queue size for 0.3 < ε1 < 0.39. As we can see, the required queuing memory can be significantly smaller using a non-uniform interleaving. As discussed in Section IV-A, the optimal non-uniform interleaving improves the BP performance only slightly in comparison to the optimal uniform interleaving. However, it can have many practical advantages such as large memory savings for realizing the encoding queue. Fig. 9 shows the non-uniform interleaving found for (ε1 = 0.375, ε2 = 0.55). It is interesting that as a result of such interleaving, the average erasure probability εz = βzε1 + (1 − βz)ε2 > εMAP in some spatial positions.

VI. CONCLUSION
Rate-loss mitigation of spatially coupled codes is one of the major challenges towards a practical implementation of this class of codes. We have shown that a significant rate-loss reduction can be obtained from shortening tail-biting SC-LDPC codes. For the case of SC-LDPC(dv = 3, dc = 6, L, w = 3) codes, we can reduce the rate-loss by more than 50% by

0

10

20

30

40

50

spatial position z

Fig. 9.

The evolution of densities xz(t) for the tail-biting SC-

LDPC(3, 6, 50, 3) ensemble over two BECs (ε1 = 0.375, ε2 = 0.55) and

with after

the optimized non-uniform interleaving t = 1, 40, 80, ... iterations.

β

∗ min

.

Each

curve

represents

xz(t)

a suitable shortening pattern. The shortened tail-biting SCLDPC codes can outperform terminated SC-LDPC codes for transmission over AWGN channels.
Rate-loss mitigation can be fulfilled effectively when the transmission takes place over more than one binary-input channel, as is the case in BICM. The extra available channel dimensions can be exploited by properly interleaving code bits in different spatial positions among channels. For the case of two parallel BECs, we show that a tail-biting SC-LDPC code under BP decoding can be operated almost anywhere within the achievable region of MAP decoding. Optimized bit mappings for higher order modulation can help to increase the spectral efficiency of the code. However, the price is a mandatory buffer at the encoder. This effect can be mitigated by non-uniform channel allocation patterns, which show a better performance than the uniform schemes.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Schmalen, V. Aref, J. Cho, D. Suikat, D. Ro¨sener, and A. Leven, “Spatially coupled soft-decision error correction for future lightwave systems,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, Mar. 2015.
[2] S. Kudekar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Threshold saturation via spatial coupling: Why convolutional LDPC ensembles perform so well over the BEC,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, 2011.
[3] S. Kudekar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Spatially coupled ensembles universally achieve capacity under belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 7761–7813, 2013.
[4] A. Yedla, Y.-Y. Jian, P. S. Nguyen, and H. D. Pfister, “A simple proof of threshold saturation for coupled scalar recursions,” in Proc. Intl. Symp. on Turbo Codes & Iterative Inform. Proc. (ISTC), 2012.
[5] S. Kumar, A. Young, N. Macris, and H. Pfister, “A proof of threshold saturation for irregular LDPC codes on BMS channels,” in Proc. Allerton Conf., 2012.
[6] V. Aref, L. Schmalen, and S. ten Brink, “On the convergence speed of spatially coupled LDPC ensembles,” in Proc. Allerton Conf., 2013.
[7] M. Lentmaier, A. Sridharan, D. J. Costello, and K. S. Zigangirov, “Iterative decoding threshold analysis for LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 5274–5289, 2010.
[8] M. B. Tavares, K. S. Zigangirov, and G. P. Fettweis, “Tail-biting ldpc convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE ISIT, 2007.
[9] S. Kudekar, C. Measson, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Threshold saturation on BMS channels via spatial coupling,” in Proc. Intl. Symp. on Turbo Codes & Iterative Inform. Proc. (ISTC), France, 2010.

[10] C. Ha¨ger, A. Graell i Amat, A. Alvarado, F. Bra¨nnstro¨m, and E. Agrell, “Optimized bit mappings for spatially coupled LDPC codes over parallel binary erasure channels,” in Proc. IEEE ICC. IEEE, 2014.
[11] C. Ha¨ger, A. Graell i Amat, F. Bra¨nnstro¨m, A. Alvarado, and E. Agrell, “Terminated and tailbiting spatially coupled codes with optimized bit mappings for spectrally efficient fiber-optical systems,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 33, no. 7, pp. 1275–1285, Apr. 2015.
[12] G. Liva and M. Chiani, “Protograph LDPC codes design based on EXIT analysis,” in Proc. GLOBECOM, 2007.
[13] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge University Press, 2008.
[14] V. Aref, “Spatially coupled codes for channel and source coding,” Ph.D. dissertation, EPFL, Switzerland, Jan. 2014.
[15] R. Storn and K. Price, Differential evolution – a simple and efficient adaptive scheme for global optimization over continuous spaces. ICSI Berkeley, 1995, vol. 3.
[16] G. Caire, G. Taricco, and E. Biglieri, “Bit-interleaved coded modulation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 927–946, 1998.
[17] A. Yedla, M. El-Khamy, J. Lee, and I. Kang, “Performance of spatiallycoupled LDPC codes and threshold saturation over BICM channels,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1303.0296, 2013.
[18] L. Schmalen and S. ten Brink, “Combining spatially coupled LDPC codes with modulation and detection,” in Proc. ITG SCC, Jan. 2013.
[19] J. Hou, P. H. Siegel, L. B. Milstein, and H. D. Pfister, “Capacityapproaching bandwidth-efficient coded modulation schemes based on low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, Sep. 2003.

