OThW3 :

Net Coding Gain of 10.2 dB using an irregular LDPC code with a Three-dimensioh Analyser
Stefan SchLWmann, Oren Jean and Werner Rosenkranz
Chairlor Communications, Universi@oJKiel, Kaisersir. 2.0-24143 Kiel, Germany srsGMuni-kieI.de

Abstract: We present a three-dimensional decoding scheme for an irregular Low Densitiy Parity Check code (LDPC). With this setup, we achieved a Net Coding Gain of 10.2 dl3 and a significant
improvement in the iterating decoding process.
e2005 Optical Society ofAmerica
OCIS codes: (060.0060)Fiber oprics and optical communicarions;(060.2360) Fiber optic l i n k and subsystem

1. Introduction Modern optical transmission systems need increasingly powerful forward error correction (FEC) schemesto ensure the maximum accuracy of data transmission with the minimum of optical power. During the last few years, a significant effort has been made to investigate different codes like concatenatedcodes [11, turbo codes [2] and Low
Density Parity Check codes (LDPC) [3]. Recently, it was shown [4] that the etror performance and the hardware
complexity of FEC could be greatly improved by using irregular LDPC codes. In this paper we present a new threedimensional decoding scheme and achieve a net coding gain (NCG)of 10.2 dB for an optical transmission system,
which is limited by ASE noise. The structure of the paper is as follows: In section 2 we describe the general simulation setup. Section 3 depicts
in detail the structure of the three-dirnensiona1analyser as the heart of our three dimensional decoding scheme. In section4, the performance of the irregular LDPC code is presented in Comparison to several other codes, and the
performance advantage of the new decoding scheme is shown.

2. General setup

All simulation results are based on a single channeI system shown in fig. 1, Thereby, our system is only influenced

,

1 ‘d U - by ASE-noise of amplifiers. As we are primarily interested in the coding performance of the three-dimensional
analyser, all other impairments(e.g. linear and nonlinear fiber influences) are neglected.

I

I

GeDneartator

LDPC Encoderi

Three-dimensional analyser

LDPC Decoder (Soft Decision)

BER

1

I

Fig: I: General simulation setup for the evaluation ofthe threedimenstional decoding scheme

The data generator generates random message blocks with a data rate of 10 Gb/s. In the next step, an LDPC encoder encodes these blocks. We used Vasic and Djordjevic H-matrixgeneration algorithm [3] to create a regular
LDPC code (1369,1260) characterized by an overhead of only 8.7 %, a column weight of k-3 and a row weight of
n=37, respectively. We removed any dependent rows in the generated H-matrix and get therefore an irregular LDPC code with the same redundancy of 8.7 %. These encoded data blocks are received at the three-dimensiona1anaIyser, which will be described in the following section. At the output of this three-dimensional analyser the likelihood of the received symbol to be a ‘1’ or a ‘0’ is calculated and is passed to the Soft Decision Iterative LDPC decoder. Finally the BER is determined by Monte-Carlo simulations.

3. Structure of the three-dimensional analyser According to fig. 2a, the three dimensional analyser is composed of a splitter, three independent receivers (each consisting of an optical preamplifier, an optical filter, a pin diode detector and an electric filter), followed by A/D
converters and one digital signal processing device. The preamplifier in each receiver adds ASE noise to the optical signal. In our simulation, we approximated the
noise after opticalielectricalconversion and electrical filteringby a Gaussian distribution(see fig. 2b).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:57:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

OThW3

Fi

LDPC

Decoder

Fig. 2a: Structureof the three dimensional analyser With fiber output, demultiplexer,three receivers, AID converters andan integrated circuit (IC); Fig.2b: fhe conditionalpdfs ofthe threereceiver outputs; Fig. 2c: Scatter plot describing the separation in three-dimensional space
Furthermore we assumed that the noise in the three receivers is independent. This assumption was used due to the fact, that no significant correlation between the measurements of the receivers is expected (each one uses a different preamplifier). On this condition, we have three onedimensional random variables x, y and z (see fig.Za), from which three different conditional pdfs (fX,b(=x),i fYlb(+y), f& (2)where i E {O, I} ) at the end of each receiver
can be determined. The joint pdf of these variables.can be calculatedwith equation 3.1:

E h ~ b = i ( =~ f)X j b = i ( X ) J ~ l b = j ( Y ) f Z l b = i ( Z ) where

(3.1)

Due to &is equation, it is now possibIe to calcuiate the likelihood L l ( d of the three-dimensional random vector to represent a ‘I’ bit (The representation of a ‘0’bit can be determinedby the complement ofL,(’).

This likelihood value LI(’ is given finally as the output signal of the three-dimensional analyser to the iterative softdecisionLDPC decodingalgorithm[SI.
In practice, sampling the output of the three receivers in the eIectrica1domain generatesthe random variables x, y and z. This is done by three A/D converters [2]. Afterwards, the signal processing Integrated Circuit (IC) is
responsible for the calculation of the Likelihood I,,@. Firstly, the corresponding one-dimensional pdf values to the random variablesx, y and zare determined. In the next step, the joint pdf and the likelihood of the three-dimensional random vector are calculated based on the equations 3.1 and 3.2.
Fig. 2c shows the threedimensiona1 scatter plot of the sampled values (‘1 ’ and ‘0’ bits) of the random vector for an input power of -46 dBm into each of the three preamplifiers. The separation threshold, based on the classical Maximum Likelihood decisionboundary, is represented in fig. 2c by the sphere around the ‘Q’.Using three receivers for each symbol instead of only one gives a better separation possibiIity in the three-dimensional space compared to the onedimensional space. Therefore a more accurate likelihood measure is created.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:57:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

OThW3
4. Results and Discussion Fig. 3a and fig. 3b show the superior performance of the irregular LDPC code with our described three-dimensional
I
analyser.

receiver input power [dBm]

-5 1 -49

-47

-45

receiver input power [dBm]

Fig. 3a: BER pdomance for different FEC codes: NCG of 10.2dB and a gain of 4.8 ds compared to common irregular LDPC Coding scheme; Fig. 3b: Number of iterations in the soft decoding processversus receiver input power for three-dimensionalreceiverand commonreceiver

Fig. 3a shows the BER versus the receiver input power for the investigated LDPC~D~(1,369,1260) FEC code
compared to LDPCIDim(1369,1260) and to the standard Rs (255,239) as well as for the uncoded case. We achieve a total NCG of 10.2dB using our three-dimensional analyser with an irregular LDPC code (only 8.7 % overhead) for
a BER of l o 9 . Fut-&hennorteh,e achieved gain from the common irregularLDPC Coding scheme is determined to be 4.8 dB (BER of To our knowledge, this is the best p e r f o m c e of an irregular LDPC code with such a Low overhead.
Directly correlated to the achieved gain, we expect a significant advantage in the soft decision decoding algorithm which is mainly characterized by the number of iterations. In fig. 3b the number of iteration in the decoding process is shown versus the receiver input power. In our simulation the maximum number of iterations w a s arbitrariIy set to 75. From fig. 3b it is apparent that the use of the three-dimensional analyser reduces drastically the required number of iterations for the same receiver input powers which confirms our expectations. Only for strongly disturbed signals @ER= IO-’) as shown in the conditional pdf in fig.3b the maximum number of 75 iterationsis necessary.Nevertheless, for a received input power of 4 8 dl3m we never observed a decoded block that took more than one iteration. This is a very useful property for a real time implementation of several iterative decoding algorithms for LDPC codes.

5. Conclusion We presented a new three-dimensional decoding scheme in combination with an irregular LDPC code (overhead of 8.7%) that outperforms previously reported one-dimensional FEC schemes. With this system upgrade we achieved a NCG of 10.2dB or a gain of 4.8 dB compared to the common one-dimensional LDPC decoding scheme. Additionally, we showed that the usage of three-dimensional analyser as heart of our decoding scheme reduces drastically the number of iterations in the decoding process. This property could be exploited by real time implementation for several iterative decoding algorithms. Generally, it is possible to use the three-dimensional
analyser in conjunction with an arbitrary FEC code.

References
- 0.Ait Sab, J. Fang; Toncatenated Fonvard Error Correction schemes for long-haulDWDM optical transmission systems”, ECOC 1999,
n-290 11-291
T. Mizuochi et al.; “Experimental Demonstration of Net Coding Gain of 10.1 dB using 12.4 Gbis Block Turbo Code with 3-bit Soft
Decision, OFC 2003, PD21-1 B.Vasic et al.; Low-DensityParity Check Codes for Long-Haul Optical Communication Systems, EEB Photonics Technology Letters,
vo1.14 No.8, August 2002
LB.Djordjevic et al.; Regular and ipegular Low-DensityParity-Chech Codes for Ultra-LongHaul High-Speed Optical Communications: Constructionand Perfomance Analysis, OFC 2004, WM4, R.G.Gallager. Low Density Parity Check Codes, IRE Trans.Jnfo.Theory,IT-8: 21-28 Jan 1962

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:57:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

