IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 53, NO. 3, MARCH 2005

415

Transactions Papers

A Decoding Algorithm for Finite-Geometry LDPC Codes
Zhenyu Liu, Student Member, IEEE, and Dimitris A. Pados, Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper, we develop a new low-complexity algorithm to decode low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. The developments are oriented specifically toward low-cost, yet effective, decoding of (high-rate) finite-geometry (FG) LDPC codes. The decoding procedure updates iteratively the hard-decision received vector in search of a valid codeword in the vector space. Only one bit is changed in each iteration, and the bit-selection criterion combines the number of failed checks and the reliability of the received bits. Prior knowledge of the signal amplitude and noise power is not required. An optional mechanism to avoid infinite loops in the search is also proposed. Our studies show that the algorithm achieves an appealing tradeoff between performance and complexity for FG-LDPC codes.
Index Terms—Belief propagation (BP), bit-flipping (BF) decoding, block codes, cyclic codes, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, min-sum algorithm, soft-decision decoding, sum-product algorithm (SPA).
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes, originally introduced by Gallager [1], [2] and brought into prominence by MacKay and Neal [3], [4], have been attracting a great deal of research interest. Indeed, practical decoding algorithms operating on certain long LDPC codes were seen to offer exceptional error protection that approaches the Shannon limit for binary-input additive white Gaussian noise (BIAWGN) channels more closely than turbo codes with similar decoding complexity [5], [6]. On the other hand, although various code design techniques are available (examples include [6]–[9]), most of the “good” LDPC codes known so far are generated randomly by computer and lack algebraic structure. This impairs our ability to carry out theoretical analysis or develop cost-effective encoder implementations. In addition, good codes usually have
Paper approved by M. Fossorier, the Editor for Coding and Communication Theory of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received July 30, 2002; revised July 13, 2004 and September 20, 2004. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCR-0219903. Computational support was provided by the Center for Computational Research (CCR) at the State Uuniversity of New York at Buffalo. This paper was presented in part at the IEEE International Conference on Communications, Communications Theory Symposium, Anchorage, AK, May 2003.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14260 USA (e-mail: zliu2@eng. buffalo.edu; pados@eng.buffalo.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2005.843413

a very long code length, which causes long transmission de-

lays and requires large storage capacity at the decoder. Take [5]

as an example where powerful codes were found with perfor-

mance only 0.04 dB away from the Shannon limit at bit-error

rate (BER) of ; the codes have a huge block length of .

A notable exception to the above is the algebraically con-

structed finite-geometry (FG) LDPC codes [10]. FG codes are

a class of majority-decodable codes [11], [12]. Most of the FG

codes are cyclic or quasicyclic; therefore, encoding can be easily

implemented by linear shift registers with feedback connec-

tions. Compared with computer-generated LDPC codes with

similar code length and dimension, FG-LDPC codes have a

more balanced structure and better performance, especially in

the range of short-to-moderate code lengths – . The

parity-check matrices of FG-LDPC codes employ some redun-

dant checks (the number of rows of the parity-check matrix is

greater than the difference between the code length and the code

dimension), and row/column weights are also somewhat higher

than usual LDPC codes. This implies higher decoding com-

plexity than the computer-generated LDPC codes, which may

be the price for the improved performance.

In this paper, we propose a new decoding algorithm for

high-rate FG-LDPC codes. While most of the general LDPC

decoding literature focuses on the belief-propagation (BP)/sum-

product algorithm (SPA) [2], [4] and its downward lower

complexity approximations [13]–[16], here we move from the

opposite direction. We start from the simple minimal-cost bit-

flipping (BF) algorithm of Gallager [2], and build on it, ac-

counting for the attributes of FG-LDPC codes. In this context,

the “weighted BF” algorithm in [10] is a parallel development

on which we would like to improve performance-wise, while

maintaining similar computational complexity.

LDPC codes draw their error-correction strength from their

relatively long length in comparison with conventional linear

block codes. Undetected errors at the decoder (incorrect valid

codeword decisions) are exceedingly rare. The codewords are

sparsely distributed in the -dimensional space over

,

and in almost all cases, we either find the correct codeword

or cannot find any codeword at all. In other words, when we

search around the received vector, according to a properly de-

fined distance metric, we expect the first valid codeword we

encounter to be the correct one with exceedingly high proba-

bility. In this paper, we begin with the hard-decision received

0090-6778/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:54:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

416

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 53, NO. 3, MARCH 2005

vector of length and search around it iteratively. In each iteration, we flip only one bit of the length- vector. The bit to be flipped is chosen according to a selection metric that is supposed to conform well with the characteristics of FG-LDPC codes (many cycles of length six, redundant checks, and somewhat higher than usual row/column weights). The metric combines the number of failed checks that bits participate in and their reliability. After each iteration, the metric values are updated as needed. Calculation of the bit-selection metric requires no knowledge of the signal energy or noise power characteristics of AWGN channels that are necessary for BP decoding [2], [4]. If a valid codeword is found, the search is terminated and successful decoding is claimed. If no codeword is found after a certain number of iterations (search upper bound), then we declare decoding failure. Last, but not least, during decoding, we can also record a window of searched vectors along the search path to identify and break closed loops and improve the decoding performance without much complexity increase, as we will explain in the following.
The presentation of this material is organized as follows. Notation, definitions, and the core algorithm are given in Section II. In Section III, we present the mechanism to avoid infinite loops. We calculate the complexity of the algorithm in Section IV. In Section V, we present and discuss some simulation results, and in Section VI, we draw a few concluding remarks.

II. DECODING ALGORITHM

A. Notation and Basic Definitions

Consider a binary

LDPC code with length

and dimension and choose an arbitrary codeword

. The codeword is transmitted over a

symmetric binary-input memoryless discrete-time channel, and

the received vector is denoted by

. Here, by

“symmetric channel,” we mean that

where

is the conditional probability distribution function

of the channel output. If, for example, we consider binary

phase-shift keying (BPSK) transmissions over a BIAWGN

channel, then the channel output is

A binary

LDPC code is completely described by its

sparse binary parity-check matrix that has columns and

rows. For any tentative bit-decision vector , the

set of check sums, or syndrome, is the vector

, where

the multiplication operation is over

. For a regular LDPC

code, has a constant column weight and a constant row

weight . Following exactly the notation of [4], we define the

set

that contains the indexes of the bits that participate

in check , and the set

that contains the indexes of the

checks in which bit participates

(4)

For each check

, we define the “lower check reli-

ability” value and the “upper check reliability” value as

follows:

(5)

In Section II-B, we use and to define a “bit-selection metric” that incorporates both the individual bit reliability and the outcome of the checks in which the bit participates.

B. Algorithm

The proposed algorithm starts from the hard-limited received

data vector and searches iteratively the -dimensional

vector space over

for a valid codeword vector. Assume

that prior to the th iteration,

, the bit vector under

consideration is

with corresponding syndrome vector

. The objective is to perturb

by one bit and create a new candidate bit vector . To choose

which bit of

to flip, for each bit

, we

calculate the metric value

if (6)
if

1 for every check

. We add up

over all checks (7)

(1)

and flip the bit in

with minimum value

where is the received energy per code bit, and are independent Gaussian random variables with mean zero and vari-

and

(8)

ance .

We define the log-likelihood value for each channel output where denotes addition over

and

,

, as

(2)

We update the syndrome vector to ; if

, we have a

and the initial hard-limited bit decision

valid codeword and stop the search; if not, we calculate

,

, and continue.

(3) The basic properties of the suggested selection criterion in (6)

where

if

, and

if

.

The absolute value of is called the reliability of the ini-

tial decision . The vectors

and

are the inputs to the decoder.

and (7) are as follows. 1) Among all bits that participate in check , the selection rule favors the least reliable. 2) Over all bits and
all checks, the selection rule favors bits that participate in most
2 + 2 = 1 2 . . . 1l = and u l = , m ; ; ; M , need to be calculated only once
before the first iteration of the algorithm.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:54:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU AND PADOS: A DECODING ALGORITHM FOR FINITE-GEOMETRY LDPC CODES

417

failed checks (

if

, and

if

).

In essence, the selection rule combines “the number of failed

checks” and “the reliability” into a new criterion function. 3)

The metric maintains linearity with respect to , therefore,

for AWGN channels, we can replace by and still have

an equivalent detector which requires no knowledge of signal

energy/noise power.

It is important to note that we can claim no particular opti-

mality of the proposed bit-selection criterion. Indeed, the met-

rics , may be defined differently to match characteris-

tics of the code of interest or hardware limitations, and poten-

tially achieve superior decoding complexity versus performance

behavior. With this particular implementation of , in

(6) and (7), we simply attempted to perform very low-com-

plexity decoding of (high-rate) FG-LDPC codes, and hoped to

stay within a decibel or so away from the performance of BP.

III. IMPROVEMENT: LOOP DETECTION In the algorithm that we described in the previous section, the selection of the bit to flip depends only on the current bit vector
and the reliability vector
(9)

To compare ,

, with the all-zero vector,

we denote its Hamming weight by . Then,

can be

easily derived from without counting the number of ones

in

if if th bit of if th bit of

(12) .

Of course,

if and only if

.

In summary, the complete decoding algorithm of Section II

that incorporates loop detection and prevention is as follows.

1) Initialization: Iteration counter

; “Exclusion list”

;,

,

, calculated

by (5); calculated by (3).

2) Calculate syndrome ; if

, then return

and STOP.

3)

; if

(user-specified maximum itera-

tion number), then declare decoding failure and STOP.

4) Calculate ,

, by (6) and (7).

5)

.

6) Calculate , by (11), (12),

;

if

for any

, then

and go back to step 5.

7) Calculate by (8);

; go to step 2.

If in the th iteration, the new bit vector coincides with

a previously considered vector ,

, then

IV. COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY

and

. Since there is no valid code-

word vector in

, we will not find

a codeword if we continue the search. The decoding process is

trapped in an infinite loop, and decoding failure will be reported

when the maximum allowable iteration number is reached. To

detect and break such infinite loops when they appear, we can

record all searched vectors; if in the th iteration we attempt to

generate a previously searched vector ,

, we will

discard this bit-flip choice and select instead the bit immedi-

The computational complexity of the decoding algorithm de-

scribed above can be calculated as follows. During each itera-

tion, one bit of the -dimensional bit vector is flipped. To

select this bit according to the metric ,

real compar-

isons are needed. After bit is selected and flipped, syndrome

bits that correspond to the checks in which bit participated

should be updated (flipped)

(13)

ately next in value. At first sight, it appears that to record and compare with all searched vectors has complexity proportional to the code length (which can be prohibitive for long LDPC codes). The cost, however, can be greatly reduced, as we

Then, for each

, we update for all

if if

(14)

see below.

Since comparisons can be considered as additions, we need al-

For convenience, we first define the vector sum

together

real additions per

. From (8), and by induction, we have iteration. If desired, both the comparisons and the update of

. Naturally, we reach the conclusion that if and only if

for any (10)

can be parallelized and accomplished in

and real ad-

dition time units, with and available parallel processing

units, respectively.

Loop detection, as described in Section III, requires only bit

This means that to detect and prevent infinite loops, we need

only the vectors

. If any of these

vectors is zero, an infinite loop is detected, and the bit selec-

tion should be discarded. We notice also that since

depend only on

, there is no

need to record the searched bit vectors

(which

otherwise would impose a significant storage requirement for

long codes).

In more detail, we can calculate iteratively

operations and integer counter increments/decrements. Most

importantly, the total number of loop-detection operations is in-

dependent of the block length , and depends only on the total

number of executed iterations. In practical applications,

(the user-specified maximum iteration number) is much less

than the block length , therefore, the cost of loop detection in

comparison with the

real additions required by

the core decoding procedure can be safely ignored.

In Table I, we summarize the decoding complexity in real-

number operations per iteration for BP, three simplified ver-

if otherwise.

(11)

sions of BP, namely the “normalized BP-based” [16], “normalized APP-based” [17], and “uniformly most powerful (UMP)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:54:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

418

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 53, NO. 3, MARCH 2005

TABLE I DECODING COMPLEXITY PER ITERATION (UNIT ONE REAL OPERATION)

BP-based” [15] algorithms, the “weighted BF” algorithm in [10]

and, as the last entry, our proposed algorithm. It is interesting to

note that the UMP BP-based and “min-sum” algorithms coin-

cide [18], although their derivations are different. It follows that

the normalized BP-based algorithm is an improved min-sum al-

gorithm. UMP BP-based (min-sum), weighted BF, and the pro-

posed algorithm all require no multiplication/division opera-

tions at all. It is also important to note that for certain LDPC

codes, the normalized BP-based and normalized APP-based di-

visions may be with respect to a power of two, in which case,

they degenerate to trivial binary-shift operations [16], [17].

Analytical statistical evaluation of the total number of iter-

ations that are required per codeword is not an easy task for

either of the above algorithms. For the proposed algorithm in

particular, since only one bit is flipped in each iteration, we

may suggest intuitively and validate experimentally a statistical

model under which the average number of iterations is propor-

tional to the mean number of bits in error in the hard-decision

received vector (for example, the mean number of bits in error

is

for a BIAWGN channel, where

is

Fig. 1. BER versus rate-normalized SNR for the Type-I 2-D (1023, 781) EG-LDPC code.

the area under the

tail of the zero-mean unit-variance

Gaussian pdf). The mean number of iterations for the proposed

algorithm is expected to be somewhat higher than BP; however,

since the operations per iteration are much fewer, we anticipate

significant complexity savings, even compared with simplified

versions of BP. We should also point out that although theoret-

ically, BP decoders can be heavily parallelized, each iteration

still requires approximately

real addition time units,

assuming availability of

processing units. With

available processing units and

time units per iteration, a parallelized version of our pro-

posed algorithm would still maintain speed advantage for

short-to-medium-length codes at about half the hardware cost.

For FG-LDPC codes, in particular, that have relatively large

and values, the speed advantage is more pronounced. In

Section V, in conjunction with BER performance comparisons,

we present empirical results on the mean iteration number and

the total number of operations needed for the various decoding

algorithms under consideration.

BF in [10]; and 7) the algorithm proposed herein. The maximum iteration number is set equal to 200 for all algorithms. We recall that algorithms 1)–5) update multiple bits in each iteration, while 6) and the proposed algorithm update only one bit. In Fig. 1, we present our findings for the Type-I 2-D (1023, 781) Euclidean geometry (EG)-LDPC code with rate 0.763 [10]. The normalization factor for the two normalized decoders is set equal to 4.0, based on the analysis in [16]. For reference, we include the performance of uncoded BPSK transmissions and the Shannon limit. We see that the proposed algorithm, with loop detection and prevention as described in Section III, offers an arguably substantial gain of 0.48 dB at BER over the similar complexity weighted BF algorithm (the gain over UMP BP-based and plain BF is 0.57 and 0.97 dB, respectively). At the same time, the proposed algorithm is just about 0.63 dB away from straight BP decoding, 0.61 dB from normalized APP-based decoding, and 0.56 dB from normalized BP-based decoding. With these performance studies in mind, we move on to algorithmic complexity comparisons. We plot

V. SIMULATION RESULTS

the mean number of real operations needed2 (real operations per iteration mean iteration number) for each algorithm versus

In this section, we evaluate the BER of various LDPC de-

(Fig. 2). In view of the results in Figs. 1 and 2, we argue

coders as a function of the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). To allow that the proposed algorithm and the normalized APP-based al-

performance comparisons across different rate codes, we use the gorithm of [16] offer the two best tradeoff points between per-

normalized SNR per information bit

. formance and computational cost (a “low-end” and a “high-

We study the following decoders: 1) BP; 2) UMP BP-based [15] (min-sum); 3) normalized BP-based [16]; 4) normalized APPbased [17]; 5) Gallager’s original BF algorithm [2]; 6) weighted

+ 2In this plot, the operations for the BP algorithm are multiplications di+ visions additions. For all other algorithms, the operations are additions only
(multiplications/divisions are not required at all).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:54:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU AND PADOS: A DECODING ALGORITHM FOR FINITE-GEOMETRY LDPC CODES

419

Fig. 2. Real operations needed versus rate-normalized SNR for the code of Fig. 1.

Fig. 3. Frequency of occurrence of executed iterations for the code studies in Figs. 1 and 2 (
 =N = 3:85 dB).

end” tradeoff point, respectively). As a form of visual aid that

may help us gain a better understanding of the underlying al-

gorithmic behavior, in Fig. 3, we plot the empirical “distribu-

tion” of the number of iterations needed by each algorithm to

decode a received vector. We fix

at 3.85 dB, and run

each algorithm 800 000 times. The axis represents the iter-

ations needed to decode a received vector, and the axis rep-

resents the density of appearance of an iteration number, as ob-

served in the simulation. For effective visualization, we use a

log scale for the axis. We see that for the BP, UMP BP-based

(min-sum), normalized BP-based, and APP-based algorithms,

most successful decodings terminate during the first 10–15 it-

erations at the price of high complexity per iteration (notice

the 9.7% decoding failure of the UMP BP-based algorithm, as

indicated by the spike at the maximum iteration number 200).

Weighted BF and the proposed algorithm with or without loop

detection have frequency-of- occurrence peaks at about 25 iter- Fig. 4. BER versus rate-normalized SNR for the Type-I 2-D (4095, 3367) ations. The algorithm without loop detection has almost all suc- EG-LDPC code.

cessful decodings concentrated in the first 65 or so iterations.

The remaining decodings fail, as seen by the spike at iteration Finally, in Fig. 5, we consider the Type-II 3-D (4599, 4227)

200. Apparently, a good number of decoding failures can be at- EG-LDPC code with rate 0.919 and minimum distance 9. In

tributed to infinite-loop traps, as seen by the operation of the this study, we also include the recently published improved

version of the algorithm that incorporates loop detection and weighted BF decoder of [19]. The required “weighting factor

prevention (bottom entry in Fig. 3). On the other hand, if during parameter ” [19] is tuned to 0.9. The normalization factor

implementation, one chooses not to use loop detection, then the for the normalized decoders is set at 4.0. At BER , the

maximum iteration number of this basic version of the algorithm proposed algorithm is once again about 0.6 dB away from BP,

can be greatly reduced to 65 without any visible performance less than 0.4 dB from normalized BP-based decoding, and only

degradation for this code and SNR.

1.7 dB away from the Shannon limit.3 Compared with weighted

To verify that our findings and conclusions continue to hold BF and improved weighted BF, the algorithm offers a gain of

true for much longer FG-LDPC codes than the (1023, 781) about 0.8 and 0.3 dB, respectively. Fig. 6 establishes the pro-

code of Figs. 1–3, in Fig. 4, we consider the Type-I 2-D (4095, posed algorithm as the lowest-complexity solution among all

3367) EG-LDPC code with rate 0.822 and minimum distance studied schemes. As with Fig. 2, we must clarify again that the

65. The normalization factor is set at 8.0 for the two normalized BP curve of Fig. 6 accounts comprehensively for real additions

decoders. At BER of , the proposed low-cost algorithm and multiplications/divisions; all other curves represent only

is again about 0.55 dB away from BP, less than 0.44 dB from additions, since no multiplications/divisions are required.

normalized APP-based decoding, and about 0.34 dB away from normalized BP-based decoding. Compared to weighted BF, the algorithm offers a performance improvement of 0.36 dB.

3In the simulation study of this code, we observed that all decoders, including BP, generate a considerable percentage of undetected errors except for the normalized BP-based decoder.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:54:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

420

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 53, NO. 3, MARCH 2005

A loop-detection procedure with minimal computational overhead is also designed that protects the generated bit-search sequence from falling into infinite-loop traps. Certainly, the loop detection and prevention mechanism goes beyond the developments presented herein, and can be used in conjunction with other decoders, as well. Our studies led us to conclude that the proposed decoder and the “normalized APP-based” decoder of Chen and Fossorier [17] offer two of the most appealing performance versus cost tradeoffs, and may deserve a place in an LDPC decoding “toolbox.”

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors express their gratitude to the three anonymous reviewers for a variety of comments and suggestions that improved significantly the presentation of this material.

Fig. 5. BER versus rate-normalized SNR for the Type-II 3-D (4599, 4227) EG-LDPC code.
Fig. 6. Real operations needed versus rate-normalized SNR for the code of Fig. 5.
VI. CONCLUSIONS FG-LDPC codes [10] are algebraically generated and allow effective, low-cost, hardware encoder implementations. In general, under BP decoding, they offer better error protection than random computer-generated LDPC codes, particularly in the domain of short-to-medium code lengths – . On the other hand, the main attributes of FG-LDPC codes (“redundant” checks and higher than usual row and column weights) put more stress on the already high-complexity BP algorithm. In this paper, we developed a new low-complexity decoder for FG-LDPC codes. In principle, and in complexity, the decoder can be grouped with the simple BF algorithms of Gallager [2], Kou, et al. [10], and Zhang and Fossorier [19]. The defining attribute of the proposed decoder is the bit-selection criterion that encompasses failed checks and bit-reliability values.

REFERENCES

[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf.

Theory, vol. 8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.

[2]

, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,

1963.

[3] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near-Shannon-limit performance of

low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 1645–1646,

Aug. 1996.

[4] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse

matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–432, Mar. 1999.

[5] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “On

the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the

Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.

[6] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of

capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE

Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.

[7] J. Campello and D. S. Modha, “Extended bit-filling and LDPC code

design,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom, vol. 2, San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001,

pp. 674–679.

[8] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D.-M. Arnold, “Progressive edge-growth

Tanner graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom, vol. 2, San Antonio, TX, Nov.

2001, pp. 995–1001.
[9] R. Echard and S.-C. Chang, “The -rotation low-density parity-check

codes,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom, vol. 2, San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001,

pp. 980–984.

[10] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes

based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans.

Inf. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.

[11] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Jr., Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and

Applications. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1983.

[12] L. D. Rudolph, “A class of majority logic decodable codes,” IEEE Trans.

Inf. Theory, vol. IT-13, pp. 305–307, Apr. 1967.

[13] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Iterative reliability-based decoding of low-density

parity-check codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 19, pp. 908–917,

May 2001.

[14] Y. Mao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Decoding low-density parity-check

codes with probabilistic scheduling,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, pp.

414–416, Oct. 2001.

[15] M. P. C. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced-complexity it-

erative decoding of low-density parity-check codes based on belief prop-

agation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, pp. 673–680, May 1999.

[16] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Near-optimum universal belief propa-

gation-based decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans.

Commun., vol. 50, pp. 406–414, Mar. 2002.

[17]

, “Decoding low-density parity-check codes with normalized APP-

based algorithm,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom, vol. 2, San Antonio, TX,

Nov. 2001, pp. 1026–1030.

[18] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation,

Linköping Univ., Linköping, Sweden, 1996.

[19] J. Zhang and M. P. C. Fossorier, “A modified weighted bit-flipping de-

coding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8,

pp. 165–167, Mar. 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:54:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU AND PADOS: A DECODING ALGORITHM FOR FINITE-GEOMETRY LDPC CODES

421

Zhenyu Liu (S’00) received the B.Eng. degree in electronic engineering from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 1999. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in the Department of Electrical Engineering, State University of New York at Buffalo.
Since August 1999, he has been a Research Assistant with the Communications and Signals Laboratory, Department of Electrical Engineering, State University of New York at Buffalo. His research interests are in the areas of low-complexity iterative decoding algorithms, code-design techniques, and wireless multiple-access communications. Mr. Liu is a student member of the IEEE Communications Society.

Dimitris A. Pados (M’95) was born in Athens, Greece, on October 22, 1966. He received the Diploma degree in computer engineering and science from the University of Patras, Patras, Greece in 1989, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Virginia, Charlottesville, in 1994.
From 1994 to 1997, he was an Assistant Professor with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and the Center for Telecommunications Studies, University of Louisiana, Lafayette. Since August 1997, he has been with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University at Buffalo, The State University of New York, where he is presently an Associate Professor. His research interests are in the general areas of communication theory and adaptive signal processing, with emphasis on wireless multiple-access communications, spread-spectrum theory and applications, coding and sequences, adaptive antenna arrays, and array radar. Dr. Pados has been serving as an Associate Editor for the IEEE SIGNAL PROCESSING LETTERS and the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS since January 2001. Articles that he co-authored with his students received a 2001 IEEE International Conference on Telecommications Best Paper Award and the 2003 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS Outstanding Paper Award.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:54:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

