954

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 3, MARCH 2005

Using Linear Programming to Decode Binary Linear Codes
Jon Feldman, Martin J. Wainwright, Member, IEEE, and David R. Karger, Associate Member, IEEE

Abstract—A new method is given for performing approximate

maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding of an arbitrary binary linear

code based on observations received from any discrete memoryless

symmetric channel. The decoding algorithm is based on a linear

programming (LP) relaxation that is defined by a factor graph

or parity-check representation of the code. The resulting “LP de-

coder” generalizes our previous work on turbo-like codes.

A precise combinatorial characterization of when the LP de-

coder succeeds is provided, based on pseudocodewords associated

with the factor graph. Our definition of a pseudocodeword unifies

other such notions known for iterative algorithms, including “stop-

ping sets,” “irreducible closed walks,” “trellis cycles,” “deviation

sets,” and “graph covers.”

The fractional distance frac of a code is introduced, which is a

lower bound on the classical distance. It is shown that the efficient

2 1 LP decoder will correct up to

= 
( ) are codes with frac

1

frac

errors and that there

. An efficient algorithm to com-

pute the fractional distance is presented. Experimental evidence

shows a similar performance on low-density parity-check (LDPC)

codes between LP decoding and the min-sum and sum-product al-

gorithms. Methods for tightening the LP relaxation to improve per-

formance are also provided.

Index Terms—Belief propagation (BP), iterative decoding, lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes, linear codes, linear programming (LP), LP decoding, minimum distance, pseudocodewords.

I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-density parity-check (LDPC) codes were first discovered by Gallager in 1962 [7]. In the 1990s, they were “rediscovered” by a number of researchers [8], [4], [9], and have since received a lot of attention. The error-correcting performance of these codes is unsurpassed; in fact, Chung et al. [10] have given a family of LDPC codes that come within 0.0045 dB of the capacity of the channel (as the block length goes to infinity). The decoders most often used for this family are based

Manuscript received May 6, 2003; revised December 8, 2004. The work of J. Feldman was conducted while the author was at the MIT Laboratory of Computer Science and supported in part by the National Science Foundation Postdoctoral Research Fellowship DMS-0303407. The work of D. Karger was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Contract CCR-9624239 and a David and Lucille Packard Foundation Fellowship. The material in this paper was presented in part at the Conference on Information Sciences and Systems, Baltimore, MD, June 2003.
J. Feldman is with the Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027 USA (e-mail: jonfeld@ieor.columbia.edu).
M. J. Wainwright is with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science and the Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, 94720 USA (e-mail: wainwrig@eecs.berkeley.edu).
D. R. Karger is with the Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (CSAIL), Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA (e-mail: karger@mit.edu).
Communicated by R. L. Urbanke, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2004.842696

on the belief-propagation algorithm [11], where messages are

iteratively sent across a factor graph modeling the structure of

the code. While the performance of this decoder is quite good,

analyzing its behavior is often difficult when the factor graph

contains cycles.

In this paper, we introduce a new algorithm for decoding

an arbitrary binary linear code based on the method of linear

programming (LP) relaxation. We design a polytope that con-

tains all valid codewords, and an objective function for which

the maximum-likelihood (ML) codeword is the optimum point

with integral coordinates. We use linear programming to find the

polytope’s (possibly fractional) optimum, and achieve success

when that optimum is the transmitted codeword. Experiments

on LDPC codes show that the performance of the resulting LP

decoder is better than the iterative min-sum algorithm. In addi-

tion, the LP decoder has the ML certificate property; whenever

it outputs a codeword, it is guaranteed to be the ML codeword.

None of the standard iterative methods are known to have this

desirable property.

A desirable feature of the LP decoder is its amenability to

analysis. We introduce a variety of techniques for analyzing the

performance of this algorithm. We give an exact combinatorial

characterization of the conditions for LP decoding success, even

in the presence of cycles in the factor graph. This characteriza-

tion holds for any discrete memoryless symmetric channel; in

such channels, a linear cost function can be defined on the code

bits such that that the lowest cost codeword is the ML codeword.

We define the set of pseudocodewords, which is a superset of the

set of codewords, and we prove that the LP decoder always finds

the lowest cost pseudocodeword. Thus, the LP decoder succeeds

if and only if the lowest cost pseudocodeword is actually the

transmitted codeword.

Next we define the notion of the fractional distance of

a factor graph, which is essentially the minimum distance be-

tween a codeword and a pseudocodeword. In analogy to the per-

formance guarantees of exact ML decoding with respect to clas-

sical distance, we prove that the LP decoder can correct up to

errors in the binary-symmetric channel (BSC). We

prove that the fractional distance of a linear code with check de-

gree at least three is at least exponential in the girth of the graph

associated with that code. Thus, given a graph with logarithmic

girth, the fractional distance can be lower-bounded by

,

for some constant , where is the code length.

For the case of LDPC codes, we show how to compute the

fractional distance efficiently. This fractional distance is not

only useful for evaluating the performance of the code under

LP decoding, but it also serves as a lower bound on the true

distance of the code.

0018-9448/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:56:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FELDMAN et al.: USING LINEAR PROGRAMMING TO DECODE BINARY LINEAR CODES

955

A. Relation to Iterative Algorithms

C. Outline

The techniques used by Chung et al. [10] to analyze LDPC codes are based on those of Richardson and Urbanke [12] and Luby et al. [13], who give an algorithm to calculate the threshold of a randomly constructed LDPC code. This threshold acts as a limit on the channel noise; if the noise is below the threshold, then reliable decoding (using belief propagation (BP)) can be achieved as the block length goes to infinity.
The threshold analysis is based on the idea of considering an “ensemble” of codes for the purposes of analysis, then averaging the behavior of this ensemble as the block length of the code goes to infinity. For many ensembles, it is known [3] that for any

We begin the paper in Section II by giving background on factor graphs for binary linear codes, and the ML decoding problem. We present the LP relaxation of ML decoding in Section III. In Section IV, we discuss the basic analysis of LP decoding. We define pseudocodewords in Section V, and fractional distance in Section VI. In Section VII, we draw connections between various iterative decoding algorithms and our LP decoder, and present some experiments. In Section VIII, we discuss various methods for “tightening” the LP in order to get even better performance. We conclude and discuss future work in Section IX.

constant , the difference in error rate (under belief-propagation decoding) between a random code and the average code in the ensemble is less than with probability exponentially small in the block length.
Calculating the error rate of the ensemble average can become difficult when the factor graph contains cycles; because iterative algorithms can traverse cycles repeatedly, noise in the channel can affect the final decision in complicated, highly dependent ways. This complication is avoided by considering the limiting case of infinite block length, such that the probability of a message traversing a cycle converges to zero. However, for many practical block lengths, this leads to a poor approximation of the true error rate [3].
Therefore, it is valuable to examine the behavior of a code ensemble at fixed block lengths, and try to analyze the effect of cycles. Recently, Di et al. [3] took on the “finite length” analysis

D. Notes and Recent Developments
Preliminary forms of part of the work in this paper have appeared in the conference papers [15], [16], and in the thesis of one of the authors [17]. Since the submission of this work, it has been shown that the LP decoder defined here can correct a constant fraction of error in certain LDPC codes [18], and that a variant of the LP can achieve capacity using expander codes [19].
Additionally, relationships between LP decoding and iterative decoding have been further refined. Discovered independently of this work, Koetter and Vontobel’s notion of a “graph cover” [20] is equivalent to the notion of a “pseudocodeword graph” defined here. More recent work by the same authors [21], [22] explores these notions in more detail, and gives new bounds for error performance.

of LDPC codes under the binary erasure channel (BEC). Key to their results is the notion of a purely combinatorial structure known as a stopping set. BP fails if and only if a stopping set exists among the erased bits; therefore, the error rate of BP is reduced to a purely combinatorial question.
For the case of the BEC, we show that the pseudocodewords we define in this paper are exactly stopping sets. Thus, the performance of the LP decoder is equivalent to BP on the BEC. Our notion of a pseudocodeword also unifies other known results for particular cases of codes and channels. For tail-biting trellises, our pseudocodewords are equivalent to those introduced by Forney et al. [5]. Also, when applied to the analysis of computation trees for min-sum decoding, pseudocodewords have a connection to the deviation sets defined by Wiberg [4], and refined by Forney et al. [6] and Frey, Koetter, and Vardy [14].

II. BACKGROUND

A linear code with parity-check matrix can be repre-

sented by a Tanner or factor graph , which is defined in the

following way. Let

and

be indices for the columns (respectively, rows) of the

parity-check matrix of the code. With this notation, is a bi-

partite graph with independent node sets and . We refer to

the nodes in as variable nodes, and the nodes in as check

nodes. All edges in have one endpoint in and the other in

. For each

, the edge is included in if

and only if

.

The neighborhood of a check node

, denoted by ,

is the set of nodes

such that check node is incident to

variable node in . Similarly, we let be the set of check

nodes incident to a particular variable node .

Imagine assigning to each variable node

a value in

B. Previous Results

, representing the value of a particular code bit. A parity-

check node is “satisfied” if the collection of bits assigned to

In previous work [1], [2], we introduced the approach of de- the variable nodes s.t.

have even parity. The binary

coding any “turbo-like” code based on similar network flow and vector

is a codeword if and only if all check

linear programming relaxation techniques. We gave a precise nodes are satisfied. Fig. 1 shows an example of a linear code

combinatorial characterization of the conditions under which and its associated factor graph. In this Hamming code, if we set

this decoder succeeds. We used properties of this LP decoder to

, and

, then the

design a rate- repeat–accumulate (RA) code (a certain class neighborhood of every check node has even parity. Therefore,

of simple turbo codes), and proved an upper bound on the prob- represents a codeword, which we can write as

. Other

ability of decoding error. We also showed how to derive a more codewords include

,

, and

.

classical iterative algorithm whose performance is identical to Let denote the maximum variable (left) degree of the

that of our LP decoder.

factor graph; i.e., the maximum, among all nodes , of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:56:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

956

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 3, MARCH 2005

We will frequently exploit the fact that the cost vector can

be uniformly rescaled without affecting the solution of the ML

problem. In the BSC, for example, rescaling by

allows us to assume that

if

, and

if

.

III. DECODING WITH LINEAR PROGRAMMING

Fig. 1. A factor graph for the (7; 4; 3) Hamming code. The nodes
f1; 2; 3; 4; 5; 6; 7g drawn in open circles correspond to variable nodes, whereas nodes fA; B; Cg in black squares correspond to check nodes.

degree of . Let denote the minimum variable degree. Let and denote the maximum and minimum check (right) degree of the factor graph.

A. Channel Assumptions

A binary-codeword of length is sent over a noisy channel,

and a corrupted word is received. In this paper, we assume

an arbitrary discrete memoryless symmetric channel. We use

the notation

to denote the probability that was the

codeword sent over the channel, given that was received. We

assume that all information words are equally likely a priori. By

Bayes’ rule, this assumption implies that

for any code . Moreover, the memoryless property of the channel implies that

Let be the space of possible received symbols. For example,

in the BSC,

, and in the additive white Gaussian

noise (AWGN) channel,

. By symmetry, the set can be

partitioned into pairs

such that

(1) and
(2)

In this section, we formulate the ML decoding problem for an arbitrary binary linear code, and show that it is equivalent to solving a linear program over the codeword polytope. We then define a modified linear program that represents a relaxation of the exact problem.
A. Codeword Polytope
To motivate our LP relaxation, we first show how ML decoding can formulated as an equivalent LP. For a given code , we define the codeword polytope to be the convex hull of all possible codewords

Note that

is a polytope contained within the -hyper-

cube

, and includes exactly those vertices of the hyper-

cube corresponding to codewords. Every point in

corre-

sponds to a vector

, where element is defined

by the summation

.

The vertices of a polytope are those points that cannot be ex-

pressed as convex combinations of other points in the polytope.

A key fact is that any linear program attains its optimum at a

vertex of the polytope [23]. Consequently, the optimum will al-

ways be attained at a vertex of

, and these vertices are

in one-to-one correspondence with codewords.

We can therefore define ML decoding as the problem of min-

imizing

subject to the constraint

. This

formulation is a linear program, since it involves minimizing a

linear cost function over the polytope

.

B. LP Relaxation

B. ML Decoding

Given the received word , the ML decoding problem is to

find the codeword that maximizes

. It is equivalent to

minimizing the negative log-likelihood, which we will call our

cost function. Using our assumptions on the channel, this cost

function can be written as

, where

The most common practical method for solving a linear program is the simplex algorithm [23], which generally requires an explicit representation of the constraints. In the LP formulation of exact ML decoding we have just described, although can be characterized by a finite number of linear constraints, the number of constraints is exponential in the code length . Even the Ellipsoid algorithm [24], which does not require such

an explicit representation, is not useful in this case, since ML

(3) decoding is NP-hard in general [25].

Therefore, our strategy will be to formulate a relaxed poly-

is the (known) negative log-likelihood ratio (LLR) at each vari- tope, one that contains all the codewords, but has a more man-

able node. For example, given a BSC with crossover probability ageable representation. More concretely, we motivate our LP

, we set

if the received bit

, and relaxation with the following observation. Each check node in a

if

. The interpretation of is the factor graph defines a local code; i.e., the set of binary vectors

“cost” of decoding

. Note that this cost may be negative, that have even weight on its neighborhood variables. The global

if decoding to is the “better choice.”

code corresponds to the intersection of all the local codes. In LP

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:56:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FELDMAN et al.: USING LINEAR PROGRAMMING TO DECODE BINARY LINEAR CODES

957

terminology, each check node defines a local codeword polytope

(meaning the set of convex combinations of local codewords),

and our global relaxation polytope will be the intersection of all

of these polytopes.

We use the variables

to denote our code bits.

Naturally, we have

(4)

To define a local codeword polytope, we consider the set of

variable nodes

that are neighbors of a given check node

. Of interest are subsets

that contain an even

number of variable nodes; each such subset corresponds to a

local codeword set, defined by setting

for each index

,

for each

but , and setting all other

arbitrarily.

For each in the set

even , we

introduce an auxiliary LP variable , which is an indicator

for the local codeword set associated with —notionally, setting

equal to indicates that is the set of bits of

that

are set to . Note that the variable is also present for each

parity check, and it represents setting all variables in equal

to zero.

As indicator variables, the variables

must satisfy the

constraints

(5)

The variable can also be seen as indicating that the codeword “satisfies” check using the configuration . Since each parity check is satisfied with one particular even-sized subset of nodes in its neighborhood set to one, we may enforce
(6)

as a constraint that is satisfied by every codeword. Finally, the indicator at each variable node must belong to the local codeword polytope associated with check node . This leads to the constraint
(7)

Let the polytope be the set of points

such that (4)–(7)

hold for check node . Let

be the intersection of

these polytopes; i.e., the set of points

such that (4)–(7)

hold for all

. Overall, the Linear Code Linear Program

(LCLP) corresponds to the problem

minimize

s.t.

(8)

An integral point in a polytope (also referred to as an integral solution to a linear program) is a point in the polytope whose values are all integers. We begin by observing that there is a one-to-one correspondence between codewords and integral solutions to LCLP.

Proposition 1: For all integral points

, the se-

quence

represents a codeword. Furthermore, for all

codewords

, there exists a such that

is

an integral point in where

for all .

Proof: Suppose

is a point in where all

and all

. Now suppose

is not a

codeword, and let be some parity check unsatisfied by setting

for all . By the constraints (6), and the fact that

is integral,

for some

, and

for all

other

where

. By the constraints (7), we have

for all , and

for all

, . Since

is even, is satisfied by setting

, a contradiction.

For the second part of the claim, let

be a code-

word, and let

. For all

, let be the set of nodes

in

where

. Since

is a codeword,

check is satisfied by , so is even, and the variable is

present. Set

and

for all other

. All

constraints are satisfied, and all variables are integral.

Overall, the decoding algorithm based on LCLP consists

of the following steps. We first solve the LP in (8) to obtain

. If

, we output it as the optimal code-

word; otherwise, is fractional, and we output an “error.”

From Proposition 1, we get the following.

Proposition 2: LP decoding has the ML certificate property:

if the algorithm outputs a codeword, it is guaranteed to be the

ML codeword.

Proof: If the algorithm outputs a codeword , then

has cost less than or equal to all points in . For some codeword

, we have that

is a point in by Proposition 1.

Therefore, has cost less than or equal to .

Given a cycle-free factor graph, it can be shown that any op-

timal solution to LCLP is integral [26]. Therefore, LCLP is an

exact formulation of the ML decoding problem in the cycle-free

case. In contrast, for a factor graph with cycles, the optimal solu-

tion to LCLP may not be integral. Take, for example, the Ham-

ming code in Fig. 1. Suppose that we define a cost vector as

follows: for variable node , set

, and for all other

nodes

, set

. It is not hard to verify that

under this cost function, all codewords have nonnegative cost:

any codeword with negative cost would have to set

, and

therefore set at least two other

, for a total cost of at least

. Consider, however, the following fractional solution to

LCLP: first, set

and then for check

node , set

; at check node , as-

sign

; and lastly at check node , set

. It can be verified that

satisfies

all of the LCLP constraints. However, the cost of this solution

is , which is strictly less than the cost of any codeword.

Note that this solution is not a convex combination of code-

words, and so is not contained in

. This solution gets

outside of

by exploiting the local perspective of the re-

laxation: check node is satisfied by using the configuration

, whereas in check node , the configuration

is not

used. The analysis to follow will provide further insight into the

nature of such fractional (i.e., nonintegral) solutions to LCLP.

It is worthwhile noting that the local codeword constraints (7)

are identical to those enforced in the Bethe free energy formu-

lation of BP [27]. For this reason, it is not surprising that the

performance of our LP decoder turns out to be closely related to

that of the BP and min-sum algorithms.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:56:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

958

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 3, MARCH 2005

C. LP Solving and Polytope Representations

The efficiency of practical LP solvers depends on how the

LP is represented. An LP is defined by a set of variables, a

cost function, and a polytope (set of linear constraints). The

ellipsoid algorithm is guaranteed to run in time polynomial in

the size of the LP representation, which is proportional to the

number of variables and constraints. The simplex algorithm,

though not guaranteed to run efficiently in the worst case, still

has a dependence on the representation size, and is usually

much more efficient than the ellipsoid algorithm. For more de-

tails on solving linear programs, we refer the reader to standard

texts [28], [23].

The polytope described by (4)–(7) is the most intuitive

form of the relaxation. For LDPC codes, has size linear in

. Thus, the ellipsoid algorithm is provably efficient, and we

can also reasonably expect the simplex algorithm to be even

more efficient in practice. For arbitrary binary linear codes, the

number of constraints in is exponential in the degree of each

check node. So, if some check node has degree

(as one

would expect in random codes, for example), the polytope has

a number of constraints that is exponential in . Therefore, to

solve efficiently, we need to define a smaller polytope that

produces the same results.

Alternative representations of the LP are useful for analytical

purposes as well. We will see this when we discuss fractional

distance in Section VI.

1) Polytope Equivalence: All the polytopes we use in this

paper have variables for all . They may also involve aux-

iliary variables, such as the

variables in the description

of . However, if two polytopes share the same set of possible

settings to the variables, then we may use either one. We

formalize this notion.

Definition 3: Let be some polytope defined over variables

where

, as well as some auxiliary variables

. We define

s.t.

as the projection of onto the we say is equivalent to if

variables. Given such a ,


 Q Fig. 2. The equivalence of the polytopes and in three dimensions. 
 l The polytope is defined as the set of points inside the unit hypercube with Q distance at least one from all odd-weight hypercube vertices. The polytope
is the convex hull of even-weight hypercube vertices.
. Then, for every check , we explicitly forbid every bad configuration of the neighborhood of . Specifically, for all
, odd, we require
(9)

Note that the integral settings of the bits that satisfy these con-

straints for some check are exactly the local codewords for ,

as before.

Let be the set of points that satisfy (9) for a particular

check , and all

with odd. We can further under-

stand the constraints in by rewriting (9) as follows:

(10)

In other words, the distance between (the relevant portion of)

and and the incidence vector for each set is at least one. This

constraint ensures that is separated by at least one bit flip from

all illegal configurations. In three dimensions (i.e,

),

it is easy to see that these constraints are equivalent to the convex

hull of the even-sized subsets

, as shown in Fig. 2. In

fact, the following theorem states that in general, if we enforce

(9) for all checks, we get an explicit description of .

Theorem 4: Let the polytope

. Then and are

equivalent. In other words, the polytope

s.t.

In other words, we require that the projections of and onto the variables are the same. Since the objective function of LCLP only involves the variables, optimizing over and
will produce the same result.
In the remainder of this section we define two new polytopes.

is exactly the set of points that satisfy (9) for all checks and

all

where odd.

Proof: Recall that is the set of points

that satisfy

the local codeword polytope for check . Consider the projection

The first is an explicit description of that will be useful for

s.t.

defining (and computing) the fractional distance of the code, which we cover in Section VI. The second polytope is equivalent In other words, to , but has a small overall representation, even for high-den- defined by sets

is the convex hull of local codeword sets

. Note that

, since each

sity codes. This equivalence shows that LCLP can be solved ef-

exactly expresses the constraints associated with check .

ficiently for any binary linear code.

Recall that is the set of points that satisfy the constraints

2) Projected Polytope: In this subsection, we derive an ex- (9) for a particular check . Since

, it suffices to

plicit description of the polytope . The following definition of show

for all

. This is shown by Jeroslow [29].

in terms of constraints on was derived from the parity poly- For completeness, we include a proof of this fact in Appendix I.

tope of Jeroslow [29], [30]. We first enforce

for all

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:56:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FELDMAN et al.: USING LINEAR PROGRAMMING TO DECODE BINARY LINEAR CODES

959

3) High-Density Code Polytope: Recall that is the max- A. The All-Zeros Assumption

imum degree of any check node in the graph. As stated, LCLP

has

variables and constraints. For turbo and LDPC

codes, this complexity is linear in , since is constant.

For arbitrary binary linear codes, we give a characterization

of LCLP with

When analyzing linear codes, it is common to assume that the codeword sent over the channel is the all-zeros vector (i.e.,
), since it tends to simplify analysis. In the context of our LP relaxation, however, the validity of this assumption is not immediately clear. In this section, we prove that one can make

the all-zeros assumption when analyzing LCLP. Basically, this

variables and constraints. To derive this characterization, we give a new polytope for each local codeword polytope, based on a construction of Yannakakis [30], whose size does not have an exponential dependence on the size of the check neighborhood. We refer to this representation of the polytope as . The

follows from the fact that the polytope is highly symmetric; from any codeword, the polytope “looks” exactly the same.
Theorem 6: The probability that the LP decoder fails is independent of the codeword that was transmitted.
Proof: See Appendix III.

details of this representation, as well as a proof that and are From this point forward in our analysis of LP decoding, we

equivalent, can be found in Appendix II.

assume that the all-zeros codeword was the transmitted code-

IV. ANALYSIS OF LP DECODING

word. Since the all-zeros codeword has zero cost, Theorem 5, along with our consideration of multiple LP optima as “failure,”

When using the LP decoding method, an error can arise in one gives the following.

of two ways. Either the LP optimum is not integral, in which case the algorithm outputs “error”; or, the LP optimum may be integral (and therefore corresponds to the ML codeword), but the ML codeword is not what was transmitted. In this latter case, the code itself has failed, so even exact ML decoding would

Corollary 7: Given that the all-zeros codeword was transmitted (which we may assume by Theorem 6), the LP decoder will fail if and only if there is some point in other than
with cost less than or equal to zero.

make an error.

We use the notation

to denote the probability that

the LP decoder makes an error, given that was transmitted. By

Proposition 1, there is some feasible solution

to LCLP

V. PSEUDOCODEWORDS

corresponding to the transmitted codeword . We can charac- In this section, we introduce the concept of a pseudocodeword

terize the conditions under which LP decoding will succeed as for LP decoding, which we will define as a scaled version of a

follows.

solution to LCLP. As a consequence, Theorem 5 will hold for

Theorem 5: Suppose the codeword is transmitted. If all fea-

sible solutions to LCLP other than

have cost more than

the cost of

, the LCLP decoder succeeds. If some solu-

tion to LCLP has cost less than the cost of

, the decoder

fails.

Proof: By Proposition 1,

is a feasible solution to

LCLP. If all feasible solutions to LCLP other than

have

cost more than the cost of

, then

must be the

unique optimal solution to LCLP. Therefore, the decoder will

output , which is the transmitted codeword.

If some solution

to LCLP has cost less than the cost of

, then

is not an optimal solution to LCLP. Since

pseudocodewords in the same way that it holds for solutions to

LCLP.

The following definition of a codeword motivates the notion of a pseudocodeword. Recall that is the set of even-sized sub-

sets of the neighborhood of check node . Let

.

Let be a vector in

, and let be a setting of nonnegative

integer weights, one weight for each check and

.

We say that

is a codeword if, for all edges

in the

factor graph ,

. This corresponds ex-

actly to the consistency constraint (7) in LCLP. It is not difficult

to see that this construction guarantees that the binary vector

is always a codeword of the original code.

the variables do not affect the cost of the solution, it must We obtain the definition of a pseudocodeword

by re-

be that

. Therefore, the decoder either outputs “error,” or moving the restriction

, and instead allowing each

it outputs , which is not the transmitted codeword.

to take on arbitrary nonnegative integer values. In other words,

In the degenerate case where

is one of multiple op-

tima of LCLP, the decoder may or may not succeed. We will be

conservative and consider this case to be decoding failure, and

so by Theorem 5

a pseudocodeword is a vector

of nonnegative

integers such that, for every parity check

, the neighbor-

hood

is a sum of local codewords (incidence

vectors of even-sized sets in ).

With this definition, any codeword is (trivially) a pseudocode-

word as well; moreover, any sum of codewords is a pseudocode-

word. However, in general, there exist pseudocodewords that (11) cannot be decomposed into a sum of codewords. As an illus-

tration, consider the Hamming code of Fig. 1; earlier, we con-

We now proceed to provide combinatorial characterizations of structed a fractional LCLP solution for this code. If we simply

decoding success and analyze the performance of LP decoding scale this fractional solution by a factor of two, the result is

in various settings.

a pseudocodeword

of the following form. We begin by

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:56:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

960

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 3, MARCH 2005

setting pseudocodeword, set

. To satisfy the constraints of a We refer to the set of copies of the variable node as

This pseudocodeword cannot be expressed as the sum of individual codewords.
In the following, we use the fact that all optimum points of a linear program with rational coefficients are themselves rational [23]. Using simple scaling arguments, and the all-zeros assumption, we can restate Corollary 7 in terms of pseudocodewords as follows.

Theorem 8: Given that the all-zeros codeword was trans-

mitted (which we may assume by Theorem 6), the LP decoder

will fail if and only if there is some pseudocodeword

,

, where

.

Proof: Suppose the decoder fails. Let

be the op-

timal point of the LP, the point in that minimizes

. By

Corollary 7,

. Construct a pseudocodeword

as follows. Let be the lowest common denominator of the

and , which exists because

is the optimal point of the

LP and all optimal points of the LP are rational. Then

is

an integer for all , and

is an integer for all for all

and sets

. For all bits , set

; for all

checks and sets

, set

.

By the constraints (7) of ,

meets the definition of a

pseudocodeword. The cost of

is exactly

. Since

, we have

. This implies that

. Since

and

, we see that

.

To establish the converse, suppose a pseudocodeword ,

, has

. Let

. We

construct a point

as follows: Set

for all

code bits . For all checks , do the following:

i) set ii) set

for all sets

;

.

We must handle as a special case since does not exist.

By construction, and the definition of a pseudocodeword,

meets all the constraints of the polytope . Since

, we

have

. The cost of

is exactly

. Since

, the point

has cost less than or equal to zero.

Therefore, by Corollary 7, the LP decoder fails.

This theorem will be essential in proving the equivalence to iterative decoding in the BEC in Section VII.

and the copies of the check node with label as

The edges of the graph are connected according to membership

in the sets . More precisely, consider an edge in . There

are copies of node in , i.e.,

. Now consider the

set of nodes in that are copies of check node labeled

with sets that include . In other words, the set

By the definition of a pseudocodeword

and so

In the pseudocodeword graph , connect the same-sized node

sets and using an arbitrary matching (one-to-one corre-

spondence). This process is repeated for every edge in .

Note that every check node in appears in exactly sets

, one for each

. Therefore, the neighbor set of any

node in consists of exactly one copy of each variable node

. Furthermore, every variable node in will be connected

to exactly one copy of each check node in . The cost of the

pseudocodeword graph is the sum of the costs of the variable

nodes in the graph, and is equal to the cost of the pseudocode-

word from which it was derived. Therefore, Theorem 8 holds

for pseudocodeword graphs as well.

Fig. 3 gives the graph of the pseudocodeword example given

earlier, and Fig. 4 gives the graph of a different more complex

pseudocodeword.

This graphical characterization of a pseudocodeword is es-

sential for proving our lower bound on the fractional distance.

Additionally, the pseudocodeword graph is helpful in making

connections with other notions of pseudocodewords in the liter-

ature. We discuss this further in Section VII.

A. Pseudocodeword Graphs

VI. FRACTIONAL DISTANCE

A codeword corresponds to a particular subgraph of the factor

graph . In particular, the vertex set of this subgraph consists

of all the variable nodes

for which

, as well as all

check nodes to which these variable nodes are incident.

Any pseudocodeword

can be associated with a graph

in an analogous way. The graph consists of the following

vertices.

• For all

, the graph contains copies of each

node .

• For all ,

, the graph contains copies of

each check node , with “label” .

A classical quantity associated with a code is its distance, which for a linear code is equal to the minimum weight of any nonzero codeword. In this section, we introduce a fractional analog of distance, and use it to prove additional results on the performance of LP decoding. Roughly speaking, the fractional distance is the minimum weight of any nonzero vertex of ; since all codewords are nonzero vertices of , the fractional distance is a lower bound on the true distance. This fractional distance has connections to the minimum weight of a pseudocodeword, as defined by Wiberg [4], and also studied by Forney et al. [6].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:56:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FELDMAN et al.: USING LINEAR PROGRAMMING TO DECODE BINARY LINEAR CODES

961

Fig. 3. The graph of a pseudocodeword for the (7; 4; 3) Hamming code. In this particular pseudocodeword, there are two copies of node 1, and also two copies of check A.

Theorem 9: For a code with fractional distance , the

LP decoder is successful if at most

bits are flipped

by the binary symmetric channel.

Proof: Suppose the LP decoder fails; i.e., the optimal so-

lution

to LCLP has

. We know that must be

a vertex of . Since

, we have

. This implies

that

, since the fractional distance is at least .

Let

be the set of bits flipped by the channel.

Under the BSC, and the all-zeros assumption, we have

if , and

if . Therefore, we can write the cost

of as the following:

(12)

Since at most have that

bits are flipped by the channel, we , and so

It follows that

since

. Therefore, by (12), we have

.

However, by Theorem 5 and the fact that the decoder failed, the

optimal solution

to LCLP must have cost less than or

Fig. 4. A graph H of the pseudocodeword [0; 1; 0; 1; 0; 2; 3] of the (7; 4; 3) Hamming code. The dotted circles show the original variable nodes i of the factor graph G, which are now sets Y of nodes in H. The dotted squares are original check nodes j in G, and contain sets C (shown with dashed lines)
for each S 2 E .

equal to zero; i.e.,

. This is a contradiction.

Note again the analogy to the classical case: just as exact ML decoding has a performance guarantee in terms of classical distance, Theorem 9 establishes that the LP decoder has a perfor-

mance guarantee specified by the fractional distance of the code.

A. Definitions and Basic Properties

Since there is a one-to-one correspondence between code- B. Computing the Fractional Distance

words and integral vertices of , the (classical) distance of the In contrast to the classical distance, the fractional distance of

code is equal to the minimum weight of a nonzero integral an LDPC code can be computed efficiently. Since the fractional

vertex in the polytope. However, the relaxed polytope may distance is a lower bound on the real distance, we thus have

have additional nonintegral vertices. In particular, our earlier ex- an efficient algorithm to give a nontrivial lower bound on the

ample with the Hamming code involved constructing precisely distance of an LDPC code.

such a fractional or nonintegral vertex.

To compute the fractional distance, we must compute the

As stated previously, any optimal solution

to LCLP minimum-weight vertex in . We first consider a more gen-

must be a vertex of . However, note that the objective func- eral problem: given the facets of a polytope over vertices

tion for LCLP only affects the variables

; as a con-

, a specified vertex of , and a linear function

sequence, the point must also be a vertex of the projection

, find the vertex in other than that minimizes .

. (In general, not all vertices of will be projected to vertices An efficient algorithm for this problem is the following: let be

of .)

the set of all facets of on which does not sit. Now for each

Therefore, we use the projected polytope in our definition facet in , intersect with the facet to obtain , and then opti-

of the fractional distance, since its vertices are exactly the set- mize over . The minimum value obtained over all facets

tings of that could be optimal solutions to LCLP. (Using in is the minimum of over all vertices other than .

would introduce “false” vertices that would be optimal points The running time of this algorithm is equal to the time taken by

only if the problem included costs on the

variables.)

calls to an LP solver.

For a point in , define the weight of to be , and let This algorithm is correct by the following argument. It is

be the set of nonzero vertices of . We define the fractional well known [23] that a vertex of a polytope of dimension is

distance of a code to be the minimum weight of any vertex in uniquely determined by giving linearly independent facets of

. Note that this fractional distance is always a lower bound the polytope on which the vertex sits. Using this fact, it is clear

on the classical distance of the code, since every nonzero code- that the vertex we are looking for must sit on some facet in

word is contained in . Moreover, the performance of LP de- ; otherwise, it would be the same point as . Therefore, at

coding is tied to this fractional distance, as we make precise in some point in our procedure, each potential is considered.

the following.

Furthermore, when we intersect with a facet of to obtain

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:56:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

962

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 3, MARCH 2005

Fig. 5. The average fractional distance d as a function of length for a randomly generated LDPC code, with left degree 3, right degree 4, from an
ensemble of Gallager [7].

0 Fig. 6. The classical versus fractional distance of the “normal realizations” of
the Reed–Muller(n 1, n) codes [31]. The classical distance of these codes is exactly n=2. The upper part of the fractional distance curve follows roughly
n.

we have that all vertices of are vertices of not equal to

. Therefore, the true will obtain the minimum value over

all facets in .

For our problem, we are interested in the polytope , and the

special vertex

. In order to run the above procedure,

we use the small explicit representation of given by (9) and

Theorem 4. The number of facets in this representation of has

an exponential dependence on the check degree of the code. For

an LDPC code, the number of facets will be linear in , so that

we can compute the exact fractional distance efficiently. For ar-

bitrary linear codes, we can still compute the minimum-weight

nonzero vertex of (from Section III-C), which provides a (pos-

sibly weaker) lower bound on the fractional distance. However,

this representation (given explicitly in Appendix II) introduces

many auxiliary variables, and therefore may have many “false”

vertices with low weight.

D. The Max-Fractional Distance In this subsection, we define another notion of fractional dis-
tance, which we call the max-fractional distance. This is simply the fractional distance, normalized by the maximum value. We can also show that the LP decoder corrects up to half the max-fractional distance. Furthermore, we prove in the next section that the max-fractional distance grows exponentially in the girth of .
We define the max-fractional distance of the code using polytope as
Using essentially the same proof as for Theorem 9, we obtain the following.

C. Experiments

Theorem 10: For a code with max-fractional distance

Fig. 5 gives the average fractional distance of a randomly

, the LP decoder is successful if at most

bits

chosen LDPC factor graph, computed using the algorithm we are flipped by the binary-symmetric channel.

just described. The graph has left degree , right degree , and is randomly chosen from an ensemble of Gallager [7]. This data is insufficient to extrapolate the growth rate of the fractional distance; however, it certainly grows nontrivially with the block length. We had conjectured that this growth rate could be made linear in the block length [17]; for the case of graphs with regular degree, this conjecture has since been disproved by Koetter and Vontobel [20].
Fig. 6 gives the fractional distance of the “normal realizations” of the Reed–Muller( , ) codes [31].1 These codes, well defined for lengths equal to a power of , have a classical distance of exactly . The curve in the figure suggests that the

The exact relationship between

and

is an inter-

esting question. Clearly,

in general, since

is always at most . In fact, we know that

,

which follows from the fact that for all

, there is some

for which

. (The proof of this fact comes from simple

scaling arguments.) Therefore, for LDPC codes, the two quan-

tities are the same up to a constant factor. We can compute the

max-fractional distance efficiently using an algorithm similar to

the one used for the fractional distance: we reduce the problem

of finding the point with the minimum to finding the min-

imum-weight point in a polytope.

fractional distance of these graphs is roughly

. Note that

for both these code families, there may be alternate realizations

(factor graphs) with better fractional distance.

E. A Lower Bound Using the Girth
The following theorem asserts that the max-fractional distance is exponential in the girth of . It is analogous to an ear-

lier result of Tanner [32], which provides a similar bound on the

1We thank G. David Forney for suggesting the study of the normal realizations classical distance of a code in terms of the girth of the associ-

of the Reed–Muller codes.

ated factor graph.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:56:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FELDMAN et al.: USING LINEAR PROGRAMMING TO DECODE BINARY LINEAR CODES

963

Theorem 11: Let be a factor graph with

and

.

Let be the girth of , . Then the max-fractional distance

is at least

.

This theorem is proved in Appendix IV, and makes heavy

use of the combinatorial properties of pseudocodewords. One

consequence of Theorem 11 is that the max-fractional distance

is at least

for some constant (where

),

for any graph with girth

. Note that there are many

known constructions of such graphs (e.g., [33]). Although The-

orem 11 does not yield a bound on the word error rate (WER)

for the BSC, it demonstrates that LP decoding can always cor-

rect

errors, for any code defined by a graph with loga-

rithmic girth.

VII. COMPARISON TO ITERATIVE DECODING
In this section, we draw several connections between LP decoding and iterative decoding for several code types and channel models. We show that many known combinatorial characterizations of decoding success are in fact special cases of our definition of a pseudocodeword. We discuss stopping sets in the BEC, cycle codes, tail-biting trellises, the tree-reweighted max-product algorithm of Wainwright et al. [26], and min-sum decoding.
At the end of the section, we give some experimental results comparing LP decoding with the min-sum and sum-product (BP) algorithms.

Theorem 12: Under the BEC, there is a nonzero pseudocode-

word with zero cost if and only if there is a stopping set. There-

fore, the performance of LP and BP decoding are equivalent for

the BEC.

Proof: If there is a zero-cost pseudocodeword, then

there is a stopping set. Let

be a pseudocodeword where

. Let

. Since all

, we must

have

for all ; therefore,

.

Suppose is not a stopping set; then

where check node has only one neighbor in . By the defi-

nition of a pseudocodeword, we have

.

Since

(by the definition of ), there must be some

,

such that

. Since has even cardi-

nality, there must be at least one other code bit in , which

is also a neighbor of check . We have

by the def-

inition of pseudocodeword, and so

, implying

.

This contradicts the fact that has only one neighbor in .

If there is a stopping set, then there is a zero-cost pseudocode-

word. Let be a stopping set. Construct pseudocodeword

as follows. For all , set

; for all , set

.

Since

, we immediately have

.

For a check , let

. For all

,

where

even, set

. By the definition of a stop-

ping set,

, so if

is odd, then

. For all

, where

odd, let

be an

arbitrary size- subset of . If

, set

.

Set

Set all other

that we have not set in this process. We have

for all

A. Stopping Sets in the BEC

In the BEC, bits are not flipped but rather erased. Conse-

quently, for each bit, the decoder receives either , , or an era-

sure. If either symbol or is received, then it must be correct.

On the other hand, if an erasure (which we denote by ) is re-

ceived, there is no information about that bit. It is well known

[3] that in the BEC, the iterative BP decoder fails if and only if

a “stopping set” exists among the erased bits. The main result

of this section is that stopping sets are the special case of pseu-

docodewords on the BEC, and so LP decoding exhibits the same

property.

We can model the BEC in LCLP with our cost function . As

in the BSC,

if the received bit

, and

if

. If

, we set

, since we have no informa-

tion about that bit. Note that under the all-zeros assumption, all

the costs are nonnegative, since no bits are flipped. Therefore,

Theorem 8 implies that the LP decoder will fail only if there is

a nonzero pseudocodeword with zero cost.

Let be the set of code bits erased by the channel. A subset

is a stopping set if all the checks in the neighborhood

of have degree at least two with respect to . In

the following statement, we have assumed that both the iterative

and the LCLP decoders fail when the answer is ambiguous. For

the iterative algorithm, this ambiguity corresponds to the exis-

tence of a stopping set; for the LCLP algorithm, it corresponds

to a nonzero pseudocodeword with zero cost, and hence mul-

tiple optima for the LP.

Additionally

for all

Therefore,

is a pseudocodeword.

B. Cycle Codes

A cycle code is a binary linear code described by a factor

graph whose variable nodes all have degree . In this case, pseu-

docodewords consist of a collection of cycle-like structures we

call promenades [1]. This structure is a closed walk through the

graph that is allowed to repeat nodes, and even traverse edges in

different directions, as long as it makes no “U-turns;” i.e., it does

not use the same edge twice in a row. Wiberg [4] calls these same

structures irreducible closed walks. We may conclude from this

connection that iterative and LP decoding have identical perfor-

mance in the case of cycle codes.

We note that even though cycle codes are poor in general,

they are an excellent example of when LP decoding can decode

beyond the minimum distance. For cycle codes, the minimum

distance is no better than logarithmic. However, we showed [1]

that there are cycle codes for which LP decoding has a WER of

for any

, requiring only that the crossover probability

is bounded by a certain function of the constant (independent

of ).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:56:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

964

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 3, MARCH 2005

C. Tail-Biting Trellises

On tail-biting trellises, one can write down a linear program

similar to the one we explored for turbo codes [1] such that pseu-

docodewords in this LP correspond to those analyzed by Forney

et al. [5]. This linear program is, in fact, an instance of network

flow, and therefore is solvable by a more efficient algorithm than

a generic LP solver. (See [17] for a general treatment of LPs for

trellis-based codes, including turbo-like codes.)

In this case, pseudocodewords correspond to cycles in a di-

rected graph (a circular trellis). All cycles in this graph have

length for some integer

. Codewords are simple cy-

cles of length exactly . Forney et al. [5] show that iterative

decoding will find the pseudocodeword with minimum weight-

per-symbol. Using basic network flow theory, it can be shown

that the weight-per-symbol of a pseudocodeword is the same as

the cost of the corresponding LP solution. Thus, these two algorithms have identical performance.
We note that to get this connection to tail-biting trellises, if the code has a factor graph representation, it is not sufficient

Fig. 7. A waterfall-region comparison between the performance of LP
decoding and min-sum decoding (with 100 iterations) under the BSC using the same random rate-1=2 LDPC code with length 200, left degree 3, and right degree 6. For each trial, both decoders were tested with the same channel
output. The “Both Error” curve represents the trials where both decoders failed.

simply to write down the factor graph for a code and plug in

the polytope . This would be a weaker relaxation in general. One has to define a new linear program like the one we used for turbo-like codes [1]. With this setup, the problem reduces directly to min-cost flow.

• each nonleaf variable node is connected to one copy of each check node in ; and
• each check node has even degree. As is clear from the definition, deviation sets are quite sim-

ilar to pseudocodeword graphs; essentially the only difference is

D. Tree-Reweighted Max-Product
In earlier work [2], we explored the connection between this LP-based approach applied to turbo codes, and the tree-reweighted max-product message-passing algorithm developed by Wainwright, Jaakkola, and Willsky [26]. Similar to the usual max-product (min-sum) algorithm, the algorithm is based on passing messages between nodes in the factor graph. It differs from the usual updates in that the messages are

that deviation sets are acyclic. In fact, if we removed the “nonleaf” condition above, the two would be equivalent. In his thesis, Wiberg states:
Since the (graph) is finite, an infinite deviation cannot behave completely irregularly; it must repeat itself somehow. … It appears natural to look for repeatable, or ’closed’ structures (in the graph)…, with the property that any deviation can be decomposed into such structures. [4]

suitably reweighted according the structure of the factor graph. By drawing a connection to the dual of our linear program, we showed that whenever this algorithm converges to a codeword, it must be the ML codeword. Note that the usual min-sum algorithm does not have such a guarantee.

Our definition of a pseudocodeword is the natural “closed” structure within a deviation set. However, an arbitrary deviation set cannot be decomposed into pseudocodewords, since it may be irregular near the leaves. Furthermore, as Wiberg points out, the cost of a deviation set is dominated by the cost near the

leaves, since the number of nodes grows exponentially with the

E. Min-Sum Decoding
The deviation sets defined by Wiberg [4], and further refined by Forney et al. [6] can be compared to pseudocodeword graphs. The computation tree of the iterative min-sum algorithm is a map of the computations that lead to the decoding of a single bit at the root of the tree. This bit will be decoded correctly (assuming the all-zeros word is sent) unless there is a negative-

depth of the tree. Thus, strictly speaking, min-sum decoding and LP decoding
are incomparable. However, experiments suggest that it is rare for min-sum decoding to succeed and LP decoding to fail (see Fig. 7). We also conclude from our experiments that the irregular “unclosed” portions of the min-sum computation tree are not worth considering; they more often hurt the decoder than help it.

cost locally consistent minimal configuration of the tree that sets F. New Iterative Algorithms and ML Certificates

this bit to . Such a configuration is called a deviation set, or a From the LP Dual

pseudocodeword. All deviation sets have a support, which is the set of nodes
in the configuration that are set to . All such supports are acyclic graphs of the following form. The nodes of are nodes from the factor graph, possibly with multiple copies of a node. Furthermore,

In earlier work [2], we described how the iterative subgradient ascent [34] algorithm can be used to solve the LP dual for RA codes. Thus, we have an iterative decoder whose error-correcting performance is identical to that of LP decoding in this case. This technique may also be applied in the general setting of LDPC codes [17]; thus, we have an iterative algorithm for any

• all the leaves of are variable nodes;

LDPC code with all the performance guarantees of LP decoding.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:56:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FELDMAN et al.: USING LINEAR PROGRAMMING TO DECODE BINARY LINEAR CODES

965

Fig. 8. A comparison between the performance of LP decoding, min-sum
decoding (100 iterations) and BP (100 iterations) under the BSC using the same random rate-1=4 LDPC code with length 200, left degree 3, and right degree 4.

Fig. 10. Error-correcting performance gained by adding a set of (redundant)
parity checks to the factor graph. The code is a randomly selected regular LDPC
code, with length 40, left degree 3, and right degree 4, from an ensemble of
Gallager [7]. The “First-Order Decoder” is the LP decoder using the polytope Q defined on the original factor graph. The “Second-Order Decoder” uses the polytope Q defined on the factor graph after adding a set of redundant parity checks; the set consists of all checks that are the sum (mod2) of two original
parity checks.

VIII. TIGHTER RELAXATIONS

It is important to observe that LCLP has been defined with

respect to a specific factor graph. Since a given code has

many such representations, there are many possible LP-based

relaxations, and some may be better than others. Of particular

significance is the fact that adding redundant parity checks to

the factor graph, though it does not affect the code, provides

new constraints for the LP relaxation, and will in general

strengthen it. For example, returning to the

Hamming

code of Fig. 1, suppose we add a new check node whose neigh-

Fig. 9. A comparison between the performance of ML decoding, LP decoding,
min-sum decoding (100 iterations), and BP (100 iterations) under the BSC using the same random rate-1=4 LDPC code with length 60, left degree 3, and right degree 4. The ML decoder is a mixed-integer programming decoder using the
LP relaxation.

borhood is

. This parity check is redundant for the

code, since it is simply the mod two sum of checks and .

However, the linear constraints added by this check tighten the

relaxation; in fact, they render our example pseudocodeword

infeasible. Whereas redundant

Furthermore, we show [17] that LP duality can be used to give constraints may degrade the performance of BP decoding (due

any iterative algorithm the ML certificate property; that is, we to the creation of small cycles), adding new constraints can

derive conditions under which the output of a message-passing only improve LP performance.

decoder is provably the ML codeword.

As an example, Fig. 10 shows the performance improvement

G. Experimental Comparison

achieved by adding all “second-order” parity checks to a factor graph . By second-order we mean all parity checks that are the

We have compared the performance of the LP decoder with sum of two original parity checks. A natural question is whether

the min-sum and sum-product decoders on the BSC. We used adding all redundant parity checks results in the codeword poly-

a randomly generated rate- LDPC code with left degree , tope

. This turns out not to be the case; the dual of the

and right degree . Fig. 8 shows an error-rate comparison in

Hamming code provides one counterexample.

the waterfall region for a block length of . We see that LP In addition to redundant parity checks, there are various

decoding performs better than min-sum in this region, but not generic ways in which an LP relaxation can be strengthened

as well as sum-product.

(e.g., [35], [36]). Such “lifting” techniques provide a nested

However, when we compare all three algorithms to ML de- sequence of relaxations increasing in both tightness and com-

coding, it seems that at least on random codes, all three have plexity, the last of which is equivalent to

(albeit with

similar performance. This is shown in Fig. 9. In fact, we see exponential complexity). Therefore, we obtain a sequence of

that LP decoding slightly outperforms sum-product at very low decoders, increasing in both performance and complexity, the

noise levels. It would be interesting to see whether this is a gen- last of which is an (intractable) ML decoder. It would be inter-

eral phenomenon, and whether it can be explained analytically. esting to analyze the rate of performance improvement along

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:56:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

966

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 3, MARCH 2005

Fig. 11. The WER of the lift-and-project relaxation compared with LP decoding and ML decoding.
this sequence. Fig. 11 shows the performance gained by one application of the “lift-and-project” [35] method on a random
LDPC code of length . Another interesting question is how complex a decoder is needed in order to surpass the performance of BP.
Finally, the fractional distance of a code, as defined here, is also a function of the factor graph representation of the code. Fractional distance yields a lower bound on the true distance, and the quality of this bound could also be improved by adding redundant constraints, or other methods of tightening the LP.

which corresponds to a rescaled solution of the LP relaxation. Our definition of pseudocodeword unifies previous work on iterative decoding (e.g., [5], [6], [4], [3]). We also introduced the fractional distance of a code, a quantity which shares the worst case error-correcting guarantees with the classical notion, but with an efficient algorithm to realize those guarantees.
There are a number of open questions and future directions suggested by the work presented in this paper, some of which we detail here. In an earlier version of this work [15], we had suggested using graph expansion to improve the performance bounds given here. This has been accomplished [18] to some degree, and we now know that LP decoding can correct a constant fraction of error. However, there is still work to be done in order to improve the constant to the level of the best known (e.g., on the Zyablov bound or beyond). We also know that LP decoding can achieve the capacity of many commonly considered channels [19]. It would be interesting to see if these methods can be extended to achieve capacity without an exponential dependence on the gap to capacity (all known capacity-achieving decoders also have this dependence).
Since turbo codes and “turbo-like” codes have much more efficient encoders than LDPC codes, it would be interesting to see if LP decoding can be used to obtain good performance bounds in this setting as well. In previous work on RA codes [1], we were able to prove a bound on the error rate of LP decoding stronger than that implied by the minimum distance. Analogous LP decoders for general “turbo-like” codes have also been given [17], but it remains to provide satisfying analysis of their performance.

A. ML Decoding Using Integer Programming

Another interesting application of LP decoding is to use the polytope to perform true ML decoding. An integer program

APPENDIX I PROVING THEOREM 4

(IP) is an optimization problem that allows integer constraints; Recall that is the set of points such that

for

that is, we may force variables to be integers. If we add the con- all

, and for all

, odd

straint

to our linear program, then we get an exact

formulation of ML decoding. In general, integer programming

(13)

is NP-hard, but there are various methods for solving an IP that far outperform the naive exhaustive search routines for ML de- To prove Theorem 4, it remains to show the following.

coding. Using the program CPLEX [37], we were able to perform ML decoding on LDPC codes with moderate block lengths (up to about 100) in a “reasonable” amount of time. Fig. 9 in-

Theorem 13: [29] The polytope s.t.

cludes an error curve for ML decoding an LDPC code with a block length of . Each trial took no more than a few seconds (and often much less) on a Pentium IV (2-GHz) processor.
Drawing this curve allows us to see the gap between various suboptimal algorithms and the optimal ML decoder. This gap further motivates the search for tighter LP relaxations to approach ML decoding. The running time of this decoder becomes prohibitive at longer block lengths; however, ML decoding at small block lengths can be very useful in evaluating algorithms, and determining whether decoding errors are the fault of the decoder or the code.

Proof: For all

, the variable is unconstrained

in both and (aside from the constraints

);

thus, we may ignore those indices, and assume that

.

(We henceforth use to denote

.)

Let be a point in . By the constraints (6) and (7), is the

convex hull of the incidence vectors of even-sized sets

.

Since all such vectors satisfy the constraints (13) for check node

, then must also satisfy these constraints. Therefore,

.

For the other direction, suppose some point

is not

contained in . Then some facet of cuts (makes it

infeasible). Since

for all , it must be the case

IX. DISCUSSION

that passes through the hypercube

, and so it must cut

off some vertex of the hypercube; i.e., some

. Since

We have described an LP-based decoding method, and proved all incidence vectors of even-sized sets are feasible for , the

a number of results on its error-correcting performance. Cen- vertex must be the incidence vector for some odd-sized set

tral to this characterization is the notion of a pseudocodeword,

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:56:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FELDMAN et al.: USING LINEAR PROGRAMMING TO DECODE BINARY LINEAR CODES

967

For a particular

, let

if

,

and

if

. We specify the facet in terms of the

variables , using the equation

Since is infeasible for , it must be that

. Since

for all

, we have

, so we may

conclude that

.

For some

, let denote vector with bit flipped;

i.e.,

and

for all . Since has odd

parity, we have that for all , has even parity, so

,

and is not cut by . This implies that for all

• For all

and

, we have a variable ,

. This variable indicates the contribution

of weight- local codewords.

• For all

,

, and

, we have a variable

,

, indicating the portion of

locally assigned to local codewords of weight .

Using these variables, we have the following constraint set:

(14)

(15)

(16)

Note that

for all

, and

So, we may conclude

, for all

.

Except for the case

, the polytope is full-dimen-

sional. For example, the set of points with exactly two (cycli-

cally) consecutive ’s is a full-dimensional set. (For a full proof,

see [29]). Therefore, must pass through vertices of ; i.e.,

it must pass through at least even-parity binary vectors. This

claim is still true for the case

, since both faces in this case

pass through both points.

We claim that those vectors must be the points

. Suppose this is not the case. Then some vertex of

is on the facet , and differs from in more than one place.

Suppose without loss of generality (w.l.o.g.) that

and

, and so

,

. Since is on , we have

. Therefore,

(17)

(18)

(19)

Let be the set of points

such that the above

constraints hold. This polytope has only

vari-

ables per check node , plus the variables, for a total of

variables. The number of constraints is at

most

. In total, this representation has at

most

variables and constraints. We must now show that

optimizing over is equivalent to optimizing over . Since

the cost function only affects the variables, it suffices to

show that the two polytopes have the same projection onto the

variables. Before proving this, we need the following fact.

Lemma 14: Let

,

, and

, where , , , and all are nonnegative integers. Then,

can be expressed as the sum of sets of size . Specifically,

there exists a setting of the variables

Since

, we have

, and so

This contradicts the fact that

.

Thus, passes through the vertices

. It is

not hard to see that is exactly the odd-set constraint (13) cor-

responding to the set for which is the incidence vector.

Since cuts , and is a facet of , we have

,a

contradiction.

to nonnegative integers such that

, and for all

,

.

Proof: By induction on .2 The base case

is

simple; all are equal to either or , and so exactly of them

are equal to . Set

.

For the induction step, assume w.l.o.g. that

. Set

, where

if , and

otherwise. The fact that

and

for all

implies that

for all , and

for all .

Therefore,

for all . We also have

APPENDIX II HIGH-DENSITY POLYTOPE REPRESENTATION

In this appendix, we give a polytope of for use in LCLP

with

variables and con-

straints. This polytope provides an efficient way to perform LP

decoding for any binary linear code. This polytope was derived

from the “parity polytope” of Yannakakis [30].

For a check node

, let

be the set of even numbers between and

. Our new rep-

resentation has three sets of variables.

Therefore, by induction, can be expressed as the sum of ,

where has size . Set

, then increase

by .

This setting of expresses .

Proposition 15: The set

is

equal to the set

s.t.

. Therefore,

optimizing over is equivalent to optimizing over .

Proof: Suppose

. Set

(20)

• For all

, we have a variable , where

This variable represents the code bit , as before.

.
2We thank Ryan O’Donnell for showing us this proof.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:56:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

968

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 3, MARCH 2005

(21)

It is clear that the constraints (17)–(19) are satisfied by this set-

ting. Constraint (14) is implied by (7) and (21). Constraint (15)

is implied by (6) and (20). Finally, we have, for all

,

(by (21))

APPENDIX III PROVING THEOREM 6

In this appendix, we show that the all-zeros assumption is valid when analyzing LP decoders defined on factor graphs. Specifically, we prove the following theorem.

Theorem 6: The probability that the LP decoder fails is in-

dependent of the codeword that was transmitted.

Proof: Recall that

is the probability that the

LP decoder makes an error, given that was transmitted. For an

arbitrary transmitted word , we need to show that

(by (20))

giving constraint (16).

Now suppose

is a vertex of the polytope , and so

all variables are rational. For all

,

, consider the set

By (19), all members of are between and . Let be a common divisor of the numbers in such that is an integer. Let

Define

to be the set of received words that

would cause decoding failure, assuming was transmitted. By

Theorem 5

Note that in the above, the cost vector is a function of the received word . Rewriting (11), we have for all codewords
(24)
Applying this to the codeword , we get (25)

The set consists of integers between and . By (16), we

have that the sum of the elements in is equal to . So, by

Lemma 14, the set can be expressed as the sum of sets of

size . Set the variables

according to

Lemma 14. Now set

, for all

.

We immediately satisfy (5). By Lemma 14 we get

(22)

and By (14), we have

(23) (by (22))

We will show that the space of possible received vectors

can be partitioned into pairs

such that

and

if and only if

and (25), gives

. This, along with (24)

The partition is performed according to the symmetry of the

channel. Fix some received vector . Define as follows: let

if

, and

if

, where is the

symmetric symbol to in the channel. Note that this operation

is its own inverse and therefore gives a valid partition of into

pairs.

First, we show that

. From the

channel being memoryless, we have

giving (7). By (15), we have

(by (23))

0

1

(26)

0

1

(27)

0

1

0

1

giving (6). Since this construction works for all vertices of ,

the projection of any point in onto the variables must be Equations (26) and (28) follow from the definition of

in

s.t.

.

(27) follows from the symmetry of the channel.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:56:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(28) , and

FELDMAN et al.: USING LINEAR PROGRAMMING TO DECODE BINARY LINEAR CODES

969

Now it remains to show that

if and only if

. Let be the cost vector when is received, and let

be the cost vector when is received, as defined in (3).

Suppose

. Then,

, and so

. Now

suppose

; then

, and so

Lemma 17: For a feasible solution

to LCLP, the rela-

tive solution

with respect to

is also a feasible

solution to LCLP.

Proof: First consider the bounds on the variables (see (4)

and (5)). These are satisfied by definition of

, and the

fact that both

and

are feasible. Now consider the

distribution constraints (6). From the feasibility of

and

the definition of we have, for all checks

(31)

(29)

Equation (29) follows from the symmetry of the channel. We conclude that

and

if

(30)

The following lemma shows a correspondence between the points of under cost function , and the points of under cost function .

Lemma 16: Fix some codeword . For every

,

, there is some

,

, such that

where is defined as in the definition of . Note that

so we get

, satisfying the distribution

constraints.

It remains to show that

satisfies the consistency con-

straints (7). In the following, we assume that sets are con-

tained within the appropriate set , which will be clear from

context. For all edges in , we have

(32)

Furthermore, for every

,

,

, such that

, there is some

• Case 1:

. In this case, from (32) we have

The last step follows from the fact that

We prove this lemma later in this section. Now suppose

, and so by the definition of there is some

,

where

as long as

.

• Case 2:

. From (32), we have

By Lemma 16, there is some

,

, such that

The last step follows from the fact that

(by (31)) (33)

as long as

Therefore,

. A symmetric argument (using the other

, we get

half of the lemma) shows that if

then

.

. Finally, from the distribution constraints on , and therefore, by (33),

Before proving Lemma 16, we need to define the notion of a relative solution in , and prove results about its feasibility and

cost. For two sets and , let

denote the symmetric

difference of and , i.e.,

. Let Lemma 18: Given a point

be the point in LCLP corresponding to the codeword tion

, we have

, and its relative solu-

sent over the channel. For a particular feasible solution

to LCLP, set

to be the relative solution with respect to

as follows: For all bits , set checks , let be the member of where

. For all . For all

Proof: From the definition of , we have

, set

.

Note that for a fixed

, the operation of making a rel-

ative solution is its own inverse; i.e., the relative solution to

is

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:56:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

970

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 3, MARCH 2005

Using (30), we get

Recall that and

represent the sets of variable and

check nodes in that are copies of the same node in the un-

derlying factor graph . For a variable node

, let

be the corresponding node in ; i.e.,

if

is a variable node, and (

for some

)

if is a check node.

Claim 19: For all promenades of length less than the girth

of , is a simple path in , and also represents a simple path

The lemma follows from the fact that

.

in . More precisely, for all promenades

We are now ready to prove Lemma 16, which completes the proof of Theorem 6. We restate the lemma here for reference.

Lemma 16: Fix some codeword . For every

, there is some

,

, such that

, is a simple path in , and that

Furthermore, for every

,

,

, such that

, there is some

Proof: Consider some

, and let

be

the relative solution with respect to

. By Lemma 17,

. By definition,

, since

. By Lemma

18

is a simple path in .

Proof: First note that

is a valid path. By construc-

tion, if there is an edge

in , there must be an edge

in . If

is simple, then must be

simple, so we only need to show that

is simple. This is

true since the length of

is less than the girth of the graph.

For the remainder of this appendix, suppose w.l.o.g. that

. Thus,

. Note that is even, since is

bipartite. For all

, let be the set of nodes in

within distance

of ; i.e., is the set of nodes

with a path in of length at most

from .

For the second part of the lemma, consider some

, and let

be the relative solution with respect to . By

Lemma 17,

. By definition,

, since

.

Because the operation of making a relative solution is its own

inverse, the relative solution to

is

. Therefore, by

Claim 20: The subgraph induced by the node set is a tree.

Proof: Suppose this is not the case. Then, for some node

in

, there are at least two different paths from to ,

each with length at most

. This implies a cycle in

of length less than ; a contradiction to Claim 19.

Lemma 18

Claim 21: The node subsets

in are all mu-

tually disjoint.

Proof: Suppose this is not the case; then, for some ,

and share at least one vertex. Let be the vertex in

closest to the root that also appears in . Now consider

APPENDIX IV PROVING THEOREM 11

Before proving Theorem 11, we will prove a few useful facts

about pseudocodewords and pseudocodeword graphs. For all

the theorems in this section, let be a factor graph with all

variable nodes having degree at least , where

and all

check nodes having degree at least , where

. Let

be the girth of ,

. Let be the graph of some arbitrary

pseudocodeword

of ,

.

We define a promenade to be a path

the promenade

, where the

subpath from to is the unique such path in the tree ,

and the subpath from to

is the unique such path in the

tree . We must show that has no U-turns. The subpaths

and

are simple, so we must

show only that

. Since we chose to be the node closest

to that appears in , must not appear in , and so

. Since

,

must be simple path by Claim

19. However, it is not, since node appears twice in , once

at the beginning and once at the end. This is a contradiction.

in that may repeat nodes and edges, but takes no U-turns; i.e., Claim 22: The number of variable nodes in is at least

for all ,

,

. We will also use to

.

represent the set of nodes on the path (the particular use will

Proof: Take one node set . We will count the number

be clear from context). Note that each could be a variable or a of nodes on each “level” of the tree induced by . Each level

check node. These paths are similar to the notion of promenade consists of all the nodes at distance from . Note that

in [1], and to the irreducible closed walk of Wiberg [4]. A simple even levels contain variable nodes, and odd levels contain check

path of a graph is one that does not repeat nodes.

nodes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:56:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FELDMAN et al.: USING LINEAR PROGRAMMING TO DECODE BINARY LINEAR CODES

971

Consider a variable node on an even level. All variable

REFERENCES

nodes in are incident to at least other nodes, by the con-

struction of . Therefore, has at least

children

in the tree on the next level. Now consider a check node on an

odd level; check nodes are each incident to at least two nodes,

so this check node has at least one child on the next level.

Thus, the tree expands by a factor of at least

from an even to an odd level. From an odd to an even level, it

may not expand, but it does not contract. The final level of the

tree is level

, and thus, the final even level is level

. By the expansion properties we showed, this

level (and, therefore, the tree ) must contain at least

variable nodes.

By Claim 21, each tree is independent, so the number of vari-

able nodes in is at least

.

Theorem 11: Let be a factor graph with

and

. Let be the girth of ,

. Then the max-fractional

distance is at least

.

Proof: Let

be an arbitrary vertex in . Construct

a pseudocodeword

from

as in Lemma 8; i.e., let

be an integer such that is an integer for all bits , and

is an integer for all for all checks and sets

. Such

an integer exists because

is a vertex of , and therefore

rational [23]. For all bits , set

; for all checks and

sets

, set

.

Let be a graph of the pseudocodeword

, as defined

in Section V-A. By Lemma 22, has at least

variable nodes. Since the number of variable nodes is equal to , we have
(34)

Recall that

. Substituting into (34), we have

It follows that

This argument holds for an arbitrary . Therefore.

where

[1] J. Feldman and D. R. Karger, “Decoding turbo-like codes via linear programming,” in Proc. 43rd Annu. IEEE Symp. Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), Vancouver, BC, Canada, Nov. 2002, pp. 251–260.
[2] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. R. Karger, “Linear programming-based decoding of turbo-like codes and its relation to iterative approaches,” in Proc. Allerton Conf. Communications, Control and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2002.
[3] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. E. Telatar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[4] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden, 1996.
[5] G. D. Forney, F. R. Kschischang, B. Marcus, and S. Tuncel, “Iterative decoding of tail-biting trellises and connections with symbolic dynamics,” in Codes, Systems and Graphical Models. New York: Springer-Verlag, 2001, pp. 239–241.
[6] G. D. Forney, R. Koetter, F. R. Kschischang, and A. Reznik, “On the effective weights of pseudocodewords for codes defined on graphs with cycles,” in Codes, Systems and Graphical Models. New York: Springer-Verlag, 2001, pp. 101–112.
[7] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[8] D. MacKay, “Good error correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[9] M. Sipser and D. Spielman, “Expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1710–1722, Nov. 1996.
[10] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[11] R. McEliece, D. MacKay, and J. Cheng, “Turbo decoding as an instance of Pearl’s belief propagation algorithm,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 140–152, Feb. 1998.
[12] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[13] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs and belief propagation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Cambridge, MA, Oct. 1998, p. 117.
[14] B. J. Frey, R. Koetter, and A. Vardy, “Signal-space characterization of iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 766–781, Feb. 2001.
[15] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. R. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode linear codes,” presented at the 37th Annu. Conf. on Information Sciences and Systems (CISS ’03), Baltimore, MD, Mar. 2003.
[16] J. Feldman, D. R. Karger, and M. J. Wainwright, “LP decoding,” in Proc. 41st Annu. Allerton Conf. Communications, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2003.
[17] J. Feldman, “Decoding error-correcting codes via linear programming,” Ph.D. dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, MA, 2003.
[18] J. Feldman, T. Malkin, R. A. Servedio, C. Stein, and M. J. Wainwright, “LP decoding corrects a constant fraction of errors,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Chicago, IL, Jun./Jul. 2004, p. 68.
[19] J. Feldman and C. Stein, “LP decoding achieves capacity,” in Proc. Symp. Discrete Algorithms (SODA ’05), Vancouver, BC, Canada, Jan. 2005.
[20] R. Koetter and P. O. Vontobel, “Graph-covers and iterative decoding of finite length codes,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, Brest, France, Sep. 2003, pp. 75–82.
[21] P. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “On the relationship between linear programming decoding and max-product decoding,” paper submitted to Int. Symp. Information Theory and its Applications, Parma, Italy, Oct. 2004.
[22] , “Lower bounds on the minimum pseudo-weight of linear codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Chicago, IL, Jun./Jul. 2004, p. 70.
[23] A. Schrijver, Theory of Linear and Integer Programming. New York: Wiley, 1987.
[24] M. Grotschel, L. Lovász, and A. Schrijver, “The ellipsoid method and its consequences in combinatorial optimization,” Combinatorica, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 169–197, 1981.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:56:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

972

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 3, MARCH 2005

[25] E. Berlekamp, R. J. McEliece, and H. van Tilborg, “On the inherent intractability of certain coding problems,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-24, no. 3, pp. 384–386, May 1978.
[26] M. J. Wainwright, T. S. Jaakkola, and A. S. Willsky, “MAP estimation via agreement on (hyper)trees: Message-passing and linear programming approaches,” in Proc. 40th Annu. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2002.
[27] J. S. Yedidia, W. T. Freeman, and Y. Weiss, “Understanding Belief Propagation and its Generalizations,” Mitsubishi Electric Res. Labs, Tech. Rep. TR2001-22, 2002.
[28] D. Bertsimas and J. Tsitsiklis, Introduction to Linear Optimization. Belmont, MA: Athena Scientific, 1997.
[29] R. G. Jeroslow, “On defining sets of vertices of the hypercube by linear inequalities,” Discr. Math., vol. 11, pp. 119–124, 1975.
[30] M. Yannakakis, “Expressing combinatorial optimization problems by linear programs,” J. Comp. Syst. Sci., vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 441–466, 1991.
[31] G. D. Forney Jr., “Codes on graphs: Normal realizations,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 529–548, Feb. 2001.

[32] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[33] J. Rosenthal and P. O. Vontobel, “Constructions of LDPC codes using Ramanujan graphs and ideas from Margulis,” in Proc. 38th Annu. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2000, pp. 248–257.
[34] D. Bertsekas, Nonlinear Programming. Belmont, MA: Athena Scientific, 1995.
[35] L. Lovász and A. Schrijver, “Cones of matrices and set-functions and 0–1 optimization,” SIAM J. Optimiz., vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 166–190, 1991.
[36] H. D. Sherali and W. P. Adams, “A hierarchy of relaxations between the continuous and convex hull representations for zero-one programming problems,” SIAM J. Optimiz., vol. 3, pp. 411–430, 1990.
[37] User’s Manual for ILOG CPLEX, 7.1 ed., ILOG, Inc., Mountain View, CA, 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:56:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

