ICC 2022 - IEEE International Conference on Communications | 978-1-5386-8347-7/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICC45855.2022.9839059

Protograph-Based Raptor-Like LDPC Codes with Edge Addition for URLLC

Hyejin Ro Department of ICT Convergence System Engineering
Chonnam National University Gwangju, South Korea
Email: gpwlsehrehr@gmail.com

Hosung Park Department of Computer Engineering Department of ICT Convergence System Engineering
Chonnam National University Gwangju, South Korea Email: hpark1@jnu.ac.kr

Abstract—For ultra-reliable low-latency communications (URLLC), low error floors are required for channel codes. In this paper, we propose a method of adding some edges to the protograph of the protograph-based raptor-like (PBRL) lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes. The added edges play a role of boosting up the reliability of weak variable nodes so that the code with edge addition can achieve low error floors. The edge addition is applied to an instance of 5G new radio (NR) LDPC code and it is shown that the edge addition lowers the error floor of the 5G NR LDPC code. Since the edge addition does not change the existing edge connections in the protograph, an adaptive use with/without edge addition have an effect of implementing two PBRL LDPC codes for enhanced mobile broadband (eMBB) and URLLC in an efficient way while keeping the system compatible with the original PBRL LDPC code.
Index Terms—Edge addition, error floor, PBRL LDPC codes, protograph, ultra-reliable low-latency communications (URLLC)
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] became dominating channel codes for high-speed communications owing to excellent error-correcting performance and the inherent high parallelism in decoder implementation [2], [3]. Most practical LDPC codes are constructed based on protogaphs [4] because they give a simple description of codes and enable hardwarefriendly implementation. The Tanner graph of a protographbased LDPC code is generated by lifting a protograph, which means to copy the protograph several times and then permute the copied edges originated from a common edge. When cyclic permutations are used for lifting, the resulting codes become quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes [5].
Protograph-based raptor-like (PBRL) LDPC codes [6] provide a rate-compatible feature to adapt the channel coding to channel states. Without rate-compatibility, a lot of LDPC codes must be designed, stored, and implemented for all code rates whereas a PBRL LDPC code can implement various code rates alone by freely adjusting the number of parity bits. So they are suitable for wireless communication environments where the channel state changes fast. In addition, PBRL LDPC codes have good thresholds especially when a few variable nodes with high degrees are punctured. Owing to these advantages, PBRL LDPC codes are adopted in communications standards such as 5G new radio (NR) [7] and ATSC 3.0 [8].

The error-correcting performance of irregular LDPC codes are dominated by degree distributions. A PBRL LDPC code by nature includes many degree-1 variable nodes in the protograph to generate parity bits block by block for ratecompatibility. When the message part is carefully designed to include high-degree variable nodes, the code can have good thresholds in the existence of the degree-1 variable nodes [11]. By taking this strategy in design, most existing PBRL LDPC codes have been developed to have a good threshold and equivalently good waterfall performance.
As the importance of ultra-reliable low-latency communications (URLLC) is growing for 5G and beyond, it is necessary to develop rate-compatible codes with low error floors. Nonetheless, channel codes for URLLC are not discussed much and the current PBRL LDPC codes adopted in 5G NR have a target block error rate (BLER) up to 10−5. Recently, extreme URLLC (xURLLC) [12],[13] is discussed for 6G and beyond 5G and we need to consider much lower BLER than 10−5. Efficiently achieving such reliability by the aid of channel coding alone is challenging but an interesting and significant research topic for future wireless communications.
There have been some research works to construct PBRL LDPC codes for reliable communications. In [14], the authors proposed a class of PBRL LDPC codes with short length and fast convergence for URLLC in 5G. In the protographs, the connection degrees can be progressively optimized by the protograph-based extrinsic information transfer (PEXIT) analysis. In [15], the authors proposed a design method maximizing an upper bound of the minimum distance of QC LDPC codes to obtain good PBRL LDPC code families at short lengths for low BLER requirements. An equivalence between an integer linear program and the new design method is also established.
In this paper, we propose a method to add some edges to existing protographs of PBRL LDPC codes with good thresholds to achieve low error floors. We make the added edges connected to some degree-1 variable nodes properly selected from a protograph and do not change the existing edge connections in the protograph. This property ensures that the implementation of the encoder/decoder with edge addition requires a simple addition of logics to the encoder/decoder of the original PBRL LDPC codes. We propose algorithms to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:13:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
2930

determine the locations of added edges optimized for PBRL LDPC codes. It is shown that the resulting codes with a few edges added have lower error floors than the original PBRL LDPC codes.
From a perspective of the tradeoff between waterfall and error floor performances [9], [10], only one PBRL LDPC code is not easy to have good coding gains for various target BLER points, i.e., a high target BLER for eMBB‘and a low BLER for URLLC. So we need to implement two or more codes in a system to cover all target BLER points but this can increase the complexity of the system much. In the scenario of our edge addition, a main PBRL LDPC code is constructed to have a good threshold as normal and then a set of added edges are determined by the proposed construction algorithm to have low error floor. Then, the PBRL LDPC code with edge addition can effectively cover various target BLER points by using or not the edge addition adaptively to a given target BLER.

II. PBRL LDPC CODES

Protograph-based LDPC codes can be described with protographs in two ways: the Tanner graph representation and the protomatrix representation, where the protomatrix of a protograph is defined as the incidence matrix of the protograph. The protograph of a PBRL LDPC code consists of two parts. The first part is the protograph of a relatively simple precode which is called the highest-rate code (HRC). The second part is the protograph of an LT code [16] which is called the incremental redundancy code (IRC). The IRC includes degree-1 variable nodes and check nodes and they are connected each other one by one. The check nodes in the IRC are connected to the variable nodes of the HRC. The rate of the HRC becomes the upper limit on the rate of the PBRL LDPC code and the IRC provides a lower rate by transmitting a portion of degree-1 variable nodes.
Let PHRC and PIRC denote the protomatrices of the HRC and the IRC, respectively. The protomatrix of a PBRL LDPC code is expressed as

P=

PHRC PIRC

O I

,

(1)

where O is an all-zero matrix and I is an identity matrix. To strictly speaking, the protomatrix of the IRC must be [PIRC|I] but the connection of I is obvious so we simply use the notation in (1). To define the protograph of a PBRL LDPC code, it is enough to specify PHRC and PIRC. The identity matrix will be sometimes called the extension part of the code because the set of variable nodes are extended from PHRC one by one to form I.
Lifting is a process to obtain a Tanner graph of LDPC code by applying the copy-and-permutation operation to a protograph. The lift size is defined as the number of times to copy the protograph and denoted by z. In the protomatrix representation, each element of a protomatrix is replaced with a z × z permutation matrix, a sum of z × z permutation matrices, or a z × z zero matrix. In this paper, we consider

only cyclic permutations for lifting and the resulting PBRL LDPC codes alway become quasi-cyclic.
The degree-1 variable nodes in the IRC might result in poor error floors performance owing to a small minimum Hamming distance. Thus, replacing the identity matrix in (1) with any lower triangular matrix could be seen as an effective way to avoid this but the PBRL LDPC code with the lower triangular matrix is again range-equivalent to a PBRL LDPC code with the identity matrix [6] so the identity matrix is not a problem for a small minimum distance by properly designing PIRC. The remaining concern is that the degree-1 variable nodes might introduce poor error floors under iterative decoding. It is observed in [17], [18] that this can be resolved by concatenation with the HRC. If we increase the degree of these variable nodes, small cycles can be generated after lifting and rather make a bad effect on the performance of iterative decoding.
In the protograph representation, the notations are defined as follows. A protograph is defined as a triple of sets of variable nodes, check nodes, and edges. The protographs corresponding to the protomatrices P, PHRC, and PIRC are denoted by P , P (HRC), and P (IRC), respectively. Let V (1) and V (2) denote the set of variable nodes in the HRC and the set of degree1 variable nodes, respectively, and let V = V (1) ∪ V (2). Let C(1) and C(2) denote the sets of check nodes in the HRC and the IRC, respectively, and let C = C(1) ∪ C(2). Let E(1), E(2), and E(3) denote the sets of edges between C(1) and V (1), between V (1) and C(2), and between C(2) and V (2), respectively, and let E = E(1) ∪ E(2) ∪ E(3). Then, we see P (HRC) = (V (1), C(1), E(1)), P (IRC) = (V (1), C(2), E(2)), and P = (V, C, E).
Let P (EXT) denote the extension part of the protograph and then we have P (EXT) = (V (2), C(2), E(3)). In the original form of PBRL LDPC codes in (1), P (EXT) just corresponds to the identity matrix I but we will propose the edge addition by modifying this part later. Reversely, the protomatrix expression of P (EXT) is denoted by P(EXT). Let λ, λ1, and λ2 denote the number of variable nodes in V , V (1), and V (2), respectively, and let ρ, ρ1, and ρ2 denote the number of check nodes in C, C(1), and C(2), respectively. That is, λ = |V |, λ1 = V (1) , λ2 = V (2) , ρ = |C|, ρ1 = C(1) , and ρ2 = C(2) . It is obvious that λ = λ1 + λ2, ρ = ρ1 + ρ2, and ρ2 = λ2. Accordingly, the sizes of protomatrices PHRC, PIRC, O, and I (or P(EXT)) become ρ1 × λ1, ρ2 × λ1, ρ1 × λ2, and ρ2 × λ2, respectively.
We will use lower case letters to denote every element in a set and let the superscript of the notation of elements inherit the superscript of the set. The subscript will designate the order of each element. For example, V (1) = v1(1), v2(1), . . . , vλ(11) .
III. EDGE ADDITION FOR PBRL LDPC CODES
A. Principles
We propose to put some edges on the lower triangular part of the matrix I in (1) and do not consider parallel edges in the lower triangular part. The rate-compatibility of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:13:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
2931

resulting PBRL LDPC code will be preserved if the identity matrix is replaced by a lower triangular matrix. According to [6], the resulting PBRL LDPC code with a lower triangular matrix is equivalent to a PBRL LDPC code with the identity matrix I and thus adding the edges in the lower triangular part corresponds to designing another conventional PBRL LDPC code in terms of code equivalence. However, the PBRL LDPC code with the edge addition is better than the two different PBRL LDPC codes in terms of code expression because the two codes with the former expression have nearly same description of code parameters and encoder/decoder structures. Moreover, a direct change of PHRC and PIRC makes a larger additional implementation cost in encoder/decoder than a change to the extension part. So we can say that the edge addition we propose is an efficient way to implement two different codes with a low complexity.
Now, we need to look into the effect of edge addition in the lower triangular part to eventually determine where to add edges for low error floors. PBRL LDPC codes are mostly used for communications systems so their degree distribution is basically irregular. Irregular degree distributions are to expedite the unbalance of reliability among variable nodes and this leads to a good threshold in an asymptotic setting and good waterfall performance in a finite-length setting. On the other hand, a good error floor performance can be attained by diminishing the unbalance and making the reliability of variable nodes as uniform as possible. An extreme case in this direction will be regular LDPC codes which are known to have low error floors. We assume that a main PBRL LDPC code is designed to have good waterfall performance and so have good irregular degree distributions. Thus we aim to add edges in the lower triangular part so that they can have a good influence on relatively unreliable variable nodes of the HRC. We will specifically explain how to measure the reliability of the variable nodes of the HRC and where to add an edge in the lower triangular part for this purpose in Section III. Here, we explain how the added edges can boost up the reliability of some variable nodes of the HRC.
We explain by example the effect of the edge addition in terms of iterative decoding. Fig. 1 shows an IRC part of an example protograph and illustrates adding an edge between v5(2) and c(72). In the original protograph, for i = 1, . . . , 7, variable node vi(2) sends its channel value to check node ci(2) for every iteration while the messages passed through E(2) are evolved as iteration proceeds. After the edge is added, the message sent from v5(2) to c5(2) is strengthened as a sum of the channel value and the message sent from c(72) to v5(2). The strengthened message can arrive at v3(1) and v6(1) via c5(2) so that the variable nodes become more reliable than the case of the original protograph without the added edge. This edge addition will be effective for low error floors when the variable nodes v3(1) and v6(1) had high error rates.
In this paper, we assume that added edges are not connected each other by any path inside the lower triangular part. We also assume that more than one edge can be added per variable

ሺଵሻ ଵ
ሺଵሻ ଶ
ሺଵሻ ଷ
ሺଵሻ ସ
ሺଵሻ ହ
ሺଵሻ ଺
ሺଵሻ

ሺଶሻ ଵ

ሺଶሻ ଶ

ሺଶሻ ଷ

ሺଶሻ

ସ

ܿହሺଶሻ

ሺଶሻ

ହ

ሺଶሻ ଺

ሺଶሻ

ሺଶሻ

ܿ଻ሺଶሻ

ሺଷሻ

଻

ሺଶሻ

ሺଶሻ

ሺ୍ୖେሻ

ሺ୉ଡ଼୘ሻ

Fig. 1. Illustration of an example for protograph of IRC with an added edge.

node in the extension part but at most one edge is added per check node so that the added edges cannot generate any cycles inside the lower triangular part.
B. Algorithm for Edge Addition
We give some notations to clearly describe the construction algorithms. For c ∈ C(2), let Vc denote the set of the variable nodes in V (1) ∪ V (2) connected with c. For v ∈ V (1) ∪ V (2), let Cv denote the set of the check nodes in C(2) connected with v. For v ∈ V (2), let Cv(low) denote the set of the check nodes in C(2) whose index is larger then the index of v. If v = vi(2), we have Cv(low) = {ci(+2)1, ci(+2)2, . . . , cρ(22)}. The meaning of Cv(low) becomes clear in the protomatrix representation and it corresponds to the rows below the 1 in the main diagonal for a given column of weight 1.
We use bit error rate (BER) per subblock of the code corresponding to a variable node in the protograph as a metric to decide whether a variable node in the HRC is reliable or not and it will give criteria where to add edges. The subblock BER is empirically obtained by simulations. For a given variable v ∈ V (1), let mv denote the metric value of subblock BER. Let M denote the set of the metric values for all v ∈ V (1), that is, M = {mv|v ∈ V (1)} and we assume that M is an ordered set based on the index of v.
Let n(e) denote the number of edges which will be added on the extension part of the protograph and let n(ve) denote the number of edges which will be added to be connected to v ∈ V (2). Let V (sel) denote the set of selected degree-1 variable nodes which at least one added edge will be connected to. For v ∈ V (sel), let Cv(sel) denote the set of selected check nodes in the IRC, each of which one added edge from v will be connected to. Let C(sel) denote the set of selected check nodes in the IRC, which will be connected to any v ∈ V (sel) via added edges. That is, C(sel) = ∪v∈V (sel) Cv(sel). As we assumed that a check node in the IRC can be connected to at most one edge added, all Cv(sel)’s are disjoint and we have

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:13:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
2932

Algorithm 1 Edge addition for protographs of PBRL LDPC
codes Input: P (IRC), M , n(e) Output: P (EXT) with n(e) edges added
1: C(sel) ← ∅ 2: Construct P (EXT) corresponding to I of size λ2 × λ2 3: (V (sel), V (tgt)) ← Run Algorithm 2 4: for v ∈ V (sel) in order do 5: n(ve) ← n(e)/|V (sel)| if v belongs to the first
n(e) − |V (sel)| n(e)/|V (sel)| elements of V (sel), nv(e) ← n(e)/|V (sel)| otherwise 6: end for 7: for v ∈ V (sel) in descending order of index in V (2) and nv(e) = 0 do 8: Cv(sel) ← Run Algorithm 3 9: C(sel) ← C(sel) ∪ Cv(sel) 10: Add edges to P (EXT) such that v is connected to each check node in Cv(sel) 11: end for
C(sel) = n(e). Algorithm 1 shows the overall procedure to determine the
edge addition. For given P (IRC), M , and n(e), the algorithm finally finds the location of edges to be added on P (EXT). For this, we first construct a set of target variable nodes in the
HRC, which currently have high error rates and need to be reinforced by edge addition. The set is denoted by V (tgt) in the algorithm. Then, we construct V (sel) such that V (tgt) are most reinforced. It is noted that more first elements of V (sel) can reinforce worse target nodes. The construction of V (sel) and V (tgt) is specifically described later in Algorithm 2. For a given n(e), we determine nv(e) for v ∈ V (sel) so that edges are distributed to the elements of V (sel) as uniformly as possible and, if a perfectly uniform distribution is impossible, more edges are assigned to first elements in V (sel). Then, Cv(sel) is constructed and the corresponding edges are added to P (EXT). The edge addition is performed in descending order of index of v ∈ V (sel) in V (2) because adding an edge to v with a large index is restricted to a small number of choices of check nodes. The construction of Cv(sel) is also specifically described later in Algorithm 3.
In Algorithm 2, the most unreliable nodes are included in V (tgt) one by one until the contribution of V (tgt) to the total error rate of V (1) approaches 1/2. Remind that adding an edge to vi(2) makes a new path to propagate an additional extrinsic message to some v ∈ V (1) via ci(2) as shown in Fig. 1. So the construction of V (sel) determines how the variable nodes in V (tgt) are boosted up. To form V (sel) ⊂ V (2), we have only to find ci(2) one by one which is connected to the most unreliable v ∈ V (tgt). A selected ci(2) can be connected to some v ∈ V (tgt) other than v ∈ V (tgt) with the largest mv. All the v ∈ V (tgt) connected to c(i2) are excluded when selecting the next c(i2). There can be multiple candidates ci(2), equivalently vi(2) to be included in V (sel). The selection criteria with the

Algorithm 2 Construction of V (sel) and V (tgt)

Input: P (IRC), P (EXT), M

Output: V (sel) (ordered set), V (tgt)

1: V (tgt) ← ∅, V (sel) ← ∅

2: V (tmp) ← V (1)

3: while (

v∈V (tgt)

mv

<

1 2

v∈V (1) mv ) do

4: V (tgt) ← V (tgt) ∪ {v} for which v ←

argmaxv ∈V (tmp) mv 5: V (tmp) ← V (tmp)\{v}

6: end while

7: V (tmp) ← V (tgt)

8: while V (tmp) = ∅ do

9: v ← argmaxv ∈V (tmp) mv

10: if argmaxc ∈Cv m v ∈Vc ∩V (tgt) v = 1 then

11:

if argmaxc ∈Cv m v ∈Vc ∩V (1) v = 1 then

12:

c

← a random selection among

argmaxc ∈Cv m v ∈Vc ∩V (1) v

13:

else c ← argmaxc ∈Cv m v ∈Vc ∩V (1) v

14:

end if

15: else c ← argmaxc ∈Cv m v ∈Vc ∩V (tgt) v 16: end if

17: V (sel) ← V (sel) ∪ {Vc ∩ V (2)} 18: V (tmp) ← V (tmp)\{Vc ∩ V (tgt)}

19: end while

priority are summarized as follows.
1) Largest sum of mv of v ∈ V (tgt) connected to a c ∈ C(2) 2) Largest sum of mv of v ∈ V (2) connected to a c ∈ C(2) 3) Random selection among the remaining candidates It is noted that the last degree-1 variable node vλ(22) is always excluded for V (sel) because there will be no space to add an
edge if selected. Algorithm 3 constructs Cv(sel) for a given v ∈ V (sel) when
the number of edges to be added to v is given and the check
nodes connected to previously added edges are known. The construction of Cv(sel) determines the exact locations of edges added to v and also determines which extrinsic message is brought to v and finally propagated to V (tgt). The extrinsic
message will have the same reliability on average even if
any check node position is randomly selected to add an edge
because the selected check node is always connected to a
degree-1 variable node and the extrinsic message will be
dominated by the degree-1 variable node. So the reliability cannot be a criteria to construct Cv(sel).
Inducing a short cycle passing through v ∈ V (sel) is critical for error floor performance because v will still have a small
degree even after adding some edges and the extrinsic message
degree will be small. In fact, we can avoid short cycles in
the parity-check matrix by carefully lifting the protograph
although there are short cycles in the protograph. Nonetheless,
we try to avoid 4-cycles in the protograph when adding edges
in a sense of blocking any possibility at source. Accordingly,
the selection criteria with the priority are summarized as

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:13:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
2933

Algorithm 3 Construction of Cv(sel)

Input: P (IRC), P (EXT), V (tgt), C(sel), M , v ∈ V (sel), nv(e) Output: Cv(sel)
1: Cv(sel) ← ∅ 2: for i = 1 to n(ve) do 3: C(tmp) = {c ∈ Cv(low) \ {Cv(sel) ∪ C(sel)} | adding

an edge (v, c) induces no 4-cycle in P (IRC) ∪ P (EXT)

when assuming that the edges corresponding to Cv(sel) are

added}

4: if |C(tmp)| > 1 then

5:

C(tmp) ← argmaxc ∈C(tmp) Vc ∩ V (tgt)

6:

if C(tmp) = 1 then

7:

C(tmp) ← {argmaxc ∈C(tmp) deg(c )}

8:

if C(tmp) = 1 then

9:

c ← a random selection among C(tmp)

10:

else c ← argmaxc ∈C(tmp) deg(c )

11:

end if

12:

else c ← argmaxc ∈C(tmp) Vc ∩ V (tgt)

13:

end if

14: else if |C(tmp)| = 1 then

15:

Let c ∈ C(tmp)

16: else

17:

Let v and v denote the two variable nodes traversed

by the 4-cycle with a given c

18:

c

←

argminc

{m ∈Cv(low) \{Cv(sel) ∪C (sel) }

v

+ mv

}

19: end if

20: Cv(sel) ← Cv(sel) ∪ {c}

21: end for

follows.
1) Avoiding 4-cycles in the protograph 2) The selected check node is connected to V (tgt) as many
as possible 3) The selected check node has the largest degree 4) Random selection among the remaining multiple candi-
dates
When it is impossible to avoid 4-cycles in the protograph, we select to minimize the sum of metric values of the two variable nodes in the 4-cycle. This corresponds to an effort to maximize the extrinsic message degree under the existence of 4-cycles.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, the BLER of PBRL LDPC codes with the edge addition is compared to that of the original PBRL LDPC codes via simulations. Modulation is QPSK and the received signals are generated under the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. The sum-product algorithm (SPA) decoding is used with the maximum number of iterations set to 50.
As an original PBRL LDPC code, we simulate an instance of 5G NR LDPC code from base graph 2 [7]. The base graph 2 in 5G NR has a 42×52 protomatrix and the first two variable nodes are always punctured. The detailed parameters are λ1 =

  

*%*RULJLQDO *%*DGGRQn(e)  *%*DGGRQn(e)  *%*DGGRQn(e)  *%*DGGRQn(e) 



%/(5























(V1>G%@

Fig. 2. Block error rates of a base graph 2 LDPC code in 5G NR with the edge addition for R = 1/5 and n(e) = 4, 5, 6, 8.

14, ρ1 = 4, ρ2 = λ2 = 38. The code rate becomes R = 1/5 when the full protomatrix is used with the puncturing. We choose z = 80 and the information and the code lengths become 800 and 4000 after puncturing, respectively.
For a PBRL LDPC code with edge addition, we use Algorithm 1 to construct the code for n(e) = 4, 5, 6, 8. We use the original shift values for the existing edges in the protograph from the original PBRL LDPC code and we need to lift only the added edges. For this, we use the error minimization progressive edge growth (EMPEG) [19] algorithm, which determines the cycle length and the extrinsic message degree to be maximized.
In Fig. 2, we compare the BLER performances of the 5G NR LDPC code and the code with n(e) = 4, 5, 6, 8 for R = 1/5. The proposed codes outperform the original 5G NR LDPC code in the error floor region while they show worse waterfalls than the original code. As n(e) increases, the BLER performance in the waterfall region degrades but the slope of the BLER curve in the error floor region becomes steep, which shows a tradeoff between waterfall and error floor performances. For n(e) = 4, 5, 6, the cross points over the original code are formed above BLER of 10−5 so the proposed codes have advantages for BLER below 10−5.
In Fig. 3, we compare the BLER performances of the 5G NR LDPC code and the code with n(e) = 4 for R = 1/5, 1/4, 1/3 by taking submatrices of different sizes from the topleft of the protomatrix. The proposed codes outperform the original 5G NR LDPC code in the error floor region for all rates and the coding gain over the original code becomes smaller as the code rate changes higher. This shows that the design of the edge addition for R = 1/5 works well for R = 1/4 and R = 1/3 as well.
V. CONCLUSIONS
To achieve low error floors, we proposed the algorithms to add edges to the extension part of the existing protograph

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:13:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
2934

 

*%* RULJLQDO *%*DGGRQ n(e) 





%/(5





5 

5 

5 















(V1 >G%@

Fig. 3. Block error rates of a base graph 2 LDPC code in 5G NR with the add-on structure for n(e) = 4 and various rates.

of PBRL LDPC codes. The edge addition was performed in a way to reinforce variable nodes with large BER in the original PBRL LDPC code. The proposed edge addition was applied to an instance of base graph 2 of 5G NR LDPC code and the simulation results showed that the code with edge addition shows better error-correcting performance than the original code in the error floor region for various code rates.
The edge addition will be useful when an original PBRL LDPC code is constructed to have a good threshold. The PBRL LDPC code with the edge addition can effectively cover various target BLER points by using or not the edge addition adaptively to a given target BLER. The adaptive use of edge addition corresponds to implementing two PBRL LDPC codes for enhanced mobile broadband (eMBB) and URLLC in an efficient way while keeping the system compatible with the original PBRL LDPC code.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported by Institute of Information & Communications Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government(MIST) (No. 2021001016001, Channel coding with flexible reliability for 6G/B5G xURLLC) and also supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea(NRF) grant funded by the Korea government(MSIT) (No. 2020R1F1A1076583).
REFERENCES
[1] R. G, Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[2] S. Kumawat, R. Shrestha, N. Daga, and R. Paily, “Highthroughput LDPC-decoder architecture using efficient comparison techniques & dynamic multi-frame processing schedule,” IEEE Trans. on Circuits and Syst. I: Reg. Papers, vol. 62, no. 5, pp. 1421–1430, 2015.
[3] J. Nadal and A. Baghdadi, “Parallel and Flexible 5G LDPC Decoder Architecture Targeting FPGA,” IEEE Trans. on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Syst., vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 1141–1151, 2021.

[4] J. Thorpe, “Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from protographs,” IPN progress report, vol. 42154, pp. 1–7, August 15, 2003.
[5] Q. Huang, Q. Diao, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Cyclic and quasi-cyclic LDPC codes on constrained parity-check matrices and their trapping sets,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 2648–2671, 2012.
[6] T.-Y. Chen, K. Vakilinia, D. Divsalar, and R. D. Wesel, “Protograph-based raptor-like LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 63, no. 5, pp. 1522–1532, 2015.
[7] Technical Specification Group Radio Access Network; NR; Multiplexing Channel Coding (Release 15), Dec. 2017.
[8] K.-J. Kim, S. Myung, S.-I. Park, J.-Y. Lee, M. Kan, Y. Shinohara, J.-W. Shin, and J. Kim, “Low-density parity-check codes for ATSC 3.0,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 189–196, 2016.
[9] S. Moloudi, M. Lentmaier, and A. Graell i Amat, “Spatially coupled turbo-like codes: A new trade-off between waterfall and error floor,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 67, no. 5, pp. 3114–3123, 2019.
[10] M. Jang, J. W. Kang, and S.-H. Kim, “Design of irregular LDPC codes with degree-set and degree-sum distributions,” in 2012 IEEE 23rdInt. Symp. Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC). IEEE, 2012, pp. 1925–1930.
[11] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. U.K, Cambridge:Cambridge Univ. Press, 2008.
[12] IEEE ICC 2021: Workshop on Extreme URLLC towards 6G Connectivity.
[13] J. Park, S. Samarakoon, H. Shiri, M. K. Abdel-Aziz, T. Nishio, A. Elgabli, and M. Bennis, “Extreme URLLC: Vision, challenges and key enablers,” 2020, [online] Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2001.09683.
[14] X. Wu, M. Jiang, C. Zhao, L. Ma, and Y. Wei, “Low-rate PBRL-LDPC codes for URLLC in 5G,” IEEE Wireless. Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 800–803, 2018.
[15] S. V. Ranganathan, D. Divsalar, and R. D. Wesel, “Quasicyclic protograph-based raptor-like ldpc codes for short block-lengths,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 65, no. 6, pp. 3758–3777, 2019.
[16] M. Luby, “LT codes,” in Proc. 43rd Annu. IEEE Symp. Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), 2002, pp. 271–280.
[17] J. Garcia-Frias and W. Zhong, “Approaching Shannon performance by iterative decoding of linear codes with low-density generator matrix,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 266–268, 2003.
[18] A. W. Eckford, J. P. Chu, and R. S. Adve, “Lowcomplexity cooperative coding for sensor networks using rateless and LDGM codes,” in Proc. IEEE ICC, vol. 4, 2006, pp. 1537–1542.
[19] E. Sharon and S. Litsyn, “Constructing LDPC codes by error minimization progressive edge growth,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 359–368, Mar. 2008.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:13:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
2935

