2924

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 70, NO. 5, MAY 2022

Optimization of SC-LDPC Codes for Window Decoding With Target Window Sizes
Hee-Youl Kwak , Jae-Won Kim , Member, IEEE, Hosung Park , Member, IEEE, and Jong-Seon No , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract— In this paper, we propose an optimization method for protograph-based spatially coupled low-density parity-check (SC-LDPC) codes under window decoding (WD). Previous works on constructing SC-LDPC codes for WD typically focused on optimizing asymptotic performance metrics such as the WD threshold. However, in this paper, it is observed that the WD threshold is not an appropriate metric to sufficiently explain the finite-length behavior of SC-LDPC codes under WD. Thus, we propose a new performance metric, called the window mean parameter, based on a scaling analysis to capture the WD performance more accurately and formulate a code optimization algorithm that optimizes the proposed performance metric. Since the proposed metric depends on the window size, the optimization algorithm can provide a code family of SC-LDPC codes optimized for various target window sizes. Simulation results confirm that the improvement in the proposed metric leads to a finite-length performance improvement, resulting in one to two orders of the frame error rate gain over the conventional SC-LDPC codes for a wide range of window sizes. Furthermore, we investigate structural characteristics of the proposed codes to provide a supplementary explanation for the performance improvement, which also promotes a better understanding of SC-LDPC codes for WD.
Index Terms— Finite-length performance, low-density paritycheck (LDPC) code, optimization, scaling analysis, spatially coupled LDPC (SC-LDPC) code, window decoding (WD), window size.
I. INTRODUCTION
B Y CONNECTING L multiple block low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes, the resulting spatially coupled LDPC (SC-LDPC) codes attain many appealing features such
Manuscript received October 13, 2021; revised January 18, 2022; accepted March 5, 2022. Date of publication March 10, 2022; date of current version May 18, 2022. This work was supported in part by Institute of Information and communications Technology Planning and Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korea Government (MSIT) under Grant 2021-0-00400, Development of Highly Efficient PQC Security and Performance Verification for Constrained Devices, and in part by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (No. 2021R1G1A1091583). The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was J. Yuan. (Corresponding author: Jae-Won Kim.)
Hee-Youl Kwak and Jong-Seon No are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, INMC, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, South Korea (e-mail: ghy1228@ccl.snu.ac.kr; jsno@snu.ac.kr).
Jae-Won Kim is with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Engineering Research Institute (ERI), Gyeongsang National University, Jinju 52828, South Korea (e-mail: jaewon07.kim@gnu.ac.kr).
Hosung Park is with the Department of Computer Engineering, Chonnam National University, Gwangju 61186, South Korea (e-mail: hpark1@jnu.ac.kr).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at https://doi.org/10.1109/TCOMM.2022.3158307.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2022.3158307

as the threshold saturation effect [1] and the capacity achieving performance over general binary memoryless channels [2]. In addition, the localized structure of SC-LDPC codes, where the connections between variable nodes (VNs) and check nodes (CNs) are concentrated locally, makes it possible to implement a cost-efficient decoding scheme, called window decoding (WD) [3], [4]. While belief propagation (BP) decoding with flooding scheduling activates all VNs and CNs simultaneously, the window decoder runs on a small size of subgraphs configured by the window size W , which is irrelevant to the coupling length L, and provides substantial gains in the decoding latency and complexity. In addition, it was also proven that the WD performance approaches the BP decoding performance for sufficiently large W in an asymptotic setting [3]. Hence, the WD algorithm has been used as a standard decoding scheme for SC-LDPC codes that provides a good trade-off between the decoding performance and decoding latency, which can be controlled by the window size W .
Most studies on WD (e.g., [4]–[11]) were carried out on protograph-based SC-LDPC codes [12] because they take not only the same benefits of randomly constructed SC-LDPC codes [1] but also other additional features, such as the linear minimum distance growth [12], [13] and superior finite-length performances [14]. Among them, the works in [4] and [5] are directly related to this paper, where they aimed to improve the WD threshold as an asymptotic performance metric of WD performances. As an initial study on WD [4], they proposed a code design rule to enhance the WD threshold, especially for small W . They provided some exemplary ensembles satisfying the design rule but no optimization method was provided. As a follow-up work, a code optimization method was proposed in [5] to further improve the WD threshold. Both codes in [4], [5] achieved a better performance than the original SC-LDPC codes [12] with small W .
However, in this paper, we point out that optimizing the WD threshold is not the best way to improve the finitelength code performance because the WD threshold is a metric for an asymptotic analysis that does not take finite-length code behaviors into account. For example, it is observed that two finite-length SC-LDPC codes having similar WD thresholds can show notably different decoding performances. In some cases, SC-LDPC codes with inferior WD thresholds even outperform those with superior WD thresholds, which was already observed for the BP decoding case in [15]. Moreover, the SC-LDPC codes in [4], [5] are worse than the original SC-LDPC codes for large W . Since the maximum

0090-6778 © 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:12:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KWAK et al.: OPTIMIZATION OF SC-LDPC CODES FOR WINDOW DECODING WITH TARGET WINDOW SIZES

2925

encoding/decoding latency is generally limited by a system, it is worthwhile to construct a family of SC-LDPC ensembles optimized for a wide range of window sizes and then utilize the optimized ensemble selectively for a given window size determined by the limited decoding latency.
A. Main Contributions of This Paper
Our primary goal is to construct optimized protograph-based SC-LDPC codes that outperform the conventional SC-LDPC codes [4], [5], [12] in terms of finite-length performance over a wide range of window sizes. To achieve this goal, we first propose an alternative performance metric that complements the insufficient WD performance analysis. The proposed metric is based on the scaling analysis of the finite-length performance of SC-LDPC codes investigated in [14]–[18]. Those works indicated that finite-length performance under BP decoding is affected by not only the BP threshold but also other scaling parameters such as the mean parameter. Inspired by this fact, we propose a new performance metric for WD, named the window mean parameter, as a counterpart of the mean parameter for BP decoding. Following the method of calculating the mean parameter for BP decoding using density evolution (DE) [16], the proposed metric is obtained by DE under the WD schedule. We show that the proposed metric can give a good interpretation of finite-length performance results while they cannot be explained solely by the WD threshold.
With an objective function to improve the window mean parameter for a given target window size, we next propose an optimization algorithm based on differential evolution in [19], [20] to obtain the proposed code ensembles with the improved window mean parameters. Simulation results demonstrate that the improvement in the proposed metric is translated into the improvement in the actual decoding performance and accordingly a substantial improvement in the WD performance is achieved by the proposed ensembles for window sizes from W = 6 to 24. In particular, for large window sizes, the frame error rate (FER) performance over the binary erasure channel (BEC) is improved by up to order of two compared to the conventional SC-LDPC codes in [4], [5], [12]. The improvement comes from the fact that the proposed metric reflects the WD performance more accurately than the WD threshold. Furthermore, compared to the previous works [4], [5], the proposed work is general with respect to the window size in that we propose a family of code ensembles targeting a wide range of window sizes. Using the proposed SC-LDPC code family, a better trade-off between the decoding performance and the decoding latency can be achieved compared to the conventional SC-LDPC codes.
In addition, we analyze the proposed SC-LDPC ensembles to figure out which structural characteristics contribute to the performance improvement. Interestingly, there exists a common property underlying the whole proposed ensemble in terms of the CN degree distribution, although they are independently optimized for each target window size by stochastic optimization methods. As the target window size increases, the average CN degree for the left boundary positions continues to decrease while that for the right boundary positions changes

in the opposite direction. This property holds for the whole proposed ensemble, resulting in a completely different code structure depending on the target window size. This means that the optimized code structure is determined by a specific window size and hence it is practically important to utilize the code optimized in accordance with the operating window size. Finally, we show that the proposed optimization method is flexible in the code rate and degree distributions by repeating the optimization with various input settings, and the proposed ensembles also outperform the conventional ones over the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel as well as the BEC.
B. Related Works
In addition to the aforementioned related works, the construction of protograph-based SC-LDPC codes has been addressed in [21]–[26] with a quasi-cyclic (QC) structure. These works focused on eliminating harmful structures of codes, such as short cycles and absorbing sets, which are irrelevant to the involved decoding algorithm. On the other hand, our work is novel in the sense that we perform decoderaware code optimizations using the proposed window mean parameter. In addition, many variants of the window decoder have been introduced in [6]–[10] i) to reduce the decoding complexity by non-uniform schedules [6] and ii) to improve the decoding performance by allowing the backward direction [7]–[9] or refining the decoding messages [10]. We remark that such variations in WD can also be applied to our proposed SC-LDPC codes because the proposed methodology is independent of specific WD algorithms. Also, the proposed methodology can enhance the research in [11], where the decoding parameters are optimized with a metric of the WD threshold under the limited complexity. Specifically, we expect that the decoding parameters can be optimized in a more sophisticated way by using the proposed metric instead of the WD threshold.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the notation and terminology that are used throughout the paper. In Section III, we propose a new performance metric based on a scaling analysis and show its effectiveness in analyzing the finite-length performance. In Section IV, a new optimization method is proposed to maximize the proposed performance metric and the superiority of the optimized SC-LDPC codes is shown by comparison with conventional SC-LDPC codes. Section V provides the discussion on the proposed SC-LDPC codes to discover the reason for improvements. Finally, conclusions are given in Section VI.
II. PRELIMINARIES
A. Notation
In this paper, we use bold capital letters, such as X, to denote matrices and use [X]i,j to denote the (i, j)th entry in X. Code ensembles are represented by calligraphic characters, such as X . For a performance metric α, we use the notation αX to denote the performance metric of an ensemble X . In addition, this paper mainly considers the BEC with erasure probability .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:12:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2926

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 70, NO. 5, MAY 2022

B. Construction of the SC-LDPC Ensemble

The protograph-based SC-LDPC codes with the coupling length L and coupling width w are represented by the base matrix of size (L + w)nc × Lnv as follows [12]

Lnv

⎡

⎤

B0

⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢BB...w1

B0
B1 ...
Bw

... ... ... ...

B0
B1 ...

⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥,

(1)

Bw

(L+w)nc×Lnv

where the component matrices B0, B1, . . ., Bw are of size nc × nv. The base matrix (1) is composed of L positions for VNs and L + w positions for CNs, where nv VNs and nc CNs exist at each position. The base matrix can be defined
completely by S = [B0; B1; . . .; Bw] called the component part. Let M denote the number of VNs at each position after

lifting. The total numbers of VNs and CNs in the lifted graph with the lifting factor z are Lnvz = LM and (L + w)ncz, respectively. Thus, the code length (frame size) becomes LM

and the code rate is expressed as

1 − nc

−

nc

w ,

nv

nv L

where the first term is the target code rate and the second term corresponds to the rate-loss induced by the last w additional positions consisting only of CNs. We can see that the rate-loss increases as w grows and L decreases.
The most popular way to design the component part S is to use the edge spreading operation [12]. From the uncoupled base matrix B, the edge spreading operation is to spread the edges in B into w + 1 component matrices with the condition
w
Bi = B.
i=0
The way of edge spreading can be different for a given uncoupled base matrix B and w. For example, from the (3, 6) regular uncoupled base matrix B = [3 3], the original protographbased SC-LDPC ensemble in [12], denoted by CA in this paper, is represented by S = [1 1; 1 1; 1 1]. In [4], a different edge spreading with S = [2 2; 1 0; 0 1] was proposed to improve the WD performance. In fact, the component matrices can be designed directly instead of spreading the edges from a given uncoupled base matrix. In [5], they searched for the optimized component matrices in the large search space extended by increasing the matrix size as nc × nv = 2 × 4. Let CB and CC denote the ensembles proposed in [4] and [5], respectively. In Table I, we summarize the code parameters w, nc × nv, and the component part S of the ensembles CA, CB, and CC. We also include the average VN degree l¯ of the resulting SC-LDPC base matrix. Note that contrary to the ensembles CA and CB, the ensemble CC has the smaller coupling width w = 1 and larger value of ¯l = 3.5. Thus, to be strict, it is

not fair to compare CC with CA or CB directly under the same decoding circumstance because their code rates and decoding complexities are different.

C. DE Analysis

Here, we describe the DE equations over BP decoding for
an ensemble defined by the base matrix B. Using the DE equations, the BP threshold BP can be calculated as the
performance limit of BP decoding in the asymptotic settings
such as infinite code length and decoding iterations [29]. For
the BEC, the DE equations keep tracks of the average erasure
probability of outgoing messages from VNs and CNs in the
protograph. Over the base matrix B, let Ni denote the set of non-zero column indices in the ith row and Mj denote the set of non-zero row indices in the jth column. Also, we call yi(,j) the average erasure probability of messages sent from the ith CN to the jth VN at iteration . Similarly, xi(,j) denotes the average erasure probability of messages sent from the jth VN to the ith CN and xj( ) denotes the erasure probability of the jth VN at iteration . Set the initial conditions as xi(,0j) =  for [B]i,j = 0. Then, the evolution of yi(,j), xi(,j), and xj( ) can be expressed as

yi(,j) = 1 −

1 − x(i,j−1) [B]i,j −δj,j

(2)

j ∈Ni

xi(,j) = 

y( ) [B]i ,j −δi,i
i ,j

(3)

i ∈Mj

xj( ) = 

yi(

) ,j

[B]i ,j
,

(4)

i ∈Mj

where δi,j = 1 if i = j and δi,j = 0 if i = j. The BP threshold BP is defined as the supremum of  for which xj( )
goes to zero for all j as  grows. In addition, the average
erasure probability x¯p( ) of VNs at position p is given by

nv p

x¯p( ) =

xj( )/nv.

(5)

j=nv (p−1)+1

D. Scaling Analysis
Contrary to the BP threshold representing the performance
limit when the code length goes to infinity, the finite-length
code performance can be analytically estimated by the scaling
law [14], [16]–[18]. The scaling law of SC-LDPC codes is
an analytical expression of the FER which is a function of code parameters M, L, and a set of scaling parameters including the BP threshold BP and the mean parameter γBP [17]. In general, the threshold BP is related to the point at
which the FER curve starts to fall while the mean parameter γBP is related to the falling slope of the FER curve [17].
Thus, the finite-length analysis of SC-LDPC codes should be accompanied by calculation of the mean parameter γBP as well as the BP threshold BP. In particular, in [15], they showed that SC-LDPC codes with larger γBP perform better than those with larger BP in some cases, which emphasizes the necessity of improving γBP.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:12:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KWAK et al.: OPTIMIZATION OF SC-LDPC CODES FOR WINDOW DECODING WITH TARGET WINDOW SIZES
TABLE I CODE PARAMETERS OF THE CONVENTIONAL SC-LDPC ENSEMBLES

2927

The mean parameter γBP can be obtained by solving a
system of differential equations for the number of degree-1
CNs along the peeling decoding process [17], which requires
relatively higher computations compared to DE. The high
complexity was relaxed in [16] by deriving an approximation of γBP from DE, enabling simple computation of γBP. Let r1( ) be the approximation of the normalized number of degree-
1 CNs at iteration  in average [16]. The normalization is with respect to M and the gap between the threshold BP and computing point . Then, r1( ) is given as

r1( ) =

L

L

x¯(p −1) − x¯p( ) /(BP − ).

p=1

p=1

The approximated γBP is defined as the value of r1( ) at the steady state for which r1( ) remains almost constant [16], [17]. Since the approximated value of γBP is almost identical with its actual value [16], we use the approximated γBP in this paper and simply denote it as γBP.

E. Window Decoding
The diagonal structure of the base matrix of SC-LDPC codes enables to implement the cost efficient window decoder [4]. The WD algorithm with the window size W operates BP decoding on the window configuration consisting of W nvz VNs, W ncz CNs, and their connected edges. At the tth stage for 1 ≤ t ≤ L, the VNs at positions t, . . ., min(t + W − 1, L) and CNs at positions t, . . ., min(t + W − 1, L + w) are included in the tth window configuration and the window decoder performs decoding for the purpose of recovering VNs at position t. In detail, we choose the typical window decoding scheme over the BEC that runs decoding until the state of all VNs stays the same without any early termination rule and restriction on the maximum number of iterations. The decoding window moves if all target VNs are recovered or the state of all VNs in the window does not change anymore. Thus, we can see the maximum performance limit of all codes whose differences only originate from the code performance itself.
Compared to the BP decoder that requires the entire LM VNs to run, the WD algorithm can start decoding only after receiving the first W M VNs, which gives a significant gain in the decoding latency if W < L. However, at the cost of taking the advantage of the decoding latency, WD inevitably suffers from a performance loss compared to BP decoding due to the restricted operating graph [4], [18]. Although the performance loss can be mitigated to some extent as the window size W grows, it cannot be negligible because the window decoder

TABLE II BP AND WD THRESHOLDS OF THE SC-LDPC
ENSEMBLES CA , CB , AND CC
can exploit only one decoding wave from the left boundary while BP decoding triggers the two decoding waves from the both boundaries [18]. From another point of view, there is a possibility to improve the WD performance if one can enhance the effect of the left decoding wave at the cost of degrading the unused right decoding wave. We will show that the proposed codes have this desired property.
Similar to the BP threshold BP, the WD threshold WIN(W ) with the window size W can be obtained by evolving the DE equations (4) within the window configuration under the WD scheduling [4]. In terms of the WD threshold, the decoding at the stage t is considered as success when the target erasure probability x¯t( ) is smaller than a prior defined value δ. Note that the WD threshold WIN(W ) varies depending on the window size W and monotonically increases as W grows.
III. PROPOSED PERFORMANCE METRIC In the previous section, we have introduced the BP threshold BP and the mean parameter γBP as performance metrics under BP decoding. For the case of WD, the WD threshold WIN(W ) is defined alone. In this section, we propose a new metric for the WD performance called the window mean parameter, which is analogous to the mean parameter γBP of BP decoding.
A. Conventional Performance Metric: WD Threshold In Table II, we summarize the BP threshold BP and the
WD threshold WIN(W ) of the ensembles CA, CB, and CC for L = 100. The WD thresholds are obtained with δ = 10−3, which is used throughout this paper. Table II shows that the ensembles CA and CB have the same BP threshold but have quite different WD thresholds especially for W = 6. According to the analysis in [4], the ensemble CB is designed to avoid degree-1 VNs within the window configuration in order to improve WIN(W ) for small W . However, WIN(W ) for the ensemble CA rapidly increases as W grows, and accordingly the ensemble CA is shown to be better than the ensemble CB in terms of the WD threshold for W ≥ 12.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:12:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2928

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 70, NO. 5, MAY 2022

Fig. 1. Finite-length performance of three SC-LDPC codes from CA, CB, and CC for L = 100 and M = 1,000 decoded by the window decoder with W = 6, 9, 12, 15.
For the ensemble CC, the WD threshold is improved further by using the optimization technique and allowing the irregular degree distribution with the higher average degree ¯l = 3.5.
Fig. 1 compares the WD performance of finite-length codes from the ensembles CA, CB, and CC for L = 100 and M = 1,000. The window size W ranges from W = 6 to 15. We first observe that the finite-length performances for CA, CB, and CC are saturated to their performance limits for W ≥ 12, W ≥ 12, and W ≥ 6, respectively. This result indicates that once achieving the performance limit, there is no notable performance improvement even though the window size W is increased further. Furthermore, it is observed that the relative superiority between the codes varies depending on the window size; the codes from CB and CC are shown to have the better performance than the code from CA for W = 6 but the code from CA outperforms the others for W > 6. In other words, it is practically important to choose an ensemble properly according to the target window size.
The inferior decoding performance of CA for W = 6 can be expected from the smaller value of the WD threshold W CAIN(W ). However, there exist several observations inconsistent with the WD thresholds; i) the ensemble CA outperforms the others for W = 9 even though WIN(9) of the ensemble CA is still inferior to those of the other ensembles, ii) the ensemble CC is not shown to have better performances even though it has notably better WIN(W ) values for all range of W , iii) the falling slopes of FERs are different depending on the window size W for the ensembles CA and CB, which cannot be explained by the WD threshold solely. Thus, it is required to find a different kind of performance metric to complement the insufficient finite-length analysis.
B. Proposed Performance Metric: Window Mean Parameter
As we mentioned in Section II-C, the mean parameter γBP plays an important role in analyzing the finite-length performance under BP decoding. Our goal is to find a performance metric for WD that has a similar operational interpretation to γBP. We refer to this performance metric as the window mean parameter γWIN(W ). Similar to the BP mean parameter γBP obtained by the DE equations, we want to define the window mean parameter as a value that can be obtained using the

Algorithm 1 Calculation of Window Mean Parameter γWIN(W )

Input: B, W, (< WIN(W )), δ

Set  = 0, 0 = 0 1: for t = 1 : L − W + 1 do

2: Initialization:

⎧

⎪⎨δ, if [B]i,j = 0 and j < tnv

xi(,j)

=

⎩⎪1,,

if if

[B]i,j [B]i,j

=0 =0

and and

tnv ≤ j ≤ (t + (t + W − 1)nv

W− <j

1)nv

3: while do 4:  =  + 1 5: Update the DE equations in (4) and (5) for (i, j) in
the tth window configuration and calculate

r1( ) =

L

L

x¯(j −1) − x¯j( ) /(WIN(W ) − ).

j=1

j=1

6: If x¯t( ) < δ , then set t =  and break the while loop.

7: end while

Set γtWIN(W ) =

min
t−1 < ≤ t

r1( )

8: end for

Set γWIN(W ) = min
t

γtWIN(W )

DE equations for the WD schedule. Algorithm 1 shows the procedure to obtain γWIN(W ). With the inputs including the
base matrix B of an SC-LDPC ensemble, the window size
W , and the operating parameters , δ, Algorithm 1 initializes the value of xi(,j) in (4) and updates the DE equations (4) and (5) within the tth window configuration. If the target erasure probability x¯t( ) is smaller than δ for the tth stage, i.e., decoding is successful in terms of DE, Algorithm 1 breaks the
while loop and continues the same process for the next stage t + 1. This process is repeated from t = 1 to L − W + 1 while continuously calculating r1( ) without initializing . In this case, r1( ) is normalized with respect to the gap to the WD threshold, WIN(W )−. In addition, Algorithm 1 records the last iteration
number t for the tth stage. Note that, for Algorithm 1, the last (L − W + 1)th window configuration containing VNs at
the last position L is modified to contain all the remaining CNs at position from L − W + 1 to L + w (not to L) in order
to capture the behavior of the last termination part at once. Using Algorithm 1, we plot the evolution of r1( ) under
WD for W = 6, 9 in Fig. 2. The evolution of r1( ) for BP decoding is also included for reference. We compute r1( )’s for BP decoding and WD at  = BP − 0.01 and  = WIN(W ) −
0.01, respectively, where the computing point of the scaling
parameters is typically chosen by the point near the threshold
[14]–[18]. The x-axis of the graph is normalized horizontally
by the last number of iteration max for DE updates so that all plots have the same range of x-axis from 0 to 1. It is shown that the evolution of r1( ) for BP decoding has the steady state phase for which the value of r1( ) remains almost unchanged as reported in [16], [17]. Since a degree-1 CN can
recover its connected VN in the perspective of the peeling
decoding process, the number of degree-1 CNs, represented

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:12:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KWAK et al.: OPTIMIZATION OF SC-LDPC CODES FOR WINDOW DECODING WITH TARGET WINDOW SIZES
TABLE III BP AND WINDOW MEAN PARAMETERS OF THE
SC-LDPC ENSEMBLES CA , CB , AND CC

2929

Fig. 2. The evolution of r1( ) for the SC-LDPC ensemble CA with L = 30 under BP decoding and WD for W = 6, 9.

by r1( ), indicates the number of sources for recovering VNs in the graph. In the steady state phase under BP decoding,

a decoding process is repeated and the existing degree-1 CNs

are consumed to recover VNs locating in the neighboring

w + 1 positions, which in turn generates additional degree-

1 CNs and consequentially maintains the number of degree-1

CNs [17]. On the contrary, the evolution of r1( ) under WD exhibits
a different pattern, where r1( ) steadily decreases in the initial
phase similar to the case for BP decoding but the value of r1( ) becomes smaller than that of the steady phase for BP
decoding. That is because the VNs participating in WD are

restricted by the window configuration, resulting in the smaller

number degree-1 CNs than that for BP decoding. Instead of the steady phase, the evolution of r1( ) encounters a single
minimum which occurs when achieving the target erasure probability, x¯1( ) < δ. After finishing the first stage t = 1, the DE equations are updated on the next stage t = 2 and

continues until the last stage t = L − W + 1.

Analogous to the BP mean parameter γBP, we mathemati-

cally define the window mean parameter γtWIN(W ) for stage

t as the minimum value of r1( ) during the operation on the tth

window configuration, that is, γtWIN(W ) =

min
t−1 < ≤ t

r1( ) .

The window mean parameter γWIN(W ) for an ensemble is

defined as the minimum of γtWIN(W ) for all t. For example, for the ensemble CA, the values of γtWIN(W ) for stage t, w < t < L−W +1, are the same due to the equivalent window

configuration and channel condition for those stages. For stages t ≤ w and t = L − W + 1, the values of γtWIN(W ) are slightly larger than the value for the other stages because CNs

at the boundary positions are assumed to be connected with

known VNs while the other CNs are connected to previously

recovered VNs whose outgoing messages are fixed to δ > 0.
Thus, for the ensemble CA, the minimum value of γWIN(W ) is determined by γtWIN(W ) for w < t < L − W + 1.

C. Effectiveness of γWIN(W )
In order to clearly depict γWIN(W ) in Fig. 2, we place each mark at the point indicating the value of γWIN(W ) and include the enlarged graph. In Table III, γWIN(W ) for the

ensembles CA, CB, and CC is given as well as the BP mean

parameter γBP. We can see that the ensemble CA has superior

γWIN(W ) values for W ≥ 9 compared to the ensembles CB

and CC. For example, for W = 9, γCWAIN(9) is apparently

blaertgweer etnhanW CAγINCWB(I9N)(a9n)dwhW CiBlIeNt(h9e)

difference in the WD threshold is subtle. This result provides a

clue to explain the unexpected result in Fig. 1, where CA shows

a better performance than the other ensembles despite of the

inferior WD threshold for W = 9. In addition, the ensemble

CA has non-decreasing values of γWIN(W ) as a function of
W , e.g., γCWAIN(9) < γCWAIN(12) and accordingly the slope of the FER curve is improved for W = 12 compared to that for

W = 9. For the ensemble CC, the smaller values of γWIN(W ) over all ranges of W may result in the inferior performance of

CC and the slower falling slope of the FER curve regardless

of the window size. Note that, in order to compare the WD

performance exactly, it is required to investigate the stochastic

properties of the finite-length behavior in detail. However, it is shown that the proposed metric γWIN(W ) can complement

finite-length performance analysis especially when there is no

distinct difference in the WD threshold and can add analysis

in the slope of the error rate curve. Moreover, it will be

shown in the next section that we can design an efficient

optimization algorithm and predict the comparison result of

the WD performance using the window mean parameter.

IV. A NEW OPTIMIZATION METHOD OF SC-LDPC CODES
In this section, we propose a new optimization method of SC-LDPC codes based on the WD mean parameter. Before discussing the optimization method, we first introduce a generalized code structure of SC-LDPC codes with nonuniform coupling widths to expand the search space of the code design. Then, we introduce the optimization algorithm and perform the optimization to obtain the proposed ensembles for various window sizes. Numerical analysis is given to verify the superiority of the proposed SC-LDPC codes over the conventional SC-LDPC codes.

A. SC-LDPC Ensembles With Non-Uniform Coupling Widths
In the structure of the base matrix in (1), the number of additional CN positions is equal to the coupling width w. If one wants to increase the coupling width w to improve the decoding performance or introduce an additional degree of freedom in the code design space, it unavoidably causes more rate-loss. To address this problem, we consider a generalized structure of SC-LDPC ensembles with non-uniform coupling widths, which permits to increase w while maintaining the number of CNs. Let cadd denote the number of additional

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:12:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2930

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 70, NO. 5, MAY 2022

Fig. 3. Examples of the protograph with (a) the uniform coupling width
w = 2 and (b) non-uniform coupling widths w = 3 and wL = 2. Both protographs have cadd = 2.

In Fig. 3, the degree of each CN is stated in the corresponding square box. Let avg(dˆ(k)) and avg(dˇ(k)) denote the
average boundary CN degrees of the leftmost and rightmost k boundary positions, respectively. For the protograph in Fig. 3(a), both avg(dˆ(3)) and avg(dˇ(3)) are equal to 4 due to the symmetric structure of the ensemble CA. In contrast, the protograph in Fig. 3(b) has a lower left boundary CN degree avg(dˆ(3)) = 3.33 because their edges are widely spread into the right direction. However, the restricted coupling width wL for position L results in the edge distribution concentrated on
the right boundary CNs, which in turn leads to a higher right boundary CN degree avg(dˇ(3)) = 4.66. Such an asymmetric
structure can bring about different decoding properties such
as the one-sided decoding wave, which will be discussed in
Section V in detail. We remark that a particular instance of the
generalized structure of SC-LDPC ensembles was introduced
in [30], [31], where some additional CNs of the conventional ensemble CA are removed. In addition, the ensemble discussed here is different from the non-uniformly coupled LDPC codes
in [32]. Using the terminology of our paper, the ensemble
in [32] has a uniform coupling width for all positions while the
number of edges between different positions is non-uniform,
which corresponds to the case when the component matrices B0, . . ., Bw are different from each other.

CN positions from now on. Then, cadd = w for a uniform
coupling width. For non-uniform coupling widths with the
base coupling width w > cadd, the coupling width wL−i for position L−i, i ∈ {0, . . ., w−cadd−1} is not w but is bounded
by cadd + i so that the number of the additional CN positions becomes the pre-defined value cadd. Thus, the rightmost w −
cadd boundary positions have different coupling widths from w. In addition, the component part S(L−i) for position L − i, i ∈ {0, . . ., w − cadd − 1}, differs from S accordingly. The size of S(L−i) is (wL−i + 1)nc × nv = (cadd + i + 1)nc × nv. Then, the base matrix of size (L + cadd)nc × Lnv for the generalized
SC-LDPC ensemble structure is represented by

(L−(w−cadd))nv
⎡

⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣

S

...

S

(w −cadd )nv
⎤

S(L−u)

...

⎥⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥ , S(L)

(6)

where u = w − cadd − 1. The numbers of VNs and CNs in (6) are equal to those in (1) for a uniform coupling width when they share the same value of w and thus no difference in the
code rate exists.
For example, Fig. 3(a) shows the protograph of the ensemble CA with the uniform coupling width for w = cadd = 2. In Fig. 3(b), we show an instance of the protograph with non-uniform coupling widths for w = 3 and cadd = 2. The coupling width wL for position L is restricted to cadd = 2 in order not to make additional CNs more than cadd = 2. The protograph in Fig. 3(b) corresponds to S = 1 1 ; 1 1 ; 0 0; 1 1 and S(L) = 1 1 ; 1 1 ; 1 1 .

B. Proposed Optimization Method of SC-LDPC Codes

According to the analysis in Section III, the finite-length
performance under WD is affected by both the WD threshold WIN(W ) and the window mean parameter γWIN(W ). Thus,
it is natural to consider an optimization algorithm to maximize WIN(W ) and γWIN(W ) simultaneously. However, it corre-
sponds to a multi-objective optimization problem that gives a
set of optimal solutions and requires additional fine control
to pick an optimized ensemble. Thus, we slightly modify the
definition of the window mean parameter to formulate a single
objective function. Recall that the metric γWIN(W ) for an arbitrary ensemble
A is obtained from r1( ) in Algorithm 1, which is computed at the point near the WD threshold, i.e.,  = AWIN(W ) − 0.01 and normalized with respect to AWIN(W ) − . In order to formulate a single-objective function, we use a modified metric γ¯WIN(W ), for an ensemble A, that is obtained by taking the minimum value of r¯1( ) given as

r¯1( ) =

L

L

x¯j( −1) −

x¯j( ) /(CWAIN(W ) − ),

j=1

j=1

which is original

computed at metric γWIN

 = W CAIN (W ), the

(W ) − 0.01. Compared to modified metric γ¯WIN(W

the ) is

measured at the fixed computing point  = CWAIN(W ) − 0.01, which is determined by the WD threshold CWAIN(W ) of the aforementioned ensemble CA and regardless of the particular

ensemble A. In other words, the ensemble CA gives a reference

point for comparing different ensembles and γ¯WIN(W ) is just

proportional to the number of degree-1 CNs representing the

decoding performance at the reference point. Thus, the ensemble having a higher value of γ¯WIN(W ) is expected to have a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:12:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KWAK et al.: OPTIMIZATION OF SC-LDPC CODES FOR WINDOW DECODING WITH TARGET WINDOW SIZES

2931

better finite-length performance. Of course, it is not always
true because other scaling parameters are required to accurately predict the finite-length performance but we empirically observe that the modified mean parameter γ¯WIN(W ) predicts
well the relative superiority of finite SC-LDPC codes. Thus, we use the modified mean parameter γ¯WIN(W ) as a single
objective function without considering the window threshold WIN(W ). In addition, the modified metric γ¯WIN(W ), called the window mean parameter instead from now on, has other
advantages of enabling to compare ensembles in the same channel condition and accelerating the optimization with the
single objective function that requires only one DE operation
on the computing point. On the contrary, the WD threshold WIN(W ) requires multiple DE operations to find the limit of
the channel condition, which takes multiple times longer than computing the metric γ¯WIN(W ).

Algorithm 2 Proposed Optimization Algorithm Input: W ∗, wmax, L, cadd, nv, nc, lmin, lmax, lavg, bmax, Np,
G, F, pc 1: Initialization: Generate a set of component parts of
size nc(w + 1) × nv, {S1, . . . , SNp } satisfying the code constraints. Then, obtain γ¯WIN(W ∗) for Bt from St, t ∈ {1, . . . , Np}. 2: for g = 1 : G do 3: Mutation: For each t ∈ {1, . . . , Np}, generate Mt as
follows:

[Mt]i,j = [Sk1 ]i,j + F ([Sk2 ]i,j − [Sk3 ]i,j ),
where k1, k2, and k3 are randomly-chosen distinct values in the range {1, . . ., Np}. If an entry of Mt is not an integer or larger than bmax, the entry is replaced by the closest integer value among {0, 1, . . . , bmax}. 4: Crossover: For each t ∈ {1, . . . , Np}, generate a trial instance Tt as follows:

[Tt]i,j =

[St]i,j with probability pc [Mt]i,j with probability 1 − pc.

If Tt does not satisfy the code constraints, repeat the
generating process of Tt.
5: Selection: Update St to Tt when one of the following
conditions is satisfied. 1) γ¯WIN(W ∗) is improved. 2) If not, γ¯WIN(W ∗) keeps unchanged and
std(dˇ(wmax)) becomes smaller. 6: end for
Select Bt such that γ¯WIN(W ∗) is the maximum value.

Algorithm 2 describes the proposed optimization algorithm for SC-LDPC codes. The objective of the optimization is to maximize γ¯WIN(W ∗) for a given target window size W ∗. Algorithm 2 is based on differential evolution in [19], [20] for which randomly generated component parts are evolved through the mutation, crossover, and selection steps. Since the component part S completely defines the full base matrix B of SC-LDPC ensembles with a uniform coupling width,

Algorithm 2 evolves S instead of B. For the case of non-uniform coupling widths with w > cadd, each instance to be evolved includes additional w − cadd component parts S(L−k), . . ., S(L) for k = w − cadd − 1 as well. Algorithm 2 is described for the case of a uniform coupling width without
loss of generality.
As input parameters, we include the target window size W ∗ and the maximum available coupling width wmax. The generated base matrix can have the coupling width w up to wmax for non-uniform coupling widths. The other inputs are the parameters for the code structure L, cadd, nv, nc, the constraint parameters lmin, lmax, lavg, bmax, and the parameters for differential evolution Np, G, F, pc. Algorithm 2 is initialized with a set of Np randomly generated instances S1, . . ., SNp of the component part S satisfying the code constraints as follows.
1) The maximum entry of S is at most bmax. 2) The VN degree of the resulting base matrix B from S
should be at least lmin and at most lmax. The average VN degree should be less or equal to lavg. 3) B0 should contain the identity matrix Inc×nc of size nc × nc as a sub-matrix such that B0 = B0 Inc×nc . The first and second constraints are trivial and the third one
is the condition for enabling linear time encoding [33]. For the selection step, a trial instance Tt is selected if it has an improved γ¯WIN(W ∗) value. Otherwise, the trial instance Tt is also selected instead of St if γ¯WIN(W ∗) keeps unchanged and the standard deviation of the rightmost wmax boundary CN degrees dˇ(wmax), denoted by std(dˇ(wmax)), becomes smaller. The second condition for the selection step makes the
right boundary CN degrees as equal as possible to make the
check concentrated degree distribution for the right boundary
positions [29].
C. Optimization Results
For the target window sizes W ∗ = 6, 9, 12, 15, 18, 21, 24, we repeat Algorithm 2 with the input parameters wmax = 4, L = 50, cadd = 2, nv = 4, nc = 2, lmin = 3, lmax = 3, lavg = 3 and the parameters for differential evolution Np = 100, G = 1,000, F = 0.5, pc = 0.5. The VN degree and cadd are restricted to three and two, respectively, as in the case of the ensembles CA and CB. In addition, the coupling width is permitted up to wmax = 4. For the smallest target window size W ∗ = 6, multiple edges are allowed by bmax = 2 like the competing ensembles CB and CC targeting small window sizes. For the other target window sizes, we set bmax = 1 to compare with CA showing the competitive performance among the conventional ensembles for large window sizes. The number of populations Np = 100 and the max generation number G = 1,000 are large enough for all Np populations to converge to an optimized result. As mentioned before, the DE equations for obtaining γ¯WIN(W ) require only one operation at a particular point W CAIN(W ) − 0.01. One optimization task in Algorithm 2 for each target window size
and the particular input parameters takes less than one hour
by the standard computing environment. For each target window size W ∗, we refer to the optimized
proposed ensemble as PW ∗ . Note that we will use W for an

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:12:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2932

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 70, NO. 5, MAY 2022

Fig. 4. Base matrices of the proposed SC-LDPC ensembles for L = 6: (a) P6, (b) P9, (c) P12, (d) P15, (e) P18, (f) P21, and (g) P24.

operating window size and W ∗ for a target window size of the
proposed ensembles hereafter. Algorithm 2 gives a family of proposed ensembles denoted by {PW ∗ } = {P6, P9, . . ., P24}. In Fig. 4, the base matrices for the proposed ensemble family {PW ∗} are described for L = 6, which is sufficient to define their base matrices for an arbitrary L. We also include the
coupling width w in Fig. 4. If w is larger than cadd = 2, the boundary positions have a different coupling width and component part. For example, for target window W ∗ = 15,
Algorithm 2 continuously evolves component parts to find the optimized result maximizing γ¯WIN(W ∗ = 15). Algorithm
2 gives the optimized value w = 3 > cadd = 2 and the optimized component parts S and S(L) such as S, S(L), shown

at the bottom of the page, which completely define the base
matrix of the proposed ensemble P15 in Fig. 4(d). In Table IV, we summarize γ¯WIN(W ) and WIN(W ) for
the conventional ensembles CA, CB, CC, and the proposed ensemble family {PW ∗} with their w and cadd. To show the
optimization results clearly, we highlight the optimized values of γ¯WIN(W ∗) and the corresponding values of WIN(W ∗) for
PW ∗ in the bold type. It shows that the proposed ensemble PW ∗ has an improved γ¯WIN(W ) value compared to the conventional ensembles if the operating window size W is equal to the target window size W ∗, which implies that the optimization algorithm for maximizing γ¯WIN(W ∗) works as
we intended. Although the resulting WD threshold of the

S=

0 1

1 0

1 0

0 1

;

1 1

0 0

1 1

0 0

;

0 0

0 0

0 0

0 0

;

0 0

1 1

0 0

1 1

,

S(L) =

0 0

0 0

1 0

0 1

;

1 0

1 1

0 1

0 1

;

1 1

0 1

1 0

1 0

,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:12:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KWAK et al.: OPTIMIZATION OF SC-LDPC CODES FOR WINDOW DECODING WITH TARGET WINDOW SIZES
TABLE IV COMPARISON OF THE CONVENTIONAL ENSEMBLES CA, CB, CC AND PROPOSED SC-LDPC ENSEMBLES P6, . . ., P24
IN TERMS OF THE WINDOW MEAN PARAMETER AND WD THRESHOLD

2933

Fig. 5. Plot of γ¯WIN(W ) as a function of the operating window size W for the conventional ensembles CA, CB, and the proposed ensembles PW ∗ for the target window size W ∗ = {6, 9, . . ., 24}. For the proposed ensemble family {PW }, we plot γ¯PWWIN(W ) at each point of W .

proposed ensemble is slightly degraded for some cases such
as W CAIN(24) > PW2I4N(24), the gap is negligible to make a negative effect on the decoding performance. If the WD
Itγ¯hnWreFIsNihg(o.Wl5d,),thPWeWINv∗=a(WlueW C)sAIioNsf(sWγ¯mWa)lIlN−er(W0th.0a)1na, rthewepecloostemttepdγ¯uPfW toiW nIrNg∗t(hpWeoic)notn=vefon0r-.

tional and the proposed ensembles, showing again that the

proposed ensemble PW ∗ with the target window size W ∗

achieves the maximum γ¯WIN(W ) if the operating window

size equals to the target window size, W = W ∗. Note that

γ¯PWWIN∗ (W ) tends to W decreases from

be monotonically and rapidly the target window size W ∗,

decreasing as which means

it is not desirable to use PW ∗ if W < W ∗. However, the

proposed ensemble family {PW } can provide improved values

of γ¯WIN(W ) over all range of window sizes, as represented

by blue plus symbols in Fig. 5, under the assumption that PW

is used in accordance with the given operating window size

W . For the proposed ensemble family {PW }, the value of γ¯WIN(W ) for PW is plotted for each point of W .

D. Finite-Length Performance Comparison This subsection shows that the improvement in γ¯WIN(W )
also results in the WD performance gain. Fig. 6 compares the

FER decoding performance for the conventional and proposed

SC-LDPC codes from CA, CB, CC, and {PW ∗ }. We set L = 100 and M = 1,000 for all codes in Fig. 6. Each sub-

graph corresponds to an operating window size varying from

W = 6 to 24. As is clear from Fig. 6, the proposed code PW optimized by targeting the operating window size W outper-

forms the conventional codes CA, CB, and CC over all ranges of W , validating the effectiveness of the proposed optimization

method. The performance improvement, especially for large

window sizes W = 18, 24, is around more than two orders of

magnitude for the lower FER region. In addition, the falling

slope of the FER curve is slightly improved for W = 12 and

noticeably improved for W = 18, 24, which can be explained

by the improvement in γ¯PW2I4N(24). In Fig. 6(c),

γ¯WIN(W ) such as γ¯CWAIN(24) we also include the performance

< of

the other proposed codes P15 and P21 that are optimized

for different window sizes near the operating window size

W = 18, where we can see that the target code P18 also outperforms the other proposed codes while the codes P15 and P21 have a similar decoding performance. It is noticeable

that this comparison in the actual decoding performance is

consistent with the comparison in the window mean parameter as γ¯PW1I5N(18) ≈ γ¯PW2I1N(18) < γ¯PW1I8N(18). For W = 24 shown in Fig. 6(d), the proposed code P24 outperforms P18 obviously but the code P24 shows significantly degraded performance for W = 18 as shown in Fig. 6(c). In other words, the operating

window size should not be smaller than the target window size

in order to obtain the promised performance of the proposed

codes. The same phenomenon is observed when the code CA

is decoded by a small window size W = 6.

E. Trade-Off Between the Decoding Latency and Performance
For the window decoder, there is a trade-off between the decoding latency and decoding performance, which can be controlled by varying the window size W . We assume that the decoding latency is proportional to the window size W . In Fig. 7, we plot the required  for achieving the target FER 10−3 by varying W . For each proposed ensemble, we only

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:12:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2934

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 70, NO. 5, MAY 2022

Fig. 6. Finite-length performance for the conventional ensembles CA, CB, CC and the proposed ensembles PW ∗ ’s for different window sizes: (a) W = 6, (b) W = 12, (c) W = 18, and (d) W = 24. We set L = 100 and M = 1,000.

Fig. 7. Required for achieving FER 10−3 against the window size W for the ensembles CA, CB, P6, . . ., P24 with L = 100 and M = 1,000. For the proposed ensemble family {PW }, we plot the required of PW at each point of W .
include the case when the window size W is at least the target window size W ∗. Similar to the representation in Fig. 5, we trace the required  of the ensemble PW at each point W for the proposed ensemble family {PW }. It shows that the proposed ensemble family {PW } provides a non-saturated performance improvement as a longer decoding latency is supported. It is also remarkable that the proposed ensemble PW for the window size W outperforms the conventional ensembles and other proposed ensembles targeting other

window sizes, which is consistent with the comparison in terms of γ¯WIN(W ) shown in Fig. 5. In other words, there is a direct correlation between the proposed metric and the actual finite-length performance. We finally note that the proposed ensembles can produce a performance gain even under the adaptive WD scheme [4], for which the window size can be varied while decoding a codeword, as long as the proposed ensemble PW is selected according to the smallest possible window size W of the adaptive WD scheme. For example, if the smallest possible window size is equal to W = 6, the proposed ensemble P6 still provides a performance gain over all possible window sizes W ≥ 6 compared to the conventional ensemble CB as shown in Fig. 7. Note that in this case, the conventional ensemble CA cannot be used due to its poor decoding performance for W = 6.
V. DISCUSSION
In this section, we first analyze the structural characteristics of the proposed ensembles from which we find out underlying design rules on the proposed SC-LDPC codes. In addition, we show that the proposed optimization algorithm is still effective for various input parameters.
A. Analysis of the Proposed Ensembles
Consider the first three positions for the ensemble P6 given as (7), shown at the bottom of the next page. In [4], they

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:12:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KWAK et al.: OPTIMIZATION OF SC-LDPC CODES FOR WINDOW DECODING WITH TARGET WINDOW SIZES

2935

Fig. 8. Comparison of the ensembles in terms of the CN degree distribution: (a) The CN degree di at position i for the ensembles CA, CB, P6, P12, P18, and P24, and (b): the average boundary CN degrees avg(dˆ(wmax)) and avg(dˇ(wmax)) for the proposed ensemble family {PW ∗ }.
introduced a design rule that recommends to avoid degree-1 VNs as much as possible within a window to improve the WD performance for small W . This design rule is for protecting the most vulnerable VNs located in the right end of the window by increasing their degrees, resulting in high density of the component matrix B0. The proposed ensemble P6 is also optimized to have high density of B0 (shaded in (7)). Except for the last nc VNs at B0 enforced to have degree-1 by the code constraint for linear-time encoding, the other nodes are optimized to have degree-3 by concentrating all edges at B0. In other words, the proposed algorithm is evolved to impose the design rule in [4] automatically.
The concentrated edge distribution on B0 improves γ¯WIN(W ) for small W . However, at the same time, the structure of B0 inevitably induces a side effect of increasing CN degrees of the left boundary positions, which in turn makes

the left decoding wave weak. Fig. 8(a) shows the average CN degree di at position i for the conventional and proposed ensembles for L = 20. The ensembles CB and P6 targeting small W have higher left boundary CN degrees compared to
the other ensembles. We observe that the proposed ensemble PW ∗ has a characteristic that the left boundary CN degrees tend to decrease as the target window size W ∗ increases. Especially for the ensemble P24, the CN degrees for the first three positions are extremely low, where the edges connected
to VNs at the first position are widely spread to CNs at the w = 4 neighborhood positions as shown in Fig. 4. In other words, the proposed ensemble PW ∗ for large W ∗ is optimized in the direction of decreasing the left boundary CN degrees to enhance the left decoding wave. This optimization direction
is opposed to the design rule in [4] for small window sizes,
resulting in weak reliability of VNs located in the right end of the window, but this effect becomes marginal in the region
of large window sizes. It is noticeable that the proposed ensemble PW ∗ for large
W ∗ such as W ∗ = 18, 21, 24 makes full use of the maximum coupling width wmax = 4 to strengthen the left decoding wave. However, the widespread structure toward the right
direction with the large coupling width induces a higher CN
degrees of the right boundary positions as shown in Fig. 8(a). In Fig. 8(b), we plot the boundary CN degrees, avg(dˆ(wmax)) and avg(dˇ(wmax)), of the leftmost and rightmost wmax boundary positions for the ensemble family {PW ∗ }. It shows that the left average degree monotonically decreases as the target window size W ∗ grows and the right average degree shows the opposite tendency. For P24, the left and right average degrees are extremely asymmetric, whose effect can be shown graphically by the evolution of erasure probability x¯i( ) for BP decoding as shown in Fig. 9. The evolution is obtained by the DE equations (4) and (5) for L = 100 and at  = 0.47. Compared with the left decoding wave for the ensemble CA, a much faster left decoding wave is observed for the ensemble P24. It comes from the large coupling width and the corresponding extremely lower left boundary CN degrees, which
was also reported in [27], [28] for the randomly constructed
SC-LDPC codes. On the contrary, no right decoding wave is observed for the ensemble P24 due to higher right boundary CN degrees. However, it is expected that no performance
degradation occurs from the absence of the right decoding wave, as the window decoder can exploit the left decoding
wave only. We conclude this subsection by summarizing the underlying design rules observed from the proposed ensembles
as follows.
1) For a small target window size, edges tend to be concentrated on B0 to improve the reliability of the most vulnerable VNs in the small window.

⎡

⎤

2210

⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣

1 0 0 0

1 0 0 0

0 0 2 0

1 0 0 1

2 1 0

2 1 0

1 0 0

0 1 0

2

2

1

0 ⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥.

(7)

000100201101

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:12:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2936

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 70, NO. 5, MAY 2022

Fig. 9. The evolution of erasure probability x¯i( ) as grows for the ensembles CA and P24 for L = 100 and at = 0.47.
2) For a large target window size, edges tend to be spread up to Bw with large w to reduce left boundary CN degrees for enhancing the left decoding wave.
B. Effect of the Coupling Width
In Section IV, we perform the optimization with the maximum coupling width wmax = 4 and the proposed ensembles for large window size W = 24 are optimized to have the coupling width w = wmax. In order to confirm the effect of the coupling width independently, we repeat the optimization with different values of wmax = 2, 3. The optimized ensembles for wmax = 2, 3 are denoted by P24,2 and P24,3, respectively, while P24 is the previously proposed one for wmax = 4. Fig. 10 compares the finite-length performance of the codes CA, P24,2, P24,3, and P24 with the window size W = 24. It shows that the performance is improved as wmax grows. The average boundary CN degrees avg(rˆ(5)) are 4.125, 3.125, 2.5 for the ensembles P24,2, P24,3, and P24, respectively. It confirms again that a better performance comes from lower left boundary CN degrees with large wmax for the case of large W . Fig. 10 also includes the BP decoding performances for CA and P24. We can see that the WD performance for CA is fairly worse than its BP decoding performance even though the window size is sufficiently large because BP decoding can exploit the right decoding wave which cannot be triggered by the window decoder, resulting in notably different performance curve slopes. On the contrary, P24 has no right decoding wave even under BP decoding as shown in Fig. 9 and thus the BP decoding and WD performances show nearly the same performance and falling slope. In other words, Fig 9 shows the impact of the asymmetric termination of the proposed ensemble P24 in terms of the finite-length performance.
C. Flexibility of the Proposed Optimization
Up to now, we have considered (3, 6) regular degrees with the target code rate 1/2 as an running example. This subsection shows the design flexibility of the proposed optimization algorithm in terms of the code rate and degree distribution with different input parameters. In addition, we evaluate the performance over the AWGN channel.
1) Degrees (4, 8): To compare with the conventional ensemble C(4,8) defined by S = [1 1; 1 1; 1 1; 1 1]

Fig. 10. Finite-length performance for the SC-LDPC ensembles CA, P24,2, P24,3, and P24 with the window size W = 24 together with the BP decoding performance for the ensembles CA and P24. We set L = 100 and M = 1,000.
from the (4, 8) regular uncoupled ensemble, the proposed ensemble P(4,8),W ∗ is optimized with the input parameters nc = 2, nv = 4, lmin = 4, lmax = 4, lavg = 4, cadd = 3, wmax = 5. Fig. 11(a) shows that the proposed ensembles outperform the conventional ensemble for both window sizes W = 6 and W = 24. 2) Code rate 3/4: The proposed ensemble P(3,12),W ∗ is obtained with the input parameters nc = 2, nv = 8, lmin = 3, lmax = 3, lavg = 3, cadd = 2, wmax = 4 to be compared with the conventional ensemble C(3,12) defined by S = [1 1 1 1; 1 1 1 1; 1 1 1 1] from the (3, 12) regular uncoupled ensemble of rate 3/4.
Fig. 11(b) shows that the superiority of the proposed ensembles is still valid for code rate 3/4. 3) Irregular degree distribution: The ensemble CC has irregular degree distributions with the average VN degree ¯l = 3.5 and the maximum VN degree lmax = 4. The value of cadd is one, which is different from those of the other ensembles in Subsection IV-C. Thus, we construct the proposed ensemble P6,irr with the input parameters nc = 2, nv = 4, lmin = 3, lmax = 4, lavg = 3.5, cadd = 1, wmax = 2 with the target window size W ∗ = 6 to be compared with the conventional ensemble CC fairly. In addition, we compare with the spatially coupled repeataccumulate (SC-RA) ensemble CRA that is known to have good finite-length scaling properties [14], [34]. The SC-RA ensemble CRA with coupling width w = 5 has also irregular degree distribution with the average VN degree l¯ = 3.5 and is proper for large window size W due to large w = 5. Thus, we construct the proposed ensemble P24,irr with the input parameters nc = 2, nv = 4, lmin = 3, lmax = 5, lavg = 3.5, cadd = 2, wmax = 5 with the target window size W ∗ = 24. Fig. 11(c) shows the superiority of the proposed ensembles P6,irr and P24,irr over the conventional ensembles CC and CRA, respectively.
4) Evaluation over the AWGN channel: For the window
decoding over the AWGN channel, we set the maximum number of iterations by 10 for each window

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:12:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KWAK et al.: OPTIMIZATION OF SC-LDPC CODES FOR WINDOW DECODING WITH TARGET WINDOW SIZES

2937

Fig. 11. Finite-length performance for (a) the ensembles C(4,8), P(4,8),6, P(4,8),24 with (4, 8) regular degrees, (b) the ensembles C(3,12), P(3,12),6, P(3,12),24 with (3, 12) regular degrees, (c) the ensembles CC, P6, P6,irr, CRA, P24, P24,irr, and (d) the ensembles CA, P6, P24 over the AWGN channel. We set L = 100 and M = 1,000 and write the window size at each label.

configuration and use the early termination scheme based on the soft bit error rate (BER) estimates [6]. Fig. 11(d) shows that the proposed ensembles outperform the conventional ensembles over not only the BEC but also the AWGN channel.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed an optimization method for protograph-based SC-LDPC ensembles decoded by the window decoder. We first proposed a performance metric reflecting the finite-length WD performance from a scaling analysis for WD and then formulated the optimization problem to maximize the proposed metric. For a given window size, it was shown that the proposed SC-LDPC ensemble, which is optimized for the given window size, outperforms the conventional SC-LDPC ensembles. In addition, we provided the analysis of the proposed ensembles and revealed that the desired property of SC-LDPC codes is completely different according to the window size. In addition to the performance improvement, the proposed optimization method has several advantages as follows: i) Since optimization targeting a given window size can be performed, we constructed a code family for a wide range of window sizes {6, 9, . . ., 24}. ii) The optimization time is relatively shorter than other optimization methods such as maximizing the WD threshold because the proposed metric is obtained by running the DE equations at a particular point. iii) It was shown that the optimization method is flexible

to various code rates and degree distributions. iv) Since the proposed metric is obtained from DE, the optimization method
can be generalized into different channels or decoding schemes
as long as their corresponding DE equations are provided.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Kudekar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Threshold saturation via spatial coupling: Why convolutional LDPC ensembles perform so well over the BEC,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 803–834, Feb. 2011.
[2] S. Kudekar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Spatially coupled ensembles universally achieve capacity under belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 7761–7813, Dec. 2013.
[3] A. R. Iyengar, P. H. Siegel, R. L. Urbanke, and J. K. Wolf, “Windowed decoding of spatially coupled codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 2277–2292, Apr. 2013.
[4] A. R. Iyengar, M. Papaleo, P. H. Siegel, J. K. Wolf, A. Vanelli-Coralli, and G. E. Corazza, “Windowed decoding of protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes over erasure channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 2303–2320, Apr. 2012.
[5] M. Schluter, N. U. Hassan, and G. P. Fettweis, “On the construction of protograph based SC-LDPC codes for windowed decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Wireless Commun. Netw. Conf. (WCNC), Apr. 2018, pp. 1–6.
[6] N. Ul Hassan, A. E. Pusane, M. Lentmaier, G. P. Fettweis, and D. J. Costello, “Non-uniform window decoding schedules for spatially coupled LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 65, no. 2, pp. 501–510, Feb. 2017.
[7] K. Klaiber, S. Cammerer, L. Schmalen, and S. T. Brink, “Avoiding burstlike error patterns in windowed decoding of spatially coupled LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE 10th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process. (ISTC), Dec. 2018, pp. 1–5.
[8] A. Tarable, M. Ferrari, and L. Barletta, “Two is better than one: Reducing the loss of the window decoder for SC-LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop (ITW), Apr. 2021, pp. 1–5.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:12:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2938

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 70, NO. 5, MAY 2022

[9] S. Abu-Surra, E. Pisek, and R. Taori, “Spatially-coupled low-density parity check codes: Zigzag-window decoding and code-family design considerations,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop (ITA), Feb. 2015, pp. 275–281.
[10] I. Ali, J.-H. Kim, S.-H. Kim, H. Kwak, and J.-S. No, “Improving windowed decoding of SC LDPC codes by effective decoding termination, message reuse, and amplification,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 9336–9346, 2018.
[11] M. Battaglioni, M. Baldi, and E. Paolini, “Complexity-constrained spatially coupled LDPC codes based on protographs,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Wireless Commun. Syst. (ISWCS), Aug. 2017, pp. 49–53.
[12] D. G. M. Mitchell, M. Lentmaier, and D. J. Costello, “Spatially coupled LDPC codes constructed from protographs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 9, pp. 4866–4889, Sep. 2015.
[13] D. J. Costello, Jr., L. Dolecek, T. E. Fuja, J. Kliewer, D. G. M. Mitchell, and R. Smarandache, “Spatially coupled sparse codes on graphs: Theory and practice,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 168–176, Jul. 2014.
[14] M. Stinner and P. M. Olmos, “On the waterfall performance of finitelength SC-LDPC codes constructed from protographs,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 345–361, Feb. 2016.
[15] H.-Y. Kwak, J.-W. Kim, and J.-S. No, “Optimizing code parameters of finite-length SC-LDPC codes using the scaling law,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 118640–118650, 2021.
[16] M. Stinner, L. Barletta, and P. M. Olmos, “Finite-length scaling based on belief propagation for spatially coupled LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jul. 2016, pp. 2109–2113.
[17] P. M. Olmos and R. Urbanke, “A scaling law to predict the finite-length performance of spatially coupled LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 6, pp. 3164–3184, Jun. 2015.
[18] R. Sokolovskii, A. G. I. Amat, and F. Brannstrom, “Finite-length scaling of spatially coupled LDPC codes under window decoding over the BEC,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 68, no. 10, pp. 5988–5998, Oct. 2020.
[19] K. V. Price, R. M. Storn, and J. A. Lampinen, Differential Evolution: A Practical Approach to Global Optimization. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2005.
[20] S. Das and P. N. Suganthan, “Differential evolution: A survey of the state-of-the-art,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 4–31, Feb. 2011.
[21] K. Liu, M. El-Khamy, and J. Lee, “Finite-length algebraic spatiallycoupled quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 329–344, Feb. 2016.
[22] M. Battaglioni, A. Tasdighi, G. Cancellieri, F. Chiaraluce, and M. Baldi, “Design and analysis of time-invariant SC-LDPC convolutional codes with small constraint length,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 66, no. 3, pp. 918–931, Mar. 2018.
[23] S. Mo, L. Chen, D. J. Costello, D. G. M. Mitchell, R. Smarandache, and J. Qiu, “Designing protograph-based quasi-cyclic spatially coupled LDPC codes with large girth,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 68, no. 9, pp. 5326–5337, Sep. 2020.
[24] H. Esfahanizadeh, A. Hareedy, and L. Dolecek, “Finite-length construction of high performance spatially-coupled codes via optimized partitioning and lifting,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 3–16, Jan. 2019.
[25] A. Hareedy, R. Wu, and L. Dolecek, “A channel-aware combinatorial approach to design high performance spatially-coupled codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 66, no. 8, pp. 4834–4852, Aug. 2020.
[26] S. Naseri and A. H. Banihashemi, “Construction of time invariant spatially coupled LDPC codes free of small trapping sets,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 69, no. 6, pp. 3485–3501, Jun. 2021.
[27] V. Aref, L. Schmalen, and S. ten Brink, “On the convergence speed of spatially coupled LDPC ensembles,” in Proc. 51st Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput. (Allerton), Oct. 2013, pp. 342–349.
[28] R. El-Khatib and N. Macris, “The velocity of the propagating wave for spatially coupled systems with applications to LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 64, no. 11, pp. 7113–7131, Nov. 2018.
[29] T. J. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridege Univ. Press, 2008.
[30] K. Tazoe, K. Kasai, and K. Sakaniwa, “Efficient termination of spatiallycoupled codes,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Sep. 2012, pp. 30–34.
[31] M. R. Sanatkar and H. D. Pfister, “Increasing the rate of spatiallycoupled codes via optimized irregular termination,” in Proc. 9th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process. (ISTC), Sep. 2016, pp. 31–35.
[32] L. Schmalen, V. Aref, and F. Jardel, “Non-uniformly coupled LDPC codes: Better thresholds, smaller rate-loss, and less complexity,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jun. 2017, pp. 376–380.

[33] A. E. Pusane, A. J. Felstrom, A. Sridharan, M. Lentmaier, K. S. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Implementation aspects of LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 1060–1069, Jul. 2008.
[34] S. Johnson and G. Lechner, “Spatially coupled repeat-accumulate codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 373–376, Feb. 2013.
Hee-Youl Kwak received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical and computer engineering from Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea, in 2013 and 2019, respectively. Since 2019, he has been a Staff Engineer with Samsung Electronics, South Korea. In 2021, he joined the Faculty of the Institute of New Media and Communications, Seoul National University, where he is currently a Senior Researcher. His area of research interests include error-correcting codes, coding theory, and coding for memory.
Jae-Won Kim (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical and computer engineering from Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea, in 2014 and 2020, respectively. From 2020 to 2021, he was a Staff Engineer with Samsung Electronics, South Korea. In 2021, he joined Gyeongsang National University, Jinju, South Korea, where he is currently an Assistant Professor with the Department of Electronic Engineering. His research interests include error-correcting codes, coding theory, index coding, and DNA storage.
Hosung Park (Member, IEEE) received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea, in 2007, 2009, and 2013, respectively. He was a Post-Doctoral Researcher with the Institute of New Media and Communications, Seoul National University, in 2013, and the Qualcomm Institute, California Institute for Telecommunications and Information Technology, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA, from 2013 to 2015. Since 2015, he has been an Associate Professor with the Department of Computer Engineering, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, South Korea. His research interests include channel codes for communications systems, coding for memory/storage, coding for distributed storage, communication signal processing, compressed sensing, and network information theory.
Jong-Seon No (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S. and M.S.E.E. degrees in electronics engineering from Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea, in 1981 and 1984, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA, in 1988. He was a Senior MTS with Hughes Network Systems from 1988 to 1990. He was an Associate Professor with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Konkuk University, Seoul, from 1990 to 1999. In 1999, he joined the Faculty of the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, where he is currently a Professor. His current research interests include error-correcting codes, cryptography, sequences, LDPC codes, interference alignment, and wireless communication systems. He became a fellow of the IEEE through the IEEE Information Theory Society in 2012. He became a member of the National Academy of Engineering of Korea (NAEK) in 2015, where he is currently the Division Chair of electrical, electronic, and information engineering. He was a recipient of the IEEE Information Theory Society Chapter of the Year Award in 2007. From 1996 to 2008, he served as the Founding Chair for the Seoul Chapter of the IEEE Information Theory Society. He was the General Chair of Sequence and Their Applications 2004 (SETA2004), Seoul. He also served as the General Co-Chair for the International Symposium on Information Theory and Its Applications 2006 (ISITA2006) and the International Symposium on Information Theory 2009 (ISIT2009), Seoul. He served as the Co-Editor-in-Chief for the Journal of Communications and Networks from 2012 to 2013.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:12:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

