964

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 26, NO. 5, MAY 2022

Lower Bounds of Regular QC-LDPC Codes and SES Generation Algorithm
Aleksei Kharin , Aleksei Dryakhlov, Konstantin Zavertkin , Aleksei Ovinnikov , and Evgeny Likhobabin

Abstract— In this letter we propose a new approach to generation of regular QC-LDPC codes with girth up to 12. The aim of the proposed smart exhaustive search (SES) algorithm is to construct codes with the desired lifting factor or to check whether codes with this parameter even exist. We define new lower bounds on the lifting degree as a necessary condition for the lifted graph to have a certain girth from fully connected base graphs. This modification opens space for improvement of the lifting factor minimisation problem for QC-LDPC code construction. With a more precisely defined search region it is possible to achieve better results with existing algorithms.
Index Terms— Regular LDPC, quasi-cyclic (QC), girth, cyclic lifting, bounds on girth.
I. INTRODUCTION
O NE of the well-known classes of structured low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes is based on protographs [1]. Such codes are constructed by lifting a smaller Tanner graph, called the base graph, into a lifted graph. When using circulant permutations in the lifting process, the resultant code is called quasi-cyclic (QC). A special case of protograph construction is where the base graph is a fully connected or complete bipartite graph. In this case, each node in one partition is connected to all the nodes in the other partition of the graph.
QC-LDPC codes can be divided into two major classes: algebraic and random constructions. Search-based methods [3], [4], (even heuristic or exhaustive ones) require high search complexity but may find codes with shorter length than the ones obtained with algebraic methods. However, all of them are probabilistic, so they are not able to solve the lifting factor minimisation problem. Algebraic-based methods [2], on the other hand, will explicitly determine the code; however, so far algebraic methods are only known for the construction of small girth code, not high girth code. Some authors try to combine these two methods in order to construct large girth QC-LDPC codes with short length in considerably lower search complexity [5]. Sequentially multiplied column (SMC) and its Integer Ring Sieve (IRS) modification [12] are one of the best in terms of lifting factor minimisation for different girths and base graph densities.
In this letter, we study the relationships between the short cycles of a lifted graph, the size of the base graph, and the
Manuscript received October 25, 2021; revised December 13, 2021 and January 31, 2022; accepted February 22, 2022. Date of publication February 25, 2022; date of current version May 10, 2022. This work was supported by Russian Science Foundation under Grant 17-79-20302. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was M. Baldi. (Corresponding author: Aleksei Kharin.)
The authors are with the Department of Basis of Radio Engineering and Telecommunication, Ryazan State Radio Engineering University, 390005 Ryazan, Russia (e-mail kharin.a.v@tor.rsreu.ru; drahlov.a.a@tor. rsreu.ru; zavertkin.k.n@tor.rsreu.ru; ovinnikov.a.a@tor.rsreu.ru; likhobabin. e.a@tor.rsreu.ru).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2022.3154799

lifting degree using known bounds and modifying them. Based on [7], an algorithm is proposed that allows the known values of lifting factor to be lower compared with the SMC method. The bounds presented in the letter prompted experiments that lowered the values of minimum circulant size for some SMC-structured QC-LDPC codes.
The remainder of the letter is organized as follows. Section II contains several common definitions and notations used in this letter. In Section III, the proposed smart exhaustive search (SES) algorithm is presented. Lower bounds on the lifting degree required for the lifted graphs to have girth values 8 and 12 are provided in Section IV. Finally, we present numerical results that demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithm and compare it with designs from the literature.

II. DEFINITIONS AND NOTATIONS

Let G{V, C} denote a bipartite graph of an (n, k)

QC-LDPC code of rate R = k/n, which consists of the set

of n variable nodes V = {v0, v1, . . . , vn−1} and the set of m ≥ n − k check nodes C = {c0, c1, . . . , cm−1}. An LDPC

code is said to be regular if all variable and check nodes have

the same degree - dv and dc, respectively. The girth g of the

graph G is the length of the shortest cycle in it. The parity-

check matrix H of a (dv, dc)-regular QC-LDPC code of length

n = z · dc can be represented by:

⎡

I (p0,0 )

H = ⎢⎢⎢⎣

I (p1,0 ) ...

⎤

I(p0,1) . . . I(p0,dc−1)

I (p1,1 ) ...

... ...

I (p1,dc−1 ) ...

⎥⎦⎥⎥ (1)

I(pdv−1,0) I(pdv−1,1) . . . I(pdv−1,dc−1)

where z is called the lifting factor and I(pi,j) represents the z × z circulant permutation matrix whose nonzero elements in each row are cyclically shifted to the right by pi,j. Without loss of generality, all entries in the first row and the first column of the base matrix P can be fixed to zero, pi,0 = p0,j = 0, ∀i, j and I(0) is the identity matrix.
Fossorier [3] showed that the necessary and sufficient condition for the existence of the cycle of length 2 · l in P is

 l−1

(pik,jk − pik+1,jk ) = 0 mod z,

(2)

k=0

where il = 0, ik = ik+1, jk = jk+1, 2 ≤ l ≤ g/2 − 1. He also showed that the girth of such codes is upper bounded by 12.
We can see that the larger z is, the more degrees of freedom one gets to satisfy the set of equations (2). However, finding the minimum circulant size zmin such that (2) is satisfied is not a trivial problem. One of the proposed solutions to obtain QC-LDPC with minimised circulant sizes is to rely on the PEG

1558-2558 © 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:14:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KHARIN et al.: LOWER BOUNDS OF REGULAR QC-LDPC CODES AND SES GENERATION ALGORITHM

965

Fig. 1. a) - Equivalent cycles of different lengths - a cycle of length 10 and a cycle of length 6 have the same base equation; b) - Three cycles that have the same disabled relative shift values in the last column.
algorithm for quasi-cyclic codes [6]. We offer an extended modification of this method.
III. SES GENERATION ALGORITHM
The SES algorithm is based on the PEG approach. Shift values in the matrix are subsequently selected one by one, so that at each step the formed submatrix has the required properties in terms of girth. We have introduced a number of modifications to the girth-control mechanism. These modifications allow us to lower the search complexity.
A. Cycle Storing
To control the girth, it is necessary to control the presence of cycles of different lengths. For each cycle, a condition can be composed based on (2). By solving this condition, we can check whether a cycle exists in the current submatrix or not.
In the SES algorithm, the conditions for cycles with lengths of 4 and 6 are stored in a form of (2), and cycles with lengths of 8 and 10 are stored differently. In [8] and [9], it was shown that for any cycle of length 8 or length 10 formed from a route, equation (2) can be expressed through equations of cycles with lengths of 4 and 6. Furthermore, equations for single cycles of length 8 and length 10 can also be expressed through cycles with lengths of 4 and 6. Based on this idea, conditions for cycles of length 8 and 10 are stored as links to a couple of base equation solutions of certain cycles of length 4 or 6. This modification significantly simplifies the check process.
Additionally, we tend to minimise the total number of conditions to check. The first idea is to exclude the ‘equivalent cycles’ [12]. This allows the number of conditions to be lowered twice for some types of paths. The second idea is very similar: it is based on the fact that some base equations are equal for cycles of different lengths. For cycles of length 10, some base equations are equal to those for cycles of length 8 or length 6 (Fig. 1.a). As we aim to achieve a certain girth, the conditions for short cycles have already been checked, and there is no need to check them again for cycles of length 10. The conditions for such cases are not stored.
The final optimisation that allows us to lower the total number of cycles is possible due to the predictive approach used in the SES algorithm and is described later.

B. Predictive Search
The SES algorithm uses a predictive approach for the shift value selection mechanism instead of the generally used ‘guess-and-test’ approach.
All the conditions are linked to the column and to the element. As a result, when we switch to a new column, we have a list of conditions for potential cycles that appear in a matrix with the addition of the new column. Also, for every element there is a narrow list of cycles that are connected to the current and previous elements in the column. For prediction implementation, all the conditions are divided into two groups:
• conditions that depend only on two elements in the current column, and
• conditions that depend on three or four elements in the current column.
When we switch to the next column, conditions from the first group can be used to calculate a difference between two shift values in the column, which will lead to the presence of a cycle. We define this difference as the disabled relative shift value. These values are calculated every time we switch to the next column. At this step, more conditions can be excluded from the process based on their repeatability from column to column.
Assume a matrix of five columns. Let there be a cycle that is located in columns 1, 2 and 3. When switching to the third column, a disabled relative shift value for the column is calculated based on the cycle. However, there is a similar cycle that is located in the same elements of columns 1, 2 and 4. When switching to the fourth column, this cycle will generate the same disabled relative shift value. Further, this is also true for a cycle that is located in the same elements of columns 1, 2 and 5. For example, in Fig. 1.b all three cycles have the same disabled relative shift values for elements p12, p13 and p14. This allows the exclusion of all cycles and paths that do not include elements from the previous column and makes it possible for disabled relative shift values to simply be copied from the previous column.
After disabled relative shift values are copied and calculated, shift values for elements in the column can be chosen. Switching to the next element of the column, we calculate a list of possible shift values based on the list of disabled relative shift values for the element, the current shift values for the previous elements and those conditions that depend on three or four elements in the current column. The first value from the list is chosen as a shift value for the current element.
The search algorithm includes three types of transitions. The first one is the switch to the next column. In this case, disabled relative shift values are calculated based on the conditions associated with the column. The second transition is the switch to the next element. This transition includes the calculation of a list of available shift values for the element. The smallest value from the list is chosen for the element if the list is not empty. Otherwise, the third type of transition happens - the switch to the previous element/column. In this case, we just choose the next value from the existing list of available shift values and switch forward again.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:14:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

966

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 26, NO. 5, MAY 2022

Algorithm 1 SES Algorithm

1: procedure NEXT ELEMENT:

2: if Next column then

3:

Update equations for cycles 4 and 6

4:

Calculate disabled relative shift values

5: Calculate available shift values list

6: if List not empty then

7:

Select the smallest value

8:

if Last element then

9:

return: Matrix

10:

else

11:

goto: NEXT ELEMENT

12: else

13:

goto: PREVIOUS ELEMENT

14: procedure PREVIOUS ELEMENT

15: if List not empty then

16:

Select next value

17:

goto: NEXT ELEMENT

18: else

19:

if First element then

20:

return: ∅

21:

else

22:

goto: PREVIOUS ELEMENT

TABLE I
TOTAL NUMBER OF POTENTIAL CYCLES OF A CERTAIN LENGTH IN A MATRIX

The search is a process of forward-backward movement through the matrix elements. It ends either when a non-empty list of available shift values is obtained for the very last element of the matrix or when there are no available shift values left for the very first variable element. The description of the search flow is formalised in Algorithm 1.
The SES algorithm is capable of searching for regular QC-LDPC matrices with a girth of up to 12. Also, it can be easily modified to follow the SMC approach.
C. Complexity Estimation
For the complexity estimation of the proposed SES algorithm we use a technique which allows us to directly compare it with the base SMC algorithm [5], its IRS modification [12] and an exhaustive search approach. The whole algorithm complexity is divided into two parts: ‘verification’ complexity and ‘assigning’ search spaces. The ‘verification’ complexity parameter is calculated using the number of

arithmetical operations necessary to check all the potential

cycles. We assume that in a conservative approach, each

potential cycle check is conducted through the computation of

the corresponding equation (2). From this, each potential cycle

of length 2l requires 2l−1 arithmetical operations for its check.

min{l,dv} min{l,dc}

The ‘verification’ complexity is equal to

(2l

−

1)tCij2l


dv
i


dc
j

 ,

where

tCij2l

is

from

i=2
[12] for

j=2
the base

SMC algorithm and for exhaustive search. For the IRS

SMC algorithm, the ‘verification’ complexity is equal to

min{l,dv} min{l,dc}
(2l

−

1)tiCj2l


dv
i


dc
j

 /(dv

− 1).

With

the

i=2

j=2

SES algorithm, for cycles of length 8 and length 10 that are represented by routes, the base equation (2) is replaced

with a sum of base equations for cycles with lengths 4 and 6,

according to [8] and [9]. Furthermore, even for single cycles of length 8 and length 10, the base equation can be presented

as a sum of base equations for cycles with lengths 4 and 6.

This means that a check for any cycle of length 8 or length 10 is performed with a single arithmetical operation

based on the previously counted solutions for cycles of

length 4 and length 6. As a result, the overall ‘verification’

min{l,dv} min{l,dc}

complexity for the SES algorithm is

(2l − 1)

i=2

j=2

tCij2l


dv
i


dc
j |l=2,3

+

min{l,dv i=2

}

min{l,dc j=2

}

tCij2l


dv
i


dc
j

 .
|l=4,5

For

matrices with dc  dv, the number of cycles with lengths of

8 and 10 becomes dominant over the number of cycles with

length of 4 and 6. The ‘verification’ complexity is reduced

by about 7 times for matrices with girth 10 and by about

9 times for matrices with girth 12 compared to the base

SMC algorithm and exhaustive search approach. It is reduced

7/(dv − 1) times and 9/(dv − 1) times compared to the IRS

SMC algorithm.

Also, the total number of considered cycles of length 8 and

length 10 is almost cut in half based on the modifications

discussed in the SES algorithm description earlier. The total

number of cycles of length 8 and length 10 is presented in

Table I and can be compared to that in [12]. In conjunction,

the proposed modifications allow us to reduce the ‘verification’

complexity by up to 18 times compared to the exhaustive

search approach and by up to 18/(dv − 1) times compared

to the SMC IRS algorithm.

As we tend to save the exhaustive nature of the proposed

algorithm, we were still able to make the ‘assign’ search space

smaller. This is achieved with the limitations applied to the

matrix format, which does not affect the generality of the

search. The first row and the first column are filled with zeros,

while the shift values in the second row and in the second

column are positioned in ascending order. Also, the element in

the second row and second column is equal to 1. Finally, it can

be shown that if there is a (no) matrix with the desired para-

meters for the second column of 0, 1, p1, p2, . . . , pdv−3, pdv−2, then there is a (no) matrix with the same parameters for the

second column of 0, 1, z − pdv−2 + 1, z − pdv−3 + 1, . . . , z − p2 + 1, z − p1 + 1. This allows half of the second

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:14:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KHARIN et al.: LOWER BOUNDS OF REGULAR QC-LDPC CODES AND SES GENERATION ALGORITHM

967

TABLE II
COMPARISON OF EXPERIMENTAL DATA USING THE SES ALGORITHM AND THE MODIFIED LOWER BOUND (MLB), g = 8

column variants total number of

to be excluded from the second column variants

check would

pbreoc12e
sszz.v−−T22he.


Fzzo−cr−d2veachvarviaanritasntofofthtehesesceocnodndrowco.luWminth,

there every

would be combina-

tion of the second column and the second row, the rest

of

the

matrix

can

be

filled

with

(z−dv −dc +2)! ((z−dv −dc +2)−(dv −2)(dc −2))!

shift value variants. As a result, overall we move from

t21h
ezzv−−(z22−
zz−c1−d)2v(d
v −(zz1v−)−(ddv2c)−−(dd1cc)−+22‘)as(s(idgvn−ing2’)(dscea−rc2h))!spTahcies

to the is some

orders less than the full exhaustive search space and yet it is

much wider than the one for the SMC IRS algorithm.

Finally, the predictive nature of the SES algorithm must be

considered in the task of complexity minimisation. However,

its effect cannot be calculated straight-forwardly because of

the probabilistic nature of the matrix generation process.

This places our algorithm between the conservative exhaus-

tive search approach and the significantly simplified SMC IRS

algorithm in terms of the overall search complexity.

IV. GIRTH BOUNDS OF REGULAR QC-LDPC CODES

The work performed is based on fully connected base graphs, in which there are no parallel edges. One of the qualitative indicators of the protograph lifting algorithm is its ability to approach the bound of the circulant size for the fixed girth value of the Tanner graph. Therefore, it is advisable to consider the known methods for determining such bounds, numerically compare them with each other, and also obtain a number of modified bounds that have high accuracy compared to the existing ones.
It is known that code length of a (dv, dc)-regular QC-LDPC code with girth g satisfies the so-called Moore bound [10]

n

≥

dv

(dc

−

1)

[(dv − (dv

1) (dc − − 1) (dc

1)]g/4 − − 1) − 1

1

+

1.

(3)

Using the expression n = z · dc we get






z≥

dv

(dc

−

1)

[(dv − (dv

1) −

(dc − 1) (dc

1)]g/4 − − 1) − 1

1

+

1

/dc.

(4)

An alternative way of determining the lower bound of the lifting factor is shown in [11], which is characterized by two features – a narrowly directed application for QC-LDPC constructed on fully connected graphs, as well as a dependence on the selected girth of the Tanner graph. A necessary condition for having a girth of at least 8 is that the lifting degree z must satisfy

z ≥ (dv − 1) (dc − 1) + 1.

(5)

Based on the work [7], in which the SES algorithm was used for codes with a girth 8 of regular QC-LDPC codes where dc ∈ [4, 12] from Table II, we can make some conclusions. Comparing the obtained practical results with the existing bounds determined by (4) and (5) (see Table II), it can be noted that the Moore bound is greatly overestimated with respect to the applied values, and the bound (5), on the contrary, is underestimated. However, using the difference between (4) and (5) we obtain an extremely accurate value for dv = 3. After performing a number of mathematical transformations over (4) and (5) we get

z ≥ [dv (dc − 1) ((dv − 1) (dc − 1) + 1) + 1] /dc

− (dv − 1) (dc − 1) + 1

=

(dc − dc

1)

[dv

(dv

− 1) (dc

− 1) + dv

− dc (dc

− 1) − 1]

=

(dc

− 1) (dv dc

− 1)

[dv (dc

− 1) − dc

+ 1] .

(6)

The result of the above simplifications is an expression for

the empirical modified lower bound

z

≥



(dv

−

1)2

(dc

−

1)2

 .

(7)

dc

A comparison of the experimental data and the bound values

is given in Table II. At the same time, with an increase in the

column weight, the accuracy of the obtained border decreases.

For matrices with girth 10 the newest and most accurate

lower bound is presented in [12]. The following expression is

used to estimatethe bound 





z ≥ 2 dv dc − 2 dv − 2 dc − 2 + 1.

(8)

22

2

2

The use of the Moore bound, in contrast to [11], at the maximum possible girth value for regular QC-LDPC codes constructed on fully connected graphs is justified. The values obtained according to (4) can act as the lower bound of the analyzed parameter.

V. RESULTS
The updated lower bound opens space in improvement of the lifting factor minimisation problem for QC-LDPC codes construction. With a more precisely defined search region it is possible to achieve better results with existing algorithms.
For the SMC algorithm the search was run with ascending lifting factor values starting with the newly defined lower bound. Table III contains new minimal lifting factor values for some regular QC-LDPC matrices. These results are lower than those presented in [12].
Even lower values for lifting factor were found with the proposed SES algorithm. In this case the search was run with descending lifting factor values, starting with the one obtained by the SMC search. The search time for a single matrix was unlimited. It took several days to get the matrices presented in Table IV. With longer search times it is possible to achieve lower lifting factor values than those presented in Table IV.
The SES algorithm proposes one more advantage. Unlike the SMC algorithm it is capable of constructing a matrix for every lifting factor value above the minimal one. For example,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:14:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

968

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 26, NO. 5, MAY 2022

TABLE III
MINIMAL LIFTING FACTOR OBTAINED WITH THE SMC ALGORITHM BASED ON THE UPDATED GIRTH BOUNDS (THE FIRST ROW AND COLUMN OF THE MATRIX ARE NOT PRESENTED AS THEY ARE FILLED WITH ZEROS)

bound closely follows real values obtained by various matrix construction algorithms. With the updated search bounds, new minimal lifting factor values were obtained with the SMC algorithm. Further, the proposed SES algorithm allows even lower lifting factor values to be found. Yet, the SES algorithm remains too computationally complex to get results for matrices with big dv, dc values. In future work we plan to concentrate on the algorithm’s implementation to achieve better performance.

TABLE IV MINIMAL LIFTING FACTOR OBTAINED WITH THE SES ALGORITHM FOR
MATRICES WITH GIRTH 10 (THE FIRST ROW AND COLUMN OF THE MATRIX ARE NOT PRESENTED AS THEY ARE FILLED WITH ZEROS)
for a 3 × 6 matrix with girth 12 the SES algorithm finds a solution for every lifting factor value between 389 and 290 (total of 100 matrices). The SMC algorithm in the same conditions finds a solution for 49 values of 100, of which 33 belong to the interval from 389 to 340. The closer a lifting factor value is to the lower bound, the less chance there is that the SMC algorithm will provide a solution.
Still, high computational complexity that leads to long search times remains the main problem of the SES algorithm.
VI. CONCLUSION In this letter a new estimation for lower bound of the lifting factor of the Tanner graph was proposed. The modified lower

REFERENCES
[1] J. Thorpe, “Low density parity check (LDPC) codes constructed from protographs,” JPL INP Prog. Rep. 42-154, Aug. 2003.
[2] W. E. Ryan and S. Lin, Channel Codes: Classical and Modern. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2009.
[3] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.
[4] M. Diouf, D. Declercq, M. Fossorier, S. Ouya, and B. Vasic, “Improved PEG construction of large girth QC-LDPC codes,” in Proc. 9th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process. (ISTC), Brest, France, Sep. 2016, pp. 146–150.
[5] M. H. Tadayon, A. Tasdighi, M. Battaglioni, M. Baldi, and F. Chiaraluce, “Efficient search of compact QC-LDPC and SC-LDPC convolutional codes with large girth,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 1156–1159, Jun. 2018.
[6] Z. Li and B. V. K. V. Kumar, “A class of good quasi-cyclic low-density parity check codes based on progressive edge growth graph,” in Proc. Conf. Rec. 38th Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst. Comput., vol. 2, Nov. 2004, pp. 1990–1994.
[7] A. Kharin, A. Dryakhlov, E. Mirokhin, K. Zavertkin, A. Ovinnikov, and E. Likhobabin, “An approach to the generation of regular QCLDPC codes with girth 8,” in Proc. 9th Medit. Conf. Embedded Comput. (MECO), Jun. 2020, pp. 1–4.
[8] A. V. Kharin, K. N. Zavertkin, and A. A. Ovinnikov, “Detecting cycles of length 8 in the tanner graph of a QC-LDPC code based on protograph analysis,” Problems Inf. Transmiss., vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 173–184, Apr. 2020.
[9] A. V. Kharin, K. N. Zavertkin, and A. A. Ovinnikov, “Detecting cycles of length 10 in the tanner graph of a QC-LDPC code based on protograph analysis,” Problems Inf. Transmiss., vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 317–331, Dec. 2020.
[10] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[11] M. Karimi and A. Banihashemi, “On the girth of quasi-cyclic protograph LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 9, pp. 4542–4552, Jul. 2013.
[12] A. Tasdighi and E. Boutillon, “Integer ring sieve for constructing compact QC-LDPC codes with girths 8, 10, and 12,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 35–46, Jan. 2022.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:14:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

