2654

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 24, NO. 8, AUGUST 2016

Exploiting Intracell Bit-Error Characteristics to Improve Min-Sum LDPC Decoding for MLC NAND Flash-Based Storage in Mobile Device
Hongbin Sun, Member, IEEE, Wenzhe Zhao, Minjie Lv, Guiqiang Dong, Student Member, IEEE, Nanning Zheng, Fellow, IEEE, and Tong Zhang, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— A multilevel per cell (MLC) technique significantly improves the storage density, but also poses serious data integrity challenge for NAND flash memory. This consequently makes the low-density parity-check (LDPC) code and the soft-decision memory sensing become indispensable in the next-generation flash-based solid-state storage devices. However, the use of LDPC codes inevitably increases memory read latency and, hence, degrades speed performance. Motivated by the observation of intracell unbalanced bit error probability and data dependence in the MLC NAND flash memory, this paper proposes two techniques, i.e., intracell data placement interleaving and intracell data dependence aware LDPC decoding, to efficiently improve the LDPC decoding throughput and energy efficiency for the MLC NAND flash-based storage in a mobile device. Experimental results show that, by exploiting the intracell bit-error characteristics, the proposed techniques together can improve the LDPC decoding throughput by up to 84.6% and reduce the energy consumption by up to 33.2% while only incurring less than 0.2% silicon area overhead.
Index Terms— Bit-error characteristic, low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes, multilevel per cell (MLC) NAND flash, solid-state storage.
I. INTRODUCTION
B ECAUSE of its small physical size, low power consumption, high performance, and high shock resistance, NAND flash memory has been widely used to realize the solid-state data storage in numerous computing and storage systems [1], [2]. To pursue higher storage capacity, the industry has been employing multilevel per cell (MLC) NAND flash memory, which can store 2 bit in each memory cell. However, aggressive technology scaling makes the MLC NAND flash memory cells subject to increasingly severe noise
Manuscript received August 19, 2015; revised November 14, 2015 and January 20, 2016; accepted February 21, 2016. Date of publication April 1, 2016; date of current version July 22, 2016. This work was supported in part by the National High-Tech Research and Development Program, China, under Grant 2011AA010405 and in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61274028. (Corresponding author: Wenzhe Zhao.)
H. Sun, W. Zhao, M. Lv, and N. Zheng are with Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China (e-mail: hsun@mail.xjtu.edu.cn; venturezhao@ gmail.com; lv.minjie@stu.xjtu.edu.cn; nnzheng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn).
G. Dong is with Skyera Inc., San Jose, CA 95054 USA (e-mail: dongguiqiang@gmail.com).
T. Zhang is with the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180 USA (e-mail: tzhang@ecse.rpi.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVLSI.2016.2535224

and distortion, which can largely degrade the NAND flash memory storage reliability and performance [3]–[5]. As a result, a low-density parity-check (LDPC) code [6], which has very strong error correction strength, is believed to be indispensable for MLC NAND flash-based solid-state data storage. Recently, how to employ the LDPC code in the solidstate storage has attracted much attention and is extensively evaluated [7], [8]. A prior work has demonstrated that, with soft-decision memory sensing, the LDPC code can achieve a noticeable coding gain over the conventional BCH code.
However, since NAND flash memory read latency is proportional to the memory sensing precision, the use of soft-decision memory sensing directly causes significantly increased NAND flash memory read latency, leading to unacceptable storage system read response time degradation. Therefore, the practical use of LDPC in the solid-state storage should employ a two-step trial-and-error procedure [9]. Upon a read request, solid-state storage always first executes hard-decision memory sensing and decoding, and only when hard-decision LDPC code decoding fails, it executes soft-decision memory sensing and decoding. Although the two-step trial-and-error procedure reduces the memory read latency overhead induced by soft-decision memory sensing, the decoding throughput degradation is still noticeable, especially when NAND flash memory chips are heavily cycled. As the throughput of LDPC decoding has a significant impact on the performance of the overall storage system, a great effort has been made to investigate the throughput improvement techniques for the LDPC decoding [10]–[12].
Most of the previously proposed LDPC decoders generally assume all the data bits that are independent to each other and have the equal error probability [13]–[15]. Nevertheless, understanding and leveraging the error behaviors of flash memories are beneficial to an efficient error correcting design, as demonstrated in several previous works [16], [17]. The MLC NAND flash memory actually possesses some unique biterror characteristics: 1) the bit error probability in one flash memory cell is quite unbalanced, and in general, upper page bits are much more prone to errors and 2) the probability that one bit is prone to error could be largely dependent on the value of the other bit in the same flash memory cell. Since min-sum LDPC decoding is essentially a beliefpropagation procedure, being aware of these intracell bit

1063-8210 © 2016 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:21:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SUN et al.: EXPLOITING INTRACELL BIT-ERROR CHARACTERISTICS TO IMPROVE MIN-SUM LDPC DECODING

2655

error characteristics is potentially beneficial to the LDPC decoder design. This observation motivates us to investigate the possible design techniques that can exploit intracell biterror characteristics for improving the throughput of LDPC decoding. First, we propose to use intracell data placement interleaving to put the upper page bit and the lower page bit that belong to the same flash cell into one LDPC codeword. This can effectively enable us to leverage the aforementioned intracell data dependence as the additional belief information during LDPC decoding. Accordingly, we further propose an intracell data dependence aware min-sum LDPC decoding technique to exploit the additional belief information during the decoding procedure and improve the decoding throughput and energy efficiency.
This paper is an extended version of work originally reported in [18]. In particular, we further propose to only exploit intracell bit-error characteristics for those large-size and read-only multimedia files, where data pages are stored consecutively within each block of NAND flash memory. This can efficiently improve min-sum LDPC decoding while eliminating the additional memory access overhead due to intracell data placement interleaving. Targeting at multimedia file access in the mobile device, we have demonstrated the feasibility and effectiveness of the proposed techniques by the measurement of flash chip bit-error probability statistics, trace-driven storage system simulation, and LDPC decoding evaluation. By using the proposed two techniques together, the LDPC decoding can achieve up to 84.6% throughput improvement and 33.2% energy consumption reduction when MLC NAND flash chips are heavily cycled, while its area overhead is only less than 0.2%.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II briefly reviews the background and further presents the motivation to justify this paper. Section III describes the proposed techniques and VLSI architecture to exploit intracell bit-error characteristics. Section IV presents the experimental methodology and results to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed design solution. Finally, the conclusion is drawn in Section V.
II. BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
A. Program/Read Operation of MLC NAND Flash Memory
Compared with single-level cell, MLC NAND flash memory allows more bits to be stored in a single cell. As the penalty for its high storage density, each MLC NAND flash memory cell has much less margin between two adjacent storage states and is thereby much more prone to errors. In order to reduce its raw bit error probability, Gray code is commonly used when mapping information bits to voltage levels in the MLC cells, so that neighboring levels only differ in 1 bit. Fig. 1 shows an example for 2-bit/cell NAND flash memory. The voltage levels S0, S1, S2, and S3 denote information bits 11, 10, 00, and 01, respectively. The most significant bit (MSB) and the least significant bit (LSB) are associated with upper page and lower page, respectively.
As more than 1 bit is stored in a single cell, the program/read operations of MLC NAND flash memory are

Fig. 1. Program and read operations for 2-bit/cell NAND flash memory. (a) Program operation. (b) Read operation.
also complicated. One typical program operation is shown in Fig. 1(a), 2 bit are associated with the four read threshold distribution, and the multilevel programming is achieved in two distinct rounds, one for each bit to be stored. In the first round, the LSB is programmed. If the bit is 1, the voltage threshold of the cell Vthr does not change, and the cell remains in the erased state S0. If the bit is 0, the threshold is increased until it reaches the S2 state. In the second round, the MSB is programmed. The value of voltage threshold depends upon the state of lower page. When the cell remains at the S0 state, the voltage threshold does not change if the bit is 1, while it increases to the S1 state if the bit is 0. When the cell has already been programmed to the S2 state, the voltage threshold increases to the S3 state if the bit is 1, while it moves to the S2 state if the bit is 0.
During the read operation, if the sensing threshold is lower than VTH, the cell denotes bit 1; else, the cell denotes bit 0. As shown in Fig. 1(b), when reading lower page data from 2-bit/cell NAND flash memory, the read voltage threshold is set as Vthr2, and then, lower page data can be read out by flash memory sensing. For the upper page data, the flash cell needs to be sampled two times by changing the read voltage threshold as Vthr1 and Vthr3, representing the result as D1 and D2, respectively. Finally, the upper page data can be calculated as D1 + D2.
The above-mentioned read operation is so-called harddecision memory sensing, which uses only one quantization level between two adjacent storage states. When more than one quantization levels are used between two adjacent storage states, it is called soft-decision memory sensing. As the beliefpropagation LDPC decoding algorithm inherently prefers high-precision information, the use of soft-decision memory sensing is able to significantly improve the error correction strength of LDPC decoding. However, since NAND flash memory read latency is proportional to the memory sensing

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:21:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2656

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 24, NO. 8, AUGUST 2016

precision, soft-decision memory sensing will directly cause the increased NAND flash memory read latency, leading to read response time degradation in the storage system. Therefore, it is reasonable for current LDPC-based solid-state storage to employ a two-step trial-and-error procedure, and only execute soft-decision memory sensing and decoding when necessary.
B. Intracell Bit-Error Characteristics
Due to the specific data structure and operation inside memory cell, MLC NAND flash memory possesses unique intracell bit-error characteristics that can be exploited for the LDPC decoder design. First, due to the unbalanced voltage threshold arrangement, the bit error probability of the upper page is significantly higher than the lower page, which is referred to as intracell unbalanced bit error probability in this paper. We can intuitively see intracell unbalanced bit error probability from Fig. 1. For the lower page, there is only one adjacent threshold voltage level that can cause bit 1 → 0 or 0 → 1, while for the upper page, there are two. As the great majority of errors in the MLC NAND flash memory are caused by the obscure area between two adjacent levels [19], for 2-bit/cell flash with Gray mapping, the upper page has two regions between storage levels that may cause errors, while the lower page only has one region. Therefore, the bit error rate (BER) of the upper page is obviously larger than the lower page, leading to significantly unbalanced bit error probability in each MLC NAND flash cell. The intracell unbalanced bit error probability has been further justified according to our raw bit error probability statistics measurements in Section IV.
Besides the intracell unbalanced bit error probability, the probability that 1 bit is prone to error could be largely dependent on the value of the other bit in the same flash memory cell, which is referred to as intracell data dependence. Again, we take the 2-bit/cell flash memory shown in Fig. 1 as an example. The following three intracell data dependence are exploited in the proposed LDPC decoding design: 1) when the value of upper page bit equals to 1, the probability that the corresponding lower page bit is correct will be very large; 2) when the upper page bit falls to the obscure area between two adjacent levels, the probability that the corresponding lower page bit is correct will also be large; and 3) when the lower page bit falls to the obscure area between two adjacent levels, the data value of the corresponding upper page bit has a very large probability to be 0. NAND flash memory with more than 2 bit/cell also has the similar intracell data dependence characteristic.
The intracell bit-error characteristics exploited in this paper include both intracell unbalanced bit error probability and intracell data dependence. Most of the previously proposed LDPC decoders generally assume the equal error probability for all bits and omit the data dependence between upper page bits and lower page bits. However, since LDPC decoding is essentially a belief-propagation procedure, it is natural for us to exploit the use of these intracell bit-error characteristics as additional belief input to further improve the throughput and energy efficiency of LDPC decoding and, hence, reduce the read response time of a flash-based solid-state storage system.

Nevertheless, despite of the potential benefit, to employ intracell bit-error characteristics during LDPC decoding requires the availability of both the corresponding upper and lower pages. This seems to be a serious restriction for the use of intracell bit-error characteristics, as due to advanced address mapping in a flash translation layer (FTL), and the data pages that are physically adjacent are actually inconsecutive in terms of logic address and, hence, should not be accessed simultaneously. The random address mapping and the management due to FTL indeed significantly restrict its application scope. However, we contend that there are still many chances that intracell bit-error characteristics can be exploited, at least in the mobile devices as we described and demonstrated in Sections II-C and IV-A.
C. Solid-State Storage in Mobile Device
Although mobile device also stores small amount of documents or other miscellaneous files, the great majority of its data storage space is occupied by multimedia files, such as videos, songs, and pictures. Access to these multimedia files tends to incur serious throughput bottleneck and energy consumption to the solid-state data storage device. Hence, it is desired to further optimize the performance of a storage system in these scenarios. In particular, we note that these multimedia files are inherently large-size and read-only. Due to the simplicity methodology employed by an FTL design in the mobile device, these large-size read-only files tend to be stored consecutively within each block of NAND flash memory. This gives us the opportunity to exploit the intracell bit-error characteristics to improve the throughput and energy efficiency of LDPC decoding for the solid-state storage in the mobile device.
To manage the flash memory chip that has to be erased before programming, the use of FTL is necessary. There are two different methods to integrate the FTL into a file system in the mobile device. One is to employ a conventional disk-based file system (e.g., FAT32 and EXT4) while integrating a simple FTL between the file system and the flash-based physical layer. The other is to employ the more advanced file system that is specially designed and optimized for flash-based storage (e.g., JAFFS2 and F2FS). Both of them have their pros and cons, and have been widely used in current mobile devices.
Nevertheless, both of the above-mentioned methods have to convert logical address into physical address and manage garbage collection, wear leveling, and other operations. As flash memory chip is programmed by a page size and has to be erased by a block size, during garbage collection, the flash storage is released as each free block. When copying multimedia files, the FTL should provide one or more entire free blocks to store the large-size files. Moreover, as multimedia files are usually read-only and would not be modified during their lifetime, these files are actually stored in consecutive physical addresses within the block of flash memory. When these files are accessed and LDPC decoding is invoked, we can read out both of the corresponding upper and lower pages consecutively and exploit the intracell bit-error characteristics.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:21:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SUN et al.: EXPLOITING INTRACELL BIT-ERROR CHARACTERISTICS TO IMPROVE MIN-SUM LDPC DECODING

2657

Fig. 2. Upper/lower page interleaving diagram in 2-bit/cell NAND flash memory.
III. PROPOSED TECHNIQUES AND VLSI ARCHITECTURE
This section describes the proposed techniques and VLSI architecture that exploit intracell bit-error characteristics to improve the throughput and energy efficiency of min-sum LDPC decoding for the MLC NAND flash-based solid-state storage in the mobile devices.
A. Intracell Data Placement Interleaving
Whether we can exploit intracell bit-error characteristics in LDPC decoding is largely dependent on the data organization in the flash memory page. Although the intracell bit-error characteristics tend to be beneficial to LDPC decoding, the previously proposed decoding algorithm stores the codewords in each separate upper or lower page, and there is no interaction between the upper page bit and the lower page bit during the decoding procedure. This is mainly because the corresponding upper page and the lower page are not necessarily accessed consecutively due to the random address mapping and management in FTL. However, as we explained in Section II-C, multimedia files give us the opportunity to reorganize the data storage in the mobile device. To exploit the intracell bit-error characteristics, first, we need to put the upper page bit and the lower page bit that belong to the same cell into one codeword. Accordingly, we propose an intracell data placement interleaving technique to enable the exploration of intracell bit-error characteristics in the LDPC decoding.
The proposed intracell data placement interleaving technique is shown in Fig. 2. To make one codeword contain both the upper page bit and the lower page bit belonging to the same flash memory cell, we divide each codeword into several subblocks, and place the subblocks into upper page and lower page alternately in an interleaved form. In particular, the size of each subblock is chosen to be half of the parallel processing bits of an LDPC decoder, and thus, the decoder could process data that are stored in the same flash cells simultaneously.
One potential benefit of the proposed intracell data placement interleaving technique is to reduce the hard-decision decoding failure rate. Due to intracell unbalanced bit error probability, to interleave data placement into both the upper and lower pages can significantly reduce the percentage of data pages that have relatively high BER, even though their average BER almost remains the same. This may be less useful when flash memory chip is in its early lifetime. However, when flash memory chip is heavily cycled and its BER is high, this will become critical to the overall performance, since the hard-decision decoding failure rate can be significantly

reduced and the possibility to invoke expensive soft sensing and soft-decision decoding can be largely alleviated. More important, the intracell data placement interleaving can also enable the exploration of intracell data dependence in the LDPC decoding, which will further improve the throughput and energy efficiency of the LDPC decoding design.
To support the proposed intracell data placement interleaving only requires slight modification at architecture level. The potential penalty is the increase in memory sensing and data transfer delay during read operation, since the error correction has to wait until both the upper and lower pages are received. However, the cache read mode in current flash chip can significantly mitigate this overhead. As both the upper and lower pages contain useful data in the consecutive access scenario, we can exploit the cache read mode and read out the upper and lower pages interleavingly to eliminate the negative effect on the overall throughput. We note that the proposed intracell data placement interleaving should be only employed to the large-size read-only multimedia files whose access is physically consecutive. Otherwise, it will inevitably incur two additional memory sensing operations during flash memory read and, hence, may significantly degrade the overall decoding performance.
B. Intracell Data Dependence Aware Min-Sum Decoding
Conventional min-sum LDPC decoding solely relies on the message passing between the variable bits and the check bits. By employing intracell data placement interleaving, we can further benefit from message passing among variable bits, since the error probability of one bit largely depends on the value of the other bit in the same cell. Accordingly, we propose an intracell data dependence aware min-sum LDPC decoding technique that can improve both the error correction strength and the decoding convergence speed.
In essence, min-sum decoding aims to compute the maximum a posteriori probability of each bit, i.e., the probability that the i th bit is 0 or 1 if all parity-check constraints are satisfied. During each decoding iteration, each check bit connecting to variable bit provides the probability that the current hard decision of this variable bit is correct, based upon which we estimate the updated probability of this bit and accordingly update its hard decision. Then, the decoder checks whether all the parity checks are satisfied given the current hard decisions. If all bits are satisfied, the decoding is successful. Otherwise, the decoder uploads the probability information of check node, and continues to start another iteration.
As a direct enhancement of the conventional min-sum decoding algorithm, the proposed intracell data dependence aware min-sum decoding scheme has almost the same procedure as the conventional one [15]. The input to the LDPC decoding is represented as log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) to simplify the decoding message computation. When LLR equals to 0, the variable bit has the same probability to be set by 1 and 0. If the LLR is smaller than 0, the bit is more likely to be 1; otherwise, the bit is more likely to be 0. During the min-sum decoding, the variable bit is defined as i and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:21:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2658

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 24, NO. 8, AUGUST 2016

Fig. 3. Three intracell data dependence scenarios in one MLC NAND flash memory cell.
the check bit is defined as j . The conventional procedure of min-sum decoding is described as follows, and the detailed description of the computation within each step can be found in [15].
Step 1: Initialize all of the variable-to-check message M j,i with the LLR of input codeword Ri .
Step 2: Calculate the check-to-variable message E j,i for each variable bit with the variable-to-check message.
Step 3: Compute the variable-to-check message M j,i for each parity-check bit with the check-to-variable message and the LLR Ri .
Step 4: Concurrent with step 3, update the tentative hard decision di for each variable bit, and check whether all the check bits are satisfied. If all the check bits are satisfied, decoding is successful. Otherwise, go to step 2 to start a new decoding iteration until the maximum iteration number is reached.
The proposed algorithm enhances the conventional min-sum decoding algorithm in the following two steps. First, when calculating the tentative decision result in step 4, the corresponding variable bit provides additional probability by leveraging the intracell data dependence. Second, when estimating the variable-to-check message in step 3, the corresponding variable bit also provides additional probability that helps to improve the estimation accuracy. Therefore, the proposed algorithm modifies the conventional min-sum decoding by adding an additional probability Ki to the variable-to-check message M j,i in step 3, and adding an additional probability Ki when computing the tentative hard decision di in step 4, where Ki is provided by the intracell data dependence.
In the following, we further describe the calculation of Ki in more detail. We define the two variable bits in the same flash cell as i and c. As we described in Section II-B, since both of the two bits share the same threshold voltage, if one bit can be estimated, the other bit can get additional belief information for correction. Fig. 3 shows this intracell data dependence relationship. Three such cases can be exploited for additional belief information.
The value of additional probability Ki for variable bit i depends on Rc and dc, where Rc is the LLR of variable bit c and dc is the tentative hard decision of variable bit c. According to the relationship between Rc and dc, the Ki calculation has the following three possible cases according to Fig. 3.
Case 1: When calculating the variable bit i in the lower page, if Rc and dc of the other variable bit c are both

smaller than 0, the variable bit c is likely to be 1

and the threshold voltage locates in the field of
S0 or S3, as shown in Fig. 3 (case 1). Thus, Ri , which is defined as the LLR of initial variable bit i , is likely to be correct. We accordingly set Ki as α Ri , where α is usually set as 0.75.

Case 2: When calculating the variable bit i in the lower page,
if the sign of Rc is different with dc, the variable bit c can be 1 or 0 and the threshold voltage locates in
the cross field of S0/S1 or S2/S3, as shown in Fig. 3 (case 2), while Ri is likely to be correct in this case. We accordingly set Ki as 0.5α Ri . Case 3: When calculating the variable bit i in the upper page, if the sign of Rc is different with dc, the variable bit i is likely to be 0 and the threshold voltage locates in
the cross field of S1/S2, as shown in Fig. 3 (case 3). Accordingly, we set Ki as a positive value, which is equal to 0.5α|Ri |, to make the variable bit i prone to 0.

For concise description, Ki is calculated as

⎧

Ki

=

⎪⎪⎪⎨α0.R5αi Ri ⎪⎪⎩⎪00.5α|Ri |

if Rc < 0 && dc < 0, i ∈ lower page

else if Rcdc < 0, i ∈ lower page

(1)

else if Rcdc < 0, i ∈ upper page

else.

We note that, although the occurrence possibility of case 2 or case 3 is very low, they still take a certain percentage in the case of the occurrence of bit errors. Hence, their contributions to the overall throughput improvement are not negligible, especially when the flash memory is heavily cycled, according to our experimental evaluation in Section IV.
By exploiting the intracell data dependence in the harddecision LDPC decoding, the proposed enhanced decoding strategy can reduce the average iteration number and, meanwhile, increase error correction strength. Moreover, due to the improved error correction strength, the frequency of softdecision memory sensing can be largely reduced, leading to significantly improved LDPC decoding throughput, especially when the flash memory is heavily cycled. In particular, the proposed intracell data dependence aware min-sum decoding scheme has almost the same procedure as the conventional method, and it can also easily support normal min-sum decoding simultaneously.

C. VLSI Architecture Design
This section concerns the VLSI architecture design of min-sum LDPC decoding that integrates the above proposed two techniques, i.e., intracell data placement interleaving and intracell data dependence aware min-sum decoding. As shown in Fig. 4, data pages that are read out from flash memory chips are first deinterleaved to recover the codewords from two corresponding pages. Then, the recovered codewords are transferred to intracell data dependence aware min-sum decoding module to generate the original file data. The design of data page deinterleaving module is very simple as it just needs to move and reorder data subblocks. The architecture

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:21:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SUN et al.: EXPLOITING INTRACELL BIT-ERROR CHARACTERISTICS TO IMPROVE MIN-SUM LDPC DECODING

2659

Fig. 5. Ki calculation circuit in additional belief information unit.

Fig. 4. Overall architecture of the proposed min-sum LDPC decoder that exploits intracell bit-error characteristics.
design for intracell data dependence aware min-sum decoding is the most critical part in the proposed min-sum LDPC decoder architecture.
From the description in Section III-B, to enable the intracell data dependence aware capability in min-sum decoding, we only need to generate the additional belief information from intracell data dependence and provide it to the iterative belief-propagation computation. Therefore, the intracell data dependence capability can be implemented in a very efficient way. As shown in Fig. 4, the intracell data dependence aware decoding follows the conventional min-sum LDPC decoding architecture design, which also consists of the check node unit, variable node unit, and belief-propagation information storage. Upon a conventional min-sum decoding, the codeword is first stored in the initial codeword buffer. During each iteration, the check node unit calculates the belief-propagation information for all the parity-check matrix and, then, stores all the sign bits, the minimum (Min1), and second minimum (Min2) values in each row. In the meanwhile, the tentative decision codeword is calculated to judge whether current codeword is satisfied. If not, the belief-propagation information continues to be updated by invoking the variable node unit. Moreover, being aware of intracell data dependence, we can generate additional belief-propagation information in the check node unit by exploiting the relationship between the initial codeword and the tentative decision codeword. This additional belief information is directly provided to tentative decision calculation and belief information update of check node unit, and is able to significantly accelerate the decoding convergence.
The additional data page deinterleaving seems to require a larger size data buffer. However, in order to support softdecision memory sensing and decoding, the min-sum LDPC decoder actually has already integrated a large-size data buffer that is sufficient for the proposed data page deinterleaving. Therefore, compared with the conventional min-sum LDPC decoder, the extra overhead of the proposed design is mainly

due to the additional belief information circuit. Actually, the additional belief information circuit only implements to calculate Ki for each variable node. Fig. 5 shows the Ki calculation circuit design for one variable node. The initial variable node and the tentative decision codeword are represented as Ri [3 : 0] and dc. M[3 : 0] and M[3 : 1] equal to α Ri [3 : 0] and 0.5α Ri [3 : 0], respectively, where α is set as 0.75. The belief-propagation information Ki [3 : 0] is the final output of this circuit. As the additional belief information unit can be implemented with very simple combinational circuit, its cost is actually very low with the respect to overall decoding design.
To recognize and record whether the target is large-size read-only multimedia file and stored in consecutive physical addresses also incur extra overhead in the system level. However, as these multimedia files are usually large and the amount of these files is relatively limited, we believe that this kind of overhead is also limited and acceptable, especially taking into consideration the appealing benefit of intracell bit-error characteristics. Moreover, we note that the proposed VLSI architecture only integrates the additional belief information circuit to support intracell data dependence aware min-sum LDPC decoding. Therefore, for those files that are not stored physically consecutive, the proposed min-sum LDPC decoder can easily perform normal decoding by disabling the additional operations and circuits in the additional belief information module that are only employed for exploiting the intracell bit-error characteristics.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Experimental Verification on NAND Flash Chip and FTL
To quantitatively verify and evaluate the intracell error characteristics of NAND flash memory that are analyzed in Section II-B, we conduct extensive experiment using commercial sub-22-nm MLC NAND flash memory chips. We carry out bit-error probability statistics measurements following the same experimental flow as we did in our prior work [9]. In our experiment, we randomly select 128 blocks from the flash memory chips, and continuously conduct 1000 program/erase (P/E) cycling by ten times. After each time, we bake the flash memory chip to accelerate the wear-out recovery effect, and count the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:21:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2660

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 24, NO. 8, AUGUST 2016

Fig. 8. Percentage of physically consecutive pages under different I/O traces.

Fig. 6. Distribution histogram of measured raw bit error probabilities using sub-22-nm MLC NAND flash memory.
Fig. 7. Measured raw bit error probability comparison of upper and lower pages using sub-22-nm MLC NAND flash memory.
page error probability. We collect the raw BER distribution of each MLC NAND flash memory page, and show the distribution histogram under four different P/E cycling numbers in Fig. 6. The measurement results show that, with the increase in P/E cycling, the average raw bit error probability in each MLC NAND flash memory page increases significantly. Moreover, the raw BER among different pages varies largely, especially when the NAND flash chip comes to the end of its lifetime.
We further conduct the bit-error probability statistics in the lower and upper pages to analyze the intracell unbalanced bit error probability. As shown in Fig. 7, the raw bit error probability of the upper page is much higher than that of the lower page. Moreover, the difference increases with the P/E cycling number, and it reaches up to 76% at the P/E cycling of 9000. The experimental results clearly justify the previous analysis for intracell unbalanced bit error probability in the MLC NAND flash memory. Moreover, as the intracell data dependence is an intrinsic feature for Gray code and is extremely difficult to be demonstrated by experiment, we do not explicitly conduct experiment to demonstrate the intracell data dependence.

Then, we conduct experiment to verify our analysis on the consecutive upper and lower page read of the flash-based solidstate storage. To evaluate the effect of address mapping, wear leveling, and garbage collection in FTL, we employ the widely used Flashsim simulator configured with the page mapping FTL firmware. The total capacity of NAND flash memory is set as 8 GB with two flash channels, and each channel consists of four dies. The page size is set as 4 kB and each block has 128 pages. As it is very difficult to collect input/output (I/O) trace from mobile device, we run a synthetic workload over the FAT32 file system and collect the I/O trace benchmark for mobile device. The synthetic workload includes both the operation to copy and delete multimedia files, such as pictures, music, and movies, and the operation to access and modify a large amount of documents and system files. After 150 000 file operations, we collect and analyze how many pages in the multimedia files are still physically consecutive. Fig. 8 shows the percentage of physically consecutive data pages in the multimedia file for the generated synthetic mobile device I/O trace. We can tell that the percentage remains above 99.926%. The residue 0.074% is mainly due to small amount of system log data. Moreover, we also collect I/O traces from a Microsoft windows-based personal computer (PC) using DiskMon [20]. Four different PC I/O traces are collected for the simulation, including movie, music, game, and mixed. For these multimedia traces, we create a separate 8 GB of FAT32 disk partition, and only the requests coming to the partition are collected. For each I/O trace, we install/access, copy, move, and delete these multimedia files and also add operations to access and modify small-size documents and system files. The simulation results in Fig. 8 show that these multimedia I/O traces on PC also have a very high percentage of physically consecutive data pages. The evaluation results clearly justify that mobile device has the great potential to read the corresponding upper and lower pages consecutively, at least for large-size read-only multimedia files. Therefore, it is reasonable to exploit the intracell bit-error characteristics for MLC NAND flash-based storage in mobile device.
B. Throughput Improvement
To evaluate the throughput improvement by using the proposed techniques, we employ the MLC NAND flash memory

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:21:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SUN et al.: EXPLOITING INTRACELL BIT-ERROR CHARACTERISTICS TO IMPROVE MIN-SUM LDPC DECODING

2661

Fig. 9. Hard-decision LDPC decoding failure rate comparison between the baseline and the proposed techniques.
model that is developed in our prior work [21]. In addition, we use the rate-8/9, length-2 kB QC-LDPC codes with the column weight cw of 4 and 5, respectively, and assume the codewords pass through diverse adding white Gaussian noise channels. The data stored in NAND flash memory are generated as random numbers to fairly evaluate the effect of intracell data dependence. For the purpose of comparison, we set the baseline scenario as conventional min-sum LDPC decoding without exploiting any intracell bit-error characteristics. In particular, we simulate both flooding and layered scheduling schemes for the conventional and proposed LDPC decoding designs. Fig. 9 shows the hard-decision decoding failure rate comparison between the baseline and the proposed intracell data dependence aware min-sum LDPC decoding at different raw BERs. As the flooding and layered scheduling schemes have the same decoding failure rate, we only show one decoding failure rate figure. Experimental results show that, by leveraging the intracell data dependence, the proposed LDPC decoding technique has much lower hard-decision decoding failure rate than baseline whether cw is 4 or 5. Therefore, with the enhanced error correction capability, the proposed technique is able to significantly reduce the possibility that soft-decision memory sensing and decoding are invoked and, hence, improve the overall throughput, especially when the raw BER is high.
Besides the increase in error correction strength, the harddecision decoding convergence speed of the proposed LDPC decoding is also improved. The average iteration number comparisons for flooding and layered decoding at different raw BERs are shown in Figs. 10 and 11, respectively. Simulation results demonstrate that the layered scheduling has the much lower average iteration numbers compared the flooding scheduling. The result is in accordance with prior works [22] that the layered scheduling has the faster convergence speed than the flooding scheduling. Nevertheless, the results for both flooding and layered scheduling clearly suggest that the proposed technique demands the much lower iteration numbers than baseline. This can effectively increase harddecision decoding speed and, hence, improve the overall throughput to some extent, especially when the raw BER is relatively high. Moreover, the increased error correction strength during hard-decision decoding can reduce the probability of

Fig. 10. Average iteration number comparison during hard-decision LDPC decoding between the baseline and the proposed techniques using flooding scheduling.

Fig. 11. Average iteration number comparison during hard-decision LDPC decoding between the baseline and the proposed techniques using layered scheduling.

high-precision soft-decision memory sensing being invoked and further improve the decoding throughput.
The throughput of a hard-decision LDPC decoder Thavg can be calculated as follows:

Thavg =

1 fq · linf · (1 − d f r (x )) d(x ) 0 citer(x ) · num + cload

(2)

where fq , linf , d f r , citer, num, cload, and x denote the working frequency, the information length, the decoding failure rate, the average iteration number, the clock cycle/iteration, the decoding preparation time, and the NAND flash raw BER, respectively. To evaluate the decoding throughput, we employ a length-18 432, rate-8/9 min-sum LDPC decoder as published in [23], which can work at 300 MHz and consumes 72 cycles for one iteration when the parallel processing bit is set as 256. In case of hard-decision decoding failure, the soft-decision memory sensing and decoding will be invoked, leading to extra delay penalty. According to the raw bit-error probability statistics under a different P/E cycling as shown in Fig. 6, we can simulate the corresponding average LDPC decoding throughput and illustrate the simulation result in Figs. 12 and 13. Fig. 12 shows the simulated throughput comparison for flooding scheduling, and Fig. 13 shows for layered scheduling. The experimental results clearly demonstrate

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:21:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2662

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 24, NO. 8, AUGUST 2016

Fig. 14. Normalized throughput improvement of different decoding schemes against baseline using flooding scheduling when NAND flash is at the P/E cycling of 10k.

Fig. 12. Simulated throughput comparison between the baseline and the proposed techniques using flooding scheduling.

TABLE I SENSITIVITY OF THROUGHPUT IMPROVEMENT TO THE VALUE OF Ki

Fig. 13. Simulated throughput comparison between the layered baseline and the proposed techniques using layered scheduling.
that the throughput improvement of the proposed techniques increases when the P/E cycling number is getting higher. In particular, the throughput improvement of the proposed LDPC decoding techniques can reach up to 84.6% for flooding scheduling and 62.8% for layered scheduling, when the MLC NAND flash chips are heavily cycled and their P/E cycling numbers approach to 10k. In addition, as the layered scheduling has the faster convergence speed during hard-decision decoding, its average LDPC decoding throughput is also much higher than that of the flooding scheduling. We further analyze the throughput improvement contribution of intracell data placement interleaving and each intracell data dependence case. Taking flooding scheduling as an example, Fig. 14 shows the normalized throughput improvement of different decoding schemes against baseline when NAND flash is at the P/E cycling of 10k. For the overall 84.6% decoding throughput improvement, the intracell data placement interleaving technique takes 13.9%, case 1 of intracell data dependence takes 56.5%, case 2 of intracell data dependence takes 7.2%, and case 3 of intracell data dependence takes 7%. The sensitivity analysis on the value of Ki is also shown in Table I.
C. Energy Efficiency and Overhead
In addition to the throughput improvement, the enhanced error correction capability by exploiting intracell bit-error

characteristics in the LDPC decoding can also reduce the energy consumption, as it is able to significantly reduce the average iteration number during hard-decision LDPC decoding and the possibility that soft-decision memory sensing and decoding are invoked. The potential to improve the energy efficiency of the MLC NAND flash-based solid-state storage is very appealing for battery-powered mobile device.
In order to evaluate the energy efficiency of the proposed technique, we consider the energy consumption of both the LDPC decoder and the NAND flash memory when reading data from flash-based storage. As the VLSI implementation results of layered scheduling are lack of detail in related references, only the min-sum LDPC decoding using flooding scheduling is evaluated in this section. Nevertheless, evaluation on the min-sum LDPC decoding using layered scheduling should give similar results according to the simulation in Section IV-B. According to the dc characteristics in micrometer datasheet [24], we estimate the energy consumption by reading out a single-precision data page from the storage system consisted of eight NAND flash chips is ∼4.356 μJ, which is represented as Epage. As the average power consumption of a conventional length-2304 min-sum LDPC decoder is ∼180 mW at the operational frequency of 400 MHz and each iteration takes about 110 cycles, as demonstrated in [14], we assume that a length-18 432, rate-8/9 min-sum LDPC decoder consumes 396 nJ for one iteration, which is eight times higher than that of the length-2304 LDPC decoder. The energy consumption for one iteration is represented as Eiter. The energy consumption of target storage system consists of both the energy of data page read and LDPC decoding, where the energy of once data page read varies according to whether hard-decision or soft-decision is invoked and the energy of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:21:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SUN et al.: EXPLOITING INTRACELL BIT-ERROR CHARACTERISTICS TO IMPROVE MIN-SUM LDPC DECODING

2663

about 2.81 mm2 at the TSMC 65-nm technology, as demonstrated in [23], we roughly assume the area of a min-sum LDPC decoder with 256 parallel processing bits doubles its area and takes about 5.62 mm2. Therefore, the extra area overhead of the proposed technique is <0.2% compared with the overall min-sum LDPC decoder. This clearly demonstrates that it is very cost efficient to exploit intracell bit-error characteristics in the LDPC decoding for the MLC NAND flash-based storage.

Fig. 15. Energy consumption comparison between the conventional and the proposed techniques under a different P/E cycling.
once LDPC decoding varies with the iteration numbers and the raw BERs of NAND flash memory. When soft-decision is invoked, we assume that six extra data pages (seven-level soft sensing) have to be read out and two additional decoding iterations are executed for each data page. For each P/E cycling number, we calculate the energy consumption of both data page read and LDPC decoding, according to the measured raw bit error probability statistics in Fig. 6, the hard-decision failure rate in Fig. 9, and the average iteration number in Fig. 10. The average energy consumption can be calculated as follows:
1
Eavg = [Epage + citer(x ) · Eiter + 6
0
· (Epage + 2Eiter) · d f r (x )]d(x ) (3)
where d f r , citer, and x denote the decoding failure rate, the average iteration number, and the NAND flash raw BER, respectively. The simulation results are shown in Fig. 15. We can see that, as the energy consumption of data page read is much higher than LDPC decoding, the majority of energy consumption of target storage system is dominated by data page read. More importantly, the simulation results clearly demonstrate that the proposed technique is effective at reducing the overall energy consumption. When the flash memory chips are heavily cycled, the reduced energy consumption can reach up to 33.2% with respect to the conventional min-sum LDPC decoding.
Despite of its superior decoding throughput and energy efficiency, the area overhead of the proposed technique and its VLSI architecture is actually very low with respect to the conventional min-sum LDPC decoding design. As we explained in Section III-C, the extra overhead of the proposed VLSI architecture is mainly due to the additional belief information module. Accordingly, we implement the additional belief information module using Verilog hardware description language and further synthesize it with the TSMC 65-nm standard cell library. The additional belief information module is implemented to support 4-bit inner precision and 256 parallel processing bits. Synthesis results show that the additional belief information module only consumes about 6592 gate counts and its area overhead is as low as 9216 μm2. While as a conventional min-sum LDPC decoder with 128 parallel processing bits would take

V. CONCLUSION
This paper is motivated by the observation that the bit error probability of the upper page bit and the lower page bit in one memory cell is largely unbalanced and has data dependence on each other in MLC NAND flash memory. By exploiting these characteristics, we developed two techniques that are able to reduce the decoding iteration number, increase the error correction strength, and alleviate the invoke of soft-decision memory sensing, leading to significantly improved decoding throughput and energy efficiency for the LDPC code. The proposed LDPC decoding design is implemented and evaluated for the MLC NAND flash-based storage in the mobile device. Experimental results have demonstrated the feasibility and efficiency of the proposed design techniques that, with only less than 0.2% area overhead, the LDPC decoding throughput can be improved by up to 84.6% and the energy consumption can be reduced by up to 33.2% when the MLC NAND flash memory chips are heavily cycled.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments.
REFERENCES
[1] R.-S. Liu, M.-Y. Chuang, C.-L. Yang, C.-H. Li, K.-C. Ho, and H.-P. Li, “Improving read performance of NAND flash SSDs by exploiting error locality,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 65, no. 4, pp. 1090–1102, Apr. 2016.
[2] Y. Pan, G. Dong, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “Using quasi-EZ-NAND flash memory to build large-capacity solid-state drives in computing systems,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 62, no. 5, pp. 1051–1057, May 2013.
[3] L. M. Grupp, J. D. Davis, and S. Swanson, “The bleak future of NAND flash memory,” in Proc. 10th USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol. (FAST), 2012, p. 2.
[4] C. M. Compagnoni et al., “First evidence for injection statistics accuracy limitations in NAND flash constant-current Fowler–Nordheim programming,” in IEDM Tech. Dig., Dec. 2007, pp. 165–168.
[5] K. Kim, “Future memory technology: Challenges and opportunities,” in Proc. Int. Symp. VLSI Technol., Syst. Appl. (VLSI-TSA), Apr. 2008, pp. 5–9.
[6] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[7] N. Duann, “Error correcting techniques for future NAND flash memory in SSD applications,” Flash Summit, 2009.
[8] J. Kim, J. Cho, and W. Sung, “A high-speed layered min-sum LDPC decoder for error correction of NAND flash memories,” in Proc. IEEE 54th Int. Midwest Symp. Circuits Syst. (MWSCAS), Aug. 2011, pp. 1–4.
[9] K. Zhao, W. Zhao, H. Sun, T. Zhang, X. Zhang, and N. Zheng, “LDPC-in-SSD: Making advanced error correction codes work effectively in solid state drives,” in Proc. USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol. (FAST), 2013, pp. 243–256.
[10] H. Zhong and T. Zhang, “Block-LDPC: A practical LDPC coding system design approach,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 766–775, Apr. 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:21:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2664

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 24, NO. 8, AUGUST 2016

[11] M. Weiner, B. Nikolic´, and Z. Zhang, “LDPC decoder architecture for high-data rate personal-area networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), May 2011, pp. 1784–1787.
[12] D.-H. Lee and W. Sung, “Estimation of NAND flash memory threshold voltage distribution for optimum soft-decision error correction,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 440–449, Jan. 2013.
[13] M. Rovini, N. E. L’Insalata, F. Rossi, and L. Fanucci, “VLSI design of a high-throughput multi-rate decoder for structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. 8th Euromicro Conf. Digit. Syst. Design, Aug./Sep. 2005, pp. 202–209.
[14] Y. Sun, J. R. Cavallaro, and T. Ly, “Scalable and low power LDPC decoder design using high level algorithmic synthesis,” in Proc. IEEE Int. SOC Conf. (SOCC), Sep. 2009, pp. 267–270.
[15] Z. Wang, Z. Cui, and J. Sha, “VLSI design for low-density parity-check code decoding,” IEEE Circuits Syst. Mag., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 52–69, Feb. 2011.
[16] E. Yaakobi, J. Ma, L. Grupp, P. H. Siegel, S. Swanson, and J. K. Wolf, “Error characterization and coding schemes for flash memories,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM Workshops, Dec. 2013, pp. 1856–1860.
[17] T. Tokutomi, M. Doi, S. Hachiya, A. Kobayashi, S. Tanakamaru, and K. Takeuchi, “Enterprise-grade 6x fast read and 5x highly reliable SSD with TLC NAND-flash memory for big-data storage,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC), Feb. 2015, pp. 1–3.
[18] W. Zhao, H. Sun, M. Lv, G. Dong, N. Zheng, and T. Zhang, “Improving min-sum LDPC decoding throughput by exploiting intra-cell bit error characteristic in MLC NAND flash memory,” in Proc. Symp. Mass Storage Syst. Technol. (MSST), Jun. 2014, pp. 1–6.
[19] C. M. Compagnoni et al., “Investigation of the threshold voltage instability after distributed cycling in nanoscale NAND flash memory arrays,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Rel. Phys. Symp. (IRPS), May 2010, pp. 604–610.
[20] Microsoft Corporation. Diskmon. [Online]. Available: http://technet. microsoft.com/en-us/sysinternals/bb896646.aspx
[21] G. Dong, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “On the use of soft-decision errorcorrection codes in NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 429–439, Feb. 2011.
[22] K. Zhang, X. Huang, and Z. Wang, “High-throughput layered decoder implementation for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 985–994, Aug. 2009.
[23] H. Zhong, W. Xu, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “Area-efficient min-sum decoder design for high-rate quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes in magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 43, no. 12, pp. 4117–4122, Dec. 2007.
[24] Micron Corporation. (2013). NAND Flash Memory MT29F128G08cbcab Datasheet. [Online]. Available: http://www.micron.com
Hongbin Sun (M’11) received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in 2003 and 2009, respectively.
He was a Visiting Ph.D. Student with the Electrical, Computer and Systems Engineering Department, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, USA, from 2007 to 2008. He held a post-doctoral position with the Computer Science Department, Xi’an Jiaotong University, from 2009 to 2011, where he is currently an Associate Professor with the School of Electronic and Information Engineering. His current research interests include memory hierarchy in computer system, VLSI architecture for digital video processing, and signal processing system for new memory technology.
Wenzhe Zhao received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical engineering from Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in 2005 and 2008, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from the Department of Electronic Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, in 2014.
He was a Visiting Ph.D. Student with the Electrical, Computer and Systems Engineering Department, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, USA, from 2012 to 2013. He is currently an Advanced Engineer with Huawei Corporation, Shenzhen, China. His current research interests include video enhancement technique, VLSI architecture for low-density parity-check codes, and signal processing system for new error correction code algorithm.

Minjie Lv received the B.S. degree from the Department of Electrical Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in 2010, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics.
His current research interests include highperformance computer architecture and high reliability, and low-power memory system.
Guiqiang Dong (S’09) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees from the University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China, in 2004 and 2008, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from the Department of Electrical, Computer, and Systems Engineering, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, USA.
He is currently a Chief Channel Architect with Skyera Inc., San Jose, CA, USA. His current research interests include coding theory, signal processing for data-storage systems, and faulttolerant system design for various digital memories.
Nanning Zheng (SM’93–F’06) graduated from the Department of Electrical Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in 1975 and recieved the M.S. degree in information and control engineering from Xi’an Jiaotong University, in 1981, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from Keio University, Yokohama, Japan, in 1985.
He joined Xi’an Jiaotong University in 1975, where he is currently a Professor and the Director of the Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics. His current research interests include computer vision, pattern recognition and image processing, and hardware implementation of intelligent systems. Dr. Zheng became a member of the Chinese Academy of Engineering in 1999, and he is the Chinese Representative on the Governing Board of the International Association for Pattern Recognition. He also serves as the President of the Chinese Association of Automation.
Tong Zhang (M’02–SM’08) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees from Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in 1995 and 1998, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA, in 2002, all in electrical engineering.
He is currently a Professor with the Electrical, Computer and Systems Engineering Department, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, USA. His current research interests include algorithm and architecture codesign for communication and data storage systems, variation-tolerant signal processing IC design, fault-tolerant system design for digital memory, and interconnect system design for hybrid CMOS/nanodevice electronic systems. Dr. Zhang serves as an Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—PART II: EXPRESS BRIEFS and the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:21:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

