Flexible Low-Complexity Decoding Architecture for QC-LDPC Codes
Nan Jiang, Student Member, IEEE, Kewu Peng, and Zhixing Yang State Key Laboratory on Microwave & Digital Communications
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China Email: jiangnan02@gmail.com

Abstract—A novel flexible decoding architecture for quasicyclic (QC) low-density parity-check (LDPC) code is proposed in this paper to reduce decoding complexity. The novelty of this architecture lies in a new time-sharing scheme of processing units, which provides low complexity and flexible serial factor of decoding hardware. Without loss of coding performance, the architecture requires significantly less processing units compared with known semi-parallel decoders at the expense of throughput decrease, while keeping memory requirement unchanged. As demonstrated by hardware and software implementation results, the proposed architecture is advisable and competent for wireless mobile systems and portable devices.
I. INTRODUCTION
For communication and broadcasting systems, especially for wireless systems, error control coding is essential to overcome channel impairments. Originally discovered by Gallager [1], LDPC codes have proven able to approach Shannon limit under belief propagation (BP) decoding algorithm [2]. With remarkable coding performance and low-complexity implementation, LDPC coding has drawn much research attention in recent years and has been employed in several communication and broadcasting standards, such as IEEE802.16e, DVB-S2, IEEE802.3an (10BASE-T), Chinese Digital Television Terrestrial Broadcasting (DTTB) standard.
In the last few years, some hardware architectures have been proposed for LDPC decoding towards various applications. Directly mapping BP algorithm to hardware, the parallel decoder [3] achieves good throughput performance, while it consumes huge hardware resources, which grow infeasible for large block lengths. The serial decoder [4] reuses processing units for all rows or columns in parity check matrix to alleviate hardware complexity, and thus requires huge latent clock cycles for a decoding iteration. The semi-parallel decoding architecture [5] [6] offers a better balance between throughput performance and hardware requirements, which is fairly advisable for LDPC codes with array-structured parity check matrix, e.g., quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes. Since the serial factor of known semi-parallel architecture is inherently no more than the submatrix size of the array-structured LDPC code, semi-parallel decoders incur a threshold of hardware
The work reported in this paper is supported by National High Technology Research and Development Program of China (863 Program) under Grant 2007AA01Z2B6 and 006AA01Z279.

complexity. The complexity and throughout of LDPC decoders with different serial factors are presented in Fig. 1. It can be observed that there is a throughput/complexity gap between semi-parallel and serial decoders, which would be efficient and suitable for wireless applications.
With restricted frequency bandwidth and thus much lower throughput requirements than wired wideband systems, wireless systems, especially mobile and portable devices, are intensively demanding for reduction in hardware. Due to recently growing interests in wireless and mobile multimedia transmission systems, low-complexity LDPC decoder is everincreasingly requisite. In order to exploit the gap between semi-parallel and serial decoders, a novel LDPC decoding architecture with a flexible inter-circulant time-sharing scheme of processing units is proposed in this paper. The architecture performs normalized uniformly most powerful (UMP) BP decoding algorithm with significantly low complexity.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II presents the definition of LDPC codes and a brief introduction to LDPC decoding algorithms. The flexible low-complexity decoding architecture is derived in Section III. Implementation results of the proposed architecture are presented and discussed in Section IV. Finally, concluding remarks are drawn in Section V to summarize the paper.
II. BACKGROUND: DEFINITIONS AND ALGORITHMS
A. Definition of LDPC Codes
An LDPC code is specified by a parity check matrix HM×N , containing mostly 0’s and a small number of 1’s [1] (In this study, binary LDPC codes are considered). Each codeword is orthogonal to the row space of H; namely, the codewords satisfy M check equations, HcT = 0. Assuming that H is full rank, the length of message word is K = N−M bits, and the code rate is R = K/N = 1−M/N . An LDPC code can be represented with a Tanner Graph, which consists of N bit nodes, M check nodes, and a certain number of edges. There is an edge between check node m and bit node n if and only if H’s entry hmn = 1.
QC-LDPC codes, as a class of array-structured LDPC codes, were proposed to facilitate code construction and to reduce encoding complexity [7]. The parity check matrix of an (N, K) QC-LDPC is an (M/b × N/b) array of circulants, which are

1-4244-2424-5/08/$20.00 ©2008 IEEE

1316

ICCS 2008

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:23:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Throughput & Complexity

Parallel Minimum Semi-Parallel

SemiParallel

Proposed

Serial

1

b

N (or M)

Serial Factor

Fig. 1. Complexity and throughout of LDPC decoding architecture as functions of serial factor, where b is the submatrix size of array-structured code and M (or N ) is the row (or column) number of parity check matrix.

TABLE I
ITERATION COMPUTATIONS OF LLR BP, UMP BP, AND NORMALIZED UMP BP ALGORITHMS FOR AN (N, K) REGULAR LDPC CODE WITH
ROW WEIGHT ρ AND COLUMN WEIGHT ν

Computation Addition Multiplication tanh(x/2) 2arctanh(x) Minimization Bit XOR

LLR 2νN (ρ−2)(N −K) (ρ−1)(N −K) N −K
0 0

UMP 2νN
0 0 0 (ρ−1)(N −K) (ρ−1)(N −K)

Norm. 2νN
N −K 0 0
(ρ−1)(N −K) (ρ−1)(N −K)

shifted identity matrices or zero matrices with uniform size b×b. Three irregular QC-LDPC codes with N = 7493, K = 3048/4572/6096, and b = 127 have been employed in Chinese DTTB standard [8] as the inner channel codes.

B. Decoding Algorithms
Soft-decision decoding is the procedure of estimating the transmitted codeword c by calculating the a posteriori probability (APP) that each bit in c is 1 or 0 given the received word y= (y0, y1, · · · , yN−1) with yn ∈ R, which would have been corrupted by channel impairment: noise and fading. Therefore, the maximum a posteriori probability (MAP) estimation

cˆ = arg max c :Hc T=0{Prob(c |y)}

(1)

is the codeword with minimum Euclidean distance to y. With extrinsic information relaying between check nodes and bit nodes in Tanner Graph, BP decoding algorithm utilizes the bitto-bit dependence required in check-sum equations of LDPC code to adjust the probability of each bit until obtaining a valid codeword.
The complexity of BP decoding algorithm, derived in Gallager’s paper, was unfortunately infeasible for the electronic processors at that time, which was also the reason that LDPC codes had been overlooked until 1996. In the past decade, such notable revisions of BP decoding algorithms as logarithmlikelihood ratio (LLR) [9], UMP BP [10], and normalized UMP BP [11] have been proposed to exploit better tradeoffs between coding performance and computation complexity. The complexities in one iteration of LLR BP, UMP BP and normalized UMP BP algorithms are compared in Table I. Normalized UMP BP algorithm significantly reduces computation complexity without loss in performance compared to LLR BP algorithm[6]; normalized UMP BP algorithm is utilized and implemented in this paper.
Normalized UMP BP algorithm is described in Fig. 2. The messages are normalized with a factor α during the horizontal process, which can be chosen to maximize the coding gain according to the channel noise [11]. The notations used in Fig. 2 are defined as follows. Cn is the LLR of bit n derived from the received symbol yn. Lm i n denotes the message sent from check node m to bit node n in the ith iteration, while Zmi n denotes the message sent from bit node n to check node m in the ith iteration. Zni denotes the LLR of bit n in the ith

Initialization: 1) Set i = 1. For each (m, n) ∈ {(m, n)|hmn = 1}, set Zm0 n = Cn.
Recurrence:
2) Horizontal Process: From m = 0 to M −1, update Lm i n for each n ∈ N (m) by

Lm i n = α ·

sgn Zmi−n1

·

min
n ∈N(m)

Zmi−n1

.

(2)

n ∈N(m)

n =n

n =n

3) Vertical Process: From n = 0 to N − 1, update

Zni = Cn +

Lm i n,

(3)

m∈M(n)

and update Zmi n for each m ∈ M(n) by

Zmi n = Zni − Limn.

(4)

4) Stopping Criterion Create cˆi = [cni ], by hard decision: cˆin =

0, Zni > 0; 1, Zni 0.

If HTcˆi == 0 or i == IMAX, terminate the decoding.

Otherwise, set i = i + 1 and repeat decoding from Step 2).

Fig. 2. Normalized UMP BP Decoding Algorithm.

iteration, with which hard decision of the bit is made. IMAX is the prespecified maximum number of decoding iterations. The set of bit nodes connecting to check node m is denoted by N(m) = {n|hmn = 1}, and the set of check nodes connecting to bit node n by M(n) = {m|hmn = 1}.
III. LDPC DECODING ARCHITECTURE
A. Semi-Parallel Decoding Architecture
In LDPC decoders, decoding elements: horizontal processing units (HPUs), vertical processing units (VPUs), LRAMs to store check-node message, ZRAMs to store bit-node messages, and CRAMs to store the LLRs of received symbols are inherent from the BP-decoding scheme and from the interconnection specified by the parity check matrix.
Semi-parallel decoding architecture employs a time-sharing scheme of processing units to reduce hardware complexity[5] [6]. It can be observed in a QC parity check matrix that any row or column in a circulant contains no more than one nonzero entry and thus the Tanner edges corresponding the entries in a circulant do not intersect at their nodes, and that

1317
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:23:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Clock

Address

Controller

Address

Valid Codeword ?

HPUs

Q

D

ZRAMs D

VPUs

LRAMs Q

Address

CRAMs
INPUT: Received Symbols

OUTPUT: Decoded Codeword

Row Class

1

F

1

F

F

Column Class

Address Generator

Column Class

1

F

1

F

1

F

1

F

F

ZRAM Array

HPU HPU

LRAM Array

An H. Group

VPU

VPU CRAMs

A V. Group

Fig. 3. Semi-Parallel Decoding Architecture.

Decoded Codeword

Received Symbols

the inter-circulant connection of entries can be specified by the circulant connection. Utilizing the quasi-cyclic character, semi-parallel decoding architecture reuses an HPU for b check nodes in a circulant row and a VPU for b bit nodes in a circulant column. Namely, the serial factor of the architecture is S = b.
The overall architecture of a semi-parallel decoder is illustrated in Fig. 3. Since the access of messages in a circulant has been distributed to different clock periods without conflicts, check-node messages of a circulant are stored in an LRAM, and bit-node messages in a ZRAM; the number of LRAMs or ZRAMs is Ω, the number of nonzero circulants in parity check matrix. Each LRAM, ZRAM, or CRAM, has an Ssymbol capacity. ZRAMs and LRAMs of each circulant row are connected to an HPU’s inputs and outputs, respectively; LRAMs and ZRAMs of each circulant column are connected to a VPU’s inputs and outputs. In the first half of a decoding iteration, each HPU fetches Zmi−n1’s from the ZRAMs to perform HP as (2), and then distributes results Lm i n’s to the LRAMs; in the second half iteration, each VPU fetches Lm i n’s from the LRAMs to perform VP as (3) and (4), and then distributes results Zmi n’s to the ZRAMs. Each processing unit operates for b times for the b rows or columns by successively accessing b symbols in LRAMs, ZRAMs, and CRAMs. Until the stopping criterion is reached, the decoder halts, and the estimated codeword cˆ hard decided in VPUs is output.
If higher throughput is required, (G − 1) processing units can be added to participate the processes of a circulant row or column. Thus, the semi-parallel architecture can render serial factor as S = b/G with G = 1, 2, · · ·
B. Flexible Low-Complexity Architecture
With serial factor S b, semi-parallel architecture suffers from a lower bound of hardware complexity; namely, the minimum semi-parallel decoder is that with S = b. However, for the bandwidth-restricted systems even the throughput of the minimum decoder would be redundant. Low-complexity decoding architecture that exploits the gap between semiparallel and serial would offer better throughput-complexity

Fig. 4. Flexible Low-complexity Decoding Architecture.
balance to enhance the portability of LDPC-coded systems. Motivated by this observation, a novel flexible low-complexity architecture is derived in this paper to reduce the hardware complexity of LDPC decoding. With an efficient time-sharing scheme of processing units, serial factor of the proposed architecture is S = bF with folding factor F = 1, 2, · · ·.
The flexible low-complexity decoding architecture with folding factor F is presented in Fig. 4. In the architecture, each horizontal or vertical sharing group is extended to cover F circulant rows or columns; namely, a processing unit is shared by F circulant rows or columns and reused for bF times in each iteration. Since the bit-edge-check interconnections is shared within circulants, a message RAM cannot cover more than one circulant; otherwise, for the entries in a RAM would inevitably span among multiple sharing groups, memoryaccess conflicts cannot be simultaneously avoided for HP and VP. In the architecture, b messages in each nonzero circulant are kept in a block of RAM; therefore, F RAM rows or columns are multiplexed to reuse a processing unit. LRAMs and ZRAMs are marked off by F rows classes and F column classes, in each of which the RAMs can be managed by the same control signals. Instead of employing multiplexers, different RAM classes in a sharing group are connected the data bus to multiplex messages to the processing unit, and therefore high-impedance output at the port of the RAM is required. During HP or VP, F classes are alternately permitted to the access of the processing units on the bus.
The design parameters of semi-parallel architecture and the proposed architecture are described in Table II. It can be observed that without extra memory capacity the proposed architecture decreases the number of processing units to 1/(GF ) compared to semi-parallel architecture, and thus can be expected to flexibly reduce hardware complexity.
Implementation details for the LDPC decoder are described as follows.
1) Intermediate Message Storage: For each circulant in the parity check matrix, an LRAM and a ZRAM, are assigned to

1318
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:23:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

b Row Class

A Circulant in Parity Check Matrix į 1 1
1 1
1

V. Start

1 b
H. Start

ZRAMs 1 2 F
HPU
LRAMs 1 2

Absolute-Value Calculation
^ ` Z i1 mn '

^ ` Z i1 mn '

^  ` sgn

Z i1 mn '

Minimization

^ ` min

Z i1 mn '

XOR

^  ` sgn

Z i1 mn '

Signing and Scaling

^ ` Limn

LRAMs

VPU

_ +

Ȉ

_Ȉ
+
Ȉ

_

+
Ȉ

Hard-Decision

Limitor

Limitor

Limitor

ZRAMs

0 1 į-1 į į+1 b-1 Row Class

b

F

A RAM for the Circulant

(a)

(b)

12

F

Column

CRAM
(c)

12

F

Column

Fig. 5. Implementation of (a) message-store scheme, (b) horizontal sharing group, and (c) vertical sharing group in proposed architecture.

TABLE II PARAMETERS OF DECODING ARCHITECTURE FOR AN (N,K) QC LDPC
CODE (CIRCULANT WEIGHT IN H IS Ω AND CIRCULANT SIZE IS b)

Parameter Serial Factor HPU VPU Cycles Per iteration Memory Capacity

Semi-Parallel b/G
(N −K)G/b N G/b b/G
2bΩ+N

Proposed bF
(N −K)/(bF ) N/(bF ) bF 2bΩ+N

store Limn’s and Zmi n’s respectively. The depth of each RAM is b symbols (data width depends on messages’ quantization); the number of LRAMs or ZRAMs is equal to the circulant weight Ω of H. The access addresses of LRAMs and PRAMs are managed by an address generator, operating as a cyclic counter with two loads, 0 and circulant’s shifted value δ. The message-store scheme in the decoding architecture is illustrated in Fig. 5(a).
2) HP: A horizontal sharing group is presented in Fig. 5(b), where F row classes of LRAMs and ZRAMs are successively connected to the HPU. According to (2), HP consists of four phases: absolute-value calculation, minimization, signing and scaling. The number of required minima is equal to the number of inputs, also referred to as the degree of the HPU. In these minimizing operations lies much of the complexity in horizontal process, even much of that in a decoding iteration. Minimizations in horizontal process can be solved by calculating the minimum, the second minimum, and the indices of the minimum inputs [4]. Efficient hardware implementation of HPU is a considerable issue in LDPC decoding, especially for HPU with a high degree.
3) VP: A vertical sharing group is presented in Fig. 5(c), where F column classes of LRAMs and ZRAMs are successively connected to the VPU. As (3) and (4), VPU performs |M(n)| additions to derive Zni and |M(n)| subtractions to derive Zmi n’s. To avoid overflow, magnitude’s of Zmi n’s are

clipped with limiters. Hard-decision bit cˆni is calculated according to the sign of Zni .
4) Sharing Group: For the implementation of processing unit is largely related to the degree, the share grouping depends on the weights of rows or columns. For a regular LDPC code, rows and columns can be grouped by their ordinals for sharing. If M/b or N/b, the number of circulant rows or columns, could not divide into F , a sharing group would suffer from at most (F−1) blank classes. For an irregular code, the sharing group should try to unify the weights of its rows or the columns. Nonetheless, by padding with dummy inputs, the rows or columns with different but similar weights can be accommodated into a group to reduce idle periods resulting from wide weight distribution. The dummy input for HPU is the positive maximum, while that for VPU is the zero message.
C. Complementary Remarks
Besides, in the decoding architecture there is possible improvability in respects as follows.
1) Critical Path: Processing units, especially the horizontal, would incur long delay paths, which largely confine the operating speed of the decoder. Thus, pipelining schemes of processing units would considerably increase the throughput performance [12].
2) Storage Redundance: Since horizontal process and vertical process are successively performed in the decoding scheme described above, it is unnecessary to store both bit-node messages and check-node messages simultaneously. Nonetheless, to reduce a half of the message RAMs will result in huge routing, entangled among the dispersed decoding elements.
3) Scheduling: In the scheme described above, one class of processing units is idle while the other is operating. Thereby, in order for the decoding architecture to enhance throughput performance, overlapping approaches with scheduling concepts are proposed to utilize idle units [13] [14].

1319
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:23:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE III IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS WITH SCALE FACTOR α = 0.625 (fMAX IS
MAXIMUM OPERATING FREQUENCY REPORTED BY THE COMPILER)

(N, K)

F

1

(7493, 3048) 2

3

1 (7493, 4572)
2

1 (7493, 6096)
2

#ALUT 19 773 12 802 10 602 23 425 15 234 26 068 16 532

#MemoryBits 377 216 378 240 398 720 401 408 404 320 399 104 400 128

fMAX/MHz 77.83 72.38 73.82 61.29 63.60 53.15 54.56

The throughput performances versus hardware complexities of implemented decoders are presented in Fig. 6, where the throughput is estimated with the maximum iteration number, 10 or 30 (the worst case). It can be observed that, compared with the minimum complexity of semi-parallel architecture, the decoders with F = 2 reduce the hardware consumption by about 40% with half throughput decrease. As folding factor grows, the hardware reduction would become less appreciable due to constant routing complexity and memories requirement.
V. CONCLUSION
We derived and described a novel decoding architecture for array-structured LDPC codes, including QC-LDPC code. The proposed architecture features a new flexible time-sharing scheme of decoding processing units, which significantly reduces the number of processing units without extra message memories. The proposed architecture exploits the gap between semi-parallel and serial LDPC decoders to better balance complexity and throughput. The architecture is advisable and competent for efficiency-demanding applications, such as wireless and mobile systems and portable devices.

Fig. 6. Throughput and Complexity of decoders with proposed architecture.

IV. IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS

Employing the proposed architecture, decoders for QCLDPC codes in Chinese DTTB were implemented with Verilog HDL and verified using ModelSim simulator. The coding performance of the decoders was validated with a fixedpoint C-coded model of normalized UMP BP algorithm. After functional and timing verification, the decoders were compiled and synthesized for Altera’s FPGA of Stratix II family, using Quartus II compiler.
The implementation results of the decoders are compared in Table III, where FPGA resources are measured with the consumption of adaptive look-up tables (ALUT) and memory bits. Assuming that the decoding lasts for μ iterations and that the operating frequency of the decoder is f , for an (N, K) QC-LDPC code with circulant size b, the throughput of the proposed architecture with folding factor F is

Γ

=

2·μ·(F

K ·f ·b + δr

+

δw)

,

(5)

where δr and δw are the numbers of reading and writing latency cycles of the RAMs. Besides, different folding factors, Fh and Fv, can be assigned for horizontal and vertical sharing groups to further adjust throughput and complexity, as

Γ

=

μ·(Fh ·b +

K ·f Fv ·b + 2δr

+ 2δw)

.

(6)

REFERENCES
[1] Robert G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, IT-18, pp. 21-28, Jan. 1962.
[2] Thomas J. Richardson and Ru¨diger L. Urbanke, “The capacity of lowdensity parity check codes under meaasge-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, Vol. 47, No. 2, pp. 599-618, Feb. 2001.
[3] C. Howland and A. Blanksby, “Parallel decoding architecture for low density parity check codes,” in Proc. 2001 IEEE Int. Symp. on Circuits and Syst., 6-9 May 2001, Vol. 4, pp. 742-745.
[4] Mauro Cocco, John Dielissen, Marc Heijiligers, Andries Hekstra, and Jos huisken, “A scalable architecture for LDPC decoding,” in Proc. 2004 Design, Automation and Test in European Conf. and Exhibition, Vol. 3, pp. 88-93, 16-20 Feb. 2004.
[5] Tong Zhang, “Efficient VLSI Architecture for Error-Correcting Coding”, Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. of Minnesota, Mineapolis, MN, July 2002.
[6] Marjan Karkooti, “Semi-parallel architecture for real-time LDPC coding,” M.S. thesis, Rice Univ., Houston, TX, May 2004.
[7] Lei Chen, Jun Xu, Ivana Djurdjuvic, and Shu Lin, “Near-shannon-limit quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., Vol. 52, No. 7, pp. 1038-1042, Jul. 2004.
[8] Framing Structure, Channel Coding and Modulation for Digital Television Terrestrial Broadcasting System(in Chinese), Chinese National Standard GB 20600-2006.
[9] Joachim Hagenauer, Elke Offer, and Lutz Papke, “Iterative decoding of binary block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, Vol. 42, No. 2, pp. 429-445, March 1996.
[10] Marc P. C. Fossorier, Miodrag Mihaljevic´, and Hideki Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propogation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., Vol. 47, No.5, pp. 673680, May 1999.
[11] Jinghu Chen and Marc P. C. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-densityparity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., Vol. 50, No. 3, pp. 406-414, Mar. 2002.
[12] Zhixing Yang, Nan Jiang, Kewu Peng, and Jintao Wang, “High throughput LDPC decoding architecture,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Commun. Circuit and Syst. (ICCCAS’08), Xiamen, China, May 25-27, 2008.
[13] Hua Qiao, Wu Guan, Mingke Dong, and Haige Xiang, “Design and implementation of LDPC decoder with high throughput,” Acta Scientiarum Naturalium Universitatis Pekinensis on Line (in chinese), Vol. 2, No. 2, Jun. 30 2007.
[14] Yanni Chen, and Keshab K. Parhi, “Overlapped massage passing for quasi-cyclic low-decsity parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuit Sys. I, Reg. Papers, Vol. 51, No.6, pp. 1106-1113, June 2004.

1320
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:23:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

