The Analysis of Cycle Structure IRU A Class Rf

Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes

Jing Lei National University of Defense Technology
ChangSha Hunan ,410073, P.R. China leijing@nudt.edu.cn

Jianhui Wang1,2 and Yongqiang Gao1 National University of Defense Technology1
ChangSha Hunan, 410073, P.R. China Unit 66018 of the PLA2 Beijing, 100041 wjh0369@163.com

Abstract—In this paper, we analyse the cycle structure of a class of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes, and divide the cycles of this kind of LDPC codes into three classes. It offeres some help for improving the existing construction algorithms of this kind of LDPC codes. The cycles in base matrix could be extended as long as possible when p the row’s(or column’s) number of block-elements was prime.
I. INTRODUCTION
Recently Low-Density Parity-Check(LDPC) codes have attracted people’s attention by their outstanding error correcting performance. The encoding complexity of LDPC codes is the bottleneck of their application. The construction methods of LDPC codes involve two classes: random construction method and structured construction method. LDPC codes constructed randomly can achieve a high BER performance, whose encoding complexity is high in general. On the other hand, structured LDPC codes have lower encoding complexity, which can be implemented easily. Kou et al presented a geometric approach to design LDPC codes over finite fields[1]. Codes constructed in this way have no cycles of length four. Four-cycle-free LDPC codes based on balanced incomplete block designs(BIBD)[2] have been constructed by Mackay and Davey, which can achieve very high code rate, but these codes can only guarantee four-cycle-free. M.P.C Fossorier analyzed the performance of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes constructed from circulant permutation matrices[3], whose girths are not more than 12. Zongwang Li et al presented a class of LDPC codes based on PEG algorithm[4], but they didn’t analyze the cycle structure

deeply. D.Sridhara et al advanced a new way, assembling some circulant permutation matrices with p lines, to construct LDPC codes whose performance even surpassed that of random LDPC codes[5]. This method requested that p should be a prime number. The conclusion is one special case in our article which presents a comprehensive discussion about this problem .
[6] proposed an algorithm based on PEG algorithm, and constructed a kind of LDPC codes called PEG-E-LDPC codes, whose parity check matrix can be depicted by a base matrix and a shift matrix. Given the base matrix, a well constructed shift matrix can eliminate some short cycles in the base matrix. But [6] has not analyzed the cycle structure of PEG-E-LDPC codes. This paper analyzes the cycle structure of PEG-E-LDPC codes intensively.
II. CHARACTERISTIC OF PEG-E-LDPC CODES
A. Construction of a PEG-E-LDPC code
The construction of a PEG-E-LDPC code can be depicted as the following two steps. Firstly, construct a base matrix by PEG algorithm. Secondly, replace the ‘1’s and ‘0’s in the base matrix with circulant permutation matrices and null matrices respectively. Clearly the PEG-E-LDPC code is a kind of quasi-cyclic codes [6] .So it can be implemented with a group of shift registers, and has low encoding complexity. The parity check matrix of this code can be transformed into the format of formula (1).

1-4244-2424-5/08/$20.00 ©2008 IEEE

1307

ICCS 2008

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:22:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

I(S1,1) I(S1,2)

. . . I(S1,k)

H=

I(S2,1) I(S2,2)

.

.

.

.

.

.

...

I(S2,k)
. . .

I(Sc,1) I(Sc,2)

...

I(Sc,k)

I (Si, j ) is a p × p circulant permutation matrix, called a
block-element of the parity check matrix H, where Si, j is
the right shift number of I (Si, j ) over identity matrix , −1 ≤ Si, j ≤ p −1 , and Si, j ∈ Z . I (−1) represents
a p × p null matrix. I (0) represents a p × p identity
matrix. Obviously, a base matrix and some shift matrices with certain right shift number could determine the parity check matrix of a PEG-E-LDPC code.

Generally, there are many factors which affect the performance of LDPC code, including cycle structure, stopping sets, trapping sets, the minimum distance of codes and so on. In the next section, we would analyse the cycle structure of PEG-E-LDPC code from two aspects. First of all, it is necessary to introduce the definition of cycles of a certain codes.

B. Cycles of PEG-E-LDPC codes

A cycle of length 2l in Tanner graph is a set of l variable nodes and l constraint nodes connected by edges such that a path exists that travels through every node in the set and connects each node to itself without traversing an edge twice[7],as showed in Fig.. The bold part denotes a cycle of length 6˄v1-c3-v3-c2-v2-c1-v1˅in Tanner graph. The cycle in the Tanner graph of a LDPC code manifests itself as a closed path in associated parity-check matrix H. This closed path is a polygon with 6 edges, every vertex’s value in H is ‘1’.

Fig.1. Relation between a cycle in a Tanner graph and a closed path in associated parity-check matrix
On the other hand, for the PEG-E-LDPC code, because the ‘1’s and ‘0’s in the base matrix are replaced by some

kinds of p × p circulant permutation matrices, we would
define the cycles in the base matrix as block-element-cycles of the parity check matrix H. According to the construction principle, each vertex of a block-element-cycle would not be a null matrix after replacing the elements in base matrix with permutation matrices. In Fig.2, it’s a block-element-cycle of length 6( I (S1,1) − I (S1,2 ) − I (S2,2 ) − I (S2,3) − I (S3,3 ) − I (S3,1) − I (S1,1) ).
A length-2k block-element-cycle whose vertexes are labeled is formed by the following procedure, starting from
the ‘1’ in the ith( 0 ≤ i ≤ p −1 ) column of the first
block-element, changing column and row alternatively until all block-elements in the block-element-cycle have been passed, as showed in Fig.2. To describe conveniently, we make this course to be the rule of traversing cycle in this article.
In this course, the jth ‘1’ being contained in the jth block-element, the first ‘1’ and the second ‘1’ are in the same row, and the third ‘1’ locates in the same column with the second ‘1’, and so on. The 2kth ‘1’ and the (2k-1)th ‘1’ are in the same row.
Fig.2. A block-element-cycle in a parity check matrix
It is easy to observe that the cycle and block-element-cycle of H are different. In sectionċ, we will find that there must be at least one cycle in a block-element-cycle of H. III. CYCLE STRUCTURE ANALYSIS OF PEG-E-LDPC
CODES Cycle structure has great impact on the BER performance, convergence rate and error floor of a LDPC code. PEG-E-LDPC code has remarkable cycle structure. In part A of this section we analyse the influence of shift matrix on the cycle structure in every block-element-cycle through

1308
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:22:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

several propositions. Then in part B we research the relationship between two block-element-cycle of H. A. Characteristic of cycles in block-element-cycle
Theorem 1: For a block-element-cycle of length 2k in the parity check matrix of a PEG-E-LDPC code, If the first ‘1’ starts from ith column in first block-element and changing the column firstly, then the 2kth ‘1’ must be in the
2k
¦ [i + (−1)m Sαm ,βm ] mod p th column in the 2kth m=1
block-element, where p is the number of rows(or columns)
of each block-element, and Sαm ,βm is the right shift of the
mth block-element over identity matrix in the block-element-cycle.
Proof: The first block-element in the block-element-cycle
has right shift Sα1,β1 over identity matrix. The ‘1’ in the ith
column locates in the ((i − Sα1,β1 ) mod p) th row
synchronously. The ‘1’ in the second block-element which is in the same row with the first ‘1’ locates in the
((i − Sα1,β1 ) mod p) th row of the second block-element.
So the column serial number of the second ‘1’ in the second block-element is:
[(i − Sα1,β1 ) mod p + Sα2 ,β2 ] mod p = (i − Sα1,β1 + Sα2 ,β2 ) mod p
Similarly, in the third block-element, the third ‘1’ in the
(i − Sα1,β1 + Sα2 ,β2 ) mod p th column is in the same
column with the second ‘1’. The row serial number of the third ‘1’ is:
(i − Sα1,β1 + Sα2 ,β2 − Sα3 ,β3 ) mod p
The rest can be deduced by analogy. The column serial number of the 2kth ‘1’ in the last block-element is:

2k
¦ (i − Sα1,β1 + Sα2 ,β2 − Sα3 ,β3 + " + Sα2k ,β2k ) mod p = [i + (−1)m Sαm ,βm ] mod p m=1
This completes the proof.
Theorem 1 shows that, starting from the first block-element and changing the column firstly, the column serial number of the 2kth ‘1’ is determined by that of the first ‘1’, p and shifts of the block-elements in the block-element-cycle. If p and all shifts are fixed, only does the column serial number of the first ‘1’ affect that of the last ‘1’.

2k

¦ Let ( (−1)m Sαm ,βm ) mod p = S1 .

(2)

m=1

Similarly, starting from the ‘1’ in the (i + S1) mod p th
column of the first block-element and standing by the touring rule, the column serial number of the 2kth ‘1’ in the last block-element:
[(i + S1) mod p + S1]mod p = (i + 2S1) mod p
Repeat this course m times. Suppose that each of i,
(i + S1) mod p , (i + 2S1) mod p ,…, (i + mS1) mod p
is not equal to any other. Considering that every column and row of each block-element in the block-element-cycle has only one ‘1’, if there exists a cycle for the first time when repeating this course (m+1) times, [i + (m +1)S1]mod p must be equal to i.
Theorem 2: In a length-2k block-element-cycle, If S1 and p are relatively prime, which can be expressed as (S1, p) = 1 this block-element-cycle contains only a cycle
whose length is 2pk. Where S1 is defined by formula (2), and p is the number
of rows(or columns) of each block-element.
Proof: Starting from the ‘1’ in the ith column of the first block-element and following the traversing rule we have made previously, if a cycle is formed for the first time in

1309
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:22:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the (m-1)th repetition, (i + mS1) mod p = i must be true.
That is to say:

(mS1) mod p = 0 , m ≥ 1

(3)

A cycle comes into being when (3) is satisfied.

If (S1, p) = 1 , the minimum m satisfying (3) is p.
Videlicet, a cycle be formed for the first time in the mth repetition. According to (3), the emerging of a cycle is independent of i. Starting from any column of the first block-element, we can get the same cycle in the pth
repetition. That is to say if (S1, p) = 1 , the
block-element-cycle contains only one length-2pk cycle.

If S1 = 0 , according to (3), the block-element-cycle
contains p cycles whose length is 2k.

If (S1, p) ≠ 1 and S1 ≠ 0 , there exists a minimum

number l which is less than p and satisfies formula (3). Here

l is the least number of repetition. In this case, the

block-element-cycle contains more than one cycles. Each

cycle has 2lk ‘1’s. The number of cycles in the

block-element-cycle is

2 pk 2lk

=

p l

= (S1,

p) .

As a summary, any block-element-cycle of PEG-E-LDPC codes must contain a cycle or more cycles. If

(S1, p) = 1, it contains only one cycle whose length is 2pk.

This completes the proof.
According to theorem 2, if p is prime, the cycles in the base matrix can be prolonged farthest when the shift matrix Si,j is fixed.
Based on the propositions above, we can choose good shift numbers of permutation matrices in order to enlarge the cycles in every block-element-cycle as large as possible.

For the research of the construction of LDPC codes, short cycles should be eliminated as more as possible. For PEG-E-LDPC codes, extending the cycles within block-element-cycle is one potent way, but there is another problem should be paid attention to. Owing to the connection between nodes in Tanner graph, there may be some short cycles across several block-element-cycles. We just describe the relation between two block-element-cycles.

B. Relation between two block-element-cycles

Fig.4 shows two cases of the directly connecting relation between two block-element-cycles:

a2k1

b2k2

a1=b1

a2=b2

a1

b1+1

al=bl

DTwo block-element-cycles have more than one common element

a2k1 a1 a2

. 1RGHV

b1 b2k2 b2

ETwo block-element-cycles are connected by a chain
Fig.3. The two cases of directly connecting relation between two block-element-cycles.
˄a˅. Two block-element-cycles have more than one common elements. Referring to literature [8], there are at least one cycle across them. Considering there are more than one cycles, if the two block-element-cycles with the length of 2k1 and 2k2 respectively have l common nodes (showed as Fig 3-a), the length of shortest cycles across them is less than
2 × (2k1 + 2k2 − l) .

˄b˅. Two block-element-cycles are connected by a chain. Suppose that there are two block-element-cycles whose lengths are 2k1 and 2k2 respectively. We know there must be at least one cycle in each block-element-cycle. At the same time, if the connecting relation of two block-element-cycles is as the Fig 3-b showed, there may be short cycles across the two block-element-cycles, and the

1310
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:22:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

length of the shortest cycle between two block-element-cycles is 2k1 + 2k2 + 2k3 − 2 , where k3 is the length of chain(containing the two vertexes of the chain),
and k3 ≥ 1.
Based on the analyzing above, the cycles of PEG-E-LDPC codes can be divided into three classes:
1). Cycles contained in a length-2k block-element-cycle have length 2kˈas Fig.4. (a) depicted.
2). Cycles contained in a length-2k block-element-cycle have length more than 2k, as Fig.4. (b) depicted.
3). Cycles between two block-element-cycles whose
smallest length is 2k1 + 2k2 + 2k3 − 2 , where 2k1, 2k2 and
k3 ( k3 ≥ 1) are the length of the two block-element-cycles
and the chain respectively, as Fig.4. (c) depicted.

IV. CONCLUSION
This paper analyzes the cycle structure of PEG-E-LDPC
codes extensively, and divides the cycles of PEG-E-LDPC
codes into three classes. If p is prime, a block-element-cycle
contains either p cycles or only one cycle. A proper shift
matrix S can extend the cycles in the base matrix as long as
possible.
REFERENCES
[1] Yu Kou, Shu Lin and M.P.C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: a rediscovery and new results,”[J].IEEE Trans.Inform. Theory, 2001, 47(7):2711–2736.
[2] D.J.C. Mackay and M.C. Davey, “Evaluation of Gallager codes for short block length and high rate applications”, [J].in Codes, Systems and Graphical Models; IMA Volumes in Mathematics and Its Applications, B. Marcus and J. Rosenthal, Eds. New York: Springer-Verlag, 2000, 123:113–130.
[3] M.P.C. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity -check codes form circulant permutation matrices”,[J].IEEE Trans .Inf. Theory, 2004, 50(8): 1788-1793.
[4] Zongwang Li and B.V.K. Vijaya Kumar, “A Class of Good Quasi-Cyclic Low-Density Parity Check Codes Based On Progressive Edge Growth Graph”, [J].Signals, Systems and Computers. Conference Record of the Thirty-Eighth Asilomar Conference on, 2004, 2:1990-1994.
[5] D.Sridhara, R. M.Tanner, Thomas E.Fuja, “Low Density Parity Check Codes from Permutation Matrices”, In Proceedings of 2001 Conference on Information Sciences and Systems, The Johns Hopkins University, March 21-23, 2001.
[6] Jing Lei, Chaojing Tang and Jianhui Wang, “An Effective Algorithm for Construction of LDPC Codes”, ICIA 2008, submitted.
[7] Tao Tian, Chris Jones, John D. Villasenor et al,“Construction of
Irregular LDPC Codes with Low Error Floors”,In Proc.IEEE
Int.Con.Communications(ICC),Dallas,Tx,USA,2003:3125-3129.
[8] Myung S,Yang K,and Kim J, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for fast
edcoding”, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory,2005,51
(8):2894-2901.

(k3 =2)
Fig.4. Three classes of cycles of PEG-E-LDPC codes
We succeed in analyzing the cycle structure for a class of Quasi-Cyclic LDPC codes named PEG-E-LDPC by mathematic methods. It is helpful for construction of Quasi-Cyclic LDPC codes, especially for eliminating short cycles to improve the performance. How to extend the cycle and analyse the performance of codes is the tantalizing work for us to do.

1311
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:22:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

