Low Complexity Iterative Decoding Algorithm

for Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes
Hany R. Zeidan, Student Member, IEEE and Maha M. Elsabrouty, Member, IEEE Department of Electronics and Electrical Communications, Faculty of Engineering, Arab Academy for Science, Technology and Maritime Transportation, Cairo, Egypt
ahmed_zeidane@yahoo.com, maha2000_eg@yahoo.com

Abstract—The reliability ratio weighted based bit-flipping (RRWBF) algorithm for decoding low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes has recently been developed to provide the best performance among all existing bit-flipping based algorithms. The implementation efficient reliability ratio weighted based bitflipping (IERRWBF) algorithm speedup the original algorithm to decrease the processing time used. A drawback for this algorithm is the decrease in the improvement as the maximum number of iterations assigned for the algorithm increase as a large percentage of decoding time is spent on the iteration part without any change in the performance. In this paper, a modified version for this algorithm is proposed to solve this drawback by reducing the number of iterations required to achieve the same performance of the existing IERRWBF algorithm using efficient number of iterations instead of using the maximum number of iterations for decoding without any change in the performance of the IERRWBF.
Index Terms—bit-flipping algorithm, decoding complexity, error sum, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, implementation efficient reliability ratio weighted bit-flipping (IERRWBF) algorithm.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity check (LDPC) codes proposed by Gallager [1], [2] in 1960s have proved to be one of the best codes that have excellent performance and approaches Shannon limit. LDPC codes have gained substantial research interest in the information theory field. They become strong competitors for turbo codes [3] for error control coding for many digital communication systems.
LDPC can be decoded using various types of decoding schemes such as hard-decision decoding scheme, soft-decision decoding scheme and hybrid-decision decoding scheme. All these schemes are based on Gallager’s work in his thesis. The most brilliant hard-decision decoding algorithms include: onestep majority-logic (MLG) algorithm as in [12] and bit-flipping (BF) decoding presented by Gallager in his PhD thesis [1], as this algorithm can be considered one of the most efficient hard-decision algorithms for decoding LDPC codes as they can be easily implemented and can provide relatively large coding gain [4]. There are also many versions of this bitflipping algorithm such as weighted BF (WBF) decoding [4], modified weighted BF (MWBF) decoding [8], Reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping (RRWBF) decoding [9] and Implementation-efficient reliability ratio based weighted bitflipping (IERRWBF) [10] decoding.
As for the soft-decision decoding, belief propagation (BP) algorithm or the Sum-Product algorithm (SPA) [4-7] is the

most famous algorithm used for decoding LDPC codes that can approach Shannon limit. As it was proved in [4], and [7], the sum-product algorithm (SPA) achieves the best performance among all decoding schemes that yield to excellent error correcting capability. However, the decoding complexity of the SPA is the highest among all algorithms which is considered as a drawback for this algorithm.
On comparing the bit-flipping algorithm to the sum-product algorithm, it was found in [4] that there is a big reduction in the complexity as the number of operations performed for each
decoding iteration is of the order O(J ρ + nγ ) , while the
number of operations required for the SPA is of
order O(2J ρ + 4nγ ) . However, the SPA provides much
better performance than the bit-flipping algorithm that makes it favorable to be used for decoding LDPC codes.
In this paper, a modification is proposed to the implementation efficient of reliability ratio based weighted bitflipping algorithm (IERRWBF) that is capable of reducing obviously the required number of iteration for decoding without any change in the performance of the original and the modified algorithms. This modification reduces the decoding complexity through observing the decoded vector at the end of each iteration and stops the algorithm in case of repetition.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section (II), presents the background on the bit-flipping algorithms especially the implementation efficient reliability ratio weighted bit-flipping (IERRWBF) algorithm. Section (III), then, presents the modification proposed to the IERRWBF algorithm. Section (IV) presents simulation environment and section (V) presents results obtained compared to the original IERRWBF algorithm. Finally, the conclusion and future work are presented in section (VI).
II. A BRIEF REVIEW ON BIT-FLIPPING (BF) ALGORITHMS
The bit-flipping algorithm includes a large family of algorithms that had started since 1960 by Gallager in his thesis [1], [2] and continued modification till nowadays to improve its performance and reduce its complexity.
There are many versions of this algorithm that have appeared such as weighted bit-flipping algorithm [4] and modified weighted bit-flipping [8] algorithm as they are considered a good trade-off between error performance and decoding complexity compared to the sum-product algorithm (SPA). They improve the error performance of the BF decoding with some additional computational complexity. The attractive property of weighted bit-flipping algorithm is that during each iteration, the weighted sum is computed resulting

978-1-4244-2829-8/08/$25.00 ©2008 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:21:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

in a significantly lower decoding complexity with respect to that of the SPA. The modified weighted bit-flipping algorithm provides enhanced decoding performance compared to the weighted bit-flipping algorithm. However, this enhanced performance is dependent on the value of optimum α (a real number representing weighting factor where α≥0) that has to be found optimally for each individual SNR for each code). It was recently shown in [9] that reliability ratio based bitflipping algorithm is the best algorithm among all based bitflipping algorithms, but it is has a drawback of having large decoding time. This leads to the implementation efficient of reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping algorithm (IERRWBF) in [10] which helps to reduce decoding time to be suitable for simulation and hardware implementation especially when the maximum iteration number assigned for the algorithm is small. This version of RRWBF provides a way for interpreting its superior performance over the other bitflipping algorithms.
The implementation efficient reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping (IERRWBF) algorithm mentioned in [10] is the last modified version of the decoding algorithms based on bit-flipping algorithms. The symbols used in this algorithm are shown in table (1).

H mn rn zn N (m)
M (n)

TABLE 1: SYMBOLS USED IN THE ALGORITHM [10]
mth row, nth column of parity-check matrix H
nth bit received from the channel
Hard decision of rn
The set of variable nodes that participate in mth check node The set of check nodes in which nth variable node participates

The algorithm is divided into four steps: initialization step,

variable node step, decision step and check node step. The

operation done in each step is shown as follows:

Initialization step:

Tm = ∑ | rn |

(1)

n∈ N ( m )

∑ Variable node step:

En

=

1 | rn

|

m∈M

(

(2
n)

s

m

− 1)Tm

(2)

Decision step: Flip the bit zn for n = arg max n′ En′

N

Check node step:

∑ sm = zm H mn

(3)

n=1

In the last step (check node step) the syndrome vector is

calculated for the decoded vector. This syndrome vector is

checked if it is all-zero vector, then the algorithm will be

terminated and the received vector is decoded correctly.

However, if the syndrome vector is not all-zero vector, then

the received vector is not decoded correctly and the algorithm

continues trying to correct error in the received vector until it

is corrected or the maximum number of iterations is achieved.

III. THE PROPOSED ALGORITHM
One of the drawbacks of the implementation efficient reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping (IERRWBF) algorithm as stated in [10] which the author failed to solve is that the algorithm spends a larger percentage of time at the variable node step and the check node step, i.e. the higher the decoding iteration number, the more processing time is spent on the iteration part resulting in less improvement. As the maximum iteration number assigned for decoding increases, delay increases without any significant improvement in the performance due to increasing number of iterations.
There has been some proposal to improve the performance with reducing number of iterations required as in [11], the authors not only find the phenomenon of oscillation in the decoding process and exploit it to improve the performance quite a bit.
In case of channels with low Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) having AWGN and Rayleigh fading (for multipath fading) for wireless channels, the hard-decision based bit-flipping based algorithms sometimes fail to decode received vector correctly as the decoding in such a case causes the syndrome vector to be a non-zero vector, which leads to wrong decoding of the received vector. Even with large iteration number assigned for the algorithm (500 iterations and more), there will be no significant improvement in the error performance. It has been observed that in such low SNR the syndrome vector will continue to be a non-zero vector and the decoding will keep flipping endlessly consuming computational power with no improvement throughput.
The modified version of the implementation efficient reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping decoding algorithm is based on the original scheme described as in [7]. The initialization, decision and variable node steps are the same as the original algorithm. However, the new modification in the proposed algorithm is added in the check node step. Such a modification that is introduced has a great effect on significant reduction of the decoding time. This is explained in details in the rest of this section.
The check node step used in all previous based bit-flipping algorithms is a mere syndrome check condition that checks if the decoded vector is a valid codeword or not. If the syndrome vector is all-zero vector, then the decoded vector is a valid codeword and if the syndrome vector is not all-zero vector, then the decoded vector is not decoded correctly and the algorithm continues till the syndrome becomes all-zero vector or the maximum number of iterations is achieved without fulfilling the syndrome condition. As explained in the previous sections, such a condition is rendered in case of low SNR.
However, what is required in such cases is to try decreasing the number of iterations required at each SNR for decoding any received vector to a limited number of iterations as extending the algorithm to more number of iterations will not achieve any observable or enhanced performance. This is done by adding an extra conditional step to examine such situations and control the iteration loop by deciding whether to continue

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:21:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

decoding or exit the iteration loop and stop the algorithm to

have a final decoded vector.

Since the bit-flipping algorithm is based by flipping only

one bit at certain position after each iteration according to the

error-sum E n computed. The algorithm observes the decoded

vector at the end of each iteration and computes the syndrome

for this decoded vector. The error-sum E n at any iteration (i)

depends on the syndrome bits sm and the received vector rn

according to equation (2). Since Tm is always constant as it is

calculated at the initialization step only and the received

vector rn is also constant for every received codeword. So, if

the syndrome vector of the decoded vector obtained at any

iteration (i-2) is identical to the syndrome at iteration (i), then

the error-sum E n = E n−2 resulting that the decoded vector at

(i-2) will be found to be repeated at iteration (i) and the

decoding process will be moving in oscillation without any

change i.e. The same vector is obtained after two iterations

(this also means that the same bit in the vector is being flipped

twice to obtain the same vector after two iterations). If the

decoded vector begins to be repeated, i.e. the syndrome is also

repeated, after each two decoding iterations, this repetition will

continue endlessly or at least till the maximum predefined

number of iterations is achieved and the syndrome will never

be all-zero vector to get a decoded vector still containing

erroneous bits.

N
∑ So, if sm1 = z H m1 m n are the syndrome bits forming n =1

the syndrome vector obtained from iteration (i-2)

N

∑ and sm 2 =

z H m 2

mn

are

the

syndrome

bits

forming

the

n =1

syndrome vector obtained from iteration (i) where the

difference between these two iterations is 2.

∑ Also, if

E n1

=

1 | rn

(2 sm1 | m∈M (n)

− 1)Tm1 is the error sum

∑ for iteration (i-2) and

E n2

=

|

1 rn

|

(2sm2
m2∈M (n)

− 1)Tm2

is the error sum for iteration (i).Since Tm is always constant

as it is calculated at the initialization step only and the

received vector is also constant for each codeword,

so Tm1 = Tm2 .

sIf m1 = sm2 for 0 ≤ m1 < N − M and 0 ≤ m2 < N − M

where m1 is the syndrome bit for the first iteration, m2 is the syndrome bit for the second one, N is the number of columns

and M is the number of rows of the parity-check matrix H for

a given LDPC code.

So, E n1 = E n2 for 0 ≤ n1 < N and 0 ≤ n2 < N . It

results that zn1 = zn2 where zn are the bits of the decoded

vector. So, the decoded vector will be found to be repeated after two iterations. Based on this observation, our modified algorithm works as follows:
The syndrome obtained at the end of each iteration is stored in 3-entry register (the register is chosen to be of minimum size equal to 3 precisely because we need at least 2 iterations to get the same decoded vector and the same syndrome, starting from initial vector, if the same bit in the decoded vector is being flipped two times to return to the initial state, so the 3 entries corresponds to the initial syndrome (initial vector) in the register, the syndrome vector after first iteration and the syndrome vector after second iteration. So, size 3 is the minimum size of register that could be used for storing syndrome vector for comparing between the first and the third (last) one) where each new entry is stored at the top of the register and the remaining entries are shifted down to remove the last entry.
As for the decoding complexity of regular LDPC code using the RRWBF and the IERRWBF decoding algorithms is shown in table 2 where Wc denotes column weight (number of nonzero entries per column) and Wr denotes row weight (number of nonzero entries per row).

TABLE 2: LOGIC FUNCTION USAGE PER ITERATION AT FOR THE RRWBF AND IERRWBF ALGORITHMS [7]

Initialization step

Variable step

Operation Original Proposed Original Proposed

Abs

1

1

-

-

Max Adder

Wr-1 -

Wr-1

Wc-1

Wc-1

Divider

Wc

-

-

1

Multiplier

Wc

-

-

-

Modify MSB

-

-

Wc

Wc

The complexity of the initialization step is calculated for

each iteration. As for the complexity of the variable step, the

shown complexity in the table is multiplied by the total number

of iterations used. Let I be the total number of iteration. So, if

the syndrome vector has non-zero entries although the total

number of iterations is achieved, then the complexity of the

IERRWBF is multiplied by I which is the number of iterations.

As for this modified version of the algorithm, let

p = K be the fraction of iterations used from the total I

number of iteration I where K is the number of iterations that

is used during this modified algorithm, then the complexity of

this modified algorithm is the same as the complexity of the

IERRWBF multiplied by K (or p*I).

As for the performance with this modification, no more

improvement in the performance will be achieved

corresponding to any increase in the number of iterations,

which proves that this limited number of iterations achieves

the same performance as that achieved before with the

maximum number of iterations.

The problem that may arise from this modification is the

total memory size required for the register in case of hardware

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:21:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

implementation as each entry for storing the decoded vectors will increase as the codeword length increases. This problem is observable more for large codeword lengths (10000 and more) as they require large memory size. In this case, we can store the syndrome vector as each received codeword gives a syndrome vector different than the other as the syndrome vector consists of (n-k) bits. So if LDPC code of high rate is used of large n and large k, the syndrome will have small size which will not need large memory for storing it. In case of hardware implementation, this modified version of the algorithm is capable of having less decoding time and allows the algorithm to converge fast.
IV. SIMULATION ENVIROMENT
We use (n,k,v) to represent regular LDPC code using a BPSK modulation scheme communicating over channel having AWGN and Rayleigh fading (for multipath fading) to simulate the effect of real wireless channel where n stands for the code word length, k is the message length, and v is the number of ‘1’s per column in the parity check matrix H. (250,125,3), (1000,500,3) and (2114,1870,3) regular LDPC codes of different rates were used in simulation to be decoded using the original and modified version of the implementation efficient of reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping algorithm (IERRWBF). The simulations shown in [10] were done over AWGN channel only.
Random LDPC codes were used as the construction method for generating the parity check matrix H of these regular LDPC codes based on the approach of Mackay [11]. The simulations were run on MATLAB. The speedup percentages excluded the time spent on memory allocation, program initialization and initial value assignments such as variable and check node steps information, and received bits generation.
V. SIMULATION RESULTS
The figures show the performance (bit error rate) of the two algorithms (IEREWBF algorithm and its modified version proposed in this paper) and the reduction in the number of iterations that occurs, for a certain maximum number of iterations, obtained at each SNR for the two algorithms that occurs. The graphs shown are for the case of channels having AWGN and Rayleigh fading unlike channel used in [10] which is specified by AWGN only which is not the case of wireless channels which should be represented by AWGN and fading.
The reduction in the number of iterations occurs due to the decoding failures that occur with the iterations assigned for the algorithm as the modified IERRWBF algorithm requires efficient number of iterations to decode any received codeword and the IERRWBF algorithm use all the iterations assigned for it as long as the syndrome is not equal to zerovector. In case of comparing the successful decoding iterations, the average for the two algorithms will be the same.
Figure 1 shows the BER performances of the IERRWBF algorithm and its modified version for decoding (250,125) regular LDPC code with 10 and 50 maximum iterations for decoding any received codeword. As it can be observed that

there is almost no difference between the performances of the two algorithms without any change at any given maximum number of iterations which proves that the modification proposed uses the efficient number of iterations to have the same performance of the original IERRWBF.
Figure 2 shows the reduction in the number of iterations obtained at each SNR for 10 and 50 iterations assigned as the maximum number of iterations for decoding (250,125) regular LDPC code using the IERRWBF algorithm and its modified version. In case of 10 maximum iterations, there is almost no difference in the two curves for the two algorithms. The difference begins to be observed starting from 4 dB as the reduction in the number of iterations (gap between the two curves) begins to increase as the SNR increases. As for 50 maximum iterations, the reduction in the number of iterations for the modified IERRWBF is much more obvious than that for 10 maximum iterations. This shows that as the number of iterations assigned for the decoding algorithm increases, the reduction (gap between the two curves) increases.
Table 3 summarizes the results obtained for the modified IERRWBF algorithm compared to the original IERRWBF algorithm for different code lengths for (250,125,3), (1000,500,3) and (2114,1870,3) regular LDPC codes with increasing the codeword length and in case of increasing maximum number of iterations assigned for the decoding algorithm. As observed from the table that the reduction in the number of iterations increases more and more as the code length increases and also increases as the maximum number of iteration assigned for the decoding algorithm increases. This is clear in the table that (2114,1870) can give the maximum reduction among the three codes and the speedup percentage that can be obtained can reach up to 2000% in case of 1000 iterations assigned as the maximum number of iterations for decoding any received vector although more than 100 iterations is considered to be high and needs a large processing time to consider. Also, the (2114,1870) code has an advantage from the other codes which is having a small number of bits for the syndrome vector which requires smaller memory to store as this code has a rate higher than the other LDPC codes.

TABLE 3: AVERAGE NUMBER OF ITERATIONS AND IMPROVEMENTS FOR

VARIOUS LDPC CODES WITH DIFFERENT ITERATION NUMBERS

Iteration

10

50

100

500

1000

(250,125,3)

Original

8.70

16.75

57

294.2

570.23

Proposed 8.65

10.50

17.33

27.68

34.50

Speedup 0.6% 59.5 % 228.9%

962.9%

1552%

(1000,500,3)

Original

9.35

33.80

72.87

317.49

650.11

Proposed

9.2

13.50

18.20

25.13

34.05

Speedup 1.6% 150.4% 300.4% 1168.2% 1809%

(2114,1870,3) Original

9.8

47.63

92.80

353.51

694.95

Proposed Speedup

9.6 2.3%

15.57 205.9%

19 388.5%

26.67 1225.5%

32.22 2056%

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:21:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 1: BER performances of the (250, 125) regular LDPC code with the IERRWBF and modified IERRWBF algorithms for 10 and 50 maximum
iterations

(IERRWBF) algorithm is proposed. As it was shown before that the reliability ratio weighted bit-flipping (RRWBF) algorithm performs the best among the existing algorithms based on bit-flipping algorithms and it is more efficient for simulation and hardware implementation. The modified version of this algorithm also gives the same performance of the original algorithm without any change. Moreover, it has an important advantage over the original algorithm which is the observable reduction in the number of iterations, at each SNR, required for decoding received vector which results in saving a large percentage of processing time which was previously spent on the iteration part without any improvement. This reduction increases as the code length increases or as the maximum number of iterations for decoding increases.
As for the future work, the performance of this modified version can be improved more to approach the performance of the soft-decision algorithms (especially the performance of the SPA as it approaches Shannon bound) to take advantage of its small complexity of the modified IERRWBF algorithm with respect to the complexity of the soft-decision algorithms. This modification can be made in the part of the variable node as it consumes a considerable part of the processing time of the whole algorithm to improve overall performance. Also, this modification can be applied to irregular LDPC codes to enhance its performance.

Figure 2: Average number of iterations of the IERRWBF and modified IERRWBF algorithms for decoding (250,125) regular LDPC code with 10
and 50 maximum iterations
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK In this paper, a modified version of the implementation efficient reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963. [3] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit
error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo codes,” in Proc. 1993 IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070. [4] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low density parity check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and more,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001. [5] David J. C. MacKay “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–432, Mar. 1999. [6] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electronics Letters, vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645–1646, 1996. [7] M. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, pp. 673–680, May 1999. [8] Zhang, J., and Fossorier, M.P.C.: ‘A modified weighted bit-flipping decoding of low-density parity-check codes’, IEEE Communication. Letters, 2004, 8, (3), pp. 165–167 [9] Guo, F., and Hanzo, L.: ‘Reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping decoding for low-density parity-check codes’, Electronics. Letters., 2004, 40, (21), pp. 1356–1358 [10] C.-H. Lee and W. Wolf “Implementation-efficient reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping decoding for LDPC codes”, Electronics. Letters 23rd June 2005 Vol. 41 No. 13. [11] M. Shan, C.M. Zhao and M. Jiang,” Improved weighted bit-flipping algorithm for decoding LDPC codes”, IEE proceedings Communications, vol. 152, pp. 919-922, Dec. 2005. [12] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Jr., Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications, 2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2004

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:21:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

