IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2008

4991

Average Stopping Set Weight Distributions of Redundant Random Ensembles
Tadashi Wadayama, Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper, redundant random ensembles are defined and their average stopping set (SS) weight distributions are analyzed. A redundant random ensemble consists of a set of binary matrices with linearly dependent rows. These linearly dependent rows significantly reduce the number of stopping sets (SS) of small size. Upper and lower bounds on the average SS weight distribution of the redundant random ensembles are proved based on a combinatorial argument. Asymptotic forms of these bounds reveal asymptotic behavior of the average SS weight distributions. From these bounds, a tradeoff between the number of redundant rows (corresponding to decoding complexity of belief propagation on binary erasure channel) and the average SS weight distribution (corresponding to decoding performance) can be derived.
Index Terms—Asymptotic growth rate (AGR), ensemble, lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes, stopping set, weight distribution.
I. INTRODUCTION
O N binary erasure channel (BEC), the decoding performance of a belief propagation (BP)-based iterative decoder of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [6] is dominated by combinatorial structures in a Tanner graph, which are called stopping sets (SS) [5]. Di et al. [5] introduced the idea of SS and presented a recursive method to evaluate the average block and bit error probabilities of LDPC codes of finite length on BEC [5]. Orlitsky et al. [12] found the asymptotic behavior of the SS weight distributions of bipartite graph ensembles and extended the results of Di et al. to the irregular code case.
For a given binary linear code , it is hoped to find a representation of (i.e., a parity-check matrix), which yields a good tradeoff between decoding performance and complexity when it is decoded with iterative decoding on BEC. A parity-check matrix, which defines , can be a redundant parity-check matrix, which is not a full-rank matrix: that is, it can contain some linearly dependent rows. For example, some finite geometry LDPC codes require a redundant parity-check matrix to achieve good decoding performance with BP. Recently, the studies on stopping redundancy, such as [14], [1], [8], and [7], became a hot topic in coding theory. These works also indicate that the

stopping distance (smallest size of nonempty SS) of a given parity-check matrix can be improved by appending linearly dependent rows to the original matrix.
Developments on the average weight distributions of LDPC codes, such as Litsyn and Shevelev [10], [11], Burshtein and Miller [3], Richardson and Urbanke [13] show that ensemble analysis is a powerful method for investigating typical properties of codes and matrices. Furthermore, from the asymptotic behavior of typical properties, we often can predict a threshold phenomenon.
The average stopping set weight distributions presented in [5] and [12] are a useful decoding performance measure (for BP on BEC) of a given ensemble of parity-check matrices. The distribution can be used for optimizing an ensemble suitable for BEC. BEC is not only of practical interest, but also can be considered as an appropriate starting point for theoretical studies of performance analysis of BP for more general channels, such as binary input symmetric output channels [13].
In this paper, redundant random ensembles are defined and their average SS weight distributions are analyzed. A redundant random ensemble consists of a set of binary matrices with linearly dependent rows. These linearly dependent rows significantly reduce the number of SS of small size. Upper and lower bounds on the average SS weight distribution of the redundant random ensembles are proved based on a combinatorial argument. Asymptotic forms of these bounds reveal asymptotic behavior of the average SS weight distributions. From these bounds, a tradeoff between the number of redundant rows (corresponding to decoding complexity of BP on BEC) and the average stopping set weight distribution (corresponding to decoding performance) can be derived.
The contents of this paper are organized as follows. In Section II, basic notation and definitions on the average SS weight distribution are introduced. Section III contains the main contribution of the paper: upper and lower bounds on the average SS weight distribution of the redundant random ensemble. Section IV deals with the asymptotic behaviors of average SS weight distributions of the redundant random ensemble. Section V gives conclusions.

Manuscript received July 21, 2007; revised March 6, 2008. Current version published October 22, 2008. This work was supported by the Ministry of Education, Science, Sports and Culture, Japan, Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research on Priority Areas (Deepening and Expansion of Statistical Informatics) 180790091 and by a research grant from Storage Research Consortium (SRC). The material in this paper was presented in part at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Nice, France, June 2007.
The author is with the Nagoya Institute of Technology, Nagoya, Aichi 4668555, Japan (e-mail: wadayama@nitech.ac.jp).
Communicated by T. J. Richardson, Associate Editor for Coding Theory.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2008.929973

II. PRELIMINARIES
In this section, some notations and definitions required in this paper are introduced. Furthermore, some known results on average SS weight distributions are briefly reviewed.

A. Stopping Set and SS Weight Distribution

Let be the binary Galois field with elements

. The

operator denotes the integer ring inner product defined by

for

0018-9448/$25.00 © 2008 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:24:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4992

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2008

and

. The additions in

the above definition of is the addition of the integer ring (i.e.,

). In this paper, the addition of is denoted by

(i.e.,

).

Suppose that a binary

matrix

is

given. The row vectors of are represented by

;

namely

The notation

is the indicator function such that

if condition is true; otherwise, it gives . The

stopping distance of is defined by

(3)

Example 1: Let

...

For a given

, the SS indicator

is defined by

(1)

where denotes the th row vector of , and we denote the

cardinality of a given finite set by . The notation

means the set of consecutive integers from to . The support

set of is defined as

Let be the

matrix whose column vectors are taken from the columns of

corresponding to the support set of . The SS indicator

can be considered as the number of row vectors of , which

have Hamming weight .

The stopping set is defined as follows.

Definition 1 (Stopping Set): If

, then

is

called an SS vector of . The support set of is called an SS of

.

This definition of SS is not exactly the same as the original

definition [5]. In the original definition, it is implicitly assumed

that each variable node in a Tanner graph has positive degree (for

example, the assumption is valid for a bipartite graph ensemble).

The present definition includes the original definition and also

covers the case where there exists a variable node of degree

zero, which corresponds to a column with zero weight in the

corresponding parity-check matrix.

Note that if there exists a row vector

satisfying

, then is not an SS vector. Let

be a received word through a BEC, where denotes

the erasure symbol. It is known that BP fails to decode if and

only if the erasure support set

con-

tains a nonempty stopping set of . This property justifies the

study of the SS in order to reveal the BP decoding performance

for BEC [5].

The next definition provides the definition of the SS weight

distribution and the stopping distance.

Definition 2 (SS Weight Distribution and Stopping Distance):

For a given

matrix , the SS weight distribution

is defined by

(2)

(4)

In this case,

is the set of all SS

of . Thus, the SS weight distribution is given by

and the stopping distance is

.

B. Average SS Weight Distribution

Suppose that is a set of binary

matrices. Note that

may contain some matrices with all elements identical. Such

matrices should be distinguished as distinct matrices. We as-

sign probability

to each matrix in . The set can

be regarded as an ensemble of binary matrices. Let

be a

real-valued function that depends on

. The expectation

of

with respect to the ensemble is defined by

(5)

The average SS weight distribution is defined as follows.
Definition 3 (Average SS Weight Distribution): The average SS weight distribution of a given ensemble is defined by

(6)

for

.

One of the most important properties of an ensemble is its symmetry. Although several types of symmetry are shown to be useful in [15], the following simple definition is sufficient for the purposes of this paper.

Definition 4 (Symmetry of an Ensemble): Let be an en-

semble such that equal probability

is assigned for each

matrix in the ensemble . Let be a set of all column permuta-

tions for columns. The ensemble is called symmetric if and

only if

holds for any

.

Namely, an ensemble that is invariant to any column permutation is symmetric. Note that all the ensembles discussed in this paper are symmetric.
There is a simple expression of the average SS weight distribution for a symmetric ensemble. The next lemma shows that the evaluation of the average SS weight distribution is equivalent to a counting problem of matrices satisfying a certain condition.

Lemma 1 (Case of Symmetric Ensemble): If is symmetric, then

for

, where

is the set of constant weight

binary vectors of length whose Hamming weights are .

(7)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:24:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WADAYAMA: AVERAGE STOPPING SET WEIGHT DISTRIBUTIONS OF REDUNDANT RANDOM ENSEMBLES

4993

holds for

. The vector

is the binary

vector whose first elements are one, with all other elements

zero.

Proof: The average SS weight distribution of can be

transformed into the following form:

(14)
Note that in deriving the second equality from the first equality, the symmetric property of the random ensemble and Lemma 1 was used.

The exponential asymptotic growth rate (AGR) of the average SS distribution of the random ensemble is defined by

(15)

(8)

The last equation follows from the symmetric property such that

(9)

holds for any

and any

.

C. Average SS Weight Distributions of Known Ensembles

In this subsection, the average SS weight distribution of three

well-known ensembles, random ensemble, constant row weight

ensemble, and bipartite ensemble, will be shown.

1) Random Ensemble: The random ensemble

consists

of the set of all binary

matrices. The size of

is equal

to and equal probability

is assigned for each matrix

in . The following lemma gives the average SS distribution

of the random ensemble. The key of the proof is to count

.

where

is called design rate and

is

the normalized weight. The AGR reflects the asymptotic (in the

limit as goes to infinity) behavior of the average SS weight

distribution for fixed design rate and normalized weight. The

next lemma gives the AGR of random ensembles.

Lemma 3 (AGR of Random Ensembles): The AGR of the random ensemble is given by

(16)

where

is the binary entropy function defined by

(17)
Proof: Substituting the average SS weight distribution (10) into the expression (15), we have

Lemma 2 (Average SS Weight Distribution of average SS distribution of the random ensemble by

): The is given

(10)

for

.

Proof: From the definition of the random ensemble, it is

evident that the following equality holds:

(18)

It is easy to show that the equality

Note that in deriving the fourth equality from the third equality, (11) the following equality:

(12)

(19)

holds because Combining the above results, we get

was used. The notation denotes the terms converging to

as

.

(13) 2) Constant Row Weight Ensemble: The constant row weight

ensemble

consists of all the binary

matrices whose

rows have exactly weight

. The size of the en-

semble is thus

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:24:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4994

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2008

Equal probability

is assigned for each matrix in

. we obtain

The average weight distribution of this ensemble is shown in

[10].

The following lemma shows the average SS distribution of

. The proof is similar to that of Lemma 2.

(28)

Lemma 4 (Average SS Weight Distribution of

): The

average SS distribution of the constant row weight ensemble

is given by

and

for

.

Proof: Combining

and

we have

(20) (29)

These bounds imply that the equality

(21)

(30)

holds because is constant (i.e., not a function of ). Using this (22) equation, we immediately obtain

(23) The average SS weight distribution is thus given by
(31)

3) Bipartite Ensemble: The bipartite graph ensemble (abbre-

viated as a bipartite ensemble)

is the ensemble of regular

(24) bipartite graphs of variable node degree and check node de-

gree .1 The following lemma is due to Orlitsky et al. [12].

Lemma 6 (Average SS Weight Distribution of

): The

The AGR of the constant row weight ensemble is defined by average SS weight distribution of

is given by

(25)

(32)

for

and

. The next lemma gives the

explicit form of the average growth rate of the constant row

weight ensembles.

Lemma 5 (AGR of Constant Row Weight Ensembles): The AGR of the constant row weight ensembles is given by

where

denotes the coefficient of a polynomial

corresponding to the term .

The AGR of -bipartite ensemble is defined by

(33)

(26) for

. It is shown in [12] that the AGR

has the

form

for

and

.

Proof: By using the lower and upper bounds on the bino-

(34)

mial coefficients given by

(27)

1Strictly speaking, to define the average SS weight distribution of B , we
need a graph-based definition of the SS and ensemble average. Details can be
found in [12].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:24:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WADAYAMA: AVERAGE STOPPING SET WEIGHT DISTRIBUTIONS OF REDUNDANT RANDOM ENSEMBLES

4995

where is the only positive solution of

(35)

and

is the entropy function with base defined by

(36)

III. AVERAGE SS WEIGHT DISTRIBUTIONS OF REDUNDANT RANDOM ENSEMBLES
In this section, we discuss the average SS weight distributions of extended ensembles obtained from the random ensemble.

A. Redundant Extension 1) Idea of Redundant Extension: Before commencing a dis-
cussion of redundant extension, it is perhaps worthwhile to consider how some SS can be eliminated by extending a paritycheck matrix.
Example 2: Consider the following parity-check matrix:
(37)

It is easy to see that the column indices

constitute a

stopping set (i.e., the submatrix composed of the second, third,

and fourth columns has no row of weight 1). Appending

(obtained by adding the first and second rows of ) to as a

row vector, we have the modified matrix

(38)

Fig. 1. Redundant extension of a parity-check matrix.

2) A submatrix is extended to an extended submatrix. The row

vectors in the extended submatrix are all linear combina-

tions (except for the zero combination) of the row vectors

in the original submatrix.

3) Concatenation of the extended submatrices yields the ex-

tended matrix .

In the case of Fig. 1, is divided into three submatrices (named

as , , and ). The submatrix is extended into . The ex-

tended submatrix contains all linear combinations (except for

the zero combination) of the row vectors of as its row vectors.

The extended matrix consists of the extended submatrices

, , and , which are stacked as shown in Fig. 1.

An extended submatrix has

rows and there are ex-

tended submatices. This implies that the extended matrix

has

rows.

2) Details of Redundant Extension: Let be a binary

matrix

We can observe that the weight of the last row of the submatrix

corresponding to the second, third, and fourth columns is . This

implies that

is no longer a stopping set of . Note also

that the row spaces spanned by and are exactly the same.

...

(39)

For

,

, we define by

The previous example demonstrates the possibility that the

SS weight distribution could be improved by adding linearly

dependent rows (called redundant rows) to a given matrix. It is evident, from the definition of SS, that the addition of redundant

...

(40)

rows does not introduce a new SS which is a non-SS of the

original matrix.

where

Redundant extension is a procedure to enhance a given parity-

check matrix to a matrix with redundant rows. Of course, there

is the th bit of binary representation of an integer , namely

are many ways to make a matrix with redundant rows but a naive

enhance method makes ensemble analysis intractable. Redun-

dant extension is carefully designed so that ensemble analysis

of the SS weight distribution becomes feasible.

Let be an

binary parity-check matrix and be a pos-

itive integer, which is a divisor of . The parameter is called

extension degree. Fig. 1 illustrates the idea of the redundant ex-

tension. The extension process is as follows.

In other words, is a linear combination of .
The redundant extension of a given matrix is defined as follows.

1) The matrix is divided into

submatrices Definition 5 (Redundant Extension): The redundant exten-

with size

.

sion of , denoted by , is the matrix whose row vectors

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:24:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4996

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2008

are for is given by
where

and ...

. In other words, (41)

B. Average SS Weight Distribution of Redundant Random Ensemble

In this section, we discuss the average SS weight distribution

of the redundant random ensemble

. In this case, we can

derive a simple exact formula for the average SS weight distri-

bution.

Suppose that the first three rows of

(45)

for

and

.

The following example shows the case where the extension degree is .

Example 3: For a given is expressed as

( is even) matrix ,

are given. In this section, is assumed to be an even positive

integer. Our first task is to count the number of pairs

satisfying

. Let us define by

(46)

Note that

submatrices exist in

, and these

submatrices can be chosen independently when we count

(42)

. This observation leads to the

...

equality

(47)

The next lemma gives a concise description of .

From the above definition of the redundant extension, it is

clear that the row spaces of and

are exactly the same.

In other words, the code defined by coincides with the code

defined by . Although the codes defined by and

are the same, and

may have different SS weight distri-

butions.

The definition of the redundant extension naturally leads to

the idea of the redundant extension of an ensemble.

Lemma 7: For Proof: Let

, , defined in (46), is given by (48) (49)

Definition 6 (Extended Ensemble): Consider the case where Using the equality

an ensemble , which consists of

binary matrices, is

given. Let be a divisor of . The extended ensemble of ,

denoted by , is defined by

(50)

(43) we have

The size of the ensemble inal ensemble . For each is assigned.

is equal to the size of the orig, the probability

The redundant random ensemble that is the main subject of this paper is the extended ensemble of a random ensemble.

Definition 7 (Redundant Random Ensemble): The extended

ensemble of the random ensemble

is called the redundant

random ensemble, which is defined by

(51) In the following, we will evaluate . Because the last
-elements in and in (49) are arbitrary, we have another expression of
(52)

(44) where

denotes the Hamming weight function. Note

that and can be considered as the first -elements in

Equal probability

is assigned for each matrix in . and , respectively. The number of pairs of binary -tuples

satisfying

and

is given by

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:24:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WADAYAMA: AVERAGE STOPPING SET WEIGHT DISTRIBUTIONS OF REDUNDANT RANDOM ENSEMBLES

4997

Let be

TABLE I COMPARISON ON AVERAGE SS WEIGHT DISTRIBUTION OF THE CONSTANT ROW WEIGHT ENSEMBLE AND THE EXTENDED ENSEMBLE (SPARSE CASE)

(53)

Suppose that we wish to construct a pair

satisfying the

conditions in (53). Counting the number possibilities for such

constructions leads to evaluation of . We first choose a bit

position

at which the th bits of

differ and

then decide how they differ ( in and in or vice versa).

This counts possibilities. We next choose the remaining bits

(equal in both) but exclude the case that these

bits are of

weights or . This counts

. We thus have

. Combining these results, we obtain

TABLE II COMPARISON ON AVERAGE SS WEIGHT DISTRIBUTION OF THE CONSTANT ROW WEIGHT ENSEMBLE AND THE EXTENDED ENSEMBLE (DENSE CASE)

(54)

This completes the proof.

The following theorem is an immediate consequence of From Theorem 1, we have the average SS weight distribution of Lemma 7.

Theorem 1 (Average SS Distribution of

): Let

even positive number and be an integer satisfying

average SS weight distribution of

is given by

be an . The
On the other hand,

(57) has the average SS weight distribution

(58)

for

.

Proof: The average SS weight distribution of

derived in the following way:

(55) can be

where this distribution is derived from Lemma 2. It can be ob-

served that the values of the average SS weight distribution of

the extended ensemble are smaller than those of the original en-

semble in the cases

and 4.

The argument used in the proof of Theorem 1 can be exploited

to derive the average SS weight distribution of the extended con-

stant row weight ensembles with

. The details are sum-

marized in the Appendix. We here only consider the following

example.

Example 5: Let

and

. The average SS

weight distribution of the extended constant row weight ensem-

The first equation is due to Lemma 1. The third equality is derived from (47). Note that is defined in (46). Applying Lemma 7 to the last equality, we obtain the claim of the theorem.

bles with

,

, can be evaluated using Lemma 13

in the Appendix. Tables I and II present the two cases

(sparse matrix) and

(dense matrix), respectively. Note

that

holds only for

in both cases.

The next example demonstrates a comparison between the av- We can see that the improvement due to extension in terms of

erage SS weight distributions of a redundant random ensemble values of the average SS weight distribution is very small for the

and that of the corresponding original random ensemble.

case

. On the other hand, significant improvement can be

Example 4: Consider the case where

and

. The observed for the case

.

ensemble consists of matrices of the form

This example suggests that the advantages of redundant ex-

tension are more evident when the original matrix is dense.

This is one of the major reasons that we focus on the redun-

(56) dant random ensembles, whose typical matrices contain

ones, in this paper.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:24:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4998

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2008

C. Average SS Weight Distribution of Redundant Random Ensemble

The next lemma is the basis of a lower bound on the average SS weight distribution of redundant random ensembles.

1) Idea of Bounds: As becomes larger, it becomes more

and more difficult to evaluate the number of extended parity-

check matrices by using a simple combinatorial argument sim-

ilar to the proof of Theorem 1. Instead of deriving an exact ex-

pression, we here utilize upper and lower bounds on the number

of such parity-check matrices to study the average SS weight

distribution of extended ensembles.

The key of the following discussion is to use the fact that the

rows of an extended submatrix consists of all linear combina-

tion (except for the zero combination) of the rows of the orig-

inal submatrix. Namely, the original submatrix can be seen as a

generator matrix and the extended submatrix is the table of cor-

responding nonzero codewords. In Sections III-C2 and III-C3,

the first and second moment methods will be exploited to eval-

uate the number of such generator matrices.

2) Number of Generator Matrices With Minimum Distance

Greater Than or Equal to 2: Let be a binary

matrix

. We here consider that is a generator matrix.

The weight distribution of the code generated from is defined

by

Lemma 9 (Lower Bound on the Number of Matrices): The

number of matrices in

that have minimum distance

greater than or equal to can be lower bounded by

(65)

Proof: Let

. We will

first prove

. The number

of matrices whose minimum distance is greater than or equal to

can be written in the form

(59)

(66)

for

. The average of the weight distribution (where where

is given by

expectation is taken over a given symmetric ensemble ) is

given by

(67)

(60) Markov inequality implies

(68)

The minimum distance of is given by

(61) which is equivalent to
(69) (62) Substituting this upper bound into (66) and using (63), we have

To derive upper and lower bounds on the average SS weight

distribution, we need to have the number of

generator

matrices with

, which can be evaluated with the

(70)

first and second moment methods [2]. The following lemma is presented in the problem section of
[13] (the proof is given in the Appendix).

Lemma 8 (First and Second Moments of Weight Distribution):

For

, the first and second moments of

with

respect to

are given by

We then consider another inequality

. Suppose

the case where every row of

is of even weight.

We call this condition the even weight condition. In such

a case, no linear combination of rows of gives a vector

of weight . The number of

matrices satisfying the

even weight condition is

because there exist

(63)

even weight vectors of length . Because

. We thus have the inequality is always greater than , the

and

equality

holds. This completes

the proof.

(64) The next lemma will be required to prove an upper bound

on the average SS weight distribution of the redundant random

respectively.

ensembles.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:24:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WADAYAMA: AVERAGE STOPPING SET WEIGHT DISTRIBUTIONS OF REDUNDANT RANDOM ENSEMBLES

4999

Lemma 10 (Upper Bound on the Number of Matrices): The

number of matrices in

that have minimum distance

greater than or equal to is upper bounded by

(71)
Proof: For a nonnegative integer-valued random variable , the following inequality holds [2]:

(77)
The first equality is due to Lemma 1 and the third equality arises from the property that submatrices can be chosen independently. The last equality holds because

Considering

as a random variable, we obtain

(78)

Note that

means that no linear combination of

row vectors of (except for all zero coefficients) has weight .

Applying the inequality in Lemma 10 to (77), we immediately

obtain the upper bound

(72)

From Lemma 8, the first and second moments of

are

given by

(73)

(79)

(74)

Substituting these expressions into (72), we have the claim of

the lemma.

3) Upper and Lower Bounds on Average SS Weight Distribu-

tions: We are now ready to prove the following upper and lower

bounds on the average SS weight distribution of the redundant

random ensemble.

Theorem 2 (Upper and Lower Bounds on

): Let be a

positive integer and be a positive integer satisfying

.

The average SS weight distribution of the redundant random

ensemble satisfies the following inequalities:

where is defined by (80)
On the other hand, applying the inequality in Lemma 9 to (77), the lower bound can be derived. The lower bound in Lemma 9 is equivalent to
(81) which leads to the lower bound

(75)

(76)

for

where is a divisor of satisfying

.

Proof: From the definition of the average SS weight distri-

(82)

bution,

can be expressed as

This theorem holds for any

but it is only useful for

because we already have exact expressions in the cases

. It is easy to check that the upper and lower bounds

coincide with the average SS weight distribution of the nonex-

tended ensemble

given in (10) if

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:24:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5000

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2008

TABLE III

S AVERAGE SS WEIGHT DISTRIBUTION

: EXACT VALUES,

UPPER AND LOWER BOUNDS

VALUES OF Q

TABLE IV : THE NUMBER OF MATRICES WITH MINIMUM

DISTANCE GREATER THAN OR EQUAL TO 2

Example 6: Consider the case

,

, and

.

In this case, we can compute the exact values of the average

SS weight distribution due to Theorem 1. Table III presents the

exact values (Theorem 1) together with the values of the upper

and lower bound (Theorem 2) of the average SS weight distri-

bution of

. For the cases

and , we can see that

the values of the upper and lower bounds coincide and they give

the exact values.

An exact (nontrivial) expression for

is not

currently known. Let

. The source of the difficulty in deriving an exact expression

comes from the difficulty in counting

precisely. However,

if both and are small, we can obtain

by an exhaustive

computer search. Table IV presents the values of

for

and

, which have been evaluated by such an

exhaustive computer search. The following lemma gives exact

value of

if we know the value of .

Lemma 11 (Exact Formula for average SS weight distribution of

Based on ): The is given by

TABLE V

S AVERAGE SS WEIGHT DISTRIBUTION

: EXACT VALUES,

UPPER AND LOWER BOUNDS

(83)

Proof: The claim of the lemma has already been derived as (77).

= 100 = 50 Fig. 2. Upper bounds on the average SS weight distribution of redundant

random ensembles (n

and m

).

Example 7: Consider the case

,

, and

.

Combining Lemma 11 and the result presented in Table IV, we

can derive the exact values of the average SS weight distribution

for

,

. These values are presented in Table V

together with the corresponding values of the upper and lower

bounds.

There is a tradeoff between the extension degree and the

average SS weight distribution. The decoding complexity of

BP-based iterative decoding increases as increases because

the number of rows in the extended matrix

is

an exponentially increasing function of . On the other hand,

large tends to give larger typical stopping distance defined in

Section III-D. The next example demonstrates such a tradeoff

relation.

upper bound on the average SS weight distribution decreases as

increases when

.

D. Typical Stopping Distance
From the average SS weight distribution, we can retrieve some information about the stopping distance of matrices contained in an ensemble. The definition of typical stopping distance is given below.
Definition 8 (Typical Stopping Distance): The typical stopping distance of an ensemble is defined by

Example 8: Fig. 2 presents the relation between extension

(84)

degree and the upper bound of the average SS weight distri-

bution. The horizontal axis of Fig. 2 represents weight . The

original ensemble assumed here is the random ensemble with The condition

is equivalent to

,

, namely,

. We can observe that the . It is evident that there exists a matrix

satisfying

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:24:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WADAYAMA: AVERAGE STOPPING SET WEIGHT DISTRIBUTIONS OF REDUNDANT RANDOM ENSEMBLES

5001

because the average

is strictly

smaller than . This means that there exists a matrix with stop-

ping distance larger than or equal to the typical stopping dis-

tance .

We here compare a high-rate redundant random ensemble

with constant row weight ensembles and bipartite ensembles

in terms of their typical stopping distances. The next example

presents the results.

It is evident that infinity. This implies that the equality

as goes to

(88)
holds for sufficiently large . Upon using this result, we immediately obtain a lower bound

Example 9: Consider the case where

and

.

We can show that the maximum value of the typical stopping

distance of

is

For bipartite ensembles, we have

(89)

We next consider the case where . In this case,

holds as

and thus we have

(90)

These results mean that there are no constant row weight ensem-

bles and bipartite ensembles with

and

, which By using this result, we obtain

achieve the typical stopping distance . On the other hand, the

redundant random ensemble (

,

, and

)

has a larger typical stopping distance:

. In this

case, the extended random ensemble is expected to give better

decoding performance (with BP) than those of the constant row

weight ensemble and the bipartite ensemble in the regime of

(91)

small erasure probability.

IV. AGR OF REDUNDANT RANDOM ENSEMBLES

The next corollary provides an upper bound on

.

In this section, we will discuss the asymptotic behavior of the Corollary 2: The AGR

average SS weight distribution.

by

has an upper bound given

A. Bounds on AGR

The AGR

is defined by

(92) .
Proof: The upper bound in Theorem 2 can be rewritten in (85) the form

for

,

. The parameter is called nor-

malized extension degree. It is evident that, from the definition

of redundant extension, the above definition of

is well

defined only if

is an integer.

The next corollary gives a lower bound on

.

(93)

Corollary 1: The AGR

can be lower bounded by

.

(86)

for sufficiently large . The last inequality holds because is always positive for large . Thus, the AGR can be
bounded from above in the following way:

Proof: We first consider the case we have

. From Theorem 2,

(87)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:24:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(94)

5002

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2008

= 0 5 = 0 25 ( = 0 5 0 75) R :  : R : ; : Fig. 3. Upper and lower bounds on the exponential AGR of the redundant Fig. 4. Lower bounds on the critical exponent of redundant random ensembles

random ensemble (

and

).

.

On the other hand, the inequality

The following lemma, which gives bounds on the critical exponent, is a direct consequence of Corollaries 1 and 2. (95) Lemma 12 (Bounds on Critical Exponent): The inequalities

leads to another (trivial) upper bound on

(99)

hold where (96)

is the minimum positive solution of

, and

is the minimum

positive solution of

.

The asymptotic form of this upper bound is given by

Proof: From Corollaries 1 and 2, it is evident that the claim

holds. (97)
According to [12], the critical exponent of the bipartite en-

If

, the upper bound (94) gives smaller values than the semble is given by

trivial bound (97). If

, the trivial bound (97) becomes

tighter. When

, both of the bounds yield the same value

(100)

.

Combining the above two corollaries, we can see that

for

. That is, the upper and lower

bounds are asymptotically tight when . The next example

shows numerical values of the upper and lower bounds.

Fig. 4 presents the lower bound on the critical exponent of the

redundant random ensemble with

and

. The

horizontal axis represents the normalized extension degree . Of

course, if

is not an integer, the lower bound is not well

defined. However, for simplicity, the lower bound is plotted as if

Example 10: Fig. 3 shows the lower bound (Corollary 1) and

the upper bound (Corollary 2) for the case

and

. The horizontal axis of Fig. 3 represents the normalized

weight . The curve

(the AGR of nonextended ensemble

) is also included in Fig. 3 as a reference.

it were valid in the entire range

. We can see that

the exponent increases as increases. Because the parameter

can be considered as a measure of decoding complexity, the

curves in Fig. 4 can be regarded as the tradeoff curves between

decoding complexity and the asymptotic decoding performance.

We then compare the critical exponent of the redundant

B. Critical Exponent
The critical exponent of an ensemble means the point where the value of the AGR changes from negative to positive. The explicit definition of the critical exponent of a redundant random ensemble is given below.

random ensemble and the bipartite ensemble with a design rate

of 0.5. It is known that there exists an optimal choice of the

variable node degree to attain the maximum critical exponent

[12]. The largest value is

,

which is obtained when

and

. In other words,

no bipartite ensemble with

yields a critical exponent

Definition 9 (Critical Exponent): The critical exponent of the larger than

. Note that the plot of the lower bound on

redundant random ensemble is defined by

the critical exponent of the redundant random ensemble takes

larger values than

if is sufficiently large. This result

implies that BP-performance on BEC of a dense matrix can be

(98) better than that of a sparse matrix without redundant extension.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:24:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WADAYAMA: AVERAGE STOPPING SET WEIGHT DISTRIBUTIONS OF REDUNDANT RANDOM ENSEMBLES

5003

transformation

(101)

Fig. 5. Comparison of the AGRs: random, bipartite, constant row weight, and redundant random ensembles.

We next consider the second moment. The second moment can be written as

In the case of a high code rate (design rate

), we

have

. The maximum value is achieved

when

and

. We can observe that, as for the former

case, the redundant random ensemble with sufficiently large

gives larger critical exponents.

Example 11: Fig. 5 presents the AGR of the random en-

semble

, bipartite ensemble

, constant

row weight ensemble

, and the redundant

random ensemble (

,

, upper bound). The pa-

rameters of the bipartite ensemble and the constant row weight

ensemble are chosen so as to maximize the critical exponent

under the constraint

. In this case, both the bipartite and

the constant row weight ensembles have almost the same max-

imum critical exponent of . On the other hand, we have

, which is larger than the maximum crit-

ical exponent of the constant row weight ensemble and the bi-

partite ensemble.

From a combinatorial argument, we have

and

. Finally, we get

(102)

,

,

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, the average SS weight distribution and the AGR of redundant random ensembles have been analyzed. The results obtained in the paper indicate one aspect of the tradeoff relation between decoding complexity of BP on BEC and its decoding performance. It is shown that, in some cases, a dense matrix with linearly dependent rows can yield a better decoding performance over BEC than those of regular LDPC matrices with comparable parameters. In particular, in high-rate regime, a redundant matrix appears to offer promising performance not only for BEC, but also for other channels. For example, it is known that there is a close relationship between SS and pseudocodewords, which are influential to decoding performance of linear programming decoding [4]. Studies on the effect of redundant extension for linear programming decoding are currently undertaken.
APPENDIX

B. Redundant Constant Row Weight Ensemble:

As in the case of the redundant random ensemble, it is pos-

sible to write down a simple formula for the redundant constant

row weight ensembles if

.

Lemma 13 (Average SS Weight Distribution of

):

The average SS weight distribution of the redundant constant

row weight ensemble with parameters , ,

, and

is given by

where is given by

(103)

A. Proof of the First and Second Moment of
From a simple counting argument, we obtain . This equation leads to the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:24:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(104)

5004

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2008

Proof: Let
(105) and
(106) A simple combinatorial argument leads to the following formula for :

Using the relation

(107)

we have

(108)

(109)

for

and

is, therefore, given by

. The average SS weight distribution

(110) where the last inequality coincides with the claim of the lemma.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author would like to thank the anonymous reviewers
whose comments help to improve the quality of this paper.
Especially, the expressions in Theorems 1 and 2 have been
greatly simplified based on their comments.
REFERENCES
[1] K. A. S. Abdel-Ghaffar and J. H. Weber, “On parity-check matrices with optimal stopping and/or dead-end set enumerators,” in Proc. Turbo-Coding, Munich, Germany, 2006.
[2] N. Alon and J. H. Spencer, The Probabilistic Method. New York: Wiley, 2000.
[3] D. Burshtein and G. Miller, “Asymptotic enumeration methods for analyzing LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1115–1131, Jun. 2004.
[4] J. Feldman, “Decoding error-correcting codes via linear programming,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Electr. Eng. Comput. Sci., Massachusetts Inst. Technol., Cambridge, MA, 2003.
[5] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. E. Teletar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Finitelength analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[6] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[7] J. Han and P. H. Siegel, “Improved upper bounds on stopping redundancy,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 90–104, Jan. 2007.
[8] H. D. L. Hollmann and L. M. G. M. Tolhuizen, “On parity check collections for iterative erasure decoding that correct all correctable erasure patterns of a given size,” 2005 [Online]. Available: arXiv: cs.IT/ 0507068
[9] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[10] S. Litsyn and V. Shevelev, “On ensembles of low-density parity-check codes: asymptotic distance distributions,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 4, pp. 887–908, Apr. 2002.
[11] S. Litsyn and V. Shevelev, “Distance distributions in ensembles of irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 11, pp. 3140–3159, Nov. 2003.
[12] A. Orlitsky, K. Viswanathan, and J. Zhang, “Stopping set distribution of LDPC code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 929–953, Mar. 2005.
[13] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2008.
[14] M. Schwartz and A. Vardy, “On the stopping distance and the stopping redundancy of codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 922–932, Mar. 2006.
[15] T. Wadayama, “Average coset weight distributions of combined LDPC matrix ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 11, pp. 4856–4866, Nov. 2006.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:24:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

