Decoding Architectures for Projective Geometry Based LDPC Codes
Harihara S.G, M.Girish Chandra, Tarakapraveen Uppalapati, B.S. Adiga Embedded Systems Research Group, Tata Consultancy Services, 96, EPIP Industrial Estate, Whitefield Road, Bangalore, INDIA.
{harihara.g, m.gchandra, tarakapraveen.uppalapati, bs.adiga }@tcs.com

Abstract— Projective Geometry (PG) based Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes have many useful properties, including easy encoding and decoding by simple majority logic technique. With these useful features, they can be useful error control codes in future. In this paper, we present three novel architectures comprising of one parallel and two semi-parallel decoder architectures for popular PG-based LDPC codes. These architectures have no memory clash and further are reconfigurable for different lengths (and their corresponding rates). The three architectures can be configured either for the regular belief propagation based decoding or majority logic decoding (MLD).
Index Terms— LDPC, Projective Geometry Codes, Belief Propagation, Majority Logic Decoding
I. INTRODUCTION
Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes have emerged as very powerful error control codes with performance approaching capacity limits. LDPC codes are linear block codes originally proposed by Gallager in the early 1960s. Their parity check matrix is sparse having low density of one (1) entries. The regular LDPC codes have uniform column and row weight in the parity check matrix. The good performance of LDPC codes is achieved with a proper choice of code and decoding signal processing. The popular LDPC decoding algorithm is the Belief Propagation algorithm (also referred to as Sum-Product algorithm). This can be viewed as a message passing algorithm operating on the Tanner graph, which is a bipartite graph representing the parity check matrix, and consisting of variable nodes and check (or constraint) nodes. The algorithm starts with initialization, in each iteration message passing occurs from each check node to all adjacent variable nodes (first half of iteration) and then in the second half, from each variable node to its adjacent check nodes. The decoding performance is achieved through repeated iterations of the message passing along the edges of the graph, with some stopping criterion.
It has already been proved that the LDPC codes are universal on fading channels. The maximum achievable rate

of an LDPC code is very close to the theoretical limit of any code, indicating that significantly better code than LDPC code probably does not exist [1]. One can design and implement a single LDPC code that is optimal across a range of rates (including very high rates). LDPC codes are appropriate candidates for wireless systems based on MIMOOFDM transmission. Suitably designed LDPC codes are also proved to be excellent candidates for Hybrid Automatic Repeat Request (HARQ) schemes.
The popularity of LDPC codes from the past few years led into the proposals for utilizing the code for various applications and standards; examples being the DVB-S2 (2nd Generation Digital Video Broadcasting via Satellite), the WiMAX (Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access) standard, correcting soft errors in nanoscale memories. The codes for applications should have properties like low encoding and decoding complexities, good waterfall regions, low error floors, and flexibility in terms of getting different rates and frame lengths [2]. There are various code designs available, starting from the pseudo-random constructions to sophisticated algebraic and graph-based techniques [3]. In this paper, we restrict to codes based on the finite projective geometry, where the parity check matrix is obtained as a matrix of incidence vectors of the unique lines in the underlying PG [2],[3],[4],[5]. These codes are also majority-logic decodable (MLD) and hence decoding processing complexity can be drastically reduced.
Since error control coding is an important component of the modern day communication systems, it is natural to see vigorous research and efforts are being put into VLSI/ASIC/FPGA realizations of the LDPC decoders and encoders. Concentrating on the decoders, there are proposals for different structures on various platforms [5],[6] (see also references given in them). There are different issues to be considered in the realization like, serial, parallel or semiparallel architectures, edge memory (memory to store messages passed along the edges of Tanner graph) requirement, processing unit complexity (for check node processing), and so on.

978-1-4244-2829-8/08/$25.00 ©2008 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:24:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This paper presents decoder architectures for PG based LDPC codes, extending our earlier works on decoder architectures for LDPC codes in DVB-S2 and WiMAX [6], [7]. The paper is organized as follows. In Part II, relevant details of the PG LDPC codes, including the advantages of them are given. In Part III, the decoder architectures for PG LDPC codes are worked out in detail. Conclusions are given in Part IV.
II. PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY BASED LDPC CODES
A LDPC code defined by a regular parity check matrix H has the following structural properties [4]: (1) each row
consists of ρ “ones”; (2) each column consists of γ
“ones”; (3) the number of "ones" in common between any
two columns, is no greater than 1; and (4) both ρ and γ
are small compared to the length of the code. The code is simply the null space of H.
A PG can be constructed from the elements of a Galois field
( ) ( ) GF 2(m+1)s , which contains GF 2 s as a subfield. In this
paper, we restrict ourselves to m = 2 or the two-dimensional PG. In this case, the number of distinct points and lines are the same and is equal to n = 22s + 2s + 1 . The incidence
vector for any line is an n-tuple in GF(2) , with j th
component being 1 if that point is on the line. The square parity check matrix H of dimension n × n has incidence vectors of n lines as rows. Each row has ρ = 2s +1 ones and each column, which corresponds to a point, has γ = 2s + 1 ones. Any two columns have exact one “1” in common, which means that no two code bits are checked by the same two parity constraints. Thus, there is no rectangle in H with four “ones” at its four corners. This ensures that there is no cycle of length 4 in the Tanner graph that represents the code, a property very important for a LDPC code to achieve good error performance with iterative decoding based on belief propagation.
It is useful to note that H can be obtained by shifting an incident vector 22s + 2s times [4]. These codes being cyclic can be encoded easily, using linear shift registers with feedback connections based on their generator polynomials. Apart from this, these codes are majority-logic decodable (MLD) as mentioned earlier. The essence of this scheme is that the parity checks involving a particular received bit cast “votes” as to the correctness of that bit. A simple majority of these votes is used to determine the error pattern. MLD requires that for each bit position, the parity check equations form an orthogonal set in a sense described in [4] and [5]. The PG LDPC codes satisfy this orthogonality requirement by virtue of their construction.
A popular code in two-dimensional PG is of length 1057 and rate 0.769. We can use this as the base code (mother code) and get other rates through shortening and puncturing.

Decoding for the shortened case can be achieved using the original tanner graph or in our case by using the same decoder architecture by placing infinite (very large value) reliability on the shortened variable nodes [8]. Similarly, for the punctured case, decoding can be achieved by placing 50% reliability (0 in case of the usual log likelihood ratios) on the punctured variable nodes [8]. This aspect and the related performance issues are not covered in this paper as the focus here is on decoders. Before presenting the decoder architectures, the useful properties of PG codes are captured to bring out the usefulness of decoders in the near future.
1. The encoding is straight forward with the simple shift registers due to the cyclic property of the codes.
2. Good decoding architectures, without having memory clash, are possible. This is the major theme of this paper. The architecture based on Karmarkar’s template for interconnects is covered in [9].
3. They are majority-logic decodable and hence decoding processing complexity can be drastically reduced. For the energy-limited mobile terminals, this can be a useful option, although there is a trade off with the performance. Also, when the signal to interference and noise ratio is really good, it is possible to switch from the regular belief propagation to majority logic decoding without compromising the performance to reduce the processing power.
4. The PG codes are regular codes and they have better error floor compared to the irregular codes.
5. The algebraic PG codes have highly redundant paritycheck matrices. This leads to very good iterative decoding performance without the need for very long block lengths.
6. Based on (5) and (6), the codes exhibit steeply falling bit and frame error rate performances, in spite of having worse threshold performance compared to irregular codes.
7. Shortening these regular codes is easy as we need not worry about degree distributions.
With these useful features, PG codes can be useful candidates for future broadband wireless systems, sensor networks, satellite and space communications, as well as for the correction of soft errors in memories (including nano-scale memories). In [10], Euclidean Geometry (EG) based codes are suggested for nano-scale memories. Since, EG codes can be considered as descendants of PG codes [4], they are equally applicable for nano-scale memories. The decoder architectures thus form very useful design exercise and are covered in detail in the next Section.
III. DECODER ARCHITECTURES
In this paper we propose three novel architectures, a parallel architecture and two semi parallel architectures for decoding of PG based LDPC codes. We can use all the three architectures for decoding the mother code as well as the shortened and punctured versions of the mother code. The

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:24:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

architectures avoid the address clashes, which tend to be severe bottleneck during the VLSI implementation. The architectures, apart from being used for regular belief propagation algorithm can be used for MLD algorithm and modified MLD algorithm. Further all the three architectures can be reconfigured for PG code with different frame length and rates such as length 255 and rate 0.686, length 4095 and rate 0.822 and so on.
Few General remarks for decoder design
The design of decoder needs to address an important issue of effective management of message passing across the tanner graph. The classification of decoder architecture can broadly be done as (1) Parallel (2) Serial and (3) Semi Parallel.
The Fully parallel decoders are designed to depict the bipartite graph of the LDPC code directly onto the hardware, i.e. they directly instantiate the graph. Every individual variable node or check node is physically implemented as node functional unit, and the interconnection network is used to connect these units, which reflect the bipartite graph connectivity. The necessity of central memory blocks to store the messages is eliminated here and they can be latched close to the processing units. Very high decoding throughputs in terms of bit per second are obtained by the fully parallel decoders. The fully parallel decoders though suffer from couple of disadvantages one is the infeasibility of design for large block lengths (more than couple of thousands of bits) because of area of implementation (due to the implementation of all the processing units) and interconnect routing. The other is the reconfigurablity of the design. Since the hardware is fixed for a particular parity check matrix, any alterations in the block length or rate (both changes the parity check matrix).
The Fully-serial architecture comes with a major advantage of the smallest area of implementation as it is sufficient to have just one variable node computation units (VCU) and one check node computation units (CCU) and hence are very much preferred for DSP implementations in which there are only a few functional units available to use. However, it suffers from low decoding speed. Hence targeting on the appropriate trade-offs between hardware complexity and decoding speed the partially parallel or semi-parallel decoder are constructed. These decoders consist consists of an array of node computation units to perform all the node computation (in time-division multiplexing mode) and an array of memory blocks to store all decoding message. The message passing that reflects the bipartite graph connectivity is jointly realized by the memory address generation and the inter connection among memory blocks and node computation units. Further they also can support flexible code rate configurations and degree distributions. The Design of processing units reflects the kind of decoder mapping which needs to be done. The

node computational units can be serially (one input and at most one output in a clock cycle) or parallely implemented. For all the proposed architectures serial processing is chosen as it relaxes the constraints on the memory organization [11]. Further serial computational units can be pipelined and hence they are not in critical path. The structure of the processing elements is described in more detail in [12]. A good number of issues in the implementation of VCU and CCU in general can be found in [11] (pp.46-50).
Motivation
Our earlier works [6],[7], for DVB-S2 and WiMAX standards had no address clash in the structure. Mapping the PG based codes onto the same architecture to eliminate the address clashes, would have a huge advantage during the VLSI implementation. The PG based LDPC codes are cyclic in nature and also our previous architectures exploited the cyclic property of LDPC codes to design the architecture. The entries for bank selector and location pointer are obtained through novel mathematical expressions (see Eqn.1 and Eqn.2). The architectures as shown in figures consists of different components such as check node computation units (CCU), variable node computation units (VCU), memory banks and switching network. All these components are crucial components and come along with their own design issues as outlined in the next section.
Architecture Design
The architectures proposed are designed for block length 1057 and rate 0.769 code. The design as mentioned earlier exploits the cyclic properties of the codes also bearing in mind the usefulness of decoder design as mentioned previously. All the three architectures realized share few common hardware blocks. Apart from the computation units these architectures consist of bank selectors, location pointers and permutation network.
Figure.1 shows parallel decoder architecture for a code of length 1057 and rate 0.769. The design of parallel architecture is simple but a careful choice on the number of processing elements, memory banks and their connection mechanism to achieve the Tanner graph, for the code has to be made. The bank selector provides us the address for the connectivity. The necessity of location pointer is eliminated since in case of fully parallel architecture there is only one processing unit associated with each address. The entries of the bank selector are check node addresses or the variable node addresses depending on the operation we would be carrying out.
In the Figure.1 shown, the bank selector values are the check node addresses to which the variable nodes need to be connected. The parallel architecture consists of individual processing units and associated memory bank with each and every address, i.e. for a block length of 1057 we use equal

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:24:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

number of both processing units and memory banks. Now for a larger block length of 4095 it is infeasible to use such large number of processing units. Hence we further propose two novel semi parallel architectures, which do an optimum trade off between the decoding speed and number of processing elements. For the code under consideration the architectures comprise of either 151 or 7 processing elements. By mere observation one can say this arises due to fact that both 7 and 151 being the only factors of 1057.
Figure 1. Fully parallel decoder architecture for PG based LDPC codes
The semi parallel architecture as shown in the Figure2 and Figure 3 has equal number of variable nodes and check nodes connected through an interconnection network. As in our previous works [6],[7] we use the bank selector and location pointer registers for the Tanner graph connectivity. The architectures for code with block length 1057 and rate 0.769 code are discussed below, hence the location pointer and bank selector entries shown in the figures also achieve the tanner graph connectivity for the same.

required to reconfigure the architecture PG codes with different lengths and different rates. As mentioned earlier we can use the same architecture to decode the shortened and punctured version of the same mother code. The cyclic pattern of the PG based codes is observed for both the variable nodes and the check nodes. For a set of z nodes
starting from 0th node till z − 1 node there would be general
increment of one in the corresponding node connected, i.e. if we look from check node to the variable nodes connectivity, for every set of z check nodes, the address values of the variable nodes generally gets incremented by one.
As far as the variable nodes portion, similarly for every z variable nodes the address of check nodes gets incremented by one. For example, for rate 0.769, for the set of 1057check nodes from 0th node till 1056th node, the variable node addresses for 1st node are one incremented value of that of the 0th node. Based on this observation for a length of 1057(51 and 7 are the only two factors ), we have come up with two architectures one to use seven processing elements each for VN (variable node) and CN (check node) processing in the serial-parallel architecture, with a connection mechanism to take care of the wrap around problem. This connection mechanism is depicted in Figure.2, and when more number of processing units is available we can use one hundred and fifty one processing elements for each VN and CN as depicted in Figure.3.

Figure 2. Semi Parallel Decoder Architecture for PG based LDPC codes
A slight modification with respect to the number of memory banks and number of addresses stored in each bank would be

Figure 3. Semi Parallel Decoder Architecture for PG based LDPC codes
In Figure.2, the entries shown in the memory banks are the addresses of variable nodes and check nodes. The seven processing units work in parallel and fetch the inputs oneby-one based on the entries given in the bank selector, which selects the bank and the location pointer, which suggests the location within the selected bank. The entries shown are for the entire variable-node processing operations; the variable nodes in this set are 0, 1, 2, …, 1056 (see Figure.2). Once the entries are loaded into these registers they can be retained for the entire operation. To elaborate the iterative procedure further, assume that the entire frame of 1056 received values is scaled ([12],[11]) to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:24:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

get appropriate LLRs and are stored in banks as suggested by addresses in Figure.2. The variable-node units can then start processing. They get the values sequentially. For example, the values for variable node 0 are taken from first location of first bank, first location of second bank etc. All variable node units can get the values this way. Once the processing is completed, they generate the same number of outputs as inputs and these are put into the memory banks in the VN portion in the respective addresses. The inputs of the bank selector and the locations pointer can be obtained from the novel mathematical expressions we have identified (for the architecture of Figure.2). For all the variable nodes the location pointer can be obtained from

LPV

=

[C

− mod(C, 7)]
7

(1)

where C is the check-node address and again mod(C,7) is
the bank selector value. With this the zeroth bank for any processing unit is the exactly opposite bank in Figure.2 and the remaining are counted downwards in circular fashion. Once all the variable-node processing is completed, the check node processing can be started again seven at a time, fetching the values from the VN memory banks. The novel expression for location pointer values is:

LPC

=

[I

−

mod(I ,
7

7)]

(2)

Where I is the address of the variable node connected to a
particular parity check node. Further, in (2) mod (I , 7 )
gives the bank selector value.

An entirely similar architecture with different number of processing units is shown in Figure.3, This architecture is also designed for rate 0.769 and block length 1057 and there are equal number of variable nodes and check nodes. The addresses shown in the location pointer and bank selector are based on the design and are obtained with slight modifications to the earlier equations as shown in equation (3) and (4)

LPV

=

[C

− mod(C, 51)]
51

(3)

Where, C is the check-node address and again mod(C,51) the
bank selector value.

LPC

=

[I

−

mod(I ,
51

51)]

(4)

Where I is the address of the variable node connected to a
particular parity check node and mod (I , 51) gives the bank
selector value. The above equations are specific to code example considered and can be modified to accommodate any change with the block lengths (other PG codes). All the

three architectures can be utilized for majority logic decoding (MLD) and it’s variant like weighted MLD [5], apart from the Belief Propagation (and its variants). In this situation, the processing elements are modified to simple computational structures acting on the hard decided message values.
The switching or permutation network of Figure.1, Figure.2 and Figure.3 ( Π1 / Π1−1 ) can be implemented using the logarithmic barrel shifter to establish the connectivity between the memory banks and the processing elements. Once the connection to the first bank is established, the other banks are connected is by a simple shifting operation. The number of stages in the shifter is given by the logarithm to the basis 2 of number of parallel banks beings used. This completes the decoder architecture design and in implementation a controller is required to make sure that all the units are synchronized.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
The paper presented three decoder architectures for twodimensional Projective Geometry codes. These decoder architectures, facilitating efficient decoder implementations, can make the PG codes (with their additional features) useful for many applications.
REFERENCES
[1] Stuber G.L, Barry J.R, Mc Laughlin S. W,Ye Li, Ingram M.A and Pratt T.G, “Broadband MIMO-OFDM wireless communications,” Proceedings of the IEEE,vol.92, no.2, pp.271-294, February 2004.
[2] Gianluigi Liva, Shumei Song, Lan Lan, Yifei Zhang, Shu Lin, and William E.Ryan, “Design of LDPC Codes: A Survey and New Results”. IEEE Journal of Communications Software and Systems, vol.2, no.3, September 2006.
[3] Sarah J.Johnson, “Introducing Low Density Parity-Check Codes”, The University of Newcastle, sigpromu.org/sarah/SJohnsonLDPCintro.pdf
[4] Yu Kou, Shu Lin and Marc Fossorier, “ Low Density Parity Check codes Based on Finite Geometries: A rediscovery and More:” NASA Technical Report.
[5] Joseph B.Attili, “An Investigation of Low Density Parity Check Codes”, San Diego State University Report, May 2006.
[6] Harihara S.G, M. Girish Chandra, B.S. Adiga, Pramod D.N, Balamuralidhar. P, “A Proposal for the LDPC Decoder Architecture for DVB-S2”, NCC 2006, New Delhi, India, Jan 2006.
[7] Harihara S.G, M.Girish Chandra, B.S. Adiga, D.N.Pramod, and Balamuralidhar. P, “A Novel Architecture for LDPC Decoder for WiMAX”, WPMC’07, Jaipur, India, Dec 2007.
[8] TaoTian, and Christopher R. Jones, “Construction of Rate-Compatible LDPC codes Utilizing Information Shortening and Parity Puncturing” EURASIP Journal on Wireless communications and Networking, pp. 789–795, 2005:5.
[9] Hrishikesh Sharma, “Optimal Projective Space Lattices-based Architectures for LDPC Decoding”, Tata Consultancy Services Report, 2006.
[10] Shalini Ghosh and Patrick D.Lincoln “Low Density Parity Check codes for Error Correction in Nano sclaeMemory” SRI Computer Science Laboratory Technical Report,CSL-0703,September 2007
[11] F. Guilloud, “Generic Architecture for LDPC Codes Decoding”, PhD Thesis under SPRING project, July 2004.
[12] M. Karkooti, J.R. Cavallaro, “Semi-Parallel Reconfigurable Architectures for Real-Time LDPC Decoding”, ITCC 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:24:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

