IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 44, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2008

3773

A New Burst Detection Scheme Using Parity Check Matrix of LDPC Code for Bit Flipping Burst-like Signal Degradation
Yasuaki Nakamura1, Mitsuhiro Nishimura1, Yoshihiro Okamoto1, Hisashi Osawa1, and Hiroaki Muraoka2, Fellow, IEEE
Graduate school of science and engineering, Ehime University, Matsuyama 790-8577, Japan Research Institute of Electrical Communication (RIEC), Tohoku University, Sendai 980-8577, Japan
In this paper, a new burst detection method using the check matrix of low-density parity-check (LDPC) code is proposed. The burst detection for the bit flipping burst-like signal degradation which the conventional burst detection using a reproducing waveform, an equalizer output, an a posteriori probability (APP) decoder output and so on cannot detect is studied. The performance of the LDPC coding and iterative decoding system with the proposed burst detector is evaluated by computer simulation for a perpendicular magnetic recording channel with bit flipping burst-like signal degradation, and it is compared with that of the RS encoding and decoding system using the erasure correction. The results show that the LDPC coding and iterative decoding system with our burst detector shows the better performance and has the resistance to the bit flipping burst-like signal degradation of about 1500 bits.
Index Terms—Burst detection, burst-like signal degradation, low-density parity-check (LDPC) code, perpendicular magnetic recording (PMR).

I. INTRODUCTION
ALONG sector format of 4096 B/sector draws attention as a new sector format for the next-generation hard disk drive (HDD). Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] also attract much attention as a next-generation error correcting code, and its introduction is attempted. The LDPC coding and iterative decoding system with a burst detector has the resistance to the burst-like signal degradation due to the media defects or the thermal asperity (TA) with the amplitude fluctuation which is detected by the conventional burst detector using a reproducing waveform, an equalizer output, an a posteriori probability (APP) decoder output and so on [2], [3]. However, the LDPC coding and iterative decoding system has the unsolved problem in the undetectable signal burst which is generated by the overwrite of the recorded information due to the pole-erase [4]. Since the undetectable signal burst called bit flipping burstlike signal degradation has no amplitude fluctuation, the conventional burst detector using amplitude fluctuation cannot detect it. Furthermore, the bit-flipping burst-like signal degradation gives the fatal influence on the iterative decoding system with the conventional burst detector.
In this paper, we propose a new burst detection scheme using a check matrix of LDPC code to detect the bit flipping burst-like signal degradation and evaluate the performance of the LDPC coding and iterative decoding system with the burst detector under a long sector format of 4096 B/sector.
II. R/W CHANNEL
Fig. 1 shows the block diagram of an LDPC coding and iterative decoding system with a new burst detector using a check matrix of the LDPC code. In this paper, we assume that a sector consists of 4096 B of user data sequence. The user data sequence is encoded in a sector unit by the 128/130 (0,16/8) RLL encoder and the regular-(22, 3) LDPC encoder. We also assume that the

Fig. 1. Block diagram of LDPC coding and iterative decoding system.

bit flipping over the length normalized by a user bit interval occurs as the undetectable burst-like signal degradation each
sector, which is functionally equivalent to flipping the recording sequence as shown in Fig. 1.
In computer simulation, we assume the following perpendicular magnetic recording (PMR) channel. The step-like waveform reproduced by the reading head from an isolated transition on the medium is defined by
(1)

where is the saturation level and is the rising time of

from

to [5]. Here, we define the normalized linear

density as

. We assume that the noise at the reading

point consists of a jitter-like medium noise and an additive white

Gaussian noise (AWGN), a system noise whose powers in a

bandwidth of

are equal to and . Here, is the

user bit rate. We also define the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) at

the reading point and the percentage of the jitter-like medium

noise power to the total noise power by the following equations,

respectively

SNR

dB

(2)

(3)
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2008.2002424
0018-9464/$25.00 © 2008 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:20:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3774

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 44, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2008

The equalizer is composed of a low-pass filter with a normalized cutoff frequency by and a transversal filter with
taps. The equalizer is adjusted so as to convert the bit response of R/W channel into a PR1 target [6]. The equalizer output sequence is input to the APP decoder with an autoregressive (AR) channel model as a channel estimator [7]. The AR channel model predicts the current noise level from the previous decoder input noise sequence for bit period. The APP decoder outputs the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) sequence calculated by both the equalizer output sequence and the extrinsic information provided by the sum-product (SP) decoder. However, the extrinsic information is not used at the first decoding. The LLR sequence from the APP decoder is input to the burst detector and the SP decoder. The iterative decoder with the burst detector consists of an APP decoder, an SP decoder and the burst detector. Here, shows the iteration times in the SP decoder, while indicates the iteration times as the iterative decoder. In this paper, we set iteration limits in the SP and iterative decoders to 5. The burst detector generates the burst information which is composed of the position and length of the bursts obtained by using parity check matrix of the LDPC code. The SP decoder decodes the RLL coded sequence using the constraint of LDPC code from LLR with the burst information by controlling the amplitude of LLR not to cause error propagation due to the burst-like signal degradation. Furthermore, we attenuate the reliability information in the iterative process of the SP decoder to prevent the error floor [8]. In the iterative process of the SP decoder, the prior information for the next LLR calculation is attenuated by multiplying calculated LLRs by an extinction ratio and the extrinsic information divided by the column weight of LDPC code after the given iterations is finished. After the given iterations of the iterative decoder, the output data sequence is recovered by a hard decision and RLL decoding.

= Fig. 2.
SNR

A21P:P5

x decoder
dB,

=out0p:u4t,

sNamp=les15(K, L==1:55,).R

= 80%, L

Fig. 3. Block diagram of proposed burst detector.

= 1000,

III. BURST DETECTION SCHEME

Fig. 2 shows the APP decoder output samples in a PR channel

with bit flipping burst-like signal degradation. In the Fig. 2,

the bit flipping burst-like signal degradation of

has been from

. Here, is a channel bit in-

terval. The other parameters are set to

,

,

SNR

dB,

,

, and

. The sym-

bols and show the correct LLR and the erroneous LLR, re-

spectively. As can be seen in the figure, the reliability of correct

LLR is comparable with that of the erroneous LLR. Therefore,

it is difficult for the conventional burst detector using the am- Fig. 4. Proposed burst detection scheme. plitude fluctuation to detect the bit flipping burst. Consequently,

the iterative decoding may be disturbed by the erroneous LLR,

if the same level of erroneous LLR is provided to the following the parity flag sequence smooth. Finally, we get the burst flag

process.

with “1” over the burst part detected by the threshold detection.

Figs. 3 and 4 show the block diagram of proposed burst de- Here,

is the threshold level in the burst detector. Fig. 5

tector and the proposed burst detection scheme, respectively. shows an example of parity check in the burst detector using the

The burst detector consists of a hard decision unit, a parity flag parity check matrix of LDPC code. Here, as the parameters of

generator, a filter and a burst flag generator. The APP decoder the LDPC code, we set the code length to 16, the row weight to 4

output sequence is input to the burst detector, and is determined and the column weight to 3, respectively. The submatrices of the

by the hard decision unit using the threshold level “0.” The ten- parity check matrix are divided by the solid lines and the “0”s

tative sequence is fed to the parity flag generator and is checked in the parity check matrix are shown by the space. As shown the

by parity check matrix of LDPC code. Here, the parity flag gen- figure, the parity flag generator checks whether the errors have

erator outputs are “0,” “1,” “2,” and “3” if the column weight occurred in each row by the parity check. If the errors are found

of LDPC code is equal to 3. The moving average filter makes by the parity check, the parity flag generator changes from “1”

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:20:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NAKAMURA et al.: NEW BURST DETECTION SCHEME USING PARITY CHECK MATRIX OF LDPC CODE

3775

Fig. 5. Example of parity check.

RFig.=7. L 8R0%ela,tionshi=p b1e0t0w0e,eSnNthRe : x =det2e1cte5ddbBu,rst le=ng0th:4a,nNd T=H15,(LK == 15:)5. ,

: x 1F0ig0.08,.SNFRreq=ue2n1cy5odfBd,etect=ed 0b:u4r,stNlen=gth15(K, L==1:55,,TRH = =802%5,).L =

x = Fig. 6. 0:F4i,ltNer ou=tp1ut5(,KL ==1:55),.R = 80%, L

= 1000, SNR = 21:5 dB,

may be shorter than the actual length. As discussed in Fig. 2, the iterative decoding may be disturbed by the erroneous LLR

if the detected length is short. Therefore, we extend the detected

burst flag by 100 bits at both sides to avoid the influence due to

to “ ” every row, and makes parity flag sequence by summing the erroneous LLR.

“ ” in the column direction. Fig. 6 shows the moving average filter output. The parameters

IV. PERFORMANCE COMPARISON

are set to the same values as those of Fig. 2. Here, the bit flipping Fig. 9 shows the relationship between and the required

burst-like signal degradation of

has also occurred SNR to achieve the error free detection for about 10-M bit

from

. As can be seen from the figure, the burst sequence. The parameters are set at

,

,

flag generator can determine the position and length of the burst

,

and

. Here,

is the

by threshold detection using the threshold level

. Fig. 7 optimum number of taps of the transversal filter which gives

shows the relationship between the detected burst length and the minimum required SNR at each . The symbols , ,

. The parameters are set to the same values as those of and show the performance of the LDPC coding and iterative

Fig. 6. The dotted line shows the generated burst length

decoding system with the proposed burst detector using the

. As can be seen from the figure, the burst detector can parity check matrix of LDPC code (LDPC-PCBD), the LDPC

shows the good accuracy of burst detection for

– . coding and iterative decoding system with the conventional

Fig. 8 shows the frequency of the detected burst length. The burst detector using the amplitude fluctuation at the APP

parameters are set to the same values as those of Fig. 7, except decoder output [9] (LDPC-BD) and the erasure correcting

. As the burst detector can obtain the burst length system using Reed–Solomon (RS) code (RS-EC), respectively.

corresponding to

, we use

in this The RS code over

with 190 code symbols error-cor-

study. However, as shown in Fig. 8, the detected burst length rection capability is employed. Here, the code rate of these

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:20:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3776

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 44, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2008

Fig. 9. As can be seen from the figure, the LDPC-PCBD system and LDPC-BD system have the resistance to a medium defect of about 2000 or fewer bits though the LDPC-PCBD system is inferior to the LDPC-BD system.

Fig. 9. L N ,L

= 5versus required SNR (K ).

=

1:5, R

= 80%, x

= 0:4, N

=

V. CONCLUSION
We have proposed and evaluated a new burst detection scheme using a check matrix of LDPC code for the bit flipping burst-like signal degradation under a long sector format of 4096 B/sector. The results show that the LDPC coding and iterative decoding system with the proposed burst detector shows the better performance and has the resistance to a bit flipping burst-like signal degradation of about 1500 bits. The proposed system also has the resistance to a medium defect of about 2000 or fewer bits.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported in part by the Storage Research Consortium (SRC), Japan.

F80ig%. 1,0x.

L=

0:v4e,rNsus

=required SNR
N ,L

= 5 for amplitude ).

fluctuation

(K

=

1:5, R

=

systems is almost 0.85 [3]. As can be seen from the figure, the

LDPC-BD system cannot reach the error free, except

.

This is because the LDPC-BD system with the conventional

burst detector does not quite detect the bit-flipping burst-like

signal degradation. So the error propagation occurs, which is

caused by erroneous LLR from the APP decoder due to the

bit flipping burst-like signal degradation. On the other hand,

the LDPC-PCBD system has the resistance to a bit flipping

burst-like signal degradation of about 1500 bits. Furthermore,

the LDPC-PCBD system shows the better performance com-

pared with the RS-EC system until

.

Fig. 10 shows the relationship between

and the re-

quired SNR for the amplitude fluctuation. Here,

is the

burst length caused by the medium defect normalized by a

[9]. The parameters set to the same values as those of Fig. 9. The

symbols show the performances of the same system as those of

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] W. Tan and J. R. Cruz, “Array codes for erasure correction in magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 2579–2581, Sep. 2003.
[3] T. Morita, Y. Sato, and T. Sugawara, “ECC-less LDPC coding for magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 2304–2306, Sep. 2002.
[4] K. Nakamoto, T. Okada, K. Watanabe, H. Hoshiya, N. Yoshida, Y. Kawato, M. Hatatani, K. Meguro, Y. Okada, H. Kimura, M. Mochizuki, K. Kusukawa, C. Ishikawa, and M. Fuyama, “Single-pole/TMR heads for 140- Gb/in perpendicular recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 290–294, Jan. 2004.
[5] Y. Okamoto, H. Osawa, H. Saito, H. Muraoka, and Y. Nakamura, “Performance of PRML systems in perpendicular magnetic recording channel with jitter-like noise,” J. Magn. Magn. Mater., vol. 235, pp. 259–264, Oct. 2001.
[6] K. R. Kretzmer, “Generalization of a technique for binary data communication,” IEEE Trans. Commun. Technol., vol. COM-14, pp. 67–68, Feb. 1966.
[7] Y. Nakamura, Y. Okamoto, H. Osawa, H. Saito, H. Muraoka, and Y. Nakamura, “A study of turbo decoding with embedded AR channel model for perpendicular recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 2570–2572, Sep. 2003.
[8] Y. Nakamura, M. Nishimura, Y. Okamoto, H. Osawa, H. Muraoka, and Y. Nakamura, “Iterative decoding algorithm using attenuated information in PMR with bit-patterned medium,” in Dig. PMRC’07, Oct. 2007, 16pD-04.
[9] Y. Nakamura, S. Nakashita, Y. Okamoto, H. Osawa, H. Muraoka, and Y. Nakamura, “Performance evaluation of LDPC coding and iterative decoding system using burst information,” (in Japanese) IEICE Trans. Electron., vol. J90-C, no. 5, pp. 437–446, May 2007.
Manuscript received March 03, 2008. Current version published December 17, 2008. Corresponding author: Y. Nakamura (e-mail: nakamura@ rec.ee.ehime-u.ac.jp).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:20:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

