Comparison of Decoding Turbo Gallager Codes in Hybrid Decoding Arrangements with Different Iterative Decoders over the Erasure Channel
Li Yang, Marcel Ambroze, Martin Tomlinson Fixed and Mobile Communications Research University of Plymouth PL4 8AA, United Kingdom
Email: li.yang, marcel.ambroze, martin.tomlinson@plymouth.ac.uk

Abstract—In this paper, different iterative decoders for turbo Gallager codes are optimised and compared for the binary erasure channel. The complexity and performance differences between turbo decoder, BCJR-based Look-Up Table decoder and belief propagation decoder are analysed and evaluated. A hybrid decoding arrangement, which uses an iterative decoder followed by a maximum likelihood “In-Place” matrix inversion algorithm, is compared for the different iterative decoders. Results are presented which show that the BCJR-based iterative decoders achieve better performance than using the belief propagation decoder for turbo Gallager codes in the erasure channel. When small encoder memory is selected, the optimised Look-Up Table decoder provides a good balance between convergence performance and complexity.
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, the Binary Erasure Channel (BEC) [1], has been shown to be useful in evaluating an error correcting code’s performance. The erasure channel is characterised by the bit erasure probability , where 0 ≤ ≤ 1.
In 1993, turbo codes, which have been shown to be capable of achieving near-Shannon limit performance with affordable decoding complexity, were first introduced by Berrou [2]. The turbo encoder is formed by a parallel concatenation of two convolutional encoders interconnected through an interleaver. The corresponding decoding process is based on an iterative decoding algorithm in which each component decoder passes the extrinsic information to the other to realise successful decoding. Another class of codes which were able to exhibit similar performance and characteristics was called low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [3]. The first iterative decoding algorithm for LDPC codes over the erasure channel was proposed by Luby [4], who showed that channel capacity can be approached arbitrarily closely. The Finite-length analysis of LDPC codes over the BEC was described in [5], which showed that the performance of iterative belief-propagation decoding of LDPC codes over BEC can be characterised in terms of stopping sets. From [6], it was shown that stopping sets also existed for turbo codes and that they characterised exactly the performance of turbo decoding on the erasure channel. Turbo codes are easier to analyse due to the existence of efficient weight spectrum algorithms [7], however it is thought that

LDPC codes could potentially have lower error floors [3]. In order to achieve low encoding and decoding complexity,
Colavolpe proposed a new class of codes which combined the advantages of turbo codes with those of LDPC codes, now known as turbo Gallager codes (TGC) [8]. An optimised hybrid decoding arrangement, which uses an iterative decoder followed by a maximum likelihood “In-Place” decoder for turbo Gallager codes over the erasure channel was proposed by Yang et al [9]. Since turbo Gallager codes can be decoded by either BCJR-based decoders, which include turbo decoder and optimised Look-Up Table (LUT) decoder, or belief propagation (BP) decoder, the complexity and performance of each type of iterative decoder for turbo Gallager codes is compared and analysed together with the complexity and performance of the hybrid decoding arrangement.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows: in Section II, we give the background of turbo Gallager codes, and discuss code constraints necessary for the absence of cycles of length 4. General complexity considerations are given. Section III describes the iterative turbo decoder, LUT decoder and the simplified belief-propagation decoder in the erasure channel. Their complexities in terms of equivalent additions are analysed and compared. In Section IV, the complexity of the hybrid decoding arrangement combining each iterative decoder is analysed and discussed. Section V presents the numerical results of some turbo Gallager codes showing the differences between different iterative decoders and hybrid decoding arrangements over the erasure channel. Section VI presents the conclusions of the paper.
II. PRELIMINARIES
A. Turbo Gallager Codes
Turbo Gallager codes are a special type of turbo codes which can be successfully decoded by means of the decoding algorithm used for LDPC codes by properly choosing the component convolutional codes. According to the algebraic rules of selecting the proper turbo codes as TGCs [8], we consider different constituent encoders which are recursive convolutional codes, the codes’ polynomial exponent differences are constrainted to be distinct in order to ensure

1-4244-2424-5/08/$20.00 ©2008 IEEE

253

ICCS 2008

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:24:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE I NUMBER OF EQUIVALENT ADDITIONS PER OPERATION

Operations Addition, Subtraction Multiplication, Division
Comparison Assignment Table Look-up

Number of Equivalent Additions 1 1 1 1 3

TABLE II NUMBER OF COMPUTATIONS FOR STANDARD TURBO DECODING
ALGORITHM

Procedure

ADD

MUL

DIV

CP

ASSI

Proc. A

−

1 + 2 × 2M

− 4 × 2M + 2

2

Proc. B 2 × 2M − 1

2 × 2M

2M

4 × 2M

−

Proc. C 2 × 2M − 1

2 × 2M

2M

4 × 2M

−

Proc. D 2 × 2M − 1

4 × 2M

2

6 × 2M

−

that message-passing decoding can work successfully on the Tanner graph of the overall code due to the absence of cycles of length four. As an example, the standard UMTS turbo codes (15/13), corresponding to the polynomials 1 + x + x3 and 1 + x2 + x3, are suitable as turbo Gallager codes, because for each polynomial the exponent differences are distinct and form the perfect difference sets (0,1,3), (0,2,3) of size 1.
B. Complexity Analysis Considerations
The purpose of the complexity analysis is to determine the relative speed of the different decoders. The decoding algorithms considered for TGC decoding are optimised LUT decoder, standard turbo decoder, belief propagation decoder and “In-Place” decoder. The LUT decoder requires the lookup table to be constructed once, and this has no impact on decoding speed. Consequently the look-up table construction complexity is not included, when comparing the different decoders. A MAP decoding algorithm complexity analysis was presented in [10]. A more thorough investigation on turbo decoding algorithms was performed in [11], where each operation is quantified as a number of “equivalent additions” and logical and mathematical operations have similar complexity. In our analysis, the basic operations performed by the various decoding algorithms in erasure channel include addition (ADD), subtraction (SUB), multiplication (MUL), division (DIV), comparison (CP), assignment (ASSI) and table look-up (LKUP). The ASSI is to assign a relative value to variable. The LKUP is used in the LUT decoder, it corresponds to three equivalent additions, since 3 CPs are used to map the input parameters to the decoded value stored in the lookup table. The number of equivalent additions for the various operations are shown in Table I.
III. COMPARISON OF ITERATIVE DECODERS
A. Turbo Decoder
Due to the properties of the erasure channel, the MAP algorithm is sufficient to provide the accurate conditional probability for each data bit. Thus MAP algorithm is considered as the turbo decoding algorithm. Let n be the length of codeword, ne be the number of data erasures at the input to the decoder, where n¯e = (k · ), k is the length of information bits. With each iteration of the iterative decoder, the number of erasures is reduced. Let nei be the number of erasures at iteration i, and 2M be the number of states in the trellis, where M is the encoder memory, No represents the required number of operations in equivalent additions, ni is the maximum number of iterations.

For the turbo decoding algorithm, the required procedures are classified as follows:

1) Branch Metrics Calculation (Proc. A), requires 2 CPs and 2 ASSIs for each data bit and parity bit, 1 MUL
for updating data bit estimation. For each valid branch, it consists of 2 CPs and 1 MUL. There are 2 × 2M
branches in total.
2) Forward Metrics Calculation (Proc. B), each state con-
sists of 4 CPs, 2 MULs and 1 ADD for both branches. There are 2M states in total. Normalisation requires 2M − 1 ADDs and 2M DIVs.
3) Backward Metrics Calculation (Proc. C), the computa-
tion is the same as that in the forward metric calculation.
4) Soft Decision of the decoded bit (Proc. D), computation
for dt = 1 includes 3 CPs and 2 MULs for each state, where dt is the data bit at time t; there are 2M states in total. Computation for dt = 0 is same as dt = 1. The soft decision is summed by 2M − 1 ADDs for dt = ±1. Normalisation includes 1 ADD and 2 DIVs.

The required computations for the turbo decoding algorithm

are shown in Table II. In a 1/3 rate turbo decoding scheme,

decoding one frame, k trellis sections and 2 corresponding MAP decoders are required. The number of operations NoT for k trellis sections with ni iterations is obtained as:

ni

NoT (k) = (4k + 74k2M )

(1)

i=1

B. Optimised LUT Decoder

Based on the earlier invention of the table look-up based approach for decoding on trellis for convolutional codes [12] over the erasure channel, a further simplified LUT decoding algorithm for turbo Gallager codes over the erasure channel was proposed by Yang [9]. Since non-zero values of α or β are always identical, where α is the forward metric, and β is the backward metric. Consequently the values of αi and βi may be represented by a single bit with a “1” representing a non-zero value state and a “0” representing a zero value state. Thus two binary vectors can be used to represent the values of α and β at each trellis section and a more efficient decoding arrangement may be realised by constructing a Look-Up table, which includes two vectors of binary numbers to represent the final trellis transitions, and one vector to represent the conditions of received bits. In the decoding process, the trellis section containing erased information is processed by looking up the table to directly obtain the corrected information bit, or to indicate decoding failure. For the optimised iterative

254
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:24:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE III NUMBER OF COMPUTATIONS FOR OPTIMISED LUT DECODING
ALGORITHM

Procedure Proc. F Proc. G Proc. H Proc. I Proc. J

ADD
−
−
− 2M 2M+1 − 2

MUL − − − −
2M +1

CP 9 × 2M+1
2M +1 2M +1
−
2

ASSI
− 2M 2M
−
2

LKUP − − − − 1

TABLE IV COMPUTATION REQUIREMENT OF BP DECODING ALGORITHM

Procedure Proc. K Proc. L

ADD −
n−2

MUL −
n−1

CP n−k
−

108

108

Complexity (number of equivalent additions)

LUT decoder, the look-up table is constructed once only. The decoding procedures including look-up table construction are classified as follows:

1) Look-Up Table Construction (Proc. F), for each trellis

section, there are three possible conditions to be con-

sidered. The condition includes a) both data and parity

bits are erased; b) data is erased and parity is not erased,

parity is either 0 or 1. Each branch requires 2 CPs for

its validation, there are 2M+1 branches in total. One

trellis section includes 2M+1 CPs to decide the decoding

success or failure. There are 2 ×

M 2M i=0 2i

possible

trellis sections.

2) α Metric (Proc. G), each state requires 2 CPs and 1

ASSI for its validation, there are 2M states in total.

3) β Metric (Proc. H), its computation is as same as the

Proc. G.

4) Valid Trellis Construction (Proc. I), it consists of 1 ADD

for each state.

5) Hard Decision of the decoded bit (Proc. J), it requires 2M+1 − 2 ADDs and 2M+1 MULs for getting starting

states and ending states; 2 CPs and 1 ASSI for getting

decoding options, and 1 LKUP and 1 ASSI to assign

the decoded bit.

The required computations for the optimised LUT decoding

algorithm are shown in Table III. Thus in a 1/3 rate turbo de-

coding scheme, decoding one frame requires k trellis sections, 2 corresponding LUT decoders and nie decoding operations at each iteration. The required number of operations NoLUT with ni iterations is obtained as:

ni

NoLUT (ne) = (12k2M + (2M+2 + 5)nie)

(2)

i=1

For comparison, we assume k as the maximum number of data
erasures decoded by LUT decoder after ni iterations. Thus there exist maximum k Proc. J for decoding one block, then the required number of operations NoLUTs in term of k is obtained as:

NoLUTs (k) = 12k2M ni + (2M+2 + 5)k

(3)

C. Simplified Message-Passing Decoding

Due to the simplicity of the computation of conditional probabilities over the erasure channel, the belief propagation decoding algorithm may be simplified based on [4]. If at row i, there exists more than one erasure, then there is insufficient information to decode each erasure. Thus these rows are

108

108

108

100

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Iterations (for BP) or Memory Order (for BCJR based)

BP Decoding Turbo Decoding, Iteration=15
LUT Decoding, Iteration=15

Fig. 1. Complexity Comparison between BCJR-based Decoding and BP Decoding

not calculated during the complexity computation excluding checking the subset. Hence, only if subset ci contains one erasure, these computations are counted regarding the decoding complexity. Then the algorithm is classified as follows:

1) Equation Check (Proc. K), each equation consists of n CPs, there are n − k equations in total.
2) Decoding Erasure (Proc. L), for equations containing only one erasure, each of these requires n − 1 MULs and n − 2 ADDs.

The required computations for the BP decoding algorithm is
shown in Table IV. For 1/3 rate turbo Gallager codes, n −
k = 2k. Thus, to decode one frame, the required number of operations NoBP in terms of ne with ni iterations for BP algorithm is obtained as:

ni
NoBP (ne) = (6k2 + (nei−1 − nie)(6k − 3)) (4)
i=1

For comparison purpose, again we assume n − k as the
maximum number of erasures decoded by BP decoder after ni iterations, thus there exist maximum n − k Proc. L for decoding one block, then the required number of operations NoBPs in term of k is obtained as:

NoBPs (k) = 6k2ni + 12k2 − 6k

(5)

The comparison between different iterative decoders for decoding one block, which is n = 1536, k = 512, is shown in Fig. 1. From the figure, it is clear that the complexity of the BCJR-based decoding algorithms is exponential as a function of memory order, meanwhile, the complexity of BP decoding is only increased by the number of iterations. Since the turbo decoder and the LUT decoder both use the BCJR

255
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:24:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

algorithm, their performance will be identical. Ignoring the look-up table construction computation, the LUT algorithm provides reduced complexity compared to the turbo decoder.

IV. MAXIMUM LIKELIHOOD HYBRID DECODER

As it is well known that the Maximum Likelihood decoder (ML) for the erasure channel is practically realisable but with complexity proportional to n3, we consider the “In-Place” algorithm as the maximum likelihood decoding algorithm with reduced complexity [13]. The hybrid decoder scheme includes an inner iterative decoder based on either BCJR based decoding or BP decoding. The iterative decoder is followed by the “In-Place” matrix inversion algorithm, which works on the residual erasures left after iterative decoding.
“In-Place” Algorithm: The “In-Place” algorithm, which is able to achieve maximum likelihood performance [13], is a Gaussian reduction algorithm avoiding the need for columnpermutations over the parity-check matrix. Since the paritycheck matrix structure of turbo Gallager codes is exactly the same as turbo codes, each encoder is independent from each other. The corresponding parity bits are independent, and the parity-check matrix is divided into two independent sections. For the upper section, since the matrix is constructed in diagonal order, there are maximum M equation additions for one equation. For the lower section, since the information columns are permuted by the interleaver, we assume the maximum number of equation additions for one equation is k − 1. Each equation addition requires n ADDs, and by using 32 bit integers to store the equation information, there are n/32 sub-blocks in one single equation. Hence each equation addition requires n/32 ADDs. Hard decision of each decoded bit requires n − 1 MULs and n − 2 ADDs. In decoding one frame, the required number of operations NoIP for “In-Place” algorithm is computed as:

NoIP (ne)

=

3k(ne

−

1)(2k 64

−

ne)

+

3kM ne 32

+

ne(6k

−

3)

(6)

Complexity of Hybrid Decoding Arrangements: Since the

hybrid decoder includes the iterative decoder, the entire com-

plexity is equal to the iterative decoder plus the complexity

of the “In-Place” algorithm to solve the stopping sets, when

stopping sets exist. The blocks decoded correctly by iterative

decoder only include the iterative decoding complexity; and

the blocks, which are unable to be decoded due to the residual

erasures, include the iterative decoding computations and the

“In-place” decoding computations. The required number of

operations for each arrangement by adapting each iterative

decoder is shown in Table V. Since nne i is less than or equal to n0e, which is the input number of erasures to the decoder, each hybrid decoding arrangement provides a reduced complexity

decoding scheme than the “In-Place”decoder on its own. The

convergence performance of each hybrid decoder in term of

complexity only depends on the number of erasures remain-

ing after the iterative decoder, and depends on the iterative

decoder’s performance. It should be noted that as all of the

decoders are maximum likelihood decoders, they all achieve

TABLE V REQUIRED NUMBER OF OPERATIONS FOR DIFFERENT HYBRID
DECODING ARRANGEMENTS

Hybrid Decoders Hybrid (Turbo Decoder) Hybrid (LUT Decoder) Hybrid (BP Decoder)

Iteratively Decoded Blocks
NoT (k) NoLUT (ne) NoBP (ne)

Maximum Likelihood Decoded Blocks
NNoLNoBUoTPT(((knn)ee+))++NNoINPoIoIP(Pn((nennineen)ii))

the same performance. The only difference is the complexity and how this affects the decoding speed. This is primarily determined by the effectiveness of the first stage iterative decoder: the better the performance of the iterative decoder, the less the complexity of the hybrid decoder arrangement.
V. NUMERICAL RESULTS
Computer simulations have been carried out to assess the performance of some example turbo Gallager codes using different decoders on the erasure channel. Since the complexity of BP decoding does not directly depend on the code constraint length, it is capable of decoding turbo Gallager codes having constituent convolutional codes with long constraint lengths, and hence potentially characterised by a large free distance. Meanwhile the decoding complexity of the BCJR-based algorithm grows exponentially with the constituent convolutional code’s constraint length, the alternative iterative decoder cannot be practically used for codes with long constraint lengths. In order to compare the different iterative decoders under the same conditions, we consider the UMTS turbo codes’ structure as the basic code structure, where the code constraint length is increased by adding more “0” in the middle of the generator polynomials. For comparison purposes, we consider the (0,3,4/0,14,34) [8] component code as the reference code, but it should be noted that this code may only be decoded by BP decoder, due to the codes’ constraint length.
The simulation is implemented for turbo Gallager codes, n = 1536, k = 512, in structure of (11..1/1..11) with DRP interleaver, the results of BP decoder are shown in Fig. 2. From the results, it may be seen that the decoding performance is improved by increasing the code constraint length with the runs of “0” inside. When the longer code constraint length is selected, some of the stopping sets caused by the shorter constraint length code are broken and a lower error floor is realised. When the constraint length is chosen to obtain a certain minimum Hamming distance, there only exists the difference of error floors, for instance the difference between TGC (61/43) and TGC (141/103).
Since the performance of TGC (141/103) decoded by BP decoder nearly reaches the best performance in the UMTS structure, and its constraint length is still manageable by turbo decoder, the TGC (141/103) is considered for comparison. The turbo decoding results of codes TGC (15/13) and (141/103) and their BP performances are compared and their hybrid decoding performance and ML performance are shown in Fig. 3. Since turbo decoder and LUT decoder achieve the same performance as they both are based on the BCJR algorithm,

256
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:24:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FER

100

10-1

10-2

10-3

10-4

10-5

10-6

10-7

TGC (15/13) TGC (31/23)

TGC (61/43)

TGC (141/103) 10-8

0.35

0.4

0.45

0.5

0.55

0.6

Erasure Probability

Fig. 2. Results for TGC in (11..1/1..11) Structure with BP Decoder

Frame Error Rate

100

10-1

10-2

10-3

10-4

10-5

10-6

10-7

10-8

10-9

0.45

0.5

0.55

0.6

0.65

0.7

Erasure Probability

TGC (15/13), BP Decoder TGC (141/103), BP Decoder TGC (0,3,4/0,14,34), BP Decoder TGC (141/103), BCJR-based Decoder TGC(15/13), BCJR-based Decoder (n=1536,k=512), Hybrid Decoder (n=1536,k=512), ML Decoder

Fig. 3. Results Comparison between Iterative Decoders and Hybrid Decoders

we use BCJR-based decoder performance to describe both decoders’ performances. According to the results, it is realised that TGC (141/103) may be a better code compared with TGC (0,3,4/0,14,34) due to its better performance with BP decoder, although TGC (0,3,4/0,14,34) has a lower error floor due to its long constraint length. At the other side, the BCJRbased decoders achieve impressive coding gain improvements for both TGC (15/13) and TGC (141/103) compared to the BP decoder. The TGC (15/13) with small encoder memory achieves the best iterative decoder performance. It is clearly seen that for turbo Gallager codes on the erasure channel, BCJR-based decoders converge much better than the BP decoder. This is in contrast to the AWGN channel where turbo Gallager codes with BCJR-based decoding or BP decoding produce similar results.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have compared different iterative decoding algorithms for examples of turbo Gallager codes. Unlike the AWGN channel, we have shown that there exists a performance difference for turbo Gallager codes between BCJRbased decoding and BP decoding on the erasure channel. The

iterative decoding algorithms’ complexity have been compared
between MAP decoding, LUT decoding and belief propagation
decoding in terms of number of equivalent additions. Ignoring
the complexity of look-up table construction, the LUT decoder
is able to achieve a reduced complexity than MAP decoder
and should operate faster in practical decoder implementations.
Although both BCJR-based iterative decoders suffer from an
exponential increase in complexity with encoder memory, the
numerical results have shown that BCJR-based decoding algo-
rithms are able to achieve better performance than BP decoder
in erasure channel for same turbo Gallager codes. Both hybrid
decoding arrangements using the “In-Place” decoder provide
reduced complexity decoding compared to a stand alone “In-
Place” decoder, and all decoders achieve ML performance. The
BCJR-based decoders using low memory turbo Gallager codes
provide the best trade-off between convergence performance
and complexity. Good performance was obtained for the TGC
(15/13) with small memory and is a good candidate for a
hybrid decoding scheme using the LUT decoder with reduced
complexity.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Elias, “Coding for two noisy channels,” in Proc. 3rd London Symposium on Information Theory, London, England, 1955, pp. 61–76, Academic Press, New York.
[2] C. Berrou A. Glavieux and P. Thitimajshima, “Near shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo codes,” in Proc. IEEE International Conference on Communications, Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[3] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[4] M. Luby M. Mitzenmacher M. Shokrollahi and D. Spielman, “Efficient erasure correcting codes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 47, Feb 2001.
[5] D. Proietti I. E. Telatar T. Richardson C. Di and R. Urbanke, “Finitelength analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 48, pp. 1570– 1579, Jun 2002.
[6] E. Rosnes and O. Ytrehus, “Turbo decoding on the binary erasure channel: Finite-length analysis and turbo stopping sets,” in IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Feb 2006.
[7] E. Rosnes and O. Ytrehus, “Improved algorithms for the determination of turbo-code weight distributions,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, 2005.
[8] G. Colavolpe, “Design and performance of turbo gallager codes,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 52, no. 11, Nov 2004.
[9] L. Yang M. Ambroze and M. Tomlinson, “Decoding turbo gallager codes for the erasure channel,” Submitted to IEEE Communication Letter, Feb 2008.
[10] P. Robertson E. Villebrun and P. Hoeher, “A comparison of optimal and sub-optimal map decoding algorithms operating in the log domain,” in IEEE Int. Conf. Comm., Seattle, WA, USA, June 1995, vol. 2, pp. 1009–1013.
[11] P.H.-Y. Wu, “On the complexity of turbo decoding algorithms,” in Proc. 53rd Vehicular Technology Conference,, Spring 2001, vol. 2, pp. 1439–1443.
[12] B. M. Kurkoski P. H. Siegel and J. K. Wolf, “Exact prbability of erasure and a decoding algorithm for convolutional codes on the binary erasure channel,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, San Francisco, CA, Dec 2003, vol. 3, pp. 1741–1745.
[13] J. Cai C. Tjhai M. Tomlinson M. Ambroze and M. Z. Ahmed, “An efficient solution to packet loss: Erasure correcting codes,” in Proc. 4th IASTED International Conference Communication Systems and Networks, Spain, 2005, pp. 224–229, ACTA Press.

257
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:24:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

