2150

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

Reduced-Complexity Min-Sum Algorithm for Decoding LDPC Codes With Low Error-Floor
Fabián Angarita, Javier Valls, Member, IEEE, Vicenç Almenar, and Vicente Torres

Abstract—This paper proposes a low-complexity min-sum algo-

rithm for decoding low-density parity-check codes. It is an im-

proved version of the single-minimum algorithm where the two-

minimum calculation is replaced by one minimum calculation and

a second minimum emulation. In the proposed one, variable cor-

rection factors that depend on the iteration number are introduced

and the second minimum emulation is simplified, reducing by this

way the decoder complexity. This proposal improves the perfor-

mance of the single-minimum algorithm, approaching to the nor-

malized min-sum performance in the water-fall region. Also, the

error-floor region is analyzed for the code of the IEEE 802.3an

standard showing that the trapping sets are decoded due to a slow

down of the convergence of the algorithm. An error-floor free op-

eration below BER

is shown for this code by means of a

field-programmable gate array (FPGA)-based hardware emulator.

A layered decoder is implemented in a 90-nm CMOS technology

achieving 12.8 Gbps with an area of 3.84 mm .

Index Terms—Error correction codes (ECC), error-floor, lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes, VLSI.

I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] have received much research attention in recent years due to their remarkable coding performance and efficiency, very close to the Shannon limit. They have been adopted in several industrial standards such as wireless local area network (IEEE 802.11n) [2], mobile broadband wireless access systems (IEEE 802.16e) [3], wireless personal area network millimeter-wave-based alternative (IEEE 802.15.3c) [4], and 10-Gbps Ethernet communication over unshielded twisted pair (IEEE 802.3an) [5]. Furthermore, LDPC codes have been widely employed in satellite television, space communications, magnetic storage in hard disk drives, and optical networking.
LDPC codes can perform very close to Shannon limit when decoded iteratively using belief propagation (BP) decoding algorithm [6], also called sum-product (SP) algorithm [7]. Although the SP algorithm has the best decoding performance, it requires complex computations that involve large hardware implementations [8]. In order to reduce the complexity of the SP algorithm, a simplification called min-sum (MS) algorithm was proposed in [9]. This simplification consists in approximating the complex computations in the check nodes using summation
Manuscript received July 16, 2013; revised November 20, 2013 and December 24, 2013; accepted January 09, 2014. Date of publication February 18, 2014; date of current version June 24, 2014. This work was supported by the Spanish Ministerio de Econom´ıa y Competitividad under Grants TEC2011-27916 and TEC2012-38558-C02-02. This paper was recommended by Associate Editor J. Ma.
The authors are with the Instituto de Telecomunicaciones y Aplicaciones Multimedia, Universitat Politècnica de València, 46730 Gandia, Spain (e-mail: faanpre@doctor.upv.es; jvalls@eln.upv.es).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2014.2304660

and comparison operations, yielding some significant degrada-

tion in the decoding performance. However, in [10] two mod-

ifications of the MS algorithm, called normalized-MS ( MS)

and offset-MS ( MS), were proposed in order to improve the

performance in exchange for a small increment in complexity.

These algorithms received much interest because of their low

complexity and good performance, which is comparable to that

of the SP algorithm.

To further reduce complexity, the single-minimum MS

(smMS) algorithm was proposed in [11]: it only search the

absolute minimum, the second minimum is estimated applying

a constant correction factor on the absolute minimum. This

algorithm exhibits some performance loss but reduces the

hardware complexity of the check-node units. It was used in

[11] to design a fully-parallel bit-serial LDPC decoder for the

LDPC code of IEEE 802.3an standard and in [12] to design a

flexible gigabit decoder for Shift-LDPC codes.

Many applications, including optical communications,

10-Gbps Ethernet, deep-space communications and storage

systems, require very low bit-error rate (BER), below

.

Nevertheless, LDPC codes suffer from the so called error-floor

phenomenon: at high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) the bit error

rate (BER) curve exhibits a sudden change in its slope, so

the correction capability of the code is deteriorated. It has

been found that small trapping-sets are the main cause of the

error-floor [13]. Trapping sets are related to the structure of

the code, specifically to the cycles in the factor graph. Error

bits that fall in the trapping-set produce false satisfied check

nodes that make their reliability values to grow reinforcing

themselves as wrong bits. Different strategies have been pro-

posed to lower the error-floor: concatenation with other code

[14], averaged decoding [15], informed dynamic schedule [16],

bi-mode and bit-pinning decoders [14], backtracking [17], and

biasing message [18]. Among them only concatenation and

biasing message are suitable to be implemented in high-speed

VLSI decoders requiring gigabit operation.

In this paper, the smMS algorithm is enhanced by intro-

ducing variable correction factors dependent on the iteration

number. The smMS algorithm requires an exhaustive search

to determine if more than one absolute minimum value exists.

This search has a high computational cost. In this paper we pro-

pose an alternative to this search which reduces the complexity

of the check-node update operation without penalizing the

performance. The proposed algorithm is called variable-weight

MS (vwMS) and improves convergence and performance of

the smMS algorithm. Its performance is similar to that of the

well-known MS and MS algorithms in the waterfall region,

whereas outperforms MS in the error-floor region lowering

the error-floor by various orders of magnitude. The behavior

in the error-floor region has been analyzed with the help of a

1549-8328 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:14:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ANGARITA et al.: REDUCED-COMPLEXITY MIN-SUM ALGORITHM

2151

field-progammable gate array (FPGA)-based hardware emulator for the code of the IEEE 802.3an standard. Finally, we give implementation results for the proposed algorithm using a high-speed layered decoder architecture for the RS(2048, 1723) LDPC code. A throughput of 12.8 Gbps with an area of 3.84 mm is achieved using a 90-nm CMOS library.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the LDPC codes and the min-sum based algorithms. The proposed algorithm is detailed in Section III. Sections IV and V are devoted to analyze the performance of the algorithms in the waterfall and error-floor regions, respectively. Section VI presents the implementation results of a Gbps decoder using the proposed algorithm and comparisons with other published decoders. Finally, the conclusions are summarized in Section VII.

II. LDPC CODES AND DECODING ALGORITHMS

A binary LDPC code is a linear block code specified by a

sparse

parity-check matrix , where represents the

number of parity checks and represents the number of bits in

the code block. It can be represented by a bipartite Tanner graph

[19] using as incidence matrix, with check nodes in one

class and variable nodes in the other. An edge connects the

check-node to the variable-node if and only if

is

nonzero. The number of 1’s in a row is called the row weight

and the number of 1’s in a column, column weight. An LDPC

code is called regular when the row and column weights do not

change along the matrix; otherwise, it is an irregular code.

Structured LDPC codes [20] are the most popular because

they have a very good performance and allow low-complexity

hardware implementations. These codes are generated by parti-

tioning matrix into

square submatrices of size ,

so

and

.

Let us denote the set of (neighbor) bits that participate in

check by

and the set of (neighbor)

checks that participate in bit by

.

Also, let

denote the set with bit excluded and

the set with parity check excluded. Assume that

a codeword

is transmitted over an addi-

tive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel with zero mean and

variance using binary phase-shift keying (BPSK) signaling,

and let

be the corresponding received se-

quence and

the intrinsic channel reliability,

where

.

Step 2 (check-node update): for

and

sign

(1)

Hard Decision: The iteration process stops when the maximum number of iterations, , is reached, or when all parity checks are satisfied using the hard decisions calculated as

otherwise.

In practice, the min operation with exclusion (1) for each

check-node is reduced to the computation of two values,

the minimum and the second minimum, and a selection of

the proper one for each output: when the output of the

check-node is the one that generates the first minimum,

the second minimum is used. In hardware implementation,

two minimum values for inputs are calculated using a two

minimum comparator tree [21], whose hardware complexity is

additions/subtractions and

multiplexers.

1) Normalized-MS and Offset-MS Algorithms: An improve-

ment to the MS algorithm was proposed in [10] in order to di-

minish the performance degradation. It consists in using a cor-

rection factor in the check-node update rule (1). When a correc-

tion factor is subtracted from the minimum value it is called

MS algorithm and when a correction factor multiplies the

minimum it is called MS algorithm.

The performances achieved by MS and MS algorithms are

very close to that of SP algorithm. For optimum performance,

the correction factors should vary with the SNR and the itera-

tion number, but in practice they are kept constant for simplicity

assuming some performance loss.

2) Single-Minimum MS Algorithm: The smMS algorithm

was first proposed in [11]. This algorithm modifies the check-

node update operation of the MS algorithm (1), eliminating the

exclusion from the min computation and including a weight

factor to emulate the use of the second minimum that usually

has a higher value. Moreover, in [12] a normalization factor

is included in order to improve the algorithm performance. The

check-node update operation of the smMS algorithm is shown

in

and

A. Min-Sum Algorithm

The MS algorithm is an iterative two-phase message-passing

algorithm: at th iteration, first, the variable-to-check messages

that represent an estimate of the a posteriori log-likelihood ratio

(LLR) are computed and sent to the corresponding neighbor

check nodes. Second, the check-to-variable messages are com-

puted and sent back to the neighbor variable nodes. The MS

algorithm is carried out during

iterations, as

follows.

Initialization:

Step 1 (bit-node update): for

and

otherwise (2)

where

and indicates the number

of

messages whose magnitude is equal to the minimum,

.

As can be seen in (2), the two minimum operations of the

MS algorithm are converted to a minimum operation plus an

addition. The hardware complexity of this operation is addi-

tions and

multiplexers, then, compared to the two min-

imum operations, this algorithm requires almost the 50% of

additions/subtractions and nearly 66% less multiplexers. The

computation of introduces some complexity, however, the

overall complexity is lower than that of the MS algorithm.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:14:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2152

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

III. PROPOSED ALGORITHMS
The smMS algorithm performance is worse in general than the performance of the MS algorithm and in some cases it fails to converge, as shown later. With the purpose of improving its performance and convergence we propose a modification: the use of an iteration dependent weight factor, . Analyzing the behavior of the first and second minimum values on each iteration of the MS algorithm, we observed that these values and their difference increase in every new iteration; therefore, the correction factor should be increased with each iteration in order to maintain the proportion between the first and second minimum. This new algorithm is called variable weight MS (vwMS) and its check-node update operation is shown in

TABLE I OPTIMUM VALUES OF NORMALIZATION AND WEIGHT FACTORS

and
otherwise. (3)

As in the smMS algorithm, vwMS also requires the compar-

ison between the minimum value with all the messages

to determine if there exist more than one minimum value .

In order to reduce the complexity given by this exhaustive com-

parison we divide the input messages into two groups, even and

odd, and we calculate the minimum of each group (4). The min-

imum value is then calculated as the minimum between the

even and odd minimum values,

. To de-

termine if more than one minimum exist, the even and odd min-

imums are compared: if both have the same value, more than

one minimum exists and, if the two values are different we as-

sume that only one minimum exists, as shown in

value between 0 and 4 in steps of 0.25, and a threshold vector

, which indicates the iteration range for each

weight, i.e., for iterations 0 to

the weight factor is ,

for iterations to

is , for iterations to

is

and for the rest ( to ) the weight factor is .

To find the best weight and threshold vectors the next proce-

dure was followed. The starting point was the smMS, which is

the vwMS with a constant weight for the whole iteration range.

First, the iteration range was divided into two halves and the

weight factor was evaluated from 0 to 4 in steps of 0.25 using

the next condition: the weight factor applied to the second iter-

(4)

ation region (the one with the last iterations) is always higher than the one of the first iteration region. This condition allows

the algorithm to emulate the MS algorithm where the difference

between the first and second minimum increases as the number

and

of iterations increases. Next, beginning with an Eb/N0 of 3.8 dB

(which gives an FER

when the MS is employed), an

otherwise.

exhaustive simulation with the above restrictions was carried (5) out. Then, the sets of weight factors that gave a performance loss

This simplified version of the vwMS algorithm is called svwMS algorithm. Simulation results showed that this approximation does not affect the algorithm performance.

lower than 1 dB with respect to MS were selected (survivor

sets). After that, the Eb/N0 value was incremented by 0.2 dB

and the survivor sets were tested again. This process was carried

out iteratively up to Eb/N0

dB FER

. So, at the

IV. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS: WATERFALL REGION

end we selected the set with the best performance for the case of the decoding iteration range divided into two halves. The pre-

The performance of the proposed algorithm (svwMS) was vious process was also carried out for the iteration range divided

evaluated using different LDPC codes from the IEEE 802.15.3c into 4 and 8 parts. From this experiment we observed that the

[4] and IEEE 802.3an [5] standards. For comparison purposes, division of the iteration range in more than 4 parts does not rep-

the performance of the MS, MS and smMS algorithms resent any significant advantage in terms of performance. Fur-

were also evaluated. The algorithms were simulated over thermore, we also observed that the weight values vary with the

an AWGN channel with zero mean and variance using SNR for best performance, as happens with correction factors

BPSK signaling. The maximum number of iterations was set of the MS and MS; however, in this paper fixed values were

to 30. Moreover, various normalization and weight factors, used for all the SNR range assuming a small performance loss.

selected with the method explained below, were simulated but On the other hand, as we restricted our experiments to iteration

only those that yield the best performances were used for the regions of the same length and weight values limited by a quan-

comparisons. The normalization factors , used in the MS, tization step of 0.25, better configuration values that improve the

smMS and svwMS algorithms, have the form

, where performance might exist. Table I shows the best found values of

. The smMS algorithm was evaluated with weight normalization and weight factors for the different LDPC codes

factors ranging from 0 to 4 in steps of 0.25. For the svwMS used to evaluate the performance.

algorithm the variable weight factors were defined by a weight The error performance curves for the IEEE 802.15.3c codes,

vector

, where each element has a in terms of frame-error rate (FER) as a function of SNR, are

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:14:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ANGARITA et al.: REDUCED-COMPLEXITY MIN-SUM ALGORITHM

TABLE II PERFORMANCE LOSS DUE TO QUANTIZATION AT FER

2153

Fig. 1. FER curves performance for the IEEE 802.15.3c LDPC code .

represented by

, where indicates the total number of bits

including the sign bit and indicates the number of fractional

bits. Three quantization schemes for the channel reliability were

used: [5:1], [6:2], and [7:2]. The same schemes were used in the

variable-to-check messages, while in the check-to-variable mes-

sages the number of bits was increased by , according to the

factor, i.e.,

when

when

and

when

. The normaliza-

tion and weight factors used in the finite precision analysis are

the same used in the floating point performance analysis, listed

in Table I.

Table II shows the performance loss due to the effect of quan-

tization of the MS, MS, smMS, and svwMS algorithms for the

IEEE 802.15.3c and IEEE 802.3an LDPC codes. The perfor-

mance loss is measured at an FER of

and is referred to the

performance of the unquantized MS algorithm.

Fig. 2. FER curves performance for the IEEE 802.3an LDPC code .

It can be seen that with the [5:1] scheme, the performance losses of the MS and svwMS algorithms are around 0.21 dB, while with the other schemes ([6:2] and [7:2]) they are close

to 0.1 dB. It is important to highlight the fact that the perfor-

shown in Fig. 1. These codes have a length of 672 with rates

1/2, 3/4, and 7/8. It is important to notice that the smMS algo-

rithm exhibits a great performance degradation at FER

for rates 1/2 and 3/4, and with rate 7/8 its performance is com-

parable to that of the MS algorithm, with only 0.02 dB gain at

FER

. By contrast, the svwMS algorithm outperforms

the MS algorithm, at FER

, by 0.24, 0.13, and 0.12 dB

with rates 1/2, 3/4, and 7/8, respectively. Furthermore, with rate

7/8 the performance loss compared to the MS is lower than

0.1 dB.

Fig. 2 shows the FER performance curves of the MS, MS,

smMS, and svwMS algorithms for the IEEE 802.3an LDPC

code. This code has a length of 2048 with rate 1723/2048 and

it is suitable for high throughput applications (10 Gbps). It can

be seen that at FER of

the proposed algorithm (svwMS)

only has 0.03 dB of performance loss, compared to the MS al-

gorithm, while the smMS algorithm performance loss is around

mance at FER

with the [6:2] scheme is almost the

same as with the [7:2] scheme; however, as it will be shown

in the next section, their performances at low error rates differ

considerably. The difference between the performances of the

MS and svwMS algorithms for the IEEE 802.15.3c codes is

independent of the quantization scheme, being 0.3 dB for the

1/2 rate, 0.2 dB for the 3/4 rate and 0.07 for the 7/8 rate. Nev-

ertheless, with the code of the IEEE 802.3an standard the per-

formance gap between the two algorithms is reduced with the

[6:2] and [7:2] schemes, obtaining practically the same perfor-

mance. On the other hand, the smMS algorithm fails to converge

at FER

with the 1/2 and 3/4 rate codes of the IEEE

802.15.3c standard. With the other codes, the performance loss

with the [5:1] scheme is close to 0.3 dB and with the [6:2] and

[7:2] schemes is around 0.14 dB and the performance gap be-

tween this algorithm and the MS algorithm is independent of

the quantization scheme.

0.32 dB.

V. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS: ERROR-FLOOR REGION

A. Finite Precision

In this section we analyze the behavior of the proposed algo-

A finite precision analysis with uniform quantization was per- rithm for high SNR, in the low FER region (below

). In

formed by simulation, under the same conditions of the floating order to obtain the performance curve at this region in a reason-

point analysis previously presented. The quantization scheme is able time, an FPGA-based emulator for structured LDPC codes

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:14:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2154

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

was implemented [22]. This emulator also allows us to capture

the inputs of the decoder that produce errors, which is useful to

analyze how the decoding algorithms behave when the errors

fall in trapping-sets.

The emulator first generates the received symbols, which

correspond to a codeword that is transmitted over an AWGN

channel. Next, the received symbols are decoded and the

resulting bits are compared with the transmitted codeword to

calculate the number of erroneous bits. The LDPC decoder is

implemented with a memory-based partially-parallel architec-

ture [23] and implements early termination to achieve a high

throughput at high SNRs, where most of the received frames

can be decoded in one iteration. Also, the received symbols

generation is parallelized to avoid bottlenecks when the decoder

throughput is maximum. The Gaussian noise for the AWGN

channel emulation is generated with the low-complexity ar-

chitecture proposed in [24]: a uniformly distributed random

sample is produced using a 64-bit combined Tausworthe gener-

ator [25] and the obtained sample is transformed into Gaussian

using an approximation of the inverse cumulative distribution

function (ICDF). The Tausworthe generator yields a very high

periodicity, around , thereby the AWGN generator achieves

a tail of

in the Gaussian distribution.

We focused our attention on the RS(2048, 1723) LDPC code of

the IEEE 802.3an standard, as it requires an error-free operation

below the BER level of

(

of FER) [5], [18]. This code

is constructed using an algebraic method and it is based on short-

ened Reed–Solomon codes with two information symbols [26].

The code is regular and structured, with

and

. The error-floor analysis was performed with the MS

and svwMS algorithms. They were simulated with various quan-

tization schemes and multiple normalization and weight factors.

The maximum number of iterations was set to 30 and the number

of frame errors to be detected was set to 100.

The performance of the MS, vwMS, and svwMS algorithms

is compared in Fig. 3. Although many different combinations

of normalization and weight factors were tested for vwMS and

svwMS algorithms, only the ones that yield the best perfor-

mance are presented. First, it can be seen that svwMS has as

good performance as vwMS for

; this behavior has

also been observed in all the configurations tested, although

they are not shown for the sake of clarity. As expected, the

error-floor is lower when the integer part of the quantization

scheme is increased. For example, Fig. 3 shows the [6:2] and

[7:2] quantization schemes for MS algorithm (with

)

and svwMS algorithm (with factors

and

), in both cases the error-floor

is one order of magnitude lower when the [7:2] quantization

scheme is used. If we compare MS algorithm with svwMS al-

gorithm, it can be seen that the performance of the later, using

quantization scheme [6:2] is better than the former with quan-

tization scheme [7:2]. It is also observed that if we are inter-

ested in reducing the error-floor, there is a better set of fac-

tors for the svwMS algorithm:

; using them, the algorithm under-performs

the MS by 0.14 dB in the waterfall region, but it guarantees

an operation free of error-floor below a BER of

(FER of

).

Finally, we have also checked the performance of the svwMS

algorithm using the layered schedule. We have observed that its

Fig. 3. Performance of the quantized MS and svwMS algorithms for the IEEE 802.3an LDPC code.
Fig. 4. Graph induced by the (8, 8) trapping-set.
performance is equivalent to using the flooding schedule which is the one represented in Fig. 3.
A. Trapping Sets Errors in the waterfall region are mostly random-like errors
and their correction depends on the minimum distance of the code. However, it has been found that small trapping-sets are responsible for the error floors of many LDPC codes [13]. An
trapping-set is defined as a set of variable-nodes (VNs) which induces a subgraph with odd-degree check-nodes (CNs) and an arbitrary number of even-degree CNs. The hardware emulator was used to analyse how the proposed algorithm decodes the trapping-sets. First, it was configured to simulate high SNR values (error-floor region with Eb/N0 values of 4.2, 4.6, and 5.0 dB). Next, the input values (data packets) that produce erroneous decoding words are stored. Finally, the stored packets were simulated in Matlab to detect which ones produced errors due to trapping-sets, and these ones have been used in our analysis.
It is known that the error-floor in the performance curve of the RS(2048, 1723) code is mainly due to (8, 8) trapping-sets [27]. Fig. 4 shows the graph induced by the (8, 8) trapping-set. It is composed of 8 VNs and 28 CNs. The CNs are divided into two groups: 20 nodes of degree-2 (rightmost) and 8 nodes of degree-1 (leftmost). Besides, all the 20 degree-2 CNs are connected to the 8 VNs forming subgraphs with girth equal to 6. When the erroneous bits fall in the 8 VNs of the graph, the 20 degree-2 CNs are falsely satisfied (FS-CNs), as each one receives two error bits, and the 8 degree-1 ones are correctly unsatisfied CNs (CU-CN). In such a case, each one of the 8 VNs of the subgraph receives five wrong messages from FS-CNs and one correct message from one CU-CN.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:14:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ANGARITA et al.: REDUCED-COMPLEXITY MIN-SUM ALGORITHM

2155

Fig. 6. Histograms of the soft-decision values of the correct and erroneous bits per iteration. (a) Correct bits. (b) Erroneous bits.

• The VN-TS always receive five messages with moderate

value from FS-CNs and one message with higher value

Fig. 5. Soft-decision values evolution per iteration. (a) MS algorithm. (b) svwMS algorithm.

from CU-CNs. • A bit is trapped when the addition of the five moderate
values from the FS-CNs is higher than the high value re-

ceived from the CU-CN. During the iterative decoding

When the error-floor occurs in a very reliable channel, the re-

process both, the moderate values from the FS-CNs and

ceived soft-decision values are mostly high and the ones that fall

the higher value from CU-CN, get higher and higher. So,

in a trapping-set usually exhibit low or moderate values [27].

the FS-CNs are reinforced in their falsely satisfied deci-

For the sake of simplicity in the analysis of the trapping-sets,

sion, remaining trapped.

two assumptions are made: 1) only 8 received bits are erroneous The trapping process can be shown with a real example. The

and fall in the trapping-set; 2) all the reliability values outside reliability values that cause the MS algorithm to fall in a trap-

the trapping-set are higher than the ones inside. In such circum- ping-set were captured with the FPGA-based hardware simu-

stances and taking into account that the CNs degree of the trap- lator. Fig. 5(a) shows the soft-decisions (vertical axis) of the

ping-set subgraph is 32, we have the following behavior.

2048 bits in the code block (horizontal axis) after each decoding

• Each FS-CNs receives two messages with moderate value iteration. The 8 bits that belong to the trapping-set are marked

from two VNs belonging to the trapping-set (VN-TS) and with a circle and the others with a cross. It is assumed that the

30 messages with higher value from the VNs outside. In all-zero codeword is transmitted using BPSK modulation

such conditions those CNs, due to the MS algorithm oper- with mapping

. Thereby, positive values in the

ation, will always propagate the moderate values received soft-decisions are interpreted as correct. In this example, the re-

from VN-TS, which have the lowest values: one of the two ceived block (iteration 0) has 26 error bits from which only 4 of

VN-TS has sent the minimum value and the other one the them fall in a trapping-set. As can be seen, the reliability values

second minimum.

of the bits inside the trapping-set have moderate values (below

• Each CU-CNs receives one message with moderate value 5) and the majority of the bits outside the set have higher values.

from one VN-TS and 31 messages with higher values from After the initial iteration, 7 of the 8 bits in the trapping-set are

VNs outside the TS. As the minimum value will be the one erroneous. In the second iteration all the bits inside the trap-

sent by VN-TS, the CU-CN will send back to the VN-TS ping-set are erroneous and all the bits outside are correct. In the

the second minimum, which have higher values than the next iterations all the bits are reinforced in their decision in-

ones received from the VN-TS.

creasing their soft-decision values: the 8 bits in the trapping-set

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:14:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2156

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

Fig. 7. (a) Architecture of the parallel-layered decoder for vwMS algorithm. (b) Check node update architecture for svwMS algorithm.

become more and more negative and the rest more and more standard flooding schedule, the layered schedule speeds up the

positive.

convergence of the decoding algorithms, yielding a reduction

The evolution of the soft-decisions from the 2048 bits for the in the total number of iterations required to achieve a given

proposed algorithm is shown in Fig. 5(b). In this case the same performance. From the hardware point of view, in the layered

received symbols of the MS algorithm example are used. As architecture the VN update units have a reduced complexity

can be seen it has a similar behavior as MS in the 1st iteration. due to the fact that the VN and CN update units can be both

However, in the second and fourth iteration the bits inside the efficiently implemented as a single computational unit.

trapping-set hardly increase their values whereas the majority of The parity-check matrix of the IEEE 802.3an standard has

the other bits increase their values. This slow convergence of the a dimension of 384 2048 and column and row weights of 6

bits in the trapping-set avoids them being trapped: soft-decision and 32, respectively. In the layered architecture this matrix is

message received from the CU-CN is increasing on each itera- divided into six partial parity-check matrices (layers) each of

tion while the five messages received from the FS-CNs hardly size 64 2048 and column-weight equal to 1. Therefore, 64

increase or maintain their values. In next iterations the bits in the computational units are required.

trapping-set are slowly corrected. The speed of convergence de- Fig. 7(a) shows the complete computational units for vwMS

pends on the weighting factor associated with the iteration, the algorithm and Fig. 7(b) shows only the modified check-node up-

higher the factor the faster the convergence.

date unit architecture for the svwMS algorithm. In the first case

In order to verify the previous analysis, 900 frames that lead [vwMS - Fig. 7(a)] the output of the minimum tree, which cor-

to trapping-set errors with the MS where captured with the responds to the first minimum (min1), is compared with all the

hardware simulator. In Fig. 6 the histograms of the soft-deci-

messages to determine if there is only one message equal

sion values of the correct and erroneous bits per iteration are to the minimum value or not. If there is only one minimum, the

shown for the MS and svwMS algorithms. As can be seen, “Min2 Estimate” block generates the second minimum (min2)

the soft-decision of erroneous bits increase their values faster adding the variable weight to the min1 value. On the other

with the MS than with the proposed one (svwMS). In the hand, if more than one minimum is found the “Min2 Estimate”

latter algorithm, the values are maintained close to the deci- block equals min2 to min1 value. Finally, the MUX blocks

sion threshold, while the reliability values of the correct bits select the proper minimum value according to the position of

grow. The histograms reflect that the convergence of the MS the first minimum (pos min1) to obtain the extrinsic informa-

algorithm is faster than the convergence of the svwMS. How- tion at the outputs of the check-node update unit. In the second

ever, the rapid convergence of the MS algorithm also means case svwMS - Fig. 7(b)] there are two minimum tree blocks,

the bits in the trapping-set are trapped faster to an erroneous which calculate the minimum and its position from the mes-

value. The svwMS convergence is slower because in this algo- sages

with even and odd indexes. The “Min Values Esti-

rithm the second minimum is underestimated, so it avoids large mate” block obtains the minimum value, min1, comparing the

changes in the magnitudes of the messages preventing the bits even and odd minimums. Additionally, this block obtains the

being trapped.

second minimum (min2) as follows: if the odd and even mini-

mums are equal, min2 is equal to min1; otherwise the variable

VI. HARDWARE IMPLEMENTATION
The vwMS and svwMS algorithms were implemented using the parallel-layered decoder architecture [28] for the

weight is added to min1 in order to calculate min2. With this approach 32 comparators are saved maintaining the same performance.

IEEE 802.3an LDPC code. This architecture uses the layered decoding schedule, where the parity-check matrix is parti-

A. Implementation Results

tioned into partial parity-check matrices, called layers. The Table III shows the post-layout ASIC implementation results

layers are decoded in successive order from

, and of the parallel-layered decoders with the vwMS, svwMS and

the processing of each layer depends on the messages

MS algorithms and for the IEEE 802.3an LDPC code. The de-

obtained in the immediately preceding layer. Compared to the coders were codified in VHDL and implemented with Cadence

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:14:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ANGARITA et al.: REDUCED-COMPLEXITY MIN-SUM ALGORITHM
TABLE III ASIC IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS OF DIFFERENT ALGORITHMS AND ARCHITECTURES FOR THE RS(6, 32, 6) LDPC CODE

2157

tools using a Faraday 90-nm CMOS standard cell library. Al- The behavior in the error-floor region has been analyzed with

gorithms were implemented for the [6:2] quantization scheme, the help of an FPGA-based hardware emulator for the code

as it is the one used in the other published decoders. By way of of the IEEE 802.3an standard. The proposed algorithm has an

comparison, implementation results of existing decoders in the error-floor free operation below BER

FER

,

literature for the IEEE 802.3an LDPC code are also included. which is reached thanks to the underestimation of the second

In order to make a fair comparison the area (A) and maximum minimum that slows down its convergence, helping the bits to

frequency values are scaled to the 90-nm technology using avoid being trapped in the trapping sets.

the factors given in [29]. The second column of the tables indi- A layered decoder has been implemented in a 90-nm CMOS

cates the performance at an FER of

and the column technology showing that the complexity reduction of the algo-

indicates the throughput achieved with the maximum operation rithm is translated into the hardware architecture: a throughput

frequency . The throughput per area ratio (Th/A) is used as a of 12.8 Gbps was achieved with an area of 3.8 mm .

measure of efficiency. The average power consumption results are measured with the maximum operating frequency using a

REFERENCES

supply voltage of 1.2 V. The energy per bit values are also in-

cluded in the table.

As shown in Table III, the highest throughput is achieved

by the decoder implemented in [32]. However, it requires al-

most three times the area of the svwMS implementation and its

throughput per area ratio is 10% worst. Moreover, the layered

implementation with the proposed algorithm (svwMS) gives the

best throughput per area ratio and also is the implementation

with the least area (only 3.84 mm ). In terms of energy per

bit ratio the lowest value is achieved by the implementation of

[32] followed by the proposed svwMS. However, the one of

[32] has worse throughput per area ratio and, furthermore, it

does not correct the error floor. Comparing the values of SNR

at FER

, the implementations in [33] and [18] outper-

form the proposed one by 0.02 dB and 0.05 dB, respectively.

However, one important thing to remark is that only the vwMS

and svwMS implementations and the one proposed in [18] per-

forms well in the low error region, with an error-floor below

[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks Part 11: Wireless Lan Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications, IEEE Std. 802.11n-2009, Oct. 2009.
[3] IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks Part 16: Air Interface for Broadband Wireless Access Systems, IEEE Std. 802.162009, May 2009.
[4] IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks Part 15.3: Wireless Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications for High Rate Wireless Personal Area Networks (WPANs), IEEE Std. 802.15.3c-2009, Oct. 2009.
[5] IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks Part 3: Carrier Sense Multiple Access With Collision Detection (CSMA/CD) Access Method and Physical Layer Specifications, IEEE Unapproved Draft Std. P802.3/D2.2, 2008.
[6] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[7] F. Kschischang, B. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[8] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes

BER

FER

.

VII. CONCLUSION

based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001. [9] M. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propa-

A low-complexity algorithm for decoding LDPC codes has been proposed in this paper. It is an improved version of the single-minimum algorithm with two modifications: 1) the introduction of variable correction factors dependent on the iteration number and 2) the simplification of the condition to apply the correction factors. It has been shown for two LDPC codes with different features (the quasi-cyclic LDPC codes of the IEEE 802.15.3c standard and the one based on Reed–Solomon of the IEEE 802.3an standard) that the proposed algorithm exhibits better BER performance than the single minimum one, approaching the min-sum algorithm in the water-fall region.

gation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May 1999. [10] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu, “Re-
duced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, Aug. 2005. [11] A. Darabiha, A. Carusone, and F. Kschischang, “A bit-serial approximate min-sum LDPC decoder and FPGA implementation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), May 2006, p. 4. [12] C. Zhang, Z. Wang, J. Sha, L. Li, and J. Lin, “Flexible LDPC decoder design for multigigabit-per-second applications,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I: Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 116–124, Jan. 2010. [13] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Annu. Conf. Communication, Control and Computing, Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435. [14] Y. Han and W. Ryan, “Low-floor decoders for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1663–1673, 2009.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:14:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2158

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

[15] S. Landner and O. Milenkovic, “Algorithmic and combinatorial analysis of trapping sets in structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Wireless Networks, Communications and Mobile Computing, Jun. 2005, vol. 1, pp. 630–635.
[16] Y. Gong, X. Liu, W. Yecai, and G. Han, “Effective informed dynamic scheduling for belief propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 10, pp. 2683–2691, Oct. 2011.
[17] X. Chen, J. Kang, S. Lin, and V. Akella, “Hardware implementation of a backtracking-based reconfigurable decoder for lowering the error floor of Quasi-Cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I: Reg. Papers, vol. 58, no. 12, pp. 2931–2943, Dec. 2011.
[18] Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic, “An efficient 10 Gbase-T ethernet LDPC decoder design with low error floors,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 843–855, Apr. 2010.
[19] R. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[20] J. Lu and J. Moura, “Structured LDPC codes for high-density recording: Large girth and low error floor,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 208–213, Feb. 2006.
[21] C.-L. Wey, M.-D. Shieh, and S.-Y. Lin, “Algorithms of finding the first two minimum values and their hardware implementation,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I: Reg. Papers, vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 3430–3437, Dec. 2008.
[22] F. Angarita, V. Torres, A. Perez-Pascual, and J. Valls, “Highthroughput FPGA-based emulator for structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. 19th IEEE Int. Conf. Electronics, Circuits and Systems (ICECS), Dec. 2012, pp. 404–407.
[23] S.-M. Kim, C.-S. Park, and S.-Y. Hwang, “A novel partially parallel architecture for high-throughput LDPC decoder for DVB-S2,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 820–825, May 2010.
[24] R. Gutierrez, V. Torres, and J. Valls, “Hardware architecture of a Gaussian noise generator based on inversion method,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, vol. 59, no. 8, pp. 501–505, Aug. 2012.
[25] P. L’Ecuyer, “Maximally equidistributed combined Tausworthe generators,” Math. Comput., vol. 65, no. 213, pp. 203–213, 1996.
[26] I. Djurdjevic, J. Xu, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, and S. Lin, “A class of lowdensity parity-check codes constructed based on Reed–Solomon codes with two information symbols,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 317–319, Jul. 2003.
[27] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam, and M. Wainwright, “Design of LDPC decoders for improved low error rate performance: Quantization and algorithm choices,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 11, pp. 3258–3268, Nov. 2009.
[28] K. Zhang, X. Huang, and Z. Wang, “A high-throughput LDPC decoder architecture with rate compatibility,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I: Reg. Papers, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 839–847, Apr. 2011.
[29] J. M. Rabaey, A. Chandrakasan, and B. Nikolic, Digital Integrated Circuits—A Design Perspective, 2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 2004.
[30] Y.-L. Ueng, C.-J. Yang, K.-C. Wang, and C.-J. Chen, “A multimode shuffled iterative decoder architecture for high-rate RS-LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I: Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 2790–2803, Oct. 2010.
[31] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. Kschischang, “Power reduction techniques for LDPC decoders,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, no. 8, pp. 1835–1845, Aug. 2008.
[32] T. Mohsenin, D. N. Truong, and B. M. Baas, “A low-complexity message-passing algorithm for reduced routing congestion in LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I: Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 1048–1061, May 2010.
[33] A. Cevrero, Y. Leblebici, P. Ienne, and A. Burg, “A 5.35 mm 10 Gbase-T ethernet LDPC decoder chip in 90 nm CMOS,” in Proc. IEEE Asian Solid State Circuits Conf. (A-SSCC), Nov. 2010, pp. 1–4.
[34] D. Bao, X. Chen, Y. Huang, C. Wu, Y. Chen, and X. Y. Zeng, “A single-routing layered LDPC decoder for 10 Gbase-T ethernet in 130 nm CMOS,” in Proc. 17th Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conf. (ASP-DAC), Feb. 2012, pp. 565–566.

Fabián Angarita received the B.S. degree in electronics engineering from the Universidad Javeriana, Bogota, Colombia, in 2001, and the M.S. degree in communications technologies, systems and networks and Ph.D. degree in electronics engineering, in 2008 and 2013, respectively, both from the Universidad Politécnica de Valencia (UPV), Valencia, Spain.
He works as a Research Engineer at the Instituto de Telecomunicaciones y Aplicaciones Multimedia, which belongs to the UPV. His current research interests include the design of FPGA-based systems, error control coding and digital signal processing, and digital communications.
Javier Valls (M’01) received the telecommunication engineering degree from the Universidad Politécnica de Catalunya, Spain, and the Ph.D. degree in telecommunication engineering from the Universidad Politecnica de Valencia, Spain, in 1993 and 1999, respectively.
He has been with the Department of Electronics at the Universidad Politécnica de Valencia since 1993, where he currently is an Associate Professor. His current research interests include the design of FPGA-based systems, computer arithmetic, VLSI signal processing, and digital communications.
Vicenç Almenar received the Ingeniero de Telecomunicacion and Ph.D. degrees from the Universitat Politècnica de València (UPV) in 1993 and 1999, respectively.
In 2000, he was in a Postdoctoral Research stay at the Centre for Communications Systems Research, University of Surrey, U.K., where he was involved in research on synchronization techniques for OFDM systems. He is currently an Associate Professor and Deputy Director at the Departamento de Comunicaciones, UPV. His current research interests include OFDM, MIMO, and signal processing techniques for wireless and optical communication systems.
Vicente Torres works as an Associate Professor at the Universidad Politécnica de Valencia (UPV), Spain. He graduated as a Telecommunications Engineer at the UPV in 1994 and he was awarded with the Ph.D. degree, from the same University, in 2001.
He is currently a member of the Institute for Telecommunications and Multimedia Applications. His research work is focused on digital signal processing in electronic devices. He has contributed to more than 50 papers in renowned technical journals and conferences and has been an active member of several financially aided research projects.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:14:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

