2014 International Conference on Control, Instrumentation, Communication and Computational Technologies (ICCICCT)

Modified Greedy Permutation Algorithm for Low Complexity Encoding in LDPC Codes

Rajasekar.B 1, Logashanmugam.E 2
1Research Scholar, 2 Prof &Head, Faculty of Electrical and Electronics Email: rajarrec@gmail.co m1, logu999@yahoo.com2 1, 2 Sathyabama University, Chennai, India.

Abstract— The low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are used to achieve excellent performance with low encoding and decoding complexity. One major criticism concerning LDPC codes has been their apparent high encoding complexity and memory inefficient nature due to large parity check matrix. More generally, we consider the encoding problem for codes specified by sparse parity-check matrices. We show how to exploit the sparseness of the parity-check matrix to obtain efficient encoders. A new technique for efficient encoding of LDP Codes based on the known concept of approximate lower triangulation (ALT) is introduced. The algorithm computes parity check symbols by solving a set of sparse equations, and the triangular factorization is employed to solve the equations efficiently. The key of the encoding method is to get the systematic approximate lower triangular (S ALT) form of the Parity Check Matrix with minimum gap g, because the smaller the gap is, the more efficient encoding will be obtained. The functions are to be coded in MATLAB.
Keywords—Encoding; ALT; SALT; LDPC;MATLAB
I. INT RODUCT ION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are forward errorcorrection codes, first proposed by Gallager in his 1962 PhD thesis at MIT [1]. Their incredible potential was rediscovered after 35 years. Today, design techniques for LDPC codes exist which enable the construction of codes which approach the Shannon’s capacity to within hundredths of a decibel [2]. Therefore, LDPC forward error correction has been an active area of research in the recent years.
In addition to the strong theoretical interest in LDPC codes, such codes have already been adopted in satellite-based digital video broadcasting and long-haul optical communication standards [1]. Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes are also finding increasing use in applications requiring reliable and highly efficient information transfer over bandwidth or return channel-constrained links in the presence of corrupting noise.
The sparseness of the parity-check matrix (PCM) allows for decoding with low complexity based on a graph based decoder. However, encoding with low complexity is not straight forward, as LDPC codes are defined by their PCM and the generator matrix is generally unknown[10]. The conventional way is systematic encoding with the generator matrix derived from PCM by (modulo-2) Gaussian

elimination. The method is the same for any block code, thus it does not deploy the sparseness of LDPC codes, and the complexity is O(n2) (Preprocessing O(n3), actual encoding by matrix multiplication O(n2)) where n is the length of the code words; for large block size n the encoding complexity can be s ig n ifican t [9].
The outline of the paper is as follows. Related work is discussed in the Section II. Section III focuses on the proposed methodology. Performance of the proposed technique is discussed in the Section IV. Section V concludes the paper.
II. RELAT ED WORK
Hanghang Qi and Norbert Goertz (2013) proposed an efficient encoding technique with greedy permutatio n algorithm. For changing the h-matrix they used Approximate Lower Triangular (ALT) form by two ways namely Systematic Encoding by Gaussian elimination and Encoding with a Complexity that grows approximately linear with the blocksize. Then the Systematic ALt form (SALT form) is used to change the H-matrix. The greedy permutation is used for encoding and the performance is compared with the results of Gaussian and greedy permutation [3].
T. J. Richardson and L. Urbanke (2001) exploited the sparseness of the parity check matrix to obtain efficient encoders. The proposed technique involved preprocessing and encoding. Preprocessing actually involved triangulation and rank checking such that for every non-singular H matrix, an equivalent non-singular parity check matrix is generated. Based on the parity check matrix the input data stream is encoded such that the resultant matrix is also non-singular in nature. Conventionally the complexity of the encoding technique is quadratic to the block length. But in the proposed technique, encoding codes with higher lengths were also possible. It is also proved that optimal codes adhere to linear time encoding [10].
Yuichi KAJI (2006) proposed an encoding technique for LDPC codes that involved the following steps: parity check symbols were generated by solving sparse matrices by using triangular factorization. Initially row and column vectors are permuted such that a portion of the sparse matrix and the triangular matrices is sparse. The proposed encoding technique reduces the computational complexity of the LDPC codes with lesser gaps. However further permutations can make the encoding technique simpler [11].

978-1-4799-41A9ut0ho-r2ize/1d l4ic/e$ns3e1d .u0se0lim©ite2d0to1: 4YonIsEeiEUEniv. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:13:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

336

2014 International Conference on Control, Instrumentation, Communication and Computational Technologies (ICCICCT)

Tanner et al (2004) determined the bounds on the girth and the minimum distance on the codes using algebraically structured QC-LDPC. The proposed codes exploited the following properties that similar to the block codes, a constraint graph based on a parity-check matrix can be obtained for the convolutional codes. Also tail biting can be used to construct a block code without any loss of rate. It is found that performance gain has improved significantly for the convolutional representations instead of the original QC versions [9].
III. MODIFIED GREEDY PERMUTATION
The problem of finding the SALT form with minimum gap is rather hard, especially when H is large, because the larger the matrix dimensions are, the more possibilities for row and column-permutations exist [5] and it is not straightforward which permutations to use in which order to obtain the best result [4].
Below, we present an algorithm to get the SALT form of the PCM with small (but not necessarily the minimum) gap. It applies to any LDPC code and it is efficient for both regular and irregular codes. We call the scheme a greedy permutation algorithm and its complexity is O(n3),
which is the same as Gaussian elimination.
A. Description of Greedy permutation algorthms
We start with a given PCM with m rows and n columns; there may be redundant rows. Initialization: search for the column with smallest number k0 > 0 of one’s (random choice if more than one such column exists).Permute this column to the rightmost position, i.e., to the column index n [3]. Permute all k0 rows which have a ―one‖ in the last column to the bottom of the PCM. Set the current gap to g = k0-1. The Current sub matrix T starts at the lower right-hand corner with alone. In row m-g and column n. Set p = n -1 and j = 1.
Step 1: Search for the index 1,….,p of the column in which there is the smallest number kj>0 of ―ones‖ on or above the main diagonal of the current sub-matrix T (arbitrary choice if more than one such column exists). This is the smallest number of ―ones‖ in any column 1,…, p in the rows 1,…,m-g + j. Permute the ―best‖ column to column-index p. Is there only one‖one‖ on or above the main diagonal of the submatrix T in the column permuted to column-index p? Yes No If the ―one‖ is above the main diagonal of T permutes the corresponding row such that the ―one‖ is placed on the main diagonal of the sub-matrix T. This is permute the row with an index 1,…,m- g + j + 1 (which has a ―one‖ in column ―p‖) with the row with index m-g + j[8]. Pick any row with an index 1,…,m-g+j which has a ‖one’ in column p and permute it to row-index m-g+j. Append the remaining number rj rows with indices 1,…., m-g+j+1, which also have a ―one‖ in column p, at the bottom of the PCM. The gap increases, i.e., the new gap is g := g + rj and Set j := j + 1 and p := p – 1. If m - g - j < 1. Go To Step 2; Otherwise Go To Step 1.

Step 2: ALT-form is obtained. Convert the ALT into the SALT form: start from the right in Fig. 1 and cancel all .ones. in the sub matrix E by adding rows from the sub matrix T. Afterwards, perform Gaussian elimination on the matrices C and D to transform D into an identity matrix D1. The result is the SALT form illustrated by Fig. 2. During Gaussian elimination, some of the g rows at the bottom of the matrix may turn out to be linearly dependent. Remove these rows; the gap g is reduced by the number of linearly dependent rows.
B. Flow chart Representation of algorithm
The flow chart for the greedy permutation algorithm that given H-matrix is converted to different steps and obtaining the encoding code word as the result in the last. The flow chart starts with getting input of H-matrix then it splits to the different matrices. Then the column of switching of different rows and columns has been done in the matrix. Then the matrix is to be multiplied with elements. Then the matrix is checking its reversible property. After it can be make generate the parity with to its Greedy Permutation algorithm [8]. Then the encoding is done with the multiplying the parity matrix to the message bit to obtain the encoded codeword. This step is shown in the flow chart below fig 1.
The following steps the process as follows.
Step 1: Conduct column switching of the Matrix A and Matrix B of the original matrix with Matrix T. The switching results are: the diagonal lines of the Matrix T are all 1; the right upper corners are all 0[11].
Step 2: For the convenience of solving the redundant vector p1, Gaussian elimination computation of check matrix H. Matrix I in (3.2) represent the identity matrix.
Step 3: After the Gaussian elimination computation, we Define Ψ=-ET-1B+D, and check whether it is reversible or not.
Step 4: After confirming, Ψ=-ET-1B+D, as reversible, the weights of parity check matrix can be converted into the weights of the original parity check matrix (3, 6) to complete the parity check matrix that can be encoded. Code word vector X is composed of two parts including the information vector m and redundant vectors (p1p2).HXT=0 Can lead to (3) (4) by interface.

AmT+BP1T+TP2T=0

(3)

(-ET-1A+C)mT+(-ET-1B+D)P1T=0 (4)

After obtaining by (3) (4) the redundant vectors (p1, p2), code word X = [m p1 p2] can be obtained by adding the information vector m to complete the entire approximate lower triangular LDPC encoding process.

The equations which used for the LDPC Preprocess codes

P1T= Ψ-1(ET-1A+C)mT

(5)

P2T=T-1(AmT+BP1T)

(6)

978-1-4799-41A9ut0ho-r2ize/1d l4ic/e$ns3e1d .u0se0lim©ite2d0to1: 4YonIsEeiEUEniv. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:13:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

337

2014 International Conference on Control, Instrumentation, Communication and Computational Technologies (ICCICCT)

The above equations are used in the LDPC Preprocess codes that are to be help in finding the parity check matrix

The steps used are shown in the flowchart below

GIVEN MATRIX

SPLITIN
G OF MATRIX

COLUMN
SWITCHING OF MATRIX

MATRIX MULTIPLICATION
IF 2nd ELEMENT OF 2nd ROW IS REVERSIBLE
NO YES
GENERATION OF PARITY MATRIX

Fig. 2. Modified Greedy Permutation algorithm
IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
The pre-existing schemes and proposed scheme are analyzed in terms of Sparseness of matrix and convergence time. It is observed that the Sparseness performance of the proposed scheme is very well than that of the existing schemes. This enhancement is achieved by evaluating in different types of parity check matrix. The software tool used for this project is Matrix Laboratory MATLAB.
Let us see the example for the modified greedy permutation algorithm as we take the input as H-matrix

ENCODING OF MESSAGE

Fig. 1.Flow chart Representation
C. Modified Greedy Permutation algorithm The problem of finding the SALT form with minimum gap is rather hard, especially when H is large, because the larger the matrix dimensions are, the more possibilities for row and column-permutations exist and it is not straightforward which permutations[6] to use in which order to obtain the best result. Below, we present an algorithm to get the SALT form of the PCM with small (but not necessarily the minimum) gap. It applies to any LDPC code and it is efficient for both regular and irregular codes [7]. We call the scheme a greedy permutation algorithm and its complexity is O(n3), which is the same as Gaussian elimination [10].
For the modified Greedy Permutation algorithm we have change the C-matrix as the elements can be modified as the diagonals are 1 and other elements are to be taken as zero. By changing the values using this we can get the output as the more.
Thus the result of Modified Greedy Permutation algorithm which changed in C-matrix elements will result in the improvement of the encoding compared to the Greedy Permutation algorithm as output obtained is quickly and sparseness of the matrix is more.

The output obtained for the given H-matrix in modified Greedy Permutation algorithm is shown as below
Thus output clearly shows that the sparseness is high in the above example matrix.

978-1-4799-41A9ut0ho-r2ize/1d l4ic/e$ns3e1d .u0se0lim©ite2d0to1: 4YonIsEeiEUEniv. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:13:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

338

2014 International Conference on Control, Instrumentation, Communication and Computational Technologies (ICCICCT)

The bit error rate and frame error rate graph found for another example matrix is shown below in fig.3
Modified Greedy Algorithm
0
10

10-1

10-2

BER/FER

-3
10

10-4

-5
10

10-6

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Eb/No (dB)

Fig.3 BER/FER of LDPC codes with Modified Greedy Algorithm

V. CONCLUSION
Based on the different encoding techniques the Greedy Permutation algorithm is more sparseness and output obtained is taking very less time compared to the other encoding methods. The SALT form in the Greedy Permutation algorithm is increases the sparseness of the parity check matrix and obtains the output quickly compares to other methods. In the Modified Greedy Permutation algorithm the change which made in C-matrix as the diagonal elements are one and all other elements are zero is also improves the sparseness and make the output of the Parity check matrix is quick. Then the improved parity check matrix is multiplied with the message bit and obtained the encoded codeword for Modified Greedy Permutation algorithm. Thus the change in parity check matrix which results in the improve the sparseness of the Parity check matrix and delay in the output also reduced due to the change in the matrix.
If we use this matrix to any decoding algorithm, that results in getting output as error free and easily obtain the same input in the decoding. This also indicates from LDPC Tanner graphs but also increases the number of correlation free iterations and improves the convergence of the decoder thereby minimizing the convergence time of the decoder compared to its counterparts.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, ― Low-density parity-check codes,‖ IRE T rans. Inform. T heory, vol. IT -8, Jan. 1962, pp. 21-28.
[2] Shannon C. E., ― Amathematical theory of communication‖, Bell System T echnical Journal, no. vol. 27, 1948,pp. 379-423 (Part I) and 623-656 (Part II).
[3] Hanghang Qi and Norbert Goertz,‖ Low-Complexity Encoding of LDPC Codes: ― A New Algorithm and its Performance‖, Jan. 2013.
[4] T . J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, .Design of
Capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity check codes,. IEEE
T ransactions on Information Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619.637, Feb.
2001.
[5] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Error Control Coding, Pearson Prentice Hall, 2004.
[6] R. M. T anner, .A recursive approach to low complexity codes,. IEEE

T ransactions on Information Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533.547, Sept.
1981.
[7] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, D. Spielman, and V. Stemann,.Practical erasure resilient codes,. in Proc. 29th Annu. ACM
Symp. T heory of Computing, (ST OC), 1997, pp. 150.159.
[8] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. E. T elatar, T . J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary
erasure channel,. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 48, no.
6, pp. 1570.1579, June 2002.
[9] R. M. T anner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja, and D. J. Costello,
LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,.IEEE
T ransactions on Information Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966.2984, Dec.2004.
[10] T . J. Richardson R. L. Urbanke, .Efficient encoding of low-density parity check codes,. IEEE Transactions on Information T heory, vol. 47, no. 2,pp. 638.656, Feb. 2001.
[11] Yuichi KAJI, Member, ‖Encoding LDPC codes using the T riangular Factorization‖, IEJCE T RANS FUNDAMENT ALS, VOL.E89 -A, NO.10 OCT OBER 2006.

978-1-4799-41A9ut0ho-r2ize/1d l4ic/e$ns3e1d .u0se0lim©ite2d0to1: 4YonIsEeiEUEniv. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:13:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

339

