2019 International Conference on Field-Programmable Technology (ICFPT)

SoC-FPGA-based Implementation of Iris Recognition Enhanced by QC-LDPC Codes

Longyu Ma
School of Computer Science The University of Auckland
Auckland, New Zealand Email: lma792@aucklanduni.ac.nz

Chiu-Wing Sham
School of Computer Science The University of Auckland
Auckland, New Zealand Email: b.sham@auckland.ac.nz

Abstract—Introducing error correction codes into an iris recognition system to solve the intrinsic fuzziness, like variability and noise in iris codes is a research area that hasn’t catch massive attention, but the positive effect brought by error correction should not be underestimated. Rather than theoretical analysis and simulation that have been well-understood and deeply explored, in this paper, we focus on an iris recognition system implementation with an error correction scheme, namely QC-LDPC and the whole system is based on a compact SoCFPGA platform which is a DE-10 nano Cyclone V SOC evaluation board by Intel. Every iris information bit as the input data in this platform will be stored after they are encoded as QCLDPC codes which make the whole system more feasible than normal LDPC codes and loaded to improve the acceptance rate when a verification request is invoked with a new series of iris information. Moreover, the fundamental modules, such as iris processing, LDPC encoding and decoding in the system are reorganized and distributed to which section (HPS or FPGA) they are more suitable to be employed into, leading to a single chip design.
Index Terms—Iris recognition; Biometric recognition; SoC; FPGA; QC-LDPC; LDPC;
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent decades, iris recognition has been increasingly studied and used due to its impressive advantages compared with traditional methods, such as password, fingerprint and facial recognition. This non-invasive method associated with an individual promises the personal privacy in an extremely high security level without being easily stolen or being easily reproduced[1].
Unfortunately, slight differences in the acquired iris data due to acquisition noise, result in a large difference. To be more specific, as every capture of a certain slice of biometric information cannot be 100% identical, the received information in the first time or enrollment phase can be denoted as original data in a “sender and the information captured in other time except the first time or verification phase can be denoted as received data in a “receiver. Through a virtual communication, data in the receivers side is contaminated by noise that leads to the data difference in both sides. Enough differences between the enrolled and to-be-verified biometric may fail to fulfill the threshold for matching.
The basic idea of error-correcting biometric information derives from an analogy between a communication channel

and a ”biometric channel”. The capability of Error correction codes[2][3][4][5][6] has been proven to be not only capable of correcting received data in a communication channel, but also enhance the robustness of biometric systems. LDPC codes are a type of error correction codes. On the other hand, the parity check bits generated when encoding can perform much the same function as a cryptographic hash of a password on conventional access control systems.
As the capability is getting popularized, works regarding to error-correction-code(ECC)-based biometric system are studied. The paper[7] adopts Reed Solomon(RS) codes to correct iris information bits. False Rejection Rate and False Acceptance Rate are measure thoroughly with various of threshold values through simulation tools. Considerable decrements of False Rejection Rate is achieved, which means the recognition performance of irises is enhanced. Rather than introducing traditional ECCs to biometric areas, other papers like [8] explicitly prove that LDPC codes, as a class of promising ECCs, own better error correction ability, shorter output delay and more hardware-friendly than RS codes.
In the reference [9], a novel iris recognition system using LDPC and SHA is proposed. Apart from conventional iris segmentation, localization and feature extraction, the authors attach a LDPC encoder and decoder to the module outputting iris information bits, but only simulation result is given. One major reason could be that most of LDPC codes, if their structures are not optimized for FPGAs or ASICs, are not feasible enough to implement them.
Due to few papers focusing on hardware implementation of iris recognition system, we propose an SoC-FPGA-based implementation of iris recognition enhanced by QC-LDPC codes. The main contributions of this paper are:
• By thorough analyzing each module’s algorithm architecture for iris recognition and their difficulties of feasibility, A SoC-FPGA platform is selected, resulting in FPGA implementation for LDPC decoding/encoding and High Performance System (HPS) implementation for other modules which massively depend on OpenCV library. The hybrid design, to some extend, balance the different type of functions associated to an iris recognition system.
• QC-LDPC codes are introduced into biometric recognition. Since it is more FPGA-friendly or , in another

978-1-7281-2943-3/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE

391

DOI 10.1109/ICFPT47387.2019.00075

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:33:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 1: Overview diagram of the proposed architecture

word, has a more simply structural architecture to be implemented, encoders and decoders are realized on the FPGA part rather than only simulated.
The rest of paper is organized as follows. In section II, a brief concept of QC-LDPC codes is explained. Section III presents the proposed architecture. In section IV, evaluation results are described followed by the conclusion in section V.

III. THE PROPOSED ARCHITECTURE OF IRIS RECOGNITION
Fig. 1 shows the diagrams of our proposed iris recognition system. It is composed of three major sections. One section in the middle is HPS containing a hard-core ARM processor. The section on the right is FPGA or programmable logic. The rest part is auxiliary.

II. BACKGROUND OF QC-LDPC CODES

LDPC codes are a class of linear block codes that can be represented by a sparse parity-check matrix H. Quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) codes are one subclass of the derived LDPC codes with consisting of circulant permutation submatrices only. Because of the regular structure of QC-LDPC code, both the encoders and the decoders [10], [11], [12] can be implemented in low complexity while keeping the error correction performance.
In Fig. 2, L denotes the number of block columns and J denotes the number of block rows. The size of Iaj,l is z x z (z is the size of matrix I). It is created by cyclically shifting the columns of an identity matrix to the right by a j,l times. Hence, QC-LDPC codes’ construction is easier to be build due to its cyclical property.
Fig. 2: H Matrix for QC-LDPC codes

Fig. 3: Segmentation and Localization
In terms of HPS, a text-based linux is installed as OpenCV library is mandatory for some image processing algorithms and requires an Operation System to be compiled and used. The RAM in Fig. 1 are one of core components for an OS and are reserved by Linux. One major component in the HPS is HPS-FPGA interconnection bus. It is a internal bus in the SoCFPGA platform and used to provide a bi-directional channel for exchanging data between HPS and FPGA. In Linux, image processing algorithms like iris segmentation, localization[13] and feature extraction are executed. The first two algorithms are based on OpenCV library and the output examples are depicted in Fig. 3. Please noted that the algorithms mention are not improved in term of performance but are modified to adapt to embedded Linux.
For QC-LDPC encoders and decoders on the FPGA side, we introduce AXI bus as the interface of QC-LDPC encoder and decoder, the buffers in front of the decoder and encoder are implemented using dual-port Random Access Memory(RAM).

392 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:33:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the QC-LDPC decoder and encoder derive from another paper[14]. One difference is the selection of initial parameters and the size of matrix. Besides that, the decoding algorithm is changed from more complex Sum Product Algorithm to Min-Sum in order to simplify the architecture and adapt to the application for iris recognition which does demands such long codeword mention in [14]. More details are stated in next section.

• Read encoded or decoded data back to HPS. • Erase FPGA finish flag and wait for next block data.
The FPGA state machine run in the order as below:
• Go into initial status. • Check HPS finish flag until they are 0x0A0A0A0A. • Read iris binary data and send them to LDPC encoder or
decoder depending on the corresponding indicator. • Erase HPS finish flag and wait for LDPC output. • Write the LDPC output to RAM 1 and write FPGA finish
flag. • Go back to check HPS finish flag.

Fig. 5: Package format

IV. EVALUATION

Fig. 4: Finite State Machine
The buses between image processing and LDPC encoding/decoding play a crucial role in implementation of iris recognition. its main function has two. One is to ensure the safe data exchange from pre-encoded iris data that come from the feature extraction module to FPGA on which LDPC encoder or decoder awaits its input. The other is to ensure the decoded data back to HPS. An entire procedure on the side of HPS is presented in Fig. 4 as below:
• The whole system starts when an iris image is capture and sent to HPS.
• A series of conventional image processing algorithms are executed and output feature-extracted iris binary data stream.
• Control function in HPS writes all data above to a dualport RAM 0 depicted in Fig. 5.
• Write HPS finish flag data to RAM 0 at the first 4 byte address with 0x0A0A0A0A.
• Check if FPGA has finished decoding or encoding.

The whole proposed system is implemented on an Intel Cyclone V SOC chip that has an ARM dual-core Cortex A9 Processor(HPS) and an FPGA. A Linux distribution, Debian, runs on the HPS. Modules except LDPC encoders and decoders are written in C language and executed in the Linux OS. LDPC-related modules are deployed on FPGA section of the Cyclone V SoC. A interconnection bus between HPS and FPGA enables mutual communication for HPS and FPGA sections. Table I shows the FPGA resource utilization. The hard-core processor doesn’t count as it is not a programmable logic.
The evaluation in this section includes an enrollment phase and a verification phase:
During an enrollment phase, an iris image is sent to HPS and then the control function send the post-image-processing iris data with encoding indicate to FPGA which distributes the received data to which the indicator indicates. The encoded data is sent back to HPS which picks up the parity check bits and other bits(they are post-image-processing data). Lastly the parity check bits will be saved as a template in FLASH memory.
During a verification phase, the post-image-processing iris data are attached to the fore-mentioned parity check bits. The new bunch of data then are sent to the LDPC decoder. The

393 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:33:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

decoder output will be used to compare with post-imageprocessing iris data stored in the FLASH memory. Matching result is going to be printed on a PC’s screen via a UART port.
Based on procedures above, several simple test cases are programmed for confirming that the proposed system operates correctly. All image processing modules run at 800MHz on the hard-core processor. On FPGA side, LDPC encoder and decoder run at 50MHz. The whole system’s power consumption estimated by Intel Quartus is 1.31 Watts.
According to [9], 5142 most reliable bits positions of the 9600 bits in an iris template should be stored and used. As shown in Table II, a list of time consumption for each of key section have been measured. Note that the method to measure FPGA logic is to embed a timer which utilization could be omitted compared to other big modules. Other time consumption measurement is done by using Linux command “time”.
TABLE I: The utilization of resources

Resource
ALM Block memory bits
RAM blocks IO PLL DLL

Used
23366 149708
84 172
0 1

Available
41910 5662720
533 314 6 4

Utilization %
55.75% 2.64% 16.32% 54.78%
0% 25%

TABLE II: Time consumption for iris recognition

Function
Image Processing Data Transferring LDPC operation
Total

Time
2.1s 0.5s x 2 = 1s
0.05s
3.15s

V. CONCLUSION
The paper presents an implementation of iris recognition system with LDPC coding and decoding scheme on a Intel SoC-FPGA device. The theoretical architecture is optimized and re-organized to be fitted in hardware, considering of the advantages of FPGAs and processors.
The paper presented is a preliminary work in progress. As time is limited, some supporting experiment have not been conducted. Future works will cover the comparison between HPS design without FPGA and the proposed design, although some papers (a x86 platform in [15] is beaten by an FPGA platform in [16] in terms of throughput.) have proven that FPGA or ASIC architecture is more suitable to implement LDPC codes. Possible shortcomings may be the dependency on OpenCV library or that a hard-core processor must be in the targeted chip, which will limit the scope to be applied. Whatsoever, a translation from C language to Hardware Description Language mitigate this when some of functions in OpenCV library are more suitable to be paralleled

on an FPGA. Besides, applying soft-core processors such as
RISC-V is also an alternative direction, as more research
works[17][18] prefer open-source architecture which is easier
to be customized.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Masek et al., “Recognition of human iris patterns for biometric identification,” Ph.D. dissertation, Masters thesis, University of Western Australia, 2003.
[2] M. Baldi, M. Bianchi, F. Chiaraluce, J. Rosenthal, and D. Schipani, “On fuzzy syndrome hashing with LDPC coding,” in Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium on Applied Sciences in Biomedical and Communication Technologies. ACM, 2011, p. 24.
[3] U. Uludag, S. Pankanti, S. Prabhakar, and A. K. Jain, “Biometric cryptosystems: issues and challenges,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 92, no. 6, pp. 948–960, 2004.
[4] Y. Sutcu, S. Rane, J. S. Yedidia, S. C. Draper, and A. Vetro, “Feature extraction for a slepian-wolf biometric system using LDPC codes,” in 2008 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory. IEEE, 2008, pp. 2297–2301.
[5] D. Slepian and J. Wolf, “Noiseless coding of correlated information sources,” IEEE Transactions on information Theory, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 471–480, 1973.
[6] G. I. Davida, Y. Frankel, and B. J. Matt, “On enabling secure applications through off-line biometric identification,” in Proceedings. 1998 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (Cat. No. 98CB36186). IEEE, 1998, pp. 148–157.
[7] S. H. Moi, P. Saad, N. A. Rahim, and S. Ibrahim, “Error correction on iris biometric template using reed solomon codes,” in 2010 Fourth Asia International Conference on Mathematical/Analytical Modelling and Computer Simulation, May 2010, pp. 209–214.
[8] Y. Xiao, C. Luo, and C. Yang, “The comparative analysis of LDPC and RS code,” in 2011 International Conference on Consumer Electronics, Communications and Networks (CECNet), April 2011, pp. 4510–4513.
[9] K. Seetharaman and R. Ragupathy, “A novel biometric cryptosystem using LDPC and SHA based iris recognition,” Journal of Computer Technology and Electronics Engineering, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 41–47, 2012.
[10] Z. Li, L. Chen, L. Zeng, S. Lin, and W. H. Fong, “Efficient encoding of quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 71–81, 2006.
[11] W. Tang, C. H. Ho, C.-W. Sham, and K. F. C. Yiu, “Low-power reconfigurable acceleration of robust frequency-domain echo cancellation on fpga,” in The 2010 International Conference on Green Circuits and Systems, June 2010, pp. 361–364.
[12] C.-W. Sham, X. Chen, W. M. Tam, Y. Zhao, and F. C. M. Lau, “A layered QC-LDPC decoder architecture for high speed communication system,” in 2012 IEEE Asia Pacific Conference on Circuits and Systems, Dec 2012, pp. 475–478.
[13] C. Rathgeb, A. Uhl, and P. Wild, Iris biometrics: from segmentation to template security. Springer Science & Business Media, 2012, vol. 59.
[14] L. Ma and C.-W. Sham, “Optimized layer architecture for layered LDPC code decoder,” in 2018 International Conference on Advanced Technologies for Communications (ATC), Oct 2018, pp. 287–291.
[15] B. Le Gal and C. Jego, “High-throughput multi-core LDPC decoders based on x86 processor,” IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 1373–1386, May 2016.
[16] Q. Lu, J. Fan, C.-W. Sham, W. M. Tam, and F. C. M. Lau, “A 3.0 Gb/s throughput hardware-efficient decoder for cyclically-coupled QC-LDPC codes,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 134–145, Jan 2016.
[17] A. Niktash, H. T. Parizi, A. H. Kamalizad, and N. Bagherzadeh, “RECFEC: A reconfigurable FEC processor for viterbi, turbo, reedsolomon and LDPC coding,” in 2008 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference, March 2008, pp. 605–610.
[18] J. Gray, “GRVI phalanx: A massively parallel RISC-V FPGA accelerator accelerator,” in 2016 IEEE 24th Annual International Symposium on Field-Programmable Custom Computing Machines (FCCM), May 2016, pp. 17–20.

394 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:33:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

