2082

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 66, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2019

Page-Based Dynamic Partitioning Scheduling for LDPC Decoding in MLC NAND Flash Memory
Kang Wei, Student Member, IEEE, Jun Li , Senior Member, IEEE, Lingjun Kong , Member, IEEE, Feng Shu , Member, IEEE, and Francis C. M. Lau , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—To increase program-and-erase (PE) cycles for the multi-level-cell NAND flash memory, a page-based dynamic partitioning scheduling (DPS) algorithm for low-density parity-check codes is proposed in this brief. The proposed scheme provides a dynamic scheduling metric to obtain variable nodes (VNs) with the highest erroneous probabilities in each iteration so as to improve the convergence speed of decoding. Then, two DPS-based belief-propagation (BP) and min-sum (MS) decoding algorithms are introduced, named DPS-based BP (DPS-BP) and DPS-based MS (DPS-MS), respectively, which utilize the interaction between the upper page and the lower page bits to detect the probable charge-shift memory cells. Simulation results show that the proposed DPS-BP and DPS-MS decoding algorithms improve the PE endurance up to about 700 and 1000 cycles against the conventional BP and MS decoding algorithms, respectively, at a bit-error-rate of 10−5. In addition, an effective approximation method is presented to reduce the hardware complexity in practical implementations, in which the size of each partitioned group is preset to raise the efficiency of the VN units.
Index Terms—MLC NAND flash memory, LDPC codes, belief propagation, error performance.
I. INTRODUCTION
N AND flash memory, widely used in solid state drives (SSDs) today, is the most popular type of non-volatile memory (NVM). It can store multiple bits over a single memory cell by employing the multi-level-cell (MLC) or triple-level cell (TLC) technique [1]. Due to the requirements of small flash cell size and high reliability, the serious scaling challenges loom up in NAND flash memory. These challenges are originated from flash device characteristics and the corresponding noise sources, such as programming noise (PN),
Manuscript received October 29, 2018; revised December 9, 2018; accepted January 28, 2019. Date of publication February 4, 2019; date of current version December 6, 2019. This work was supported in part by NSFC for Young Scientists under Grant 61501250, and in part by NSFC under Grant 61501238, Grant 61771244, Grant 61702258, Grant 61472190, and Grant 61602245. This brief was recommended by Associate Editor Y. Liu. (Corresponding authors: Lingjun Kong; Jun Li.)
K. Wei, J. Li, and F. Shu are with the School of Electronic and Optical Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing 210014, China (e-mail: kang.wei@njust.edu.cn; jun.li@njust.edu.cn; shufeng@njust.edu.cn).
L. Kong is with the College of Telecommunication and Information Engineering, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing 210014, China (e-mail: ljkong@njupt.edu.cn).
F. C. M. Lau is with the Department of Electronic and Information Engineering, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong (e-mail: encmlau@polyu.edu.hk).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSII.2019.2897223

cell-to-cell interference (CCI), random telegraph noise (RTN) and retention noise (RN) [2].
To overcome the large degradations of reliability and error performance, several error correcting codes (ECCs) have been considered such as Bose-Chaudhri-Hocquenghem (BCH) [3] and low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [4], [5]. By exploiting data error characteristics introduced by retention errors, [6] proposes a cooperative error correction scheme, which makes the initial information of LDPC decoding for the most significant bit (MSB) page accurate using the decoding result of the least significant bit (LSB) page. In [7], the characteristic of retention errors caused by cell threshold voltage shift is utilized and a retention error aware LDPC decoding scheme is developed to reduce decoding latency. To achieve better error correction performance, a serial reliability-based iterative min-sum decoding (RBI-MSD) algorithm for LDPC-coded MLC flash memory systems with the serial scheduling is proposed [8]. In the serial scheduling, the variable nodes (VNs) or check nodes (CNs) are sequentially updated according to a predetermined order. Serial scheduling compared with the flooding schedule could converge twice as fast [9]. In [10], an adaptive group shuffled belief-propagation (AGSBP) decoding has been introduced, and it provides a set of simple integer-based rules to regroup the VNs dynamically with improved error performance. Thus, it is of great interest to design a suitable serial decoding scheduling scheme for the MLC NAND flash memory.
In this brief, an innovative page-based dynamic partitioning scheduling (DPS) algorithm is proposed to improve the error performance of the MLC NAND flash memory, especially when the memory cells are severely charge-shift. The proposed algorithm exploits the MLC flash device characteristics, i.e., there exists a large endurance gap and a fixed interaction between the upper page and lower page bits. Under this scenario, a detecting counter is obtained by jointly analyzing their read voltage signals and the corresponding decoded codeword bits. In conjunction with the proposed algorithm, DPS-based BP (DPS-BP) and DPS-based MS (DPS-MS) decoding algorithms are introduced, and the VNs with the highest erroneous probabilities are updated in advance. Simulation results show that the proposed decoding algorithms improve the MLC NAND flash channel tolerance and the program-and-erase (PE) cycles endurance compared with the conventional algorithms. Considering the hardware complexity in practical implementations, we propose an effective approximation method for the

1549-7747 c 2019 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:36:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WEI et al.: PAGE-BASED DPS FOR LDPC DECODING IN MLC NAND FLASH MEMORY

2083

DPS scheme, which raises the efficiency of the variable-node units effectively.

II. MLC NAND FLASH MEMORY CHANNEL
Flash device characteristics can be approximated as several noise models, in which the large number of PE cycles limits the operational lifetime. The threshold voltage distribution for erased cells is modeled as a Gaussian distribution and the programmed cells follow the uniform distributions. We model the PN, RTN and RN by Gaussian distribution functions with zero mean and nonstationary standard deviations, which vary with the number of PE cycles. Using the cell precoding technique, the CCI effect of the programmed cells is mitigated. A shifted mean is considered for the threshold voltage distribution function of erased state cells because of this interference and technique [11]. In general, the final threshold voltage distribution functions are calculated by the convolution integral of initial voltage distribution functions with various noise functions and denoted as ps0 , ps1 , ps2 and ps3 [11], [12].
With a non-uniform 6-level quantization scheme [11], the threshold voltage is split into 7 regions, denoted by E1, E2, E3, O1, O2, O3 and O4. Memory cells whose observed threshold voltages fall in E1, E2 and E3 can easily incur errors. So, these regions are named erasure regions. In contrast, O1, O2, O3 and O4 are usually named data regions [7].
For MLC flash memory, LSB and MSB belong to a lower and an upper page, respectively. To exploit the intracell biterror characteristics, we put the upper page bit and the lower page bit that belong to the same cell into one codeword [13]. In [11], an optimized method for write-voltages V1 and V2 is proposed. With such a multipage data organization, lower and upper pages have exactly the same size but unequal errorrate performances. The raw error-rate performances of lower page bits l are better than upper page bits u versus the number of PE cycles. In addition, lower-page and upper-page bits share the same threshold voltage in one memory cell and suffer from possible charge-shift simultaneously. Although the LDPC decoding improves the bit-error performance a lot for the MLC NAND flash memory, the relationship between the lower page bit and the upper page bit is not utilized during the decoding procedure.
III. DYNAMIC PARTITIONING SCHEDULING BASED BP DECODING ALGORITHM AND ITS APPROXIMATION
A. Charge-Shift and Error Position Detecting
We have already illustrated an example of 6-level nonuniform quantization scheme. Let Pr(AsEij ) denotes the shift probability that the memory cell was orginally programmed as si but appeared in the erasure region Ej. Meanwhile, Pr(AOsi j ) denotes the shift probability that the memory cell was orginally programmed as si but appeared in the data region Oj. Noticeably, suffering from the various noise sources and interferences, it is inevitable that charge-shift may be taken place in several memory cells. In Fig. 1, the shift probabilities of various input symbols are plotted. If the charge-shift happens in a memory cell, it may bring incorrect initial LLRs

Fig. 1. Shift probabilities of input symbols ‘11’, ‘10’, ‘00’ and ‘01’ when PE = 20K.

and BP decoding failure. An arbitrary ξ is used to present the

quantized values of various error probabilities.

Suppose a pair of decoding bits are {zl, zu} = {1, 1}, where

zl represents the lower page bit and zu represents the upper

page bit in this memory cell. The unfit conditions are consid-

ered in the following. If the memory cell is observed in data

region O2, the second bit may be decoded incorrectly and the

corresponding shift counter η (ηl, ηu) is

probability is Pr(AsO02 ). defined to compare the

Then, a detecting error probabilities.

The value of this detecting counter is set as ξ . If the thresh-

old of the memory cell is observed in erasure region E2, data region O3 or erasure region E3, Pr(AsE02 ), Pr(AsO03 ) and Pr(AEs03 ) are represented as the shift probabilities, respectively. Due to

the small values of these shift probabilities, the values of this

detecting counter for the first and second bit can be set as 2ξ

and ξ . If the memory cell is observed in data region O4, the value of detecting counters for the first bit is set as 3ξ because of the very small shift probability Pr(AsO04 ).
When the decoding bits of the lower page and upper page

are {zl, zu} = {1, 0} and the memory cell is observed in data region O1, the value of this detecting counter for the second bit is set as ξ . If the memory cell is observed in data region O3 or erasure region E3, Pr(AOs13 ), Pr(AEs13 ) are represented as the shift probabilities, respectively. Due to the small values of

these shift probabilities, the value of this detecting counter for

the first bit is set as ξ . If the memory cell is observed in data

region O4, the value of this detecting counter for the second bit is set as 2ξ because of the very small shift probability Pr(AOs14 ).
Suppose the decoding bits of the lower page and upper page

are {zl, zu} = {0, 0}. If the memory cell is observed in data

region O1, the value of this detecting counter for the second

bit is set as 2ξ because of the very small shift probability

Pr(AOs21 ). If the or data region

memory cell O2, Pr(AsE21 )

is observed in erasure region and Pr(AOs22 ) are represented

E1 as

the shift probabilities, respectively. Due to the small values of

these shift probabilities, the values of this detecting counter

for the first bit is set as ξ . If the memory cell is observed

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:36:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2084

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 66, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2019

TABLE I
THE DETECTING COUNTER (ηl, ηu) OF ALL CONDITIONS FOR THE DECODED BITS OF A MEMORY CELL AND ITS OBSERVED REGIONS

in data region O4, the value for this detecting counter of the

second bit is set as ξ because of the small shift probability

Pr(AsO24 ). When a

pair

of

bits

are

decoded

to

{zl, zu}

=

{0, 1}

and

the memory cell is observed in data region O1, the value of

this detecting counter for the first bit is set as 3ξ because of

the very small is observed in

eshraifsturperorbeagbioilnityE1P,r(dAasOt3a1

). If the memory cell region O2 or erasure

region E2, Pr(AsE31 ), Pr(AOs32 ) and Pr(AEs32 ) are represented as

the shift probabilities, respectively. Due to the small values of

these shift probabilities, the values of this detecting counter

for the first and second bit are set as 2ξ and ξ . If the memory

cell is observed in data region O3, the value of this detecting counter for the second bit can be set as ξ .

Until now, all the conditions of decoding bits in a cell are

considered, we conclude the error probabilities for different

pages, respectively. The concise description for the detecting

counter η (ηl and ηu represent lower page and upper page bits respectively) is given in Table I, in which the observed region

of a cell is obtained and ξ can be set to 1 for convenience.

B. Dynamic Partitioning Scheduling Based BP Decoding

Let H be an M × N parity-check matrix of a binary LDPC

code, which has dc,m ones in the m-th row and dv,n ones in the

n-th column. When a decoding result zn is known, there are M

syndromes corresponding to the M check equations, given by

fm =

N n=1

znhm,n,

where

hm,n

is

the

element

of

check

matrix

H on the m-th row and n-th column. When detectable errors

occur, the syndrome vector f = (f1, f2, . . . , fM) will be parity

failures. Hence, we define a reliability metric of the hard-

decision values as E = (E1, E2, . . . , EN) using the syndrome

vector f, soft information Ln and column weight dv,n. The soft

information Ln is updated during the soft decision decoding algorithm. In (1), the minimum |Ln| of the m-th row is selected

as wm, given by

wm = minn∈N(m)|Ln|.

(1)

The En collects all the syndromes connected to the n-th received symbol, given by

En =

(2fm − 1)wm.

(2)

m∈M(n)

En is the quantization value of En, where α is a positive integer, given by

En =

αdv,maxEn max(En)

.

(3)

The DPS scheme is summarized below to select a suitable

serial decoding scheduling.

Initialization Set ← 1, t ← 1, Gpre ← ∅, G ← ∅ and { 1, 2} ← { u, l}, obtain wm, En and En using (1), (2) and (3), obtain the detecting counter η using Table I.
Step 1 If t ≤ 2 and t = ∅, For all indices of variablenode vn ∈ t, let Gpre ← arg max En and remove the selected VNs from t, t ← t \ Gpre.
Step 2 For all indices of variable-node vn ∈ Gpre, let G ← arg max ηn. Then, remove the selected VNs from Gpre, Gpre ← Gpre \ G and perform ← + 1. If t = ∅, t ← t + 1. If Gpre = ∅, go to Step 1.
Step 3 If t > 2, stop and output G = (G1, G2, . . . , Gλ). Note that all the VNs are divided into λ groups corresponding to the G, using the different page bits, predetermined reliability metric E and detecting counter η. To begin with, the partitioning number is initialized to 1, which is to represent
the starting point of a new iteration. Following the previous steps, the detecting counter η and the reliability metric E are calculated. The DPS scheme first divides all the VNs into two
parts corresponding to upper page u and lower page l separately. Then, it selects the VNs associated with the largest En and records the scheduling order into a previous group Gpre. In the following, the first group is generated using one or more VNs in Gpre, which have the largest value of the detecting counter η. When all the VNs are selected and assigned into these groups G = (G1, G2, . . . , Gλ), the algorithm is accomplished. It is obvious that the three metrics are employed in
this algorithm and the partitioning result is obtained as G. The
VNs with larger erroneous probabilities will be selected firstly
and assigned into the previous group.
According to the DPS scheme, the VNs with different erro-
neous probabilities estimated by our scheme are sorted in the
certain sequence. Based on this updating sequence, we recon-
sider the conventional BP decoding algorithm. The progress
of the modified BP decoding algorithm to update the checkto-bit messages Cm(k,)n and bit-to-check messages B(nk,m) in the k-th iteration is given as
a) for n ∈ V, and each m ∈ M(n), compute

Cm(k→) n = ϕ Bn(k,)m,⎛Bn(k,−m1) = 2tanh−1⎝
n ∈J (m)\n

tanh
G (k)

Bn(k,)m 2

×
n ∈J (m)\n

tanh
G (k−1)

Bn(k,−m1) 2

⎞ ⎠,
(4)

b) for m ∈ C, and each n ∈ J (m), compute

B(nk,m) = ψ (Cm(k),n) = ln +

Cm(k),n,

(5)

m ∈M(n)\m

c) for n ∈ V, and each m ∈ M(n), process

Ln(k) = ln +

Cm(k,)n,

(6)

m∈M(n)

where k is the iteration count, ln is the intrinsic channel information for the variable node vn, J (m) \ n is the set of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:36:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WEI et al.: PAGE-BASED DPS FOR LDPC DECODING IN MLC NAND FLASH MEMORY

2085

Algorithm 1: Dynamic Partitioning Scheduling Based BP (DPS-BP)

Data: the maximum iteration z(0), the extrinsic information

Kmax, the hard-decision ln, the check matrix H

1

Result: the final decoding Initialization: k ← 0, i ←

result 1, f(0)

z←=z((z01)H, zT2;,

.

.

.

,

zN

)

2 while f(k) = 0 and k < Kmax do

3 k ← k + 1;

4

Obtain the partitioning result G(k) = (G1, G2, . . . , Gλ)

based on the scheme above;

5 while i ≤ λ do

6

for all indices of variable-node vn ∈ Gi implied in

check-node cm do

7

Cm(k,)n ← ϕ(B(mk,)n, Bm(k,−n1)) using (4);

8

i←i+1

9 for all indices of check-node cm implied in variable-node

vn do

10

Bn(k,m) ← ψ(Cm(k,)n) using (5);

11

Ln(k) ← Bn(k,m) + Cm(k,)n using (6);

12

z(nk) =

1, 0,

Ln(k) ≥ 0 , for n = 1, 2, . . . , N; else

13

f(k) ← z(k)HT ;

14 End

neighbors of check node cm except variable node vn, M(n)\m is the set of neighbors of check node vn except variable node cm, G is the set of the selected VNs, G(k) is the set of VNs which have been updated for k iterations, G(k−1) is the set of VNs which have only been updated for k − 1 iterations, V is the set of VNs and C is the set of CNs.
Based on above statements, the detailed steps for the proposed decoding algorithm are shown in Algorithm 2. In the horizontal step, the updating process is divided into λ parts corresponding to the partitioning result G using Algorithm 1. All values of the check-to-bit messages for the VNs in the same group are updated in parallel and the λ groups are processed sequentially. When all the VNs are scheduled, the horizontal step is completed for one iteration. The vertical step is performed after the horizontal step and the decoded bits z(k) are obtained based on Ln(k) for the k-th iteration.
C. Approximation for the Proposed DPS-BP Decoding
Considering the practical implementations for a LDPC decoder, there are two groups of processing units the variablenode units (VNUs) and check-node units (CNUs). During the decoding, the computed messages are transmitted between VNUs and CNUs through the connection networks in each iteration [13], [14]. The proposed DPS-BP decoding algorithm finds the VNs belonging to Gi and then performs the horizontal steps using the VNUs, the number of which is same as the size of Gi. Therefore, the required VNUs of the DPS-BP decoding algorithm architecture are corresponding to the size of each group. However, when the size is not certain and changed, several VNUs may be idle for some time in the decoding process.

Fig. 2. BER performance of various decoding algorithms with Kmax = 5, 10 and 25 over different PE cycles.
To avoid the hardware being idle, we propose an approximated DPS method for this decoding algorithm. The main difference between the proposed algorithm and approximated method is the number of the selected VNs in each group. In this approximated scheme, an N-bit codeword c is divided into λ groups of equal size Nλ = N/λ and each group contains certain VNs in advance. The certain VNs are obtained by the following approximated scheme. When the satisfied VNs are found in the generating process of Gi, the number is usually unequal to the preset size Nλ in the DPS algorithm. If the number of satisfied VNs is larger than the preset size, the approximated scheme randomly selects adequate VNs to fill in Gi. In contrast, if the number is smaller than the preset size, these VNs are recorded and more VNs are considered until the preset size is reached.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In order to investigate the error performance and convergence speed of the proposed algorithms for the MLC NAND flash memory, we construct a quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC code. In this code, each entry of a small base matrix HB (7 × 71) is replaced by either a circulant shift of a 64 ×64 identify matrix or an all-zero 64 × 64 matrix. The block-length of this code is 4544 bits and code rate is set as 0.9. This irregular code has column-weight dv = 5 and row-weight dc = 50 or 51. In addition, the positive integer α is set to 2 and the range of En is from −2dv,max to 2dv,max. The maximum iteration count Kmax is set to 5, 10 or 25. For further decoding complexity reduction, the MS algorithm is considered, in which an approximation [13] of the updating formula (4) is employed. The conventional MS algorithm with the DPS method is denoted by DPS-MS and the approximation method is practicable.
To study the performance of the DPS-BP decoding algorithm, in Fig. 2, we plot the bit-error-rate (BER) curves over the number of PE cycles under the maximum iteration number of 5 and 10. Based on the observation, the flash channel tolerance against the PE-cycles-induced errors is significantly improved using the proposed algorithm. For instance, we assume that the required performance of BER is at 10−5.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:36:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2086

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 66, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2019

Therefore, the proposed algorithms are more effective on the error performance and convergence speed, especially for early states.

Fig. 3. BER performance of the approximated DPS-BP and approximated DPS-MS decoding algorithms with various λ values over different PE cycles.
TABLE II AVERAGE NO. OF ITERATION FOR VARIOUS SIMULATED ALGORITHMS
WITH QC-LDPC CODE (4544, 448) AND MAXIMUM ITERATION 10 (PCT: PERCENTAGE)
The conventional BP algorithm can approximately endure 23000 and 25000 PE cycles when Kmax = 5 and Kmax = 10, respectively. In contrast, for the same BER, the endurance limit of the PE cycles is extended to 24500 and 25700 using the DPS-BP decoding algorithm. Fig. 2 also plots the BER performance of the DPS-MS decoding algorithms. It is shown that, at a BER of 2 × 10−5, the proposed DPS-MS decoding algorithm improves the PE cycles by up to 1000 cycles under the maximum iteration count 10, and 500 cycles under the maximum iteration count 25 compared with the conventional MS decoding algorithm.
Fig. 3 plots the BER performance of the approximated DPSMS and DPS-BP decoding algorithms. λ = 32, 71, 142 and λ = 16, 32 are set in the approximated DPS-MS algorithm and approximated DPS-BP algorithm, respectively. The required number of VNUs for the approximated decoding algorithm architecture are corresponding to the value of Nλ. Note that the number of VNs in these groups λ yields significant improvement in the BER performance, where the larger λ can bring more improvement but more serial decoding delay.
In the previous statements, we mainly analyse the improvement in error performance using the proposed decoding algorithm. To show the decoding convergence, the conventional MS and our proposed DPS-MS algorithms are executed under 10 maximum decoding iterations. As shown in Table II, the decoding convergence is reduced up to 40.78% in the early state (PE = 21000), and up to 13% when PE = 27000, using the DPS-MS decoding algorithm. Compared with the conventional BP decoding algorithm, the decoding convergence using the DPS-BP decoding algorithm is also improved.

V. CONCLUSION
Two DPS-based decoding algorithms, known as DPS-BP and DPS-MS algorithms, have been proposed for the MLC NAND flash memory to mitigate data loss. By virtue of the large endurance gap and fixed relation between the upper page and lower page bits, the decoded bits are calculated and utilized to detect probable charge-changing memory cells, in which VNs with the highest erroneous probabilities are considered and the updated sequences of VNs for the proposed decoding algorithms are redetermined. Through simulations, it is shown that the performance of the proposed DPS-BP and DPS-MS algorithms are improved when compared to the conventional decoding algorithms. In conjunction with the proposed algorithms, the method for the approximated algorithms that fix the number of VNs in each group works at raising the efficiency of the VNUs.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Kim, “Future memory technology: Challenges and opportunities,” in Proc. Int. Symp. VLSI Technol. Syst. Appl., Hsinchu, Taiwan, Apr. 2008, pp. 5–9.
[2] Q. Li, A. Jiang, and E. F. Haratsch, “Noise modeling and capacity analysis for NAND flash memories,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Honolulu, HI, USA, Jun. 2014, pp. 2262–2266.
[3] W. Xueqiang, P. Liyang, W. Dong, H. Chaohong, and Z. Runde, “A high-speed two-cell BCH decoder for error correcting in MLC nor flash memories,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 56, no. 11, pp. 865–869, Nov. 2009.
[4] Y. Hu et al., “A dominating error region strategy for improving the bitflipping LDPC decoder of SSDs,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 62, no. 6, pp. 578–582, Jun. 2015.
[5] G. Dong, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “On the use of soft-decision errorcorrection codes in NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 429–439, Feb. 2011.
[6] M. Zhang et al., “CooECC: A cooperative error correction scheme to reduce LDPC decoding latency in NAND flash,” in Proc. 35th IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Design (ICCD), Boston, MA, USA, Nov. 2017, pp. 657–664.
[7] M. Zhang et al., “REAL: A retention error aware LDPC decoding scheme to improve NAND flash read performance,” in Proc. 32nd Int. Conf. Massive Stor. Syst. Technol. (MSST), Santa Clara, CA, USA, May 2016, pp. 1–13.
[8] S. Ouyang, G. Han, Y. Fang, and W. Liu, “LLR-distribution-based nonuniform quantization for RBI-MSD algorithm in MLC flash memory,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 45–48, Jan. 2018.
[9] C. A. Aslam, Y. L. Guan, K. Cai, and G. Han, “Informed fixed scheduling for faster convergence of shuffled belief-propagation decoding,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 32–35, Jan. 2017.
[10] T. C.-Y. Chang and Y. T. Su, “Adaptive group shuffled decoding for LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 21, no. 10, pp. 2118–2121, Oct. 2017.
[11] C. A. Aslam, Y. L. Guan, and K. Cai, “Read and write voltage signal optimization for multi-level-cell (MLC) NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 4, pp. 1613–1623, Apr. 2016.
[12] J. Moon et al., “Statistical characterization of noise and interference in NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 60, no. 8, pp. 2153–2164, Aug. 2013.
[13] H. Sun et al., “Exploiting intracell bit-error characteristics to improve min-sum LDPC decoding for MLC NAND flash-based storage in mobile device,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 2654–2664, Aug. 2016.
[14] W. Shao, J. Sha, and C. Zhang, “Dispersed array LDPC codes and decoder architecture for NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 65, no. 8, pp. 1014–1018, Aug. 2018.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:36:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

