2019 11th International Conference on Advanced Computing (ICoAC) 978-1-7281-5286-8/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 10.1109/ICoAC48765.2019.246813

LDPC Codes for Distributed Storage systems

P V Bhuvaneshwari

Dr. C Tharini

pvbunaperumal@gmail.com

tharini@crescent.education

Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering

BS Abdur Rahman Crescent University, Vandalur,Chennai,India

Abstract— Replication was the easiest and most convenient method adopted for data storage systems however it increased the memory utilization as it made various duplicates or multiple copies of original data. Henceforth, erasure codes such as Reed-Solomon Codes were considered for the purpose of Data storage. RS Codes utilized Galois field operations which included Vandermonde Matrices and subsequently increased the decoding complexities making them more expensive for storage systems. In this paper, small sized Low Density Parity Check Code, for distributed storage architecture is proposed which uses only simple arithmetic XOR operations, and hence displays lower encoding and decoding complexities compared to its counterpart, Reed Solomon Codes. It is observed that reconstruction of the original information is possible even when there are node failures. LDPC Codes has been chosen for distributed data storage system as it does not require all of the data blocks in order to reconstruct the original file, making it an efficient coding scheme for storage systems.
Keywords— LDPC, Distributed Storage System, RS Codes, MDS, MTTDL.
I. INTRODUCTION
The most common method to store large amounts of data redundantly is Replication. In 3 way-replication process, multiple copies (mostly 3) of each data are created, thus requiring more storage space to store the data. For eg: In order to store 1 GB data, 3 way-replication creates 3 copies to protect the data, thus it requires a total of 3GB of memory space to store only 1GB of original data.
The reason behind utilizing 3 way-replication procedure till date is that, when, one of the replicas gets inaccessible, one can recreate another new replica utilizing the remaining two copies, thus guaranteeing full availability and reliability in data storage systems. But considering the fact, that 3 copies of each data getting stored requires huge memory space, made this strategy to be an inefficient method adopted for data storage.
Another strategy that can be applied to data storage frameworks is Erasure Coding. In this erasure coding scheme, a (n, k) erasure code splits the data file into two types of fragments i.e. k number of data fragments and m number of parity fragments, thus a total of n fragments are stored in different storage nodes/servers of storage networks (where n =k + m). Some examples of erasures codes used are Reed-Solomon (RS) code, Cauchy Reed Solomon Codes, Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) Codes.
Erasure codes that satisfy the Maximum-DistanceSeparable property are termed as MDS codes. In other words, a linear code (ᶇ, ᶄ, ᶑmin) with k input message length that generates a codeword of length ᶇ, and whose ᶑmin achieves equality in singleton bound are called as MDS codes.
ᶑmin İ ᶇ − ᶄ + 1 (1)
where ᶑmin is the minimum distance between the codeword and it helps to find the erasure tolerance capability ‘є’ of a code .

Codeword length “Ɩ” is not considered at all for data storage systems. When MDS erasure codes (for example: RS codes) are used in storage systems, any k message blocks out of the total Ɩ number of encoded codeword, can recover the original data during failures.
RS codes, discovered by Reed and Solomon in the year 1960 [19] were widely used in distributed storage systems. A (k, m) RS code encodes k part of original data into m parity parts, such that all the k data parts are recoverable from any k out of these (k+ m) parts. Hence if the file size is about 1GB, by use of (4+2) RS erasure codes, the whole file is split into 4 data fragments and 2 parity fragments, for a total of 6 fragments. Thus if 4 out of the 6 fragments (either data or parity fragments) are available then it is 100% possible to reconstruct the original file. Such an erasure code adds about 50 percent in storage overhead.
Main issue concerning the use of RS codes for data storage systems is that the decoding process is complex and decoding time was longer due to the Galois field operations performed. Galois field size i.e. GF (256) decided the length of the RS code hence as GF size grew bigger, operations became more complex and thereby slower.
To address the weaknesses of the discussed coding methods utilized in data storing systems, a new class of erasure coding scheme popularly known as Systematic LDPC Codes is proposed. The computational complexity is reduced by use of LDPC Codes as only exclusive-OR operations are performed for encoding and decoding. This code challenges other erasure codes utilized for storage in terms of encoding, decoding speeds and required blocks to be downloaded for reconstruction (comparatively lesser than RS codes) during node failure in distributed storage network.
II. RELATED WORK
There has been a lot of research on the use of Low Density Parity Checks for Data storage systems recently. Some of the most prominent work has been discussed in this paper to throw light on the reason for using such codes in data storage frameworks.
According to James Plank in [1], LPDC codes perform far better than Reed-Solomon codes for all values of n or code length. These codes are suitable for different storage applications like DSS and cloud as seen in [1], [6], and [7].
In [2], author has implemented a highly reliable and high performing, distributed storage system with small LowDensity Parity-Check (LDPC) code. The small LDPC Code used had n = 8 (data) and m = 6 (parity) chunks as shown in Fig.1. Such a code had the capability to tolerate loss of any three data blocks out of the total 11 number of blocks.
It means that the original file can be reconstructed successfully even if 3 are data blocks are missing. Overhead factor f of 1.108 is obtained. [4] Presents Locally Repairable Codes (LRC) for increased repair efficiency in data storage. An LRC code reduces the repair bandwidth and also the memory utilization, thus showing high performance in data

978-1-7281-5286-8/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE

34

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:39:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

storage systems which involves only single node failure and not in multiple node failures.
Fig.1. A graph with n = 8 and m = 6 which can be reconstructed with any 11 nodes out of 13 total blocks [2]
Main problem concerning the data storage systems is that large amount of block downloads is required for data reconstruction, which has been addressed in [5], [12]. Formula for mean-time-to-data-loss (MTTDL) associated with LDPC codes have been derived in [12].
In [5], author shows how RS Codes have been utilized for data recovery operations in Facebook’s warehouse cluster, which consumes a lot of cross-rack bandwidth. He has designed a new kind of RS codes called as PiggybackedRS codes that reduces the disk usage during recovery processes.
Different types of LDPC codes have been studied in [7] and it is found that Systematic codes perform better than Irregular Repeat Accumulate codes for wide area storage systems. In [6], author has proposed to use LDPC codes for storage space reduction and fault tolerance in cloud.
In [8], author has proposed auto-configurable LDPC Codes for use in Distributed Storage systems. It is integrated with HADOOP with various LDPC Configurations and their performance is measured in terms of Repair Latency, encoding and decoding complexities. Comparison of both LDPC and RS codes has been studied and results showed that LDPC codes perform better in terms of decoding efficiency. Encoding latencies for all three (21, 8), (42, 30), (180,120) LDPC codes were found to be better than (14, 10) R-S code and (16, 10) LRC codes.
Repair traffic is another main issue to be addressed for data storage frameworks. In [9], author has proposed large block sized LDPC codes to achieve low repair traffic for multiple erasures and parity erasures.
In [10], Yongmei suggests a novel combination code, LDPC Convolutional Code known as expanCode for use in storage purposes. These codes boast of their property of maintaining same computational complexity and repair traffic even at the time when n keeps increasing, thus achieving better reliability.
Comparison between erasure coding method and full replication coding scheme has been conducted in [15] and author concludes that erasure code based storage systems are highly reliable and uses lesser bandwidth, storage space.
Table I. shows the comparison between the usage of three different coding techniques - Replication, RS Codes and LDPC Codes for Storage applications.
From Table 1, it is seen that LDPC Codes are considered as the best technique among three coding techniques for data storage systems.
The literature survey shows that LDPC codes are one of the best choices for usage in Data storage systems. In this

paper, a systematic small sized LDPC erasure code has been utilized for Distributed data storage system to ensure high performance. It is found that LDPC codes are less complex in terms of encoding and decoding operations as it uses exclusive-OR operations. LDPC codes are further seen to be less expensive as well due to the sparse nature of the parity check matrix “H” and simpler XOR arithmetic operations required.
TABLE I. COMPARISON BETWEEN REPLICATION, RS CODE AND LDPC CODES

Method

Overhead

Complexity

Used

Overhead factor

Storage Overhead

Encodin g

Decoding

Others

Triple Replication (Three copies)

Heavy overhead of about
200%

-------

------

-------

Cannot tolerate double disk failures

(10,3) Reed Solomon Codes

Minimum overhead of atleast
30%

1.5X

O(n(n-k)) O(n-k)

3 blocks are required for data
repair with (10,3) RS Codes

(180,120) LDPC Codes

Large Overhead but
can be minimised

1.5X Calc: (180-3) /120

O(n)

O(1)

Can tolerate upto 3 missing blocks

The remaining sections of this paper are organized as follows. Section III describes in details about LDPC code, its encoding and decoding procedures. Also it provides an insight into the reconstruction of data using bipartite graph when there is any node failure. Section IV covers distributed storage system architecture.
Section V tells how small sized LDPC Codes has been implemented in Distributed File storage system and data can be recovered even during a node failure event that has occurred. Section VI gives the performance evaluation by testing the reconstruction of a test image even when there was a node failure. And finally, Section VII provides the conclusion and future recommendations.

III. LDPC CODE
Low-Density Parity Check Codes were discovered by R. Gallager in 1960 [21] and since then they are used in communication systems. These LDPC codes are increasingly being considered for big data storage systems [1], [3], [8], [12] in the current scenario where data storage has become the prime need.
These codes are Linear block, error correction codes, usually represented by their Sparse “H” matrices having less number of 1’s.An example Parity check matrix of LDPC code having size (8, 3) is shown in (2)

(2) Code Rate (R) of the code is calculated using (3)
(3) The Parity Check Matrix “H” of an LDPC Code is represented by the bipartite graph in which the set of vertices

35
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:39:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

represents the columns in LDPC 'H' matrix (parity check matrix) and another set represents the rows of the 'H' matrix.
An LDPC bipartite graph has variable nodes on the left and check nodes on the right side of the graph which are connected based on the ones present in the “H” matrix. An example bipartite graph is shown in Fig. 2.

Fig. 2 A (2, 4) regular LDPC code with k = 8, r = 4.
A (2, 4) regular LDPC code seen in Fig. 2 has 8 variable nodes (i.e. k=8 data nodes) of degree 2 and 4 check nodes (i.e. r = 4 parity nodes) of degree 4.
In [13], [14] Study on varying the degrees of the variable nodes and check nodes of Irregular graphs is made and found that these degrees can be chosen according to some distribution.
A. Constructing Ldpc Codes For Storage Applications
Low Density Parity Check Codes are based on graphs. These codes have overhead factor f, such that (f ė 1), whenever (n ė Ğ). Regular LDPC Codes do not have this property. Hence random generation of these codes was conducted using Monte Carlo simulations to obtain better performing LDPC codes for storage applications.
With pre-decided constant block size n, parity size m and probability p, (where p was kept in between 0.4 and 0.6),a good LDPC bipartite graph was generated randomly using the Monte Carlo technique as mentioned in [7],[2].

Fig. 3 (8, 3) LDPC Code Tanner Graph
In the example tanner graph as shown in Fig.3, the number of variable nodes taken is n=5, where d1, d2, d3, d4, d5 are data blocks and number of check nodes taken is m = 3, where p1, p2, p3 are the coding/parity blocks.
Say we have a data block missing and have a known Parity block such that, all but one of the data blocks from which it has been calculated are known. Then the missing data blocks are the XOR of the words in the parity block and the known data blocks. It’s purely XOR operations.
There is one more case when all parity blocks are not available but it happens only when all parity blocks are placed in a single node which is failed. But in real time implementation of DSS, parity blocks are distributed in a way such that only a couple of parity blocks along with data blocks are placed in one node. So all parity blocks becoming unavailable is not possible.
D. Encoding And Decoding Using Bipartite Graph
LDPC codes are based on bipartite graphs in which the left nodes are the data blocks and right nodes correspond to check nodes or the parity blocks as seen in Fig. 4. Encoding and decoding uses XOR operations. Encoding process is done by computing the data blocks and parity blocks as shown in Fig. 4
Parity blocks computation is done by XOR’ing the data nodes connected to it as shown in (4),(5),(6)

B. Encoding
Low Density Parity Check Codes uses simple XOR operations for encoding and decoding. Parity blocks are calculated by XOR’ing the data blocks. The Coding blocks are calculated by XOR’ing parity block that are connected to it as shown in the bipartite graph.
An example (8, 3) LDPC bipartite irregular graph with n=5 data blocks, m=3 parity blocks and thus the total number of blocks N=8 is shown in Fig 3.
C. Reconstruction Of Data
When all data blocks are available the original file can be reconstructed by concatenating the data blocks. But if data blocks are unavailable then they can be reconstructed from the parity blocks by a technique that is suggested in this paper. Reconstruction is successful only if a required number of data and parity blocks are available.

Fig.4. A graph with variable nodes = 4, check nodes= 3 and its recovery equations

ͳ = ‫ܦ‬1 Ͱ ‫ܦ‬2 Ͱ ͵

(4)

͵ = ʹ Ͱ Ͷ

(5)

ʹ = ‫ܦ‬1 Ͱ ‫ܦ‬3 Ͱ Ͷ

(6)

Similarly, a data block is calculated by XOR’ing any parity blocks to which it is connected to as seen in (7),(8)

‫ܦ‬1 = 1 Ͱ 2

(7)

‫ܦ‬2 = ͳ Ͱ 3

(8)

36
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:39:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

A check node (parity block) is only used for reconstruction of data. Fig 5 shows the recovery equations for each check node.

IV. DISTRIBUTED STORAGE SYSTEM
A Distributed Storage System (DSS) is an advanced technology which was earlier used as “Software-Defined Storage- SDS 2.0”. In Fig.6, A distributed storage system comprises of users and storage nodes.
The users communicate with the storage nodes (SN)having servers which have memory devices or hard disk drives containing customer data. Distributed storage systems are in use for storing and retrieving large amounts of data.

Fig.5. A graph with variable nodes, VN = 4, check nodes CN = 3 and lost data node D3

When a check node (parity) is connected to only one variable node (data), then parity block can be computed by XOR’ing the variable node values (data) that is connected with it. Hence for recovering a lost data block, a check node connected to it needs to be found.

In Fig 5, check block C1 can be used to reconstruct data blocks D1, D2 and D3 connected to it. For example: In case1- D3 is lost, recovery equation to be used will be (9) for reconstruction. In other words, D1, D2, C1 are required to be downloaded for reconstruction.

 ‫ܦ‬3 = ‫ܦ‬1 Ͱ ‫ܦ‬2 Ͱ ‫ܥ‬1

(9)

The lost information recovery consistently refers to redundancy. Redundancy rate has a limit , which is to split the original information into m blocks and encode into n blocks where n > m. Any number of the encoded data that contains ‘r’ number of blocks such that m < r <n, can rebuild the original data.
The overhead factor f is assumed before generating good LDPC graph for storage applications so that erasure correction capability obtained is best. Using LDPC codes it is requited that on an average, fn blocks (out of the total n blocks) is available for successful repair of the original data. hence producing some storage overhead.

Code rate R can be found by (3) and Stretch factor or storage overhead of LDPC code is computed by (5)

S=1/R

(10)

One important parameter to be calculated for LDPC codes based storage systems is the Erasure correction capability є discussed in[2], which is found by (10). For any (n, m) LDPC code є is determined by the number of connections between n number of data blocks and m number of parity blocks in the graph

є = (n + m) - fn

(11)

For Single repair, [3] Recovery equation is first found using recovery equation methods. And then the node which needs to store the repaired chunk tries to contact the nodes which stores the chunks required in the recovery equation found already to retrieve the complete set of data blocks and reconstruct data.XOR operations are performed to obtain the missing/lost data block.

Fig 6. Architecture of Distributed Storage Network
DSS make one shared storage system out of many numbers of nodes and with low usage of compute power (CPU & RAM).A distributed storage system has servers which have CPU, memory devices such as RAM, Hard disk drives and network interface and all these behave as one single group. When a new server gets added, number of resources also increases and hence the speed of the entire data storage system increases eventually.
The nodes seen in Fig. 6, actually receive user requests from users for read or write access to files. If encoded files are available (i.e if the SN is alive), it responds to the user request with the requested file. Each SN sends the encoded block as soon as the user request is received.
The encoding process is done before storing the files in the SN of the Distributed storage network, where the original file is split into n equal size blocks, LDPC encoder present in main server encodes to obtain (n + m) equal sized data & parity blocks. This (n + m)encoded block is stored/ distributed as a whole in the different storage nodes.
Finally at the decoding side, the original image is reconstructed. Problem arises when any data gets lost or it does not reach, then the original data can be reconstructed using the rest of the blocks provided there is sufficient n data blocks available.
In order to decode, we assume fn nearest blocks are available starting from B1, B2, B3, B4 ... Bfn to be downloaded in order. Thus, the original n data blocks are found and finally reconstruction of original data is made possible.
V. IMPLEMENTATION
This paper describes the implementation of small sized systematic LDPC Codes in Distributed File storage system. LDPC Codes is used to implement data storage in Distributed Storage systems. A large sized image file is taken as input,

37
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:39:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

split into equal sized parts and encoded using the LDPC Encoder at the Server Side. The Encoded data (data blocks along with Parity blocks) is stored in different clients systems in the distributed storage network in order.
Reconstruction of the image file is carried out at the LDPC Decoder side in the same LAN Server. Both the encoder and Decoder have been implemented using MATLAB Codes and Simulink.
The image is reconstructed using the data blocks available when there is no failure of blocks. The advantage of using LDPC Code is that the image can be reconstructed even when there is a block failure or data block is unavailable. Fig7. Shows the encoding and decoding algorithm.
The algorithm was implemented using MATLAB and Simulink and the analysis of image reconstruction when there is a block failure is carried out. Images were reconstructed well when there is a maximum of 2 block failures. After 2 blocks, image could not be reconstructed.
Image Data

An image file is split into 9 equal parts and each is encoded separately using LDPC code. Each 12 encoded file is a combination of data blocks and parity blocks. The parity blocks consist of the parity data obtained by computing XOR operation between the data blocks connected to it. This encoded information ie. 12 encoded blocks are distributed in order among the 4 LAN Servers. These blocks are sent with an IP Header to the servers.
For Reconstruction of the Original image at the LDPC decoder side, the 12 encoded blocks are downloaded in the same order as stored and decoded .All the decoded files are then concatenated to obtain the original data. But if a data block is lost due to some reason; the original file can be reconstructed by just downloading 10 data blocks and a required parity block. If even one data block is lesser (i.e. 9 data block only are available), image could not be reconstructed.
VI. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
A Gray scale test image (Lena) as shown in Fig 8 is given as input to the image splitter which splits it into 9 equal parts as shown in Fig. 8. A (12, 8) LDPC code is used to encode the data at the main LAN Server which has the LDPC Encoder program running on it.

Split the image data into n fixed size data blocks
Encode using LDPC Codes (n data disks +m Parity disks)

Convert pixels to Decimal values

The data and Parity blocks are stored in a distributed manner in the different LAN systems

For decoding:

N

No. of data

Blocks

received > n,

Is sufficient?

N

Fail to reconstruct the image
Y
Reconstruct the original image

Fig.9. Image file is split into 9 equal sized parts and sent to Decimal converter using matlab
The central server also has the LAN Decoder inbuilt. MATLAB programs and Simulink blocks were used for LDPC Encoding and Decoding, which ran at the central LAN Server.
The first part of the image is encoded using a (12, 8) small sized LDPC Code. Encoding is a simple process where: At first, each pixel value of the image is converted to its corresponding decimal value as shown in Fig. 10.

Fig.7. Flowchart of Encoding & Decoding process for distributed storage
Fig.8. Input Lena gray scale test image

Fig.10. A clip of single block of image data converted to Decimal values from Matlab
The decimal values are converted to its corresponding 8 bit binary values as shown in Fig. 11 The input then is rearranged into a set of data blocks of 8 bit size.
Matrix form of the decimal values and its 8 bit binary values obtained is given in (12), (13).

38
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:39:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 11. A clip of decimal value matrix obtained for Decimal to 8 bit binary values.

Thus a total of 12 encoded files are obtained along with parity blocks and distributed among the LAN machines in order for storage. It is shown in Fig 12.
A. Decoding
The original data file (Lena test image) is reconstructed by collecting all the encoded data from each client machine and decoding each one of them separately and connecting the images together.

LDPC Encoder

D

D

D

D

D

D

D

D

D

D

D

D

12 encoded /data files

P P P P P
P P P
8 PARITY BLOCKS

LDPC DECODER
REASSEMBLE

Fig.12. Schematic diagram of the LDPC based DSS
again used for decoding in order to get the lost data. It was enough to reconstruct the entire image using 10 files out of the 12 encoded files. Fig 13 shows the fully reconstructed (12) image using LDPC Codes.

(13) Each input data is encoded with the corresponding Generator matrix to create encoded files. Thus the 9 image data blocks are encoded into 12 encoded blocks and 8 parity blocks.
These 8 Parity blocks are calculated by performing XOR operations of the data blocks connected to it as shown in Fig 3 under Section 3 Encoding procedure explanation.
12 Encoded files are then are sent to the 2 LAN Servers in systematic order along with an IP header for storage. Also the 8 parity/constraint blocks are sent for storage in the rest of the 2 LAN Servers.
The LDPC Decoder is set up at the LAN Server which reconstructs the original file by using 11 encoded files received. Same tanner graph which was used for encoding is

Fig 13 shows the reconstructed image
B. Data Reconstruction in Case of Failure a) Single Data block is lost: A single block was
deleted for testing so while decoding, the decoder finds values of data blocks and it fails so then the corresponding parity block was used to obtain the lost data block for reconstruction.

39
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:39:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

b) Single Parity block is lost along with data block: When sufficient data blocks were present and corresponding parity block was present, original data could be reconstructed.
c) All parity Blocks lost: In DSS, parity blocks are distributed among the storage nodes along with the corresponding data blocks. Hence, all parity block becoming unavailable is rare and happens only when all storage nodes fail. If that was the case when all data blocks were available, there was no need for parity blocks to get original image back. When all parity blocks and one data block was lost, then complete image was not able to be reconstructed.
In this paper, a (12, 8) LDPC code has been designed for storing test image file in Distributed Storage architecture with code rate of R=8/14=0.57 and was able to tolerate 2 failures else called as erasures. The code displayed an erasure correction capability ‘є’ of 2 and overhead factor f was 1.25, calculated as f=10/8=1.25.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a small sized (12, 8) LDPC Code has been implemented in distributed storage system and it is found that when LDPC Codes were used for storage, during a node failure event, it is not at all required to have all the data blocks (i.e.12 data blocks) to recover the original file. It just needed sufficient number of data blocks (i.e. 10 data blocks) in order to recover the original image. In addition to it, LDPC Codes were found to reduce the memory usage and provided high reliability with a low storage overhead.Hence, Low Density Parity Check Codes can be used as an efficient coding scheme for storing and reconstruction of large data. A Similar type LDPC code can also be used for other storage applications like Cloud storage (Google Cloud, Amazon Cloud).
REFERENCES
[1] James S. Plank and Michael G. Thomason, “On the Practical Use of LDPC Erasure Codes for Distributed Storage Applications,'' Technical Report UT-CS-03-510, University of Tennessee, Sept., 2003.
[2] Benjamin Gaidioz, Birger Koblitz and Nuno Santos, “Exploring High Performance Distributed File storage Using LDPC codes,” Parallel Computing, Vol. 33, No. 4, Pages 264274,May 2007.
[3] Yongmei WEI, Yong Wee FOO, Fengmin CHEN and Khai Cher LIM, “A Cost-Effective and Reliable Cloud Storage,”in 2014 IEEE 7th International Conference on Cloud Computing, Dec. 2014,pp. 938-938,USA.
[4] M. Sathiamoorthy, M. Asteris,D. Papailiopoulos,A.G. Dimakis,R. Vadali,S.Chen,D. Borthakur,“XORing Elephants: Novel Erasure Codes for Big Data” Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment,vol. 6, No. 5,pp. 325-336,March 2013.
[5] K.V. Rashmi, Nihar B. shaha, Dikang Gu, Hairong Kuang, D. Borthakur, K. Ramchandran,“A solution to the network challenges of data recovery in erasure-coded distributed storage systems: a study on the Facebook warehouse cluster,” USENIX HotStorage, 2013.
[6] Yongmei WEI, Yong Wee FOO, Fengmin CHEN and Khai Cher LIM, "Auto-configurable, Reliable, and Fault-Tolerant Cloud Storage with Dynamic Parameterization”, IEEE World Congress on Services, pp. 296-300, September 2014
[7] J.S. Plank, M.G. Thomason, "A practical analysis of lowdensity parity-check erasure codes for wide-area storage

applications", in: DSN-2004: The International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks, IEEE, July 2004,Italy.
[8] Y. Wei, Y. W. Foo, K. C. Lim, and F. Chen, “The autoconfigurable ldpc codes for distributed storage,” in 2014 IEEE 17th International Conference on Computational Science and Engineering, Dec 2014, pp. 1332–1338,China.

[9] Y. Wei, F. Chen, and K. C. Lim, “Large LDPC codes for big data storage,” in Proceedings of the ASE BigData & SocialInformatics 2015. ACM, Oct. 2015, p. 1.

[10] Y. Wei and F. Chen, “expanCodes: Tailored LDPC codes for big data storage,” in 2016 IEEE 14th Intl Conf on Dependable, Autonomic and Secure Computing, 14th Intl Conf on Pervasive Intelligence and Computing, Aug2016, pp. 620–625.

[11] Sarah Johnson, Introducing Low-Density Parity-Check Codes, School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, The University of New castle Australia, Version 1. l ,pp-15-20.

[12] Hyegyeong Park, Dongwon Lee,and Jaekyun Moon, "LDPC Code Design for Distributed Storage: Balancing Repair Bandwidth, Reliability and Storage Overhead", IEEE Transactions on Communications, Vol. 66 , No. 2 , Feb. 2018 , pp. 507 – 520

[13] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, D. A. Spielman, and V. Stemann, "Practical loss-resilient codes." in 97 Proceedings of the twenty-ninth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing,pp. 150-159 ,ACM, 1997,USA.

[14] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke. Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density paritycheck codes. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 47(2):619–637, Feb 2001.

[15] Weatherspoon, H., Kubiatowicz, J.“Erasure Coding vs. Replication: A Quantitative Comparison.” In Proceedings of the First International Workshop on Peer-to-Peer Systems (IPTPS 2002), March 2002, 328-338.

[16] Y. Cassuto, “Coding Techniques for Data-Storage Systems,” Thesis, California Inst. of Tech., Dec. 2007.

[17] V. Roca and C. Neumann,“Design, evaluation and comparison of four large FEC Codecs , LDPC, LDGM, LDGM staircase and LDGM triangle, plus a Reed-Solomon small block FEC Codec,”Technical Report RR-5225, INRIA Rhone-Alpes, June 2004.

[18] R. L. Collins and J. S. Plank. Assessing the performance of erasure codes in the wide-area. In DSN-05: International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks, Yokohama,Japan, 2005. IEEE.

[19] I. Reed and G. Solomon, "Polynomial codes over certain," in Journal of the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 300-304, 1960.

[20] Harihara S.G, ,Balaji Janakiram, M.Girish Chandra, Aravind

K.G,

Swanand

Kadhe,Balamuralidhar

P,

B.S.Adiga,"SpreadStore: A LDPC Erasure Code scheme for

Distributed Storage System," 2010 International Conference

on Data Storage and Data Engineering,Feb. 2010,

Bangalore,India

[21] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan 1962.

40
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:39:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

