2312

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 38, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2019

Pair-Bit Errors Aware LDPC Decoding in MLC NAND Flash Memory
Meng Zhang , Fei Wu , Member, IEEE, Yajuan Du, Weihua Liu, and Changsheng Xie, Member, IEEE

Abstract—By storing multibit per cell, multilevel cell (MLC) NAND flash memory achieves high storage capacity, but sacrificing data reliability. Error correction codes, such as Bose–Chaudhuri– Hocquenghem (BCH) codes, are widely used to ensure data reliability. However, high raw bit error rates induced by interference noises make BCH codes become insufficient to guarantee data reliability. Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are considered as the replacement due to the stronger error correction capability. Nevertheless, directly exploiting LDPC codes introduces a concern about decoding latency because of their iterative decoding in the soft decision process. To develop effective LDPC decoding algorithms, it is necessary to have a more profound understanding on flash failure patterns. This paper first observes the pair-bit errors (PBEs) characteristic of MLC NAND flash memory on a real field-programmable gate array testing platform, then proposes a PBE-aware LDPC (PAL) decoding scheme-based upon this observation, in which PBE provides the promotion information for LDPC decoding to reduce decoding latency. Simulation results show that the decoding latency can be reduced by up to 54%, compared with the conventional LDPC codes.
Index Terms—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, NAND flash, pair-bit errors (PBEs).
I. INTRODUCTION
N AND flash memory with excellent characteristics, such as high performance, large storage capacity, and shock resistance, is widely used in a variety of computer storage systems [13]. By storing multibit per cell, the storage capacity of multilevel cell (MLC) NAND flash memory increases and, hence, reduces the cost per bit, but introducing a concern about data reliability. Error correction codes (ECCs), such as Bose–Chaudhuri–Hocquenghem (BCH) codes [2],
Manuscript received December 26, 2017; revised June 21, 2018; accepted August 5, 2018. Date of publication October 25, 2018; date of current version November 20, 2019. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61872413, Grant U1709220, Grant 61821003, and Grant 61876019, in part by the Wuhan Science and Technology Project under Grant 2017010201010108, in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant 2016YXMS019, in part by the Shenzhen Basic Research Project under Grant JCYJ20170307160135308 and Grant JCYJ20170818162129916, in part by 111 Project under Grant B07038, and in part by the Key Laboratory of Data Storage System, Ministry of Education. This paper was recommended by Associate Editor Y. Shi. (Corresponding author: Fei Wu.)
M. Zhang, F. Wu, W. Liu, and C. Xie are with the Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail: zgmeng@hust.edu.cn; wufei@hust.edu.cn; cs_xie@hust.edu.cn; liuweihua@hust.edu.cn).
Y. Du is with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan 430070, China (e-mail: dyj@whut.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCAD.2018.2878132

are intensively adopted to ensure data reliability. High raw bit error rates (RBERs) introduced by interference noises, however, make BCH codes become insufficient to guarantee data reliability because of limited error correction capability. Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes with stronger error correction capability are considered as the replacement [38]. However, directly adopting LDPC codes lowers down decoding latency due to their iterative decoding in the soft decision process. To propose effective LDPC decoding algorithms, it is very necessary to have a deep understanding on flash failure patterns, which can be exploited to reduce LDPC decoding latency.
There are some prior works to study flash failure patterns. Cai et al. [1] measured and characterized various error patterns in MLC NAND flash memory, including retention errors, program interference errors, read errors, and erase errors. Yaakobi et al. [3] proposed the error correction technique based on error patterns in triple-level cell (TLC) NAND flash memory. Tseng et al. [9] developed an experimental platform to study the bit error behavior. Meza et al. [5] collected a large number of data from the Facebook data center to investigate and analyze failure modes of flash-based solid-state drives. By analyzing these works, it is found that they all focus on error patterns of independent bits inside a flash cell but do not dig into the pair-bit error (PBE) characteristic. We call the least significant bit (LSB) and most significant bit (MSB) in a flash cell as the pair-bit. One bit error may lead to its PBE. Besides, they also do not further exploit PBE to design effective LDPC algorithms.
This paper studies the PBE characteristics-based upon a real field-programmable gate array (FPGA) testing platform and provides the analysis from various aspects, such as threshold voltage shifts, program mechanisms, and flash internal characteristics. Based on the captured PBE characteristics, this paper proposes a PBE-aware LDPC (PAL) decoding scheme to assist the decoding. When decoding, PBE provides the promotion information integrated into the soft decision decoding process, accelerating the decoding converge to the correct codeword. The promotion information means that when one bit is decoded, its pair-bit can provide valuable log-likelihood ratio (LLR) information for this bit to facilitate decoding. Simulation results show that PAL improves LDPC decoding performance and lowers down the decoding latency.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows. 1) This paper observes the PBE in MLC NAND flash
memory. The PBE characteristic is validated through a real FPGA-based testing platform.

0278-0070 c 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:34:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: PAL DECODING IN MLC NAND FLASH MEMORY

2313

Fig. 1. Program and read of MLC NAND flash are finished including two rounds [4], [30]. LSB program in the first round injects a certain number of electrons denoted by yellow circles into flash cells based on programmed values. MSB program depending on the LSB state exists in the second round. LSB read is the first round, using reference voltage Vf 2 to judge data. In the second round, MSB read is finished by exploiting reference voltage Vf 1 or Vf 3 to determine data.
2) By exploiting this observation, this paper proposes the PAL decoding scheme to reduce LDPC decoding latency. The PBE characteristic is incorporated into the process of LDPC decoding to optimize the initial LLR information and, hence, accelerate the decoding.
3) This paper conducts the simulation experiment to verify the effectiveness of PAL. Experimental results show that PAL can reduce the decoding latency by up to 54%.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the background about MLC NAND flash memory and related work. Section III presents the observation of the PBE in detail. The proposed PAL scheme is presented in Section IV, including the PAL overview and decoding algorithm. Section V describes the experiment and provides the result analysis. Section VI concludes this paper.
II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
In this section, this paper first introduces the background about MLC NAND flash memory, including program and read operations [10], and then describes the related work.
A. Program and Read
MLC NAND flash memory stores two bits per cell, with four states (i.e., “11,” “10,” “01,” and “00”), denoted as SE, S1, S2, and S3, respectively, in which SE represents the erased state. When implementing program operations, two bits from the same MLC cell are mapped into two different pages. The left bit is called the LSB and mapped into the LSB page, while the right bit is called the MSB and mapped into the MSB page. Program and read processes are shown in Fig. 1.
Program: Program operations of MLC NAND flash memory experience two rounds [4]. LSB program is in the first round. Let’s take on the concrete program process.
1) LSB Program: LSB program is simple, with high program speed. When bit “1” is programmed, the NAND

flash cell does not require to be injected electrons, remaining state SE. Conversely, when bit “0” is programmed, it needs to inject a certain number of electrons into the flash cell. As a result, the cell is injected to a temporary state SP. This state can only be determined after the completion of MSB program. 2) MSB Program: MSB program, based on the LSB program state, is complicated, with relatively slow program speed. When programming MSB, Vf is used to determine the current LSB state. In the first case of LSB placing in the SE state, when bit 1 is programmed, it does not need to inject electrons into the flash cell, keeping SE unchanged. When bit 0 is programmed, the cell requires to be injected electrons to change the state from SE to S1. In the second case of LSB locating in the SP state, the cell is charged from SP to S2 when bit 1 is programmed. Conversely, the cell is charged from SP to S3 with more electrons. Read: Read operations of MLC NAND flash memory also undergo two rounds. Three reference voltages are used to read bit data in the MLC NAND flash cell. 1) LSB Read: Reference voltage Vf 2 is first applied to judge the LSB value. There are two cases. In the first case of Vc ≤ Vf 2, where Vc denotes the cell threshold voltage, it means that the read LSB is bit 1, otherwise 0. 2) MSB Read: MSB read is more complicated than that of LSB. Vf 1, Vf 2, and Vf 3 are exploited to determine the MSB value. Vf 2 is first adopted between S1 and S2 to determine the LSB state, and then Vf 1 or Vf 3 is used according to the LSB state. If Vf 1 < Vc < Vf 2 or Vc > Vf 3, bit 0 is read, otherwise, bit 1.
B. Related Work
With the increase of NAND flash storage density, bit data is affected by various interference noises, leading to reduced data reliability. To ensure data reliability, ECC techniques are adopted in flash controllers. Yaakobi et al. [3] developed fault tolerant techniques by exploiting the observed error behavior of TLC NAND flash memory. Zhao et al. [2] based upon characteristics of flash memory chips, proposed three techniques (i.e., predetection, step detection, and data crossing) to guarantee data reliability and improve the system performance. Zhao et al. [10] depended on unbalanced characteristics of bit errors and data dependency in flash cells, proposed two techniques, intracell data placement interleaving and intracell data dependency aware min-sum decoding, in order to improve the LDPC decoding throughput. Meza et al. [5] collected a large amount of data from the Facebook data center to investigate failure modes of solid-state drives. Tseng et al. [9] designed a hardware platform to study bit error characteristics when the flash power is cut off during operations. Cai et al. [1] constructed an FPGA-based hardware platform to study error patterns in MLC NAND flash memory. Besides, Cai et al. also studied program interference [4] and read interference errors [11] in NAND flash memory. Cai et al. [7] developed a flash correct-and-refresh flash scheme to lower down the effects of retention errors, which is to read pages periodically,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:34:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2314

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 38, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2019

(a)
(b)
Fig. 2. LSB and MSB are undercharged, leading to PBE.
correct bit errors, and write corrected data to the new locations. Wang et al. [8] proposed a programming initial step only scheme to inject additional electrons into flash cells such that retention errors are reduced dramatically. Cai et al. [1] developed an FPGA testbed for flash error patterns, such as retention errors, program interference errors, read interference errors, and erase errors, without further investigation of the PBE characteristic. Cai et al. [4], [11] proposed the error correction schemes based on the program interference and read interference errors. Cai et al. [7] and Wang et al. [8] developed correction schemes to solve the flash retention problems. However, these works do not exploit PBE to design effective LDPC decoding algorithms to ensure data reliability while improving decoding performance.
III. OBSERVATION In this section, This paper finds the PBE in MLC NAND flash memory and explains it in detail. The PBE characteristics are validated through a real FPGA-based testing platform presented in Section V. The PBE is formed from various aspects, such as program mechanisms, program interference errors, retention errors, read

interference errors, and power failure. As shown in Fig. 1, specific operations on the MSB program depend on the current LSB state. If bit errors happen in the LSB program process, the flash cell exists in an unexpected state. According to the unexpected LSB state to program MSB, the MSB errors happen with a large probability. For example, if LSB is to be programmed as bit 0 in the first round program process, the flash cell should be charged from the SE state to the SP state, as explained in Fig. 1. If unexpected power off occurs during this process, the flash cell can not be fully charged to the SP state. But it may reach the S1 state by mistake as shown in Fig. 2(a). Therefore, LSB is written as bit 1 unexpectedly. And the MSB is changed to bit 0. Since the flash cell can not change from 0 to 1 without erasing operations according to the flash program mechanism, it is impossible for the MSB to be programmed as bit 1 in the second round program process. As a result, both LSB and MSB are programmed to the incorrect values, which is a PBE behavior.
If LSB is programmed as bit 0 correctly in the first round programming process, the flash cell is charged to the SP state. If MSB is to be programmed as bit 1, the correct process is that the SP state should be charged to the S2 state. If power failure occurs during this process, the flash cell can not be fully charged to the S2 state, as shown in Fig. 2(b). The cell threshold voltage distribution crosses reference voltage Vf 2. When Vf 2 is applied to read the LSB and MSB from the flash cells, if the detected cell threshold voltage Vc < Vf 2, the LSB with correct bit 0 is misread as bit 1. If Vf 1 < Vc < Vf 2, the MSB with correct bit 1 is misread as bit 0.
Once the bit errors are beyond the error correction capability of ECCs, data reliability can not be ensured. Besides, the flash cell threshold voltage changes with the number of injected electrons. If additional electrons penetrate into the flash cell, the threshold voltage is changed, introducing state shift and thus leading to PBE. Program and read interferences are more likely to cause additional electrons to penetrate into the NAND flash cell. When programming or reading data, if additional electrons are injected into the S1 state such that the voltage state is converted from S1 to S2 or from SE to S3, leading to two-bit errors from same cells. Moreover, charges stored in cells leak over time due to retention errors such that the S2 state transfers to the S1 state. If the electron leakage is enough, the S3 state may shift to the SE state so that two bits located in same cells occur to errors at the same time. Moreover, it is more prone to PBE when state S1 shifts to state S2 or state S2 shifts to state S1. Conversely, it is more difficult for state S1 to shift to state S3 or state S3 to shift to state S1. Program interference errors, read interference errors, and retention errors are more severe after flash experiences a large number of program/erase cycles so that two bits from same flash cells are more prone to errors.
The PBE characteristic is considered as the valuable guidance to design effective ECC algorithms. This paper offers a design idea described in Section IV, which aims at LDPC decoding by fully leveraging the PBE characteristic.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:34:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: PAL DECODING IN MLC NAND FLASH MEMORY

2315

Fig. 3. During decoding, data in the LSB page is first read to correct bit errors, soft information of decoding results, (L1, L2, L3, . . . , Ln−1, Ln), a set of real numbers, is recorded and stored in the buffer. When decoding the MSB page, based on the captured PBE characteristic, (L1, L2, L3, . . . , Ln−1, Ln) is exploited to optimize initial soft information of the MSB page, (M1, M2, M3, . . . , Mn−1, Mn), facilitating the decoding convergence.
IV. PROPOSED PAL DECODING SCHEME
In this section, this paper describes the PBE overview and decoding algorithm.
A. PAL Overview
The captured PBE characteristic is helpful to develop high efficient LDPC codes. The LDPC codes [25], which are based on the belief propagation algorithms [28], are able to be effectively designed if flash failure patterns can be incorporated into the decoding process. When decoding, soft information of bit decisions is obtained and transmitted to correct bit errors. Unbalanced bit error rates (BERs) between the MSB and LSB pages lead to different decoding iterations. Higher BERs in the MSB page result in higher decoding iterations. Such unbalanced decoding iterations leading to more serious read performance of NAND flash memory can be minimized by exploiting the PBE characteristic. As shown in Fig. 3, when information bit sequences are encoded by LDPC codes, one generated codeword of (Q1, Q2, Q3, . . . , Qn−1, Qn) is first stored in the register, and then programmed into the LSB page. Similarly, another codeword of (P1, P2, P3, . . . , Pn−1, Pn) is programmed into the MSB page. The two codewords are interfered from the flash noise, such as retention and program interference noises, leading to bit errors. As a result, the two codewords are changed into the interfered two-bit sequences of (Q1, Q2, Q3, . . . , Qn−1, Qn) and (P1, P2, P3, . . . , Pn−1, Pn), respectively. The bit sequence of (Q1, Q2, Q3, . . . , Qn−1, Qn) corresponding to the soft information is first read to the register to decode. The decoding result of the LSB page, (L1, L2, L3, . . . , Ln−1, Ln), is recorded and stored in the buffer. When the bit sequence of (P1, P2, P3, . . . , Pn−1, Pn) is decoded, the corresponding soft information of (M1, M2, M3, . . . , Mn−1, Mn) is obtained and read to the register. Due to the PBE characteristic, if the bit error occurs in the LSB page, there is a large probability of

Algorithm 1 Decoding Procedures of PAL
Input: The obtained initial soft information of the jth LSB and MSB, represented as ISILSBj and ISIMSBj
Output: Decoded bit sequences of the LSB and MSB pages 1: The process is divided into decoding the LSB and MSB pages, respectively. 2: if The LSB page is decoded then 3: Activate steps of 7, 9, 10 (1), 11 (1) and 12 → 25 4: else 5: Activate steps of 8, 9, 10 (2), 11 (2) and 17 → 25 6: end if 7: Initialize VNj0→i = ISILSBj , set the maximum iteration number as Kmax, 0 ≤ k ≤ Kmax 8: Initialize VNj0→i = OSIMSBj , set the maximum iteration number as Kmax, 0 ≤ k ≤ Kmax 9: Update information CNij of the ith check node by exploiting information VNij of the jth variable node updated in the kth iteration, α is usually set as 0.85.

CNikj+1 = α

sgn(VNikm) · min VNikm

m∈G(i)\j

10: Update information VNij of the jth variable node by using information of the ith check node CNij updated in the k + 1
iteration

(1) VNikj+1 = ISILSBi +

CNnkj+1

n∈Q(j)\i

(2) VNikj+1 = ISIMSBi +

CNnkj+1

n∈Q(j)\i

11: Make decoding decisions to check whether decoded bit sequences satisfy check equations or not

(1) VNjk+1 = ISILSBi +

CNnkj+1

n∈Q(j)

(2) VNjk+1 = OSIMSBi +

CNnkj+1

n∈Q(j)

12: if VNjk+1 · ISILSBj < 0 then 13: It means that the jth bit of the LSB page occurs to errors. Let

OSIMSBj = −0.85 · ISIMSBj . 14: else

15: It means that the jth bit of the LSB page is correct. Let

OSIMSBj = ISIMSBj . 16: end if 17: if VNjk+1 ≥ 0 then 18: BSlsbj = 1 or BSmsbj = 1 19: else

20: BSlsbj = 0 or BSlsbj = 0

21: 22:

iefnVd→Nif·HT

→
=0

or

k = Kmax

then

23: break

24: else

25: for k from 1 to Nmax do

26:

repeat steps of 7, 9, 10 (1), 11 (1) and 12 → 25 until step 22

is satisfied, or repeat steps of 8, 9, 10 (2), 11 (2) and 17

→ 25 until step 22 is satisfied.

27: end for

28: end if

being the error in the corresponding MSB page. The obtained initial soft information of (M1, M2, M3, . . . , Mn−1, Mn) can be optimized to facilitate the decoding before launching the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:34:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2316

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 38, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2019

TABLE I SYMBOLS REQUIRED FOR DECODING PROCEDURES OF PAL

Fig. 4. FPGA-based testing platform.

decoding process. When the LSB happens to bit errors, the corresponding MSB is first flipped to improve initial information precision of decoding according to the PBE characteristic. For example, M2 and L2 are the decoding soft information and the initial soft information of Q2 and P2, respectively. Q2 and P2 show the PBE characteristic when experiencing the noise interference. If Q2 happen to the error, P2 has high probability of being the error, the initial soft information of M2 is flipped to make it become more accurate, i.e., the negative value is changed into the positive value, vice versa.
B. PAL Decoding Algorithm
The decoding procedures presented in Algorithm 1 can correct bit errors in the LSB and MSB pages. The decoding process of the MSB page is based on the decoding result of the LSB page. The decoding iterations are largely reduced benefiting from the provided promotion information by decoding the LSB. Related symbols are listed in Table I.
LDPC codes with strong error correction capability benefit from their soft decision decoding that is an iterative process. To activate the decoding process in NAND flash memory, it needs to obtain initial soft decision information (i.e., LLR information) by implementing multisensing operations. The LLR information is iteratively updated to improve the probability of correcting decoding. Specifically, this paper explains Algorithm 1 in detail to better understand the decoding processes for the LSB and MSB pages. When decoding the LSB page, the soft decision decoding process is launched by inputting the initial LLR information, as given in step 7. Moreover, in the process of updating LLR information, it needs to set the maximum iteration as the condition of decoding convergence. By exploiting initial LLR information, the check node information is first updated via the formula in step 9. Second, by exploiting the updated check node information, the LLR information of variable nodes is updated by using the formula (1) in step 10. Third, the decoding decision is made for the updated LLR information of variable nodes via the formula (1) in step 11. If the LLR information is larger than 0, the bit is judged to be 1. Otherwise, the bit

is judged to be 0, as given in steps 17–21. If one of the conditions of decoding convergence are satisfied in step 22, the decoding process is stop. Otherwise, the decoding process is implemented continually. When decoding the MSB page, the initial LLR information is optimized by exploiting the decoding results and initial LLR of the LSB page in steps 12–15. If their product is less than 0, it means that the detected LSB happens bit errors. According to the PBE characteristic, the initial LLR information of the MSB page is adjusted. After obtaining the optimized LLR information, the decoding process is triggered in a similar method with decoding the LSB page.
V. EXPERIMENT AND RESULT ANALYSIS
In this section, this paper introduces the experiment methodology and gives the result analysis.
A. Experiment Methodology
This paper studies the PBE on an FPGA-based testing platform shown in Fig. 4, which is equipped with 16 TSSOP48 sockets connecting to the Xilinx Spartan3E FPGA. The windows-based applications connect to the testing platform through an SATA cable. Flash test applications running in PC communicate to this platform with a vendor unique command set designed to test NAND flash performance under the ATA protocol. The code running in the MicroBlaze implements the ATA protocol and read/program operations.
Experimental processes described briefly as follows are mainly divided into two stages, as shown in Fig. 5, including data programmed into MLC NAND flash memory and read to detect bit errors.
1) Data Program: IO and data pattern generators produce address sequences and random data, respectively. The generated random data, according to the corresponding address sequences, is written to the MLC NAND flash memory via the “PageWrite” module. Once the process of data program is finished, the process of data read to count PBE is activated.
2) Data Read to Count PBE: Through the “PageReadBypass” operation, raw data stored in the MLC NAND flash memory is read according to the address sequences mentioned above, while the raw programmed data together with the read data is sent to the error detection module to check PBE. The obtained

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:34:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: PAL DECODING IN MLC NAND FLASH MEMORY

2317

Fig. 5. Experiment testing procedures mainly undergo two stages, including data written into the specific pages in the first stage and data read to check and count PBE rates in the second stage.
TABLE II CHIP PARAMETERS OF NAND FLASH
bit error information, including bit error locations and numbers, is stored in the information table together with the corresponding address sequence. The PBE characteristic is studied. This paper evaluates the proposed PAL scheme by utilizing the MATLAB simulation, and selects quasi-cyclic LDPC (QCLDPC) codes proved to be suitable for NAND flash memory systems [25], with information bit lengths of 2 KB and code rate (CR) of 0.89 and 0.80 as the ECC. The conventional scheme selected as the baseline for comparison is the classical LDPC decoding (i.e., min-sum algorithms [10], [22], [24], [38] widely used in NAND flash memory), which independently correct bit errors in the LSB and MSB pages. In the decoding process, there are no connection between the LSB and MSB pages. The additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel is adopted, which is proved to be approximate to the NAND flash channel [12]. Information sequences are first encoded by the selected QC-LDPC code and modulated by 4-pulse amplitude modulation [26] to simulate MLC NAND flash cells, and then sent to the AWGN channel. LDPC decoding iterations and latency are recorded, and decoding performance is assessed.

Fig. 6. PBE percentages occurred in each block are counted and experiment results show that the PBE percentages change from different blocks due to flash internal characteristics.
B. Result Analysis
In this experiment, this paper selects MLC NAND flash memory with 64 wordlines in each block. Four pages with odd-even arrangement rules are arranged in each wordline. The page number interval in each pair-page is considered to be 6, excluding the wordline 0 and the wordline 63. For a given wordline n, the page numbers of the even LSB page, the even MSB page, the odd LSB page, and the odd MSB page are 4n − 2, 4n + 4, 4n − 1, and 4n + 5, respectively. One hundred blocks are selected from the MLC NAND flash chip and 100 MB data is written into 25 600 pages, with the concrete chip parameters of NAND flash memory listed in Table II. When the raw data is read from flash pages to check bit errors, the total bit errors, and PBE are counted. Experiment results show that the PBE percentages vary from different blocks, as shown in Fig. 6. The PBE percentages are as high as 67%, such as the block number of “1007.” The PBE is formed from various aspects, as analyzed in Section III.
This paper also evaluates the PAL decoding performance. When MLC NAND flash memory suffers from the noise interference, there are extremely unbalanced RBER, i.e., RBER in MSB pages is much higher than that of LSB pages, leading to a very large difference for decoding iterations and time, i.e., higher decoding iterations and time in MSB pages. This paper first counts average decoding iterations of MSB pages under different RBERs when exploiting PAL with CRs of 0.89 and 0.80. The decoding iterations are compared between PAL and conventional decoding methods without using PAL, as shown in Fig. 7(a). The average decoding iterations of MSB pages without using PAL with CR of 0.89 increase rapidly with RBER. The bit errors can not be corrected at the approximate RBER of 2.3 × 10−2 and the decoding iteration gets to the maximum value of 50, leading to worse decoding performance. Conversely, the decoding iterations increase smoothly with RBER and change slightly at the approximate RBER of 2.4 × 10−2 when adopting PAL. The decoding iteration is reduced by up to 54%

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:34:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2318

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 38, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2019

(a)

(b)

Fig. 7. This paper uses two CRs of 0.89 and 0.80 to count average decoding iterations and time of MSB pages with PAL and without PAL under different RBERs. (a) Average decoding iterations of MSB pages. (b) Average decoding time of MSB pages.

at the approximate RBER of 2.5 × 10−2, compared with the conventional scheme with CR of 0.89. Because the PBE characteristic offers the promotion information for the error correction of MSB pages, accelerating decoding convergence. When adopting LDPC codes with CR of 0.80 to correct bit errors, decoding iterations have a slight difference between PAL and the conventional scheme, and the variation tendency of decoding iterations is very smooth, as shown in Fig. 7(a), because LDPC codes with CR of 0.80 have more redundancy bits than that of CR of 0.89, leading to much stronger error correction capability and lower decoding iterations. Although LDPC codes with CR of 0.80 have stronger error capability, LDPC codes with CR of 0.89 are commonly used in NAND flash storage systems due to lower decoding complexity and less out of band space to store redundancy. The decoding performance of PAL with CR of 0.89 is very close to the decoding performance without using PAL with CR of 0.80 at the approximate RBER range from 1.3 × 10−2 to 1.9 × 10−2. Besides, all decoding time counted under different schemes, as shown in Fig. 7(b), is normalized by the decoding time cost to correct bit errors in MSB pages without PAL with CR of 0.89. When adopting PAL with CR of 0.89, the decoding time is decreased by up to 54% and 26.9% at the approximate RBERs of 2.5 × 10−2 and 1.3 × 10−2, respectively. This red curve is from falling to rising because low error correction capability of using the conventional scheme causes the sharp increase of decoding iterations, leading to the rapid increase of decoding time. Conversely, decoding iterations increase smoothly due to high error correction capability when exploiting PAL, introducing the smooth increase of decoding time until the approximate RBER of 2.3 × 10−2, as higher RBER introduces higher decoding time. However, on the whole, the decoding time is lower than that of the conventional scheme. At relatively low RBER, decoding time without using PAL with CR of 0.80 is higher than the conventional scheme due to the longer codeword resulting in higher decoding complexity until the approximate RBER of 1.5×10−2. Later the decoding time

has the roughly same change trend due to not largely difference for decoding iterations between PAL with CR of 0.80 and the conventional scheme with CR of 0.80, as explained above. PAL mainly exploits the decoding result of the LSB page to assist the error correction for the MSB page, significantly reducing the decoding latency of MSB pages. PAL is able to narrow the gap of decoding iterations and time between the LSB and MSB pages, without working on the LSB page.
Finally, this paper counts BERs after decoding failure to compare the decoding performance. Fig. 8 shows the BERs of MSB pages with CR of 0.89 after decoding failure. Simulation results show that the decoding performance of PAL is better than that of the conventional scheme. This paper only shows the results that BER of MSB pages are counted when using and not using PAL with CR of 0.89, because LSB pages are successfully decoded when using CR of 0.89 and 0.80, and MSB pages are also successfully decoded when utilizing PAL with CR of 0.80. Moreover, the decoding is also successful at other RBERs so that this figure only shows these points of decoding failure.
C. Overhead Analysis
In this paper, the overheads introduced by PAL include the time and space overheads. For the time overhead, it needs to consume additional time to optimize the initial soft information of the MSB page by exploiting the decoding result of the LSB page. However, the additional time occupies a very small proportion compared to the decoding time. The ratios of additional time occupying the decoding time are counted under different RBERs, as shown in Table III. At0.80, Dt0.80, At0.89, and Dt0.89 denote the additional time and decoding time when adopting CRs of 0.80 and 0.89, respectively. For the space overhead, it needs to add an additional buffer to store the decoding result of the LSB page, whose sizes are equal to the capacity of one flash page. For example, it assumes that one page size is 2 KB and the capacity of flash is 32 GB, the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:34:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: PAL DECODING IN MLC NAND FLASH MEMORY
TABLE III RATIOS OF ADDITIONAL TIME OCCUPYING DECODING TIME

2319

Fig. 8. Bit error rates after decoding failure are counted, which mainly target to the MSB page when adopting and not adopting PAL CR of 0.89.
proportion of the space overhead is (2 KB/225 KB) × 100% that is negligible. PAL is better applied for the sequential read operations that help to improve the performance of the flash system [34].
VI. CONCLUSION
The storage capacity of MLC NAND flash memory increases because of storing multibit per cell, but reducing data reliability due to degraded noise tolerance. Data reliability can be guaranteed by exploiting ECCs with strong error correction capability. The development of cost-effective and high efficient ECCs, however, requires a more profound understanding on failure patterns of NAND flash memory. This paper conducts a comprehensive study on the PBE problem. To facilitate our research, this papers designs an FPGA-based testing platform to further understand and show the problem. The captured PBE characteristic is beneficial to develop effective ECC algorithms. Therefore, this paper proposes the PAL decoding scheme to effectively ensure data reliability while improving LDPC decoding performance and speed. Simulation results validate the effectiveness of the PAL scheme.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Cai, E. F. Haratsch, O. Mutlu, and K. Mai, “Error patterns in MLC NAND flash memory: Measurement, characterization, and analysis,” in Proc. DATE, Dresden, Germany, 2012, pp. 521–526.
[2] K. Zhao et al., “LDPC-in-SSD: Making advanced error correction codes work effectively in solid state drives,” in Proc. FAST, San Jose, CA, USA, 2013, pp. 244–256.
[3] E. Yaakobi, L. Grupp, P. H. Siegel, S. Swanson, and J. K. Wolf, “Characterization and error-correcting codes for TLC flash memories,” in Proc. ICNC, 2012, pp. 486–491.

[4] Y. Cai, O. Mutlu, E. F. Haratsch, and K. Mai, “Program interference in MLC NAND flash memory: Characterization, modeling, and mitigation,” in Proc. ICCD, Asheville, NC, USA, 2013, pp. 123–130.
[5] J. Meza, Q. Wu, S. Kumar, and O. Mutlu, “A large-scale study of flash memory failures in the field,” in Proc. SIGMETRICS, Portland, OR, USA, 2015, pp. 177–190.
[6] D.-H. Lee and W. Sung, “Least squares based cell-to-cell interference cancelation technique for multi-level cell NAND flash memory,” in Proc. ICASSP, Kyoto, Japan, 2012, pp. 1601–1604.
[7] Y. Cai et al., “Flash correct-and-refresh: Retention-aware error management for increased flash memory lifetime,” in Proc. ICCD, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2012, pp. 94–101.
[8] W. Wang, T. Xie, A. Khoueir, and Y. Kim, “Reducing MLC flash memory retention errors through programming initial step only,” in Proc. MSST, Santa Clara, CA, USA, 2015, pp. 1–8.
[9] H.-W. Tseng, L. Grupp, and S. Swanson, “Understanding the impact of power loss on flash memory,” in Proc. DAC, San Diego, CA, USA, 2011, pp. 35–40.
[10] W. Zhao et al., “Improving min-sum LDPC decoding throughput by exploiting intra-cell bit error characteristic in MLC NAND flash memory,” in Proc. MSST, Santa Clara, CA, USA, 2014, pp. 1–6.
[11] Y. Cai, Y. Luo, S. Ghose, and O. Mutlu, “Read disturb errors in MLC NAND flash memory: Characterization, mitigation, and recovery,” in Proc. DSN, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 2015, pp. 438–449.
[12] Y. Cai, E. F. Haratsch, O. Mutlu, and K. Mai, “Threshold voltage distribution in MLC NAND flash memory: Characterization, analysis, and modeling,” in Proc. DATE, Grenoble, France, 2013, pp. 1285–1290.
[13] S. Tanakamaru, Y. Yanagihara, and K. Takeuchi, “Over-10x-extendedlifetime 76%-reduced-error solid-state drives (SSDs) with errorprediction LDPC architecture and error-recovery scheme,” in Proc. ISSCC, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2012, pp. 424–426.
[14] L. M. Grupp et al., “Characterizing flash memory: Anomalies, observations, and applications,” in Proc. MICRO, New York, NY, USA, 2009, pp. 24–33.
[15] H. Q. Pon et al., “Reliability issues studied in solid-state drives,” in Proc. IMW, Taipei, Taiwan, 2014, pp. 1–4.
[16] E. Yaakobi et al., “Error characterization and coding schemes for flash memories,” in Proc. GLOBECOM Workshops, 2010, pp. 1856–1860.
[17] Q. Li, L. Shi, C. J. Xue, Q. Zhuge, and E. H. M. Sha, “Improving LDPC performance via asymmetric sensing level placement on flash memory,” in Proc. ASP-DAC, Chiba, Japan, 2017, pp. 560–565.
[18] Y. Oh, E. Lee, J. Choi, D. Lee, and S. H. Noh, “Hybrid solid state drives for improved performance and enhanced lifetime,” in Proc. MSST, Long Beach, CA, USA, 2013, pp. 1–5.
[19] Q. Li et al., “Access characteristic guided read and write cost regulation for performance improvement on flash memory,” in Proc. FAST, Santa Clara, CA, USA, 2016, pp. 125–132.
[20] G. Dong, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “Techniques for embracing intra-cell unbalanced bit error characteristics in MLC NAND flash memory,” in Proc. Globecom Workshops, Miami, FL, USA, 2010, pp. 1915–1920.
[21] A. A. Emran and M. Elsabrouty, “Simplified variable-scaled min sum LDPC decoder for irregular LDPC codes,” in Proc. CCNC, Las Vegas, NV, USA, 2014, pp. 518–523.
[22] L. Qiao, H. Wu, D. Wei, and S. Wang, “A joint decoding strategy of non-binary LDPC codes based on retention error characteristics for MLC NAND flash memories,” in Proc. IMCCC, 2016, pp. 183–188.
[23] C. A. Aslam, Y. L. Guan, and K. Cai, “Retention-aware beliefpropagation decoding for NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 64, no. 6, pp. 725–729, Jun. 2017.
[24] H. Sun et al., “Exploiting intracell bit-error characteristics to improve min-sum LDPC decoding for MLC NAND flash-based storage in mobile device,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 2654–2664, Aug. 2016.
[25] J. Kim and W. Sung, “Rate-0.96 LDPC decoding VLSI for soft-decision error correction of NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 1004–1015, May 2014.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:34:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2320

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 38, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2019

[26] J. Wang, T. Courtade, H. Shankar, and R. D. Wesel, “Soft information for LDPC decoding in flash: Mutual-information optimized quantization,” in Proc. GLOBECOM, 2011, pp. 1–6.
[27] J. Zhao, C. Xu, P. Chi, and Y. Xie, “Memory and storage system design with nonvolatile memory technologies,” IPSJ Trans. Syst. LSI Design Methodol., vol. 8, pp. 2–11, Feb. 2015.
[28] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[29] S.-L. Chen, B.-R. Ke, J.-N. Chen, and C.-T. Huang, “Reliability analysis and improvement for multi-level non-volatile memories with soft information,” in Proc. DAC, San Diego, CA, USA, 2011, pp. 753–758.
[30] M. Zhang et al., “FPGA-based failure mode testing and analysis for MLC NAND flash memory,” in Proc. DATE, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2017, pp. 434–439.
[31] Y. Pan, G. Dong, Q. Wu, and T. Zhang, “Quasi-nonvolatile SSD: Trading flash memory nonvolatility to improve storage system performance for enterprise applications,” in Proc. HPCA, New Orleans, LA, USA, 2012, pp. 1–10.
[32] X. Hu, “LDPC codes for flash channel,” in Proc. Flash Memory Summit, Santa Clara, CA, USA, 2012, pp. 1–14.
[33] J. H. Kim, J. Cho, and W. Sung, “A high-speed layered min-sum LDPC decoder for error correction of NAND flash memories,” in Proc. MWSCAS, Seoul, South Korea, 2011, pp. 1–4.
[34] F. Chen, D. A. Koufaty, and X. Zhang, “Understanding intrinsic characteristics and system implications of flash memory based solid state drives,” in Proc. SIGMETRICS, Seattle, WA, USA, 2009, pp. 181–192.
[35] R.-S. Liu et al., “EC-cache: Exploiting error locality to optimize LDPC in NAND flash-based SSDs,” in Proc. DAC, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2014, pp. 1–6.
[36] J. Guo et al., “FlexLevel: A novel NAND flash storage system design for LDPC latency reduction,” in Proc. DAC, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2015, pp. 1–6.
[37] Y. Du et al., “LaLDPC: Latency aware LDPC for read performance improvement of solid state drives,” in Proc. MSST, Santa Clara, CA, USA, 2017, pp. 1–11.
[38] F. Wu et al., “A program interference error aware LDPC scheme for improving NAND flash decoding performance,” ACM Trans. Embedded Comput. Syst., vol. 16, no. 5S, pp. 1–20, 2017.
[39] B. Schroeder, R. Lagisetty, and A. Merchant, “Flash reliability in production: The expected and the unexpected,” in Proc. FAST, Santa Clara, CA, USA, 2016, pp. 67–80.
[40] L. Zuolo, C. Zambelli, A. Marelli, R. Micheloni, and P. Olivo, “LDPC soft decoding with improved performance in 1X-2X MLC and TLC NAND flash-based solid state drives,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput., to be published.
[41] M. Zhang et al., “CooECC: A cooperative error correction scheme to reduce LDPC decoding latency in NAND flash,” in Proc. ICCD, Boston, MA, USA, 2017, pp. 657–664.
[42] O. Vahabzadeh, “LDPC codes: Principles and implementation aspects,” in Proc. Flash Summit, Santa Clara, CA, USA, 2016, pp. 1–113.
[43] D. W. Lee et al., “The operation algorithm for improving the reliability of TLC NAND flash characteristics,” in Proc. IMW, Monterey, CA, USA, 2011, pp. 1–2.
[44] Q. Xiong et al., “Characterizing 3D floating gate NAND flash,” in Proc. SIGMETRICS, 2017, pp. 31–32.
[45] Y. Du et al., “Reducing LDPC soft sensing latency by lightweight data refresh for flash read performance improvement,” in Proc. DAC, Austin, TX, USA, 2017, pp. 1–6.

Fei Wu (M’15) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical automation, control theory and control engineering from Wuhan Industrial University, Wuhan, China, in 1997 and 2000, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in computer science from the Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China, in 2005.
She is currently an Associate Professor with the Information Storage Laboratory, Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology. Her current research interests include computer architecture, nonvolatile storage, and green storage. Dr. Wu is a Senior Member of China Computer Federation and a member of the Information Storage of China Computer Society.
Yajuan Du received the Ph.D. degree from the City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, and the Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
She is currently with the Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan. Her current research interests include computer storage systems and coding algorithms, such as the low-density parity-check codes in NAND flash memory.
Weihua Liu received the B.S. degree from the School of Computer and Information Engineering, Henan University, Kaifeng, China. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
His current research interests include intelligent storage, machine learning, system, and nonvolatile memories.

Meng Zhang is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
His current research interests include error correction codes (ECCs), applications of ECC in nonvolatile memory (NVM) technologies, flash memory reliability, and NVM storage systems.

Changsheng Xie (M’16) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in computer science and technology from the Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China, in 1982 and 1988, respectively.
He is currently a Professor with the Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, where he has served as the Deputy Director. His current research interests include new storage technology and architecture, multimedia computing and network, computer storage, and network storage and security. Mr. Xie has served as the Deputy Director of computer peripheral equipment committee of China Computer Federation, the committee member of information storage of China Computer Society, and the Vice Chairman of the China Expert Committee of the international network storage industry association.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:34:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

