IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 67, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2019

8167

Binary Message Passing Decoding of Product-Like Codes

Alireza Sheikh , Student Member, IEEE, Alexandre Graell i Amat , Senior Member, IEEE, and Gianluigi Liva , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— We propose a novel binary message passing decoding algorithm for product-like codes based on bounded distance decoding (BDD) of the component codes. The algorithm, dubbed iterative BDD with scaled reliability (iBDD-SR), exploits the channel reliabilities and is therefore soft in nature. However, the messages exchanged by the component decoders are binary (hard) messages, which significantly reduces the decoder data flow. The exchanged binary messages are obtained by combining the channel reliability with the BDD decoder output reliabilities, properly conveyed by a scaling factor applied to the BDD decisions. We perform a density evolution analysis for generalized low-density parity-check (GLDPC) code ensembles and spatially coupled GLDPC code ensembles, from which the scaling factors of the iBDD-SR for product and staircase codes, respectively, can be obtained. For the white additive Gaussian noise channel, we show performance gains up to 0.29 dB and 0.31 dB for product and staircase codes compared to conventional iterative BDD (iBDD) with the same decoder data flow. Furthermore, we show that iBDD-SR approaches the performance of ideal iBDD that prevents miscorrections.
Index Terms— Binary message passing, bounded distance decoding, complexity, hard decision decoding, product codes, staircase codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
A RENEWED interest in the design of iterative coding schemes has been recently triggered by the need of efficient error correction mechanisms for very high throughput applications. Turbo and low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have been shown to be capable of approaching the channel capacity under belief propagation (BP) decoding [1], [2]. However, applications requiring transmission at data rates of several hundreds of Gbps (such as optical transport systems [3]) pose a challenge to the implementation of fast BP decoders. The difficulty is especially due to the handling of the internal decoder data flow when soft messages are exchanged within the iterative decoder. In this context, attempts to reduce to complexity of soft-input soft-output (SISO) LDPC decoders
Manuscript received February 10, 2019; revised July 3, 2019; accepted August 28, 2019. Date of publication September 11, 2019; date of current version December 17, 2019. This work was funded by the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation. This article was presented in part at the European Conference on Optical Communications (ECOC), Rome, Italy, 2018, and in part at the International Symposium on Turbo Codes & Iterative Information Processing, Hong Kong, 2018. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was H. Saeedi. (Corresponding author: Alireza Sheikh.)
A. Sheikh and A. Graell i Amat are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, 41296 Gothenburg, Sweden (e-mail: asheikh@chalmers.se; alexandre.graell@chalmers.se).
G. Liva is with the Institute of Communications and Navigation, German Aerospace Center, 82234 Weßling, Germany (e-mail: gianluigi.liva@dlr.de).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this article are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2019.2940180

have been undertaken, e.g., in [4]–[7]. An alternative line of research is to resort to hard decision decoding (HDD) for such applications. HDD reduces the decoder data flow [8] at the expense of some performance loss compared to (BP) soft decision decoding (SDD) [9].
Among the coding schemes that are particularly suited for high throughput HDD, product codes (PCs) [10] gained a large attention. The iterative decoding of PCs dates back to 1968 [11], and it regained attention after employing SDD based on the Chase-Pyndiah decoding algorithm, which improved the coding gain extensively [12]. Several works tackled the complexity reduction of the Chase-Pyndiah decoder [13]–[17]. However, these approaches still require the exchange of soft messages between component decoders, which prevents from achieving very high throughputs. Recently, HDD of product-like codes with bounded distance decoding (BDD) of the component codes, which we refer here to iterative BDD (iBDD), has been considered for high-throughput optical communications due to their excellent performance-complexity tradeoff, see, e.g., [18]–[20]. For instance, PCs have been adopted by the optical submarine standard [21].
To keep up with the increasing demand of coding gains, performance improvements of the coding scheme coupled with a reasonable decoding complexity are necessary. In [22], an algorithm that exploits conflicts between component decoders in order to assess their reliabilities even when no channel reliability information is available, was proposed. The algorithm, named anchor decoding (AD), improves the performance of iBDD at the expense of some increase in decoding complexity. However, the performance is still limited by the binary (i.e., hard) nature of the decoder input. The use of HDD is typically motivated by the need of operating with low-complexity analog to digital converters (ADCs) and the above mentioned limitations in the internal decoder data flow. Whereas the latter motivation is hard to circumvent, the former motivation is often irrelevant for several practical applications. In this case, the use of soft information at the decoder input may be considered if the complexity of the decoding algorithms is kept close to that of HDD. Following this paradigm, one proposal is to concatenate an inner code for which SDD can be performed with limited complexity, with an outer HDD code [23], [24].
In this paper, we propose a low-complexity binary message passing decoding algorithm for product-like codes that relies on BDD of the component codes. The proposed algorithm exploits the channel reliabilities and thus is soft in nature. However, the component decoders exchange only hard

0090-6778 © 2019 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:40:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

8168

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 67, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2019

decisions (i.e., binary messages), which yields a decoder data flow equal to that of conventional iBDD. The binary messages are obtained by combining the BDD outputs with the channel soft information similar to the approach proposed in [25] for the decoding of LDPC codes. The algorithm, which we dub iterative bounded distance decoding with scaled reliability (iBDD-SR), relies on the weighted sum of the BDD output with the channel log-likelihood ratio (LLR), where the BDD decoder output reliability is conveyed by a scaling factor applied to the BDD outbound messages.
This work is the extension of the conference paper [26], where we originally proposed iBDD-SR for PCs, and where the scaling factors were derived based on simulation results. This prevented the extension of iBDD-SR to other product-like codes, as the search of the scaling factors based on simulations for product-like codes such as staircase codes proved infeasible. Here, we derive a density evolution under iBDD-SR for generalized LDPC (GLDPC) code ensembles and spatially coupled GLDPC (SC-GLDPC) code ensembles, based on extrinsic BDD of the component codes, that allows us to derive the scaling factors. The derived density evolution analysis rigorously takes care of miscorrections, and follows the same principles as the density evolution proposed in [27] for the iBDD case. In particular, the density evolution for GLDPC and SC-GLDPC ensembles allows to obtain the optimal (asymptotically in the large blocklength limit) scaling factors for iBDD-SR of PCs and spatially coupled product-like such as staircase codes, respectively. Our simulation results show that iBDD-SR remarkably outperforms iBDD for both PCs and staircase codes, and performs very close to the (genie-aided) miscorrection-free iBDD.
The proposed algorithm is a promising solution for very high-throughput applications such as fiber-optic communications. For instance, the 400G ZR standard for transmission at 400Gbps over data center interconnect links up to 100 km, has agreed on an FEC scheme consisting of the concatenation of an inner Hamming code decoded soft and an outer staircase code with hard decision decoding.
Related work includes [28]–[30]. All these algorithms require the knowledge of the least reliable bits in the decoding process, and are significantly more complex than the proposed algorithm.
Notation: We use boldface letters to denote vectors and matrices, e.g., x and X, with xi,j representing the element corresponding to the i-th row and j-th column of X. |a| denotes the absolute value of a, a the largest integer smaller than or equal to a, and a the smallest integer larger than or equal to a. A Gaussian distribution with mean μ and variance σ2 is denoted by N (μ, σ2). The Hamming distance between vectors a and b is denoted by dH(a, b).
II. PRELIMINARIES Our focus is on two main classes of product-like codes, namely two-dimensional PCs and staircase codes.
A. Product Codes and Staircase Codes
We consider two-dimensional PCs with the same component code for the row and column codes. However, we remark that

Fig. 1. PC and staircase codes with n = 7 and n = 6 and the corresponding code bits c2,2 and c2(3,2). The shortened bits are dashed.

the proposed decoding algorithm extends in a straightforward

manner to more general PCs, where the row and column codes

are not necessarily the same.

Let C be an (n, k, dmin) binary linear code, where n,
k, and dmin are the code length, dimension, and minimum
Hamming distance, respectively. A (two-dimensional) PC with parameters (n2, k2, d2min) and code rate R = k2/n2 based on component code C is defined as the set of all n×n arrays such

that each row and column of the array is a codeword of C.

A codeword of the PC can thus be represented as a binary

matrix C = [ci,j] of size n × n. Fig. 1 shows the code array of a PC with component codes of length n = 7, where the

code bit c2,2 and the row and column constraints in which participates are highlighted.

PCs can be represented by a Tanner graph, where variable

nodes (VNs) represent code bits and constraint nodes (CNs)

represent row and column codes, respectively. For a PC with

component code length n, the corresponding Tanner graph has n2 degree-2 VNs (each of the n2 code bits participates

in 2 code constraints, a row constraint and a column con-

straint) and 2n degree-n CNs (n bits participate in each code

constraint). PCs are contained in the ensemble of GLDPC

codes described by the Tanner graph in Fig. 2, where each

CN corresponds to a block code of length n (the component

code of the PC). Note that the Tanner graph of a PC is a

particular instance of the Tanner graph in Fig. 2, where the

connectivity between VNs and CNs is deterministic.

A binary staircase code is defined by a two-dimensional

code array that has the form of a staircase. Formally, given a

component code of length n, a staircase code is defined as the

set

of

all

matrices

Bi

of

size

n 2

×

n 2

,

i

=

1, 2, . . .,

such

that

each row of the matrix [BTi−1, Bi] is a codeword of C. B0 is

initialized

to

all

zeros

and

the

code

rate

is

R

=

1

−

2(n−k) n

[8].

We will refer sometimes to the matrices Bi as blocks. In Fig. 1,

we plot the code array corresponding to the first four spatial

positions of a staircase code with component codes of length n = 6. The code bit c2(3,2) and the row and column constraints
in which participates are highlighted.

A staircase code can be seen as a class of spatially coupled

codes and as such it can be interpreted as spanning over a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:40:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHEIKH et al.: BINARY MESSAGE PASSING DECODING OF PRODUCT-LIKE CODES

8169

Fig. 2. (Left) Schematic of the GLDPC code ensemble containing PCs with component codes of length n as a special case. Circles and squares correspond VNs and CNs, respectively, and π denotes the interleaver. (Right) The schematic of the SC-GLDPC code ensemble with L spatial positions and u = 2 containing staircase codes as a special case. πi and πi represent the random permutations for VNs and CNs, respectively, at spatial position i.

number of spatial positions, where the code bits in position i

correspond to the code bits [BiT−1, Bi], i.e., each spatial posi-

tion contains two blocks of code bits. We will denote the code

bits in position i by the matrix C(i) [BTi−1, Bi] = [c(pi,)j],

of

dimensions

n 2

×

n.

As PCs, staircase codes can also be represented by a Tanner

graph and as such can be seen as an instance of a SC-GLDPC

code ensemble. The Tanner graph of a SC-GLDPC code

ensemble of coupling memory u is constructed by placing

L copies of a regular GLDPC code of VN degree dv and CN degree dc in L spatial positions in the set L = {1, . . . , L}. Each spatial position consists of M CNs and N VNs. The

L copies are then coupled as follows: each VN at position

i ∈ L is connected to dv CNs in positions in the range [i, . . . , i + u − 1], chosen uniformly at random. Likewise, each

CN at position i ∈ L is connected to dc randomly chosen VNs at positions in the range [i − u + 1, . . . , i]. This chain of

coupled codes may be terminated by appending u − 1 spatial

positions with CNs only at the end of the chain. The Tanner

graph of a staircase code is contained in the Tanner graph

of a SC-GLDPC code ensemble with VN degree 2, coupling

memory

u = 2,

and

N

=

n2 2

degree-2 VNs

and

and

M

=n

degree-n CNs per spatial position. The Tanner graph of such

a SC-GLDPC code ensemble, originally considered in [27],

is depicted in Fig. 2.

The connection between PCs and GLDPC codes and

between staircase codes and SC-GLDPC codes, allows the use

of tools for the analysis of codes-on-graphs, such as density

evolution, to analyze PCs.

B. Channel Model

We assume transmission over the binary-input additive white Gaussian noise (bi-AWGN) channel. For simplicity, for the definitions below we assume transmission using a PC. The channel output corresponding to code bit ci,j is given by

yi,j = xi,j + zi,j ,

(1)

where xi,j = (−1)ci,j , zi,j ∼ N (0, σ2), σ2 = (2 REb/N0)−1 and Eb/N0 is the signal to noise ratio. We denote by L = [Li,j] the matrix of channel log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) and by R = [ri,j ] the matrix of hard decisions at the channel

output, where ri,j is obtained by computing the sign of Li,j and mapping +1 → 0 and −1 → 1. We denote this mapping

by B(·), i.e., ri,j = B(Li,j ). With some abuse of notation, we also write R = B(L).

For the case of staircase codes, the matrices of LLRs and

hard decisions must be defined per each spatial position,

i.e.,

we

define

L(i)

and

R(i) ,

of

dimensions

n 2

× n,

in

accor-

dance to C(i).

Remark: The target application for the proposed decoding

algorithm is very high throughput applications. A salient appli-

cation is next generation fiber-optic links, which will support

throughputs up to 1 Tb/s. The optical channel in practical

scenarios such as wavelength division multiplexing can be

approximated with the well-established Gaussian noise (GN)

model [31]. The gist of the GN model is that the interplay

between Kerr nonlinearity and chromatic dispersion in the

optical channel can be accurately modeled as a Gaussian noise

under some mild conditions. Thus, the bi-AWGN channel

considered in this paper is also relevant for this particularly

interesting application.

C. Bounded Distance Decoding

Consider now the decoding of an arbitrary row or column

component code, assuming that the codeword c = (c1, . . . , cn)

is transmitted and decoding is based on the hard-detected bits

at the channel output, r = (r1, . . . , rn). BDD corrects all

error patterns with Hamming weight up to the error-correcting

capability of the code t =

dmin−1 2

. If the weight of the error

pattern is larger than t and there exists another codeword c˜ ∈ C

with dH(c˜, r) ≤ t, then BDD erroneously decodes r onto c˜ and a so-called miscorrection occurs. Otherwise, if such

codeword does not exist, BDD fails and we use the convention

that the decoder outputs r. Thus, the decoded vector rˆ for

BDD⎧can be written as

⎪⎨c

if dH(c, r) ≤ t

rˆ= ⎪⎩rc˜ ∈ C

if dH(c, r) > t and ∃c˜ such that dH(c˜, r) ≤ t otherwise.

(2)

The decoding of product-like codes can then be accomplished in an iterative fashion based on BDD of the component

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:40:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

8170

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 67, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2019

codes and iterating between the row and column decoders. Here, we refer to iterative decoding of product-like codes based on BDD of the component codes as iBDD.

III. ITERATIVE BOUNDED DISTANCE DECODING WITH SCALED RELIABILITY
In this section, we propose a modification of the conventional iBDD of product-like codes. The main idea is to exploit the channel reliabilities in the decoding of the component codes, while only binary messages are exchanged between the component decoders. We refer to this algorithm as iBDD with scaled reliability (iBDD-SR). The proposed algorithm applies to product-like codes in general, including, e.g., PCs, half PCs [32], staircase codes, and braided codes. For illustration purposes, we focus on PCs and staircase codes.

A. Iterative Bounded Distance Decoding With Scaled Reliability for Product Codes

Without loss of generality, assume that decoding starts with
the decoding of the row codes and, in particular, consider the
decoding of the ith row code at iteration . Let Ψc,( −1) = [ψic,,j( −1)] be the matrix of hard decisions
on code bits ci,j after the decoding of the n column codes at iteration − 1. Row decoding is then performed based on Ψc,( −1). First, BDD is performed. The output of the BDD
stage of the ith row component code corresponding to code bit ci,j , denoted by μ¯ir,j, takes values on a ternary alphabet, μ¯ir,j ∈ {±1, 0}, where the decoded bits are mapped according to 0 → +1 and 1 → −1 if BDD is successful, and the output
is 0 if a decoding fails.
The reliability information on code bit ci,j is then formed
according to

μir,,(j ) = wir,( ) · μ¯ri,,(j ) + Li,j ,

(3)

where wir,( ) is a scaling factor corresponding to the reliability of the decision on ci,j at the output of the BDD (it may be different for each iteration) that should be properly optimized. In [26] we optimized the scaling factors for PCs based on simulations. Unfortunately a simulation-based approach becomes infeasible for spatially-coupled product-like codes such as staircase codes. In Section IV-A, we show that the scaling factors can be found via density evolution, which renders the search (and hence the decoder design) feasible.
Finally, the hard decision on code bit ci,j made by the ith row decoder is formed as

ψir,,j( ) = B(μir,,(j )),

(4)

where ties can be broken with any policy. The hard decision ψir,,j( ) is the message passed from the
i-th row code to the j-th column code. In particular, after applying this procedure to all row codes, the matrix Ψr,( ) = [ψir,,j( )] is formed and used as the input for the n column decoders, and column decoding based on Ψr,( ) is performed.
As before, we assume that the output of the BDD stage of
the jth column component code corresponding to code bit ci,j, denoted by μ¯ci,j, takes values on {±1, 0}. Then, the hard

Fig. 3. Block diagram of iBDD-SR for PCs.
decision on ci,j made by the jth column decoder at iteration is formed as
ψic,,j( ) = B(μic,,j( )),
where μic,,j( ) = wc · μ¯ic,,j( ) + Li,j is the reliability of code bit ci,j. After decoding of the n column codes at decoding iteration , the matrix Ψc,( ) = [ψic,,j( )] is passed to the n row decoders for the next decoding iteration. The iterative process continues until a maximum number of iterations is reached. The iBDD-SR of PCs is schematized in Fig. 3.
The crucial modification in iBDD-SR with respect to conventional iBDD is that the hard decisions passed between component decoders are not simply the result of the BDD of the component codes, but are made on the sum of a scaled version of the output of the BDD decoder and the channel LLR. Therefore, the channel reliabilities are exploited to make the final hard decisions at each row and column decoding stage. Intuitively, since the channel reliability is exploited in the hard decisions at each row and column decoding, in the case that the reliability of the channel is high and conventional iBDD introduces miscorrections, the modified algorithm may combat the possible miscorrections.
B. Iterative Bounded Distance Decoding With Scaled Reliability for Staircase Codes
Similar to PCs, staircase codes can be decoded iteratively. Decoding of staircase codes is typically performed in a sliding-window fashion, iterating between the row and column decoders within a window containing a number of staircase blocks and after a given number of iterations shifting the window by one staircase block [8]. Thus, the iBDD-SR of PCs described in the previous subsection readily extends to staircase codes. However, in this case, the scaling factors may be different for each spatial position, and this needs to be considered when optimizing them.
IV. DENSITY EVOLUTION OF iBDD-SR
In this section, we provide the density evolution analysis for GLDPC codes and SC GLDPC codes, which contain PCs and staircase codes as particular cases for a certain choice of parameters. The analysis provides, as a byproduct, the optimal scaling factors of iBDD-SR (optimal in an asymptotic sense, for infinitely long block length [25]). Note that for finite block length, the scaling factors derived from the density evolution analysis are not necessarily the ones that minimize the error probability. However, selecting the scaling factors based on density evolution avoids resorting to an optimization based on Monte-Carlo simulations, which may be very timeconsuming, and is unfeasible for staircase codes. Furthermore,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:40:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHEIKH et al.: BINARY MESSAGE PASSING DECODING OF PRODUCT-LIKE CODES

8171

interestingly, comparing the performance of iBDD-SR with scaling factors derived from the density evolution to that with scaling factors found by simulations1, we have observed that the finite length performance of the former is always slightly better.
As discussed in Section II-A, PCs and staircase codes are contained in a particular GLDPC and SC-GLDPC code ensemble, respectively, whose asymptotic behavior can be rigorously analyzed via density evolution. In [27], the density evolution of iBDD for transmission over the binary symmetric channel (BSC) was derived. In this section, we derive the density evolution of iBDD-SR for GLDPC code ensembles and SC-GLDPC code ensembles by extending the density evolution of conventional iBDD in [27] to the iBDD-SR case. It is worth mentioning that product-like codes are structured codes and therefore their decoding threshold is not necessarily fully characterized by the threshold of the corresponding GLDPC code ensemble. In [33], the rigorous density evolution analysis that characterizes the asymptotic decoding performance over the binary erasure channel (BEC) of a deterministic construction of product-like codes that encompasses several classes of product-like codes such as irregular PCs, block-wise braided codes, and staircase codes, was derived. Its extension to the BSC, however, is very cumbersome. In practice, for the BEC the thresholds predicted by the rigorous density evolution and those predicted by the density evolution of the corresponding GLDPC ensemble are virtually identical [33], [34]. Thus, in this paper we opt to derive the density evolution of iBDD-SR for the GLDPC and SC-GLDPC ensembles encompassing PCs and staircase codes.
The GLDPC codes that we consider here can be represented graphically by a Tanner graph where each VN is connected to two CNs, corresponding to one row and one column code (see Section II-A and Fig. 2). We consider the iterative hard decision decoding algorithm based on extrinsic BDD of the component codes proposed in [27]. In particular, at the i-th VN, the input message from the j-th CN is forwarded to the j -th CN. At the j-th CN, the input corresponding to the i-th VN is replaced by the hard-detected bit ri at the channel output. This message passing algorithm is illustrated in Fig. 4. Note that substituting the i-th VN message with ri makes the decoding rule extrinsic, i.e., the decision on the i-th VN does not depend on previous decisions inside the decoder. The extrinsic decoding rule is essential for the density evolution analysis.
A. Density Evolution Analysis of iBDD-SR for GLDPC Code Ensembles
We consider transmission over the bi-AWGN channel and analyze the decoder behavior by assuming the transmission of the all-zero codeword. At the CNs, we assume a length-n binary component code with error-correcting capability t.
We denote the channel output error probability, i.e., the error probability that would be attained by applying a hard detection to the bi-AWGN channel output, as pch. For an
1Note that due to the limitation of resources, a full exhaustive search is infeasible, i.e., only a grid search with a certain accuracy (step size) is possible.

Fig. 4. Block diagram of the message passing algorithm for GLDPC codes. Circles and squares correspond to VNs and CNs, respectively.

arbitrary row/column BDD stage, we denote by P e (i) the

probability that a randomly selected bit in the component

code’s codeword is decoded incorrectly when it was initially

in error and there are i errors in the other n − 1 positions, and by P c (i) the probability that a randomly selected bit in

the component code’s codeword is decoded correctly when it

was initially in error and there are i errors in the remaining

n − 1 positions. The probability that a randomly selected

bit in the component code’s codeword is erased when it

was initially in error and there are i errors in the remaining

n − 1 positions is denoted by P (i). We have obviously that P (i) = 1 − P e (i) − P c (i). Similarly, we denote by Qe (i), Qc (i), and Q (i) the probability that a randomly selected

bit in the component code’s codeword is decoded incorrectly,

correctly, and erased, respectively, when the bit was initially

correct and there are i errors in the remaining n − 1 positions.

Note that Q (i) = 1 − Qe (i) − Qc (i).

We have that

⎧

P

e

(i)

=

⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨0t ⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩1δ=1

δ j=0

h

+ n

1

Ah+1Fh(1)

if 0 ≤ i ≤ t − 1 if t ≤ i ≤ n − t − 2 otherwise

(5)

and

⎧

⎪⎪⎪⎨⎪1t Qc(i) = ⎩⎪⎪⎪⎪0δ=1

δ j=0

n

− n

h AhFh(1)

if 0 ≤ i ≤ t if t + 1 ≤ i ≤ n − t − 1 otherwise.

(6)

where h = i − δ + 2j and Fh(1) is defined as

h n−h−1

Fh(1)

h−j δ−j n−1

.

(7)

i

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:40:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

8172

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 67, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2019

In (5), Ah is the weight enumerator of the component code,

which can be tightly approximated as

⎧

⎨⎪⎪2−νt

n h

1 + o(1)

if 2t + 1 ≤ h ≤ n − 2t − 1

Ah ≈ ⎩⎪⎪10

if h = 0, h = n

(8)

otherwise.

Similarly, one can compute P c (i) and Qe (i) as

⎧

⎨⎪⎪⎪⎪1t δ−1

if 0 ≤ i ≤ t − 1

Pc

(i)

=

⎪⎪⎩⎪⎪0δ=1

j=0

n−h n

Ah

Fh(2)

if t ≤ i ≤ n − t − 2 otherwise

(9)

and

⎧

⎨⎪⎪⎪⎪0t δ−1

Qe(i) = ⎩⎪⎪⎪⎪1δ=1

j=0

h+1 n

Ah+1Fh(2)

if 0 ≤ i ≤ t if t + 1 ≤ i ≤ n − t − 1
otherwise (10)

where h = i − δ + 2j + 1 and Fh(2) is defined as

Fh(2)

h n−h−1

h−j δ−j−1 n−1

.

i

(11)

For ease of understanding, we briefly explain the derivation of P e (i) in (5) in the appendix. The derivation of Qc(i), P c(i), and Qe(i) follows a similar reasoning.
For the considered GLDPC code ensemble, CNs are divided
into two sets of equal size to capture the serial row/column
decoding schedule of PCs. Each set defines a CN type.
We refer to the two CN types as row and column CN types.
Each VN is connected to one row-type CN and to one
column-type CN. Each decoding iteration consists of a row
CN elaboration, followed by a column CN elaboration. In the following, we denote by x the error probability associated to the messages exchanged by the component decoders. In particular, we denote by xr,( ) and xc,( ) the message error
probability at the output of the row component decoder (row-
type CN) and column component decoder (column-type CN),
respectively, at the th iteration. The message error probability
at the input of a row-type CN at the th iteration is given by xc,( −1), whereas the message error probability at the input of a column-type CN during the th iteration is xr,( ). At the first iteration, we have xc,(0) = pch, i.e., the input of the row-type CNs is initialized with the channel observations.
In iBDD-SR, the output of the BDD decoder is from a ternary alphabet, i.e., μ¯ri,,(j ) ∈ {±1, 0} (see Section (III-A)), where (under the all-zero codeword assumption) μ¯ri,,(j ) = 0, μ¯ir,,(j ) = −1, and μ¯ir,,(j ) = +1 correspond to erasure (failure), erroneous decoding, and correct decoding, respectively. In the following, the probabilities of μ¯ri,,(j ) = 0, μ¯ri,,(j ) = −1, and μ¯ri,,(j ) = +1 conditioned on xi,j = +1 are denoted as f (x; pch), f e(x; pch), and f c(x; pch), respectively, for a

given input message error probability x and a channel error probability pch. One can check that

n−1
f e(x; pch) =

n−1 i

xi(1 − x)n−i−1

i=0

· pchP e (i) + p¯chQe (i) ,

(12)

n−1
f c(x; pch) =

n−1 i

xi(1 − x)n−i−1

i=0

· pchP c (i) + p¯chQc (i) ,

(13)

n−1
f (x; pch) =

n−1 i

xi(1 − x)n−i−1

i=0

· pchP (i) + p¯chQ (i) ,

(14)

where p¯ch 1 − pch.
Under the all-zero codeword assumption, one can readily find that Li,j ∼ N (2/σ2, 4/σ2). Note that for the density evo-
lution, as all row CNs and all column CNs are of the same type (i.e., they behave identically), we can assume that wir,( ) = wr,( ) and wic,( ) = wc,( ) for all i. We are now interested in finding xr,( ) p(wr,( ) · μ¯ir,,(j ) + Li,j < 0) (alternatively xc,( ) p(wc,( ) · μ¯ic,,j( ) + Li,j < 0)), as the iBDD-SR output error probability for the row (column) decoding. To proceed further, one needs to find the distribution of wr,( ) ·μ¯ir,,(j ) +Li,j. The task of finding this distribution is rendered complicated by observing that the messages μ¯ir,,(j ) and μ¯ic,,j( ) are statistically dependent on Li,j. In fact, the evolution of the error probability
at the output of the CNs discussed so far is based on the
approach proposed in [27], where the CN operation is modified
(with respect to the classical behavior) to account for the
channel observation ri,j when computing the extrinsic terms μ¯ri,,(j ) and μ¯ic,,j( ). In our model, the BDD output message is modified according to the sum wr,( ) · μ¯ri,,(j ) + Li,j, hence the channel observation for code bit ci,j is used at both the
BDD input and output. Here instead of finding directly the distribution of wr,( ) · μ¯ri,,(j ) + Li,j, we first expand xr,( ) using the auxiliary RV Lˆi,j giving the sign of Li,j, i.e., Lˆi,j = sign(Li,j). Employing Bayes’ rule, xr,( ) can be written as

xr,( ) = p(μri,,(j ) < 0)

=

p(μir,,(j ) < 0|μ¯ri,,(j ), Lˆi,j )

μ¯ir,,(j )∈{0,±1} Lˆi,j ∈{±1}

× p(μ¯ir,,(j )|Lˆi,j )p(Lˆi,j ).

(15)

It is easy to see that Li,j → Lˆi,j → μ¯ir,,(j ) form a Markov chain, hence, conditioned on Lˆi,j, μ¯ir,,(j ) is independent of Li,j. Using this,

p(μir,,(j ) < 0|μ¯ri,,(j ), Lˆi,j) = p(wir,( ) · μ¯ir,,(j ) + Li,j < 0|μ¯ri,,(j ), Lˆi,j ) = p(Li,j < −wir,( ) · μ¯ir,,(j )|Lˆi,j )

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:40:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHEIKH et al.: BINARY MESSAGE PASSING DECODING OF PRODUCT-LIKE CODES

8173

One can easily check that p(Li,j < −wr,( )|Lˆi,j = 1) = p(Li,j < 0|Lˆi,j = 1) = 0 and p(Li,j < −wr,( )|Lˆi,j = −1) = p(Li,j < 0|Lˆi,j = −1) = 1. Using this in (15) yields

xr,( ) = p(0 < Li,j < wr,( ))p(μ¯ir,,(j ) = −1|Lˆi,j = 1) + p(Li,j < −wr,( ))p(μ¯ri,,(j ) = 1|Lˆi,j = −1) + (1 − p(μ¯ir,,(j ) = 1|Lˆi,j = −1))p(Li,j = −1). (16)

Further, p(μ¯ir,,(j ) = −1|Lˆi,j = 1) and p(μ¯ri,,(j ) = −1|Lˆi,j = −1) can be obtained based on Qe (i) and P c (i) as

f Qe (x) p(μ¯ri,,(j ) = −1|Lˆi,j = 1)

n−1
=

n−1 i

xi(1 − x)n−i−1 · Qe (i),

(17)

i=0

f P c (x) p(μ¯ir,,(j ) = 1|Lˆi,j = −1)

n−1
=

n−1 i

xi(1 − x)n−i−1 · P c (i).

(18)

i=0

Finally, by substituting (17) and (18) in (16) and using the Gaussian distribution of Li,j to compute p(0 < Li,j < wr,( )) and p(Li,j < −wr,( )), we can track the evolution of the
message error probabilities as

xr,( ) = f Qe (xc,( −1)) · Q + f P c (xc,( −1)) · Q

1 − σwr,( )

σ

2

1 σwr,( )

+

σ

2

− pch

+ 1 − f P c (xc,( −1)) pch

(19)

and

xc,( ) = f Qe (xr,( )) · Q

1 − σwc,( )

σ

2

− pch

+ f P c (xr,( )) · Q

1 σwc,( ) +

σ

2

+ 1 − f P c (xr,( )) pch.

(20)

where Q(·)

√1 2π

∞ x

e

−ξ2 2

dξ

is the familiar tail distri-

bution function of the standard Gaussian distribution and

pch = Q

1 σ

.

One can numerically search for the optimal scaling factors

wc,( ) and wc,( ) in the sense of minimizing xr,( ) and xc,( ),

respectively. Alternatively, by neglecting the statistical dependence between μ¯ri,,(j ) and Li,j one can approximate wr,( ) and wc,( ) as the LLR of the output of a binary error and erasure channel with error probability f e and erasure probability f ,

given as

wr,( ) = log

f c(xc,( −1); pch) f e(xc,( −1); pch)

(21)

and

wc,( ) = log

f c(xr,( ); pch) f e(xr,( ); pch)

.

(22)

Employing (21) and (22) yields very similar scaling factors as the ones obtained performing a numerical search. Furthermore, the code threshold given by the scaling factors

in (21) and (22) is roughly the same as the one computed
based on the numerically optimized scaling factors. Therefore, (21) and (22) provide a good approximation for wr,( ) and wc,( ), respectively. The obtained scaling factors can
then be used in (3) to implement iBDD-SR for a particular
finite-length PC.

B. Density Evolution Analysis of iBDD-SR for SC-GLDPC Code Ensembles

The density evolution for GLDPC codes derived in the

previous subsection can be readily extended to SC-GLDPC

codes with smoothing parameter u. For SC-GLDPC codes,

we need to track the probabilities of the messages exchanged in the iterative decoding for each spatial position. Let xa( ) be
the average bit error probability from VNs at spatial position a
to the connected CNs at spatial positions [a, a+u−1]. Also, let xac,( ) be the average bit error probability from CNs at spatial position a to connected VNs at positions [a − u + 1, a]. xa( ) and xac,( ) can be calculated as

xac,(

)

=

1 u

u−1 g=0

xa( −) g,

(23)

xa( +1)

=

1 u−1 u

Q

g=0

1 − σwa( +)g

σ

2

− pch f Qe (xac,+( g))

+Q

1 + σwa( +)g

σ

2

f P c (xca,+( g))

+ 1 − f P c (xac,+( g)) pch.

(24)

We consider u = 2 to account for the ensemble containing staircase codes. Thus, combining (23) and (24), we obtain

xa( +1)

=

xa( ,+0 1)

+ xa( ,+1 1) , 2

(25)

where xa( ,+0 1) and xa( ,+1 1) are given as

xa( ,+0 1) =

Q

1 − σwa( ) σ2

− pch f Qe

xa( ) + xa( −) 1 2

+ Q 1 + σwa( ) f P c xa( ) + xa( −) 1

σ2

2

+ 1 − fPc

xa( ) + xa( −) 1 2

pch,

(26)

xa( ,+1 1) =

Q

1 − σwa( +)1

σ

2

− pch

f Qe

xa( ) + xa( +) 1 2

+ Q 1 + σwa( +)1 f P c xa( ) + xa( +) 1

σ

2

2

+ 1 − fPc

xa( ) + xa( +) 1 2

pch.

(27)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:40:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

8174

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 67, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2019

Similar to the GLDPC code ensemble, wa( ) and wa( +)1 can

be obtained as ⎛
wa( ) = log ⎜⎝⎜ fnc fne

; p xa( )+xa( −) 1

2

ch

; p x(a )+xa( −) 1

2

ch

⎞ ⎟⎠⎟,

(28)

⎛ wa( +)1 = log ⎜⎜⎝ fnc
fne

; p x(a )+x(a+) 1

2

ch

; p x(a )+x(a+) 1

2

ch

⎞ ⎟⎟⎠.

(29)

We consider the decoding of staircase codes based on the sliding-window operation. To account for the effect of window decoding, we assume that the width of the window is U , i.e., the window contains U spatial positions. Let WU be the set containing the indices of the spatial positions in the current window. In window decoding, the decoder freezes the messages coming from the VNs and CNs outside the window, i.e., the VNs and CNs inside the window are updated based on the information exchanged inside the window and no information comes from the positions outside it. In the particular case of staircase codes, which are contained in the ensemble of SC-GLDPC codes with u = 2, the first and last positions inside the window do not get any information from the positions outside it. Therefore, one can define x˜a( ) as

x˜a( ) =

0 if a ∈/ WU xa( ) if a ∈ WU ,

(30)

and use it in (25)–(29) to find the average bit error probability for the spatial positions within the window.

V. COMPLEXITY CONSIDERATIONS
A thorough complexity analysis of the iBDD-SR algorithm requires delving into the hardware implementation in order to address aspects such as data bus requirements, impact on the degree of parallelism, etc., that go beyond the scope of this paper. We refer the interested reader to [35], where an efficient architecture for iBDD-SR of PCs is presented. In the following, we provide a high-level discussion of the decoding complexity. In particular, we estimate the additional resources required in terms of memory with respect to iBDD for both PCs and staircase codes. We also compare the complexity of iBDD-SR with that of AD [22] in terms of memory requirements.
Consider a PC with BCH component code (n, k, dmin) of error correcting capability t decoded over max iterations. iBDD-SR requires some extra memory compared to iBDD. With reference to (3), the decision on code bit ci,j at iteration
can be divided into two cases: i) ψir,,j( ) = B(Li,j) if wir,( ) < |Li,j | or BDD fails (i.e., μ¯ri,,(j ) = 0); and ii) ψir,,j( ) = B(μ¯ri,,(j )) if BDD is successful and wir,( ) > |Li,j|. By storing the channel LLRs (Li,j) and wir,( ), one can implement (3) with a simple logic comparison. Using nq bits for quantization of Li,j and wir,( ), the additional memory required for iBDD-SR compared to iBDD is ( max + n2)nq ≈ n2nq bits.2
2Note that max n2.

Consider now a staircase code with an (even length) BCH

component code decoded using a sliding window of size U .

We remark that the corresponding SC-GLDPC code ensemble

comprises U − 1 spatial positions, i.e., the window size for

the corresponding SC-GLDPC ensemble is U − 1. In general,

the scaling factors may be different for each spatial position

(and vary also with the number of iterations). This could be

impractical. as many scaling factors would be required to be

stored. Interestingly, as discussed in Section VI, the density

evolution for SC-GLDPC code ensembles shows that the

scaling factors converge to certain values after few (U − 2)

window slides, after which the scaling factors are identical

for each window. Thus few scaling factors need to be stored.

Therefore, the additional memory required for the decoding

of one staircase block in iBDD-SR compared to iBDD is

((U

− 2)(U

− 1)

max

+

n2 4

)nq

≈

n2 nq 4

3

.

We remark that the required memory for both PCs and stair-

case codes is static, i.e., no switching activities are involved,

as the LLRs and scaling factors are not updated in the iterative

decoding. This means that the additional memory has a limited

cost in terms of energy consumption for the decoder [35], [36].

The direct complexity comparison with AD algorithm is a

non trivial task, as AD can be implemented in various ways

(see [22, Remark 7]). In a high level view, AD assigns a flag

to each component code, which indicates the corresponding

status in decoding. Furthermore, AD reduces the decoding

conflicts between component decoders by keeping track of

the conflict locations and preventing the bit flips on the most

trusted component codes, called anchors. As the anchors can

also be miscorrected, AD allows to backtrack the decisions

on anchors. Overall, a memory in the order of 4n bits is

required for storing the status of the component codes. Also

4nt ( log2n + 1) bits are required for storing the location of conflicts and backtracking procedure (see [22, Sec. VI. B]

for more details). Unlike the static memory of iBDD-SR,

the memory required for AD is dynamic, as the status of

component codewords and the location of errors changes

during the iterative decoding. The dynamic memory is usually

significantly more costly in hardware implementation com-

pared to the static counterpart [36].

Note that in iBDD-SR only binary messages are exchanged

between component decoders, hence the internal decoder

data flow is the same as that of iBDD. Thus, iBDD-SR is

particularly interesting for very high-throughput applications,

for which the internal decoder data flow is a limiting factor.

VI. NUMERICAL RESULTS
To evaluate the performance of iBDD-SR, we simulate the transmission of two PCs with (255, 231, 3) BCH component codes and (511, 484, 3) BCH component codes and two staircase codes with the same component codes shortened by one bit (i.e., (254, 230, 3) and (510, 483, 3)), over the bi-AWGN channel.4 The code rate of the resulting product

3Note that the typical window size is in the range of 4–7 blocks, hence

(U − 2)(U − 1) max

n2 4

.

4We are particularly interested in the performance of codes based on

BCH component codes with t = 3, since their decoders can be efficiently

implemented via lookup tables [8, Appendix I].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:40:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHEIKH et al.: BINARY MESSAGE PASSING DECODING OF PRODUCT-LIKE CODES

8175

TABLE I
COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT DECODING ALGORITHMS FOR PCS AND STAIRCASE CODES WITH (255, 231, 3) AND (254, 230, 3) BCH COMPONENT CODES, RESPECTIVELY. THE CODE RATE OF THE PC AND THE STAIRCASE CODE IS 0.820 AND 0.811, RESPECTIVELY. THE Eb/N0 , CODING GAINS, AND CORRESPONDING CAPACITY GAPS ARE MEASURED AT BER = 10−6 FROM THE SIMULATIONS. THE VALUES FOR STAIRCASE CODES ARE PROVIDED WITHIN PARENTHESIS

Fig. 5. Performance of iBDD, ideal iBDD, AD, and iBDD-SR for a PC with component code (255, 231, 3) and a staircase code with component code (254, 230, 3).
codes is R = 0.820 and 0.897 for n = 255 and n = 511, respectively. The code rate of the staircase codes is R = 0.811 and 0.894 for n = 254 and n = 510, respectively. For the sake of comparison, we also simulate the performance of the codes under iBDD, ideal iBDD (i.e., a genie-aided iBDD where misscorrections are avoided by providing the component decoder input at its output whenever the error correction capability of the component code is exceeded), and AD. The BER performance of the considered codes is shown in Figs. 5-6.
It is important to remark that if the channel LLRs are highly reliable but with wrong sign, one can expect that the decoding rule in (3)–(4) will be unable to recover from these errors. In this situation, although μ¯ir,j may correspond to a correct decision, it is overridden by the channel, i.e., the hard decision on code bit ci,j made by the i-th row decoder, ψir,,j( ), becomes ψir,,j( ) = B(wir,( ) · μ¯ri,,(j ) + Li,j) = B(Li,j ) (cf. (3) and (4)), which leads to an erroneously decoded bit. Therefore, one needs to be careful when applying iBDD-SR to avoid the appearance of an error floor. In particular, to avoid such errors and the presence of a high error floor, we run iBDD-SR for some iterations and then we append a few conventional iBDD iterations, where the channel reliabilities are disregarded when making the decision on a given code bit. The appended iBDD iterations increase the chance to correct transmission errors

Fig. 6. Performance of iBDD, ideal iBDD, AD, and iBDD-SR for a PC with component code (511, 484, 3) and a staircase code with component code (510, 483, 3).
with high channel reliability. By doing so, an error floor is avoided. For PCs, we consider a maximum of 10 iBDD-SR iterations followed by 2 conventional iBDD iterations. For a fair comparison, for iBDD, ideal iBDD, and AD, we use a maximum of 12 iterations. For staircase codes, we use a window decoder with window size of 7 blocks and a maximum of 10 iBDD-SR iterations followed by 2 conventional iBDD iterations.
Table I summarizes the gains of iBDD-SR, ideal iBDD, and AD over conventional iBDD (fifth column) and the gap to the corresponding capacity (sixth column) at the BER of 10−6 for both PCs and staircase codes with BCH component codes of parameters (255, 231, 3) and (254, 230, 3), respectively. Whether the decoder exploits the channel reliabilities and the nature of the messages exchanged in the iterative decoding (hard or soft) is indicated in the third and fourth column, respectively. iBDD-SR yields a performance gain of 0.29 dB and 0.31 dB with respect to iBDD for the PC and the staircase code, respectively. For very high-throughput applications such as fiber-optic communications such gains are significant. Furthermore, one can see that iBDD-SR performs close to the ideal iBDD for both PCs and staircase codes. Interestingly, the staircase code with iBDD-SR outperforms the PC with ideal iBDD by 0.1 dB at a BER of 10−6.
In Table II, we give the gains of iBDD-SR, ideal iBDD, and AD over conventional iBDD and the gap to the corresponding

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:40:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

8176

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 67, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2019

TABLE II
COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT DECODING ALGORITHMS FOR PCS AND STAIRCASE CODES WITH (511, 484, 3) AND (510, 483, 3) BCH COMPONENT CODES, RESPECTIVELY. THE CODE RATE OF THE PC AND THE STAIRCASE CODE IS 0.897 AND 0.894, RESPECTIVELY. THE Eb/N0 , CODING GAINS, AND CORRESPONDING CAPACITY GAPS ARE MEASURED AT BER = 10−6 FROM THE SIMULATIONS. THE VALUES FOR STAIRCASE CODES ARE PROVIDED WITHIN PARENTHESIS

Fig. 7. The evolution of scaling factors for the GLDPC code ensemble with BCH component code (255, 231, 3) over 20 iterations.

capacity at the BER of 10−6 for both PCs and staircase codes with BCH component codes of parameters (511, 484, 3) and (510, 483, 3), respectively. Compared to the shorter block length, one can see that iBDD-SR yields similar gains with respect to iBDD, albeit slightly smaller. Also, the gap between iBDD-SR and ideal iBDD reduces even further. In particular, for the staircase code iBDD-SR performs almost the same as miscorrection-free decoder. Furthermore, the gap to capacity for all decoders is also reduced.
From the GN model, one can see that an optical link SNR improvement of a dB yields a dB of optical reach enhancement [37, Eq. 59]. Thus, the 0.3 dB performance improvement of iBDD-SR over iBDD yields about 7.2% of reach enhancement. We also remark that for extended BCH component codes with t = 2, not reported here, the gain of iBDD-SR with respect to iBDD is slightly larger and iBDD-SR performs almost identical as conventional iBDD (see Fig. 3 in [30] for a curve).
In Fig. 7, we show the evolution of the scaling factors resulting from the density evolution for the GLDPC code ensemble with BCH component code (255, 231, 3) as a function of the number of half iterations, where each iteration corresponds to one row or column decoding step. The scaling factors in Fig. 7 are obtained at the decoding threshold, which is 4.18 dB. As can be seen, the scaling factors are monotonically increasing over iterations. This is expected, as the reliability of the BDD output increases with the number of iterations. In Fig. 8, we show the evolution of the scaling factors for the SC-GLDPC code ensemble with the same component code. In the figure, wa,j corresponds to the vector of scaling factors corresponding to the j-th position inside the decoding window (of size U ) containing spatial positions [a, . . . , a + U − 1].

Fig. 8. The evolution of scaling factors for the SC-GLDPC code ensemble with BCH component code (255, 231, 3) over 20 iterations, using a window decoder of window size 6, for the 6-th spatial position within the window.
In particular, the figure plots the scaling factors obtained by the density evolution (at the code threshold, i.e., 4.05 dB) for the 6-th spatial position inside the windows. Note that after 5 (U − 1) window slides, the scaling factors converge to a given value. The same phenomenon has been observed for other spatial positions within the window and other ensembles. Thus, from a practical viewpoint, it is not necessary to store the scaling factors for every spatial position, but only for a limited number of positions.
It is important to remark that the density evolution in Section IV-A assumes the exchange of extrinsic information between component decoders. However, extrinsic message passing decoding of product-like codes (as explained in Section IV-A and [27] for iBDD-SR and iBDD, respectively) is complex, as it requires that the component codes are decoded n times in each iteration. In practice, when very high throughputs are required, product-like codes are hence decoded using conventional iterative row/column decoding of the component codes, i.e., intrinsic message passing, and this is the algorithm that we used for the simulations. Thus, the scaling factors are obtained for a slightly different decoder than the one used in practice. One may then wonder how good the scaling factors derived for the extrinsic message passing are for the conventional decoder. To verify the impact of using the scaling factors found from the density evolution for finite-length codes with conventional row/column decoding, we also performed a search based on Monte-Carlo simulations to optimize the scaling factors for PCs, with a grid search of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:40:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHEIKH et al.: BINARY MESSAGE PASSING DECODING OF PRODUCT-LIKE CODES

8177

step size of 0.01. Interestingly, the performance of iBDD-SR with scaling factors from the density evolution yields slightly better results (probably due to the non-exhaustive limited Monte-Carlo search), supporting that their derivation using the density evolution is very useful in practice. Also, we would like to stress that the Monte-Carlo search is not feasible for staircase codes, thus the derived density evolution is crucial in the design of iBDD-SR in this case.
VII. CONCLUSION
We proposed iterative bounded distance decoding with scaled reliability, a new decoding algorithm for the decoding of product-like codes. The proposed algorithm, based on BDD of the component codes, exploits the channel reliabilities but, notably, is a binary message passing algorithm, i.e., the component decoders exchange only hard decisions. The proposed algorithm improves the performance of conventional iBDD, with the same decoder data flow, at the expense of a minor increase in complexity. For two particular PCs and staircase codes built from BCH component code codes (255, 231, 3) and (511, 484, 3) (shortened by one bit for staircase codes), the proposed algorithm outperforms conventional iBDD by 0.24–0.31 dB and yields performance very close to that of ideal iBDD without miscorrections. For a PC with (255, 231, 3) BCH component codes, in [35] we implemented iBDD-SR in a 28nm process technology, achieving 1 Tb/s with an area and energy dissipation less than half of that of staircase decoders, at similar estimated net coding gains.
The proposed algorithm is appealing for applications requiring very high throughputs such as fiber-optic communications.
APPENDIX
We clarify the derivation of P e (i). Recall that P e (i) corresponds to the probability that BDD results in a codeword (within Hamming distance t of the input vector, see (2)) that has an error in the randomly selected position, given that the input vector has an error in that position and contains i errors in the other n − 1 positions. One can easily see that if 0 ≤ i ≤ t − 1, the total number of errors is less than or equal to t, meaning that the decoder is able to correct the codeword, therefore P e (i) = 0. On the other hand, if n − t − 1 ≤ i ≤ n − 1, the Hamming distance between the input vector and the all-one codeword is less than or equal to t, therefore BDD decodes onto the all-one codeword and the randomly selected position will always be in error, i.e., P e (i) = 1.
The nontrivial case corresponds to t ≤ i ≤ n − t − 2. In this case, we need to compute the probability that there exists a codeword c that has a one in the randomly-chosen position and is within Hamming distance t of the weight-(i + 1) vector at the input of the bounded distance decoder, which we denote by r. To do so, we can exploit the weight enumerator of the BCH code, Ah, and consider the equivalent problem of computing the probability that, given a codeword c of a given weight, the randomly selected bit for the input vector corresponds to an entry where c is one and the i other ones of the input vector are placed such that dH(c, r) ≤ t.

We proceed as follows. Consider codewords of weight h+1,

the total number of which is Ah+1. For a given codeword of weight h + 1, the probability that the randomly selected

erroneous bit is chosen among the codeword bit positions that

are

one

is

h+1 n

.

Now,

assume

that

the

input

vector

has

h−j

ones in h − j out of the h entries (one entry is already fixed)

where the given codeword has ones. Thus, the input vector has

i−(h−j) ones in i−(h−j) out of the n−h−1 entries where

the given codeword is zero. The number of possibilities is

h h−j

and

n−h−1 i − (h − j)

=

n−h−1 δ−j

,

respectively, where we defined δ i − h+ 2j for convenience. Thus, the probability that this occurs is

h n−h−1

h−j

δ−j

n−1

,

i

which we defined as Fh(1) in (7). Finally, we need to sum over all cases such that r and the
candidate codeword c are within Hamming distance t. Note that dH(c, r) = j + (i − (h − j)) = i − h + 2j = δ and we need that δ ≤ t. Thus, we need to sum over δ = 1, . . . , t
and subsequently j = 0, . . . , δ, which results in the expression
in (5).

ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors would like to thank Dr. Christian Häger and Prof. Henry Pfister for fruitful discussions and providing the simulation results of AD in Figs. 5–6.

REFERENCES
[1] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[2] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[3] J. Justesen, K. J. Larsen, and L. A. Pedersen, “Error correcting coding for OTN,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 48, no. 9, pp. 70–75, Sep. 2010.
[4] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. R. Kschischang, “Power reduction techniques for LDPC decoders,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, no. 8, pp. 1835–1845, Aug. 2008.
[5] T. Mohsenin, D. N. Truong, and B. M. Baas, “A low-complexity message-passing algorithm for reduced routing congestion in LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 1048–1061, May 2010.
[6] F. Angarita, J. Valls, V. Almenar, and V. Torres, “Reduced-complexity min-sum algorithm for decoding LDPC codes with low error-floor,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 61, no. 7, pp. 2150–2158, Jul. 2014.
[7] K. Cushon, P. Larsson-Edefors, and P. Andrekson, “Low-power 400-Gbps soft-decision LDPC FEC for optical transport networks,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 34, no. 18, pp. 4304–4311, Sep. 15, 2016.
[8] B. P. Smith, A. Farhood, A. Hunt, F. R. Kschischang, and J. Lodge, “Staircase codes: FEC for 100 Gb/s OTN,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 110–117, Jan. 1, 2012.
[9] A. Sheikh, A. Graell i Amat, and G. Liva, “Achievable information rates for coded modulation with hard decision decoding for coherent fiberoptic systems,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 35, no. 23, pp. 5069–5078, Dec. 1, 2017.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:40:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

8178

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 67, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2019

[10] P. Elias, “Error-free Coding,” Trans. IRE Prof. Group Inf. Theory, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 29–37, Sep. 1954.
[11] N. Abramson, “Cascade decoding of cyclic product codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun. Technol., vol. COM-16, no. 3, pp. 398–402, Jun. 1968.
[12] R. M. Pyndiah, “Near-optimum decoding of product codes: Block turbo codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 46, no. 8, pp. 1003–1010, Aug. 1998.
[13] A. Al-Dweik, S. Le Goff, and B. Sharif, “A hybrid decoder for block turbo codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 1229–1232, May 2009.
[14] P. Y. Lu, E. H. Lu, and T. C. Chen, “An efficient hybrid decoder for block turbo codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 18, no. 12, pp. 2077–2080, Dec. 2014.
[15] H. Mukhtar, A. Al-Dweik, and A. Shami, “Turbo product codes: Applications, challenges, and future directions,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 3052–3069, 4th Quart., 2016.
[16] A. Al-Dweik, H. Mukhtar, E. Alsusa, and J. Dias, “Ultra-Light decoder for turbo product codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 446–449, Mar. 2018.
[17] B. Ahn, S. Yoon, and J. Heo, “Low complexity syndrome-based decoding algorithm applied to block turbo codes,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 26693–26706, 2018.
[18] B. Li, K. J. Larsen, D. Zibar, and I. T. Monroy, “Over 10 dB net coding gain based on 20% overhead hard decision forward error correction in 100G optical communication systems,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Exhib. Opt. Commun. (ECOC), Geneva, Switzerland, Sep. 2011, pp. 1–3.
[19] Y.-Y. Jian, H. D. Pfister, K. R. Narayanan, R. Rao, and R. Mazahreh, “Iterative hard-decision decoding of braided BCH codes for highspeed optical communication,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Atlanta, GA, USA, Dec. 2013, pp. 2376–2381.
[20] A. Sheikh, A. Graell i Amat, G. Liva, and F. Steiner, “Probabilistic amplitude shaping with hard decision decoding and staircase codes,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 36, no. 9, pp. 1689–1697, May 1, 2018.
[21] Forward Error Correction for High Bit-Rate DWDM Submarine Systems, document ITU-T G.975.1, 2004.
[22] C. Häger and H. D. Pfister, “Approaching miscorrection-free performance of product codes with anchor decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 66, no. 7, pp. 2797–2808, Jul. 2018.
[23] L. M. Zhang and F. R. Kschischang, “Low-complexity soft-decision concatenated LDGM-Staircase FEC for high-bit-rate fiber-optic communication,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 35, no. 18, pp. 3991–3999, Sep. 15, 2017.
[24] M. Barakatain and F. R. Kschischang, “Low-complexity concatenated LDPC-staircase codes,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 36, no. 12, pp. 2443–2449, Jun. 15, 2018.
[25] G. Lechner, T. Pedersen, and G. Kramer, “Analysis and design of binary message passing decoders,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 601–607, Mar. 2012.
[26] A. Sheikh, A. Graell i Amat, and G. Liva, “Iterative bounded distance decoding of product codes with scaled reliability,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Opt. Commun. (ECOC), Rome, Italy, Sep. 2018, pp. 1–3.
[27] Y.-Y. Jian, H. D. Pfister, and K. R. Narayanan, “Approaching capacity at high rates with iterative hard-decision decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 63, no. 9, pp. 5752–5773, Sep. 2017.
[28] A. Sheikh, A. Graell i Amat, G. Liva, C. Häger, and H. D. Pfister, “On low-complexity decoding of product codes for high-throughput fiber-optic systems,” in Proc. IEEE 10th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process. (ISTC), Hong Kong, Dec. 2018, pp. 1–5.
[29] Y. Lei et al., “Decoding staircase codes with marked bits,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process. (ISTC), Hong Kong, Dec. 2018, pp. 1–5.
[30] A. Sheikh, A. G. i Amat, and G. Liva, “Binary message passing decoding of product codes based on generalized minimum distance decoding,” in Proc. 53rd Annu. Conf. Inf. Sci. Syst. (CISS), Baltimore, MD, USA, Mar. 2019, pp. 1–5.
[31] P. Poggiolini, “The GN model of non-linear propagation in uncompensated coherent optical systems,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 30, no. 24, pp. 3857–3879, Dec. 15, 2012.
[32] J. Justesen, “Performance of product codes and related structures with iterated decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 407–415, Feb. 2011.
[33] C. Häger, H. D. Pfister, A. Graell i Amat, and F. Brännström, “Density evolution for deterministic generalized product codes on the binary erasure channel at high rates,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 63, no. 7, pp. 4357–4378, Jul. 2017.
[34] C. Häger, A. Graell i Amat, H. D. Pfister, A. Alvarado, F. Brännström, and E. Agrell, “On parameter optimization for staircase codes,” in Proc. Opt. Fiber Commun. Conf. (OFC), Los Angeles, CA, USA, Mar. 2015, pp. 1–3.

[35] C. Fougstedt, A. Sheikh, A. Graell i Amat, G. Liva, and P. Larsson-Edefors, “Energy-efficient soft-assisted product decoders,” in Proc. Opt. Fiber Commun. Conf. (OFC), San Diego, CA, USA, Mar. 2019, pp. 1–3.
[36] C. Fougstedt and P. Larsson-Edefors, “Energy-efficient high-throughput staircase decoders,” in Proc. Opt. Fiber Commun. Conf. (OFC), San Diego, CA, USA, Mar. 2018, pp. 1–3.
[37] P. Poggiolini, G. Bosco, A. Carena, V. Curri, Y. Jiang, and F. Forghieri, “The GN-model of fiber non-linear propagation and its applications,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 694–721, Feb. 15, 2014.
Alireza Sheikh (S’15) was born in Mashhad, Iran, in 1989. He received the B.Sc. degree (Hons.) in electrical engineering from the Ferdowsi University of Mashhad, in 2011, the M.Sc. degree (Hons.) in communication systems engineering from the University of Tehran, Iran, in 2014, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the Chalmers University of Technology, Sweden, in 2019. In 2017 and 2018, he was a Visiting Researcher with the Institute of Communications and Navigation, German Aerospace Center (DLR), Germany, and later with the SPS Group, Eindhoven University of Technology (TU/e), The Netherlands, where he is currently a Post-Doctoral Researcher with the ICT Lab. His research interests include optical communication, coding theory, information theory, and wireless communication, in particular, the design of coding schemes with low complexity for the next generation communication systems.
Alexandre Graell i Amat (S’01–M’05–SM’10) received the M.Sc. degree in telecommunications engineering from the Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain, in 2001, and the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the Politecnico di Torino, Turin, Italy, in 2000 and 2004, respectively. From 2001 to 2002, he was a Visiting Scholar with the University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. From 2002 to 2003, he held a visiting appointment at the Universitat Pompeu Fabra and at the Telecommunications Technological Center of Catalonia, Barcelona. From 2001 to 2004, he was a Consultant on coding for magnetic recording channels for STMicroelectronics, Milan, Italy. He held faculty positions at Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, from 2004 to 2005, and at IMT-Atlantique (former ENST Bretagne), Brest, France, from 2006 to 2010. In 2011, he joined the Department of Electrical Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden, where he is currently a Professor. Since 2019, he has been an Adjunct Research Scientist with Simula UiB, Bergen, Norway. His research interests are in the field of coding theory and its application to areas including distributed computing, privacy, and optical communications. He received the Post-Doctoral Juan de la Cierva Fellowship from the Spanish Ministry of Education and Science and the Marie Curie Intra-European Fellowship from the European Commission. He was a recipient of the IEEE Communications Society 2010 Europe, Middle East, and Africa Region Outstanding Young Researcher Award. He was the General Co-Chair of the 7th International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Iterative Information Processing, 2012. He was an Associate Editor of IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS from 2011 to 2013 and IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS from 2011 to 2016. He is currently an Editor-at-Large of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS.
Gianluigi Liva (M’08–SM’14) was born in Spilimbergo, Italy, in 1977. He received the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Bologna, Italy, in 2002 and 2006, respectively. Since 2003, he has been investigating channel codes for high-data rate with the Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS) Missions. From 2004 to 2005, he was involved in research at The University of Arizona, Tucson, where he was designing low-complexity error correcting codes for space communications. Since 2006, he has been with the Institute of Communications and Navigation, German Aerospace Center (DLR), where he currently leads the Information Transmission Group. In 2010, he was appointed as a Lecturer of channel coding with the Institute for Communications Engineering (LNT), Technical University of Munich (TUM), where he has been a Lecturer of channel codes with iterative decoding since 2014. He received the Italian National Scientific Habilitation (ASN) as a Full Professor of telecommunication engineering in July 2017. His main research interests include satellite communications, random access techniques, and error control coding.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:40:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

