2019 International Symposium on Intelligent Signal Processing and Communication Systems (ISPACS)

A Transformation for Polar Code BP Decoding

Yi-Ru Chen

Huang-Chang Lee

Mao-Chao Lin

Grad. Inst. of Communication Engineering, Dept. of Electrical Engineering, Grad. Inst. of Communication Engineering,

National Taiwan University

Chang Gung University,

National Taiwan University

Taipei 106, Taiwan.

Taoyuan City 33302, Taiwan.

Taipei 106, Taiwan.

(e-mail: r07942123@ntu.edu.tw)

(e-mail: akula.lee@gmail.com)

(e-mail: mclin@ntu.edu.tw)

Abstract—A transformation technique has been designed, where the encoding result of the polar code can be transfered to an low-density parity-check (LDPC) code. The belief-propagation decoding can be applied to the received sequence according to the parity-check matrix of the LDPC code. The transfered polar code can provide the same error-rate of the LDPC code, and its performance can be further improved if the success-cancellation decoding is avaliable.
Index Terms—Belief propagation, error-control codes, polar code, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
Infinite-length polar code [1] have been proven to achieve the capacity for binary-input symmetric memory-less channels, but it cannot outperform low-density parity-check (LDPC) [2] code with limited code length using successive cancellation (SC) decoding. Although the error-rate performance can be improved by using CRC-list-SC decoding [3], these SC-based decoding schemes suffer from longer latency, and the throughput is limited due to their serial nature. On the other hand, belief propagation (BP) [4] decoding has the intrinsic advantage of parallel processing, and can be a potential solution for high throughput. However, the original BP decoding applied to polar code is based on the bipartite graph of encoding, it cannot provide the parity-check feature and achieves only limited performance.
In [5] and [6], a short LDPC code is used as an outer code and is concatenated with an inner polar code. Its errorrate performance is comparable to that of the CRC-list-SC decoding with eight CRC bits and list size equals to two (CRC-8, L=2), but the rate of overall concatenated code is lower than the original polar code, and both polar and LDPC decodings must be processed in order to achieve the final decoding results.
In this paper, an alternative solution has been proposed. A transformation matrix has been designed and serves as an inner code. The encoding result of the outer polar code can be transfered to an equivalent LDPC code, then the BP decoding for LDPC code can be directly applied to the received sequence. If the equivalent LDPC code cannot be successively decoded, SC decoding of the polar code can be used and the remaining error bits are possibly solved.
II. DESIGN OF THE PROPOSED TRANSFER MATRIX
The system model is presented in 1. The generator matrix of the polar code is denoted as Gpolar, it can be achieved

after removing the rows corresponding to the frozen bits. For a (N, K) polar code, the size of Gpolar is K-by-N . The paritycheck matrix of the LDPC code is denoted as Hldpc, its size is (N − k)-by-N . The transfer matrix is denoted as T, its size is N -by-N , then the overall concatenated code can be kept as R = K/N .

Polar Code Encoder

Inner Code

Channel

LDPC Code Decoder

Message Passing

Polar Code Decoder

Fig. 1. System model of the proposed polar code decoder.

GpolarTinnerHlTdpc = 0

(1)

In order to decode the received sequence using BP decoding
of LDPC code, the condition of (1) must be satisfied. Consider the polar code of R = 1/2. Gpolar can be represented as a combination of two N/2-by-N/2 sub-matrices GL and GR. A similar representation is shown for Hldpc, whose left and right helf parts are denoted as HL and HR, respectively. Then (1) can be re-writen as (2), the transfer matrix Tinner is separated into four N/2-by-N/2 sub-matrices, the upper-right
and lower-left ones are all zero matrices, and the upper-left and lower-right ones are denoted as U and D, respectively.

GL

GR

U0 0D

HTL HRT

= 0,

(2)

GLUHTL + GRDHTR = 0,

(3)

GLUHLT = GRDHTR.

(4)

U = (GL)−1 GRDHTR HLT −1

(5)

U = (GL)−1 GRHTR HLT −1

(6)

Follow the process from (2) to (6), and set D as an identity matrix, the transfer matrix that can convert a polar code to an LDPC code is derived.
In this work, the transfer matrix Tinner surves as a rate1 inner code. If the received sequence cannot be successfully

978-1-7281-3038-5/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:35:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2019 International Symposium on Intelligent Signal Processing and Communication Systems (ISPACS)

Fig. 2. The representation of the (Tinner)−1 transformation.

Fig. 4. The BLER performance for the (1024,512) polar code.

Fig. 3. Graph connection of (Tinner)−1 and Hldpc.

decoded using the BP decoder based on Hldpc, the LLR values of the temparly decoding result can be transfered following the message passing algorithm according to the bipartite graph corresponding to (Tinner)−1, and the SC decoding of polar code can be used to further improve the performance. The operations of the message passing based on (Tinner)−1 is shown in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3, where the circle and square nodes respectively denote the processes of variable nodes and check nodes in LDPC code.
III. NUMBERICAL EVALUATION
When a (1024,512) polar code is evaluated in an AWGN channel, the performance of block-error rate (BLER) and biterror rate (BER) are respectively presented in Fig. 4 and Fig. 5. The simulation results shows that if only LDPC decoding of 20-iterations is used, the the proposed method can provide a similar FER performance compared to that of [6] and CRClist-SC with L=2. The SC decoding can slightly improve the BLER performance. If the 50 iterations is avaliable, the BLER can be significantly improved. However, as shown in Fig. 5, due the error propagation, the BER of SC decoding is even worse than that of only use LDPC decoding.
IV. CONCLUSION
In this work, we present a design flow to transfer a polar code to an LDPC code. Although the application of this design flow is limit to rate-1/2 polar code, the simulation results show that the high throughput BP decoding is possible to achieve

Fig. 5. The BER performance for the (1024,512) polar code.
a competitive error-rate performance compared to that of the CRC-list-SC decoding.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Arkan, “Channel polarization: A method for constructing capacityachieving codes for symmetric binary-input memoryless channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 3051-3073, Jul. 2009.S.
[2] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” M.I.T. Press, 1963. [3] I. Tal and A. Vardy, “List decoding of polar codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Symp. Inf. Theory,2011,pp.1-5. [4] Guiping Li, Jianjun Mu, Xiaopeng Jiao, Junjun Guo, and Xiaohang Liu,
“Enhance belief propagation decoding of polar codes by adapting the parity-check matrix,” Eurasip journal on wireless communication and network. [5] J. Guo M. Qin A. Guillen I Fabregas P. H. Siegel “Enhanced belief propagation decoding of polar codes through concatenation,” Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, pp. 2987-2991 2014. [6] S. M. Abbas Y. Fan J. Chen C. Y. Tsui “Concatenated LDPC-polar codes decoding through belief propagation,” IEEE Int. Symp. on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), pp. 1-4 2017.

978-1-7281-3038-5/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:35:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

