770

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 65, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2019

A Low Complexity Decoding Scheme for Raptor-Like LDPC Codes
Yin Xu , Genning Zhang , Hao Ju, Dazhi He, Jun Sun, Yiyan Wu, Fellow, IEEE, and Wenjun Zhang, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Recently, a new structure of low density parity check (LDPC) code named raptor-like LDPC code has attracted much attention. It has better performance at low code rate. In this paper, a novel decoding scheme for raptor-like LDPC code is proposed. First, the Gaussian approximation density evolution (GADE) algorithm is used to track and analyze the message transmission during the decoding process. It is found that certain log likelihood ratio (LLR) messages can be approximated by “zero” setting in the early iteration of raptor-like LDPC decoding. In other words, some column and row operations could be eliminated without compromise the performance. Next, we propose a new decoding scheme, which can skip unnecessary column and row operations. In comparison with the traditional belief propagation (BP)-based LDPC decoding scheme, the proposed scheme can reduce the decoding complexity. Additionally, a new algorithm is developed to facilitate the selection of the early iteration number. With this novel design, the proposed decoding scheme performs almost the same as the traditional BP-based scheme. To proof the concept, the raptor-like LDPC codes in the ATSC3.0 digital TV system are used to evaluate the proposed scheme, in comparison with the traditional BP-based schemes, i.e., sum-product algorithm (SPA), offset min-sum algorithm (OMSA), and normalized min-sum algorithm (NMSA). The simulation results confirm that the proposed scheme can reduce the decoding complexity without sacrifice in performance for all SPA, OMSA, and NMSA methods. About 10% complexity reduction can be achieved. This will reduce the buttery consumption for Internet of Things (IoT) and handheld devices.
Index Terms—Raptor-like, LDPC, decoding, SPA, OMSA, NMSA, early iteration number.
I. INTRODUCTION
S INCE the low density parity check (LDPC) code was discovered by Gallager [1] and MacKay et al. [2], [3]. It has been demonstrated that irregular LDPC codes can perform close to the Shannon limit. In the past decade, the LDPC code has been widely used as a powerful error correcting code. Recently, a new structural LDPC code called raptor-like LDPC code [4], [5] has been recognized to have better performance at low code rate. These advantages result from the special structure of raptor-like LDPC code, that it has some degree-one variable nodes and the edges connected with these degreeone variable nodes form an identity matrix in the check matrix. In fact, this structural feature leads to some interesting behaviors during the LDPC decoding process. Based on these interesting behaviors, we propose a new LDPC decoding scheme which can reduce the decoding complexity.
Manuscript received February 4, 2019; revised May 3, 2019; accepted May 17, 2019. Date of publication July 18, 2019; date of current version December 10, 2019. This work was supported in part by the Shanghai Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 19Z111050014, in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61671297 and Grant 61420106008, in part by the Shanghai Key Laboratory of Digital Media Processing under Grant STCSM 18DZ2270700, in part by the National Science and Technology Major Project under Grant 2017ZX03001027, and in part by the Scientific and Innovative Action Plan of Shanghai under Grant 17511106102. (Corresponding author: Dazhi He.)
Y. Xu, G. Zhang, H. Ju, D. He, J. Sun, and W. Zhang are with the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China (e-mail: hedazhi@sjtu.edu.cn).
Y. Wu is with the Chief Technology Office, Communications Research Centre, Ottawa, ON K2H 8S2, Canada.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBC.2019.2921670

The most popular LDPC decoding algorithms are all traditional belief propagation (BP) based algorithms, which include sum-product algorithm (SPA) and all kinds of its simplified version, such as min-sum algorithms (MSA), offset min-sum algorithm (OMSA) and normalized min-sum algorithm (NMSA) [6], [7], [8]. These traditional BP-based LDPC decoding algorithms strictly calculate the LLR messages for every edge of the LDPC code at every iteration. However, according to our analysis, some calculations might not be necessary for raptor-like LDPC codes. In order to understand this interesting characteristic, we need to theoretically analyze the raptorlike LDPC decoding process. Several techniques have been proposed in the literatures to analyze the traditional sum-product decoding by tracking the density of the messages exchanged in the decoder. Richardson et al. introduced the density evolution (DE) algorithm based on the degree distribution framework [9], [10] and multi-edgetype (MET) framework [11], [12]. Chung et al. [13] proposed the Gaussian approximation density evolution (GADE) algorithm which used the Gaussian to approximate the density of messages during the LDPC decoding. Zhang et al. [14] proposed a two-type degree distribution framework to analyze raptor-like LDPC codes, and the corresponding GADE algorithm named two-type GADE algorithm.
In this paper, we adopt the two-type GADE algorithm to analyze the decoding of raptor-like LDPC code and explain why some calculations are not necessary in the traditional BP-based decoding scheme. Then we propose a low complexity decoding scheme for raptor-like LDPC code and the corresponding design algorithm for any early iteration number (the meaning will be explained later). The reasons to use two-type GADE algorithm is that the two-type degree distribution framework can be easily and directly used to analyze raptor-like LDPC code in this paper, while the traditional degree distribution framework can not be used to analyze the LDPC codes with degree-one variable nodes, and the MET framework is too complicated and too abstract to explain the interesting characteristic. Therefore, we first introduce the two-type degree distribution framework which can easily represent the structural feature of a raptor-like LDPC code. Then the GADE algorithm is introduced based on this framework. Up on this, we can easily calculate the density of messages at every decoding iteration of the raptor-like LDPC decoding. It can be found that some LLR messages are always close to zero at the early iteration. In other words, before early iteration number, some column and row operations are unnecessary. Therefore, we propose a new LDPC decoding scheme for raptor-like LDPC code, which selectively skips these unnecessary operations during the early iterations of raptor-like LDPC decoding. By adopting the scheme, decoding complexity can be reduced. Although analysis is initially carried out based on the sum-product algorithm, we find out that this low complexity raptor-like LDPC decoding scheme can also be extended to reduce the complexity of the famous NMSA and OMSA. Furthermore, we propose an algorithm which can obtain the optimized early iteration number of the proposed decoding scheme based on a given code.
We use the raptor-like LDPC codes in ATSC3.0 [15], [16] to evaluate the proposed raptor-like LDPC decoding scheme. According to the simulation results, it proves that by carefully designing the value of the early iteration number, the performances of the proposed decoding scheme are almost the same as the performances

0018-9316 c 2019 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:38:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 65, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2019

771
TABLE I VARIABLE NODE TYPE OF TWO-TYPE DEGREE
DISTRIBUTION FRAMEWORK

Fig. 1. The Tanner graph of a raptor-like LDPC code.

TABLE II CHECK NODE TYPE OF TWO-TYPE DEGREE DISTRIBUTION FRAMEWORK

of the traditional BP-based decoding scheme while the complexity is reduced.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The two-type degree distribution framework and the corresponding GADE algorithm are introduced in Section II. The proposed raptor-like LDPC decoding scheme is introduced in Section III along with the proposed algorithm of designing an optimized early iteration number. Finally, the simulation results are presented in Section IV, followed by some concluding remarks in Section V.
II. TWO-TYPE DEGREE DISTRIBUTION FRAMEWORK AND THE CORRESPONDING TWO-TYPE GAUSSIAN APPROXIMATION DENSITY EVOLUTION ALGORITHM
In this section, we introduce the two-type degree distribution framework [14] and the corresponding Gaussian approximation density evolution algorithm.
A. Two-Type Degree Distribution Framework
Raptor-like LDPC code has an important structural feature, which is that raptor-like LDPC code has many degree-one variable nodes and any check node is connected to at most one degree-one variable node. Since the traditional degree distribution framework can not describe this feature, it can not be used to analyze raptor-like LDPC codes.
To easily solve this problem, we introduce the two-type degree distribution framework. For the convenience of expression, we describe a raptor-like LDPC code by using the corresponding Tanner graph [17] as shown in Fig. 1. Va (or Vb) is the set of variable nodes whose degree is more than one (or is one). C1 (or C2) is the set of check nodes which are not connected to Vb (or connected to Vb). And E1 (or E2) is the set of edges which are connected to Va and C1 (or C2). In an LDPC code, for a variable node, there are some edges connecting to it. Among these edges, some edges are in E1, and other edges are in E2. We use dv1 (or dv2) to denote the number of those edges in E1 (or E2), which is named type-one-degree (or type-two-degree) of the corresponding variable node. Similarly, for a check node, some edges connected to it are in E1, and some edges connected to it are in E2 . And we use dc1 (or dc2) to denote the number of those edges in E1 (or E2), which is named type-one-degree (or type-two-degree) of the corresponding check node.
Then, the two-type degree distribution is listed in TABLE I and TABLE II. For the ith type variable node, the type-one-degree and type-two-degree are represented by dv1,i and dv2,i. For the jth type check node, the type-one-degree and type-two-degree are represented

by dc1,j and dc2,j. And we use λ1,i (or ρ1,j) to denote type-onedegree distribution of variable node type i (or check node type j),

which can be calculated as:

λ1,i

=

dv1,i

∗

the

amount of variable nodes belonging the amount of edges in E1

to

type

i

ρ1,j

=

dc1,j

∗

the

amount of check nodes the amount of edges

belonging in E1

to

type

j

Similarly, λ2,i (or ρ2,j) is the type-two-degree distribution of variable node type i (or check node type j) and they can be

calculated as:

λ2,i

=

dv2,i

∗

the

amount of variable nodes belonging the amount of edges in E2

to

type

i

ρ2,j

=

dc2,j

∗

the

amount of check nodes the amount of edges

belonging in E2

to

type

j.

B. Two-Type Gaussian Approximation Density Evolution Algorithm

Based on this two-type degree distribution framework, the sum-
product process can be represented as follows. Let v1,i and v2,i denote LLR messages from a type i variable node in Va to a check node in C1 and C2, respectively. Under sum-product decoding, we can calculate v1,i and v2,i by,

v1,i = u0 + dv1,i − 1 ∗ u1 + dv2,i ∗ u2

(1)

v2,i = u0 + dv1,i ∗ u1 + dv2,i − 1 ∗ u2

(2)

where u0 is the observed LLR, u1 and u2 are the incoming LLR from the neighboring check nodes in C1 and C2, respectively.
For the check nodes in C1, we use u1,j to represent the LLR message from a check node in C1 to a variable node in Va, where j is the check node type. Then, we get the following formula:

tanh u1,j = tanh v1 dc1,j−1

(3)

2

2

where v1 is the incoming LLR message from variable nodes in Va to check nodes in C1.
For the check nodes in C2, we use u2,j to represent the LLR message from a check node in C2 to a variable node in Va, where j is the check node type. Then, we get the message update formula at

the check node in C2 as:

tanh u2,j = tanh u0 ∗ tanh v2 dc2,j−1

(4)

2

2

2

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:38:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

772

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 65, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2019

where v2 is the LLR message from variable nodes in Va to check nodes in C2. u0 is the observed LLR and it is equal to the LLR message sent from degree-one variable node to check nodes in C2.
Next, we will briefly introduce the two-type Gaussian approxima-

tion method. Without loss of generality, we assume the all-0 codeword

is sent, and the channel is BI-AWGN channel with the parameter snr.

Then, the LLR message u0 from the channel is a Gaussian with mean

2 σn2

and variance

4 σn2

,

where

σn2

is the variance of the channel noise

and

it

can

be

calculated

as

σn2

=

1 2∗10(snr/10)

.

According to paper [13], we know that we only need the mean

to specify a Gaussian variable. Therefore, we denote the mean of

variable x by m(x). Then, formulas (1) and (2) simply becomes

m v1(l,+i 1) m v2(l,+i 1)

= m(u0) + dv1,i − 1 ∗ m u1(l) + dv2,i ∗ m u(2l) (5)
= m(u0) + dv1,i ∗ m u1(l) + dv2,i − 1 ∗ m u(2l) (6)

where (l) is the iteration number and the initial m(u1(0)) and m(u(20)) are 0.
In order to calculate the mean of u1,j, we take expectations on each side of (3), i.e.,

E tanh u1,j = E tanh v1 dc1,j−1

(7)

2

2

Because v1 consists of v1,i, i = 1, 2, . . . , NVT , v1 is a Gaussian mixture. Using the φ() function introduced in [13] (see Definition 1),

we get

E tanh v1 2

NVT
= 1 − λ1,iφ m(v1,i)

(8)

i=1

Definition 1 ([13], Definition 1):

⎧

φ (x)

=

⎨ ⎩

1− 1,

√1 4π x

R

tanh

u 2

e

−(u−x)2 4x

du,

if if

x>0 x=0

And formula (7) becomes

m u1(l,)j

⎛⎛ = φ−1⎜⎝1 − ⎝1 − NVT λ1,iφ

m(v1(l,+i 1))

⎞dc1,j−1⎞

⎠

⎠⎟

(9)

i=1

Similarly, we can calculate the mean of u2,j by taking expectations on each side of (4), i.e.,

E tanh u2,j = E tanh v2 dc2,j−1 ∗ E tanh u0

(10)

2

2

2

Using φ() function, m(u2,j) is given by

m u2(l,)j

⎛⎛ = φ−1⎝⎜1 − ⎝1 − NVT λ2,iφ

m(v2(l,)i)

⎞dc2,j−1 ⎠

i=1

⎞

× (1 − φ(m(u0)))⎟⎠

(11)

By linearly combining these means m(u1,j) (or m(u2,j)) with weights ρ1,j (or ρ2,j), j = 1, 2, . . . , NCT , we get m(u1(l)) (or m(u2(l)))

as given in the following

⎛

NCT

m u(1l) =

ρ1,jφ−1⎝1 −

NVT

1−

λ1,iφ m v1(l,)i

dc1,j −1 ⎞ ⎠

j=1

i=1

(12)

Fig. 2. The PCM structure of the raptor-like LDPC code.

⎛
NCT
m(u(2l)) = ρ2,jφ−1⎝1 −
j=1

NVT
1 − λ2,iφ m(v2(l,)i)

i=1

⎞

× (1 − φ(m(u0)))⎠

dc2,j −1
(13)

Based on the formulas (5), (6), (12), (13) we can calculate the snr threshold.
Definition 2: The threshold snr∗ is the minimum snr such that m(u1(l)) → ∞ as the iteration number (l) tends to infinity.
Furthermore, we can easily analyze the message transmission of the raptor-like LDPC code based on this two-type GADE algorithm. By this analysis, we can find out that some LLR messages are unnecessary at the early iteration. Therefore, we propose a faster raptor-like LDPC decode scheme in the last section.

III. THE PROPOSED RAPTOR-LIKE LDPC DECODING SCHEME
In this section, we first analyze the message transmission of the raptor-like LDPC code based on the two-type GADE algorithm mentioned in the previous section. By this analysis, it can be observed that some LLR messages are unnecessary during iterations that are before the iteration number. Then, we propose the low complexity raptor-like LDPC decoding scheme which skips those unnecessary column and row operations. Finally, we also propose an algorithm which can facilitate the careful design of early iteration number.

A. The Analysis of Raptor-Like LDPC Decoding

Before we analyze the message transmission during the raptor-like

LDPC decoding, we will briefly introduce the structure of raptor-like

LDPC code. The parity check matrix (PCM) structure of a raptor-

like LDPC code is shown in Fig. 2. The submatrix B, Z and D

corresponding to the parity bits are a dual diagonal lower triangular

matrix, a zero matrix and an identity matrix, respectively. For the

convenience of expression, we call the submatrix A and B as the core

part. Meanwhile, Va, Vb, C1, C2 in Fig. 2 are the same definition as shown in Fig. 1.

In order to directly analyze the LLR message transmission dur-

ing the raptor-like LDPC decoding, the two-type GADE algorithm

is used to analyze the 5/15 raptor-like LDPC code in ATSC3.0. This

code is a carefully designed raptor-like LDPC code with pretty good

performance. And we plot the relation curve between m(u1(l)) and (l)

in the Fig. 3.

From the previous section, we know that m(u(1l)) indicates the mean

of in

the LLR Va at the

message from (l)th iteration.

the check node In other words,

min(uC(11l))tointdhiecavtaersiatbhlee

node mean

of the LLR message transmitted from the check nodes to the variable

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:38:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 65, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2019

773

Fig. 3. The relation curve between m(u1(l)) and iteration number (l).

nodes in the core part. As you can see in the Fig. 3, the m(u1(l)) is

approximately equal to zero at the early iteration. Since the all-0

codeword is will always

sent in the be positive.

tTwhoe-rteyfpoereG, AmD(uE1(l)a)lgiosraitphpmro, xthime amteelaynemqu(aul1(lt)o)

zero indicates that the mean of LLR messages transmitted from the

check node to the variable node in the core part is approximately

equal to zero.

According to paper [13], we only need the mean to specify a

Gaussian variable because of the symmetry condition [9]. For a Gaussian with mean m and variance σ 2, this condition reduces to oawσnf2hdti=hcvhea2rLmimaLen.RacTnesmh0uue.s1(s,Il,s)njaifgiosetthhaueels1(rolm)waeioslawrndaasmyG, s(tahuzue1(esl)rsL)oiLaifnRsordemiqasuentrsayislbajutgo=teiozu1ne(1,rlw2)o,,iits.thh.a.etlhwnTeahtyhemsereezfPaeonDrroeF0,, we can easily draw a conclusion that the LLR messages from the

check nodes to the variable nodes in the core part are always approx-

imately equal to zero at the early iteration of the raptor-like LDPC

decoding.

Based on this zero approximation, we can simplify the decoding

scheme. In the traditional raptor-like LDPC decoding scheme, the

LLR messages from the check nodes to the variable nodes in the

core part are calculated as

E tanh u1,j = E tanh v1 dc1,j−1

(14)

2

2

Since the LLR message u1(l,)j is very close to zero, we can use 0 to approximate these messages at the early iteration. And this approxi-

mation will not affect the performance. Meanwhile, we do not need to btcoaelccuhuseleacdtketnothocedaelcscouirnlraettsehpeoLncLodRrinegmpaeLrsLts,aRbgeemcsaeuus1(ssl,ea)jg.tehsesve1(lm) efrsosamgevsarvi1(al)blaerenoodnelys
In a word, the calculations of the LLR messages transmitted in

the core part are unnecessary during the early iteration of the raptor-

like LDPC code decoding. We can use zeros to replace these LLR

messages.

B. A Low Complexity Raptor-Like LDPC Decoding Scheme
In the last subsection, we use the two-type GADE analysis algorithm to analyze the raptor-like LDPC decoding. And we find out that we do not need to calculate the LLR messages transmitted in the core part at the early iteration. Therefore, we can describe the details of the proposed raptor-like LDPC decoding scheme in Algorithm 1.
In Algorithm 1, we use (i, j) to denote the coordinate of ‘1’ in the PCM of raptor-like LDPC code, which corresponds to the ith check node and jth variable node. And the LLR L(vj → ci) (or L(ci → vj))

Algorithm 1: The Proposed Raptor-Like LDPC Decoding

Scheme

1 Set the maximum iteration number nummaxiter and the early iteration

number numearlyiter.

2 Obtain the observed LLR Lin(vj).

3 Initialize the LLR L(vj → ci) and L(ci → vj).

4 for iter = 1 : 1 : nummaxiter do

5 if iter ≤ numearlyiter then

6

for (i, j) in submatrix A and B do

7

L(vj → ci) = 0

8

end

9

for (i, j) in submatrix C and D do

10

execute the operations in the variable nodes

11

end

12

for (i, j) in submatrix A and B do

13

L(ci → vj) = 0

14

end

15

for (i, j) in submatrix C and D do

16

execute the operations in the check nodes

17

end

18 else

19

for (i, j) in the PCM do

20

execute the operations in the variable nodes

21

end

22

for (i, j) in the PCM do

23

execute the operations in the check nodes

24

end

25 end

26 Check the codeword, if the codeword is right, break the loop.

27 end

denotes the LLR from the jth variable node (or ith check node) to the ith check node (or jth variable node). The proposed raptor-like LDPC decoding scheme uses 0 to approximate the LLR L(vj → ci) and L(ci → vj) at the early iteration, when the coordinate (i, j) is in the core part of the PCM, which consists of the submatrix A and B.
It should be noticed that the analysis mentioned above is based on the sum-product algorithm (SPA). Thus, the proposed low complexity raptor-like LDPC decoding scheme can be used for the SPA. However, according to our empirical results, this proposed low complexity raptor-like LDPC decoding scheme can also be used for other BP-based algorithm, such as normalized min-sum algorithm (NMSA), or offset min-sum algorithm (OMSA). Therefore, in the Algorithm 1, the operation in variable nodes and check nodes has different meaning if different algorithm (NMSA, OMSA, SPA) is applied.
Although the operations in check nodes are not the same for SPA, NMSA and OMSA, the LLR values are very close because the NMSA and OMSA are the approximation algorithm of SPA. Therefore, if the LLR messages of SPA are close to zero at the early iteration, the LLR messages of NMSA and OMSA are also close to zero. This is the reason why the proposed decoding scheme can also be used for NMSA and OMSA.
Since the proposed decoding scheme skips some unnecessary oper-
ations, it can reduce the complexity. Therefore, we will compare the
complexity of the traditional BP-based LDPC decoding scheme and
the proposed low complexity raptor-like LDPC decoding scheme. The traditional BP-based decoding scheme will need numone ∗ nummaxiter operations in the variable and check nodes to finish the decoding
in the worst case. The number numone denotes the number of ‘1’ in the whole PCM, and the number nummaxiter denotes the maximum iteration number. However, the proposed raptor-like LDPC
decoding scheme skips the operations in the core part at the early

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:38:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

774

Algorithm 2: Obtain an Optimized Early Iteration Number Based on a Given Raptor-Like LDPC Code

1 Input the given raptor-like LDPC code.

2 Use the formulas (5) (6) (12) (13) to predict the snr threshold

snrth,1 for the traditional BP-based SPA. 3 for iter = 1 : 1 : nummaxiter do

4 Use the formulas (5) (6) (12) (13) (16) to predict the snr

threshold snrth,2 for the proposed decoding scheme. 5 if snrth,2 − snrth,1 ≤ ε then

6

continue.

7 else

8

numearlyiter = iter − 1

9

break.

10 end

11 end

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 65, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2019 TABLE III
OPTIMIZED SCALING AND OFFSET VALUES
TABLE IV RELATED PARAMETERS OF THE RAPTOR-LIKE LDPC CODES IN ATSC3.0

iteration. If we use the number numcoreone to denote the number of ‘1’ in the core part, the proposed decoding scheme can skip

numcoreone ∗ numearlyiter operations, where numearlyiter denotes the early iteration number. Therefore, the proposed raptor-like LDPC

decoding scheme can reduce the complexity. And the proportion of

the reduced complexity is

Proportion of reduced complexity

=

numcoreone ∗ numearlyiter numone ∗ nummaxiter

(15)

Apparently, both the performance and complexity of the proposed decoding scheme are relevant to the early iteration number numearlyiter. In the next subsection, we will discuss how to obtain an optimized early iteration number.

C. The Algorithm to Get Early Iteration Number

In this subsection, we propose an algorithm which can obtain an optimized early iteration number based on a given raptor-like LDPC code.

m v2(l,+i 1) = m(u0) + dv2,i − 1 ∗ m u2(l)

(16)

We can use the formulas (5), (6), (12), (13), (16) to track the LLR

messages and predict the snr threshold for the proposed decoding

scheme. Based on these predictions, we propose an algorithm that

can obtain an optimized early iteration number numearlyiter for a given raptor-like LDPC code in Algorithm 2.

In Section II, we introduced the algorithm which can predict the

snr threshold for the traditional BP-based SPA. We use the formu-

las (5), (6), (12), (13) to track the LLR messages at every iteration and

predict the snr threshold based on the Definition 2. For the proposed

decoding scheme, we can also predict the snr threshold by modi-

fying some formulas. When iter > numearlyiter, the operations of

proposed decoding scheme are the same as the traditional BP-based

scheme. When iter ≤ numearlyiter, we do not need to calculate m(v(1l,)i)

acnudlatme (mu1((lv))(2l.,)iM) beaencawuhsielew, we eskniepedthteo

modify the calculation

formula (6) to of m(u1(l)). We

calcan

easily obtain the formula (16) by using zero to replace m(u1(l)) in

formula (6). Then, we can use formulas (13) and (16) to track the

LLR messages at the early iteration of proposed decoding scheme.

First, we analyze the threshold snrth,1 for the given raptor-like LDPC code. This analysis is based on the traditional BP-based

SPA. Then we increase the early iteration number numearlyiter. For every early iteration number numearlyiter, we analyze the threshold snrth,2 based on the proposed decoding scheme. Next, we choose

the maximum early iteration number that can satisfy the condition |snrth,2 − snrth,1| ≤ ε. The value ε is the predefined precision and it should be decided based on system situations and requirements.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, the performance and complexity of the proposed raptor-like LDPC decoding scheme is evaluated based on the raptorlike LDPC codes in ATSC3.0 [15]. ATSC3.0 codes are used because they are new and carefully designed [18], and in addition, ATSC3.0 is likely to be used in IP based power constraint devices, which means any noticeable reduction in complexity is very meaningful.
In Fig. 4 and Fig. 5, we demonstrate the performances of the proposed raptor-like LDPC decoding scheme and the traditional BP-based decoding scheme based on 64800 and 16200 raptor-like LDPC codes in ATSC3.0 with BPSK AWGN mode. During the simulation, at least 20 error blocks are tested for every point. The maximum iteration number is set to 50 which is a commonly used number in the performance simulations of LDPC code. The compiled statistics for BER is to the level of 10−6.
In each figure, the performances of the SPA, NMSA and OMSA with the traditional BP-based decoding scheme and the proposed decoding scheme are compared. The optimized scaling and offset values for OMSA and NMSA are adopted based on the reference [19], which provides appropriate scaling and offset values of the raptor-like LDPC codes in ATSC3.0. We also list these values in the Table III. Meanwhile, the early iteration numbers numearlyiter are obtained by the proposed Algorithm 2 and are listed in the Table IV.
As shown in Fig. 4 and Fig. 5, the performances of either SPA or OMSA with the traditional and proposed decoding scheme are almost the same in all the figures. As for the NMSA, the performances of the traditional and proposed decoding scheme are almost the same in the short raptor-like LDPC codes. And, the performances of NMSA with the proposed decoding scheme are even better than the performances of NMSA with the traditional decoding scheme in the long raptor-like LDPC codes, which might be caused by that NMSA itself is an approximation algorithm. In addition, we also demonstrate the performances based on the 3/15 long code with 64QAM constellation in Fig. 6. The parameters for different algorithms and the corresponding ‘early iteration number’ adopted in this situation are all the same as those adopted in 3/15 BPSK mode as shown in Fig. 4(a), except the modulation orders are different. We can see from Fig. 6 that the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:38:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 65, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2019

775

Fig. 4. The performance of the proposed decoding scheme and the traditional decoding scheme based on the long codes.

Fig. 5. The performance of the proposed decoding scheme and the traditional decoding scheme based on the short codes.

proposed decoding scheme works consistently well in the case of higher order modulation.
Note that for the simulation above, the early iteration number is found at the code threhold, and around the threhold the difference of the averaged iteration numbers between the proposed and the triditional algorithms is negligible. In practical, different device, with certain code mode, works at different SNR. A serial of ‘ealry iteration number’ for different SNR region (e.g., with 0.5dB gap) can be found via the proposed scheme, and are then put into a lookup table into the hardware. Then, different device, working at different SNR region, can find its best early iteration number.
In conclusion, if we carefully design the early iteration number numearlyiter, the performance of the proposed scheme is very close

to the traditional decoding scheme in all the figures for the SPA and OMSA. Furthermore, the performance of the proposed scheme is better than the traditional decoding scheme for the NMSA in some cases.
Next, we will discuss the complexities of the proposed scheme and the traditional scheme based on the raptor-like LDPC codes used in the simulation. In Table IV, we list numcoreone, numone, and numearlyiter of the raptor-like LDPC codes in the simulations. According to these parameters, we can calculate the proportion of reduced complexity of the proposed decoding scheme based on the formula (15), which are listed in Table V. Apparently, different raptor-like LDPC codes will lead to different proportion of reduced complexity. The proportion of reduced complexity will increase as

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:38:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

776

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 65, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2019

algorithm are almost the same as the performance of the traditional BP-based LDPC code for the SPA and OMSA in all the cases. For the NMSA, the performance of proposed raptor-like LDPC decoding scheme is same as or even better than the performance of the traditional BP-based decoding scheme. And the conclusion is consistent in high order modulations.
Meanwhile, the proposed raptor-like LDPC decoding scheme can reduce the complexity, compared with the traditional BP-based decoding scheme. In specific, for all the raptor-like LDPC codes used in this paper, the proportion of reduced complexity is from 5% to 17%. The average proportion is about 10.14%, which is quite valuable for potential power constraint applications, like IoT, handhold etc.

Fig. 6. The performance of the proposed decoding scheme and the traditional decoding scheme based on the 3/15 long code with 64QAM.
TABLE V THE PROPORTION OF REDUCED COMPLEXITY
the code rate or code length increase. For all the raptor-like LDPC codes, the proportion of reduced complexity is from 5% to 17%. The average proportion is about 10.14%. And most importantly the performance is not sacrificed. In fact, if the system can tolerate some performance loss, the proposed decoding scheme can reduce more complexity. That might be very interesting for systems with power constraint considerations.
To sum up, we propose a raptor-like LDPC decoding scheme which can reduce the decoding complexity. And if we carefully design the early iteration number, the proposed raptor-like LDPC decoding scheme will not sacrifice the decoding performance of the LDPC codes, compared with the traditional BP-based decoding scheme.
V. CONCLUSION In this paper, a low complexity decoding scheme is proposed to reduce the complexity of decoding with almost no sacrifice in performance. The proposed decoding scheme selectively skips some unnecessary row and column operations during the early iteration of the raptor-like LDPC decoding. The main contributions of this paper include the following three parts. First, we explain why those row and column operations and unnecessary based on the two-type Gaussian approximation density evolution algorithm. The reason is that we find out the LLR messages output from those unnecessary operations can be approximated by zeros. Second, we proposed the low complexity decoding scheme for raptor-like LDPC code based on those zero-approximation characteristic. Finally, we also propose a method which can obtain an optimized early iteration number for a given raptor-like LDPC code. To validate our contributions, we evaluate our proposed decoding scheme based on the raptor-like LDPC codes in ATSC3.0 standard. The simulation results show that the performance of our proposed

REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, p. 1645, Aug. 1996.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[4] S. I. Park, Y. Wu, H. M. Kim, N. Hur, and J. Kim, “Raptor-like rate compatible LDPC codes and their puncturing performance for the cloud transmission system,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 239–245, Jun. 2014.
[5] S. I. Park, H. M. Kim, Y. Wu, and J. Kim, “A newly designed quarterrate QC-LDPC code for the cloud transmission system,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 155–159, Mar. 2013.
[6] M. P. C. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May 1999.
[7] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Density evolution for two improved BP-based decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 208–210, May 2002.
[8] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. P. C. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu, “Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, Aug. 2005.
[9] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[10] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[11] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Multi-edge type LDPC codes,” in Proc. Workshop Honoring Prof. Bob McEliece 60th Birthday California Inst. Technol., 2002, pp. 24–25.
[12] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2008.
[13] S.-Y. Chung, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Analysis of sumproduct decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 657–670, Feb. 2001.
[14] G. Zhang, Y. Xu, D. He, J. Sun, and W. Zhang, “Density evolution based on two-type degree distribution framework of raptor-like LDPC,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 67, no. 12, pp. 11900–11912, Dec. 2018.
[15] ATSC Standard: Physical Layer Protocol (A/322), ATSC Standard TS A/322:2017, Jun. 2017.
[16] L. Fay, L. Michael, D. Gómez-Barquero, N. Ammar, and M. W. Caldwell, “An overview of the ATSC 3.0 physical layer specification,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 159–171, Mar. 2016.
[17] R. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[18] K.-J. Kim et al., “Low-density parity-check codes for ATSC 3.0,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 189–196, Mar. 2016.
[19] S. Myung, S.-I. Park, K.-J. Kim, J.-Y. Lee, S. Kwon, and J. Kim, “Offset and normalized min-sum algorithms for ATSC 3.0 LDPC decoder,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 63, no. 4, pp. 734–739, Dec. 2017.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:38:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

