IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 57, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2009

3679

Architecture-Aware LDPC Code Design for Multiprocessor Software Defined Radio Systems
Yuming Zhu, Member, IEEE, and Chaitali Chakrabarti, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper presents a general procedure for designing low density parity check (LDPC) codes for multiprocessor software defined radio platforms. Our approach is to design the LDPC code to match the constraints imposed by the hardware architecture, without compromising on the communication performance. The proposed architecture-aware code design procedure involves feature identification, code construction and verification. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our procedure for three cases. If the local memory of the processor is small and it can only process one horizontally partitioned submatrix at a time, we show how the code can be constructed so that the traffic to the global memories is reduced by 2X. If the row weight of the matrix is large and each processor processes a vertically partitioned submatrix, we show how the matrix can be constructed so that the computational load is evenly distributed among the processors. If the processors have no storage capability and all data is stored in global memories, then for the case when all traffic is through a multistage interconnection network, we show how code construction can be used to significantly reduce the number of routing conflicts. In all three cases, the resulting LDPC codes can not only be mapped efficiently onto the multiprocessor platform but also have very good frame error performance.
Index Terms—Decoder, encoder, low-density parity check (LDPC), multiprocessor, software defined radio (SDR).
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY Parity-Check (LDPC) [1] codes are linear block codes with sparse parity check matrices. Their asymptotic performance can be as close to one-tenth dB away from the Shannon limit [2]. Another advantage of LDPC codes is that the decoding algorithm is inherently parallel and so a wide variety of hardware implementations can be derived to exploit this feature. Because of their extraordinary performance, LDPC codes have been adopted in the physical layer of many recent communication standards such as DVB-S2, 10GBase-T, 802.16e, and 802.11n.
Recently, there has been a lot of work done on LDPC decoder implementation [3]–[10]. The fully parallel ASIC implementation of LDPC decoder presented in [3] achieves
Manuscript received August 27, 2008; accepted March 30, 2009. First published May 05, 2009; current version published August 12, 2009. The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it for publication was Prof. An-Yeu Wu. This work is based on Ph.D. research at Arizona State University, Tempe. This work was supported in part by the NSF by Grants NSF-ITR 0325761 and NSF CSR-EHS 0615135.
Y. Zhu is with the DSPS R&D Center, Texas Instruments, Dallas, TX 75243 USA (e-mail: yuming.zhu@ieee.org).
C. Chakrabarti is with the Electrical Engineering Department, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287 USA (e-mail: chaitali@asu.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TSP.2009.2022356

Fig. 1. Architecture-aware LDPC code design flow.
very high throughput with large area overhead. Starting with the pioneering work in [5], many of the work consider decoder complexity in the design of the LDPC codes. For instance, [7] presented an architecture-aware LDPC code that utilizes pseudopermutation submatrices and views the LDPC code as a concatenation of supercodes. This facilitates Turbo decoding like operations in the LDPC decoder and results in an implementation that is significantly simpler in terms of both interconnection network complexity and memory requirement. This has been demonstrated in a real chip implementation in [11]. Codesign approaches have also been proposed in [9], [10]. The block LDPC design method presented in [9] jointly considers code design, decoder design and encoder design. It is shown that the encoder and decoder complexity can be reduced without significant performance loss by using circulant submatrices in the parity check matrix. In [10], we showed that by including weight-2 circulant submatrices in the parity check matrix, we can achieve higher throughput without any performance loss. While all these architecture-aware LDPC code design studies are targeted for ASIC implementations, there are LDPC decoding studies for multiprocessors as well [4]. For instance, randomly constructed LDPC codes are considered in [4]. The focus there is on balancing the computation among the processors and reducing communication cost by clustering computation.
In this paper, we consider the problem of systematically designing LDPC codes that exploit the architectural features of multiprocessor architectures, such as those used in existing SDR platforms. This is an extension of the work presented in [12] and [13]. Fig. 1 shows the design flow that we first proposed in [12]. First, the code features based on: i) system specifications, such as frame error rate (FER) performance, codeword size, code rate; and ii) architectural features of the target platform, such as the number of processing units (PU), the width of the single-instruction multiple-data (SIMD) unit and arithmetic complexity, are obtained. The LDPC code is then constructed based on code features, which include

1053-587X/$26.00 © 2009 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:15:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3680

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 57, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2009

Fig. 2. Bipartite graph of a (2,3)-regular LDPC code.

number of block columns, row weight and level of parallel timized for MIN-based interconnection. Section VII concludes

processing. The last step is verifying that the LDPC code the paper.

meets both the system constraints and the architectural con-

straints. In some cases, several iterations may be necessary to ensure that all the constraints are met. Note that the code de-

II. BACKGROUND

sign process is done off-line and does not affect the run-time A. Basics of LDPC Codes performance.

We demonstrate the effectiveness of the procedure for three LDPC codes can be represented by bipartite graphs in

cases. In all cases, we ensure that the FER performance is not which a set of nodes (variable nodes) corresponds to the

compromised. First, we present the case when the local memory elements of a codeword and another set of nodes (check

in the PU is not large enough to support the computations on nodes) correspond to the parity-check constraints of the code.

the whole parity check matrix. We present a scheme where the Fig. 2 shows the parity check matrix and the corresponding

parity check matrix is partitioned horizontally into supercodes bipartite graph of a very short (2,3)-regular LDPC code. It

[7], [14] (Section IV). We find that supercode decoding intro- is regular since each variable node is connected to 2 check

duces degree-one nodes which hinder its performance. So we nodes and each check node is connected to 3 variable nodes.

derive code design constraints that minimize the number of such LDPC codes that do not have the regularity property are

nodes. Our simulation results show that the LDPC codes con- called irregular. Irregular LDPC codes usually achieve better

structed with these constraints converge twice as fast compared performance than the regular LDPC codes [2], [15], and thus

to the nonoptimized codes. This reduces the memory traffic by are considered here.

a factor of 2 which result in the decoding throughput increasing The performance of the LDPC codes is often predicted in

by a factor of 2.

terms of the ensemble average of codes, a consequence of the

Next we consider the case when the parity check matrix has random choice of edges between check nodes and variable

a large row weight and implementation on a single PU results nodes for a given length and a given degree distribution. The

in low throughput. We present a scheme where the parity check optimal degree distribution for asymptotic cases (infinite code-

matrix is partitioned vertically and each of the sections is word size, infinite iteration number) can be computed based

mapped to a PU in a multiprocessor architecture (Section V). on density evolution (DE) [16]. An online computing program

We derive code design constraints that help in distributing the based on DE is available in [17]. Let

be the min-

computational load evenly among the PUs.

imum (maximum) variable node degree and let

Finally, we present an extreme case where the local memory be the minimum (maximum) check node degree. A study of

in each PU is relatively very small and the bulk of the informa- the asymptotic performance shows the following features for

tion is stored in the global (shared) memories. Thus there is sig- degree distribution:

nificant traffic between the PUs and the global memory, and the •

.

throughput is closely related to the number of routing conflicts. • The check node degrees for optimal distribution are limited

We demonstrate the LDPC code design procedure for a SDR

to only a few (one or two) values close to each other. Thus,

platform where the PUs communicate to the global memory

a simple notation

is used to represent

units via a multistage interconnection network (MIN). The com-

the maximum (average) check node degree.

binations of routing paths that cause conflicts in the MIN are

identified and mechanisms to avoid them are translated into constraints for the code construction step. The resulting LDPC code B. The Iterative Decoding Algorithms

can be mapped very efficiently onto the SDR platform and has very high decoding throughput.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II provides a brief review of LDPC codes. Section III outlines the SDR platform and mapping of LDPC decoding onto the plat-

LDPC decoding is done by either the bit flipping hard-decision algorithm [1], or by the soft-decision iterative decoding algorithms such as the belief propagation (BP) algorithm and variations of Min-Sum algorithm. All of them involve two kinds of operations: variable node processing

form. Sections IV and Section V describe the schemes based (VP) and check node processing (CP). The operations for

on horizontal partitioning and vertical partitioning of the parity soft-decision iterative decoding are summarized in Algo-

check matrix. Section VI describes the scheme that has been op- rithm 1.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:15:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHU AND CHAKRABARTI: ARCHITECTURE-AWARE LDPC CODE DESIGN

3681

Algorithm 1: Layered iterative decoding algorithm

1: Initialization:

Set iteration number set

, and for

The LLR information

is the sum of the intrinsic and

extrinsic information of the variable node

(7)

2: while 3: for 4: for 5:

and parity check equation not met do to do to do
Index of check node

(1) After the final iteration, a hard decision based on can be made. The number of iterations required for decoding varies with the SNR. In practice, the maximum number of iterations can be set to 10 – 15. Early termination algorithms are often adopted to stop the decoding process after all the parity check equations have been met.

6: for all variable node

do

7: Variable Node Processing (VP):

C. Finite Length LDPC Code Design

(2)

Unlike the asymptotic cases, the performance of finite length LDPC code is greatly affected by the code structure as well as

8: Check Node Processing (CP):

the degree distribution. This is because the finite length LDPC
codes are no longer cycle-free [18], [19]. Many different criteria (3) have been proposed to optimize the performance of finite length

9: Variable Node Update:

LDPC codes, for example, large girth (length of the smallest cycles in the bipartite graph) [20], [21], selective avoidance of

(4) small cycles [22] and optimization based on stopping set [23] or trapping set [24].

10: end for 11: end for 12: end for 13: end while

LDPC codes with structured submatrices [25] are widely used

in practice to reduce implementation overhead and is the focus

of this paper. The parity check matrix of size

can be

represented as a block matrix of size

; each element

in matrix is a

circulant shifted identity matrix or

14: Output the soft/hard decision of ,

.

zero matrix, where is an integer. Each row of the block parity

matrix (which is equivalent to rows with

elements per

In the description in Algorithm 1, is the intrinsic infor-

mation of variable node from the received signal,

and

are the extrinsic information from check node to vari-

able node ,

is the information from variable node to

check node , is the total information about the variable

node . All the information are in form of log-likelihood ratio

(LLR).

is the set of variable nodes which is connected

with check node in the bipartite graph. Similarly,

is

the set of check nodes which is connected with variable node

. The different decoding algorithms differ in how the func-

tion is evaluated. For BP and Min-Sum algorithm, the set

. The function in (3) for several common

algorithms are listed below:

For Min-Sum algorithm:

row of the original parity check matrix) is referred to as block

row. Similarly, each column of the block parity matrix (which

is equivalent to columns with

elements per column) is

referred to as block column. The nonzero item in is written

as

, where is the circulant identity matrix with

shift value of . For simplicity, we use ’1’ or ’0’ to represent the

or zero matrix.

To design finite length LDPC codes that can be efficiently im-

plemented on the target multiprocessor architecture, we utilize a

design process that combines the optimal degree distribution for

asymptotic performance, characteristics of the structured sub-

matrices, finite length code optimization criteria and architec-

tural constraints such as number of processors and the width of

the SIMD unit. The design process is performed at two levels:

the block matrix level design which constructs the matrix,

and the submatrix level design which assigns shift values to the

submatrices.

(5) The steps for designing LDPC codes based on the code features can be summarized as follows.

For BP algorithm:

1) First, obtain the code features based on system requirement and architectural specifications. The code features include:

, , , , , , level of parallel processing, etc.

While system requirements determine the code rate and

the range of codeword size

, the SIMD width and

(6)

number of PUs are used to determine the extent of paral-

lelism and the row weight . The specific decoding al-

gorithm is selected based on the arithmetic operation sup-

where the function

.

ported by the processor.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:15:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3682

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 57, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2009

2) Compute the degree distribution based on the targeted class of algorithms to be mapped very efficiently as shown in

channel condition, code rate (obtained from and ), [27]. The ASEs are typically included to enhance the perfor-

, and . For the asymptotic case, the optimal mance of some target protocols. For example, the ASE could be

degree distribution can be computed based on density an optimized shuffle network as in [27] or a sorter. The local

evolution [16]. To use these results for finite sized blocks, memory of a PU is typically quite small—of the order of a few

adjustments have to be made such as rounding off the kilobytes. The software control unit coordinates all the PUs in

actual node numbers to integers.

the system.

3) Construct the matrix based on the degree distribution

result in previous step. The construction procedure can be B. LDPC Decoding briefly written as:

i) Initialize the of size

with “0.”

ii) Randomly place “1”s in each row.

iii) Move the “1”s along rows to satisfy the variable

node degree distribution.

iv) Switch columns to facilitate further modification.

For example, some lower degree columns are

moved to the right side of the matrix before

step v) in order to make the encoder efficient [26].

v) Move the “1”s in the matrix in pairs to meet ad-

ditional constraints that have been imposed due to

architectural or performance considerations. The

pair-wise movement is such that if a “1” is moved

from location to location , then another

“1”’ needs to move from location to location

, provided that location

had a “1” and

location had a “0.” Note that this pair-wise

movement of ’1’s does not affect the check node

or variable node distributions.

vi) Output the matrix.

Note that steps iv) and v) may have to be processed

multiple times until all the constraints have been

met or the maximum iteration number has been

reached.

4) Assign shift values to all the nonzero elements in ma-

trix. This is done by assigning shift values based on GF( )

[25] or assigning shift values in a more flexibly way such

that the trapping set is minimized and small cycles are

avoided selectively [22], [24].

A summary of the key notations that are used in this paper is

included in Table I for easy reference.

We first consider the case where all the information related

to LDPC decoding can be stored in the local memory of a PU.

This puts an obvious limitation on the size of the codeword or

equivalently, the size of the parity check matrix that can be pro-

cessed.

Assume that the PE is a SIMD engine with slices. For ex-

ample, the PE in [27] has

slices. Fig. 4 describes such

a PU. Each SIMD slice can efficiently compute addition/sub-

traction and comparison. For LUT-based implementations that

are required for BP-based decoding, approximate computations

can be used [7]. The local memory in the PU stores the intrinsic

and extrinsic information. The local memory and the register

file feed data to the slices. In addition, there is a permutation

unit that is used to permute values to/from the slices of the

SIMD engine.

We assume the scheduling is in check node order. Each SIMD

slice is responsible for the computations in a check node. In each

step, only the check-to-variable or variable-to-check informa-

tion corresponding to the scheduled check nodes are updated.

The general process for processing check nodes in a single PU

is shown in Fig. 4. The decoding includes the following steps:

1) load from memory, permute to the correct slice and

store to register file;

2) load

from memory, load from register file, calcu-

late

(VP), store the

to register file;

3) load

from register file, calculate

(CP), store

to memory and register file;

4) load

and

from register file, calculate

,

permute

to its original order and store

to

memory.

III. LDPC DECODING ON AN SDR PLATFORM

These steps have been marked along the edges in Fig. 4. The round parenthesis denotes the data that can directly be fed to

A. SDR Platform

the SIMD slices and square parenthesis denotes the data that is organized for local memory and require permutation before/

There are many different definitions of SDR systems. In the after being processed by the SIMD slices.

context of this paper, it is a hardware platform that processes 1) Number of Cycles: We estimate the number of cycles that

the physical layer of multiple protocols. We only consider the are required for the decoding steps outlined above. Each of the

digital processing engine, thus ADC/DAC and RF parts are not steps (except Step 3) requires cycles. This is because the steps

studied here.

are repeated for each of the nonzero elements in a row. The

A typical SDR platform consists of multiple processing units CP operation in Step 3 [described in (5)–(6)] requires the all-

(PU) and multiple global memory units as shown in Fig. 3. but-one operation which can be implemented very efficiently in

The PUs and the global memory units communicate with each ASICs using adder-trees and XOR-trees. In an SDR platform,

other via an interconnection network. The interconnection net-

cycles are required to compute the all-but-one operation.

work could be one or more shared buses or even a multistage Thus the total number of cycles to process check nodes using

interconnection network. Each PU consists of a local memory, the SDR platform is cycles, ignoring the overhead due to the

a processing element (PE), which consists of a scalar unit and pipelines. The precise cycle count is platform dependent. For

a SIMD unit, and an application specific element (ASE). The example, the permutation step that is used to convert the or

combination of a scalar unit and a SIMD unit enables a large

values between variable node order and check node order,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:15:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHU AND CHAKRABARTI: ARCHITECTURE-AWARE LDPC CODE DESIGN
TABLE I DEFINITIONS FOR SOME KEY NOTATIONS

3683

of number of values in the SDR platform. For BP and Min-Sum (and its variation) algorithms, 8 bits are more than sufficient to achieve decent performance in hardware [6], [7].
The information that needs to be stored for BP decoding include the LLR value and the check-to-variable information
. The total memory requirement is

(8)

Fig. 3. Software defined radio (SDR) platform.

where the first term is equal to the number of nodes and the

second term is equal to the total number of edges in the bipartite

graph.

can be done in one cycle in [27] but may not be true for other If the Min-Sum algorithm is used then the memory require-

platforms.

ment can be reduced. For each check node, it is sufficient to

2) Memory Requirement: Because the precision of operands only store the minimum (together with its position), the second

in processors are limited to a few choices (for example, 8 bits, 16 minimum, and the signs for all check-to-variable information.

bits, 32 bits), we will evaluate the memory requirement in terms Because the sign information can be packed together to save

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:15:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3684

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 57, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2009

A. Supercode-Based LDPC Decoding

Fig. 4. LDPC decoding data flow on a single PU in the SDR platform.
memory, the total memory required for iterative Min-Sum decoding is

Fig. 5 shows the decomposition of a LDPC code into two

supercodes. The parity check matrices of supercodes ( and

) are submatrices of the original matrix.

LDPC decoding based on supercodes is summarized in

Algorithm 2. There are two levels of iteration in the de-

coding—inner and outer iteration. Each supercode is decoded

with fixed number of iterations (inner iteration). The output

LLR values from one supercode serve as the input to the

next supercode. The supercodes are decoded one after another

and in an iterative fashion (outer iteration). Let denote the

number of supercodes, each of which has a block parity check

matrix

. The outer iteration number is and the

inner iteration number of the th supercode is .

The AA-LDPC codes in [7] is equivalent to the case

,

,

. The scheme shown in [14] is equivalent

to the case

and

,

. Our method

is more general and provides more choices for the LDPC code

designer.

Algorithm 2: Supercode-based iterative decoding

(9)
where is the bit width of each word in memory. We can introduce a new notation to represent the memory required by check-to-variable information of each row.
BP algorithm Min-Sum algorithm. (10)

1: Initialization:

Set iteration number , and for

,

set

,

2: while

and parity check equation not met do

3: for

to do

4: Load Check-to-Variable information

for all edges in

For a SIMD architecture with slices, the local memory is laid out such that each memory word contains values. The local memory required for decoding is

5: for

to do

6: Perform one iteration of BP decoding for

7: end for

(11) 8: Save updated

values to global memory.

9: end for

where

.

The LDPC codes require large codeword sizes to achieve

10: end while

good performance. For example, DVB-S2 standard specifies a 11: Output the soft/hard decision of ,

.

maximum size of 16200 bits, the new Chinese DTV standard

DMB-T specifies a maximum size of 7493 bits. On the other hand, the local memory size of PU is limited. For example, the SDR architecture proposed in [27] has only 8KB+4KB local memory in each PU (which is significantly less than the memory in general purpose processors). Algorithmic innovations are required to handle such cases.

B. Memory Analysis
In this section, we analyze the memory requirements for supercode-based BP decoding. The procedure for the Min-Sumbased decoding is identical and has not been included here. In supercode-based BP decoding, the local memory requirement is smaller than that given in (11). Here the local memory keeps a

IV. LDPC CODE DESIGN FOR HORIZONTALLY PARTITIONED MATRIX
In this section, we study the case when only a single PU can be assigned for LDPC decoding. The PU has SIMD slices (as described in Section III-A) and limited local memory. To satisfy the memory constraints, the parity check matrix can be partitioned horizontally into supercodes [7], [14], and the PU operates on the supercodes one after the other. Supercode-based

complete copy of all values and only the

values for the

supercode to be decoded; the global memory stores all the

values. There is another possible storage scheme described in

[13] which stores only a subset of the values. It results in

smaller local memory but larger global memory and increased

global memory traffic. Here the memory traffic is defined as the

clock cycles used to transfer data among memory and PU.

The memory requirement is summarized here

decoding could results in degradation of FER performance if not

(12)

careful. We show how to avoid this from happening by proper

code construction.

(13)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:15:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHU AND CHAKRABARTI: ARCHITECTURE-AWARE LDPC CODE DESIGN

3685

H H H Fig. 5. Decomposition of the parity check matrix into two supercodes with block parity check matrices and .

where

, is the number of block rows in .

The values are usually set equal for all supercodes, i.e,

, to minimize the local memory.

The local memory requirement reduces with the increase in

the number of supercodes, as expected. However, the reduction

in local memory comes with the price of increase in memory

traffic between the global memory and the PU.

The number of access cycles for global memory is

create many degree-one variable nodes in supercodes, as shown in the shaded boxes in Fig. 5. As a result, the performance of supercode-based decoding is dominated by the number of outer iterations [13]. However, increasing increases the memory traffic and is detrimental to the overall throughput. In Section IV-D, we show how to unleash the potential of supercode-based decoding with small . We achieve this by constructing the codes such that the number of degree-one nodes in supercodes is reduced.

(14) D. Code Constraints

where is the number of cycles for transmitting tween the global memory and the local memory.
The number of decoding cycles is

values be-

In order to reduce the number of degree one nodes in supercode-based decoding, we impose an additional constraint in the LDPC code construction procedure (Section II-C), which is given as follows:

• Divide into parts, each of which corresponds to a su-

(15)

percode. The number is chosen so that the local memory

is able to accommodate all the and

values of one

where is the number of cycles for one decoding iteration

(including VP and CP operation) for a block row in . The

can be chosen independently for each supercode. For example,

it can be chosen proportional to . However, for simplicity

of control and performance comparison, we choose

,

. In this case,

.

A comparison between

and

shows that while

is proportional to the outer iteration number ,

is proportional to the product of the outer and inner iteration

numbers,

. Thus we need to reduce to minimize the

memory traffic and keep certain number of

to maintain

the FER performance. In Section IV-CE, we describe how this

can be achieved by appropriate code construction.

C. Study of FER Performance

supercode.

• If

and there exists degree-one nodes in the th

supercode, perform exchange operation to make it at least

degree 2 or degree 0. The only exception is where the de-

gree-one node is critical in maintaining a certain structure

of the parity check matrix.

• Reduce the outer iteration number till the FER perfor-

mance is no longer acceptable.

In step (3v) of the algorithm in Section II-C, the exchange

procedure removes degree-one variable nodes in supercodes ex-

cept in some special cases where they are kept to preserve the

structure of the parity check matrix. If all the degree-one vari-

able nodes in supercodes can not be removed, the variable nodes

with lower degree in final codeword (especially those with de-

gree 2 or 3) should be handled with higher priority.

In [14], the authors proposed a method where all supercodes Fig. 6 shows the matrix of Fig. 5 after undergoing the

have the same degree distribution and the degree distribution of the supercodes is derived directly from the overall degree distribution. The problem with this method is that it results in a large number of degree one variable nodes in the supercodes. It is easy to verify that the variable-to-check information from

exchange procedure. Almost all the degree-one nodes in supercodes have been removed. There are only two degree-one nodes left in , which are purposely kept to maintain the lower triangle shape of the matrix. The FER performance of this new code is no longer dependent on .

such variable nodes do not get updated during the inner iterations. Thus it does not help in the convergence process within E. Simulation Results

one supercode.

We simulated the LDPC codes for the original matrix

For example, Fig. 5 shows matrix generated by the block (Fig. 5) and the optimized matrix (Fig. 6) in an additive

level random placing step in the LDPC code construction pro- Gaussian white noise (AWGN) channel. Each matrix (corre-

cedure (Section II-C). A blind construction of supercodes by sponding matrix of size 1544 6176) consists of submatrices

directly partitioning an existing parity check matrix is likely to of size 193 193 and is divided into two supercodes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:15:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3686

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 57, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2009

H Fig. 6. matrix of an LDPC code optimized for supercode-based decoding.
TABLE II COMPARISON OF THE ORIGINAL AND OPTIMIZED CODE IN TERMS OF
PERFORMANCE AND MEMORY TRAFFIC

V. LDPC CODE DESIGN FOR VERTICALLY PARTITIONED MATRIX

In this section, we study the case when the parity check matrix

= 2 = 3 ( ) Fig. 7. FER of the original and optimized LDPC codes of size 6176, code rate

3/4 with C and Q

for different iteration numbers Q Q .

has a large row weight. To support this, the PU has to have larger

local memory, and more importantly, will require a large number

of decoding cycles. If throughput is an important constraint, and

Fig. 7 compares the FER performance of the original and op-

timized codes with different iteration numbers for

. The

LDPC codes in the example have codeword size 6176,

and

. The FER results are calculated based on the average

of 25 error codewords. The optimized LDPC codes have signifi-

it is indeed possible to utilize multiple PUs, one possibility is to partition the matrix vertically and assign different partitions to the different PUs. This scheme can reduce the number of cycles roughly by a factor of , where is the number of vertical partitions.

cantly better performance. In fact, they can achieve the same performance with approximately one half of the number of iterations. This translates to the memory traffic being reduced by a factor of 2 and the throughput increasing approximately by a factor of 2.
Table II summarizes the four comparisons of the original and optimized codes in terms of FER performance and normalized memory traffic. The optimized LDPC codes have significantly (2 times) faster convergence speed. It demonstrates that under

A. Cooperative Decoding for Vertically Partitioned Matrix

Algorithm 3 describes a cooperative decoding procedure for

LDPC decoding. Let be the number of partitions, so each sub-

matrix ,

, is a

block matrix, where is

the number of block rows and is the number of block columns

in . Let the number of nonzero elements in the th block row

of be denoted as

.

the same supercode-based decoding, well constructed LDPC codes can achieve much higher throughput comparing with Algorithm 3: Iterative decoding based on vertically partitioned

blindly constructed LDPC codes. Actually, it was shown in [7]

that supercode-based decoding converges 2 times faster than

regular decoding for

. Our simulation shows that by

increasing , our codes can achieve the same 2X convergence

speed as in [7] and also have significantly lower memory traffic.

The supercode-based decoding for the LDPC code with code-

word size 6176 was mapped into a single PU in the SODA ar-

1: Initialization:

Set iteration number , and for

,

set

,

2: While

and parity check equation not met

3: for

to

chitecture shown in [27]. Because of the limited size of local 4: for

to

memory and large codeword size, Min-Sum algorithm is used. For a 400 MHz clock, the throughput is 10.7 Mbps for
iterations. If each SODA PU was assigned one codeword and all 4 PUs were activated, the throughput could be as high as

5:

Index of check node

6: First Round: Calculate partial update

7: for all vertically partitioned do

42.8 Mbps.

8: for all variable node

do

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:15:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHU AND CHAKRABARTI: ARCHITECTURE-AWARE LDPC CODE DESIGN

3687

9: Variable Node Processing (VP):

(16)

(22)

10: Check Node Processing (CP): (17) (23)

11: end for 12: Update Partial Sum:

For BP algorithm: (18)

13: end for

(24)

14: Second Round: CP and variable-update based on partial update

15: for all vertically partitioned do

16: for all variable node

do

(25)

17: Check Node Processing (CP):

(19)

18: Bit Update:

(26)

(20)

19: end for 19: end for

It is easy to verify that the algorithm is equivalent to the original Min-Sum and BP algorithm. Furthermore, the memory requirement for a PU is given by

20: end for

21: end for

(27)

22: end for

23: end while

24: Output the soft/hard decision of ,

.

The cooperative decoding algorithm is based on check node-

based scheduling. In each iteration, the VP, and variable update

step remain the same as the original BP or Min-Sum algorithm.

The difference lies in the processing of the CP step.

Assume that the th partition is assigned to the th PU. The

CP processing in each check node is divided into two rounds

of operations. In the first round, the th PU updates the partial

CP result

based on its own data (same as the original

algorithm), and calculates the partial sum , where is a

variable node belonging to the th partition of the parity check

matrix; in the second round, the partial sum is sent to all

PUs and the th PU then calculates the

based on

and ,

.

The , and in Algorithm 3 are defined below. Here

is the set of variable nodes that is connected to node

in the bipartite graph corresponding to . For Min-Sum

algorithm:

(21)

Note that there are several other LDPC decoding schemes that vertically partition the matrix for different purpose [28]–[30]. In [28], the authors also proposed to partition the
matrix vertically to reduce the decoder complexity. The decoding algorithm in [28], which is based on a variation of the BP algorithm, uses heuristic multiplicative factors and results in performance loss. While the decoding is suboptimal, in [28], the inter-processor communication is significantly reduced. In [29], the matrix is vertically partitioned into groups and the groups updated sequentially from left to right. Our work differs from the scheme in [29] in that the update of vertically partitioned groups are performed simultaneously in a cooperative way. Vertical partitioning of matrix has been used in a recently published paper [30] to achieve multiple code rates.

B. Code Constraint

A closer look at Algorithm 3 indicates that although the dif-

ferent PUs work independently, they need to exchange the par-

tial sum value for each check node. Thus the throughput

performance is determined by the partition with the largest row

weight. This leads us to establishing the following LDPC code

requirement: all partitions, ,

should have

approximately the same row weight. Besides, should have

approximately the same number of block columns, which will

minimize the memory requirement of each PU.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:15:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3688

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 57, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2009

large values, the throughput increases linearly with . Thus

this method can be used to increase the throughput for matrices

with large values by effectively distributing the computa-

tional load among the PUs.

The code with codeword size 6176, code rate 3/4,

and

was mapped onto the 4 SODA PUs. The resulting

throughput was 24.8 Mbps which is lower than the 42.8 Mbps

that is achievable if horizontal partitioning is used and all 4 PUs

are activated. However, for codes with larger values, the rel-

ative difference in throughput is very small and is easily out

weighted by the advantage of the smaller memory requirement

in PUs.

VI. LDPC CODE DESIGN FOR MIN BASED SYSTEMS

When the LDPC decoder is required to support very large

Fig. 8. Normalized throughput as a function of number of PUs for vertically codeword sizes and the PU local memory that is required for

partitioned matrix.

processing vertically partitioned or horizontally partitioned

parity check matrix is not sufficient, we consider a different

approach. Assume that the whole SDR platform can be utilized

To characterize this requirement quantitatively, we introduce for LDPC decoding. We also assume that the PUs and the

a parameter called the unbalance factor (UF).

global memory units are interconnected with an MIN. The

MIN network can be of different type such as butterfly, perfect (28) k-shuffle. We consider the butterfly MIN here though the pro-

posed framework can be applied to other classes of MIN in the

Essentially UF is the number of extra cycles required for de-

coding a specific partition compared to the optimal partition

(which corresponds to

). So during code design, the

distribution of 1s should be such that UF is as small as possible.

This is achieved by applying the constraint to minimize UF de-

fined in (28) in Step 3v) in the code construction procedure in

Section II-C. Specifically, the exchange procedure in Step 3v)

would switch block columns of the original matrix such that

is as small as possible.

similar way. Because many of the known MINs, such as but-

terfly, perfect -shuffle, belong to the class of Delta networks

[31] and can be proved to be topologically and functionally

equivalent [32].

Assume that there are PUs. Each PU consists of SIMD

slices, and thus can process data simultaneously. Since the

local memories are small and store only temporary data, the

values and the

values are stored in global memories. In

each iteration, the and

values have to be read from

the global memories and after processing, the updated values

C. Performance Analysis

have to be stored back into the global memories. Thus there

FER: There is no change in the FER performance since the proposed algorithm is equivalent to the original BP or Min-Sum algorithms.
Throughput: In order to evaluate the increase in the throughput performance, we calculate the number of cycles

is significant traffic between the PUs and the global memories, and routing conflicts through the MIN network can seriously affect the throughput. In this section we describe how the LDPC code can be designed to reduce the routing conflicts and thereby increase the decoding throughput.

that are required in this scheme. Partial check node processing is equivalent to the original CP computation (outlined A. Feature Identification

in Section III-B) with

nonzero elements. Another

cycles is required for the second round of operation

during CP processing. This overhead is due to the partial

sum values that have to be sent to all the PUs and the updated

values that we assume can be broadcast to the other PUs

in one cycle. For a simple bus interconnection network, it takes

cycles to broadcast the results. Thus the number of cycles is

given by

To minimize the routing conflicts through the MIN network

during LDPC decoding, we need to first characterize the con-

straints imposed by the MIN and translate the constraints to the

corresponding code features.

1) MIN-Based Constraints: Let the number of global

memory units be . The MIN interconnection network of size

connects the PUs to the global memory units. Clearly,

,

. When multiple data have to be routed through

the network at the same time, certain routing paths (between (29) the input and output nodes) cannot be activated simultane-

ously. The relative positions of the input/output nodes play an

Fig. 8 shows the throughput of vertical partition schemes for important role in determining the conflicting paths. To make

different values. In each case, the throughput values have the problem tangible, we focus on reduction of “pair-wise”

been normalized to the

case. We see that for small conflicts. These conflicts are used to derive explicit constraints

values, the throughput increases sublinearly with , while for that are then used in the code construction process.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:15:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHU AND CHAKRABARTI: ARCHITECTURE-AWARE LDPC CODE DESIGN

3689

block columns

. Because of the sparseness of the parity

check matrix for LDPC codes, we can easily find configurations

that satisfy these constraints.

Since the two nodes in the same group in 0th level ENS should

not be routed simultaneously, the block matrix should have

the following structure. In any row, there is no more than one

’1’ element belonging to the same ENS group.

The constraints on and can be further refined by consid-

ering the encoding complexity. As shown in [12], the constraints

for encoder efficient codes are as follows. If

, the max-

Fig. 9. Butterfly MIN: neighborhood groups of (010) .

imum value of

; if

,

the result remains the same since we can amortize the unused

output nodes for the left part of . Also, it is clear

For any given input node , the remaining are divided into different neighborhood groups

input nodes from the pigeonhole principle, that the maximum variable node

:

degree

.

The positions of the input nodes can be chosen arbitrarily

as long as the two nodes do not belong to the same ENS group.

The positions of the output nodes are constrained by the posi(30) tions of the input nodes. These constraints can be derived from

It is obvious that

.

If the input node

is represented by

,

, the necessary and suf-

ficient condition that an input node

belongs to the th neighborhood group

for

butterfly MIN is given in (31). Fig. 9 shows the neigh-

borhood groups of

in an 8-point butterfly MIN:

,

and

.

Theorem 6.1. We will first present a lemma.

Lemma 6.1: If the routing conflict between two input nodes

( and ) in an

-point butterfly MIN starts at switch

stage- and ends at switch stage-

, then

• The input nodes

and

.

• The absolute value of difference in indices of the desti-

nation nodes of and is in the range of

, where

is an

integer, is an unit step function and

.

The first statement is obvious from the definition of ENS. The

proof of the second statement can be derived from the structure

otherwise

(31) of MIN and is omitted here. We will only give an example. In

a 32-point butterfly MIN

, if

, then for routing

conflict, the difference in indices of the destination nodes are

To derive a method to reduce the probability of conflict, we

introduce the concept of exclusive node set (ENS). Let

be a set of input nodes corresponding to th-level ENS which

includes and all the elements in

,

, i.e.,:

for , and

for

.

Theorem 6.1: If two input nodes and are such that

(equivalently

) and the absolute value

of difference of the destination nodes’ indices is not

,

(32)

, then there is no conflict when nodes

and are routed simultaneously.

For the butterfly MIN in Fig. 9,

.

has several properties: (1)

. (2)

,

. (3)

.

From these properties, we can see that the input nodes can

be divided into

nonintersecting groups in th level

ENS. In Fig. 9, the groups in 0th level ENS are

,

,

,

. To reduce the possibility of

routing conflict, no more than one node from each ENS should

be selected as input node. Thus the maximum number of input

nodes that can be routed simultaneously is the same as the car-

dinality of th level ENS, i.e.,

. Our goal is to have the

Theorem 6.1 can be derived directly from Lemma 6.1.

The constraints are thus summarized as follows.

•

,

.

•

,

.

• No more than one ’1’ within an ENS group in any row.

• For two input nodes in , avoid assigning their output

nodes with difference of

(absolute value),

.

By applying the constraints presented above in step 3v) in

Section II-C, the routing conflicts greatly reduce. Our experi-

mental results show that the algorithm converges very well. Next

we will show a code design example following these rules.

largest number of input nodes participate in routing at any given

time so we start with the 0th level ENS.

B. LDPC Code Design Example

2) Code Features:

input nodes from the nodes in the

0th level ENS can be routed simultaneously. Since the number In this section, we illustrate our procedure in the design of a

of input nodes equals the maximum row weight , this trans- rate

LDPC code which fully exploits the characteristics of

lates to the constraint

. In addition, the number of an SDR platform equipped with a

-point butterfly MIN.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:15:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3690

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 57, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2009

Fig. 10. An example of interconnection aware LDPC code with rate (3/4).

From the discussion above, we can derive the design parameters

as follow:

•

,

, code rate

•

,

, check node degree

With these constraints, we can design a finite length LDPC

code as described in Section II-C (for details see [12]). In a

single run, we obtained two matrixes with the same degree

distribution—one is randomly generated as shown in Fig. 10(a)

and the other is optimized for MIN interconnection as shown in

Fig. 10(b).

In the block matrices in Fig. 10, columns and

belong to the same ENS group. In this figure every other ENS

group has been highlighted. Notice that in the random matrix

of Fig. 10(a), there are multiple cases where there are two ’1’s

that belong to the same 0th level ENS group in the same row.

In contrast, in the matrix of Fig. 10(b), all such cases are

eliminated. After the LDPC codes are constructed, we map the original
and optimized LDPC codes to the target architecture. Here the

Fig. 11. FER of the rate (3/4) LDPC codes shown in this section and the WiMax 3/4A LDPC code [33].

number of input nodes is

and

. The mapping

will result in a look-up table that stores the switch states for each

stage of the MIN. For each block row there are

that need to be stored. There are

block rows

in the matrix thus result in a total of 640 bits switch states

information.

We see that when the original matrix is mapped to the

architecture, there are on an average 4 conflicts out of the 80

switch states per block row, causing a slow down of 47.5%.

LDPC encoded data is modulated with binary phase shift keying (BPSK). Each codeword is decoded with maximum of 15 iterations and each FER point represents the average of 25 error codewords. The proposed code generation procedure did not introduce any degradation in the FER performance. For better comparison, we also included simulation results for WiMax LDPC codes.

The slowing down factor is calculated by dividing the additional

number of cycles, which are introduced by separately routing the data that caused conflicts, by the overall number of cycles.

VII. CONCLUSION

The interconnection-aware LDPC code had no conflicts in any In this paper, we presented a procedure to design LDPC

switch and thus no routing conflicts. This translates to a very codes that can be mapped efficiently onto multiprocessor SDR

high decoding throughput.

platforms. The general design flow for architecture-aware code

FER Performance: We verify the performance of the code design was presented along with three case studies. In all cases,

before and after interconnection-aware optimization. Fig. 11 the FER performance of the modified LDPC code was not

shows the FER performance for AWGN channel when the compromised.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:15:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHU AND CHAKRABARTI: ARCHITECTURE-AWARE LDPC CODE DESIGN

3691

First, we considered the case when only one PU is available and the local memory of the PU is not sufficient to support decoding of the entire parity check matrix. Here the matrix is partitioned horizontally into supercodes and the PU performs supercode-based decoding. We show how addition of certain constraints during the code design phase results in enhanced FER performance compared to that of typical supercode-based decoding, as well as a 2X reduction in the memory traffic. Next, we consider the case where the parity check matrix has a large weight and multiple PUs are available for computation. We show how certain constraints can be used to create a matrix which supports even distribution of computation load among the PUs. Finally, we consider the case where the PU has very limited local memory and so there is a large volume of traffic between the PU and the global memory. We show how addition of code constraints can be used to reduce the number of routing conflicts in a MIN-based interconnection network, resulting in substantial improvement in the throughput.
Code construction principles presented in this paper can also be applied to some of the LDPC codes used in standards. Since the LDPC codes are linear block codes, we can exchange the whole block row and block column of the parity check matrix for efficient decoding. This does not change the code as long as the codeword bits are restored to their original order after decoding.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors also thank Sangwon Seo for help with the SODA implementation.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] S.-Y. Chung, G. Forney, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[3] C. Howland and A. Blanksby, “A 220 mW 1 Gb/s 1024-bit rate-1/2 low density parity check code decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Custom Integr. Circuits (CICC), May 2001, pp. 293–296.
[4] G. Al-Rawi, J. Cioffi, and M. Horowitz, “Optimizing the mapping of low-density parity check codes on parallel decoding architectures,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Technol. Coding and Computing, Apr. 2001, pp. 578–586.
[5] E. Boutillon, J. Castura, and F. R. Kschischang, “Decoder-first code design,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Related Topics, Sep. 2000, pp. 459–462.
[6] Y. Chen and D. Hocevar, “A FPGA and ASIC implementation of rate 1/2, 8088-b irregular low density parity check decoder,” in Proc. Global Telecom. Conf. (GlobeCom), Dec. 2003, vol. 1, pp. 113–117.
[7] M. Mansour and N. Shanbhag, “High-throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. Syst., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 976–996, 2003.
[8] D. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop on Signal Process. Syst. (SIPS), 2004, pp. 107–112.
[9] H. Zhong and T. Zhang, “Block-LDPC: A practical LDPC coding system design approach,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 766–775, Apr. 2005.
[10] Y. Zhu and C. Chakrabarti, “Aggregated circulant matrix-based LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE ICASSP, May 2006, vol. 3, pp. 916–919.
[11] M. Mansour and N. Shanbhag, “A 640-Mb/s 2048-bit programmable LDPC decoder chip,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 41, pp. 684–698, Mar. 2006.
[12] Y. Zhu and C. Chakrabarti, “Architecture-aware LDPC code design for software defined radio,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop on Signal Process. Syst. (SIPS), 2006, pp. 405–410.

[13] Y. Zhu and C. Chakrabarti, “Memory efficient LDPC code design for high throughput software defined radio (SDR) systems,” in Proc. IEEE ICASSP, May 2007, vol. 2, pp. 9–12.
[14] H. Sankar and K. R. Narayanan, “Memory-efficient sum-product decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, pp. 1225–1230, Aug. 2004.
[15] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, D. Spielman, and V. Stemann, “Practical loss-resilient codes,” in Proc. 29th Ann. ACM Symp. Theory Computing, May 1997, pp. 150–159.
[16] T. Richardson, M. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[17] R. Urbanke, LDPC Optimization Program [Online]. Available: http:// lthcwww.epfl.ch /research/ldpcopt/
[18] M. Chiani and A. Ventura, “Design and performance evaluation of some high-rate irregular low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE GlobeCom Conf. 2001, Nov. 2001, vol. 2, pp. 990–994.
[19] M. Yang, W. E. Ryan, and Y. Li, “Design of efficiently encodable moderate-length high-rate LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 564–571, Apr. 2004.
[20] Y. Mao and A. Banihashemi, “A heuristic search for good low-density parity-check codes at short block lengths,” in Proc. IEEE ICC 2001, Jun. 2001, vol. 1, pp. 41–44.
[21] X. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. Arnold, “Progressive edge-growth tanner graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecom. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Nov. 2001, vol. 2, pp. 995–1001.
[22] T. Tian, C. R. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPC code construction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1242–1247, Aug. 2004.
[23] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. Telatar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Finitelength analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[24] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. Allerton Conf., 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[25] R. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. Fuja, and D. Costello, “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, pp. 2966–2984, Dec. 2004.
[26] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 638–656, Feb. 2001.
[27] Y. Lin, H. Lee, M. Woh, Y. Harel, S. Mahlke, T. Mudge, C. Chakrabarti, and K. Flautner, “Soda: A low-power architecture for software radio,” in Proc. 33rd Ann. Int. Symp. Computer Arch. (ISCA), Jun. 2006, pp. 89–101.
[28] T. Mohsenin and B. M. Baas, “Split-row: A reduced complexity, high throughput LDPC decoder architecture,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Computer Design (ICCD), 2006, pp. 320–325.
[29] J. Zhang and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Shuffled iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, pp. 209–213, Feb. 2005.
[30] J. Doré, M. H. Hamon, and P. Pénard, “On flexible design and implementation of structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Pers., Indoor and Mobile Radio Commun., Sep. 2007.
[31] J. H. Patel, “Performance of processor-memory interconnections for multiprocessors,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. C-30, pp. 771–780, Oct. 1981.
[32] C. Wu and T. Y. Feng, “On a class of multistage interconnection networks,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. C-29, pp. 694–702, Aug. 1980.
[33] T. Brack, M. Alles, F. Kienle, and N. Wehn, “A synthesizable IP core for WIMAX 802.16E LDPC code decoding,” in Proc. IEEE PIMRC, Sep. 2006.
Yuming Zhu (S’00–M’07) received the B.E. and M.S. degrees in electronic engineering from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 1999 and 2002, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from Arizona State University, Tempe, in 2006.
During summer 2005, he was with the Communication and Medical Systems Laboratory, DSP Solution R&D Center, Texas Instruments Inc., Dallas, where he was involved in WiMax modem development. Since September 2006, he has been working on WiMax and 3GPP long-term evolution (LTE) modem development at the Communication and Medical Systems Laboratory, DSP Solution R&D Center, Texas Instruments Inc. His research interests include VLSI architectures for communication and signal processing systems.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:15:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3692

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 57, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2009

Chaitali Chakrabarti (SM’02) received the B.Tech. degree in electronics and electrical communication engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, in 1984, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Maryland, College Park, in 1986 and 1990, respectively.
She is a Professor with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Arizona State University (ASU), Tempe. Her research interests include the areas of low power embedded systems design including memory

optimization, high-level synthesis and compilation, and VLSI architectures and algorithms for signal processing, image processing, and communications.
Prof. Chakrabarti was a recipient of the Research Initiation Award from the National Science Foundation in 1993, a Best Teacher Award from the College of Engineering and Applied Sciences from ASU in 1994, and the Outstanding Educator Award from the IEEE Phoenix Section in 2001. She served as the Technical Committee Chair of the DISPS subcommittee, IEEE Signal Processing Society (2006–2007). She is now an Associate Editor of the Journal of VLSI Signal Processing Systems and the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION SYSTEMS.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:15:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

