The Rate-Compatible Multi-Edge Type LDPC Codes with Short Block Length

Ying You, Min Xiao, Lin Wang
Department of Communication Engineering Xiamen University Fujian, China
Email: wanglin@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract—In this letter, a framework of punctured ratecompatible multi-edge-type LDPC (RC-MET-LDPC) codes with short block length is presented. The simple form of traditional puncturing algorithms based on grouping and sorting (GS) algorithm can be applied for obtaining rate compatibility because of the structure advantage of MET-LDPC codes over conventional LDPC Codes. The simulation results show that RCMET-LDPC codes not only outperform rate-compatible irregular LDPC codes and efficiently-encodable rate-compatible (E2RC) LDPC codes in a large rate range over AWGN channel, but also achieve high throughput in HARQ scheme at a wide range of signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) regions. The proposed codes are considered as the good candidate for future communication systems requiring rate compatibility.
Keywords-rate compatible; multi-edge-type LDPC codes; efficiently-encodable rate-compatible LDPC codes; puncturing; hybrid Automatic Repeat request (HARQ) scheme
I. INTRODUCTION
The channels are usually time-varying in the wireless communication systems. In order to be adapted to the channel condition, rate compatible codes can be applied to the hybrid Automatic Repeat request (HARQ) scheme [1]. In the HARQ scheme, coded bits from punctured mother code are first sent. Then the transmitter is requested to send parity bits which were punctured previously once the receiver fails to recover the message. This scheme can achieve high throughput through rate-compatible (RC) codes with a large rate range. RC codes, which can be realized by puncturing a mother code according to the available channel state information, may reduce obviously the complexity of transmitter and receiver when a single pair of encoder and decoder is used.
A lot of successful work has been done to design ratecompatible LDPC (RC-LDPC) codes with capacityapproaching performances, in most of which a family of high rate RC codes can be achieved by puncturing a mother code. In previous paper [2], the parity bits are punctured randomly. In this way, some important bits may be lost to make the receiver unable to recover the message, which results in performance loss especially at the high rates and at the short block lengths. In order to overcome the shortcoming of random puncturing, a good puncturing method introduced by J. Ha, mainly employed the idea of grouping and sorting (GS) [3]. The RC-LDPC codes

designed based on the GS algorithm have good performances especially at the short block lengths. The GS algorithm has been successful applied to design other types of RC-LDPC codes [4], [5]. Recently E2RC LDPC codes were proposed by J. Kim, which have several desirable features [6], [7].
In this paper, a rate 0.5 multi-edge type LDPC (METLDPC) code with good performance proposed in [8] is considered as the mother code. The simplified GS algorithm for the MET-LDPC codes is adopted according to the special structure of the MET-LDPC codes. The RC-MET-LDPC codes are performed better than RC irregular LDPC codes and E2RC LDPC codes on the bit error rate (BER) and throughput over AWGN channel. In addition, in the simplified puncturing algorithm the complexity of puncturing process is reduced since the grouping processing can be deleted.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II briefly introduces the MET-LDPC codes. A puncturing algorithm of the proposed RC-MET-LDPC codes is described in Section III. In Section IV, the simulation results are presented with some discussion. The comparisons of the BER and the throughput performance of RC-MET-LDPC codes with RC irregular LDPC codes and E2RC LDPC codes are given over AWGN channel. Finally, concluding remarks are provided in Section V.
II. MULTI-EDGE TYPE LDPC CODES
Tom Richardson and Rudiger Urbanke firstly introduced Multi-edge type LDPC codes, a generalization of the concept of regular and irregular LDPC codes in [8]. Some codes, e.g. concatenated tree (CT) codes, irregular repeat accumulate (IRA) codes, low density generator matrix (LDGM) codes and conventional LDPC codes can be seen as special cases of MET-LDPC codes.
The multi-edge type LDPC codes can be represented by

∑ ∑ v(r ,x )= vb,d r b xd , μ(x )= μd xd .

(1)

The first formula is associated with variable nodes and the second one is referred to check nodes.

The project is sponsored by Natural Science Foundation of Fujian Province (No. 2008J0035)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei9U7n8iv-.1D-4o2w4n4lo-a3d6e9d3o-n4/J0u9ne/$2245,2.00026©a2t 0070:909I:E49EUETC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

The meaning of the parameters in the formula (1) is

described as follow. The number of edge types is defined as n

and the number of different received distributions types is

defined as t. More precisely, d = (d1 ,...,dn ) represents a multiedge degree and x = (x1 ,...,xn ) represents variables. xd

∏ denotes xd =

x n

di

i=1 i

.Similarly,

b = (b1 ,...,bt )

represents

a

received degree and r = (r1 ,...,rt ) represents variables

corresponding to receive distributions. So, r b denotes

∏ r b =

r t

bi

i=1 i

.

Assume

that

the

MET-LDPC

code

has

length

N , which is not equal to the number of variable nodes in the

graph, since punctured bits are not included in the codeword

but are included in the graph. The number of variable nodes of

degree type (b,d ) is v(b,d ) N . In the same fashion, the number

of check nodes of degree type is denoted by μd N .

Based on the above description, a rate 1/2 MET-LDPC code with six-edge types is employed as the mother code in this letter which can be expressed as:

v(r, x) = 0.5r1 x12 + 0.3r1 x23 + 0.2r0 x32 x41 x53 + 0.2r1 x61

(2)

μ(x )=0.4x12 x22 x3 + 0.1x12 x21 x42 + 0.2x53 x61.

The mother code has the following properties:
1) It yields improvements in threshold, adaptability and error floor, especially for short block lengths. The average degree of variable nodes is less than 3, which is smaller than that of conventional LDPC codes. This results in low computational complexity about the encoder.
2) Whether a node is information bit or parity bit can be distinguished.
3) There are only two types of parity bits. Parity bits of degree two can increase the stability of density evolution [8]. The degree one parity bits are very convenient for HARQ [9].
4) State information bits as a subset of information bits, which actually have been punctured in the original mother code, may have advantage on the thresholds and error floors. They can obtain some non-zero soft information in the first iteration [8], which is benefit to recover information bits.
III. SIMPLIFIED GS ALGORITHM FOR MET-LDPC CODES
The puncturing algorithm is a method to obtain ratecompatible codes through puncturing processing of one mother code. The GS algorithm is a feasible puncturing pattern [3]. The simple form of traditional puncturing algorithms based on GS algorithm can be applied for obtaining rate compatibility because of the structure advantage of MET-LDPC codes over conventional LDPC Codes.
In this section, we explain how GS algorithm will be simplified to fit the MET-LDPC code. In [3] a punctured variable node is defined as one-step-recoverable node (1SR), if it connects at least one check node all other variable node neighbors of which are not punctured. In this case, this check is referred as survived check. Generally, a punctured variable

TABLE I.

THE PARAMETERS IN THE SIMPLIFIED ALGORITHM

Rm mother code rate Nim

N code length

N punc

Rt target rate

N one

k

information bit Ntwo

length

maximal inserted punctured bit number for degree two parity bits Punctured bit number
degree one parity bit number
degree two parity bit number

Figure 1. The puncturing process of degree two parity bits

node is considered as k-step-recoverable-node (kSR) when it connects at least one survived check node which links at least one (k-1) SR node and some mSR nodes, where 0 < m ≤ k − 1 .To make sure the state information bits can be recovered in the first iteration, only parity bits are punctured to attain the rate compatible. The following claims are presented based on the above the construction description about METLDPC codes.
Claim 1: all parity bits with degree one can be punctured randomly. Its main reason is that any degree one parity bit is connected with three state information bits by a check node. In this case all degree one parity bits are SR nodes with the same steps.
Claim 2: the degree two parity bits can be punctured by inserting a considerable quantity of punctured bits between two unpunctured bits. The reasons are that the degree two parity bits can be generated with the same encoding process as that of repeat accumulate (RA) codes and the likelihood information of the punctured bits can be updated quickly by forward and backward likelihood information. For example, the recovery steps can be illustrated by Figure.1.
The degree one parity bits are updated followed by the parity bits of degree two. The degree one parity bits can be seen as 1SR nodes since they are taken into consideration before puncturing degree two parity bits. The simplified GS algorithm is described as follows according to above two claims:
1) Calculate N punc by (3). Calculate Nim by (4).

N

= punc

N

−

k Rt

.

(3)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:09:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Nim

=

None

N punc − None

.

− (N punc − None ) − 1

(4)

2) If None ≥ N punc , go on to 3). If None < N punc , go to 4). 3) Randomly choose N punc parity nodes of degree one to be punctured based on the analysis above.
4) For the degree two parity bits, generate
[None -(N punc -None )-1] arbitrary integer, which are smaller than Nim . Arrange them in descending order according to the connecting relationship among the state information bits and
parity bits of degree two. Then note ti as the ith integer and insert ti punctured parity bits at the ith location which is between the ith unpunctured parity bit of degree two and the
(i+1)th unpunctured parity bit of degree two. Figure.1
illustrates an example of the puncturing process introduced in
4).
5) If the number of punctured bits is equal to N punc , stop. We can skip the grouping steps in [3] using the simplified
method and puncture the parity bits directly according to the special structure of the mother codes. Therefore the complexity of puncturing process is reduced obviously.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
A. Performance of the RC-MET-LDPC code
We simulate the performances of RC-MET-LDPC codes constructed by the puncturing algorithm proposed in Section III. The mother code is MET-LDPC Codes with a rate 1/2 and k=600, whose parameters are presented by (2). The performances of the RC-MET-LDPC codes over AWGN channels are compared with RC irregular LDPC codes with k=600 [10] whose mother code has the following degree distribution:

Figure 2. The performance comparison between RC-MET-LDPC code (square) and RC irregular LDPC codes (circle).

λ(x)=0.30780x+0.27287x2+0.41933x6 ,

(5)

ρ(x) = 0.4x5 + 0.6x6 .

The performances of the RC-MET-LDPC codes over AWGN channels also are compared with E2RC LDPC codes with k=600 which are introduced in [7].
Figure.2 shows that at the BER of 10-6, RC-MET-LDPC codes possess nearly 0.1dB performance gain according to RC irregular LDPC codes at rate 0.6; meanwhile, this gain is nearly 0.2dB at rate 0.7. Further this gain value goes up to 0.5 dB at rate 0.8 significantly.
As can be seen from Figure.3, RC-MET-LDPC codes also provide nearly 0.2, 0.15, 0.2dB SNR gains compared with E2RC LDPC codes at rate 0.5, 0.6, and 0.7 respectively at the BER of 10-6. Even at high rate, rate 0.8, the performance advantage of RC-MET-LDPC codes slightly ascends to 0.3 dB.

Figure 3. The performance comparison between RC-MET-LDPC code (square) and E2RC LDPC codes (circle).
According to the previous curve graphs, it can be inferred that RC-MET-LDPC codes exhibit a superior performance compared with RC irregular LDPC codes and E2RC LDPC codes at the middle and high rate. Further more, no error floor appears for RC-MET-LDPC codes at the BER of 10-6.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:09:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

B. Throughput of Hybrid ARQ

It can be seen that when SNR <= 0.5 dB, RC-MET-LDPC codes provide the slight throughput advantage compared with RC irregular LDPC codes and E2RC LDPC codes. However, when SNR > 0.5 dB, the throughput of RC-MET-LDPC codes perform better than RC irregular LDPC codes and E2RC LDPC codes significantly. Compared with E2RC LDPC codes, the maximal gain is over 0.6dB at throughput = 0.73 b/s/Hz. Meanwhile, the gain goes up to 1.26 dB at throughput = 0.71 b/s/Hz compared with RC irregular LDPC codes.

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, an effective puncturing scheme for RC-METLDPC codes is proposed to achieve high throughput in HARQ protocol over AWGN channels through simplified GS algorithm. Simulation results show that the proposed codes possess better BER performances than RC irregular LDPC codes and E2RC LDPC codes with short block lengths, especially at high rate region. Meanwhile the former can achieve higher throughputs at high SNR. Obviously the proposed codes can be considered as one good candidate in communication systems requiring rate compatibility.

Figure 4. Throughput of the HARQ employed three different RC codes in AWGN channels.
In this part we consider the throughput of the designed RCMET-LDPC codes in HARQ scheme [1] over an AWGN channel. Define Fi , i = 0,1,… , as the frame error rate and Ni , i = 0,1,… , as the total number of transmitted bits after the ith transmission. The system throughput η is denoted as:

∑ ∏ η =

k N ave

=

N1 (1 − F1

)+

k
+∞
Ni (1 − Fi

i −1
)

Fj

.

(6)

i=2

j =1

where Nave is the average transmitted block length that the receiver needs to guarantee the correct recovery of the transmitted information. As can be seen from the formula (6), RC codes which have performance of low frame error rate can provide the good throughput. In Figure.4, the curves are plotted based on ES /N0 , where ES is the average energy per transmitted symbol and N0 is the power spectral density of AWGN.
The throughput curves of three different RC codes coded HARQ system are presented in Figure.4. The three different RC codes are the RC irregular LDPC codes, the E2RC LDPC codes and the RC-MET-LDPC codes proposed in this letter.

REFERENCES
[1] R. Mantha and F. R. Kschischang, “A capacity-approaching hybrid ARQ scheme using turbo codes,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, pp. 2341– 2345, 1999.
[2] J. Ha, J. Kim, S. W. McLaughlin, “Rate-Compatible Puncturing of LowDensity Parity-Check Codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform Theory, vol.50, no. 11, Nov. 2004.
[3] J. Ha, J. Kim, D. Klinc, and S. W. McLaughlin, “Rate-compatible punctured low-density parity-check codes with short block lengths,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-52, pp. 728–738, Feb. 2006.
[4] G. Yue, X. Wang, and M. Madihian, “Design of rate-compatible irregular repeat accumulate codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1153 – 1163, June 2007.
[5] S. Choi, Y. Shin, J. Heo, K. Cho and M. Oh, “Effective Puncturing Schemes for Block-type Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,” in Proc. IEEE VTC, pp. 1841 – 1845, April 2007.
[6] S. Song, D. Hwang, S. Seo, and J. Ha, “Linear-Time Encodable RateCompatible Punctured LDPC Codes with Low Error Floors,” in Proc. IEEE VTC, pp. 749 – 753, May 2008.
[7] J. Kim, A. Ramamoorthy, and S. W. McLaughlin, "The design of efficiently-encodable rate-compatible LDPC coeds", IEEE Trans. on Communications, pp. 365-375, February 2009.
[8] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “Multi-Edge Type LDPC Codes”， http://lthcwww.epfl.ch/papers/multiedge.ps.
[9] IEEE c802.20-03/104: IEEE 802.20 Working Group on Mobile Broadband Wireless Access. 2007.
[10] M. Yang, W. E. Ryan, and Y. Li, “Design of efficiently encodable moderate-length high-rate irregular LDPC codes," IEEE Trans. Commun.,vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 564-571, Apr. 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:09:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

