IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2009

4167

An Efficient Algorithm to Find All Small-Size Stopping Sets of Low-Density Parity-Check Matrices
Eirik Rosnes, Member, IEEE, and Øyvind Ytrehus, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this work, we introduce an efficient algorithm to find all stopping sets, of size less than some threshold, of a fixed low-density parity-check (LDPC) matrix. The solution is inspired by the algorithm proposed by Rosnes and Ytrehus in 2005 to find an exhaustive list of all small-size turbo stopping sets in a turbo code. The efficiency of the proposed algorithm is demonstrated by several numerical examples. For instance, we have applied the algorithm to the well-known (3; 5)-regular (155; 64) Tanner code and found all stopping sets of size at most 18 in about 1 min on a standard desktop computer. Also, we have verified that the minimum stopping set size of the (4896; 2474) Ramanujan–Margulis code is indeed 24, and that the corresponding multiplicity is exactly 204. Furthermore, we have applied the algorithm to the IEEE 802.16e LDPC codes and determined the minimum stopping set size and the corresponding multiplicity exactly for these codes. Finally, as an application, we present a greedy algorithm to find a small number of redundant parity checks to add to the original parity-check matrix in order to remove all stopping sets in the corresponding Tanner graph of size less than the minimum distance.
2 An extensive case study of the (155; 64) Tanner code illustrates the
usefulness of the algorithm, and we present a 110 155 redundant parity-check matrix for this code with no stopping sets of size less than the minimum distance. Simulation results of iterative decoding on the binary erasure channel show performance improvements for low-to-medium erasure probabilities when this redundant parity-check matrix is used for decoding.
Index Terms—Binary erasure channel, exhaustive stopping set enumeration, IEEE 802.16e, low-density parity-check (LDPC) code, minimum distance, minimum stopping set size, stopping redundancy, stopping set.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-density parity-check (LDPC) codes were originally introduced by Gallager [1] and later rediscovered in the mid 1990s by MacKay and Neal [2]. These codes have attracted a great amount of interest during the last decade due to their capacity-approaching capabilities and low-complexity message-passing decoding algorithms [3]. There are several ways to construct competitive LDPC codes. Both random constructions, e.g., [4], [5] and algebraic constructions, e.g., [6], [7] have been proposed.
The performance of LDPC codes under iterative messagepassing algorithms is dominated by certain structural properties of the code’s graphical representation, on which these decoding
Manuscript received October 10, 2007; revised December 18, 2008. Current version published August 19, 2009. This work was supported by the Norwegian Research Council (NFR) under Grant 174982. The material in this paper was presented in part at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), Nice, France, June 2007.
The authors are with the Selmer Center, Department of Informatics, University of Bergen, N-5020 Bergen, Norway (e-mail: eirik@ii.uib.no; oyvind@ii. uib.no).
Communicated by T. Richardson, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2009.2025573

algorithms operate. For the binary erasure channel (BEC), the error-prone structures are called stopping sets and were introduced by Di et al. in [8]. For other channels, it is much more difficult even to give a precise definition of error-prone patterns. Recently, several analysis techniques have been proposed, which has lead to the definitions of near-codewords [9], trapping sets [10], and pseudocodewords [11].
The problem of computing the minimum distance of an arbitrary binary linear code was conjectured to be NP-hard, i.e., the existence of a deterministic polynomial-time algorithm for this problem implies the existence of such an algorithm for any problem in NP, by Berlekamp et al. in [12]. This conjecture was settled in an affirmative way by Vardy in [13]. Recently, the problem of computing the minimum stopping set size for an arbitrary Tanner graph (with or without a sparsity constraint) was also proved to be NP-hard [14]. Wang et al. [15] extended this result to -out trapping sets. Note that even the problem of approximating the minimum distance of a general linear code is a hard problem [16]. Recently, it was also shown that even the problem of approximating the minimum stopping set size within a constant term for an arbitrary Tanner graph is NP-hard [17]. This result was improved upon in [18], [19], and a set of new results regarding the hardness of finding the smallest trapping sets (with or without a sparsity constraint) for the Zyablov–Pinsker decoder and the sum–product decoder were developed. The inherent intractability of computing the minimum distance/stopping set size of a fixed LDPC matrix has resulted in several approximate algorithms [20]–[26]. For instance, in [20], Hu et al. introduced the nearest nonzero codeword search (NNCS) approach to approximate the minimum distance of an LDPC code. The method uses reliability based list decoding based on the algorithm from [27] with controlled noise. Both error-impulse noise and bit-reversing noise are considered. This method has recently been improved in [24].
The fact that the problem of exhausting all low-weight errorprone patterns is NP-hard does not prevent the existence of practical enumeration algorithms for LDPC matrices with small parameters. In [15], Wang et al. proposed the first such algorithm to find all low-weight error-prone patterns for a fixed LDPC matrix. The error-prone patterns considered in [15] are codewords, stopping sets, and -out trapping sets.
In this work, we introduce an efficient algorithm to find all stopping sets of size less than some threshold of an arbitrary fixed LDPC matrix. The algorithm is different from, and much more efficient than, the algorithm presented in [15]. This will become evident in the numerical results section. The proposed algorithm is inspired by the algorithm in [28], [29], which enumerates small-size turbo stopping sets.

0018-9448/$26.00 © 2009 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:09:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4168

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2009

This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we define the minimum value of some function , where ranges

some basic notation. Section III describes the basic algorithm over some set of candidate solutions.

and its different ingredients. Some improvements to the basic al- • The branch step is a splitting procedure that, given a set

gorithm are given in Section IV. In particular, we describe how

of candidates, returns smaller sets

such that

to incorporate some common algebraic properties of LDPC ma-

, for some integer value . It follows that

trices. In Section V, we apply the algorithm to some well-doc-

the minimum value of

over is

,

umented LDPC matrices from the literature whose minimum

where is the minimum value of

within ,

stopping set sizes were previously unknown. Finally, in Sec-

. This step is called branching, since its recursive

tion VI, we present a greedy algorithm to find redundant parity

application defines a tree structure with nodes being the

checks to add to the original parity-check matrix in order to re-

subsets of .

move all stopping sets of size less than the minimum distance. • The bound step is a procedure that computes upper and

Conclusions and a discussion of future work are given in Sec-

lower bounds for the minimum value of within a given

tion VII.

subset . If the lower bound for some node is greater

than the upper bound for some other node , , then

II. PRELIMINARIES

A binary linear code of length and dimension is a -di-

mensional subspace of

. The code can be specified as

the null space of a rank

,

binary parity-check ma-

trix where

. The Tanner graph

of a

parity-check matrix is a bipartite graph with a left vertex set

consisting of variable nodes, and a right

vertex set

consisting of check nodes. The

variable nodes correspond to the columns of , and the check

nodes correspond to the rows of . There is an edge between

may be safely discarded from the search. This step is

called pruning, and can be implemented by maintaining

a global variable

that records the minimum upper

bound seen among all subregions examined so far. Any

node whose lower bound is greater than can be dis-

carded.

The recursion stops when the current candidate set is

reduced to a single element; or when the upper bound for

matches the lower bound. Either way, any element of will

give a minimum value of within .

variable node and check node if and only if the th element

in the th row of is nonzero. Also, for any fixed LDPC matrix,

two degree sequences

and

can be identified, where ( ) is the fraction of edges from the

associated Tanner graph that are connected to a variable (check)

node of degree , and ( ) is the maximal variable (check)

node degree. If

, the LDPC matrix (or code) is

said to be

-regular.

Let

denote a subset of of size . The

induced subgraph

of is the Tanner graph of the punc-

tured parity-check matrix

, where denotes the

th column from .

A stopping set of size is a subset

of

the left vertex set of size such that the induced subgraph

has no check nodes of degree one [8].

B. Algorithm Description

The description of the algorithm uses constraint sets. In more

detail, a constraint set is a set

, where

is a set of distinct codeword po-

sitions. In general, the constrained positions are distributed over

the codeword sequence. If

is a constraint, then position

is said to be -constrained. In this context, a -constrained

position means “committed for inclusion in a stopping set” and

a -constrained position means “committed for exclusion from

a stopping set,” while an unconstrained position means “uncom-

mitted.” The algorithm is a branch-and-bound algorithm on con-

straint sets.

Let

, i.e., the support set of the

constraint set . Furthermore, let denote the matrix con-

sisting of the columns from the matrix corresponding to in-

III. BASIC ALGORITHM
In this section, we present an efficient algorithm to find all stopping sets of size at most , for some threshold , of a fixed LDPC matrix.
The algorithm we will propose is a branch-and-bound approach that is commonly used to solve NP-hard integer programming problems in the computer science literature. The method consists of a systematic enumeration of all candidate solutions, i.e., nonempty stopping sets, where large subsets of candidates are discarded en masse, by using a lower bound on the stopping set size. The branch-and-bound method was first proposed by Land and Doig in 1960 [30].

dices from the set

, and with the all-zero

column for the remaining column indices. Without loss of gen-

erality, the columns of a matrix are numbered from left to right

with the first column index being zero. Also, a row in a matrix

is said to be active if and only if the row weight is exactly

one. The set of indices of active rows in is denoted by

.

Let denote a subset of

, the set of all length- binary

vectors, and define

if

, i.e.,

is in if its restriction or projec-

tion to the constrained positions in takes the corresponding

constraint values. Let denote the unique maximum subset

of

such that for every element

, with support set

, where the support set of a length- binary vector is the set

A. The Branch-and-Bound Methodology

of nonzero coordinates, there are no active rows in

, i.e.,

. It follows from the definition of a stopping set

We will now introduce the branch-and-bound methodology. that the support set of a word in is a stopping set, and that

The branch-and-bound procedure consists of two steps; the for every stopping set there is a word in with support set

branch step and the bound step. Assume that the goal is to find equal to the given stopping set. Also, a constraint set is said

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:09:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ROSNES AND YTREHUS: AN ALGORITHM TO FIND ALL SMALL-SIZE STOPPING SETS OF LDPC MATRICES

4169

to be valid for if and only if the support set of (nonzero

constrained positions) is contained in a stopping set. Formally,

a constraint set is valid for if and only if

is nonempty. It follows from this definition that if

, then

is valid if and only if the support set of , i.e., is a stop-

ping set.

Let

be the problem of finding all words of

of Hamming weight at most . This problem is equivalent to

finding a list of all stopping sets of size at most . Now, let

be the minimum Hamming weight of when is valid and

infinity otherwise, and let

be any lower bound on .

The pseudocode of the algorithm to solve

is given in

Algorithm 1. Note that the algorithm has the same structure as

the algorithm proposed by Rosnes and Ytrehus in [28], [29] to

solve the corresponding problem for turbo stopping sets. How-

ever, there are some important differences that will become ap-

parent later. For instance, the algorithm uses extended iterative

decoding which will be described below. Finally, we remark that

in the Stopping Set Enumeration (SSE) algorithm in Algorithm

1, line 10 embodies the bound step and lines 11–13 correspond

to the branch step of the branch-and-bound methodology.

Algorithm 1 Stopping Set Enumeration (SSE)

1: /* Find all words of of Hamming weight */

2: Add an empty constraint set to a previously empty list

of constraint sets.

3: while

do

4: Choose and remove a constraint set from .

5: if

then

6: perform extended iterative decoding on a vector

constrained according to and with erasures in the

positions not in .

7: Construct a constraint set based on the nonerased

positions after decoding.

8: if

and is valid then

9:

the single vector in

is saved if its weight

.

10: else if no contradicted check nodes and

then

11:

find an unconstrained position and construct

two new constraint sets:

12:

and

.

13:

Add and to .

14: end if

15: else

16: the single vector in ( is always valid) is saved

if its weight .

17: end if

18:end while

Extended iterative decoding on the Tanner graph (line 6 in Algorithm 1), whose input is a binary length- vector where some of the positions are erased, is formulated as follows.
• Initialization: An integer label is associated with each check node with initial value equal to the number of -constrained variable nodes connected to the check node.

In addition, all check nodes are marked “unfinished.”

• For all unfinished check nodes do the following.

a) If the values of all but one of the variable nodes con-

nected to the check node are known, and the check

node’s label is zero or one, set the missing variable

bit to the XOR of the other variable nodes, increase

the label of all check nodes connected to the missing

variable node with the value of the missing variable

node, and mark it as a finished check node.

b) If all the variable nodes connected to a check node

are known, then if its integer label is different from

one, mark the check node “finished,” otherwise, mark

it “contradicted.”

• The procedure is done sequentially, i.e., one check node

at a time, and continues until all check nodes are marked

“finished,” there is at least one check node marked “con-

tradicted,” or the algorithm cannot continue further.

Note that extended iterative decoding is equivalent to itera-

tive belief-propagation (BP) decoding on the BEC, as described

in [31], if the condition of having a label of zero or one in a)

is removed. In this case no check node will be marked “contra-

dicted,” since the BEC does not introduce errors.

Also, when searching for codewords only, the condition of

having a label of zero or one in a) in extended iterative decoding

can be removed, and in b) a check node can be marked “contra-

dicted” when its integer label is odd and all variable nodes con-

nected to it are known. Finally, we can relax the definition of an

active row in the sense that a row is active if and only if the row

weight is odd.

The complexity of the SSE algorithm, which is very hard to

determine in an analytical way, depends on the tightness and

the complexity of the computation of the lower bound

in line 10 (the bound step), and on the selection of an uncon-

strained position in line 11 (the branch step). Note that the com-

putational complexity of extended iterative decoding is negli-

gible in this context. The selection of an unconstrained position

and the tightness of the computed lower bound determine the

number of constraint sets (or the number of nodes in the search

tree in the branch-and-bound methodology) considered in the

algorithm. It appears that this number is very sensitive to the

position selection algorithm used.

In computer science, parameterized complexity is a measure

of complexity of problems with multiple input parameters. The

theory of parameterized complexity is motivated by the obser-

vation that there exist several NP-hard problems that require ex-

ponential runtime when complexity is measured in terms of the

input size only, but that are computable in a time that is polyno-

mial in the input size and exponential in a (small) parameter .

Such problems are called fixed parameter tractable (FPT) prob-

lems, and small instances of such problems ( is a small value)

can usually be found efficiently, as in the case of stopping sets

with

. Note that there is still no proof that the problem

of finding the size of the smallest nonempty stopping set is an

FPT problem, but all known results seem to indicate that this is

the case. The interested reader is referred to the monograph [32]

for an introduction to FPT problems. Also, in [19], the notion of

FPT problems was described and its implications for stopping

and trapping set size estimation were considered.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:09:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4170

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2009

In line 10 in the SSE algorithm, we also test if an inconsistency was encountered during extended iterative decoding based on the constraint set . An inconsistency can be encountered if the constraint set is not valid.
Finally, note that the SSE algorithm resembles the improved iterative decoding algorithm of LDPC codes in [33] with a channel vector with erasures, i.e., all positions are erased by the channel. When iterative decoding stops, an unknown position is guessed and iterative decoding is continued. Guessing an unknown position resembles extending a constraint set. However, there is an important difference because there is no computation of a lower weight bound in the improved iterative decoding outlined in [33].

C. Computing a Lower Bound on

(the Bound Step)

Finding the minimum Hamming weight

of for a

valid constraint set is a very difficult problem. Even finding a

practical lower bound

on

is difficult. Let

be the set of indices of active rows with that concern the

th column of . Formally,

,

for

, where denotes the transpose of its

argument, and it follows that

is a subset of

for

all . Let

and

Then, the goal is to find a smallest possible collection

of elements from

such that

. A lower bound

on

is

for any (valid or invalid).

Example 1: Consider the check matrix

Hamming code with parity-

If

, then

,

,

corresponding to the active rows of

and all columns

that concern these active rows. For Example 1 above

Now,

is the solution to the optimization problem

when

(1)

where

and summation and multipli-

cation are over the reals.

The optimization problem above can be relaxed by allowing

, for all , to be a nonnegative real number. This relaxation of

(1) turns the optimization problem into a linear programming

problem as follows:

when

(2)

The solution to (2) will also be a lower bound on

, since the relaxation will give all correct solutions plus

some more (solutions where is fractional or greater than one).

When the optimal feasible vector in (2) is binary, the lower

bound on

is tight. Experimental results with

regular LDPC matrices have shown that for most constraint sets

, the lower bound on

computed from (2) is

tight.

When dealing with turbo codes [28], [29], a lower bound on

the remaining weight from the unconstrained positions was ob-

tained by using a constrained Viterbi algorithm on the second

constituent (extended) trellis. In the first constituent (extended)

trellis, however, there was no need for a constrained Viterbi al-

gorithm, since the constrained positions were selected succes-

sively from the input sequence, and the remaining weight could

be preprocessed in a lookup table. Thus, the method used here

is quite different.

D. Position Selection (the Branch Step)

and

. Furthermore,

,

,

, and

. It follows that

and

or . Thus,

. Note

that

for this particular example, since no

extra rows are activated with

.

As mentioned above, the position selected in line 11 (the

branch step) in the SSE algorithm influences the complexity of

the algorithm to a large extent.

For each unconstrained position such that

, where

corresponds to the minimization of (2), let

,

, denote the number of neighboring check nodes con-

nected to unconstrained variables nodes. Consider the fol-

lowing strategy.

• Choose a position such that

and such that

Since computing the proposed lower bound is an NP-hard

problem in general, there is not much hope of calculating

in an efficient manner. However, we can compute a

lower bound on

using linear programming as follows.

Let correspond to the th subset from , i.e.,

, for

, and let be a

bi-

nary matrix in which the entry in row and column is nonzero

if and only if the th element in

is contained within

for any unconstrained position such that

and

, where denotes a total order on the set of

length- sequences over the integers.

• If there are more than one possibility, then choose a posi-

tion such that

is maximized.

• Also, if there are no positions such that

(which

the th subset from . Note that is always a submatrix of

could be the case if the -constrained positions are the sup-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:09:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ROSNES AND YTREHUS: AN ALGORITHM TO FIND ALL SMALL-SIZE STOPPING SETS OF LDPC MATRICES

4171

port set of a stopping set), then choose a position with max- If is quasi-cyclic with period , then we can initialize the

imum column weight.

list with the constraint sets

The total order is defined as follows. For any two length-

sequences over the integers

and

, is said to lexicographically follow , i.e.,

, if either there exists a positive integer

such that

for all ,

, and

, or

for all

,

. Obviously, the binary relation is a total order.

Experimental results with different regular LDPC matrices have

shown that this method works quite well in practice.

Note that with this method we pick a position that is involved

in the lower bound on

computed from (2). Consequently,

the lower bound from (2) for the constraint set

could be strictly larger than for the constraint set . If we had

chosen a position that does not correspond to a nonzero vari-

able in the linear program, then there would be no possibility

where

. The SSE algorithm will

now return all stopping sets of size at most that contain at least

one of the positions

and none of the first

positions. The corresponding words in are then cyclically

shifted positions to the right times, and the number of

distinct stopping sets are counted.

of having a strictly larger lower bound for the constraint set B. Solving the Linear Program

. The following discussion applies to the corresponding problem for turbo codes, and we remark that the reader should be familiar with [28], [29] to understand the statements below, as the discussion is overly simplified. When dealing with turbo codes [28], [29], as mentioned above, the constrained positions were selected successively from the input sequence.

Solving a linear program has polynomial complexity. In this work, we have used the simplex method to solve (2). The matrix
appearing in (2) is a sparse matrix, and we remark that it is possible to speed up the calculations by exploiting this sparsity, especially for very sparse parity-check matrices. We have not implemented these simplifications.

We remark that this approach is not the most efficient in the

V. NUMERICAL RESULTS

context of LDPC codes studied in this paper, and it is essential that the constrained positions are carefully selected at each iteration step. For turbo codes, this strategy could also be used to reduce the number of constraint sets that need to be considered. However, the complexity of calculating a lower bound on the remaining weight would increase by roughly a factor of two, since a constrained Viterbi algorithm would also be needed on the first constituent (extended) trellis. Some initial experiments seem to indicate that the reduction of the number of constraint sets is not large enough to compensate for the increased complexity of calculating the lower weight

In this section, we provide some numerical results for some

well-documented LDPC matrices from the literature. The re-

sults are summarized in Tables I–III, where denotes the

minimum stopping set size and is the number of distinct

stopping sets of size ,

. The numbers

in parentheses are the numbers of codewords. We stress the fact

that these results are exact and have, to the best of our knowl-

edge, not appeared in the literature before, except for and

for the shortest Ramanujan–Margulis code tabulated in

row F) in Table I.

bound. Here, the complexity of solving (2) does not depend A. The -Regular

Tanner Code From [34]

on whether the constrained positions are distributed over the codeword block or not.

In [34], Tanner et al. constructed a particularly nice -regular LDPC code of length , dimension , and

minimum distance . The underlying Tanner graph has girth

IV. IMPROVEMENTS TO THE BASIC ALGORITHM
In this section, we will describe some improvements to the basic algorithm outlined in Section III.

and its relatively large minimum distance of [34] makes the code an excellent candidate for iterative decoding. According to the literature, the minimum stopping set size is between and , since a stopping set of size has been located by

A. Algebraic Properties

Monte Carlo simulation [15], and it has been verified that there are no stopping sets of size at most by the algorithm from

One obvious way to improve the basic algorithm is to exploit [15]. Here, we have found all stopping sets of size at most

some of the algebraic properties of the LDPC matrix under con- using the algorithm in Section III and exploiting the transitive

sideration. For example, if has a transitive automorphism automorphism group of . See Table I for more details.

group, then we can initialize the list of constraint sets with The minimum stopping set size is and the corresponding

the constraint set

, where

. The SSE multiplicity is . In fact, we found all stopping sets of size

algorithm will now return all stopping sets of size at most that at most in about 1 min on a standard desktop computer,

contain position . The corresponding words in are then per- which again illustrates the efficiency of the proposed algorithm

muted using the permutations in the automorphism group, and compared to the algorithm from [15].

the number of distinct stopping sets are counted. If there exists a stopping set of size at most that does not contain position , B. The

-Regular

Mackay Code From [35]

this stopping set will be found when all permutations from the This code is taken from the online database of sparse graph

automorphism group are considered.

codes from MacKay’s website [35]. The minimum stopping set

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:09:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4172

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2009
TABLE I NUMERICAL RESULTS FOR DIFFERENT LDPC MATRICES. THE NUMBERS IN PARENTHESES ARE THE NUMBERS OF CODEWORDS

size was estimated with high confidence to be in [22]. Indeed, the minimum stopping set size is . Furthermore, we have found all stopping sets of size at most . See Table I for more details.

C. The -Regular

Quadratic Permutation

Polynomial (QPP) Based Code From [7]

In [7], Takeshita proposed a novel algebraic construction of LDPC codes using QPPs. These polynomials have proved to be very effective in constructing interleavers for turbo codes with high minimum distance [38]. The construction gives a quasicyclic , and we have exploited this property in the algorithm in Section III, as outlined in Section IV-A. For this particular code, the minimum distance is previously unknown, but a codeword of weight has been reported in [7]. This codeword was found using the NNCS approach from [20]. Here, we have found all stopping sets of size at most . See Table I for more details. The minimum stopping set size turns out to be , and all stopping sets of size correspond to codewords.

D. The Almost -Regular

Progressive

Edge-Growth (PEG) Code From [35]

efficiency of the proposed algorithm compared to the algorithm from [15].

F. The -Regular Code From [37]

Ramanujan–Margulis

The minimum stopping set size was recently determined to be by Wang et al. [15]. Here, we have found all stopping sets of size at most using the algorithm in Section III and exploiting the automorphism group of . See Table I for more details.

G. The -Regular Code From [37]

Ramanujan–Margulis

The minimum stopping set size was recently estimated to be in [22], but only with weak confidence. The algorithm in [22] is a probabilistic algorithm and does not give exact results. Here, we have found all stopping sets of size at most using the algorithm in Section III and exploiting the automorphism group of . See Table I for more details. We remark that the confidence level of the estimated value of has recently been improved in [26] after the submission of this paper.

H. IEEE 802.16e LDPC Codes [41]

This code is a PEG constructed almost -regular LDPC In the IEEE 802.16e standard [41] LDPC codes are speci-

code. In particular, all the left vertices have degree and all the fied. The standard specifies four different code rates and 19 dif-

right vertices, except , have degree . The code can be found in ferent code lengths. The minimum stopping set size and the cor-

the online database of sparse graph codes from MacKay’s web- responding multiplicity for these codes have been computed,

site [35], but was designed by Hu using the PEG algorithm from and the results are tabulated in Table II (the A construction)

[39]. Here, we have found all stopping sets of size at most . and Table III (the B construction). Both constructions give a

See Table I for more details, where the multiplicities of stop- quasi-cyclic with period , and we have exploited this

ping sets of size at most have been tabulated. The minimum property in the SSE algorithm in Section III, as outlined in Sec-

stopping set size is , and the corresponding multiplicity is . tion IV-A. For code rates and , two base model matrices

E. The -Regular

Margulis Code From [36]

are specified (code constructions A and B). The B base model matrices are designed such that after a model matrix row per-

It is known that this code has a codeword of weight [40]. mutation, consecutive rows do not intersect, which may be used In [15], Wang et al. verified that there are no stopping sets of to increase decoding throughput in some layered decoding arsize at most . Thus, according to the literature, the minimum chitectures [42], [43].

stopping set size is between and . Here, we have found all stopping sets of size at most using the algorithm in Section III and exploiting the automorphism group of . See Table I for

VI. ADDING REDUNDANT PARITY CHECKS TO REMOVE STOPPING SETS

more details, where the multiplicities of stopping sets of size at The stopping redundancy of a binary linear code is defined most have been tabulated. Note that the minimum stopping in [44] as the minimum number of rows of any (redundant or

set size is and that all stopping sets of size correspond to nonredundant) parity-check matrix for such that the min-

codewords. Also, there are no other stopping sets of size at most imum stopping set size of the corresponding Tanner graph is

. In fact, all stopping sets of size at most were found in less equal to the minimum distance

of . Finding the exact

than 1 min on a standard desktop computer, which illustrates the value of the stopping redundancy for an arbitrary binary linear

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:09:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ROSNES AND YTREHUS: AN ALGORITHM TO FIND ALL SMALL-SIZE STOPPING SETS OF LDPC MATRICES

4173

TABLE II

MINIMUM STOPPING SET SIZE s AND MULTIPLICITY N

OF IEEE 802.16E LDPC CODES OF DIFFERENT CODE RATES R USING BASE MODEL MATRICES

FROM CODE CONSTRUCTION A. THE NUMBERS IN PARENTHESES ARE THE NUMBERS OF CODEWORDS

TABLE III

MINIMUM STOPPING SET SIZE s AND MULTIPLICITY N

OF IEEE

802.16E LDPC CODES OF DIFFERENT CODE RATES R USING BASE MODEL

MATRICES FROM CODE CONSTRUCTION B. THE NUMBERS IN PARENTHESES

ARE THE NUMBERS OF CODEWORDS

code is a very difficult problem. Even for the

ex-

tended binary Golay code this parameter is presently unknown.

For this particular code, the best known upper bound is [44].

Various upper bounds on the stopping redundancy have been de-

rived for different classes of codes, and the interested reader is

referred to [44]–[46] for some recent results. For other channels

than the BEC, the redundant parity checks may have a negative

effect by introducing short cycles in the corresponding Tanner

graph and degrade the performance of iterative decoding. Thus,

the redundant parity checks need to be carefully selected. Using

redundant information to improve performance of iterative de-

coding has been considered in various previous works, see, for

instance, [47]–[49] for some recent work.

Our objective here is to add as few extra redundant parity

checks as possible to the original parity-check matrix such

that there are no stopping sets of size less than in the Tanner

graph from the extended set of parity checks. A greedy approach

to this problem is to find the codeword, or one of the codewords,

of the dual code of that removes the highest number of

stopping sets of size less than in the Tanner graph from

and add this parity check to . Then, this step is repeated

until all stopping sets of size less than in the Tanner graph

from are removed. The main challenge with this approach

is to find the codeword, or one of the codewords, of that

removes the highest number of stopping sets of size less than

in the Tanner graph from . If the number of codewords

in is not too large, then one can simply try all the codewords

in . This approach works quite well for the extended binary

Golay code, but is obviously not practical unless the dimension

of is very small.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:09:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4174

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2009

Algorithm 2 Greedy Stopping Set Removal (GSSR)

1: /* is a positive integer input parameter and is a list of stopping sets */

2: while

do

3: Assign

(a length- vector filled with erasures),

, and

.

4: while

do

5:

Find and remove a coordinate

that is contained in the highest number of stopping sets from .

6:

Let denote the list of stopping sets from that contain , and assign

,

,

, and

.

7:

for

to do

8:

while

do

9:

Choose and remove a stopping set from such that

is minimized. If there are more

than one possibility, then take one of the candidate stopping sets at random.

10:

Assign

,

for every

, and

.

11:

if is not consistent with a codeword of then

12:

assign

for every

.

13:

end if

14:

end while

15:

if

then

16:

reassign by

.

17:

end if

18:

Reassign by

and by

.

19: end for

20: Reassign by

.

21: Reassign by

and by

.

22: end while

23: Solve

for

by Gaussian elimination, where

,

for all ,

, and

, and fill in binary

values in the remaining positions in containing erasures by back substitution. If there are more than one solution, then fill

in zeros in the coordinates of that do not correspond to columns with a leading one from

.

24: Find from the set

such that

, i.e., the

number of stopping sets eliminated by , is maximized.

25: Add to , remove all stopping sets in

from

, and reassign by

.

26:end while

Here, we propose another greedy algorithm for codes with A precise description of the GSSR algorithm is given

larger parameters, which is an approximation of the greedy al- in Algorithm 2 (see the top of the page). The input to the

gorithm described above. The Greedy Stopping Set Removal algorithm is a positive integer parameter , a list of all

(GSSR) algorithm works on a list of stopping sets. For each iter- stopping sets of size less than in the Tanner graph from

ation of the outer loop, the algorithm determines a suitable code- , computed by the SSE algorithm from Section III, and

word of the dual code that removes a large number of stopping a parity-check matrix of . Also,

denotes

sets. The codeword, denoted by , is initially filled with erasures the automorphism group of which is equal to

,

in every coordinate. Also, let denote the subset of of all stop- the automorphism group of . Furthermore, we need the

ping sets that contain no -constrained coordinate from . Then, a following definition. Let

be a length-

coordinate such that is an erasure and such that is contained vector filled with binary values and , and erasures denoted

in the largest number of stopping sets from is located. Now, the by . The vector is said to be consistent with a codeword

algorithm will try to remove stopping sets from by setting

of if and only if the system of binary linear equations

and filling the remaining positions of stopping sets in with

zeros. At the same time we have to check that can be a codeword has at least one solution for

, where

of the dual code. This procedure continues with a new value for

,

for all ,

,

until all possible values have been tried. If there are some re- and

.

maining erasures in , these are filled in by Gaussian elimination The GSSR algorithm will succeed in finding a redundant

and back substitution. Finally, the resulting candidate codeword parity-check matrix with no stopping sets of size less than

is compared with codewords obtained by applying the permuta- in the corresponding Tanner graph, since such a matrix always

tions from the automorphism group of on the rows of

, exists [44]. Note that the GSSR algorithm does not consider

where the parity-check matrix is regarded as a collection of the girth of the Tanner graph, i.e., the length of the shortest

rows, to see if a better candidate codeword can be obtained. cycle in the Tanner graph. Cycles are known to degrade the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:09:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ROSNES AND YTREHUS: AN ALGORITHM TO FIND ALL SMALL-SIZE STOPPING SETS OF LDPC MATRICES

4175

extended parity-check matrix has

rows. The ma-

trix has 14 extra redundant weight- parity checks with support

sets

= 20 (155 64) Fig. 1. Empirical probability mass function for the number of extra redundant
parity checks returned by the GSSR algorithm (with  ) for the ; Tanner code from Section V-A.

performance of iterative decoding on channels other than the BEC. In particular, -cycles, i.e., cycles of length , should be avoided, see, for instance, [50].
The complexity of the GSSR algorithm depends extensively on the complexity of checking if is consistent with a codeword of . For short-to-medium block lengths, this can be done by performing iterative decoding (on the BEC) on a Tanner graph from with as channel output. If no contradictions are observed and decoding stops in a nonempty stopping set in the Tanner graph from , then continue with Gaussian elimination on the submatrix of consisting of all columns which correspond to the remaining erased coordinates in . For longer codes, and when the number of remaining erasures in after iterative decoding is large, the complexity of Gaussian elimination could be too high. To deal with these cases, decoding can continue by guessing some of the unknown bits involved in the stopping set [33], [51]. Furthermore, to bound the worst case complexity of this improved iterative decoding algorithm on the BEC, the maximum number of unknown bits to guess can be bounded. Note, however, that bounding the maximum number of unknown bits to guess could give a false answer, i.e., the procedure may indicate that is indeed consistent with a codeword of when this is not true, which implies that we need to incorporate a backtracking mechanism in the algorithm.
Finally, we remark that similar complexity reductions can be applied in line 23 in the GSSR algorithm in Algorithm 2.

two extra redundant weight-

parity checks with support sets

A. Case Study

and, finally, one extra redundant weight- parity check with The GSSR algorithm is nondeterministic due to the random support set selection of in line 9 in Algorithm 2. We have applied the

GSSR algorithm on the list of all stopping sets of size less than

for the

Tanner code from Section V-A. After run-

ning the GSSR algorithm about 10000 times (with

),

we got the empirical probability mass function in Fig. 1 for the We assume here the same ordering of the columns as in the

number of extra redundant parity checks needed in order to re- original construction in [34], where columns are numbered from

move all stopping sets of size less than . The empirical av- left to right with the first column index being zero. Note that the

erage number of extra redundant parity checks returned by the extended matrix, denoted by , has 325 more ones than the

GSSR algorithm is , and the best (in terms of the minimum original , and that the corresponding Tanner graph has 445

number of rows or in terms of the minimum number of -cycles) -cycles. The original Tanner graph has girth and 465 -cycles.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:09:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4176

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2009

TABLE IV MEAN NUMBER OF ITERATIONS FOR DIFFERENT VALUES OF THE CHANNEL ERASURE PROBABILITY  WHEN DECODING THE (155; 64) TANNER CODE
ITERATIVELY ON THE BEC

Fig. 2. Comparison of FER of the (155; 64) Tanner code from Section V-A on the BEC.

checks with support set sizes and , respectively. Note

that the extended parity-check matrix has 250 more ones than

the original , which has 1512 ones, and that the corresponding

Tanner graph has 1117 -cycles. The original Tanner graph has

girth and 169 -cycles.

Finally, we applied the GSSR algorithm on the list of all

stopping sets of size less than for the

IEEE

802.16e LDPC code using code construction B. This code has

a minimum distance of , and the GSSR algorithm returned

four extra redundant parity checks with support set sizes

and

respectively. Note that the extended

parity-check matrix has 1525 more ones than the original

, which has 3888 ones, and that the corresponding Tanner

graph has 63448 -cycles. The original Tanner graph has 240

-cycles. Note that the large number of -cycles in the Tanner

graph of the extended parity-check matrix is due to the fact that

the weight of the extra redundant parity checks is very high.

VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

We remark that searching for redundant parity checks by ran- In this work, we have introduced an efficient algorithm to enu-

domly combining (a small number of) parity checks from the merate all stopping sets of size less than some given threshold of

original parity-check matrix does not work, in the sense that a fixed LDPC matrix. The efficiency of the proposed algorithm

the number of extra redundant parity checks returned by such was demonstrated by computing the first few terms of the stop-

an algorithm is much larger than 17.

ping set size enumerating function of several well-known LDPC

In Fig. 2, we have compared the frame-error rate (FER) of the matrices from the literature whose minimum stopping set sizes

Tanner code with iterative decoding using both the were previously unknown. For instance, we have applied the al-

original parity-check matrix and the extended parity-check gorithm to the well-known -regular

Tanner code

matrix

given above on the BEC. For every value of the and found all stopping sets of size at most in about 1 min on

channel erasure probability , at least 50 frame errors were sim- a standard desktop computer. Furthermore, we have applied the

ulated, except for

with iterative decoding using and algorithm to the IEEE 802.16e LDPC codes and determined the

for

with iterative decoding using , where nine and minimum stopping set size and the corresponding multiplicity

16 frame errors were simulated, respectively. Note that the extra exactly for these codes. Finally, as an application of the algo-

redundant parity checks improve the FER performance of iter- rithm, we presented a greedy algorithm to find a small number

ative decoding for low-to-medium values of . The scheduling of redundant parity checks to add to the original parity-check

for iterative decoding using

is as follows. First we per- matrix in order to remove all stopping sets of size less than

form iterative decoding using until the transmitted codeword the minimum distance. An extensive case study of the

is recovered, or the decoder does not progress further. Second, if Tanner code illustrated the usefulness of the algorithm. In par-

the decoder stops in a nonempty stopping set, then we continue ticular, we found a

redundant parity-check matrix

decoding using . In Table IV, we have tabulated the mean for this code with no stopping sets in the corresponding Tanner

number of iterations for different values of . In Fig. 2, we have graph of size less than the minimum distance. Simulation re-

also plotted the corresponding truncated union bounds (TUBs) sults of iterative decoding on the BEC show performance im-

computed using all minimal stopping sets of size at most , provements for low-to-medium erasure probabilities when this

and a TUB for maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding computed redundant parity-check matrix is used for decoding.

using all (minimal) codewords of weight at most . A minimal One interesting topic for future work is the adaptation of the

stopping set is a stopping set that does not contain a nonempty presented SSE algorithm to compute the size of the smallest

stopping set as a proper subset.

nonempty stopping set of generalized and doubly generalized

We have also applied the GSSR algorithm on the list of all LDPC codes [52]–[56]. Note that the stopping set definition for

stopping sets of size less than for the

MacKay generalized and doubly generalized LDPC codes depends on the

code from Section V-B. This code has a minimum distance of specific algorithms used to decode in the check (and variable)

, and the GSSR algorithm returned two extra redundant parity nodes [55].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:09:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ROSNES AND YTREHUS: AN ALGORITHM TO FIND ALL SMALL-SIZE STOPPING SETS OF LDPC MATRICES

4177

Another topic for future work is to improve the position selection algorithm in the SSE algorithm. As mentioned above, the complexity of the SSE algorithm depends crucially on the position selection algorithm. Thus, finding a better approach to choose the unknown positions is of major importance.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank the anonymous reviewers for suggestions that improved the quality of the manuscript.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Good codes based on very sparse matrices,” in Proc. 5th IMA Conf. Cryptography and Coding (Lecture Notes in Computer Science), Cirencester, U.K., Dec. 1995, vol. 1025, pp. 100–111.
[3] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[4] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[5] Y. Mao and A. H. Banihashemi, “A heuristic search for good lowdensity parity-check codes at short block lengths,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications (ICC), Helsinki, Finland, Jun. 2001, vol. 1, pp. 41–44.
[6] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[7] O. Y. Takeshita, “A compact construction for LDPC codes using permutation polynomials,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory (ISIT), Seattle, WA, Jul. 2006, pp. 79–82.
[8] C. Di, D. Proietti, I˙. E. Telatar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[9] D. J. C. MacKay and M. S. Postol, “Weaknesses of Margulis and Ramanujan-Margulis low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 2nd Irish Conf. Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science and Information Technology (Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science), Galway, Ireland, Jul. 2002, vol. 74.
[10] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Annu. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[11] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Graph-cover decoding and finite-length analysis of message-passing iterative decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory [Online]. Available: http://arxiv. org/abs/cs.IT/0512078/, to be published
[12] E. R. Berlekamp, R. J. McEliece, and H. C. A. van Tilborg, “On the inherent intractability of certain coding problems,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-24, no. 3, pp. 384–386, May 1978.
[13] A. Vardy, “The intractability of computing the minimum distance of a code,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 1757–1766, Nov. 1997.
[14] K. M. Krishnan and P. Shankar, “Computing the stopping distance of a Tanner graph is NP-hard,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 2278–2280, Jun. 2007.
[15] C.-C. Wang, S. R. Kulkarni, and H. V. Poor, “Finding all small errorprone substructures for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 1976–1999, May 2009.
[16] I. Dumer, D. Micciancio, and M. Sudan, “Hardness of approximating the minimum distance of a linear code,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 22–37, Jan. 2003.
[17] K. M. Krishnan and L. S. Chandran, “Hardness of approximation results for the problem of finding the stopping distance in Tanner graphs,” in Proc. 26th Int. Conf. Foundations of Software Technology and Theoretical Computer Science (Lecture Notes in Computer Science), Kolkata, India, Dec. 2006, vol. 4337, pp. 69–80.
[18] A. McGregor and O. Milenkovic, “On the hardness of approximating stopping and trapping sets in LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Information Theory Workshop, Lake Tahoe, CA, Sep. 2007, pp. 248–253.

[19] A. McGregor and O. Milenkovic, “On the hardness of approximating stopping and trapping sets in LDPC codes,” [Online]. Available: http:// arxiv.org/abs/0704.2258/, submitted for publication
[20] X.-Y. Hu, M. P. C. Fossorier, and E. Eleftheriou, “On the computation of the minimum distance of low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications (ICC), Paris, France, Jun. 2004, vol. 2, pp. 767–771.
[21] M. Hirotomo, M. Mohri, and M. Morii, “A probabilistic computation method for the weight distribution of low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory (ISIT), Adelaide, SA, Australia, Sep. 2005, pp. 2166–2170.
[22] X.-Y. Hu and E. Eleftheriou, “A probabilistic subspace approach to the minimal stopping set problem,” in Proc. 4th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Munich, Germany, Apr. 2006.
[23] G. Richter, “Finding small stopping sets in the Tanner graphs of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 4th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Munich, Germany, Apr. 2006.
[24] D. Declercq and M. Fossorier, “Improved impulse method to evaluate the low weight profile of sparse binary linear codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory (ISIT), Toronto, ON, Canada, Jul. 2008, pp. 1963–1967.
[25] M. Hirotomo, Y. Konishi, and M. Morii, “A probabilistic algorithm for finding the minimum-size stopping sets of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Information Theory Workshop, Porto, Portugal, May 2008, pp. 66–70.
[26] M. Hirotomo, Y. Konishi, and M. Morii, “On the probabilistic computation algorithm for the minimum-size stopping sets of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory (ISIT), Toronto, ON, Canada, Jul. 2008, pp. 295–299.
[27] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Iterative reliability-based decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 908–917, May 2001.
[28] E. Rosnes and Ø. Ytrehus, “Turbo decoding on the binary erasure channel: Finite-length analysis and turbo stopping sets,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 4059–4075, Nov. 2007.
[29] E. Rosnes and Ø. Ytrehus, “Turbo stopping sets: The uniform interleaver and efficient enumeration,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory (ISIT), Adelaide, SA, Australia, Sep. 2005, pp. 1251–1255.
[30] A. H. Land and A. G. Doig, “An automatic method of solving discrete programming problems,” Econometrica, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 497–520, 1960.
[31] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Efficient erasure correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 569–584, Feb. 2001.
[32] R. G. Downey and M. R. Fellows, Parameterized Complexity. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1999.
[33] H. Pishro-Nik and F. Fekri, “On decoding of low-density parity-check codes over the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 439–454, Mar. 2004.
[34] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, and T. Fuja, “A class of group-structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Communication Theory and Applications (ISCTA), Ambleside, U.K., Jul. 2001.
[35] D. J. C. MacKay, Encyclopedia of Sparse Graph Codes. [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data. html
[36] G. A. Margulis, “Explicit constructions of graphs without short cycles and low density codes,” Combinatorica, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 71–78, 1982.
[37] J. Rosenthal and P. O. Vontobel, “Construction of LDPC codes based on Ramanujan graphs and ideas from Margulis,” in Proc. 38th Annu. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2000, pp. 248–257.
[38] E. Rosnes and O. Y. Takeshita, “Optimum distance quadratic permutation polynomial-based interleavers for turbo codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory (ISIT), Seattle, WA, Jul. 2006, pp. 1988–1992.
[39] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[40] M. Stepanov and M. Chertkov, “Instanton analysis of low-density parity-check codes in the error-floor regime,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory (ISIT), Seattle, WA, Jul. 2006, pp. 552–556.
[41] IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks, Part 16: Air Interface for Fixed and Mobile Broadband Wireless Access Systems, Amendment 2: Physical and Medium Access Control Layers for Combined Fixed and Mobile Operation in Licensed Bands and Corrigendum 1, IEEE Std 802.16e-2005 and IEEE Std 802.16-2004/Cor12005, Feb. 2006.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:09:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4178

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2009

[42] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “High-throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Syst., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 976–996, Dec. 2003.
[43] D. E. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Processing Systems, Austin, TX, Oct. 2004, pp. 107–112.
[44] M. Schwartz and A. Vardy, “On the stopping distance and the stopping redundancy of codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 922–932, Mar. 2006.
[45] J. Han and P. H. Siegel, “Improved upper bounds on stopping redundancy,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 90–104, Jan. 2007.
[46] T. Etzion, “On the stopping redundancy of Reed-Muller codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 11, pp. 4867–4879, Nov. 2006.
[47] T. R. Halford and K. M. Chugg, “Random redundant soft-in soft-out decoding of linear block codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory (ISIT), Seattle, WA, Jul. 2006, pp. 2230–2234.
[48] A. Kothiyal, O. Y. Takeshita, W. Jin, and M. Fossorier, “Iterative reliability-based decoding of linear block codes with adaptive belief propagation,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 1067–1069, Dec. 2005.
[49] J. Jiang and K. R. Narayanan, “Iterative soft decoding of ReedSolomon codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 244–246, Apr. 2004.
[50] L. Lan, Y. Y. Tai, L. Chen, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “A trellisbased method for removing cycles from bipartite graphs and construction of low density parity check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 7, pp. 443–445, Jul. 2004.
[51] B. N. Vellambi and F. Fekri, “Results on the improved decoding algorithm for low-density parity-check codes over the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 1510–1520, Apr. 2007.
[52] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[53] M. Lentmaier and K. Sh. Zigangirov, “On generalized low-density parity-check codes based on Hamming component codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 3, no. 8, pp. 248–250, Aug. 1999.

[54] J. Boutros, O. Pothier, and G. Zémor, “Generalized low density (Tanner) codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications (ICC), Vancouver, BC, Canada, Jun. 1999, vol. 1, pp. 441–445.
[55] N. Miladinovic and M. Fossorier, “Generalized LDPC codes with Reed-Solomon and BCH codes as component codes for binary channels,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, St. Louis, MO, Nov./Dec. 2005, vol. 3, pp. 1239–1244.
[56] Y. Wang and M. Fossorier, “Doubly generalized LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory (ISIT), Seattle, WA, Jul. 2006, pp. 669–673.
Eirik Rosnes (S’01–M’04) was born in Stavanger, Norway, in 1975. He received the Cand. Scient. degree in physics and the Dr. Scient. degree in informatics both from the University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway, in 1999 and 2003, respectively.
Since 2003, he has been with the Department of Informatics at the University of Bergen, first as a PostDoc and then as a Senior Researcher. From September 2001 to March 2002 and from March 2005 to September 2005, he was a Visiting Scholar at the Center for Magnetic Recording Research at the University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA. His research interests are in the area of communication theory and information theory, and include classical error-control coding, codes on graphs, and iterative decoding algorithms.
Øyvind Ytrehus (M’89–SM’03) was born in Bergen, Norway, in 1960. He received the Cand. Scient. and Dr. Scient. degrees from the University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway, in 1985 and 1989, respectively.
Since 1985, he has been with the University of Bergen, where he is presently a Professor of Informatics. During the academic years of 1987–1988 and 1998–1999, he spent sabbaticals at the University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA. His research interests include coding theory and cryptography.
Dr. Ytrehus has served as an Associate Editor for Coding Techniques for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:09:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

