Area and Latency Optimized High-Throughput Min-Sum Based LDPC Decoder Architectures

Matthias Korb, Tobias G. Noll
Chair of Electrical Engineering and Computer Systems RWTH Aachen University 52062 Aachen , Germany
korb , tgn@eecs.rwth-aachen.de

Abstract- Low Density Parity Check codes (LDPC) achieve bit error rates close to the Shannon limit. Therefore, codes with large block lengths are required. These codes lead to high block latencies and especially to complex decoders, which are contrary to the demanded high throughput rates. Mainly two high throughput decoder architectures are known. A bit-parallel architecture yields in a small block latency and a high throughput rate while a bit-serial architecture features a small silicon area. We present a systematic search for high-throughput Min-Sum based LDPC decoder architectures leading to a set of ATefficient architectures. In comparison to other decoder implementations accurate cost models predict a 60 % reduction in AT-complexity. Furthermore, the introduction of a digitserial communication enables a trade-off between area and throughput rate retaining the low AT-complexity.

1. INTRODUCTION
LOPC codes, invented by Gallager in 1962 [1], can be defined by a sparse parity check matrix H or by a corresponding Tanner Graph as depicted in Figure 1. This graph consists of two types of nodes: bit and check nodes.

n col,umns

I0I0I0I0
0 I I o0 I 0 I

I
H=

0

0

I

0

I

0

I

0I0I I0I0

0 I I 0 I 00 I

I 00 I 0 I I 0

m check nodes

certain architecture for a given application requires an adequate comparison. Therefore, the decoder features, such as silicon area and block period, which is the reciprocal of the block throughput rate considering i decoding iterations, need to be normalized with respect to technology and code complexity. Due to space restrictions only the dependencies derived in [14] are presented here.
The block period scales approximately with the word length of the messages WL, with the depth of the arithmetic tree structures in the nodes and with the technology feature size ), as
The decoder area is the maximum of the logic and the routing area. The logic area is about linearly dependent on the code complexity n-d; and the word length WL and quadratically dependent on the technology feature size ),
(1-2)
The routing area depends on the number of interconnect lines and the mean length of the wires. The number of interconnect lines can be calculated from the code complexity and the word length WR. In a routing dominated decoder the mean wire length scales linearly with the number of interconnect lines. Assuming (M-3) of M total metal layers being used for global routing the scaling of the routing area can be estimated as

Figure I. Parity check matrix and Tanner Graph

(1-3)

A matrix with m columns and n rows corresponds to a Tanner Graph with m bit and n check nodes. Furthermore, each non-zero entry Hi,} of the matrix defines one edge between a check and a bit node; the row weight de (column weight dv) determines the number of connections of each check node (bit node).
Various CMOS LOPC decoder implementations have been proposed in the past [3]-[13]. The optimal selection of a

A lower bound estimation of the logic and the routing area allows for a comparison between them. Thus, a decoder is routing dominated if

-3)J n

.d v

>(
-

12.5.(M wR

2
• wL •

(1-4)

This research is funded by thc Deutsche Forschungsgesellschaft (OFG) project UKoLoS (grant NO 281/11-2).

978-1-4244-4353-6 /09 /$25 .00 ©2 0 0 9 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:17:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Using these scaling rules for a (2048, 1723)-LDPC code [2], a word length W L of 6 bits and one decoding iteration leads to the AT-complexity chart shown in Figure 2. In the chart bittrue equivalent decoder implementations are characterized by a solid marker. The open markers represent implementations which either base on so-called decoder aware LDPC codes or on approximate algorithms, which negatively affect the decoding performance and especially the error floor.

• bit true equivalent decoders

40

[6]
o

~

° decoder aware codes I approximate algor ithms • this work

::l

:

~ 25 ~

\,

..,a.~: 20

\ [10]
\.

Minimal AT-complexity

-c,

15 '"
\ ; 11]

of bit equivalent decoder implementations

I 10 [4]~ [4,]:n{5]_1

° 5

0, ~ ' --______

.'1 3]

[5]-11

12 ]

- ------

o

25

50 100

[8] 1[9]
_
130

•[7]
600

TBLOCK NORM (a.u.)

Figure 2. Normalized AT-complexity of published LDPC decoder implementations

II. BACKGRO UND
In designing LDPC decoders the main emphasis lays on the achievement of the specified throughput rate. Reduction of silicon area, energy per decoded bit and block latency are further objectives. The decoder throughput, as well as the block latency, depends on the iteration period TIT

0 r=-r-'
f c l o ck

(2-1)

with y being the number of clock cycles per iteration and !clock the clock frequency. In Figure 3 a timing diagram of an interleaved decoder with two parallel decoding threads is depicted.

II
input shift reg
H decodi ng thread 0

decodi ng thread 1 :

:

I1

bl~Ck 1 ~ block 3 )

~

~ bliC k 2

output shift reg
I I
I
'I.

I

I 1 TeL OCK

I '-I

I. i T" .1

.. t,

1

Figure 3_ Timing diagram: Interleaved LDPC decoder

Assuming a constant iteration period, the interleaving of two blocks leads to a reduced block period THlD CK, which depends on the iteration period , the number of iterations and the number of interleaved blocks B

(2-2)

The block latency TL consists of the time TW AlJ to load the n a-priori symbols of a block into the input shift registers and
the duration of the decoding process i·TIT

A simultaneous reduction of the block period and the block latency requires a reduced iteration period. Therefore, a detailed understanding of the information flow in the decoder loop is essential. In the following the approximate Min-Sum algorithm is considered [11]. The block diagram of a decoder loop consisting of one bit and one check node is shown in Figure 4. In the first part of the decoding iteration the check node message L(r) is calculated as follows

The hardware complexity of the check node can be reduced by searching for the absolute and the second minimum magnitude [11]. The result of (2-4) is transmitted to the bit node. In this node the a-priori information L(c) and the (dv- I) check node messages are summed up

L(q ij)=L(c;)+ LL(rij') =L(c;)+ LL(rij') -L~ij)'

j' EF \j

j'EF

(2-5)

Due to the fixed word length, the bit node message has to be saturated before it is transmitted to the cheek node. In the decoder loop at least one system delay is required (y=I), which should be located at the position leading to the smallest number of registers. The equations to calculate these numbers for the five depicted cross sections are stated in Figure 4, as well. The optimal position for the system delay can be observed at cross section two. At this point all the information is compressed to a minimum.

1)

n · d ,, ·w =m ·dc · w

n.d, .w= m .d, .w

4) n-d; . w+ n .(w+ lld (d" + l)l)

5)

n 'd" ·(w+lld(d,,+ l)l)

Figure 4. Data flow in Min-Sum based loop

Ill. EXISTING DECOD ER ARCHITECTUR ES
Basically, two different high-throughput architectures are known : In the fully bit-parallel decoder the arithmetic in the nodes and the interconnect are implemented bit parallel [3]. A block diagram of a corresponding decoder loop and a timing diagram are shown in Figure 5. In general , this architecture allows for small iteration periods but suffers from a large chip area. Typically, this chip area is routing dominated. The insertion of additional pipeline stages in the decoder loop leads to a low utilization of the arithmetic in the nodes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:17:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Utilization can be increased by interleaving multiple blocks leading to a simultaneous increase of the throughput rate.

minimumreo 15:01 ( iteration 0 X iteration 1 :

bit in [5:01 bit out 15:01

---< iteration 0 ~
x:::: ----{ iteration 0

C check in [5:01 - - - - { iteration 0

Figure 5. Bit-parallel arch itecture and timing diagram
The interconnect complexity can be reduced significantly by transmitting the messages between the nodes in a bit-serial fashion . Typically, this leads to a logic dominated decoder. The realization of bit-serial nodes as proposed in [4] results in a further reduction of the silicon area. However, the order of the bit-serial data flow has to be swapped twice during one decoding iteration. As depicted in Figure 6, 14 clock cycles are required for one decoding iteration considering a word length of six bits. Obviously, serialization of the interconnect leads to a higher iteration period.

bit oul [5:0]

10 12 14
L.fl.f1..f1..fU ~

check in

~

chec k oul [5:0] ~

bit in

~

fi gure 6. Bit-serial architecture and timing diagram

IV. D ESIGN SPACE EXPLORATION
In order to find the most AT-efficient architecture a methodical exploration of all possible architectures was performed. The architectures are classified based on the data flow in one iteration. The loop can be separated into four basic blocks: the arithmetic in the nodes and the interconnect between these nodes. Each of these blocks can be implemented bit parallel or bit serial. A tree diagram of all possible combinations and the number of clock cycles per iteration are shown in Figure 7.

No. 14 fulfills both requirements leading to only nin e clock cycles per iteration. Therefore, a bit-serial implementation of the check node and a bit-parallel realization of the bit node results in an efficient architecture. The authors of [11] came to a similar result.
V. AT-OPTIMIZED DECODER ARCHITECTURES
A. Basic decoder architecture The decoder loop and the timing diagram of architecture
No. 14 are illustrated in Figure 8. At the beginning of the iteration the bit node message is stored in the output registers of the bit node. In the following clock cycles the message is sent bit serially to the check node . The latency of the bit-serial decoder part is three clock cycles and the complete check node message is stored in the input registers of the bit node after five additional clock cycles. The parallel calculation of the bit node message is performed in the last clock cycle resulting in nine cycles for the complete iteration.
012 345 6 789
ru1...rlJ1..IU1
bitout[5: 0 1 ~ check in ~ check out ~ bit in [5: 0 1 ~
Figure 8. Proposed architecture and timing diagram
The bit-parallel implementation of (2-5) as in [11] would result in a high node complexity leading to a large area. However, the bit-serial input stream of the bit node can be used to reduce the node complexity. The partial sum of all input bits is calculated in each clock cycle as shown in Figure 9. Before the partial sums are accumulated one input bit needs to be subtracted.
check .node 0
check node d,-1 apriori information
Figure 9. Bit node architecture

The saturation of the bit node message is performed subsequently. Since the sign of this message is independent of the operation, the saturation and the transmission of the sign are done in the same clock cycle. This node architecture reduces the complexity as well as the critical path and therefore allows for a higher clock frequency. However, the iteration period is still larger than that of a fully parallel decoder.

Figure 7. Decoder design space
Based on (2-1) the number of clock cycles per iteration can be used as an indicator of the decoder throughput. The depicted number of clock cycles for wL=6 bases on the assumption that each communication between the nodes takes one clock cycle. The reduction of the decoder area requires a bit-serial interconnect. Obviously, the number of clock cycles should be minimal to reduce the iteration period. Architecture

B. Digit-serial decoder architectures
A digit-serial decoder is a compromise between a bit-serial and a bit-parallel architecture. Due to logic domination of the silicon area in bit-serial decoders the AT-complexity can be further reduced by increasing the routing area successively. Therefore, the word length of the interconnect can be increased until the routing and the logic area match. Ideally the logic area and, thus, the total decoder area are not affected.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:17:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

In the AT-efficient architecture the check node also has to be implemented digit serially as depicted in Figure 10. The increasing check node complexity yields in an increasing logic complexity and, hence, in an increasing decoder area. However, the latency per iteration can be reduced from nine clock cycles to six clock cycles. A further reduction to five clock cycles can be achieved by choosing a digit word length of three bits.

Il.....fL...JL.
bitouI 15:01 ~ checkjn ~ ch eck out ~ bit in[5:ol ~
Figure 10. Digit-serial architecture and timing diagram

VI. RES ULTS
All time and area critical key components were optimized at circuit level and implemented in 45-nm CMOS technology leaf cell layouts supporting our physically oriented automated full custom design style [15]. Area and energy efficient, scanable registers clocked by a complementary clock system were applied throughput the decoder. Time critical paths were modelled by proper worst-case circuit simulation of extracted netlists assuming 0.9 V supply voltage. From the geometrical layout views and the circuit simulation results highly accurate parameterized cost models were derived allowing for architecture comparison and optimization.
Based on these models the silicon area and the iteration period of the proposed architectur es were estimated for a decoder compliant to the IEEE 802.3an standard [2]. In this application the specified maximum latency of the physical layer results in a tight constraint of the block latency besides the high throughput requirements. The iteration period of the decoder architecture with a bit-serial interconnect is 19 ns. A digit-serial realization of the serial decoder part results in iteration periods of 14.2 and 13.2 ns with a digit length of two and three bit, respectively. The decoder areas are estimated to 3.1,3.6 and 4.1 mrrr'. In comparison to the bit-true equivalent decoder implementation with the next lowest AT-complexity [11] a reduction of 60 % can be achieved as shown in Figure 2.

TABLE I.

COMPARISON OF NORMA LIZED BLOCK LATENCY

bit-parallel architecture [31 bit-serial architecture [II] this work: I bit interconnect this work: 2 bit interconnect this work: 3 bit interconnect

TI/WCK NOI/M
7.2 ns 13.1 ns 19 ns 14.2 ns 13.2 ns

T 1. NORM - TWA/) = B ' T I/WCK NORM (;=1)
7.2 ns 26.2 ns 19 ns 14.2 ns 13.2 ns

The low AT-complexity of the proposed bit-serial architecture is due to the low decoder area. As expected, the parallel decoder features the smallest block period and block latency. Considering the latency, the architectures proposed here fill the gap between the bit-serial and bit-parallel

implementations depending on the chosen digit word length. In contrast to [11] no block interleaving is applied to increase the decoder throughput. Thus, a small block latency and a high decoder throughput are achieved simultaneously meeting the throughput and the latency constraints of the 802.3an standard.
VII. CONCLUSION
A systematic search for most AT-efficient LDPC decoder architectures has been presented. The area and timing features of the derived decoder result in an increase of area efficiency (throughput ! area) by a factor of 2.5 compared to other bittrue equivalent implementations known from the literature. High decoder throughput is achieved by reducing the time for one decoding iteration. In contrast to the interleaving of multiple blocks, this reduction simultaneously allows for high throughput rates and low block latencies. The introduction of a digit-serial interconnect enables a trade-off between decoder throughput and silicon area retaining the low AT-complexity. Therefore, the proposed architectures can be efficiently adapted to different throughput and latency requirements.
R EFERENCES
[I] R. Gallager, "Low-density parity-check codes", Information Theory, IRE Transactions on, 1962, pp. 21-28
[2] LAN/MAN CSMAlCD Access Method, IEEE 802.3an Standard
[3] A. Blanksby, C. Howland ., "A 690-mW I-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-l/2 lowdensity parity-ch eck code decoder", Solid-State Circuits, IEEE Journal of, 2002, pp. 404-412
[4] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone , F. R. Kschischang, "Power Reduction Techniques for LDPC Decoders", Solid-State Circuits, IEEE Journal of, 2008, pp. 1835-1845
[5] 1. Mohsenin, B. M. Baas, "High-Throughput LDPC Decoders Using A Multiple Split-Row Method", Acoustics, Speech and Signal Procesing, IEEE International Conference on, 2007, pp. 11-13-11-16
[6] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, F. R. Kschischang, "Block-Interlaced LDPC Decoders With Reduced Interconn ect Complexity", Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs, IEEE Transactions on, 2008, pp. 74-78
[7] 1. Brack, M. Alles, et aI., "Low Complexity LDPC Code Decoders for Next Generation Standards", Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition, 2007, pp. 1-6
[8] M. M. Mansour, N. R. Shanbhag, "A 640-Mb/s 2048-bit programmable LDPC decoder chip", Solid-State Circuits, IEEE Journal of, 2006, pp. 684-698
[9] 1. Ishikawa, K. Shimizu, 1. Ikenaga, S. Goto, "High-throughput decoder for low-density parity-check code", Design Automation , Asia and South Pacific Conference on, 2006, pp. 112-113
[10] L. Chien-Ching, L. Kai-Li, C. Hsie-Chia, L. Chen-Yi , "A 3.33Gb/s (1200,720) low-density parity check code decoder", Solid-State Circuits Conference , Proceedings of the 3151 European, ESSCIRC, 2005, pp. 211-214
[II ] 1. Brandon, R. Hang, et aI., "A scalable LDPC decoder ASIC architecture with bit-serial message exchange", Integr. VLSI J., 2008, pp.385-398
[12] S. Jin, W. Zhong feng, G. Minglun, L. Li, "Multi-Gb/s LDPC Code Design and Implementation ", Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, IEEE Transactions on, 2009, pp. 262-268
[13] L. Jong-Yeol , R. Hye-Jin, "A I-Gb/s flexible LDPC decoder supporting multiple code rates and block lengths", Consumer Electronics, IEEE Transactions on, 2008, pp. 4 I7-424
[14] M. Korb, 1. G. Noll, "Towards a scaling model for fair benchmarking ofLDPC decoder architectures ", www.eecs.rwth-aachen.de
[15] O. WeiB, M. Gansen, T.G. Noll, "A flexible datapath generator for physical oriented design '', Solid-State Circuits Conference, Proceedings of the 27st European, ESSCIRC, 2001 , pp. 393-396

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:17:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

