IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2009

4099

Analysis of Connections Between Pseudocodewords
Nathan Axvig, Deanna Dreher, Katherine Morrison, Eric Psota, Student Member, IEEE, Lance C. Pérez, Senior Member, IEEE, and Judy L. Walker, Member, IEEE

Abstract—The role of pseudocodewords in causing non-codeword outputs in linear programming decoding, graph cover decoding, and iterative message-passing decoding is investigated. The three main types of pseudocodewords in the literature—linear programming pseudocodewords, graph cover pseudocodewords, and computation tree pseudocodewords—are reviewed and connections between them are explored. Some discrepancies in the literature on minimal and irreducible pseudocodewords are highlighted and clarified, and the minimal degree cover necessary to realize a pseudocodeword is found. Additionally, some conditions for the existence of connected realizations of graph cover pseudocodewords are given. This allows for further analysis of when graph cover pseudocodewords induce computation tree pseudocodewords. Finally, an example is offered that shows that existing theories on the distinction between graph cover pseudocodewords and computation tree pseudocodewords are incomplete.
Index Terms—Graph cover decoding, iterative message-passing decoding, linear programming decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, pseudocodewords.

I. INTRODUCTION

T HE discovery of turbo codes [1] and the subsequent rediscovery of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [2], [3]

represent a major milestone in the field of coding theory. These

two classes of codes can achieve bit-error rates between

and

on the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) and

related channels with signal-to-noise ratios that are only slightly

above the minimum possible for a given channel and code rate

established by Shannon’s original capacity theorems [4]. Per-

haps the most important commonality between turbo and LDPC

codes is that each utilizes iterative message-passing decoding

algorithms for practical decoding of large codes. Thus, it is of

primary importance to understand the behavior of iterative mes-

sage-passing decoding algorithms and, in particular, to under-

stand the non-codeword outputs that occur in computer simula-

tions of LDPC codes with iterative message-passing algorithms.

Motivated by empirical observations of the non-codeword

output of LDPC decoders, the notion of stopping sets was first

introduced by Forney et al. [5] in 2001. Two years later, a formal

definition of stopping sets was given by Changyan et al. [6].

Manuscript received April 01, 2008; revised December 11, 2008. Current version published August 19, 2009.
N. Axvig, D. Dreher, K. Morrison, and J. L. Walker are with the Department of Mathematics, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE 68588-0130 USA (e-mail: s-naxvig1@math.unl.edu; s-dturk1@math.unl.edu; s-kmorri11@math.unl.edu; jwalker@math.unl.edu).
E. Psota and L. C. Pérez are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE 68588-0511 USA (e-mail: epsota24@huskers.unl.edu; lperez@unl.edu).
Communicated by T. Etzion, Associate Editor for Coding Theory.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2009.2025529

They demonstrated that the bit- and block-error probabilities of iteratively decoded LDPC codes on the binary erasure channel (BEC) can be determined exactly from the stopping sets of the parity-check matrix. Work relating pseudocodewords to stopping sets for the BEC [5], the binary symmetric channel (BSC), and the AWGN channel [7] has revealed a relationship between pseudocodeword weight and stopping set size. However, the current notions of stopping sets and pseudocodewords do not completely characterize the performance and non-codeword outputs of iterative decoders on the BSC and AWGN channels.
In his dissertation [8], Wiberg provides the foundation for analyzing these errors by turning to an analysis of computation trees. Even with these insights, theoretical analyses of the convergence of iterative message-passing decoding have thus far been scarce. (A notable exception is the work done on density evolution [9], [10], which considers ensembles of LDPC codes rather than individual codes.) Meanwhile, linear programming (LP) decoding has strong heuristic ties to iterative message-passing decoding by way of graph cover decoding, and its analysis has proven much more attractive from a theoretical standpoint [11]. The common finding across all analyses of these decoders is that pseudocodewords play a significant role in determining convergence of the decoder and in understanding the non-codeword outputs that arise.
The focus of this paper is to further examine the three common notions of pseudocodewords—linear programming pseudocodewords, graph cover pseudocodewords, and computation tree pseudocodewords—and further elucidate relationships between these pseudocodewords. In particular, we examine properties of graph cover pseudocodewords and LP pseudocodewords that allow the translation of findings from this significant body of research to the analysis of the behavior of iterative message-passing decoders and computation tree pseudocodewords.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we give some relevant definitions and terminology, with a focus on computation tree, graph cover, and LP pseudocodewords and characterizations of each. Section III then examines the influence of minimal and irreducible graph cover pseudocodewords and provides a counterexample to an assertion in the literature regarding the equivalence of these two kinds of pseudocodewords. We also establish the value of the minimal degree cover necessary to realize an LP pseudocodeword. Section IV then focuses on the relationship between graph cover pseudocodewords and computation tree pseudocodewords, with an eye towards compactly describing the set of computation tree pseudocodewords. In particular, Section IV-A turns toward finding graphical realizations of graph cover pseudocodewords that may induce computation tree pseudocodewords. And in

0018-9448/$26.00 © 2009 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:15:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4100

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2009

Section IV-B, we explore the converse of this by examining which computation tree pseudocodewords are induced by realizations of graph cover pseudocodewords.

II. BACKGROUND AND MATHEMATICAL PRELIMINARIES
The success of LDPC codes stems from the fact that these codes come equipped with a bipartite graph on which the extremely efficient iterative message-passing algorithms operate. This graph is called the Tanner graph of the code, a notion whose definition we now recall.

Definition 2.1: A Tanner graph is a finite bipartite graph

. We call the set of variable nodes of

and the set of check nodes of . A (valid) configuration on

a Tanner graph is an assignment

of ’s and ’s

to the variable nodes of such that, at each check node of

, the binary sum of the values at the neighbors of is . The

collection of configurations on a Tanner graph is called the

(LDPC) code determined by .

Fig. 1. A Tanner graph and a corresponding 2-cover.

Let

be a Tanner graph. Since is finite,

we can identify a configuration on with a vector in , where

. The code determined by is the collection of all

such vectors, and it is easy to check that this code is linear of

length and dimension at least , where

.

A significant problem of practical interest is to transmit a

codeword of some code across a noisy channel and then

to compute an estimate based on the channel output; in this

paper, we will assume the codeword is transmitted using binary

antipodal modulation across the AWGN channel. The process

of computing the estimate is called decoding, which can re-

sult in any of the following three outcomes

1)

, called a decoding success

2)

, called a decoding error

3)

, where

, called a decoding failure.

In this paper, we will focus on decoding failures and the re-

sulting non-codeword outputs of the decoder.

Wiberg [8] shows that the non-codeword outputs of itera-

tive message-passing decoders such as sum-product (SP) and

Moreover, except for the variable nodes at level

, the

computation tree locally looks like the original Tanner graph

: if

is an edge in , then every copy of (above level

) in the computation tree is adjacent to exactly one copy

of and every copy of in the computation tree is adjacent to

exactly one copy of .

For MS and SP decoding, the decoder considers as competi-

tors all valid configurations on

computation trees

[8] and outputs a vector whose th entry is the value assigned

to the root node by a minimal cost configuration on a com-

putation tree rooted at variable node ; the precise cost func-

tion depends on the particular iterative message-passing decoder

chosen, and Wiberg gives explicit definitions for the cost func-

tions for both MS and SP decoding. Note that, for each code-

word

and for each computation tree of ,

the assignment of to each copy of in determines a con-

figuration on . However, there are also configurations that do

not correspond to codewords. This motivates the next definition.

min-sum (MS) are caused by configurations on finite computa- Definition 2.3 ([8]): Let be a Tanner graph. A computa-

tion trees associated to the Tanner graph. As computation tree tion tree pseudocodeword for is any valid configuration on

pseudocodewords will be one major focus of this paper, we now any computation tree for . A nontrivial computation tree pseu-

make these notions precise.

docodeword is a computation tree pseudocodeword that does

Definition 2.2 ([8]): Let be a Tanner graph, and assume not correspond to a codeword.

an iterative message-passing algorithm has been run on for a Because iterative message-passing decoders operate on com-

total of iterations, where a single iteration consists of message putation trees that, above the bottom level, are locally identical

passing from the variable nodes to the check nodes and then to the original Tanner graph, these decoders do not distinguish

back to the variable nodes. The depth computation tree for between the Tanner graph itself and any finite, unramified cover

with root node is the tree obtained by tracing the computation of the Tanner graph. This intuition leads one to consider graph

of the final cost function of the algorithm at the variable node cover pseudocodewords. To make this precise, we first must de-

of recursively back through time.

fine what we mean by a cover of the Tanner graph; an example

It should be noted that the structure of the computation tree of a Tanner graph and one of its -covers is given in Fig. 1.

depends upon the particular choice of scheduling used in the Definition 2.4: An unramified cover, or simply a cover, of a

iterative message-passing algorithm. However, a computation finite graph is a graph along with a surjective graph homo-

tree of depth can always be drawn as a tree with

morphism

, called a covering map, such that for each

levels, labeled from to , where the th level consists only of

and each

, the neighborhood of is mapped

the root node, each even-numbered level contains only variable bijectively to the neighborhood of . For a positive integer ,

nodes, and each odd-numbered level contains only check nodes. an -cover of is the cover

such that for each

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:15:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

AXVIG et al.: ANALYSIS OF CONNECTIONS BETWEEN PSEUDOCODEWORDS

4101

vertex of

contains exactly vertices of . If is

an -cover of , we say the degree of is .

We say that a graph is connected if, for any two vertices

of , there is a path

from to

in . In the remainder of this paper, we will consider only

connected graphs.

Given a Tanner graph with variable nodes

and

an -cover

of , we label the elements of

as

. The code determined by has length ,

and we write a codeword

in terms of its coordinates as

Definition 2.5: Let be a Tanner graph for a binary linear

code and let

be a

codeword in some code corresponding to some -cover of

. Two kinds of graph cover pseudocodewords are associated

to : The unscaled graph cover pseudocodeword corresponding

to is the vector

For a given vector of log-likelihoods mined by the channel output and for any
, the cost of is given by

deter-

LP decoding is defined to be the task of minimizing over

all

.

Since the cost function is linear and the polytope is defined by

linear inequalities, the output of linear programming decoding

may always be taken to be a vertex of the fundamental polytope.

Feldman [12] shows that a vector in

is a vertex of the

fundamental polytope if and only if it is a codeword. This mo-

tivates the following definition.

Definition 2.7: A linear programming pseudocodeword of a

code defined by the parity-check matrix is any vertex of the

fundamental polytope

. A nontrivial linear programming

pseudocodeword is a linear programming pseudocodeword that

is not a codeword.

of nonnegative integers, where, for

,

Feldman shows in [12] that linear programming decoding has the ML-certificate property, which guarantees that if LP

#

decoding returns a codeword, this codeword is an ML codeword. Additionally, he shows that when LP decoding and ML decoding

The normalized graph cover pseudocodeword corresponding to disagree, the output of LP decoding is an LP pseudocodeword,

is the vector

indicating that LP pseudocodewords are responsible for the

difference between these two decoders. It is not immediately

clear from this, however, if LP and ML decoding disagree in the

presence of LP pseudocodewords simply because ML decoding

Since the Tanner graph is a -cover of itself, every codeword is both an unscaled and a normalized graph cover pseudocodeword. A nontrivial graph cover pseudocodeword is a graph cover pseudocodeword that is not a codeword in .
Intuitively, all codewords on all covers of the Tanner graph are competitors in iterative message-passing decoding algorithms. In this vein, Vontobel and Koetter [11] define graph cover decoding; this decoder simultaneously considers all codewords on all covers of the Tanner graph and then returns the normalized graph cover pseudocodeword corresponding to the one which, in a certain precise sense, provides the best explanation of the channel output. They show that graph cover decoding is equivalent to LP decoding, as defined by Feldman [12]. We now turn to the formal definition of LP decoding.

Definition 2.6 ([12]): Let

be the

parity-

check matrix with corresponding Tanner graph , and, for

, set

is restricted to only outputting codewords while LP decoding is able to output pseudocodewords as well, or if they disagree because their decision rules are fundamentally different. It turns out that the latter explanation is true, as we will now explain.
Recall that on the AWGN channel, ML decoding is based on the squared Euclidean distance between modulated points. To determine whether the fundamental difference between LP and ML decoding is merely the collection of competitors each considers, we introduce a new decoding rule: generalized maximum-likelihood (GML) decoding. This rule minimizes the squared Euclidean distance between the received vector and any modulated vertex of the fundamental polytope. It is not difficult to show [13, Theorem 2.2] that whenever there exist nontrivial LP pseudocodewords, not only does LP decoding disagree with ML decoding, but it also disagrees with GML decoding as a result of fundamentally different decision rules. Thus, we see that LP pseudocodewords are essential to understanding the nonoptimality of LP decoding, and because of their ties to graph cover

pseudocodewords they may aid in understanding the nonopti-

mality of iterative message-passing decoding algorithms as well.

so that

is the set of variable nodes adjacent to check node

in . The fundamental polytope

is the subset

of the unit hypercube

consisting of all vectors

such that for

and each

subset

with odd, we have

Vontobel and Koetter demonstrate the relationship between LP and graph cover pseudocodewords by proving that the collection of rational points in the fundamental polytope is precisely the collection of graph cover pseudocodewords [11, Proposition 10]. Thus, with the definitions here, every linear programming pseudocodeword is a normalized graph cover

pseudocodeword, but not vice versa. An additional characteri-

zation of the set of graph cover pseudocodewords is given by

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:15:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4102

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2009

Koetter, Li, Vontobel, and Walker [14]: a vector of nonnega-

tive integers is an unscaled graph cover pseudocodeword if and

only if it reduces modulo to a codeword and it lies within the

fundamental cone

where

Example 3.4: Let be the null space of

for all for all

so that given by

The connection between these two characterizations of graph cover pseudocodewords is clear, given the observation that the fundamental cone is the conic hull of the fundamental polytope [11].

. The fundamental cone is

III. MINIMAL AND IRREDUCIBLE PSEUDOCODEWORDS
To further examine the impact of graph cover pseudocodewords, we will mimic the consideration in the classical coding case of minimal codewords, i.e., codewords whose supports do not properly contain the support of any nonzero codeword. In particular, we examine different extensions of the theory of minimal codewords to graph cover (and hence LP) pseudocodewords.

The cone can be seen as a two-dimensional cone embedded in

, and the edges are the half-rays

and

.

If

with and being nonzero nonnegative

integer vectors, then must have at least one coordinate that is

and one coordinate that is , and hence is not a pseudocodeword

since it will not reduce modulo to a codeword [14]. This means

that

is an irreducible pseudocodeword, but it is not a

minimal pseudocodeword, since it does not lie on an edge of

Definition 3.1 ([11]): A minimal pseudocodeword is a pseu-

docodeword such that

is an edge of the

fundamental cone.

Here, by edges of the fundamental cone, we mean a set of half-rays through the origin whose conic hull is the fundamental cone, with the property that no proper subset of this set has the fundamental cone as its conic hull.
A similar generalization is presented in [15].

the fundamental cone. Additionally, since

is an irre-

ducible pseudocodeword that is also a codeword, it is actually a

minimal codeword, even though it is not a minimal pseudocode-

word.

Thus, we see that while the notions of minimal and irreducible

pseudocodewords may prove important in different contexts,

such as in determining which pseudocodewords are more likely

to cause errors [15], the conflation of these terms is inaccurate

and may hinder further analysis of the set of graph cover pseu-

Definition 3.2 ([15]): An unscaled pseudocodeword is irreducible if it cannot be written as a nontrivial sum of other unscaled pseudocodewords.
Note that while a minimal pseudocodeword can refer to either a normalized or unscaled pseudocodeword, an irreducible pseudocodeword can only refer to an unscaled pseudocodeword.

docodewords. As mentioned above, Kelley and Sridhara [15] suggest
that irreducible pseudocodewords are more likely than other pseudocodewords to cause linear programming/graph cover decoding to fail to converge. Motivated by this, they examine bounds on the smallest degree cover needed to realize an irreducible pseudocodeword. With this question in mind, we

Remark 3.3: If an irreducible pseudocodeword is actually make the following definition.

a codeword, then cannot be written as a nontrivial sum of codewords and we will call an irreducible codeword. With this terminology, irreducible codewords coincide precisely with minimal codewords. Additionally, if is irreducible as a codeword, then is also irreducible as a pseudocodeword because if
were the sum of unscaled pseudocodewords then each of those pseudocodewords must consist of only zeros and ones and thus must be codewords themselves [14], which contradicts the irreducibility of . Hence, a vector is an irreducible codeword if and only if it is a minimal codeword, if and only if it is a trivial irreducible pseudocodeword.
It is important to note that although the terms irreducible pseudocodeword and minimal pseudocodeword are sometimes used interchangeably, the notions do not necessarily coincide. If is a minimal pseudocodeword, then is also a minimal pseudocodeword but it is not irreducible. Conversely, irre-

Definition 3.5: A normalized graph cover pseudocodeword

for the Tanner graph is minimally realizable on the cover

of if there is a configuration on such that

1)

, and

2) whenever has a realization on an -cover of , we have

, where is the degree of .

We find an exact value for the degree of a minimal realization of a normalized graph cover pseudocodeword in Proposition 3.7 below, under the assumption we are given the coordinates of the graph cover pseudocodeword as a point in Feldman’s extended polytope [12], rather than simply in the fundamental polytope. We first recall the definition of the extended polytope.

Definition 3.6 ([12]): Let

be an parity-check

matrix and let

be the fundamental polytope of ,

as described in Definition 2.6 above. For

, set

ducible pseudocodewords may not be minimal, as seen in the

next example.

is even

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:15:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

AXVIG et al.: ANALYSIS OF CONNECTIONS BETWEEN PSEUDOCODEWORDS

4103

where as before

and write

. Label the coordinates of

as

and

, and let

be the subset of consisting of those even-sized subsets of

that contain . The th local extended polytope of is the

polytope

and the extended polytope of is the polytope
We define a minimal realization of a point in the extended polytope in an analogous fashion to Definition 3.5 above.
Proposition 3.7: Let be a rational point in the extended polytope and let be the degree of a minimal realization of . Then is the smallest positive integer such that each coordinate of is a nonnegative integer.
Proof: For any positive integer such that is a vector of integers, Feldman [12] gives a construction that yields a realization of . We will show that this realization occurs on a -cover.
Since
we have

where each

is an integer. Feldman’s construction

gives that for each

, there are copies of check node

which are satisfied via the configuration . This constraint

implies that there are total copies of check node , i.e., that the

realization occurs on a -cover.

By hypothesis, is realizable on an -cover so must

be a vector of integers. Furthermore, must be the smallest

number such that is a vector of integers, since if this held for

some

then, by the argument above, would be realizable

on a -cover, contradicting the minimality of .

IV. CONNECTIONS BETWEEN GRAPH COVER AND COMPUTATION TREE PSEUDOCODEWORDS
While intuitive links between linear programming/graph cover decoding and iterative message-passing decoding have been proposed, the only proven analysis of iterative messagepassing decoding on finite-length LDPC codes hails from the fundamental work of Wiberg [8]. He establishes that iterative message-passing algorithms actually work by finding minimal cost configurations on computation trees, and so it is essential to further examine computation tree pseudocodewords to gain a more precise understanding of the errors that arise in iterative message-passing decoding. However, further analysis of computation tree pseudocodewords has proven difficult, largely because one generally cannot enumerate or easily describe the set of these pseudocodewords. On the other hand, this has been one of the major advantages of graph cover pseudocodewords: as mentioned above, multiple compact characterizations of graph cover pseudocodewords have been found, such as the fundamental cone and fundamental polytope. This has led us to investigate the relationship between graph cover pseudocodewords and computation tree pseudocodewords with the goal of using the various characterizations of graph cover pseudocodewords to yield a compact description of the set of computation tree pseudocodewords. In Section IV-A, we investigate which graph cover pseudocodewords can give rise to computation tree pseudocodewords. In particular, since computation trees are necessarily connected, we focus on the existence of connected realizations of graph cover pseudocodewords. In Section IV-B, we explore which computation tree pseudocodewords are induced by these connected realizations of graph cover pseudocodewords.
A. Connected Realizations of Pseudocodewords
In this subsection, we provide sets of conditions under which graph cover pseudocodewords are minimally realizable on connected covers. Connectivity of the cover is vital in order to analyze the relationship between LP/graph cover decoding and iterative message-passing decoding algorithms because the latter operate on computation trees, which are inherently connected. The following example illustrates that not every graph cover pseudocodeword can be realized on a connected cover, and thus not all graph cover pseudocodewords may influence iterative message-passing decoders.
Example 4.1: Consider the Tanner graph which is an -cycle with vertices alternating between being check nodes and variable nodes. The code determined by is the binary
repetition code with parity-check matrix

Proposition 3.7 can be extended to describe the minimum

degree realization of any vector with rational entries in the fundamental polytope whenever we can construct a corre-

The fundamental polytope is

sponding in the extended polytope. Feldman [12] establishes

that such an always exists, and Vontobel and Koetter [11] give The only connected covers of are -cycles for

,

a method for constructing under particular circumstances, and so the only unscaled graph cover pseudocodewords that

namely, when it is already known how to express as a convex have connected realizations are those of the form

linear combination of vectors in that satisfy a given check and

for

. Thus, the only normalized

node.

graph cover pseudocodewords with connected realizations are

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:15:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4104

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2009

and

. In particular, no rational point of

that is not a vertex of has a connected graph cover realization.

Although Example 4.1 shows that there are situations in which some points in the interior of the polytope cannot be realized on a connected cover of the original Tanner graph, we know that linear programming decoding (and, hence, graph cover decoding) will always output a vertex of the fundamental polytope. In Example 4.1, these vertices do have connected realizations. This phenomenon happens in general, as shown in the next proposition which originally appeared in the conference paper [16].

Proposition 4.2 ([16], Proposition 3.3): Let be a Tanner

graph with corresponding fundamental polytope . Suppose

is a vertex of , and let

be a realization of . Let

be the connected components of , so that is an

-cover of for

, with

,

and

, where is a configuration on . Then

is a connected realization of for

. In other

words, every graph cover realization of a vertex of the funda-

mental polytope is either connected or the disjoint union of con-

nected graph cover realizations of the vertex. In particular, every

minimal realization of every vertex of the fundamental polytope

is connected.

Proof: Set

for

. Then, looking at the

unscaled graph cover pseudocodewords, we have

Dividing through by gives

Since

for each and

Proof: Let notation be as in the statement of the lemma for

. Notice that to show that

is con-

nected, it suffices to show that there is a path in

from to for any

. So fix and let

.

Since is a spanning tree for , there is a path on from

to

. Then is a cycle on containing

and . By [17, Theorem 2.4.3],

consists of a disjoint

union of cycles that project onto . Since

, there is a cycle in

containing . Since

projects onto and is contained in , we see that does

not contain for any and hence does not contain for

any . Thus,

is still connected,

and so

contains a path from to in

.

Theorem 4.4: Let be a Tanner graph with average variable

node degree and average check node degree . Suppose that

either

and

, or

and

. Then any ra-

tional point in the fundamental polytope of can be minimally

realized on a connected cover.

Proof: Let be a rational point in the fundamental poly-

tope of . Then is a normalized graph cover pseudocode-

word [11] and so is minimally realizable on an -cover for

some . Let

be a realization on an -cover with a min-

imal number of connected components. By way of contradic-

tion, suppose is not connected, and let

and

be distinct connected components of . We will

give an algorithm for connecting these two components and

, demonstrating that is, in fact, realizable on a cover with

fewer connected components.

Let be any spanning tree of . We will first show that there

exists a check node

that is incident to at least two

edges not on . Assume, for the purpose of contradiction, that

every check node is incident to at most one edge that is not on

. If the check nodes are

, then we see the number

of edges on is at least

(IV.1)

we have written as a convex combination of

. But

each is a normalized graph cover pseudocodeword and hence

is in [11, Proposition 10], and so each

is too since

. Since is a vertex of the polytope, this forces each to lie

on the line segment from the origin to , i.e.,

for some

rational numbers

. So we have

which means

.

Hence,

for each , i.e.,

for all .

(IV.2) (IV.3)

since the sum of the check node degrees must be the total

number of edges in , which is equal to .

On the other hand, if there are variable nodes and check

nodes on , then has

vertices and so the number of

edges on any spanning tree for is

. The number of

edges in is

, and so

and we have that the

number of edges on is

Theorem 4.4 below gives another sufficient condition for con- Putting this together with the bound on the number of edges nected realizations of graph cover pseudocodewords to exist. in given in (IV.3), we see that The next lemma will be used in the proof.

Lemma 4.3: Let be a Tanner graph, let be a spanning

tree of , and suppose

are edges in not in . Let

be any finite connected cover of , and let

Thus

be a fixed lift of to for each

. Then

is connected.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:15:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

AXVIG et al.: ANALYSIS OF CONNECTIONS BETWEEN PSEUDOCODEWORDS

4105

and so

Rearranging this we see

In the case where

, we have

, hence

which implies that

. By assumption,

, and so we

have a contradiction. A similar contradiction is reached in the

case where

and

.

Thus, there is some check node of such that at least two

edges

incident to are not on . Let

and

be fixed lifts of and ,

respectively, to and let

and

be fixed lifts of and , respectively, to . By Lemma 4.3,

and

are connected.

For any variable node of , let denote the bit as-

signment receives from the configuration

. If

, then crossing the edges and does not change the

check sum at or and results in and becoming a

single connected component. In other words,

is a minimal realization of with fewer com-

ponents than , a contradiction. We get a similar contradiction

if

.

Finally, assume

and

.

Then

. This

means that crossing both with and with does

not change the binary check sum at or at , and again

results in and becoming a single connected component,

i.e.,

is a minimal realization of on a cover with fewer connected

components than , a contradiction.

Since, in each case, assuming and are distinct connected

components of leads to a minimal realization of on a cover

with fewer connected components than , there must be a min-

imal realization of on a connected cover of .

Remark 4.5: It should be noted that while the conditions given in Theorem 4.4 may sound rather restrictive, most practical codes actually satisfy these conditions. Tanner graphs with many check nodes of degree two or less are not generally practical since these check nodes unnecessarily decrease the rate of the code. Furthermore, closer examination of the proof of Theorem 4.4 reveals that the restrictions given in the statement of that theorem can even be loosened to include any graphs whose average variable node degree and average check node degree
satisfy

Fig. 2. The Tanner graph T of Example 4.7.

B. Computation Tree Pseudocodewords Induced by Graph Cover Pseudocodewords

As outlined above, every graph cover pseudocodeword that has a connected realization induces a computation tree pseudocodeword. It is not known, however, whether every computation tree configuration is the result of a truncated graph cover configuration. Thus, there may be computation tree pseudocodewords that cause errors in iterative message-passing decoding that are unrelated to graph cover configurations. This may yield one explanation for the inconsistent behavior of MS decoding versus LP/graph cover decoding observed across simulations [16]. Kelley and Sridhara [15] give a characterization of computation tree pseudocodewords that arise from graph cover pseudocodewords. As we will see, this characterization is not complete. We first give a brief review of the work of Kelley and Sridhara [15] in this direction, starting with the notion of a consistent configuration on a computation tree for the Tanner graph .

Definition 4.6 ([15]): Let be a computation tree of and let

be a configuration on . For a variable node

and for a

check node

, define the local assignment of at by the

configuration , denoted

, to be the average of the values

assigns to all copies of in that are adjacent to a copy of in

. The configuration is called consistent if, for each

,

we have

for all

.

Suppose that is a computation tree of that contains at

least one copy of each check node of , and suppose that

has variable nodes

. A consistent configuration on

gives rise to a vector

, where

for arbitrary

. Note that is well defined by the

consistency of [15]. The consistency of also gives us that

satisfies each of the local check constraints in the fundamental

polytope, since

comes from an average of valid local

configurations on

for any check node that is adjacent

to . Since the fundamental polytope is the intersection of all

vectors satisfying all of the local check constraints for every

check node , we see that is an element of the fundamental

polytope, and hence realizable on a finite cover of [15]. An

example of a valid configuration on a computation tree that is

not consistent is shown in Example 4.7.

Example 4.7 (See Also [15]): Let be the Tanner graph of

Fig. 2. Then the code determined by is the

repetition

Thus, the theorem applies to the majority of practical codes as code. This realization of the repetition code allows for both non-

well as a significant portion of cycle codes.

trivial computation tree pseudocodewords as well as connected

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:15:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4106

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2009

Fig. 3. A computation tree of depth 2 rooted at x for the Tanner graph T in Fig. 2. Labels on the check nodes are omitted for clarity. An inconsistent binary assignment c is shown on the tree, where the circled variable nodes are set to “1” and the others to “0.”

Fig. 4. A configuration on a 4-cover of the Tanner graph T given in Fig. 2. Circled nodes have a binary value of “1,” and other nodes have a binary value of “0.”

TABLE I
VALUES OF L (x ; f ), WITH c AS GIVEN IN FIG. 3

length four that we may associate to it and hence no graph cover pseudocodeword corresponds to it in this manner. In a different

sense, however, the configuration in Fig. 3 can be considered as

being induced by a graph cover pseudocodeword. More specifi-

cally, the Tanner graph in Fig. 4 is a -cover of the Tanner graph

in Fig. 2, and so the configuration in Fig. 4 is a realization of a

graph cover pseudocodeword. By rooting a computation tree at

the top-left variable node in Fig. 4, one can derive the inconsis-

tent computation tree configuration of Fig. 3 from the configura-

tion given in Fig. 4. Thus, the computation tree pseudocodeword

of Fig. 3 is, in this sense, induced by a graph cover pseudocode-

word. We see then that the criterion of consistency gives an in-

complete characterization of the distinction between computa-

tion tree pseudocodewords and graph cover pseudocodewords.

Furthermore, we conjecture that every computation tree pseu-

realizations of graph cover pseudocodewords that are not vertices of the fundamental polytope. Fig. 3 shows one such nontrivial computation tree pseudocodeword for .

docodeword is induced by a graph cover pseudocodeword, thus strengthening the notion that characterizations of graph cover pseudocodewords may be utilized to compactly describe the set of computation tree pseudocodewords.

Table I gives values of

for

and

It is clear that in order to study the relationship between linear

. If the variable node is not adjacent to the check programming/graph cover decoding and iterative message-

node , no value of

is given. Since there is at least passing decoders, one must better understand the relationship

one column in this table that contains differing values, the con- between graph covers and computation trees, and thus the no-

figuration given in Fig. 3 is not consistent.

tion of consistency or other characterizations of the distinctions

Since the configuration in Fig. 3 is not consistent, Kelley and between computation tree and graph cover pseudocodewords

Sridhara [15] point out that there is no meaningful vector of must be further explored.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:15:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

AXVIG et al.: ANALYSIS OF CONNECTIONS BETWEEN PSEUDOCODEWORDS

4107

V. CONCLUSION
This paper has examined relationships between the three main types of pseudocodewords in the literature: linear programming pseudocodewords, graph cover pseudocodewords, and computation tree pseudocodewords. We further explored the role of particular subsets of graph cover pseudocodewords, namely, minimal and irreducible pseudocodewords, and elucidated a discrepancy in the literature that resulted from the conflation of these terms. Additionally, we presented results describing conditions under which connected realizations of graph cover pseudocodewords exist, and we examined when graph cover pseudocodewords correspond to computation tree pseudocodewords and vice versa. A number of open questions still remain as highlighted by this analysis. Further investigation is necessary to determine the roles of minimal and irreducible pseudocodewords, keeping in mind that these notions are distinct. The relationship between graph cover pseudocodewords and computation tree pseudocodewords must also be further examined in order to reach our final goal of fully understanding the non-codeword decoder errors of iterative message-passing decoders.

[17] J. L. Gross and T. W. Tucker, Topological Graph Theory. Mineola, NY: Dover , 2001, reprint of the 1987 original [Wiley, New York; MR0898434 (88h:05034)] with a new preface and supplementary bibliography.
Nathan Axvig received the B.S. degree in mathematics from the University of North Dakota, Grand Forks, ND, in 2005 and the M.S. degree in mathematics from the University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE, in 2007.
He is currently working towards the Ph.D. degree in mathematics at the University of Nebraska, Lincoln. His research interests lie in error control coding and graph theory.
Deanna Dreher received the B.S. degree in mathematics from the University of Northern Colorado, Greeley, CO, in 2004. She received the M.S. degree in mathematics from the University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE, in 2005.
She participated in the Graduate Mathematics Program at the National Security Agency in 2007 and is currently working towards the Ph.D. degree in mathematics with a minor in electrical engineering at the University of Nebraska, Lincoln. Her research interests are in the area of error control coding and graph theory, particularly in the study of graph-based codes and iterative message-passing decoding schemes.

REFERENCES
[1] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding,” in Proc. 1993 IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, Geneva, Switzerland, 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[2] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low-density parity check codes,” IEE Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.
[4] C. E. Shannon, “A mathematical theory of communication,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 27, pp. 379–423, 623–656, Jul., Oct. 1948.
[5] G. D. Forney, Jr., R. Koetter, F. R. Kschischang, and A. Reznik, “On the effective weights of pseudocodewords for codes defined on graphs with cycles,” in Codes, Systems, and Graphical Models, ser. IMA Vol. Math. Appl. New York/Minneapolis, NY/MN: Springer, 1999, 2001, vol. 123, pp. 101–112.
[6] D. Changyan, D. Proetti, I. E. Telatar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Finite length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[7] C. Kelley, D. Sridhara, J. Xu, and J. Rosenthal, “Pseudocodeword weights and stopping sets,” in Proc. 2004 IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Chicago, IL, Jun./Jul. 2004, p. 150.
[8] N. Wiberg, “Codes and Decoding on General Graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Linköping Univ., Linköping, Sweden, 1996.
[9] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[10] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[11] P. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Graph-cover decoding and finite-length analysis of message-passing iterative decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, to be published.
[12] J. Feldman, “Decoding Error-Correcting Codes via Linear Programming,” Ph.D. dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, MA, 2003.
[13] N. Axvig, K. Morrison, E. Psota, D. Dreher, L. C. Pérez, and J. L. Walker, Towards a Universal Theory of Decoding and Pseudocodewords University of Nebraska-Lincoln, SGER Tech. Rep. 0801, Mar. 2008 [Online]. Available: http://www.math.unl.edu/~jwalker7/papers/ SGER_tech_report.pdf
[14] R. Koetter, W.-C. W. Li, P. O. Vontobel, and J. L. Walker, “Characterizations of pseudo-codewords of LDPC codes,” Adv. Math., vol. 213, pp. 205–229, 2007.
[15] C. Kelley and D. Sridhara, “Pseudocodewords of Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 4013–4038, Nov. 2007.
[16] N. Axvig, E. Price, E. Psota, D. Turk, L. Pérez, and J. Walker, “A universal theory of pseudocodewords,” in Proc. 45th Ann. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, Sept. 2007, pp. 336–343.

Katherine Morrison received the B.A. degrees in mathematics and psychology from Swarthmore College, Swarthmore, PA, in 2005. She received the M.S. degree in mathematics from the University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE, in 2008.
She is currently working towards the Ph.D. degree in mathematics with a minor in electrical engineering at the University of Nebraska, Lincoln. Her research interests include error control coding, network coding, and graph theory.
Eric Psota (S’05) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE, in 2004 and 2006, respectively.
He is currently working towards the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Nebraska, Lincoln. His research interests include digital communication systems, signal processing, error control coding, network coding, image processing, multiview geometric imaging systems, and computer vision.
Lance C. Pérez (M’87–SM’01) received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, in 1987 and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, in 1989 and 1995, respectively.
Since 1996, he has been with the Department of Electrical Engineering at the University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE, where he is currently an Associate Professor. He is the coauthor, with Christian B. Schlegel, of the book Trellis and Turbo Coding published by IEEE Press/Wiley. His research interests are in error control coding, communication and information theory, and applications of wireless communications to assistive technology.
Dr. Pérez is a past recipient of a National Science Foundation CAREER Award. He is a member of the IEEE Information Theory, Communication, and Education societies. He is also a member of Eta Kappa Nu and Tau Beta Pi.
Judy L. Walker (M’96) received the B.S. degree from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, in 1990, and the M.S. and the Ph.D. degrees from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, in 1992 and 1996, all in mathematics.
She has been with the University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE, since 1996 and currently serves as Professor and Graduate Chair of the Department of Mathematics. Her research interests are in algebraic coding theory, including algebraic aspects of codes on graphs and algebraic geometry codes.
Dr. Walker is a member of the American Mathematical Society (AMS), the Association for Women in Mathematics (AWM), and the Mathematical Association of America (MAA). She has served as an elected member of both the AMS Council and the AWM Executive Committee. She was awarded the Deborah and Franklin Tepper Haimo Award for Distinguished Teaching by the MAA in 2006 and will serve as the MAA’s Polya Lecturer for 2009–2011.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:15:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

