Rate-Compatible Punctured DVB-S2 LDPC Codes for DVB-SH Applications

Miha Smolnikar, Tomaz Javornik, Mihael Mohorcic
Department of Communication Systems Jozef Stefan Institute Ljubljana, Slovenia
{Miha.Smolnikar, Tomaz.Javornik, Miha.Mohorcic}@ijs.si

Stylianos Papaharalabos, P. Takis Mathiopoulos
Institute for Space Applications and Remote Sensing National Observatory of Athens Athens, Greece {spapaha, mathio}@space.noa.gr

Abstract—In this paper, we present and analyze three padding and puncturing schemes for DVB-S2 low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes, in order to obtain coding rates equivalent to DVB-SH specification (2/3, 1/2, 2/5, 1/3, 2/7, 1/4, 2/9 and 1/5). We compare the performance of punctured DVB-S2 LDPC codes against the 3GPP2 turbo codes. Simulation results for bit error rate (BER) and frame error rate (FER) show that the proposed coding schemes exhibit 0.5 dB to 0.75 dB penalty loss compared to 3GPP2 codes. The codes with random and deliberate puncturing show nearly the same performance in AWGN channel, while the optimal puncturing shows 0.2 dB better performance.
Keywords—low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, irregular repeat-accumulate (IRA) codes, DVB-SH standard, DVB-S2 standard, puncturing, padding, rate-compatible
I. INTRODUCTION
Digital Video Broadcasting - Satellite to Handheld (DVB-SH) is a transmission system standard designed to deliver multimedia and data services to small handheld devices, such as mobile phones and personal digital assistants (PDAs) [1]. Using S-band frequencies, a hybrid satellite/terrestrial architecture is employed with (i) a satellite to achieve wide coverage region and (ii) subordinate terrestrial gap fillers to cover the areas with inadequate satellite signal reception. In order to compensate for time-varying channel conditions, the 3rd Generation Partnership Project 2 (3GPP2) turbo codes with a specific frame size of 12282 bits have been selected for forward error correction (FEC) and combined with a highly flexible channel interleaver [2]. Handheld devices are characterised by limited processing capabilities and tight memory constraints, so an alternative FEC scheme based on rate-compatible irregular repeat-accumulate codes (RC-IRA) has been proposed for DVB-SH applications [3]. The main advantage of IRA codes as compared to turbo codes is in hardware implementation, where faster decoding and consequently higher data throughput can be achieved by the use of parallel decoding architectures. As shown in [3], RCIRA codes in principle exhibit better performance in terms of frame error rate (FER) than 3GPP2 turbo codes, with the absence of error floor at FER around 10-4.

IRA codes belong to the class of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. Thus, all their practical advantages with respect to turbo codes that were mentioned in the paragraph above are characteristic also for LDPC codes specified in the second generation Digital Video Broadcasting – Satellite (DVB-S2) standard. When combined with appropriate padding and puncturing techniques, DVB-S2 LDPC codes can be applied to DVB-SH system, which is the topic of research work presented in this paper. By adapting DVB-S2 LDPC codes the DVB-SH system can make use of several advantages, including the mature and efficient algorithms for DVB-S2 LDPC encoding and decoding, which are readily available in chipset implementations. Puncturing/depuncturing and padding/depadding operations are straightforward and introduce negligible additional computational complexity. However, due to padding and puncturing the performance can be slightly degraded with respect to the 3GPP2 turbo codes. Nevertheless, compared to 3GPP2 turbo codes the punctured DVB-S2 LDPC codes are expected to feature a good trade-off between performance and implementation complexity.
In this paper, we present random, deliberate and optimized padding and puncturing schemes, used to obtain DVB-SH compatible frame sizes and coding rates (i.e. 2/3, 1/2, 2/5, 1/3, 2/7, 1/4, 2/9 and 1/5) from the LDPC code defined in the DVBS2 standard. The resulting FER and bit error rate (BER) performances are compared with the 3GPP2 turbo [1] codes [3]. The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. In Section II LDPC and IRA codes are briefly introduced. Section III proposes three padding and puncturing schemes. A system model used for performance evaluation of puncturing schemes is described in Section IV, which also gives simulation results. Finally, Section V concludes the paper.
II. LDPC AND IRA CODES LDPC codes belong to a class of linear block codes and are defined by a sparse m×n parity check matrix H. The rows of parity check matrix represent the m party check equations, while n columns correspond to bits of the codeword. The LDPC codes are often illustrated by a bipartite Tanner graph, as shown in Fig. 1. The graph consists of two types of nodes, i.e. variable nodes and check nodes. Variable nodes correspond to bits in codeword and parity check nodes are defined by the

978-1-4244-3559-3/09/$25.00 ©2009 IEEE

IWSSC 2009

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:12:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 1. Tanner graph representation of an LDPC code.

Figure 2. Tanner graph representation of an IRA code.
parity check equations. A variable node i is connected to check node j by an edge, if the element hj,i of the parity check matrix H is equal to one.
IRA codes [4] are commonly considered as a special case of LDPC codes, though when published they were assumed as a completely distinct class of codes. In IRA codes, the data bits are first repeated, but not equal number of times as in the regular repeat and accumulated (RA) codes. For instance, the first sub-block of data bits is repeated twice, the second block of data bits is repeated three times, etc. Next, the repeated bits are interleaved, grouped and encoded by s single parity check rule. The parity bits of the single parity check encoder are encoded again using differential encoder or equivalent rate-1 convolutional encoder. The codeword consists of the data bits and the parity bits from the differential encoder, thus the resulting code is systematic. The most important advantage of IRA codes is that they achieve excellent coding performance at linear encoding and decoding complexity. The Tanner graph of IRA codes is shown in Fig. 2.







1









H



 

Info part

11 11





 







 

  

Degree 2parity 1part1

In the approach applied in this study we use the DVB-S2 LPDC code with coding rate rS2=1/4 as a mother code to generate all other coding rates specified by the DVB-SH standard. The structure of the parity check matrix H is

Figure 3. Basic principle of puncturing and pading.
presented in (1) and it consists of two parts, i.e. the part responsible for processing the info bits and the degree 2 parity part, responsible for differential encoding or accumulative operations in IRA codes.
III. PADDING AND PUNCTURING SCHEMES FOR DVB-S2 LDPC CODES
In order to adapt the coding rates of DVB-S2 LDPC codes to the DVB-SH coding rates we introduce the data bits padding and parity check bits puncturing for one codeword. The basic principle for DVB-SH coding rate rSH=1/4 is shown in Fig. 3. At the transmitter side, the block size of 12282 data bits is first padded with 3918 zeros to obtain the 16200 bit block size, which is then encoded by the DVB-S2 LDPC encoder with coding rate rS2=1/4. Padded bits, which do not contain any information, are removed from the block, and parity check bits are punctured to obtain DVB-SH compliant coding rate and frame structure. In the particular case shown in Fig. 3, 11754 bits are punctured. Finally, the remaining 49128 bit block of data and parity check bits is forwarded to the QPSK modulator and transmitted over the erroneous radio channel. On the receiver side, the detected parity bits are first depunctured and padding bits are added to obtain the block size compatible with the DVB-S2 LDPC decoder. After decoding, the padding zeros are removed from the block and the restored data bits are compared with the transmitted data bits to calculate BER and FER.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:12:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

In the puncturing operation redundant bits can be punctured either randomly or deterministically. This study compares the performance of communication system applying random and two deterministic puncturing schemes, namely deliberate and optimal puncturing.
A straight forward way to obtain higher coding rates is by random puncturing, where the bits to be punctured are chosen randomly on a block by block basis. Although this scheme guarantees equal probability for the bits to be punctured, it is not suitable for the implementation, because it implies additional signalling on the positions of punctured bits in the codeword. The only viable way to implement random puncturing without introducing additional signalling is by utilizing a pseudorandom generator, whose seed and starting point in the first transmitted block are known in advance. In this paper pseudorandom puncturing is mainly used as a reference for the performance evaluation of deterministic puncturing schemes.
A scheme for deliberate puncturing proposed in [4] utilizes the concept of recoverable steps and nodes. We implemented and evaluated this scheme to ascertain if improvements over the random puncturing scheme can be achieved. The scheme introduces one Step Recoverable (1SR) node. Its property is that it can be recovered during the first iteration using message passing algorithm when assuming binary erasure channel. In similar way, k Step Recoverable (kSR) node can be recovered in k iterations. The basic advantage of the algorithm presented in [4] is that any punctured bits can be recovered in a certain number of iterations using iterative decoding, provided there is at least one unpunctured parity bit and no data bit is punctured. The general rule to determine puncturing pattern is to try first identifying puncturing pattern with 1SR nodes. If this is not possible try with 2SR nodes, then 3SR nodes, etc. However, for large codeword the coding rates and consequently puncturing rates will typically have high prime values in nominator and denominator. For that reason the second mechanism in [4] proposes to realize rate compatibility. It suggests to use deliberate puncturing of the mother code with the highest coding rate desired, and then depuncture (randomly or deterministically) some punctured bits to obtain lower coding rates.
Applying the method of deliberate puncturing to DVB-S2 LDPC code, puncturing and deptuncturing patterns depicted in Fig. 4 are obtained for different coding rates. Circles marked with N denote transmitted bits, while circles marked with P and D denote initially punctured parity bits. Circles with letter D stand for depunctured bits. Either random or deliberate depuncturing is applied to obtain full range of coding rates in this paper. For example, for coding rate rŞH=1/3 and the data bit length being 12282 bits, 3918 zeros are padded to obtain appropriate size for DVB-S2 codec which generates 48600 parity check bits. For the DVB-SH coding rate of rŞH=1/3, however, only 24564 parity check bits is required. The required number of parity check bits is obtained by puncturing LDPC parity bits by 1/2, which results in 24300 bits. In order to obtain the required number of parity bits, the 264 punctured bits have to be depunctured (marked with D in Fig. 4). The number of required puncturing and depuncturing bits for other coding rates are given in Table 1.

Figure 4. Puncturing and depuncturing patterns for deliberate puncturing of DVB-S2 LDPC codes.
The padding and puncturing scheme proposed in [4] does not take into account that the number of padded bits is known at the transmitter and the receiver. Taking this information into account in the case soft decoding algorithms, the parity check equations would include perfectly known bits that are denoted by very high values of log-likelihood ratio and thus have the highest probability to correct erroneously received info bits. This indicates that puncturing parity check bits, whose values depend also on the padding bits, will result in lower performance degradation than puncturing of the parity bits calculated solely from info bits. Considering this assumption we have designed a new puncturing scheme, referred to as optimal scheme, with the following steps:
1. Calculate parity check nodes connected to padding bits; we name those nodes power nodes.
2. Find parity check bits connected to power nodes and mark those parity check bits as candidates for puncturing.
3. Calculate kSR and label values for puncturing candidates as proposed in [4]. The label=1 is assigned to two concecuitive nodes if they have equal kSR vales. All other nodes are assigned label=0.
4. First puncture candidate parity check bits with higher kSR and label values.
5. If the required puncturing rate is higher, then randomly puncture the remaining parity check bits.
The kSR and label values for puncturing candidates are shown in Table II for DVB-S2 LDPC code with coding rate

TABLE I.__NUMBER OF REQUIRED PUNCTURED AND DEPUNCTURED
PARITY CHECK BITS FOR DELIBERATE PUNCTURING

coding rate
2/9 1/4 2/7 1/3 2/5 1/2 2/3

number of parity bits
42987 36846 30705 24564 18423 12282 6141

puncturing rate
1/8 2/8 2/8 4/8 5/8 6/8 7/8

number of punct. bit
6075 12150 12150 24300 30375 36450 42525

number of depunctured bits
462 396 1545 264 198 132 66

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:12:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

rS2=1/4, while the number of punctured bits for different coding rates is shown in Table III. For coding rate rSH=2/9 the number of required punctured parity bits is 5613, which are randomly chosen from 6478 candidates with 1SR and label=1. The number of punctured bits is equal to 11754 for coding rate rSH=1/4, so in this case all 1SR and label=0 parity check bits are punctured, and in addition 5276 2SR and label=1 parity check bits are randomly chosen from the list of candidates. When all puncturing candidates are punctured, which happens at coding rate rSH=1/3 and higher, the rest of punctured bits are randomly selected from unpunctured parity check bits.
IV. SIMULATION SETUP AND SYSTEM PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
The block diagram of simulation setup is shown in Fig. 5. On the transmitter side, the 12282 bit data block is first padded, then LDPC encoded, and finally punctured. After QPSK modulation of the obtained bit stream, the frame is transmitted over the additive Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. The distorted signal is soft demodulated and the values are forwarded to the depuncturing block. After the LDPC decoding, the decoded bits are depadded and compared with the transmitted data bit sequence to calculate BER and FER. The Monte Carlo simulations are stopped either when 15 erroneous frames are found or 50000 frames are transmitted. We set up also the lower limit of transmitted frames to 100 in order to obtain reliable results at lower SNRs.
Simulation results depicted in Fig. 6 compare the performance of randomly punctured DVB-S2 LDPC codes and 3GPP2 turbo codes in terms of BER and FER versus energy per bit to noise power spectral density ratio (Eb/N0). Results show that the degradation of system performance using simple random puncturing is in the range between 0.5 dB and 0.7 dB. This system degradation was expected to be improved by

TABLE II.__SR AND LABEL VALUES FOR PUNCTURING CANDIDATES

SR value

label value number of bits

3

1

1272

3

0

360

2

1

2962

2

0

2754

1

1

7204

1

0

6478

Number of pucturing candidates

21030

TABLE III.__NUMBER OF PUNCTURED PARITY CHECK BITS FOR
DELIBERATE PUNCTURING

coding rate number of punctured bits

2/9

5613

1/4

11754

2/7

17895

1/3

24036

2/5

30177

1/2

36318

2/3

42459

Figure 5. Block diagram of simulation setup.
deliberate puncturing scheme proposed in [4], however, no significant improvement is observed as shown in Fig. 7. This is expected for low puncturing rates (low coding rates), since the majority of randomly punctured bits are 1SR bits, which are recovered in the first iteration of the deliberate puncturing scheme. At higher data rates also kSR bits are punctured, requiring higher number of iterations of the iterative algorithm to be recovered. In our simulations the iterative decoding algorithm is stopped after 50 iterations.
The results obtained for random and deliberate puncturing show that a source of increased system degradation are also padded bits, which are not considered in puncturing/ depuncturing process. Due to the high reliabilities of the received padded bits, the check nodes with the input of padded/depadded bits have higher ability to recover erroneous received bits connected to these check nodes (we named them power check nodes). Therefore, punctured parity check bits of power check nodes are recovered with higher probability, if other bits connected to check nodes are erroneous. Consequently, the optimal puncturing scheme exhibits 0.2 dB better performance in AWGN channel compared to random and deliberate puncturing schemes.
V. CONCLUSION In this paper we show how padding and puncturing of DVB-S2 LDPC codes can make possible the reuse of DVB-S2 LDPC encoding and decoding algorithms and technology for the DVB-SH application, thus representing an alternative to the 3GPP2 turbo codes specified in the DVB-SH standard. In particular, we investigated three padding and puncturing schemes, i.e. random, deliberate and optimal puncturing, using computer simulations. Random and deliberate puncturing of punctured DVB-S2 LDPC code with rS2=1/4 have shown very small performance degradation, i.e. in the order of 0.5 dB, with respect to 3GPP2 turbo codes. Furthermore, due to low coding rates no significant difference between random and deliberate puncturing has been observed. The proposed optimal puncturing scheme exhibits better performance in the AWGN channel, since padding bits introduce highly reliable information to the decoding process. The remaining performance degradation may be improved by introducing an additional block encoder for padded bits. Although introducing slight degradation in system performance compared to the 3GPP2 turbo codes, the adaptation of DVB-S2 LDPC codes in DVB-SH systems

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:12:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 6. BER and FER performance of 3GPP2 and DVB-S2 LDPC equivalent DVB-SH codes using random puncturing.

Figure 7. BER and FER performance of DVB-S2 LDPC equivalent DVB-SH codes using different puncturing schemes.

promises important practical advantages from the implementation point of view, especially enabling the use of parallel decoding architectures yielding higher throughputs.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT This work has been partially funded by the European Community through the 6th Framework Programme IST project SatNEx (FP6-IST-027393).
REFERENCES
[1] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); System Specifications for Satellite services to Handheld devices (SH) below 3 GHz, ETSI Standard, DVB

Project Office Technical Specification TS 102 585, Jul. 2007. [Online]. Available at: http://www.dvb-h-online.com/PDF/Ts102585.V1.1.1.pdf
[2] DVB Project Office. (2008, Feb.) DVB-SH - Satellite Services to Handheld Devices Fact Sheet. DVB-SH Fact Sheet.0208.pdf. [Online].Available at: http://www.dvb.org/technology/fact_sheets/
[3] D. Benmayor, S. Papaharalabos, P. T. Mathiopoulos, G. Tsiropoula and P. Constantinou, “Rate-Compatible Irregular Repeat-Accumulate Codes for DVB-SH Applications,” in Proc. of IEEE International Workshop on Satellite and Space Communications (IWSSC 2008), Toulouse, France, 1-3 Oct., 2008, pp. 239-243.
[4] G. Yue, X.Wang, M. Madihian, “Design of Rate-Compatible Irregular Repeat Accimulate Codes,” IEEE Trans. on Communications, vol. 55 No. 6, June 2007, pp. 1153-1163

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:12:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

