NOVEL RELIABILITY-BASED HARQ SCHEME FOR IRREGULAR LDPC CODES

Chengxin Xu, Yongyu Chang, Xin Zhang and Dacheng Yang

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications

ABSTRACT
In this paper, we propose a new and practical reliabilitybased hybrid automatic repeat request (RB-HARQ) scheme for irregular low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. Irregular LDPC codes have an unequal error protection (UEP) property. Using this property, we find that the middle degree message nodes of irregular LDPC codes are important for HARQ systems. If we pick out the low reliable message nodes of them for retransmission, we will reduce the feedback. Moreover, the system performance of this scheme is as well as that of the original RB-HARQ scheme.
Index Terms- Irregular LDPC codes, reliability-based HARQ, unequal error protection
1. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have attracted much attention for their better performance and lower decoder complexity compared with Turbo codes [1]. Because the performance of irregular LDPC codes is better than that of regular ones [2], many researchers have done much work on this kind of error correcting codes. For example, for rate 1/2, the best code found has a threshold within O.0045dB of the Shannon limit of the binary-input additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel [3].
HARQ technology has been used in many communication systems in order to improve throughput [4], such as WiMAX and UMB. Ifwe can combine LDPC codes with HARQ technology well, the system performance will be improved.
Some HARQ schemes for LDPC codes have been proposed, for example, the incremental redundancy HARQ scheme for rate compatible LDPC codes [5]. This kind of HARQ schemes can provide variable coding rate to adapt the changing channel. However, these schemes need attempt some times to get the appropriate rate. Therefore, the delay is serious. Moreover, if the channel is terrible, these systems will work with the lowest coding rate all through, so that this kind of schemes has little gain in this case. In addition, this kind of HARQ schemes needs more memories compared with chase combining HARQ schemes.
Reliability-based HARQ (RB-HARQ) scheme is a kind of good HARQ scheme for error-control codes with soft-

input and soft-output (SISO) decoders [6]. We will give more details about RB-HARQ scheme in Section III. In this paper, we propose a new RB-HARQ scheme for irregular LDPC codes. This scheme bases on the unequal error protection (UEP) property of irregular LDPC codes. In this scheme, message nodes are classified into three set according to their degrees. These sets are named as high degree message node set, middle degree message node set, and low degree message node set, respectively. We find that the performance of middle degree message nodes retransmitted is better than that of other degree message nodes retransmitted for irregular LDPC codes [7]. Therefore, we pick out low reliable message nodes of middle degree message node set for retransmission. The performance of the proposed scheme is slightly weak compared with that of the original RB-HARQ scheme, but the amount of feedback is much smaller than that of the original scheme.
The outline of this paper is as follows. We start by introducing some important concepts about LDPC codes in Section II. In Section III, we explain the new RB-HARQ scheme for irregular LDPC codes. Then, some simulation results are shown in Section IV. Finally, in Section V, we draw a conclusion.

2. LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

Define a degree distribution pair (A,P) , where

A(X)

=

dv
LAi

Xi-1

specifies

the

message

node

degree

i=2

de
distribution and p(x) = LPiXi-1 specifies the check node

i=2

degree distribution. More precisely, Ai (Pi) represents the

fraction of edges emanating from message (check) nodes of degree i . The maximum message node degree and check node degree are denoted by d, and de' respectively [8].

Sum product decoding algorithm is employed in this paper. To describe this algorithm, we first introduce some
notations. hi,j is the (i,J)th entry to the parity check matrix

H. L(m):={/:hm'l =1} and M(/):={m:hm'l =1} denote

the set of message nodes in the mth parity-check equation and the set of check nodes related with the Ith message node, respectively. L ( m ) \ / denotes the L ( m ) set exclude

978-1-4244-5076-3/09/$26.00 ©2009 IEEE

335
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:08:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

message node I and M (I) \ m denotes the M (I) set

exclude check m. q~1 is meant to be the probability that
message node I has the value x (x is 0 or 1 ), given the information obtained via checks other than check m, and
P; is its initial value. r;' is meant to be the probability of

check m being satisfied if bit I is considered fixed at x

and other bits have a separable distribution . z/ specifies the

hard decision value of lth message node [9]. Then, we can

describe this decoding algorithm in these steps:

1) Initialization:

p?= P(XI = 0),

(1)

P, where

p] =P(XI =I)=I-p?,

(2)

is meant to be the probability that variable node

I has the value x .

2) Horizontal step:

r:o="I2+I"2T

I

(

o
qmj

1)
-qmj

,

(3)

jeL(m) \1

(4)

o TI 3) Vertical step:

qml

=

0
am/PI

0
rm'l '

(5)

m'eM(I) \m

TI qmI l = amlPII

rm1'I '

(6)

m'eM(i) \m

where ami is chosen such that q~1 + q~1 = 1.

TI 4) Hard decision:

qlo = alPI0

rm0l '

(7)

meM(I)

TI ql1 = alPII

rmIl ,

(8)

meM(i)

where a, is chosen such that q~ + q; = 1. Then, z/ is given

by 0 for q~ > q; and 1 for q~ < q; .
ZI-e , 5) Check termination : Calculate a syndrome with
where Z = {Zl'Z2 , ··,ZN} and N is the number of variable

nodes. If the syndrome is zero, stop decoding. Otherwise, repeat from Step 2 to Step 5.
Therefore, the decoder of LDPC codes belongs to SISO decoders and RB-HARQ scheme can be used by LDPC codes. If we can combine this scheme with LDPC codes well, we will obtain more gains.

3. NEW RELIABILITY-BASED HARQ SCHEME FOR IRREGULAR LDPC CODES

The soft-input and soft-output decoders determine the value of codes with reliability information, which are got from channel output. Sometimes, it is difficult to correctly judge the value of low reliable nodes. RB-HARQ scheme resolves this problem through retransmitting these unreliable nodes.

Results have shown that this scheme can provide performance close to the channel capacity.
But, this scheme has a serious shortcoming that the number of feedback bits is large. We have to spend many bits to tell the sender which nodes should be retransmitted . Some methods have been proposed in order to resolve this problem . Most of them use the check metric to tell sender which nodes should be retransmitted [10]. However, it is difficult to find an efficient method for there is little correlation among the low reliable nodes.
In this paper, we propose a new RB-HARQ scheme for irregular LDPC codes based on their UEP property .
Using (5) and (6), we can find that the high degree message nodes can get more information from their correlative check nodes in decoding. Therefore, they can be corrected more efficiently, which leads to the UEP property of irregular LDPC codes [11-12].
From Fig. 1, we also can clearly obtain this result. It is a bipartite graph which describes the principle of Belief Propagation algorithm. The message node mI, whose degree is six, connects with six check nodes and the message node m3 just connects with two check nodes. Therefore, there are more check nodes joined in the decoding of message node ml , which means that mi can receive more belief information than m3. Because of the UEP property, the distribution of error nodes is nonuniform after decoding, though it is uniform before decoding .
Based on this property, we find that the performance of middle degree message nodes retransmitted is better than that of other degree nodes retransmitted.
Because of the UEP property, the error message nodes much possibly exist in the low degree message node set after decoding. Therefore , middle degree message nodes retransmitted can correct more error nodes than high degree message nodes retransmitted. Further more, the high degree message nodes have the best self correction ability and these corrected nodes have provided good information to other nodes. If these nodes are retransmitted, though they could provide more information for decoding, much of it is not efficient and low degree nodes can not well use it. On the other hand, the good self correction ability of high degree message nodes is waste. Therefore, middle degree message nodes retransmitted are better than high degree message nodes retransmitted.
message nodes

check nodes

Fig. I. Belief Propagation

336
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:08:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Compared with low degree message nodes , middle degree message nodes can provide more information to other nodes in decoding. It is very important for high degree message nodes to correctly judge which value they should be. During iterative decoding, the more belief information low degree message nodes provide, the better high degree message nodes will be corrected. As a result, not only the middle degree message nodes but also the high degree message nodes can be corrected well. Further more , with the contribution of these nodes , many low degree message nodes will be corrected. Therefore, the performance of middle degree message nodes retransmitted is the best of all.
The new scheme operates as follows . 1) Separate all the message nodes into three sets according to their degrees, which are high degree message node set, middle degree message node set, and low degree message node set. 2) Order the message nodes in the middle degree message node set by their reliability information. 3) Pick out a number of low reliable nodes in the middle degree message node set and transmit the position information of these nodes to the sender. In the original RB-HARQ scheme , low reliable nodes in the entire code will be retransmitted. However, in the new scheme, just the low reliable nodes in the middle degree message node set are retransmitted. Therefore, the candidate set is much smaller than before . If we use the same method to feedback the position of these unreliable nodes , the new scheme will spend fewer information bits. Though, the number of message nodes which are corrected directly by retransmission is small, we can get some compensative gains for middle degree message nodes retransmitted. Therefore, the performance loss of this scheme is small compared with that of other schemes .
4. SIMULATION RESULTS
The LDPC codes that we used for simulation are constructed by the IEEE 802.16e standard. The code rate is 0.5 and check matrix is 576 X 1152. The degrees of message nodes in this kind of codes are 2, 3 and 6. These degrees respectively denote the degrees of low degree message nodes, middle degree message nodes, and high degree message nodes.
There are 384 nodes in the middle degree message node set. Therefore, if take no coding method to reduce the feedback, we need 384 bits to tell the sender which nodes should be retransmitted. The amount of feedback is much smaller than that of the original RB-HARQ scheme which needs 1152 bits.
We assume that transmission channel is corrupted by AWGN and feedback channel is error free and delay free. The signal is BPSK modulated. Sum-product decoding algorithm is used and the maximum number of iteration is 100. Retransmission time is one for simplify and the number

of retransmitted nodes is 100. If the number of frames,

which is still error after retransmission, arrives to 200, the

source will stop sending data frames .

First, we compare the performance of different degree

message nodes retransmitted. Fairly, we make a subset in

each set. The message nodes in each subset are fixed and

the number of nodes is 200. Therefore, each scheme needs

200 bits for the feedback . Then , we pick out 100 unreliable

nodes of them for retransmission. The frame error rate (FER)

and throughput of each scheme are shown in Fig.2 and Fig.3.

From these figures , we can obtain that the performance of

middle degree message nodes retransmitted is the best of all.

Throughput is defined by

"1','hroug h'PUt =

F x F. success length

XR ,

(9)

+ F all X F;ength R ail X R length

where Fsuccess is the number of frames successfully received, F all is the number of all sent frames, Fiength is the length of
frame, Rail is the sum of all retransmission times, RJength is
the length of retransmitted frame, and R is code rate. From Fig. 4 and Fig. 5, we can find the advantage of
new scheme. Compared with random retransmission HARQ scheme, which retransmits the middle degree message nodes randomly, the new scheme has better FER and throughput

10'~i;::jDM===-------'

-

middle degree mess age ndoes

- - low degree message ndoes
---e---high degree message ndoes

10.3 ---e-- no HA RQ

o

0.5

1.5

SNR (dB)

Fig. 2. FER of different degree nodes retransmitted

O . 5 r----~-------_==__'"

0.45

0.4

0.35

f'5 0.3 0.25
~ 0.2

0.15

0.1

-

middle degree message nodes

----- low degree message nodes
--e-- high degree message nodes

- B - no HARQ

0.5

1.5

SNR (dB)

Fig. 3. Throughputs of different degree nodes retransmitted

337
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:08:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10~ F-

---,

- - initi al RB-HARQ scheme

_ _ new sc heme

--e--- random retransm issi on

10-4 --e- no HARQ

o

0.5

1.5

S NR (dB )

Fig. 4. FER of new schemeand other schemes

0 .5 ,-----~----_-____:_===_

0.45

0.4

0.35
_ 0.3
~
~ 0.25
~
I- 0.2

0.15

0.1

- - initial RB-HARQ scheme

---e--- random retransmission ---a--- no HARQ

1

1.5

SNR (dB)

Fig. 5. Throughputsof new scheme and other schemes

performance. At the same time, there is little difference in performance between the new scheme and the original RBHARQ scheme. However, the amount of feedback of the new scheme is 384 bits, which is smaller than that of the original scheme.

5. CONCLUSION

It is worth researching how to well combine LDPC codes and HARQ schemes for their good performance. The irregular LDPC codes have some special properties for their construction. We find that the performance of middle degree message nodes retransmitted is better than that of other degree message nodes retransmitted. Then, we propose a new RB-HARQ scheme for irregular LDPC codes based on this result. The performance of this scheme is as well as that of the original RB-HARQ scheme and the amount of feedback is small. If we take more optimum operations on feedback, we may get some better schemes.

[1] M.A. Landolsi, "A comparative performance and complexity study of short-Length LDPC and Turbo product codes," IEEE ICTTA '06. 2nd, Damascus, Syria, vol. 2, 2006, pp. 2359-2364.
[2] M.G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M.A. Shokrollahi, and D.A. Spielman, "Improved Low-Density Parity-Check Codes Using Irregular Graphs and Belief Propagation," IEEE ISIT '98, Massachusetts, USA, Aug. 1998, pp. 117.
[3] S.Y. Chung, G.D. Forney, TJ. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, "On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit," IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, No.2, pp. 58-60, Feb. 2001.
[4] S. Choi, and K.G. Shin, "A class of adaptive hybrid ARQ schemes for wireless links," IEEE Trans. on Vehicular Tech., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 777-790, May 2001.
[5] J. Kim, W. Hur, A. Ramamoorthy, and S.W. McLaughlin, "Design of rate-compatible irregular LDPC codes for incremental redundancy hybrid ARQ systems," IEEE ISIT '06, Seattle, USA, July 2006, pp. 1139-1143.
[6] J.M. Shea, "Reliability-based hybrid ARQ," Electronics Letters, vol. 38, pp. 644-645, 2002.
[7] C. Xu, Y. Chang, and D. Yang, "Influence of Degree Distribution of Irregular LDPC Codes on HARQ Performance," IEEE VTC 2008 spring, Marina Bay, Singapore, May 2008, pp. 759-762.
[8] T.J. Richardson, M.A. Shokrollahi, and R.L. Urbanke, "Design of Capacity-Approaching Irregular Low-Density Parity-Check Codes," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, No.2, pp. 619-637, 2001.
[9] D.J. MacKay, "Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices," IEEE Trans. Inform, Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399431, Mar. 1999.
[10] F. Huang, X. Yi, and T. Wang, "Reliability-based selective repeat hybrid ARQ protocol on low density parity check codes," ICAT 2006, Hangzhou, China, Nov. 2006, pp. 576-579.
[11] X. Yang, D. Yuan, P. Ma, and M. Jiang, "New research on unequal error protection (UEP) property of irregular LDPC codes," Consumer Communications and Networking Conference, Las Vegas, Nevada USA, Jan. 2004, pp. 361-363.
[12] M.G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M.A. Shokrollahi, and D.A. Spielman, "Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs," IEEE Trans. Inform, Theory, vol. 47, No.2, pp. 585-598, Feb. 2001.

6. REFERENCES

338 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:08:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

