An Improved LU Decomposition Encoding Method of LDPC Codes

Peng Zhang, Rui Lv, Gang Yang, and Jinlun Chen
Communication University of China Beijing, China
trellis_cn@sina.com

Abstract—Concerning the high encoding complexity of lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes, an improved LU decomposition encoding method is proposed, which is able to take full advantage of the characteristics of the sparse paritycheck matrix, such as cyclicity and equality of row weight. Experimental results show that, the proposed method can reduce dramatically the memory requirements in hardware implementation, while maintaining the computational complexity nearly.
Keywords-Approximately lower triangular; LDPC codes; Encoding method; CMMB
I. INTRODUCTION
In the past decade, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] had been attracting more and more attentions due to their excellent error-correcting ability and low decoding complexity. They are the most promising forward error correction (FEC) candidates in many applications, such as telecommunications and data storages. Although LDPC codes are the forceful competitors to Turbo codes, the serious drawback of obviously high encoding complexity obstacles the former. Straightforward encoding algorithms, for example, generation matrices that are usually dense, involve dense matrix multiplications and thereby result in the computational complexity quadratic to the codeword length.
Since the rediscovery of LDPC codes, lots of efforts had been made to develop computationally efficient encoders by many coding investigators. MacKay’s lower triangular method [2], Haley’s iterative encoding method [3], and Johnson’s quasi-cyclic method [4] are all aiming at the LDPC codes with specific ensembles but not suitable for arbitrary ones. The allpurpose linear encoding method is first introduced by Neal, i.e. LU decomposition method [5]. Its principle is very simple, and its key is to decompose a matrix into the product of a lower and upper triangular matrix as sparse as possible [6]. Approximately lower triangular encoding method [7] proposed by Richardson has complexity almost linear to the codeword length. Besides plenty of preprocessing [8], its trivial encoding procedure is made up of several steps. Those impose burden on programmers heavily. Therefore, the LU decomposition encoding method is preferable.
For the LU decomposition encoding method, the paritycheck matrix after elementary permutations is divided into a

few sub-matrices, which lose its characteristics. In allusion to the shortcoming, an improved LU decomposition encoding method is proposed. The proposed method is capable of making the best of the characteristics of the parity-check matrix, such as cyclicity and equality of nonzero elements’ number per row, such that the memory requirements can be decreased greatly.
II. THE LU DECOMPOSITION METHOD
Consider a q-ary LDPC code with systemic form. The lengths of its codeword, information, and parity-check vectors are n , k , and r ( r = n − k ) respectively. The codeword vector is defined as

C = [S P],

(1)

where S = [si ] ( si is the ith information element, i = 0,
1,", k −1 ) is the information vector with order 1× k , and
P = [ pi ] ( pi is the ith parity-check element, i = 0,1,", r −1 )
is the parity-check vector with order 1× r .
Denote its row-nonsingular parity-check matrix as follows

H = [A B],

(2)

where A and B are matrices with order r × k and r × r
respectively. By elementary permutations, the nonsingular matrix B becomes the product of a lower triangular matrix L and a upper triangular matrix U :

VBW = LU ,

(3)

where V is an elementary row-exchanged matrix, and W is an elementary column-exchanged matrix. L , U , V , and W are all of order r × r . The transpose of V is equal to its inverse,
the same to W . That is, V Τ = V -1 , and W Τ = W -1 , where the
superscripts Τ and −1 represent the transpose and inverse
respectively.

Thanks for sponsors of CNGI-04-12-2A of NDRC of China, important program of ME of China (106041), and 211 project of Communication University of China.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei9U7n8iv-.1D-4o2w4n4lo-a4d6e3d9o-n1/J0u9ne/$2245,2.00026©a2t 0070:913I:E33EUETC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

There are many algorithms [5] [6] for LU decomposition of B , leading to different L and U . Generally speaking, the sparser both triangular matrices are, the lower the computational complexity is.
Since LDPC codes are linear block codes in nature, they satisfy also the following expression

HC Τ = 0.

(4)

Substituting equations (1)-(3) into the equation above, we get

PΤ = −WU −1L−1VAS Τ.

(5)

At this point, it would be appropriate to outline the LU decomposition encoding procedure. The procedure consists of three major steps:
1) Calculate the vector X : X Τ = VASΤ . 2) Determine the vector Y by forward substitutions: Y Τ = L−1 X Τ . 3) Calculate the vector Z by backward substitutions: Z Τ = U −1Y Τ . Finally, the parity-check vector P is decided by the mapping relationship of PΤ = −WZ Τ , which is equivalent to P = −ZW Τ .
III. IMPROVED METHOD
The LU decomposition encoding method breaks H into a number of sub-matrices, and destroys its characteristics. Then, we start with a partial trapezium encoding method, and propose an improved LU decomposition encoding method to make it possible employing the inherent characteristics of the paritycheck matrix.

A. Partial Trapezium Encoding Method By substituting (1) and (2), (4) yields

k −1

r −1

∑ ∑ ai, j s j + bi, j p j = 0,

(6)

j=0

j=0

row whose nonzero elements are corresponding to one and only one unknown parity-check element pw′(1) is selected from the last r −1 rows of new H . Exchange the selected row with the first row. According to (6), information elements and known parity-check element pw′(0) are used to calculate the
unknown parity-check element pw′(1) , which is exchanged with
p1 . In the ith step, a row whose nonzero elements are corresponding to one and only one unknown parity-check element pw′(i) is selected from the last r − i rows of new H .
Exchange the selected row with the ith row. According to (6), information elements and known parity-check elements pw′(0) , pw′(1) ,", pw′(i−1) are used to calculate the unknown
parity-check element pw′(i) , which is exchanged with pi . The
process of determining unknown parity-check elements continues until a row whose nonzero elements are corresponding to one and only one unknown parity-check element can not be found after d steps. d represents the direct encoding ability of H .
The aforementioned process of exchanging rows and columns can be described by elementary permutation matrices V ′ and M ′ . M ′ is an elementary column-exchanged matrix with order n × n in the following form

M′

=

⎡I ⎣⎢0

0⎤ W ′⎥⎦ ,

(7)

where I is an identity matrix with order k × k , and W ′ is an elementary column-exchanged matrix with order r × r , indicating that M ′ exchanges only the last r columns of H .
If the known and unknown parity-check elements are defined as

Z ′ = ⎣⎡ pw′(0) " pw′(d −1) pw′(d ) " pw′(r−1) ⎤⎦ ,

(8)

then,

where ai, j and bi, j are the elements at row i and column j of A and B respectively. Each information element s j is
known. Among all parity-check elements p j corresponding to
nonzero elements bi, j , if and only if there is one unknown parity-check element, it can be determined by (6).
Based on the foregoing encoding rule, a part of paritycheck elements can be determined through the following iteration. Initially, a row whose nonzero elements are corresponding to one and only one unknown parity-check element pw′(0) is selected from all rows of H . Exchange the selected row with the 0th row. According to (6), information elements are used to calculate the unknown parity-check element pw′(0) , which is exchanged with p0 . In the first step, a

V ′HM ′[S Z ′]Τ = 0.

(9)

From the iterative process, we can infer the characteristics of V ′HM ′ . In the ith ( i = 0,1,", d −1) step, pw′(0) , pw′(1) ,", pw′(i−1) are known while pw′(i) , pw′(i+1) ,", pw′(r−1) are
unknown. In order to determine pw′(i) , the first k + i elements at the ith row of V ′HM ′ are arbitrary, the (k + i) -th element must be nonzero, and the last r − i −1 elements must be equal to zero. Therefore, the top right corner of V ′HM ′ must be a trapezium with d rows, demonstrated in Fig. 1.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:13:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

memory resource is the most remarkable advantage of the improved method.

Figure 1. The parity-check matrix in partial trapezium form
Because of the form of V ′HM ′ , the method of encoding a part of parity-check elements mentioned above is named the partial trapezium encoding method.

B. Improved LU Decomposition Encoding
If elementary permutations are further performed on the last r − d rows and columns of V ′HM ′ , the LU decomposition encoding method can be used to determine the remaining parity-check elements.

Segment Z ′ into two blocks: Z0′ = [ pw′(i) ] ( i = 0,1,", d −1 ) and Z1′ = [ pw′(i) ] ( i = d , d +1,", r −1 ). It is clear from
Fig. 1 that, the first k + d and last r − d columns at the last
r − d rows of V ′HM ′ correspond to [ S Z0′ ] and Z1′
respectively.

Z0′ and Z1′ can be determined by the partial trapezium and LU decomposition encoding methods respectively. The former uses the first d rows of V ′HM ′ , and the latter does the rest [A′ B′] demonstrated in Fig. 1. Upon to this point, an
improved LU decomposition encoding method is proposed. The encoding procedure is made up of four steps:

1) Z0′ is iteratively solved by the partial trapezium

encoding method.

2) 3)

Calculate the vector X ′Τ Determine the vector

=YV′Τ′A=′[LS′−1ZX0′

]Τ
′Τ

.

by

forward

substitutions. 4) Calculate the vector Z1′Τ = U ′−1Y ′Τ by backward
substitutions. At last, the parity-check vector P is decided by the mapping relationship of P = −Z ′W ′Τ .

C. Performance Analysis
All the matrices used in the original or improved LU decomposition encoding method are quite sparse. Economical strategy is that, the values and column indexes of nonzero elements of the sparse matrices are stored. For binary codes, the values of nonzero elements can be omitted.

In general, all the sub-matrices employed in the LU decomposition encoding method have different row weights themselves. However, the improved method utilizes the whole rows of V ′HM ′ or H at the first step. If row weights of H
are same, the proposed method is probably of higher speed, easier implementation, and less memory requirements. The reason is that it is unnecessary to store and decide the number of nonzero elements every row. If H is cyclic, its structure can be depicted by exceedingly little memory. In the case, saving

IV. EXPERIMENTS
Taking example for the LDPC codes adopted by China Mobile Multimedia Broadcasting (CMMB) standard [9] [10], the performance of the improved LU decomposition encoding method is verified.
There are two binary LDPC codes with different rate 1/2 and 3/4 in CMMB system. The former is a (9216, 3, 6) regular code, and the latter is a (9216, 3, 12) regular one. In the standard, the sparse parity-check matrices are specified, which are cyclic [11] but not quasi-cyclic [12]. Technically, it is difficult to encode the both LDPC codes. For the rate 1/2 (3/4), the entire parity-check matrix can be derived from the first 18 (9) rows, which shift 36 columns cyclically every 18 (9) rows. Since H is cyclic in a sense and has equal row weights, it is reasonable to believe that the proposed method is quite suitable for the two LDPC codes.
Preprocessing illustrates that, d is 2544 and 1776 for the rate 1/2 and 3/4 respectively.
The two LDPC encoders are implemented on ALTERA Cyclone III EP3C55 FPGA. Matrices and vectors are stored in the M9K block RAM on chip. For the sake of saving memory, storage strategy is optimized by splitting big matrices and incorporating small matrices. Table I compares resource consumptions of the original and improved LU decomposition encoding methods.
From Table I, both methods utilize a small quantity of logic cells. However, the improved LU decomposition encoding method outperforms remarkably the original one in terms of RAM consumption. Reducing 77 blocks of M9K block RAM admits choosing cheap FPGA.
Consisting with the encoding procedure, the improved LU decomposition encoders adopt four stages pipeline architectures, and maximum work frequency reaches up to 177.25 MHz. Under 100 MHz, pure encoding rate can achieve 17.082 Mbps (the rate 1/2) and 38.9 Mbps (the rate 3/4), which satisfy sufficiently the specifications in CMMB standard: 10.852 Mbps and 16.243 Mbps correspondingly.
V. CONCLUSION
Combining with the partial trapezium encoding method, we propose an improved LU decomposition encoding method, which is capable of making the most of the characteristics of the sparse parity-check matrix, such as cyclicity and equality of row weight.

TABLE I.

RESOURCE CONSUMPTIONS OF THE ORIGINAL AND

IMPROVED LU DECOMPOSITION ENCODING METHODS (ABSOLUTE AMOUNT /

PERCENT)

Method

Logic cell M9K RAM

Original method

1003/2%

197/78%

Improved method 2255/4%

120/47%

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:13:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Experimental results show that, the proposed method is extremely memory-efficient, keeping basically computational complexity at the same time. The improved LU decomposition encoding method is of practical value because of low cost. Our work solves the technical difficulty of encoding LDPC codes and is expected to be helpful to the research and development of CMMB base stations.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambirdge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] D. J. C. Mackay, S. T. Wilson, and M. C. Davey, “Comparison of constructions of irregular Gallager codes,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, 1999, 47(10), pp. 1449-1454.
[3] D. Haley, A. Grant, and J. Buetefer, “Iterative encoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, 1721 Nov. 2002, 2, pp. 1289-1293.
[4] S. J. Johnson and S. R. Weller, “A family of irregular LDPC codes with low encoding complexity,” IEEE Communications Letters, 2003, 7(2), pp. 79-81.

[5] R. M. Neal, “Sparse matrix methods and probabilistic inference algorithm,” IMA Summer Program on Codes, Systems, and Graphical Models, 1999.
[6] S. C. Chae and Y. O. Park, “Low complexity encoding of improved regular LDPC codes,” 2004 IEEE 60th Vehicular Technology Conference, 26-29 Sept. 2004, 4, pp. 2535-2539.
[7] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 2001, 47(2), pp. 638-656.
[8] S. Freundlich, D. Burshtein, and S. Litsyn, “Approximately lower triangular ensembles of LDPC codes with linear encoding complexity,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 2007, 53(3), pp. 1484-1494.
[9] GY/T 220.1-2006. Mobile multimedia broadcasting part 1: framing structure, channel coding and modulation for broadcasting channel, 2006.
[10] R. A. Burger, G. Iacovoni, and C. Reader, “A survey of digital TV standards China,” International Conference on Communications and Networking in China, 22-24 Aug. 2007, pp. 687-696.
[11] P. Wang and Y. E. Chen, “low-complexity real-time LDPC encoder design for CMMB,” Intelligent Information Hiding and Multimedia Signal Processing, 15-17 Aug. 2008, pp. 1209-1212.
[12] Z. F. Wang and Z. Q. Cui, “low-complexity high-speed decoder design for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, 2007, 15(1), pp. 104-114.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:13:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

