VLSI design for DVB-T2 LDPC decoder

Wengang Zhou, Jun Yang
Department of Computer science, Zhoukou Normal University
Zhoukou, 466001, China zhouwengang@zknu.edu.cn
Abstract - DVB-T2 has adopted powerful LDPC as error correcting codes, which can perform within approximately 1 dB from the Shannon capacity limit, so DVB-S2 has much better communication speed than conventional DVB. In this paper, a low-complexity LDPC decoder for DVB-T2 was designed. With modified layered decoding algorithm, average iterative No. can be decreased by nearly half compared with traditional twophase message-passing algorithms (TPMP), parallel MDU No. also can be set flexible. When set parallelratio=180, system complexity was decreased over 50% compared with conventional 360 parallel-ratio design. whole design have been implemented successfully on Stratix II EP2S130 devices of Altera Corp. Maximum frequency can come to the rate of over 90 MHz, which is significantly sufficient for real-time decoding of DVB-T2 standard.
Key words-LDPC codes; DVB-T2; Layered decoding
I. Introduction
DVB-T2 is the 2nd generation digital terrestrial television broadcasting system of European Standard. Compared with DVB-T, Its channel capacity increased nearly 50%. Stability of transmission system was also enhanced. LDPC code was chosen as core FEC code in DVB-T2. Combined with high-order modulations (QPSK, 16QAM, 64QAM and 256QAM), whole system has excellent bit-error-rate, with LDPC code playing a fundamental role in this raise of performance.
LDPC code was proposed initially by Gallager in 1962[1]. It can reach performance near the theoretical Shannon limit. To achieve better performance, most LDPC codes were constructed randomly, which is rather difficult for hardware implement [2],[3]. Hereafter, it became much more important to find a kind of special LDPC code which can be encoded /decoded with linear complexity while still keep good BER performance. Quasi-Cyclic LDPC codes and IRA LDPC codes are all these kind of structured LDPC codes. QC-LDPC code has been widely used in such standard as IEEE 802.16e, DTMB of China, CMMB [4],

Peng Wang
Electronic Information Engineering College, Tongji University
Shanghai, 200092, China pengpwn@hotmail.com
[5], [6], etc. And IRA LDPC code was also successfully used in DVB-S2 standard [7].
To decrease encoding complexity, enhanced IRA LDPC codes were used in DVB-T2, too. So that whole encoder can be implemented efficiently with linear complexity. But compared with encoding algorithm, decoding of LDPC codes is much more complicated. In DVB-T2, LDPC code length comes up to 64800 or 16200 bits. There are also 13 (6 for normal frame mode, 7 for short frame mode) different code rate, so that it become rather difficult to design low-complexity LDPC decoder for DVB-T2.
Also, DVB-T2 LDPC code’s original parity-check matrix H_org shows no QC pattern, which increase difficulty of implementation. In this paper, row permutation and column permutation were all used to transform original H_org into analogical QC pattern. With layered algorithm adopted, an efficient LDPC decoder for DVB-T2 was designed. Parallel ratio can be set flexible, so that standoff between complexities and costs can be achieved. To decrease calculation scalar, Normalized Mini-Sum algorithm replaced traditional SPA algorithm for message updating. Only adding, shifting, and subtracting was used for LDPC decoding, indicating great saving of calculation, with only less than 0.2 dB degradation compared with much more complicated BP algorithm.
II. LDPC decoding algorithm
LDPC code is a kind of special linear block code, whose parity-check matrix H is a sparse matrix, and x is valid LDPC code only if vector x*H = 0. Most of LDPC codes are defined in GF(2), meaning data for G/H matrix could only be 0 or 1. If row weight and column weight are all constant, these kinds of LDPC codes are called regular LDPC codes, else irregular LDPC codes. With proper construction, irregular LDPC codes can achieve better performance than regular LDPC codes

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei9U7n8iv-.1D-4o2w4n4lo-a3d6e9d3o-n4/J0u9ne/$2245,2.00026©a2t 0070:914I:E10EUETC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

A. BP Decoding Algorithm

BP algorithm (also called SPA algorithm) is

generally employed to decode LDPC codes. 2 types of

messages passed between variable nodes and check

nodes have to be updated in each iteration. If channel

noise power is σ 2 , received signal is y, and

row/column parameter for H matrix is M*N. The

check-to-variable message Rcv for the check node and

variable node using the incoming variable-to-check

messages Lcv is computed as follows:

∏ ∑ Rcv =

sign(Lcv' )Ψ( Ψ(Lcv' )) (1)

v'∈N (c) / v

v'∈N (c) / v

Where Ψ(x) = − lg(tanh( x / 2))

On the other hand, the variable-to-check message

Lcv for the check node c and variable node v using the incoming check-to-variable messages Rcv and received channel information Pv is computed by equation (2):

∑ Lv =

Rcv − Pv ， Lcv = Lv − Rcv

(2)

c∈M (v)

Where Pv is the intrinsic information, for BPSK modulation, AWGN channel, Pv can be calculated as

follows:

Pv

=

−2 yv σ2

(3)

If all the parity check equations are satisfied, valid

code has been decoded, indicating the iteration can be

terminated.

SPA algorithm can achieve very high capability.
However, non-linear operation Ψ(x) has to be used

for Rcv updating process, which is quite difficult for hardware implement. Decoder throughputs are also

limited seriously.

Compared with SPA, Mini-SPA is a kind of sub-

optimal decoding algorithm, its Rcv update process is:

∏ Rcv =

sign(Lcv' ) Min( Lcv' ))

(4)

v'∈N (c) / v

v'∈N (c) / v

While the others updating processes keep the

same as BP algorithm. It can be found that only

comparison, XOR, and adding/subtracting calculations

appear in the whole decoding process, so that

complexities are decreased greatly, nevertheless, Mini-

SPA’s performance is often poorer than SPA for about

0.5~1 dB. To improve this situation, Normalized MiniSPA algorithm was proposed[8]. In NMS algorithm, the Mini-SPA updated Rcv data was multiplied by a
normalized ratio K(0~1), accurate K value can be devised by Density evolution theory[9], NMS algorithm

can improve Mini-SPA’s performance evidently with

only little increase of calculation.

B. Layered decoding algorithm
Layered decoding is also called Turbo Decoding Message Passing Algorithm (TDMP), which was first proposed by M. Mansour, N. Shanbhag[10], while the traditional algorithm described in A is called TwoPhase Message Passing Algorithm (TPMP). The most important difference between TDMP and TPMP is that in TDMP, after the check node updating processing is finished for one row, the messages are immediately used to update the variable node information, whose results are then provided for processing the next row. So that updating for next row can access the newest data, therefore average iterative No. can be decreased by nearly 50%.
Also, there is no restriction for TDMP on how to update Rcv data. SPA, Mini-SPA, and NMS algorithms can all be used in TDMP.
III. LDPC code for DVB-T2
As described before, LDPC codes in DVB-T2 are enhanced IRA codes, and It’s clear that matrix H can be divided into Hs, and Hp, Hs’s non-zero element indices are defined in DVB-T2 standard Annex A and B, while Hp is a lower triangular matrix with dualdiagnose architecture. This kind of special design means that parity-check bits can be calculated recursively when encoding.
The original H matrix (recorded H_org, H_org = [Hs_org, Hp_org]) does not show any QC pattern. However, if specific row and column permutation is executed on H_org as follows:
1. Do column mod Q permutation on Hp_org (Q value for specific LDPC code rate can be found in DVB-T2 standard), meaning, the original 1st column of Hp_org is selected to be the 1st column of Hp_new, the (Q+1)th column of Hp_org is selected to be the 2ed column of Hp_new…the 1st column of Hp_org is selected to be the (pbit_len/Q + 1)th column of Hp_new, etc. where pbit_len is the length of parity-check bit length.
2. Do row mod Q permutation on matrix [Hs_org, Hp_new] with the same strategy listed before.
After this permutation, the new matrix has shown some character of QC-LDPC H matrix, with sub-block width=360, however, there are also 2 evident differences between this matrix and typical QC pattern H matrix:
1. For QC-LDPC code H matrix, the non-zero sub-block is a cyclically shifted identity matrix with certain offsets, meaning the sub-block row and column weight are all 1, while matrix after permutated has some sub-blocks with row/column weight > 1.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:14:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 1 LDPC decoder hardware structure for DVB-T

2. Hp_org matrix’s row weight of 1st row is 1 while the others row weight are all 2, indicating H_new’s last non-zero sub-block of sub-block row 1 cannot be seen as a cyclically shifted identity matrix except for adding a 1 in row 1, column 360 for this sub-block, this new matrix derived from H_new is recorded H_QC.
These 2 situations also exist for the other code rates of DVB-T2.
IV. LDPC decoder for DVB-T2
In hardware design, H_QC is more convenient for implement than H_new, for it can be designed as QCLDPC decoder architecture, which is quite efficient. Of course, since H_QC is not equivalent with H_new, if H_QC is used for data updating and parity-check calculation, some particular process have to be done:
For a valid LDPC code x of DVB-T2, x*H_org=[0], but if H_QC is used for parity check, according to theory of matrix and vector operation, the parity-check parts of code x have to be permutated as what have done on H_org’ row, so that x_new*H_new = 0, and because a 1 was added into H_new to construct H_QC, the 1st row data access have to be specially designed so that actual data updating and parity-check calculation will be equivalent to when H_new is used.
Layered updating strategy is used in LDPC decoder design. Only Rcv and Lv data are saved for iterative decoding, and Lcv can be calculated from
equation ( Lcv = Lv − Rcv ), indicating memory storage
can be saved. As to Rcv updating, NMS algorithm was used to attain better balance between complexity and performance, while the best value of Normalized ratio K was calculated by Density evolution theory.

When layered updating is performed on QCLDPC code, data of the same layer (sub-block row) can be processed in parallel mode[11]. One vital
component to achieve this is barrel-shifter, which can
complete cyclic shifting in 1 clock, however, its implement is also very difficult. Implement cost is
proportional to input data width with about square
complexity. In the typical decoder design for QC-LDPC, Rcv
and Lv are all split into part with width = K words, where K is sub-block dimension. These K group data are assigned to K Micro decoding Units (MDUs). Lv data have to be cyclic shifted when loading into MDUs and written back from MUDs via barrel-shifter. These MDUs can update K row Lv/Rcv data for each time.
However, for DVB-T2, the maximum symbol rate
per second is about 61Msps, if still 360 MDUs are implemented for DVB-T2 LDPC decoder, even when
working with 61 MHz system clock, the corresponding
decoder throughput is obvious too high, which will
also result in high complexity and manufacturing cost. Therefore, in this paper, a new architecture for DVB-
T2 LDPC codes which can decrease parallel ratio into
180 (or even lower) was presented, only 180-word
barrel shifter is needed for data cyclic shifting, whose complexity is only 1/4 of 360-word barrel shifter. And
the whole system’s complexity is also decreased by
over 50%.
To attain this, data storage strategy has to be modified. For traditional 360-MDU design, data widths of Lv are 360 words, while depths are sub-block column No. This kind of strategy splits Lv data with 360 widths, the 1st Lv array data are just data of subblock column 1. Rcv shares the similar architecture. As for 180-MDU structure, the data width of Lv and Rcv are all 180 words, depth are doubled compared with 360-MDU scheme. Take Lv for instance, the 1st Lv

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:14:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

array data save the 1st, 3rd, 5th…359th data of 1st subblock column Lv data, while the 2nd Lv array data save the 2nd, 4th, 6th…360th data of 1st sub-block column Lv data, that’s meaning that 1 intact 360-word Lv data are split into 2 parts: even parts and odd parts. So in this design, there are only 180 cyclic shifting values for barrel-shifter at most. Rcv’s data splitting is similar.
Fig. 1 shows the basic structure for DVB-T2 LDPC decoder. 3-stage pipelines were instanced to improve efficiency.
MDU array is the most important component in LDPC decoders, which completes Lv , Rcv updating and parity-check calculation. There are 180 individual MDUs in all. Each MDU can complete 1 row data processing. To ensure the validity of parity-check results from MDUs, the decoded code value cannot be modified when MDU is updating data. Only after 1 time iteration finished, all the decoded codes are updated according to Lv sign bits by Code update module.
V. FPGA Architecture Statistics
Stratix II EP2S130 FPGA of Altera Corp. was chosen to implement low-complexity DVB-T2 LDPC decoder. Verilog HDL was used to complete whole design, which was also simulated under ModelSim SE 6.2b. Table 1 show the final design statistics under Quartus II 7.2 environment:

Table 1 Design statistics of LDPC decoder

Resource
ALUTs Registers Memory bits

Resource Used 41526 15864
4.58 Mbits

Percentage used
39% 15% 67%

The maximum frequency is 91.47 MHz after fitted. Under this clock, maximum iterative No. can achieve 43, which is rather sufficient even for real-time decoding in quite rigorous situation.

Fig. 2 shows the BER performance for 1/2 code rate, normal frame mode.
VI. Conclusion
When perform specific permutation on original H matrix of DVB-T2 LDPC code, its H matrix can be transformed into a pattern alike to QC-LDPC codes, with sub-block = 360*360. Hereafter, a strategy that can decrease parallel-ratio into 180 for DVB-T2 LDPC decoder was proposed, which can decrease complexity over 50%. NMS algorithm was used in core component MDUs, which can achieve performance nearly as better as BP algorithm. 3 stage pipeline architectures made high throughputs also attainable. Whole design was successfully implemented in Stratix II EP2S130 device. Besides, if further increase work frequency or decrease maximum iterative number, parallel-ratio even can be decreased to 90 or 45 with similar strategy, which meaning lower-cost DVB-T2 LDPC decoder can also be designed straightforwardly.
References
[1] Gallager R G. Low-density Parity-check Codes [J]. IRE Trans. on Inf. Theory, 1962, IT-8 (1): 21-28
[2] D. J. C. MacKay, R. M. Neal. Near Shannon limit performance of low-density parity check codes [J]. Electron. Lett, vol. 32, 1996: 1645
[3] S. Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, Jr. T.J. Richardson, R. Urbanke. On the design of low-density parity check codes within 0.0045dB of the Shannon limit [J]. IEEE Comm. Letters, 2001, vol. 15: 58-60
[4] LDPC coding for OFDMA PHY. 802.16REVe Sponsor Ballot Recirculation comment [S], IEEE C802.16e-04 2004, 7:639.
[5] Framing Structure, Channel Coding and Modulation for Digital Television Terrestrial Broadcasting System [S]. Chinese Standard, Issued 2006:4-5.
[6] Mobile TV/Mobile Multimedia Broadcasting Framing Structure, Channel Coding, Modulation and Radio Frequency Characteristics for Broadcasting Channel [S]. Chinese Standard, Issued 2008:10-11.
[7] Digital video broadcasting (DVB); second generation [S]. In ETSI EN 302 307 v. 1. 1, 2005:19:20.
[8] Jinghu Chen, Ajay Dholakia, Evangelos Eleftheriou. ReducedComplexity Decoding of LDPC Codes [J]. IEEE Trans. on Comm. 8, 2005, vol. 53:1291
[9] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, The capacity of lowdensity parity check codes under message-passing decoding, IEEE Trans. on Inf. Theory, 2, 2001. vol. 47: 599–618,
[10] M. Mansour, N. Shanbhag. High-throughput LDPC decoders [J]. IEEE Trans. on VLSI Syst. 11, 2003, vol. 12 :976–996
[11] Colm P. Fewer, Mark F. Flanagan, and Anthony D. Fagan. A Versatile Variable Rate LDPC Codec Architecture [J]. IEEE Trans. on circuits and sys. 10, 2007, vol. 54 :2244-2248

Fig. 2 LDPC decoder BER/FER curves

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:14:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

