Over-Clocked SSD: Safely Running Beyond Flash Memory Chip 110 Clock Specs 
Kai Zhao*, Kalyana s. Venkataraman t, Xuebin Zhang*, Jiangpeng Lit, Ning Zheng*, and Tong Zhang* 
*ECSE Department, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, USA 
t Cavium, USA 
:j: Shanghai Jiaotong University, P.R.China 
Abstract 
This paper presents a design strategy that enables aggres­
sive use offlash memory chip I/O link over-clocking in solid­
state drives (SSDs) without sacrificing storage reliability. The 
gradual wear-out and process variation of NAND flash mem­
ory makes the worst-case oriented error correction code (ECC) 
in SSDs largely under-utilized most of the time. This work 
proposes to opportunistically leverage under-utilized error 
correction strength to allow error-prone flash memory I/O 
link over-clocking. Its rationale and key design issues are 
presented and studied in this paper, and its potential effec­
tiveness has been verified through hardware experiments and 
system simulations. Using sub-22nm NAND flash memory 
chips with I/O specs of 166MBps, we carried out extensive 
experiments and show that the proposed design strategy can 
enable SSDs safely operate with error-prone I/O link running 
at 275MBps. Trace-driven SSD simulations over a variety of 
workload traces show the system read response time can be 
reduced by over 20%. 
1. Introduction 
Technology scaling continuously degrades the raw storage 
reliability of NAND flash memory [9], which demands the use 
of increasingly stronger error correction codes (ECC) in solid­
state drives (SSDs) to ensure the data storage integrity. It is 
well known that NAND flash memory cells gradually wear out 
with the program/erase (PIE) cycling [5], which is reflected as 
gradual degradation of raw storage reliability throughout the 
flash memory lifetime. To meet a target PIE cycling endurance 
limit, each flash memory page must contain enough redundant 
memory cells to support a sufficiently strong ECC that can 
tolerate the worst-case raw storage reliability at the end of 
memory lifetime. The gradual flash memory wear-out makes 
the worst-case oriented ECC largely under-utilized most of the 
time. In addition, technology scaling widens process variations 
among flash memory blocks/chips, leading to a significant 
variation of flash memory raw storage reliability even under 
the same PIE cycles. This further contributes to ECC under­
utilization in solid-state data storage systems. 
The speed performance of SSDs depends on both the flash 
memory operational latency (e.g., read and programming la­
tency) and the latency of data transfer between the controller 
and flash memory chips. Since all the bits in each page are 
read from and progranuned to flash memory cells in parallel, 
flash memory read/progranuning latency has a very weak de­
pendency on the page size. In contrast, controller-flash data 
transfer latency is linearly proportional to the page size. As 
978-1-4799-3097-5/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 
technology continues to scale down, flash memory page size 
keeps increasing. As a result, controller-flash data transfer 
latency plays a more and more important role in determin­
ing the overall speed performance. Therefore, the industry 
has been constantly pushing the flash memory I/O link data 
transfer rate (e.g., the series of Open NAND Flash Interface 
(ONPI) [2] standards). NAND flash memory chip I/O circuits 
and specs are designed with the objective of guaranteeing 
virtually error-free data transfer (e.g., bit error rate of lO-15 
and below). Nevertheless, memory chips with a higher-speed 
I/O link spec are typically more expensive and more energy­
hungry because of the use of high-performance 110 circuitry 
and more accurate impedance-matching mechanism. 
In this work, we propose a design strategy that can safely 
over-clock (i.e., boost the clock frequency beyond specifica­
tion) NAND flash memory chip I/O links without sacrificing 
the data storage integrity. As discussed above, in order to 
ensure the absolute data storage reliability, SSDs must em­
ploy worst-case oriented ECC which is nevertheless largely 
under-utilized most of the time. As a result, there exists a 
certain amount of residual error correction strength available 
in the runtime. Instead of leaving the residual error correc­
tion strength unused, we propose to dynamically leverage it 
to allow error-prone over-clocking of flash memory chip I/O 
links, which can directly translate into higher system speed 
performance. In this design framework, ECC becomes re­
sponsible for bit errors caused by both flash memory storage 
and controller-flash data transfer. In spite of the simple con­
cept, its practical realization involves several issues, including 
over-clocking on data read path vs. over-clocking on data 
write path, and dynamic adaptation of over-clocking over flash 
memory lifetime. In addition, the impact of over-clocking 
on I/O data transfer error rate should be carefully character­
ized. Using ONPI 2.2 compliant sub-22nm flash memory 
chips with 166MBps I/O specs as a test vehicle, we carried 
out extensive experiments to characterize the effects of vari­
ous I/O over-clocking configurations. The experiments also 
reveal an unexpected phenomenon that, under the same I/O 
clocking, different planes on the same flash memory die may 
be subject to largely different data transfer error rates. This 
leads to more opportunities for optimizing the dynamic adap­
tation of I/O over-clocking. To evaluate the etlectiveness of 
the proposed design strategy, we carried out trace-driven SSD 
simulations assuming the use of advanced low-density parity­
check (LDPC) codes for error correction. Results show that 
SSDs can safely operate with error-prone memory chip I/O 
running at up to 275MBps, and over 20% of SSD read re-
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:49:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
sponse time reduction can be achieved. The experiment and 
simulation results also show that over-clocking on the read 
path is much more effective and favorable than over-clocking 
on the write path, and clearly demonstrate that appropriate 
over-clocking dynamic adaptation can noticeably improve the 
overall effectiveness. 
2. Background 
2.1. Error Correction in SSDs 
Reliability is an essential issue for data storage systems, and 
physical data storage devices are typically required to achieve 
an extremely low uncorrectable bit error rate (BER), e.g., 
10-15 and below. 
Until now, solid-state data storage de­
vices primarily rely on BCH (Bose-Chaudhuri-Hocquenghem) 
codes [14] to ensure the target uncorrectable BER. As technol­
ogy scaling continuously degrades the raw storage reliability 
of flash memory [9], we have to use stronger and stronger 
BCH codes. This significantly increases the amount of re­
quired BCH coding redundancy (e.g., when protecting lkB 
data, we need to add 14 bits of redundancy in order to cor­
rect one more error), which directly leads to significant flash 
memory bit cost penalty. This forces the industry to search 
for alternative ECCs that achieve stronger error correction 
strength given the same amount of redundancy. 
Due to their superior error correction strength and recent 
success in commercial hard disk drives, low-density parity­
check (LDPC) codes [8] attracted much recent interest [21, 10, 
22] and will evidently replace BCH in next-generation solid­
state data storage devices. LDPC code decoding is an iterative 
belief propagation process and the error correction strength 
depends on the accuracy of the input probability information 
that is directly determined by the NAND flash memory on­
chip sensing precision. As a result, latest commercial NAND 
flash memory chips start to provide direct support of soft­
decision memory sensing, e.g., Samsung 21nm MLC NAND 
flash memory chips can support at least seven quantization 
levels [13]. Fig. 1 presents simulation results to illustrate the 
advantage of LDPC codes over existing BCH codes and the 
impact of memory sensing precision on LDPC code decoding 
performance, where LDPC code and BCH code have the same 
code rate of 8/9 and same code length of 4kB. The LDPC 
decoding uses layered min-sum decoding algorithm. From the 
simulation results, we can see that the LDPC code can tolerate 
a much higher raw BER than its BCH counterpart. 
2.2. Flash Memory Organization and Interface 
A NAND flash memory chip package contains one or more 
memory dies that share an 8-bit VO bus and a number of 
common control signals. Each memory die contains a few 
logical units (LUNs) which is the minimum unit that can 
execute commands and report status independently from the 
others. Flash memory cells within an LUN are organized 
in a plane=}block=}page hierarchy: each LUN contains few 
2 
..... BCH code 
-+-LOPC code (hard-decision sensing) 
--LOPC code (six extra sensing levels) 
10.15 1--:--c-:-:,--,:-:,-:-=--=-=2"-:":,-:-:--:-,:-,--,-=-=-=-=--=-=---:!3 
0.02 
0.D18 
0.016 
0.014 
0.012 
0.01 
0.008 
0.006 
0.004 
Raw Bit Error Rate 
Figure 1: Simulation results comparing LOPC and BCH codes 
and showing the impact of memory sensing preci­
sion on LOPC code decoding performance. 
independent planes, each plane consists of a large number 
(e.g., a few thousand) of blocks, each block contains a number 
(e.g., 128 or 256) of pages. NAND flash memory handles 
data programming and read in the unit of page, and each page 
typically stores 4kB, 8kB or 16kB user data and associated 
redundancy. Each LUN has at least one page register, though 
in most cases each plane has its own page register. A page 
register is used for the temporary storage of data before the 
data are programmed to a page or after they are sensed out 
from a page. 
Industry has spent a great effort in unifying and improving 
the data transfer interface standards, in order to simplify the 
controller design and provide fast data transfer. Today there 
are two specifications, Open NAND Flash Interface (ONFI) [2] 
and Toggle Mode interface, both of which use the synchronous 
double data rate (DDR) scheme to achieve high data transfer 
rate. NAND flash memory chips with a higher VO link data 
transfer rate spec are typically more expensive because of the 
use of higher-performance VO circuitry and more accurate 
impedance-matching mechanism such as on-die termination. 
Therefore, although the most advanced VO specs are ONFI 3.x 
or Toggle 2.x, majority of NAND flash memory chips today 
are still ONFI 2.x or Toggle l.x compliant (i.e., the specified 
VO data transfer rate is 166MBps or 200MBps). 
3. Proposed Design Strategy 
The physical access time of an SSD can be expressed as 
'rphy-acc = 'rop + 'rxjer + 'rECC, 
(1) 
where 'rop is the flash memory data access operational latency, 
such as the read and programming latency, 'rxjer is the data 
transfer latency, and 'rECC is the ECC encoding/decoding la­
tency. For latest MLC NAND flash memory chips, typical 
read latency is around SOilS and typical prograrmning latency 
is around Ims. A well-designed ECC codec can easily achieve 
a throughput over IGBps, hence 'rECC for each page (typically 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:49:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
storing 4kB, 8kB, or 16kB user data) is only a few f.1s. The 
data transfer latency 'rxjer can be calculated by 
Page Size 
'rxjer 
= Data Transfer Rate 
(2) 
For example, when using NAND flash memory with 8kB 
page size and I/O data transfer rate of 166MBps (as specified 
in ONFI 2.2), it takes around 48f.1s to transfer one page of 
data between the controller and flash memory chips. Raising 
the data transfer rate can directly reduce the data transfer 
latency. For example, if we increase the data transfer rate 
from 166MBps to 220MBps for reading a 8kB page, we can 
reduce the data transfer latency from 48f.1s to 36f.1s. This could 
bring a significant reduction to the physical read access time 
and hence improve the overall system speed performance. As 
discussed in Section 2.2, modern NAND flash memory chips 
use synchronous DDR I/O interface for which the data transfer 
rate solely depends on the clock frequency set by the interface 
specification (e.g., ONFI 2.0 specifies up to 83MHz clock 
frequency, corresponding to maximum 166MBps data transfer 
rate). In this work, we propose a design strategy that exploits 
the characteristics of flash memory and solid-state data storage 
devices to safely enable over-clocking of flash memory chip 
I/O in order to improve the storage system speed performance 
without causing any reliability issue. 
3.1. Rationale and Basic Idea 
With the technology scaling, the impact of process variation 
and various storage noise sources becomes more significant. 
As a result, the raw BER of NAND flash memory varies dra­
matically under different PIE cycles with different retention 
time. Even for chips from the same fabrication batch, their raw 
BER still could have a large variance from blocks to blocks 
and from chips to chips. To show these effects, we carried out 
extensive experiments using several sub-22nm MLC NAND 
flash memory chips, and Fig. 2 shows the measurement results. 
Figure 2 (a) shows the average raw BER over all the chips with 
respect to the number of PIE cycles. With 1000 PIE cycles and 
a short retention time, the average raw BER is only 6 x 10-5. 
In comparison, the average raw BER increases to 2 x 10-3 
with 5000 PIE cycles and a longer retention time. Figure 2 (b) 
further shows the raw BER variations among different pages 
for the two cases, where we randomly chose total 8192 pages 
over all the chips and measured the numbers of errors within 
each page to obtain the statistical histograms. The raw BER of 
the best and the worst pages is marked in Fig. 2(a) as well. The 
measurement results clearly show that raw BER of flash mem­
ory pages strongly depends on PIE cycles and has a significant 
variation. 
Since ECC should ensure the data storage integrity under 
the worst-case scenario, the above results clearly suggest that 
the error correction strength of worst-case oriented ECC can 
be largely more-than-enough most of the time for most pages. 
Equivalently, in most of the time, majority of flash memory 
3 
A 
10-50>a--?----'10@--1 L5 ___ 2
l
0--A25B----C3LO
---' 
Retention Time (day) 
(a) 
I2:a 1 k PIE cycles, 2 days retention 
0.15 
X 5k PIE cycles, 30 days retention 
g-
" g 0.10 
,t 
C 
0.15 
0.10 
8 0.05 
Point B 0.05 
Point C 
PointD 
 
1 
1 
Il. 0.00 ..I..---''I''-'"''''r''-..... 'T'''''"''';=- 0.00 +-'YZ..>..L.:f'-'-L.L:J..t>.L>i:"'9-[ 
10 
15 
0 
200 
Number of page errors 
(b) 
400 
Figure 2: Sub-22nm MLC NAND flash memory chips measure­
ment results of (a) raw BER vs. data retention time 
under different PIE cycles, and (b) per-page bit er­
rors histogram. 
pages have a much better-than-worst-case reliability and hence 
are over-protected by the ECC. 
Meanwhile, as the industry keeps pushing the NAND flash 
memory I/O interface data transfer rate, it always ensures a vir­
tually error-free data link (e.g., BER of 10-15 and below). This 
simply follows the conventional high-speed data link design 
practice. However, in sharp contrast to other high-speed data 
links (e.g., in SDRAM and PCI), the data being transferred 
through NAND flash memory I/O are already protected by 
very strong ECCs for handling worst-case flash memory data 
storage reliability. As discussed above, the worst-case oriented 
ECC is largely under-utilized for most of the time. This di­
rectly motivates us to propose a design strategy as illustrated in 
Fig. 3: The key is a transition from conventional normal-speed 
error-free data transfer to higher-speed error-prone data trans­
fer by adaptively applying residual error correction strength 
to tolerate data transfer errors caused by aggressive I/O link 
over-clocking. The existing ECC is used to handle the errors 
from both NAND flash memory data storage and over-clocked 
data I/O data transfer. The higher-speed flash memory I/O 
data link can directly contribute to improving the overall data 
storage system speed performance. In addition, as pointed 
out above, in order to support newer-version higher-speed 
link specs (such as ONFI 3.x over ONFI 2.x), NAND flash 
memory chips tend to be noticeably more expensive. Using 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:49:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Controller 
Error-prone 
,----------------
, 0 0 0 0 0 
r Error-free 
,,: 
ECC Engine  Data Bus  NAND Flash 
Normal-clocking: 
Memory Chip 
0 0 0 
, 
, ----------------
I
---------------------------------\ 
I 
,---------------------------------
Significant ECC under-utilization 
(a) 
Controller 
Error-prone 
--------------------------------
r--::==::l r 
ECC Engine 
o o 
: 
,,11 
< Data"Bs  
i Adapfive over-
i 
clocking 
L.:::===:J \ 
NAND Flash 
Memory Chip 
, 
_
______ J----
o o o o o 
(lJ 
o 
 
o
"'  
0
0: 
o 
 
: e 
:liJ 
o o o 
t, ____________________________  
____ , 
Reduced ECC under-utilization 
(b) 
Figure 3: Illustration of (a) conventional design practice that keeps data bus error-free and results in significant ECC under­
utilization over the lifetime, and (b) proposed design solution that exploits available ECC error correction strength to 
enable aggressive and adaptive over-clocking on data bus to improve overall system speed performance. 
this proposed design strategy, we could approach a similar 
overall system speed performance while using lower-cost flash 
memory chips. 
3.2. Practical Realization 
In spite of the simple concept of the above presented design 
strategy, its practical implementation is not necessarily trivial 
and can involve various issues and trade-offs. In particular, we 
should carefully address the following three issues. 
1. Characterizing the over-clocking: Since we move away 
from error-free to error-prone I/O link through over-clocking, 
we should accurately characterize the impact of over-clock 
and quantify the link error rates under various frequencies. 
In this context, the most reliable and straightforward way is 
to carry out sufficient physical experiments using real flash 
memory chips. During the experiments, we can first search 
for the maximum allowable clock frequency. Given the error 
correction strength of ECC (e.g., the BCH code shown in 
figure 1 can tolerate around 4 x 10-3), we can accordingly 
determine the maximum allowable clock frequency that will 
not cause an error rate exceeding this error correction strength. 
During the very early lifetime of NAND flash memory chips, 
very few errors may occur in the flash memory operations, 
hence we could aggressively transport the data at this rate. 
Throughout the flash memory lifetime, raw storage reliabil­
ity gradually degrades, hence the allowable I/O link error rate 
accordingly reduces. Therefore, we should carefully deter­
mine the appropriate I/O link clock frequency given different 
allowable I/O link error rates. In Section 4, we will present an 
example on characterizing the over-clocking using commercial 
NAND flash memory chips. 
2. Over-clocking on read and/or write path: This proposed 
design strategy can be applied to either read path or write path, 
4 
or even both. When applying this strategy to the read path, 
we only over-clock the data transfer from the flash memory 
chips to the controller, and apply normal clock frequency for 
the data transfer from the controller to the flash memory chips, 
and vice versa for over-clocking on write path. 
Although 
over-clocking may introduce the same amount of bit errors for 
both read and write path, the impact could be largely different. 
When being applied to the read path, the 110 link bit errors do 
not cause pennanent data storage errors. If the over-clocking 
introduces too many errors that the ECC may not be able to 
tolerate, we can simply re-transfer the data with the nonnal 
clock frequency (or less aggressive over-clocking). However, 
when being applied to the write path, the 110 link bit errors 
directly result in permanent data storage errors. Therefore, 
we should be much more conservative on using over-clocking 
on the write path in order to ensure that overall data storage 
integrity is not sacrificed. 
3. Adaptation of over-clocking: 
As discussed above, the 
over-clocked frequency should be adaptively adjusted in re­
sponse to the gradual flash memory raw storage reliability 
degradation. 
Straightforwardly, one may adapt the over­
clocking in the worst-case oriented manner, i.e., the present 
clock frequency should not generate more bit errors than 
what can be tolerated by the worst-case pages. Under this 
straightforward approach, the controller on-the-fly monitors 
the raw storage reliability of the worst-case pages, and accord­
ingly sets the I/O link clock frequency for all the subsequent 
110 data transfer operations. Nevertheless, such a worst-case 
oriented over-clocking adaptation could result in significant 
under-utilization of over-clocking, and we propose the fol­
lowing two adaptation schemes to improve the utilization of 
over-clocking: 
(i) Aggressive over-clocking adaptation with read retry: From 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:49:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
the discussion and measurement results presented in Sec­
tion 3.1, we know that the page BER has a wide distribution. 
Under the same number of PIE cycles, only a small portion 
of pages could challenge the limit of ECC. Therefore, we 
can very aggressively set the over-clocking, especially on 
the read path. Once an ECC decoding failure occurs, we 
simply lower the transfer rate and read again. Note that we 
may not need to sense the flash memory array again if the 
data are still being held by the flash memory page register. 
(ii) Multiple data transfer rate with heterogeneous over­
clocking: The VO link errors under over-clocking may 
originate from cross-wire interference or on-chip VO cir­
cuit under-driving. I/O circuits on different dies or planes 
may suffer from different under-driving due to factors such 
as process variation. As a result, once we capture such 
variations, we can adaptively configure the over-clocking 
for different dies or planes in order to better match to the 
memory chip variations and hence improve the overall ef­
fectiveness of the proposed design strategy. 
4. Experiment Setting and Results 
To quantitatively evaluate and demonstrate the above presented 
over-clocking design strategy, we use an FPGA-based experi­
mental platform to characterize the effects of memory chip VO 
link over-clocking. These experimental results were further 
used in trace-driven SSD simulations, which will be described 
in Section 5. 
4.1. Hardware Platform 
Our hardware platform is built based upon an Altera Stratix 
IV GX FPGA PCle development board connected with a mez­
zanine board holding NAND flash memory chips. The FPGA 
device handles all the flash memory interface and commands, 
and can directly configure the flash memory VO link clock 
frequency. It reads data from flash memory chips and transfers 
the data through PCle interface to the host PC for bit error 
statistics analysis. 
4.2. Experiment Setting 
Because our purpose is to measure the data transfer I/O link 
BER caused by over-clocking, we use NAND flash memory 
chips with only few PIE cycles to avoid the interference from 
bit errors inside the flash memory cell array. The chip has one 
LUN consisting of two planes. The flash memory chips are 
ONFI 2.2 compliant and support a synchronous data transfer 
rate up to 166MBps as specified by the datasheet. 
In order to evaluate the use of over-clocking on read and 
write path separately, the experiment encompasses the follow­
ing two parts: 
(i) Over-clocking on read path: A set of random data are 
first programmed into some blocks in the flash memory 
chip at the normal data rate of 166MBps Then the data 
are read out and transferred from the flash memory chip 
5 
to the FPGA device at various data rates over 166MBps to 
characterize the impact of over-clocking on the read path. 
(ii) Over-clocking on write path: Random data are trans­
ferred from the FPGA device to the NAND flash memory 
chip at different data rates over 166MBps and progranuned 
into some blocks. Then these data are read out at the nor­
mal transfer rate of 166MBps. Since the flash memory 
chips only went through a few PIE cycles, the flash mem­
ory array will not contribute noticeable amount of bit errors. 
Hence, we can use the readback data to evaluate the effect 
of over-clocking on the write path. 
4.3. Experiment Results 
Fig. 4 shows the measured I/O link raw BER under different 
over-clocked frequencies. Very few link errors were captured 
on both read and write path when the data transfer rate is below 
237.5MBps. As shown in Fig. 4, the VO link bit errors become 
increasingly noticeable as we further increase the data transfer 
rate. The link bit errors on the write path increases slightly 
faster than those on the read path, which we expect is due to 
the difference between flash memory on-chip I/O circuits on 
the read and write path. The BER reaches over 10-3 under the 
over-clocked transfer rate of 275MBps. 
Figure 4: Measured 1/0 link raw BER on the write and read 
path under over-clocking. 
As discussed above, each page of user data is protected 
by individual ECC. Therefore, the VO link error statistics 
associated with each individual page is as important as the 
overall average I/O link raw BER. Fig. 5 shows the histograms 
of measured VO link errors per page when using 275MBps 
transfer rate on the read path and 262.5MBps transfer rate 
on the write path. From the histograms, we can observe that 
there is a small variance of link VO bit errors for write over­
clocking, while the variation is relatively significant for read 
over-clocking. As pointed out above, each LUN in the test 
chips contains two planes, hence we further investigated the 
dependency of the VO link error statistics on different plane. 
Fig. 6 plots the measured link raw BER for the two planes 
separately, which clearly shows a strong dependency of the 
VO link errors on the plane, especially for the read path. We 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:49:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
believe this is mainly due to the difference between the flash 
memory on-chip VO circuits in the two planes. We further 
investigated the 1/0 link errors among different blocks within 
the plane, and did not observe noticeable difference. This 
further verifies our conjecture since all the memory blocks in 
the same plane share the same 1/0 circuits, while each plane 
could have its own VO circuits. 
0.35 
Read Overclocking 
275 MBps 
is 0.30 
c 
2 0.25 
a' 
at 0.20 
§ 0.15 
o 
 0.10 
Ol 
&. 0.05 
0.00 +-,"'4""'--.-{|--.}-~--f"""'I''''''IF"''4'''''4-
-
o 
0.25 
is 
c 0.20 
Q) 
:J 
a' 
z 0.15 
LL 
C 0.10 
:J 
0 
U 
Q) 0.05 
Ol 
co 
a. 0.00 
200 
100 
200 
Number of Errors in One Page 
(a) 
Write Overclocking 
262.5 MBps 
250 
300 
350 
Number of Errors in One Page 
(b) 
400 
Figure 5: Histograms of the 1/0 link BER per page when the 
data transfer rate is (a) 275M Bps on the read path, 
and (b) 262.5MBps on the write path. 
10., r;::::;::=:;::===::::===:;r------,-------,----=:::til 
+ Read Overclocking: Plane 0 
_ ••• - Read Overclocking: Plane 1 
10" 
-e- Write Overclocking: Plane 0 
-0- Write Overclocking: Plane 1 
Figure 6: Measured 1/0 link raw BER for different planes under 
over-clocking. 
6 
5. Simulation Results 
Using the above experiment results on the VO link bit error 
statistics, we further carried out trace-driven simulations to 
evaluate the effectiveness of VO link over-clocking on the 
overall system-level speed performance. 
5.1. Simulation Setup 
We use the SSD module [4] in DiskSim [6] to carry out trace­
driven simulations. We use a set of different workload traces 
including the synthetic workload in DiskSim, Iozone and Post­
mark [4], Financal, WebSearch, from [3], and the traces re­
leased by MSR-Cambridge [17]. 
The SSD has 8 channels and each channel contains 8 MLC 
NAND flash memory chips. Each flash memory chip contains 
2 dies that share an 8-bit 1/0 bus and a number of common 
control signals, and each die contains 2 planes, each of which 
contains 2048 blocks. Based on our measurements with sub-
22nm MLC NAND flash memory chips, we set the block 
erase latency as 3.24ms, page programming latency as 1.45ms 
(upper page) and 121J.ls (lower page), and page read latency 
as 55J.ls (upper page) and 41J.ls (lower page). 
In the simulation, the maximum data transfer rate is set as 
275MBps and 250MBps for read and write path, respectively, 
based on the experimental results presented in Section 4.3. We 
consider 3 different page size configurations, including 4kB, 
8kB and 16kB. In each case, the average VO request response 
time at the data transfer rate of 166MBps is set as the baseline 
scenario. 
5.2. Write Over-clocking 
We first evaluate the SSD average write response time when 
using over-clocking on the write path. Traces used in this 
simulations have a large portion of write requests, varying 
from 70% to 100%. Fig. 7 shows the average write response 
time at the data transfer rate of 250MBps, which is normalized 
with respect to the baseline scenario with 166MBps. 
The results show that write over-clocking slightly reduces 
the average write response time. This could be explained 
according to Eq. 1. The page programming latency 'rarray_op 
for upper pages is quite large and dominates the total physical 
access latency 'rphy_acc. While it takes only 66J.ls to transfer 
16kB data to the NAND flash memory chip, programming 
these data into the flash memory cell array costs over Ims. 
Hence, write over-clocking can only improve the system write 
performance modestly. Our simulations show that moving 
beyond 250MBps will not noticeably improve the response 
time. In addition, as pointed out in Section 3.2, we should be 
very conservative about using over-clocking on the write path 
since the bit errors will directly result in permanent data loss. 
Therefore, even with a very strong ECC, it is highly desirable 
to limit the write over-clocking not exceeding 250MBps. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:49:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Q) 
E 
ELZI Data transfer rate 166 MBps 
 Data transfer rate 250 MBps 
ELZI Data transfer rate 166 MBps 
 Data transfer rate 250 MBps 
Q) 
E 
ELZI Data transfer rate 166 MBps 
 Data transfer rate 250 MBps 
 1.04-,""'c---­
'" 
c 
g, 
'" 
&. 
 0.9 
C 
'0 
.  
(ij g O.S -'-'''-''.J''''L..-''-'-'-=''---'-'-''-==---'-'E
''''­
 1.0 
'" 
c 
g, 
'" 
&. 
 0.9 -t-I"'T/Dl----I"T/EF----
C 
'0 
.  
(ij g O.S -'-'-'-"-""'L..--'-"-'''''''''---'-'-''-'''''-
--'-''''-
Z 
postmark IOzone 
Financial 
Page Size 4kB 
mds 
postmark IOzone 
Financial 
Page Size SkB 
mds 
Z 
postmark 
IOzone 
Financial 
mds 
Page Size 16kB 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Figure 7: Simulated SSD average write response time under over-clocking with respect to the 166MBps specification when the 
page size is (a) 4kB, (b) 8kB, and (c) 16kB. 
5.3. Read Over-clocking 
We carry out simulations over 5 different traces in which the 
portions of read requests are between 25% to lOO%. In the sim­
ulations, the data transfer rate is set as 166MBps, 200MBps, 
250MBps and 275MBps. The case of 166MBps data transfer 
rate is used as the baseline scenario to which the read response 
time of the other cases is normalized for each workload trace. 
Fig. 8 shows the simulation results over different traces. The 
average read response time noticeably reduces with the in­
creasing of data transfer rate, which clearly demonstrates the 
potential effectiveness of VO link over-clocking. As shown 
in Fig. 9, the etlectiveness of over-clock also depends on the 
page size, i.e., the larger the page size is, the more the read 
response time can be reduced. For example, when using the 
over-clocking of 275MBps, the average read response time re­
duction is around lO% for 4kB page size, while it will improve 
to 20% for 16kB page size. As NAND flash memory chips con­
tinue to increase the page size with technology scaling (from 
4kB several years ago to 16kB today, and it is expected to 
increase to 32kB in a few years), this over-clocking approach 
tends to be more and more appealing. 
From the results shown in Fig. 9, we can see a noticeably 
different effectiveness of link I/O over-clocking among differ­
ent traces. The effects of the read over-clocking on WebSearch, 
mds and hm are very close to each other. Trace Financial ex­
periences the least improvement, while trace prj can benefit 
from read over-clocking more than all the other traces. This 
discrepancy reveals two factors that affect the effectiveness of 
read over-clocking, including (i) the intensity of read requests, 
and (ii) interference from write requests, which are further 
studied in the following. 
Though prj is a one-week trace with relatively low overall 
lOPS, some part of this trace actually has very intensive read 
requests. Hence, it could suffer from a relatively long request 
queue, for which a higher data transfer rate is more beneficial. 
Based on the simulation results, the instantaneous average 
queue length is 20.7 for trace prj (16kB page size), compared 
7 
Q) 
E 1.5 
i= 
Q) 
"' 
" 
 1.0 
Q) 
[l: 
'0 
til 
Q)  0.5 
.t:! 
OJ 
E  0.0 WebSearch 
Q) 1.5 
E 
i= 
il 
" 
 1.0 
Q) 
[l: 
'0 
til 
Q)  0.5 
.t:! 
OJ 
E  0.0 WebSearch 
Q) 1.5 
E 
i= 
il 
" 
0 
iF 1.0 
Q) 
[l: 
'0 
til 
Q)  0.5 
. 
OJ 
E  0.0 WebSearch 
_166MBps 
8250MBps 
prj 
mds 
(a) Page size: 4kB 
_166MBps 
9250MBps 
prj 
mds 
(b) Page size: 8kB 
_166MBpS 
8250MBps 
prj 
mds 
(c) Page size: 16kB 
lIlIIm200MBps 
a275MBps 
hm 
Financial 
lIlIIm200MBps 
a275MBps 
hm 
Financial 
lIlIIm200MBpS 
a275MBps 
hm 
Financial 
Figure 8: Simulated SSD average read response time under 
over-clocking with respect to the 166M Bps specifi­
cation when the page size is (a) 4kB, (b) 8kB, and (c) 
16kB. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:49:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
c: 
o g 0.25 
"0 
& 0.20 
Q)  0.15 
Q) :g 0.10 t- ' IMN,<'t 
o 
a. 
m 0.05 
c:: 
_4kB 
 0.00 L..t:$%>I....J
= 
& 
WebSearch prj 
;mSkB 
16kB 
mds 
hm 
Financial 
Figure 9: Comparison of average read response time reduc­
tion of different traces when over-clocking the data 
transfer rate to 275M Bps. 
to less than 5 for all the other traces. As a result, read over­
clocking can largely reduce the read response time of trace 
prj, e.g., increasing the read transfer rate from 166MBps to 
275MBps reduces the average read response time by 26.1 % for 
trace prj. In comparison, trace Financial has a large portion of 
intensive write requests, which directly results in the longest 
request waiting time. As a result, the benefit of using read over­
clocking is not significant, e.g., increasing the read transfer 
rate from 166MBps to 275MBps reduces the average read 
response time by only 14.7% for trace Financial. 
To better illustrate the impact of these factors, we run further 
simulations using synthetic traces with the page size of 16kB. 
Different synthetic traces differ at the average inter-arrival 
time and read request percentage. With a higher read intensity, 
queueing becomes even more severe and hence causes further 
deterioration in read performance. Hence, read over-clocking 
in this case could more significantly reduce read response time. 
Fig. lO(a) shows the simulation results when 99% of requests 
are read requests. At the inter-arrival time of 15,us, the read 
over-clocking of 275MBps could substantially improve the 
read performance. As we increase the percentage of write 
requests, e.g., 75% of read requests as shown in Fig. lOeb), 
the effectiveness of read over-clocking noticeably drops, since 
the write requests causes a longer wait time due to the long 
flash memory prograrmning latency. 
5.4. Over-clocking Adaptation 
This subsection presents the results on adapting over-clocking 
throughout flash memory lifetime. As discussed in Section 3, 
we can realize dynamic 110 link over-clocking adaptation with 
two different strategies, including aggressive over-clocking 
with read retry and multiple data transfer rate with heteroge­
neous over-clocking. We only considered the over-clocking 
on the read path. Fig. 11 shows the simulated read response 
time results with page size of 16kB when using these two 
adaptation schemes, which are normalized with the scenario 
of maintaining 250MBps I/O. In the read-retry strategy, the 
110 link over-clocking is aggressively configured as 275MBps, 
8 
 1.2 
i= 
Q) 
tJ) 
§ 1.0 
a. 
tJ) 
 
-g 0.8 
 
"0 . 0.6 
ti 
E  0.4 
 1.2 
i= 
Q) 
tJ) 
§ 1.0 
a. 
tJ) 
 
-g 0.8 
 
"0 . 0.6 
ti 
E 
30 
R 166 MBps m 200 MBps 
§ 250 MBps S 275 MBps 
20 
15 
Average Inter-arrival Time (us) 
(a) 
R 166 MBps m 200 MBps 
§ 250 MBps S 275 MBps 
 0.4 L...L=="""-__ --""""""'"""'" __ --""'" 
200 
100 
50 
Average Inter-arrival Time (us) 
(b) 
Figure 10: Average read response time reduction using (a) 
synthetic trace with 99% read requests, and (b) 75% 
read requests. 
and when ECC decoding fails due to too many errors caused 
by aggressive over-clocking, the 110 link clock is reduced and 
data are re-transferred from the flash memory to the controller. 
Therefore, the overall effectiveness strongly depends on the 
first-time ECC decoding failure rate. In the simulations, we 
considered two first-time ECC decoding failure rate, 10% and 
5%. The case of 10% first-time decoding failure rate repre­
sents a worse flash memory reliability (i.e., at a later lifetime 
of flash memory) compared with the case of 5% first-time 
decoding failure rate. Note that most these first-time ECC 
decoding failures are caused by the memory plane O. In the 
multi-transfer-rate strategy, we set the data transfer rate as 
250MBps for plane 0, while for plane 1 it is 275MBps. The 
results show that, at the 5% of first-time decoding failure rate, 
the read-retry strategy can achieve a reasonable performance, 
which however severely degrades as flash memory further de­
grades (i.e., 10% first-time decoding failure rate). For a very 
low first-time ECC decoding failure rate (e.g., 1 % and below), 
the read-retry strategy will achieve almost the same perfor­
mance as shown in Fig. 8, hence have a less read response 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:49:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
time than the multi-transfer-rate strategy. In practice, we can 
combine these strategies: We always use the read-retry strat­
egy, and while the ECC first-time decoding failure rate reaches 
a certain threshold multi-transfer-rate strategy is invoked and 
different data transfer rates are used for different planes. 
Q) E 
i= 
Q) 9 1.05 
o 
a. 
'" 
& 1.00 
-0 
'" 
Q) 
0: 0.95 
-0 
. 
 0.90 
5 
z 
ELZj250 MBps 
_ Read-Retry, 10% retry probability 
§ Read-Retry, 5% retry probability) 
' Multi-Transfer-Rate 
WebSearch 
p( 
mds 
hm 
Financial 
Figure 11: Simulated read response time under different over­
clocking adaptation strategies. 
+WebSearch 
8 1.1 -e-Financial 
i= 
""'V-h m 
il 
-9-prj 
g 1.0Sf.'--'-'---..J· 
a. 
V> 
Q) 
0: 
'0 
co 
Q) 
0: 
'0 
.9  09::===---+-----Y 
5 
z 
0.9 
2s'coc---=-=':-:--=---:-:':-::--c:':-=---=-='SOOO 
Figure 12: Read response time over the late memory lifetime 
when using read-retry only, normalized to the sce­
nario of constantly maintaining 250M Bps I/O data 
transfer rate. 
We have measured the page raw BER distribution histogram 
under different PIE cycles with a retention time of 30 days 
using the sub-22nm NAND flash memory chips, as shown 
in Fig. 2 for two cases of lk and 5k PIE cycles. Combining 
these results with the rate-8/9 length-4kB LDPC decoding 
performance shown in Fig. 1, we can directly estimate the 
first-time LDPC decoding failure rate at different stages of 
the SSD's lifetime. The read-retry probability is only 0.5% 
at PIE cycles of 3k and reaches over 15% at PIE cycles of 
5k. Then we can run simulations to further evaluate these 
strategies over the memory lifetime. All the simulation results 
are normalized with respect to the average read response time 
at 250MBps of VO link transfer rate. 
Fig. 12 shows that 
the performance of read-retry strategy becomes less and less 
effective as the number of PIE cycle increases. We note that 
9 
the simulation results of the trace mds is very close to that of 
WebSearch, hence the trace mds is not included. Table 1 shows 
the number of PIE cycles when multi-transfer-rate strategy 
should be invoked based on our simulations. Fig. 13 shows 
the simulated read response time when combining read-retry 
and multi-transfer-rate strategies where we set that the multi­
transfer-rate is invoked when the number of PIE cycles reaches 
4000. The results clearly show that the combination of these 
two schemes can noticeably improve the etlectiveness and 
maintain a relatively consistent SSD speed performance even 
at the very end of memory lifetime. 
Trace 
Number of PIE cycles 
prj 
between 4000 and 4500 
hm 
between 3500 and 4000 
Financial 
around 4500 
Websearch 
between 4000 and 4500 
Table 1: Number of PIE cycles for different traces when multi­
transfer-rate outperforms read-retry. 
1.0S,--------_, 
Q) 
E 
i= 
Q) 
V> 
C 
o 
a. 
V> 
Q) 
0: 
'0 
:.'l 
+WebSearch 
-e-Financial 
""'V-hm 
-9-prj 
 09sG---
Q) 
.!:! 
'ii 
§ 
o 
Z 0.9 
2S00 
SOOO 
Figure 13: Read response time over the late memory lifetime 
when combining read-retry and multi-transfer-rate 
strategies, normalized to the scenario of constantly 
maintaining 250M Bps I/O data transfer rate. 
6. Related Work 
A large body of prior work has been done on improving the 
speed performance of flash-based solid-state data storage sys­
tems. Most prior work focused on how to exploit internal 
parallelism in SSD. Chen et al. [7] carried out comprehen­
sive study on the importance and potential by exploiting vari­
ous internal parallelism for speed performance optimization. 
Agrawal et al. [4] analyzed the effect of page size, striping 
and interleaving policy on the memory system performance. 
The authors of [15] developed several SSD speed performance 
enhancement techniques such as write request interleaving. 
Seong et al. [19] applied bus-level and chip-level interleaving 
to exploit the inherent parallelism in multiple flash memory 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:49:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
chips to improve the SSD speed performance. In [11, 12], the 
impact of page allocation on system speed performance has 
been thoroughly analyzed. All these existing solutions are 
completely orthogonal to this work. 
ECC for flash memory storage systems has been widely 
studied as well. 
As the most promising next-generation 
ECC, LDPC receives the most attentions from the indus­
try [21, 10, 22]. The authors of 
[23] investigated how to 
make LDPC work effectively in SSDs. Tanakamaru et al. [20] 
have shown that LDPC codes can improve SSD lifetime by 
lOx. LDPC decoding strategy optimized for flash memory 
was proposed in [16]. The authors of [i8] observed the ECC 
under-utilization and proposed techniques that exploit it to 
dynamically improve flash memory programming speed and 
defect tolerance. Nevertheless, to the best of our knowledge, 
no prior work has been carried out to exploit strong ECC in 
SSDs for improving data transfer rate. 
Recently, Intel demonstrated its SSD over-clocking technol­
ogy at IDF' l3 [1]. Its approach mainly over-clocks the SSD 
controller (i.e., from 400MHz to 625MHz) and modestly over­
clocks flash memory 110 link data rate (i.e., from 166MBps 
to only 200MBps) without causing any 110 link errors, which 
is fundamentally different from our proposed approach. Such 
an error-free over-clocking can achieve 10% improvement of 
overall system speed performance [1]. 
7. Conclusions 
This paper investigates the potential of leveraging strong and 
typically under-utilized error correction strength in SSDs 
to improve flash memory 110 data transfer rate. 
In this 
work, we propose an over-clocked SSD design framework 
that opportunistically trade under-utilized error correction 
strength for enabling aggressive error-prone flash memory 
chip 110 link over-clocking. Under this design framework, 
ECC is explicitly responsible for bit errors caused by 
both flash memory storage and data transfer. 
Under this 
design framework, we further present different schemes 
on dynamically adapting the 110 link over-clocking over 
the flash memory lifetime. 
To quantitatively evaluate the 
effectiveness of the proposed design solution, we carried out 
extensive experiments using ONFI 2.2 compliant sub-22nm 
flash memory chips with 166MBps 110 specs, and performed 
trace-driven SSD simulations over a variety of workload 
traces. The results show that the flash memory 110 link data 
transfer rate can be significantly over-clocked without any 
penalty of data storage integrity, which can translate into over 
20% of SSD read response time reduction. 
Acknowledgments 
We thank the anonymous reviewers and our shepherd Yuan 
Xie for their insightful comments and feedback. This work 
was supported by the NSF grant CSR-1162152. 
10 
References 
[1] 
"Intel 
developer 
forum 
(idf) 
2013," 
http://www.intel.com/ 
contentlwww/us/enlintel-developer-forum-idf/san- francisco/20 l31 
idf-20 13-san-francisco.html. 
[2] 
"Open NAND flash interface specification," hup:llwww.onfi.orgl. 
[3] 
"SPC 
Trace 
File 
Format 
Specification. 
http://traces.cs.umass.edulindex.php/Storage/Storage, 
Last 
ac-
cessed on June 6, 2010," Storage Performance Council, Tech. Rep. 
Revision 1.0.1,2002. 
[4] N. Agrawal, V. Prabhakaran, T. Wobber, J. D. Davis, M. Manasse, and 
R. Panigrahy, "Design tradeoffs for SSD performance," in Proc. of 
USENIX Annual Technical Coriference, 200S, pp. 57-70. 
[5] 
R. Bez, E. Camerlenghi, A. Modelli, and A. Visconti, "Introduction to 
flash memory," Proceedings oflhe IEEE, vol. 91, no. 4, pp. 4S9-502, 
2003. 
[6] J. S. Bucy, J. Schindler, S. W. Schlosser, and G. R. Ganger, 'The 
DiskSim Simulation Environment Version 4.0 Reference Manual," 
Carnegie Mellon University Parallel Data Lab, Tech. Rep. CMU-PDL­
OS-101, May 200S. 
[7] F. Chen, R. Lee, and X. Zhang, "Essential roles of exploiting internal 
parallelism of flash memory based solid state drives in high-speed data 
processing," in Proc. of International Symposium on High Performance 
Computer Architecture (HPCA), 2011. 
[S] R. G. Gallager, "Low-density parity-check codes," IRE Transactions 
on lriformation T heory, vol. IT-S, pp. 21-2S, Jan. 1962. 
[9] L. M. Grupp, J. D. Davis, and S. Swanson, "The bleak future of NAND 
flash memory," in Proc. of USENIX conference on file and storage 
technologies (FAST), 2012. 
[10] X. Hu, "LDPC codes for flash channel," in Proc. of Flash Memory 
Summit, Aug. 2012. 
[11] Y. Hu, H. Jiang, D. Feng, L. Tian, H. Luo, and S. Zhang, "Performance 
impact and interplay of ssd parallelism through advanced commands, 
allocation strategy and data granularity," in Proceedings of the Interna­
tional Conference on Supercomputing, 2011, pp. 96-107. 
[12] M. Jung and M. Kandemir, "An evaluation of different page allocation 
strategies on high-speed SSDs," in Proc. of HotStorage, 2012. 
[13] c. Kim, J. Ryu, T. Lee, H. Kim, J. Lim, J. leong, S. Seo, H. Jeon, 
B. Kim, I. Lee, D. Lee, P. Kwak, S. Cho, Y. Yim, C. Cho, W. Jeong, 
K. Park, l.-M. Han, D. Song, K. Kyung, Y-H. Lim, and Y-H. Jun, 
"A 21 nm high performance 64 Gb MLC N AND flash memory with 
400 MB/s asynchronous Toggle DDR interface," IEEE Journal of 
Solid-State Circuits, vol. 47, no. 4, pp. 9S1-9S9, April 2012. 
[14] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and 
Applications (2nd Ed.). 
Prentice Hall, 2004. 
[15] S. L. Min and E. H. Nam, "Current Trends in Flash Memory Technol­
ogy," Proc. of Asia and South Pacific Conference on Design Automa­
tion., p. 2., Jan. 2006. 
[16] R. Motwani and C. Ong, "Robust decoder architecture for multi-level 
flash memory storage channels," in International Coriference on Com­
puting, Networking and Communications (ICNC), Feb. 2012, pp. 492-
496. 
[17] D. Narayanan, A. Donnelly, and A. Rowstron, "Write off-loading: Prac­
tical power management for enterprise storage," in Proc. of USENIX 
coriference onfile and storage technologies (FAST), 200S. 
[IS] Y. Pan, G. Dong, and T. Zhang, "Exploiting memory device wear-out 
dynamics to improve nand flash memory system performance," in Proc. 
of USENIX conference on File and Stroage Technologies (FAST), 2011. 
[19] Y. J. Seong, E. H. Nam, J. H. Yoon, H. Kim, J. Choi, S. Lee, Y H. 
Bae, J. Lee, Y. Cho, and S. L. Min, "Hydra: A Block-Mapped Parallel 
Flash Memory Solid-State Disk Architecture," IEEE Transactions on 
Computers, vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 905 -921, Jul. 2010. 
[20] S. Tanakamaru, Y. Yanagihara, and K. Takeuchi, "Over-lOx-extended­
lifetime 76%-reduced-error solid-state drives (SSDs) with error­
prediction LDPC architecture and error-recovery scheme," in IEEE 
International Solid-State Circuits Coriference (ISSCC), Feb. 2012, pp. 
424-426. 
[21] J. Yang, "Novel ECC architecture enhances storage system reliability," 
in Proc. of Flash Memory Summit, Aug. 2012. 
[22] E. Yeo, "An LDPC-enabled flash controller in 40nm CMOS," in Proc. 
of Flash Memory Summit, Aug. 2012. 
[23] K. Zhao, W. Zhao, H. Sun, T. Zhang, X. Zhang, and N. Zheng, "LDPe­
in-SSD: Making Advanced Error Correction Codes Work Effectively 
in Solid State Drives," in Proc. of USENIX coriference on File and 
Stroage Technologies (FAST), 2013. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:49:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
