√ LDPC Code Designs Based on I Matrices

Shayan G. Srinivasa Department of Electronic Systems Engineering Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, 560012
Email: shayan.gs@dese.iisc.ernet.in

Abstract—LDPC codes can be constructed by tiling permutation matrices that belong to the square root of identity type and similar algebraic structures. We investigate into the properties of such codes. We also present code structures that are amenable for efficient encoding.
Index Terms—LDPC codes, permutation matrices
I. INTRODUCTION
Low density parity check codes (LDPC) [1] are deployed in practical data transmission and storage systems due to their excellent error correction capabilities. The code construction, design of efficient encoding/decoding architectures and theoretical analysis towards provably guaranteed performance have been the subject of active research over the last few years. From an information-theoretic perspective, in order to get towards capacity, we need to build LDPC codes with (a) long block lengths, and (b) random structures, along with a near optimal decoding algorithm. The original sum-product algrithm is optimal for Tanner graphs that are acyclic.
The design of practical LDPC codes is guided by girth, degree distributions and structures that avoid dominant trapping sets [2]. Though random codes are attractive from performance perspective, they are not pragmatic due to high computational complexity associated with the encoding and decoding algorithms. Also, random codes have a huge storage complexity associated with the storing of parity and generator matrices. Hence, structured codes with algebraic and combinatorial structures are more amenable for practical coding architectures. One of the most popular code designs is based on the class of quasi-cyclic (QC) matrices [3]. QC codes can be encoded using simple shift registers. The decoding of QCLDPC codes can be done in a parallel fashion by exploiting cyclic symmetry in the code using barrel shifters and modulo operations. Properly constructed QC-LDPC codes achieve performance close to random codes in the waterfall and error floor regions. This has paved way for their deployment in most Silicon integrated circuit (IC) applications.
Permutation matrices offer flexible degrees of parallelism in the construction of LDPC codes suited for high speed applications. By grouping a subset of permutation matrices with a predefined algebraic structure, we can construct structured LDPC codes for parallel encoding and decoding of data. In this paper, we are interested in constructing structured LDPC codes by tiling permutation matrices that belong to the square-root of identity class. We show that the generator matrix comprises of a tile of submatrices, each of which can

√ be realized a sum of I matrices. This is similar to QCcodes that have generator matrices expressed in systematiccirculant (SC) form. We also highlight an efficient on-the-fly √encoding method that can work with these codes. We show that
I matrices offer efficient encoding and decoding structures amenable for practical realization of coding architectures and performance gains comparable to the QC-LDPC family of codes.
The remainder of this paper is organized as f√ollows. In section II, we describe the construction of binary I LDPC codes guided by girth, code rate and degree distributions. We study the properties of these matrices, in particular, the rank of these matrices, with an eye towards efficient encoding. In section III, √we show an equivalence between generator matrices from I LDPC codes with QC family of LDPC codes. We also highlight the conditions for efficient on-thefly encoding for these codes. Simulation results are discussed in section IV followed by conclusions in section V.
√ II. TILING I LDPC MATRICES
Let P denote the set of all permutation matrices of order p. We have |P| = p! such matrices. The set of all permutation matrices of order p forms a special linear group SLG(p). Let Sp ⊂ P be a subset of permutation matrices defined for even order p with the property A2 = I√for A ∈ S. The matrices in Sp are defined to belong to the I family of matrices over GF (2), and are full rank.
Example: For p = 2, we have

S2 =

10 01

,

01 10

.

In the following subsection, we will explore a few properties of these matrices.

A. Structure and properties
Let bin(a) be the binary representation of an integer a su√ch that 0 ≤ a ≤ p − 1. Given a, the basic tile for a p × p I matrix can be constructed as follows:
• Represent the rows 0 ≤ i ≤ p − 1 and columns 0 ≤ j ≤ p − 1 in the form of binary tuples corresponding to the row/column positions.
• Populate a ‘1’ in the array position (i, j) if bin(i) + bin(j) = bin(a) mod (2).
Example: For p = 4 and a = 1, we can build a matrix φ(a) ∈ Sp as,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:46:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

⎛

⎞

0100

φ(1)

= ⎜⎝⎜

1 0

0 0

0 0

0 1

⎟⎟⎠ .

0010

Let A and B any two matrices ∈ Sp i.e., A2 = I and B2 = I.
Lemma 1: The following properties hold true:
1) AB = BA. 2) (AB)2 = I.
Proof: (1) In order to prove the first property, we note that A = AT and B = BT since commutative addition holds true over the code coordinates.

(AB)T = BT AT = BA

(1)

But,

(AB)T = AB.

(2)

Using equations (1) and (2), the first property is proved.
(2) In order to prove the second property, we note that A−1 = A and B−1 = B, where I is the identity element.

(AB)2 = (AB)(AB).

(3)

Using the property BA = AB in equation (3), we have,

(AB)2 = (AB)(BA).

(4)

This establishes the second property.

For A and B ∈ Sp, the following result is true regarding

the rank of the matrices under modulo binary addition.

Lemma

2:

gfrank(A + B) =

1 2

p.

Proof:

Let a and b be integers for construction of the matrices A

and B respectively. We note that A + B has repeated rows since the positions of ones occurring in the ith row of A + B are identical to a positions of ones occurring in the jth row

of A + B when bin(i) + bin(j) = (bin(a) + bin(b))mod(2).

Since such rows i and j form a pair,

gfrank(A

+

B)

=

1 2

p.

(5)

Given a code rate R, block length n which is an even power, and column weight c, one can con√struct a parity check matrix H of a certain girth g by tiling I matrices of order p and ensuring that the girth constraints are satisfied during the code construction.

III. PROPERTIES TOWARDS EFFICIENT ENCODING

We will address how efficient encoding√can be done for parity check matrices obtained by tiling I matrices. We

first show that the generator matrix comprises of a tile√of

submatrices, each of which can be realized a sum of I
n

matrices. Let X be a p×p matrix such that X = Xi, where

i=1
Xi ∈ Sp. Let y and z be p × 1 row vectors with 0,1 entries

and weights s and t √respectively. Suppose Z is expressed as

a sum of matrices ∈ I, we have the following result.

n

Theorem 1: The solution to

Xi Y = Z exists such

√i=1

that Y is a sum of matrices ∈ I.

Proof:

Suppose we have a solution to the equation

n

Xi y = z.

(6)

i=1

We can express equation (6) as

n

s

t

Xi yi = zi.

(7)

i=1 i=1

i=1

Suppose φ(d√ec(yi)) and φ(dec(zi)) are the equivalent matrices belonging to I class, where, the function dec√(.) is the decimal equivalent of the integer representing the I matrix tile. We can express equation (7) as

n
Xi

s
φ(dec(yi)) [10...0]T =

t
φ(dec(zi)) [10...0]T .

i=1

i=1

i=1

√

(8)

Let ψ(k) be a matrix belonging to I class such that k is the

integer representing decimal equivalent of the binary vector in

first column of ψ(k).

Pre-multiplying both sides of equation (8) by ψ(k), and
n
using the fact that ψ(k) and Xi commute as per Lemma
i=1
1, we have,

n
Xiψ(k)

s
φ(dec(yi)) [10...0]T = ψ(k)

t
φ(dec(zi)) [10...0]T .

i=1

i=1

i=1

(9)

s

Since ψ(k) operating on φ(dec(yi)) is essentially reading

i=1
off the kth column from each of φ(dec(yi)) and φ(dec(zi)), we

can express (9) as follows

n
Xi

s
φ(dec(yi)) [0..1.0]T =

t
φ(dec(zi)) [0..1.0]T .

i=1

i=1

i=1
(10)

The equation (10) holds for every ψ√(k), 0 ≤ k ≤ p − 1, implying that, generator matrices for I matrices can be

expressed in systematic-square root of identity form.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:46:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

We note that this result is similar to the quasi-cyclic codes [3]. The efficient encoding procedure from [3] can be easily applied to the above case.

A. On-the-fly encoding
Some times fast encoding circuitry is needed in applications such as dynamic network coding where throughtput and storage requirements are stringent. For this purpose, we can use the on-the-fly method [4]. Let k and n denote the user and code lengths respectively. The key idea is to decompose the parity check matrix as H := [A|B] in systematic form, where A is of √order (n−k)×k and B is of order (n−k)×(n−k) belonging to
I type of matrices. By choosing prototype masks [4] with the desired flexibility of degree distribution and parallelism p over the matrix B, we can ensure that the parity bits can be constructed on-the-fly. The following theorem provides the conditions for the existence of such encoders.
Theorem 2: The condition gfrank(B) = n − k is necessary and sufficient for the construction of on-the-fly encoders [4].

IV. CODE PERFORMANCE EVALUATION

√ To validate the efficacy of the codes, we evaluate the I

LDPC codes under the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN)

channel model with zero mean and variance σ2. The code

rate

was

fixed

to

be

around

8 9

with

column

weight

4

and

block length of 8192 bits. The signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) was

evaluated as

V. CONCLUSIONS
Permutation matrices offer a wide range of flexibility in the d√esign of structured LDPC codes. Codes constructed from I family of matrices share similarities in the structure of generator and parity check matrices. As a consequence, efficient encoding methods can be realized for this class of codes√similar to the QC family of codes. The generalizations into n I matrices, and an efficient encoding structure in the most general form is of theoretical interest.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The author would like to acknowledge his former colleague Dr. √Razmik Karabed for very fruitful and insightful discussions on I matrices.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IEEE. Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21-28, 1962.
[2] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Modern coding theory,” Cambridge Press, 2008.
[3] Z. Li, L. Chen, L. Zeng, S. Lin, and W. H. Fong, “Efficient encoding of quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE. Trans. Comm., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 71-81, 2006.
[4] S. G. Srinivasa and A. Weathers, “An efficient on-the-fly encoding algorithm for binary and finite field LDPC codes,” IEEE. Comm. Lett., vol. 13, no. 11, pp. 1-3, 2009.

SNR(dB) = 10 log10

1 Rσ2

.

(11)

100

Rate ~8/9 over AWGN, code length ~8192 bits

QC family

Root of identity family

10-1

Probabilty of code failure

10-2

10-3

10-4

-5

10 3

3.5

4

4.5

5

5.5

6

SNR in dB

Fig. 1. Probability of code failure over the AWGN channel model.

For the purposes√of comparison, codes from QC family were compared against I class. As we can observe from Fig. 1, the performance difference between the two code families is very marginal for two particular code instances simulated.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:46:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

