A New Schedule for Decoding Low-Density Parity-Check Codes

Yongyi Mao University of Toronto Dept. of Electrical and Computer Eng. 10 King’s College Road Toronto, ON, Canada M5S 3G4

Amir H. Banihashemi Carleton University
Dept. of Systems and Computer Eng. 1125 Colonel By Drive
Ottawa, ON, Canada K1S 5B6

Abstract— The best known practical algorithm for the decod-

ing of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes is the iterative

sum-product or belief propagation algorithm, operating on a

Tanner graph (TG) of the code. Conventionally, in each itera-

tion, all the symbol nodes and subsequently all the check nodes

in the TG pass new messages to their neighbors (the so-called

“flooding schedule”). In this work, we propose a new message-

passing schedule, called “probabilistic schedule.” Unlike flood-

ing, the probabilistic schedule operates based on the structure

of the TG, and probabilistically balances the frequency at which

different symbol nodes update their outgoing messages in ac-

cordance with their girths. Our results show that, particularly

for short block lengths, the new schedule offers a much better

performance/complexity trade-off. For a particular example of

a ´½¾

µ code, at no cost in complexity, the probabilistic

schedule not only decreases both the bit and message error rates

by an order of magnitude, but also reduces the number of unde-

tected errors considerably.

This work shows the importance of scheduling in the perfor-

mance of iterative decoding algorithms and suggests that a sched-

ule which matches the structure of the TG can substantially im-

prove the performance/complexity trade-off in the decoding of

short LDPC codes.

I. INTRODUCTION
The significance of the rediscovery of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1], [2] not only resides on its pushing the performance of error correction codes extremely close to the Shannon limit [3], [4], but it also has invoked great interest in a class of powerful lowcomplexity decoding algorithms, i.e., the iterative message-passing algorithms operating on the graphs defining the codes. In the context of decoding LDPC codes, the graph refers to the Tanner graph (TG) and the message-passing algorithm usually refers to the iterative belief propagation, or sum-product algorithm[5].
The TG of a linear block code is a bipartite graph constructed from the parity-check matrix of the code. The graph consists of two sets of nodes, namely, symbol nodes and check nodes. Each symbol node represents a symbol in a codeword and each check node represents a parity-check constraint. Every check node is connected by an edge to the symbol nodes it checks. The TGs of LDPC codes are usually sparsely connected since the “density” of the non-zero elements in the parity-check matrix is low.
In the sum-product algorithm, each node in the TG passes mes-
This work was partly supported by an NSERC grant, and partly by an OGSST scholarship.

sages to its neighbors along the connecting edges. For a binary code, a message contains the likelihood information on whether a bit is zero or one. Assuming equally likely transmission of zeros and ones, and a memoryless channel, the initial message, or local message, ÑÙ, at a symbol node Ù is the log-likelihood-ratio

ÑÙ ÐÓ ÈÙ Ö ¼ ÈÙ Ö ½

(1)

where ÈÙ Ö ¼ and ÈÙ Ö ½ represent the conditional probability density functions of receiving value Ö for symbol Ù given zero and one are sent, respectively. This initial message can be computed when the characteristics of the channel are known. The message-passing rules between a symbol node Ù and a check node are as follows [6]:

ÑÙ

ÑÙ ·

ÑÚ Ù

(2)

Ú¾Æ Ò´Ùµ

ÑÙ

¾ÆÉ Ò Ú É ÐÓ
¾Æ Ò Ú

´½ · ÑÚ ´µ Ù
´½ · ÑÚ ´µ Ù

É

É¾Æ Ò µ

´½

Ú ´µÙ

¾Æ Ò µ ·

´½

Ú ´µÙ

ÑÚ µ ÑÚ µ
(3)

Æ ¡ where ÑÜ Ý, for any pair of connected nodes Ü and Ý, is the mes-
sage sent from Ü to Ý, and ´ µ represents the set of the neighboring

nodes. At the beginning of the decoding, all the incoming messages

to the symbol nodes are initialized to zero. The algorithm is then per-

formed by passing messages between the check nodes and the symbol

nodes in a certain order, referred to as an updating rule, or a schedule.

Conventionally, the message-passing schedule for decoding LDPC

codes can be considered as a version of the so-called flooding sched-

ule, in which, in each iteration, all the symbol nodes, and sub-

sequently all the check nodes, pass new messages to their neigh-

bors. For a cycle-free TG, applying this schedule along with the

sum-product algorithm results in the optimal a posteriori probabil-

ity (APP) decoding [5]. On a cycle-free TG of diameter , messages

along all the edges reach a steady state after ¾ iterations. In this

case, the summary message, ÑÙ, at any symbol node Ù corresponds

to the log-APP-ratio for symbol Ù being zero and one, where ÑÙ is

given by

ÑÙ ÑÙ ·

ÑÚ Ù

(4)

¾Æ Ú ´Ùµ

However, cycle-free TGs do not support good codes [7]. In fact, a typical LDPC code has many cycles in any of its underlying TGs. In general, as messages are passed through cycles, in some occasions, the steady state is never reached and in other occasions, even if the the algorithm converges, it may not converge to the APP values.

0-7803-7206-9/01/$17.00 © 2001 IEEE
1007
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:36:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Despite sacrificing optimality, iterative sum-product algorithm does offer a good complexity/performance tradeoff for decoding LDPC codes. Especially at large block lengths, the cycles in the TGs of LDPC codes are usually large with respect to the required number of decoding iterations and therefore, the TGs can be considered to be virtually cycle-free [6]. This results in a quasi-optimal performance for the sum-product decoding of long LDPC codes. However, for LDPC codes at short block lengths (10000 bits or shorter), since the underlying TGs often contain many small cycles, the sum-product algorithm performs presumably further away from the optimal.
It has been noted that various schedules may be applied for iterative message-passing decoding (see, e.g., [5] and [8]). In the literature, however, to the best of our knowledge, only the application of the flooding schedule is reported. As was pointed out by Forney [5]: “an open question is whether a different schedule could improve their (iterative decoding algorithms’) performance/complexity tradeoff.”
In this article, in an attempt to answer this question, we present a new scheduling scheme for the sum-product decoding of LDPC codes, called probabilistic schedule. Fundamentally different from the flooding schedule, the probabilistic schedule is tailored to the TG of the code by adjusting the frequency of message passing at each symbol node Ù according to the length of the shortest cycle passing through Ù (girth of Ù). The smaller the girth, the less frequently Ù sends new messages. We show by simulation that this new scheduling scheme significantly improves upon the flooding schedule with similar or even lower complexity. Moreover, our work suggests that for a given code and a given TG of the code, the message-passing schedule is essential to the performance of the sum-product decoder and significant gain in the performance/complexity tradeoff may be obtained by carefully designing a schedule based on some graph property relevant to the sub-optimality of the decoder.
II. PROBABILISTIC SCHEDULE
In a previous work [9], we introduced “girth distribution” as an important entity associated with the TG of a code, which relates the performance of iterative belief propagation algorithm to the structure of the graph. Girth distribution was then used to design short LDPC codes with good performance under belief propagation decoding. In this work, we use girth distribution to devise a probabilistic decoding schedule for message passing in a given TG of a given code. One of the main results of this research is to show that changing the messagepassing schedule can greatly improve the performance of iterative decoding algorithms at no cost in complexity.
To show how the girths of a TG can be exploited to improve the decoding performance through the modification of scheduling, we start with a careful examination of the message-passing dynamics in the sum-product algorithm with the flooding schedule:
Let Ñ Ü and Ñ Ò be the largest and the smallest girths in the TG, respectively. Assuming that node Ù in the TG has girth Ñ Ò, it takes Ñ Ò ¾ iterations for the message sent from Ù to propagate back to node Ù itself. Before this number of iterations is reached, the message-passing operations at all symbol nodes and check nodes are performed optimally. The reason for this is that, assuming independent information bits and memoryless channel, for each node, all the incoming messages and the local message are independent of

each other (indeed, it is precisely this independence that guarantees the sum-product algorithm to result in APP decoding for cycle-free graphs). However, at iteration Ñ Ò ¾, the incoming messages to node Ù, and any other node with girth Ñ Ò, along their shortest cycles are dependent on the local messages at those nodes. At this time, when node Ù passes message, the optimality of the algorithm would be violated. Notice that at this iteration, the message-passing operations at other nodes with larger girths still preserve their optimality. However, the violation of optimality at node Ù (and other nodes with girth Ñ Ò) would affect the global optimality, in the sense that there is no guarantee that the algorithm converges to the APP solution.
A partial remedy to this problem could be to synchronize the timing at which different nodes pass presumably non-optimal messages. To implement this, node Ù (and other nodes with smallest girth) would not update their messages at iteration Ñ Ò ¾ and instead, wait until the iteration Ñ Ü ¾ is reached. By the same token, any other node Ú, with Ñ Ò Ú Ñ Ü, would stop updating their messages at iteration Ú ¾. Therefore, at iteration Ñ Ü ¾ ½, only nodes with girth Ñ Ü would pass new information. When the iteration Ñ Ü ¾ is reached, all the nodes would be activated again and resume updating their outgoing messages.
There are two advantages to this strategy: First, we maximize the number of iterations in which only “optimal” messages are passed through the graph. (The maximum value is Ñ Ü ¾ ½.) Second, at iteration Ñ Ü ¾, when every node Ú resumes updating its outgoing messages, the incoming messages to Ú contain more “optimal” global information than they did at iteration Ú ¾. In other words, information from farther away in the graph are inputted to Ú when Ú restarts sending new messages.
It is worth noting that the aforementioned updating schedule is consistent with the intuitive notion of “equally double counting” the initial messages at different symbol nodes, discussed in [10]. The idea is to feed back the initial message at every symbol node to itself with the same frequency. It has been shown in [10] that in graphs with a single cycle, although this “equally double counting” of initial messages might lead to over-confident APP results, the final assignment of codewords is still optimal in MAP sense.
Incorporating the “equal double counting” condition in the message passing scheduling for a TG with multiple cycles could be very complicated. In this work, as the first-order approximation, we just focus on the shortest cycles that pass through symbol nodes, and try to equalize the frequency of message passing through these cycles.
It is clear that there are many different deterministic ways to implement this strategy, including the one we just described. A more natural approach however, is to implement the “equal double counting” randomly (probabilistically), hence the name “probabilistic schedule”:
To each symbol node Ù, we associate a probability ÔÙ Ù Ñ Ü. At each iteration (except for the first), first, each symbol node Ù updates its outgoing messages with probability ÔÙ and stays idle with probability ½ ÔÙ; then all the check nodes pass messages. For the first iteration, we follow the conventional flooding schedule, i.e., all the symbol nodes pass messages then all the check nodes pass messages. This is to allow all the initial message to be inputted to the graph from the beginning of the decoding.

1008
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:36:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

With this probabilistic implementation, on average, for every Ñ Ü ¾ iterations, a message sent by a node propagates back to the node itself once along its smallest cycle.
In the following section, we will see how the performance of iterative sum-product algorithm can be significantly improved using the probabilistic schedule.
III. SIMULATION RESULTS
Simulations are performed on a (1268, 456) LDPC code constructed by construction 2A [2]. This code was designed for the transport of ATM cells in an industrial project and its performance was previously reported in [9], [11]. In our simulations, BPSK-modulated codewords are transmitted through AWGN channel and the received vectors are decoded simultaneously using two sum-product decoders, one with the flooding schedule and the other with the probabilistic schedule. The decoding is stopped when a codeword is reached or at the 500th iteration. For both schedules, the bit error rate (BER) and message error rate (MER) are plotted in Figure 1, and the statistics for the number of decoding iterations are shown in Table I. The percentages of undetected errors and detected errors are also listed in Table II. This data was obtained by decoding up to 10,000,000 simulated codewords at each signal-to-noise ratio (SNR).
It can be seen that the probabilistic schedule provides a significant improvement in performance over the conventional flooding schedule. As the SNR increases, the BER and MER for the probabilistic schedule decrease much more rapidly than those for the flooding schedule. At the SNR of 2.5 dB, compared with the flooding schedule, the error rates for the probabilistic schedule are reduced by more than an order of magnitude. It is also observed that at low SNRs, most undetected errors resulting from the conventional flooding schedule are removed by this new scheduling scheme (note that both decoders process exactly the same received vectors). This is particularly useful when a feedback channel is available and an ARQ scheme is employed.
The average number of decoding iterations for the new scheme is slightly greater than that for the flooding schedule (by 3 iterations or less, for all SNRs). However, with the new schedule, since not all the nodes update messages in each iteration, the average total num-
È ber of computations is estimated to be comparable or even smaller
than what is required for the flooding schedule. In fact, in each iteration, the new schedule only updates · Ú Ú Ñ Ü messages on
Ú average, as compared to ¾ messages in the conventional flooding schedule, where is the total number of edges in the TG and Ú is the degree of symbol node Ú.
Simulations are also performed on LDPC codes at other rates and block lengths, and similar results are observed.

probabilistic schedule, at no cost in complexity, improves substantially upon the conventional flooding schedule, both in decreasing the overall BER and MER, and also in reducing the undetected errors.
Our work also shows that scheduling plays a very important role in the performance of iterative belief-propagation decoders. For a given TG of an LDPC code, there appears to be a great potential for performance improvement, particularly at short block lengths, through a careful design of the message-passing schedule.
The results of this work confirm that for pushing the performance of iterative belief-propagation algorithms to their limit, a properly devised message-passing schedule, which matches the underlying graph, is a necessity. As the first attempt in this direction, we hope this work inspires more interest and research in this area.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes, Number 21 in Research Monograph Series. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1963.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 457–458, Mar. 1997.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[4] T. J. Richarson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[5] G. D. Forney Jr., “On iterative decoding and the two-way algorithm,” in Proc. Int. Symp. on Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 1997, pp. 12–15.
[6] T. Richarson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[7] T. Etzion, A. Trachtenbeg, and A. Vardy, “Which codes have cyclefree tanner graphs?,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2173–2181, Sept. 1999.
[8] F. R. Kschischang and B. J. Frey, “Iterative decoding of compound codes by probability propagation in graphical models,” J. Selected Areas Comm., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 219–230, Feb. 1998.
[9] Y. Mao and A. H. Banihashemi, “A heuristic search for good lowdensity parity-check codes at short block lengths,” in Proc. ICC 2001, Helsinki, Finland, June 2001, pp. 41–44.
[10] Y. Weiss, “Correctness of local probability propagation in graphical models with loops,” Neural Computation, vol. 12, pp. 1–41, 2000.
[11] Y. Mao, A. Banihashemi, and M. Landolsi, “Comparison between lowdensity parity-check codes and turbo product codes for delay and complexity sensitive applications,” in Proc. 20th Biennial Symp. Comm., Kingston, Ontario, May 2000, pp. 151–153.

IV. CONCLUSION
Building upon the relationship between the girths of a TG and the sub-optimality of the belief propagation decoder, we propose a new message-passing schedule, referred to as “probabilistic schedule”. This schedule is based on randomly balancing the frequency at which different symbol nodes in the TG update their outgoing messages in accordance with their girths. We show by simulation that

1009
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:36:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

100

10−1

10−2

10−3

Error Probability

10−4

10−5

10−6

10−7

10−8

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

2

2.2

2.4

2.6

2.8

3

Eb/N0 (dB)

Æ ¢ Fig. 1. BER ( ) and MER ( ) for the probabilistic schedule (solid line) and the flooding schedule (dashed line).

TABLE I STATISTICS OF THE NUMBER OF DECODING ITERATIONS

SNR(dB)
1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5

flooding schedule

mean standard deviation

133

198

25.2

66.7

10.5

11.1

7.7

2.5

probabilistic schedule

mean standard deviation

135

192

28.5

61.8

13.4

10.1

9.9

2.6

TABLE II BREAKDOWN OF ERROR EVENTS INTO DETECTED AND UNDETECTED

SNR(dB)
1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5

flooding schedule

MER detected undetected

0.19 96.1%

3.9%

0.013 99.7%

0.3%

7.8e-4 100%

0%

2.7e-5 100%

0%

probabilistic schedule

MER detected undetected

0.21 99.4%

0.6%

0.015 100%

0%

2.7e-4 100%

0%

1.8e-6 100%

0%

1010
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:36:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

