782

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Expander Graph Arguments for Message-Passing Algorithms
David Burshtein, Senior Member, IEEE, and Gadi Miller

Abstract—We show how expander-based arguments may be used to prove that message-passing algorithms can correct a linear number of erroneous messages. The implication of this result is that when the block length is sufficiently large, once a message-passing algorithm has corrected a sufficiently large fraction of the errors, it will eventually correct all errors. This result is then combined with known results on the ability of message-passing algorithms to reduce the number of errors to an arbitrarily small fraction for relatively high transmission rates. The results hold for various message-passing algorithms, including Gallager’s hard-decision and soft-decision (with clipping) decoding algorithms. Our results assume low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes based on an irregular bipartite graph.
Index Terms—Belief propagation, expander graph, iterative decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes were introduced by Gallager in 1963 [1]. Gallager explored the properties of these codes under the assumption of optimal (maximum-likelihood) decoding. He also suggested several practical iterative decoding algorithms. Recently, following the introduction of turbo codes by Berrou et al. [11], LDPC codes have attracted significant academic and commercial interest.
LDPC codes have been shown to possess some very desirable properties [1], [3], [4]. Under the assumption of optimal (maximum-likelihood) decoding, it can be shown that for properly chosen ensemble parameters these codes have an error exponent arbitrarily close to the random coding error exponent [4].
Maximum-likelihood decoding of LDPC codes is in general not feasible. Instead, it has been suggested to use some iterative decoding procedure [1], [2], [7], [10]. Gallager [1] proposed two iterative decoding algorithms. The first is a hard-decision decoding algorithm. The second is a soft-decision decoding algorithm, which is more complicated but at the same time more powerful. Both algorithms are “message-passing algorithms” (a precise definition will be given later). Richardson and Urbanke [7] proposed other message-passing algorithms which may be viewed as a compromise between Gallager’s hard- and soft-decoding algorithms.
Sipser and Spielman [10] suggested an alternative hard-decoding algorithm, which is not a message-passing algorithm.
Manuscript received December 15, 1999; revised July 20, 2000. The authors are with the Department of Electrical Engineering–Systems, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv 69978, Israel (e-mail: burstyn@eng.tau.ac.il; gmiller@eng.tau.ac.il). Communicated by D. A. Spielman, Guest Editor. Publisher Item Identifier S 0018-9448(01)00722-2.

Using properties of expander graphs, Sipser and Spielman [10] proved that their algorithm can correct a linear number of errors in the received bits. On the other hand, for various channels and LDPC codes it was shown [2], [7], [8] that the fraction of errors, when using message passing algorithms, can be made arbitrarily small for relatively high transmission rates. In particular, when using the soft-decoding algorithm for properly chosen irregular LDPC codes, it was demonstrated that this property holds for transmission rates close to channel capacity. Hence in [2], [7] it was suggested to combine these two types of algorithms, that is to start iterating with a message-passing algorithm, and then switch to Sipser and Spielman’s algorithm (an alternative suggestion was to conclude the work by using some other, high-rate LDPC code, at the final stage). In practice, however, it was noted that this algorithmic switch is unnecessary (e.g., [2]).
In this paper, we show that expander-based arguments may be applied for message-passing algorithms as well. Hence the algorithmic switch is indeed unnecessary. The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we provide some background information on irregular LDPC codes that are based on random irregular bipartite graphs. We also briefly describe both Gallager’s message-passing decoding algorithms and Sipser and Spielman’s decoding algorithm. In Section III, we show how expander based arguments may be applied to the hard-decoding message-passing algorithm. In Section IV, we generalize our results. In particular, we present a similar result for the soft-decoding algorithm (with appropriate clipping). Section V concludes the paper.

II. BACKGROUND

Throughout the paper we assume a binary-input,

,

memoryless channel. The following method is used to construct

an ensemble of irregular LDPC codes. The method is based on

an ensemble of irregular bipartite graphs. We first specify two

sequences

is the fraction of left nodes with degree . is the fraction of

right nodes with degree . Without loss of generality we assume

that

,

,

,

. Hence, ,

are the minimal and maximal left degrees. , are

the minimal and maximal right degrees [note: in [10], [2], [9],

[8] the notation is different: ( , respectively) denotes the

fraction of edges with left (right) degree ( )].

Now, there are left nodes such that left nodes have de-

gree

. Similarly, there are right nodes,

0018–9448/01$10.00 © 2001 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:49:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BURSHTEIN AND MILLER: EXPANDER GRAPH ARGUMENTS FOR MESSAGE-PASSING ALGORITHMS

783

an arbitrary binary-input one, we assume that is a binary quantized version of the output of the channel). Leftbound messages are messages transmitted from a check node to a variable node. Rightbound messages are messages transmitted from a variable node to a check node.

= Fig. 1. Constructing a random irregular graph (

 ,

 =  , and  =  ).

such that nodes have degree counting the total number of edges we have

= ,
. By

Algorithm 1: Gallager’s hard-decoding
algorithm [1] Do the following two steps,
alternately (the number of iterations will be
discussed later):
1. Rightbound messages. For all edges e = (i; j)
do the following in parallel: If this is the
zeroth round, then set gi; j to si. Otherwise compute gi; j as follows:
0 a) If more than (li 1) of the incoming left-
bound messages [excluding the message along
edge e = (i; j)] sent the same value to i in the previous round, then set gi; j to this value.
b) Otherwise set gi; j to si.
In either case, i sends gi; j to j.
2. Leftbound messages. For all edges (i; j) do the following in parallel: The check node j sends to i the parity (exclusive–or) of the
values it received in this round from its
adjacent variable nodes excluding i.

The edges originating from left nodes are labeled from to . The same procedure is applied for the edges originating

Notes:

from right nodes. The ensemble of bipartite graphs is obtained

by choosing a permutation with uniform probability from the

space of all permutations of

. For each , the edge

labeled on the left side is associated with the edge labeled

on the right side. This is shown in Fig. 1. Note that in this way

multiple edges may link a pair of nodes.

The nodes on the left side are associated with the codeword

bits (variable nodes) and the nodes on the right are associated

with the parity-check equations (constraints or check nodes).

The mapping from the bipartite graph space to the parity-check

matrix space is such that an element in the matrix, corre-

sponding to the th node on the right and th node on the left,

is set to “ ” if there is an odd number of edges between the two

nodes, and to “ ” otherwise.

The rate of each code in the ensemble satisfies

1) The value of is, in general, a function of , , and the iteration index.

2) The hard-decoding algorithm is also called Gallager’s de-

coding algorithm B. Gallager’s decoding algorithm A is a

special case of this algorithm with

arbitrarily close

to .

The second algorithm that Gallager proposed is a soft-decoding algorithm, which is more complicated and time-consuming. However, it possesses improved performance compared to the hard-decoding algorithm. The soft-decoding algorithm may be described as follows. Let be the channel output for the th input bit, and let be the following log-likelihood ratio:

(the inequality is due to a possible redundancy in the

parity-check equations).

A special case of the irregular code ensemble that was de-

scribed above is obtained by setting

and

. We then have an

regular code en-

semble. It was shown [8] that by setting and appropriately,

the performance of irregular codes can be made superior to the

performance of both regular codes and turbo codes.

Gallager proposed two practical iterative decoding algo-

rithms for LDPC codes. We first present the hard-decoding

algorithm. In the following, and denote the number of

edges of the th variable node and th check node, respectively.

is the received value (channel

output) corresponding to the th variable (if the channel is

where

denotes the a posteriori probability of the trans-

mitted bit given (we have assumed that the code is such that

the a priori probabilities of an input bit are equal).

Algorithm 2: Gallager’s soft-decoding algorithm [1] Do the following two steps, alternately (the number of iterations will be discussed later):

1. Rightbound messages. For all edges e = (i; j)

do the following in parallel: If this is the

zeroth round, than set gi; j to mi. Otherwise

g m i; j = i +

hi; k

k2N n (i) j

(1)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:49:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

784

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

two definitions coincide. However, we found our definition to be more convenient for formulating our results for irregular bipartite graphs.
The parallel version of the algorithm that was proposed in [10] reads as follows.

= Fig. 2. A depth-two tree spanned from e (i; j) after one iteration. Note
that the tree is actually spanned backward, that is, opposite to the direction in
which information is transferred.

Algorithm 3: Sipser and Spielman, parallel decoding algorithm [10]. Iterate the following (the number of iterations will be discussed later): For each variable node, count the number of unsatisfied check nodes among its neighbors. Flip in parallel each variable node
with fraction larger than  of its neighbors
unsatisfied.

N where (i) denotes the set of neighbor nodes
of i. In either case, the variable node i
sends gi; j to j.

2. Leftbound messages. For all edges (i; j) do the following in parallel: The check node j sends i the following message, h : i; j

hi; j = f

eg k2N (j)ni eg

01
+1

0 f (u)

=

log

1 1

+

u u

:

(2)

Note: In [10],

is used in Algorithm 3.

Sipser and Spielman [10] proved that their algorithm can cor-

rect a linear number of errors in the received bits. As was noted

in Section I, this led [2], [7] to the suggestion to combine mes-

sage-passing algorithms with Algorithm 3. That is, to start it-

erating with a message-passing algorithm, and then switch to

Algorithm 3. The resulting combined algorithm can be used for

decoding at relatively high rates. In the next two sections, we

show that as long as is large enough, this switch is unneces-

sary (for

).

The soft-decoding algorithm is also called belief-propagation

decoding [6]. The reasoning behind Algorithm 2 is that in iter-

ation , is the log-likelihood ratio that corresponds to the

probability of the variable given the values of the variables in

the graph spanned from

in layers, under the as-

sumption that this graph is tree-like. This assumption will be

discussed later. The tree assumption is illustrated in Fig. 2.

Both Algorithms 1 and 2 are “message-passing algorithms” in

the sense that information is transmitted back and forth between

variable and check nodes along the edges. The transmitted mes-

sage along an edge is a function of all received messages at the

node except for the said edge. This property of the algorithm en-

sures that the incoming messages are independent for a tree-like

graph.

Sipser and Spielman [10] suggested a slightly different hard-

decoding algorithm, which is not a message-passing algorithm.

The proof of the convergence properties of the algorithm is

based on the notion of an expander graph.

We use the following notation. For any set of variable

nodes, we denote by

, the set of neighbors (check nodes)

of .

denotes the set of edges that connect with

.

In addition,

denotes set cardinality, so that

and

are the number of neighbors and edges of the set , re-

spectively.

Definition 1: A

expander is a

bipar-

tite graph, such that for any set of variable nodes with

.

In [10], [2] an expander is defined under the condition that

is small enough (

instead of

).

Note that when the underlying bipartite graph is regular, the

III. EXPANDER ARGUMENTS FOR GALLAGER’S HARD-DECODING ALGORITHM

Theorem 1: Consider a and suppose that
some integer such that

expander. Let

,

. Let be

(3)

Then Gallager’s hard-decoding algorithm will correct any errors at the received values, after at most

decoding rounds ( denotes the smallest integer greater than

or equal to ).

Proof: We say that a variable node is good if all the right-

bound messages it transmits are correct. Otherwise, the vari-

able node is bad. At the beginning of the iterations, the set of

bad nodes is the set of variable nodes with erroneous received

values. Consider some variable node with edges. Note that by

definition of the decoding algorithm, if this variable node has

more than

correct incoming messages then all its out-

going messages must be correct, i.e., the variable node is good.

To put it differently, if this variable node is bad then it has at

most

incoming messages which are correct.

We prove the theorem by showing that the number of right-

bound messages transmitted by bad variable nodes (number of

edges that connect the set of bad variable nodes) is monotoni-

cally decreasing under the conditions of the theorem.

Let denote the set of bad variable nodes at the beginning

of the th iteration of the algorithm. The set of bad variable

nodes after the th iteration,

, is comprised of two disjoint

sets.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:49:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BURSHTEIN AND MILLER: EXPANDER GRAPH ARGUMENTS FOR MESSAGE-PASSING ALGORITHMS

785

1) Variable nodes

that were good before the iter-

ation, but turned to be bad after the iteration.

2) Variable nodes after the iteration.

that were bad both before and

. Therefore, if a leftbound message from some check

node in to

is incorrect then this check node in

must be connected to

by at least one additional edge.

Thus

First note that for all

Let denote the set of neighbors of

that are not

neighbors of . Then

[Otherwise, at

least one variable node,

, is connected by more

than edges to . Therefore, this variable node receives more

than

correct messages. Hence this node cannot be

bad at the end of the iteration]. Hence

(4)

Further, suppose that expansion property

. Then by the

(5)

Combining (4) and (5), and noting that

The first inequality follows from the fact that for every incorrect

leftbound message from to

we can find another

edge from to

. This pairing up yields the factor

. We thus conclude that

Using
in the last equation yields (7)

and

yields

Combining (6) and (7) yields

(6)

We thus conclude that (6) holds provided that

. We now claim that

.

Otherwise, there exist some

such that

[this follows from the fact

that

, where the second inequality

is due to (3) and the fact that

]. Now by (4) and (5)

with

instead of

(so that

replaces

and replaces

), we have

(8)

Now since

, the term that multiplies

in the

right-hand side of (8) is nonpositive. Hence, using the expansion

property

in (8) yields

This proves the theorem.

Hence

The last inequality contradicts (3) [(3) holds for the first iteration. For subsequent iterations, we show that the number of rightbound messages transmitted by bad variable nodes is monotonically decreasing. Hence

for all

]. Hence (6) holds under the conditions of the

theorem.

Now, let element

have edges, such that at

Step 2 of the iteration, edges carry correct leftbound mes-

sages, and edges carry erroneous leftbound messages. We

know that

and

. Let

denote the set of check nodes that are neighbors of

,

but are not neighbors of

. Each element in that is

connected to

by some edge that carries an erro-

neous leftbound message must be connected to

by

at least one more edge. To see that, note that all incorrect right-

bound messages come from nodes in . Since

is

not connected to , all incorrect messages into come from

Comparing our proof to [10, Proof of Theorem 11], we

see that the generalization to message-passing algorithms is

achieved by using the definition of bad variable nodes instead

of corrupt (erroneous) variables. The generalization to irregular

graphs is achieved by showing the decrease of the number of

edges that connect the set of bad nodes, instead of considering

the number of corrupt nodes as in [10], [2]. Note that our proof

does not utilize case b) in stage 1 of Algorithm 1. In fact, when

the condition in case a) is not satisfied, we assume that is

set to the wrong value.

Theorem 1 asserts that if

and

than

Algorithm 1 will correct a linear number of errors, provided

that the graph is a

expander for some

. On

the other hand, in the Appendix we prove the following lemma.

Lemma 1: Consider an irregular bipartite graph that is

chosen at random as was described above. We assume that all

right nodes have degree at most (independent of ), and

all left nodes have degree at least . Then with probability

, for any

and

small enough,

is a

expander.

In particular, we see that if the left degree of all nodes is at

least , then is a

expander with

. The

last claim is [2, Lemma 2]. Lemma 1 is more powerful than [10,

Theorem 26], which is based on Azuma’s inequality.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:49:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

786

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Combining Theorem 1 and Lemma 1 we see that a sufficient

condition for Algorithm 1 to correct a linear number of errors

with probability

is

In particular, choosing

ensures that this property will

be satisfied for any

. We also see from Theorem 1

that

yields the best bound for the convergence rate.

This agrees with Gallager’s observation [1, pp. 50–51] that for

sufficiently advanced iterations, the best value of is .

The result of Theorem 1 is also applicable for the case that

instead of initial left-node values, we are given rightbound mes-

sages, a sufficiently large portion of which are correct. Indeed,

suppose that at some stage of the algorithm, the number of right-

bound messages that are in error is smaller than , where

is small enough. Then the number of bad variable nodes is

upper-bounded by . Hence, by the proof of Theorem 1, after

a sufficient number of iterations all messages will be correct.

This result may be combined with the following. It has been

shown [1], [9] that for various graph parameters and values of ,

a threshold probability

exists such that for any channel

crossover probability

, as long as the tree assumption

holds the probability of error of the root message approaches

as the tree-depth grows to infinity.

Combining these two results, we may now prove a stronger

claim, that for any crossover probability

Gallager’s

hard-decoding algorithm recovers all errors with probability

. This can be shown as follows.

Denote by the event that a specific edge carries an er-

roneous rightbound message after iterations [ is the edge

labeled on the left. Recall that this edge is matched with the

one labeled on the right. Thus,

is independent of ].

Further denote by the event that the graph which spans from

is tree-like in the first layers. By the definition of , for

any crossover probability

,

as

.

It is also clear [7], that for a given ,

as

.

Now

it follows that

is arbitrarily small for and large

enough. Let be a random variable indicating the number of

erroneous rightbound messages after iterations. Then

Theorem 2: Consider a irregular bipartite graph chosen

at random as was described in Section II. Suppose that

. Let be the threshold probability such

that for any crossover probability

, the probability of

error for the rightbound message of specific edge approaches

zero as the graph depth tends to infinity, under the assumption

that the graph spanned by to this depth is tree-like. Further-

more, let be defined as above.

Then for any crossover probability

the

probability that Gallager’s hard-decoding algorithm fails to cor-

rectly decode all bits approaches as

.

Note: The probability space is comprised both of the channel

and the code structure.

Typically

so that the proof of Theorem 2 utilizes

both the tree-based and the expander-based arguments.

Sipser and Spielman proved the convergence of Algorithm 3

for regular bipartite graphs, by showing that the number of cor-

rupt variables (variable nodes with wrong values) is monoton-

ically decreasing. In order to prove the convergence of the al-

gorithm for the general case of irregular bipartite graphs, we

need to consider the number of edges that connect the set of cor-

rupt variables, and show that this number is monotonically de-

creasing. Following the proof of Theorem 1 (with corrupt vari-

ables instead of bad variable nodes) it can be shown that for

, Algorithm 3 will correct any errors

after at most

decoding rounds, where

Combining this result with Lemma 1 we see that a sufficient

condition for Algorithm 3 to correct a linear number of errors

with probability

for the case

is

.

IV. EXPANDER ARGUMENTS FOR GALLAGER’S SOFT-DECODING ALGORITHM
In this section, we show that the techniques used in the previous section may be used for the soft-decoding (belief-propagation) algorithm as well. To this end, we formulate the results of Section III for a wider class of message-passing algorithms.
Definition 2: A message-passing algorithm is an algorithm on an irregular bipartite graph, proceeding as follows.
1) Initially, values are associated with each edge . These values are interpreted as rightbound messages.

Thus, by the discussion above,

can be made ar-

bitrarily small by choosing and large enough (i.e.,

). Hence, by Markov’s inequality, for any

we have

as

. However,

as was mentioned above, when

and is sufficiently

small, the decoding algorithm will always terminate success-

fully. Thus, a complete successful decoding is achievable with

a probability

.

On the other hand, denoting

and employing the law of large numbers, Theorem 1 implies

that for crossover probability

, Gallager’s hard-decoding

algorithm successfully decodes all message bits. We have thus

proved the following.

2) Then, the following two steps are performed alternately.

a) In parallel, the new value of each edge

is set to a function of all rightbound messages of

edges

,

. These values are interpreted as

leftbound messages.

b) In parallel, the new value of each edge

is

set to a function of and all leftbound messages of

edges , . These values are interpreted as

rightbound messages.

Definition 3: Let

good bad and let

good bad be two functions associating the right-

bound and leftbound message of each edge with a “goodness”

property, respectively.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:49:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BURSHTEIN AND MILLER: EXPANDER GRAPH ARGUMENTS FOR MESSAGE-PASSING ALGORITHMS

787

A message-passing algorithm is said to be good if functions and exist such that the following two properties hold.

1) At Step 2a), for each , if all rightbound messages

, , are good

good , then the

resulting leftbound message

is good

good .

2) At Step 2b), for each left node , if more than of the in-

coming leftbound messages

are good (

good ), then all the resulting rightbound messages

are good [

good for all ].

Retracing the proof of Theorem 1, the following generalization can be made.

Theorem 3: Consider a

expander. Suppose

that

. Let be some integer satisfying (3). If at

some stage of a good message passing algorithm, the number

of bad rightbound messages is at most , then after at most

rounds, all rightbound messages

will be good.

To prove the Theorem we first say that a variable node is good if all the rightbound messages it transmits are good. Otherwise, that variable node is bad. We then show that the number of messages that connect the set of bad nodes is monotonically decreasing, by following the arguments of Theorem 1.
To complete our argument, we now show that the soft-decoding Algorithm 2 is indeed a good message-passing algorithm. In practice, Algorithm 2 needs some modification, since the messages tend to increase to infinity as the iteration index increases (the probabilities that the algorithm assigns tend to approach either or ). Hence, it is common practice to clip the messages. We assume that after some number of iterations, we clip the absolute value of the rightbound messages to some sufficiently large value . In fact, it is this modification that makes it possible to extend our results to the soft-decoding algorithm. For convenience we also assume that the uncoded log-likelihood ratios are bounded by some constant (independent of ). In practice, the validity of this assumption follows from the fact that the channel output is typically bounded (e.g., a quantized channel).
As a consequence of the clipping assumption we have the following. First, from (2) we see that

In addition to that, suppose that

Then, since both

and

increasing

for

.

are monotonically

We now define the functions

and

as follows.

We say that a rightbound (leftbound) message is good if that

message has the correct sign and an absolute value after the clip-

ping ( ; here is the index of the check node that transmits

the message). Otherwise, the message is bad.

From (1) and the discussion above we see that for large

enough, if more than

of the incoming leftbound

messages of some variable node are good, then all the right-

bound messages

will be good. Hence, Property 2) in

Definition 3 holds for

.

In addition to that, it is easy to see that Property 1) in Defi-

nition 3 holds as well. Thus, by Theorem 3, if after iterations

there are bad rightbound messages, where is sufficiently

small, then eventually all messages will be good and hence cor-

rect (provided that we have the required graph expansion). We

summarize our results by the following theorem.

Theorem 4: Consider a irregular bipartite graph chosen

at random as was described in Section II. Suppose that

.

Further consider Gallager’s soft-decoding algorithm with clip-

ping of rightbound messages to a sufficiently large value after

a sufficiently large number of iterations . Let

be

some edge, and suppose that the graph spanned by to depth

is tree-like. Let be the rightbound message transmitted on

after iterations. The algorithm is operated on a binary-input

memoryless channel such that for all

,

and

is correct

, as

, assuming a tree-like

graph up to depth . Then the probability that the algorithm

fails to correctly decode all bits approaches as

.

Note: The probability space is comprised both of the channel

and the code structure.

In fact the condition in Theorem 4 can be weakened by using the following lemma.

Lemma 2: The following three conditions are equivalent for Algorithm 2 under the tree like graph assumption:

c1) For all

and

is correct

as

.

c2) For all

,

as

.

c3)

is correct

as

.

Hence, if

for all

then

where

Furthermore

Proof: It is obvious that Condition c1) implies c2) and c3).

Also, c2) and c3) together imply c1). To complete the proof we

show that c2) implies c3) and that c3) implies c2). For brevity,

we denote by . Let denote a decoding error event, i.e.,

is erroneous . Using these notations, c3) states that

as

.

Since we assume a tree-like graph, is the log-likelihood ratio

so that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:49:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

788

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Now

Hence (9)
c2) c3): Using (9) we have

(10)

Let

be any positive number. Since the function

takes its maximum in the set

at

, we have

from (10):

. Hence

is that once a message-passing algorithm has corrected most of the errors, it will eventually correct all errors.
In the previous sections we considered two message-passing algorithms. We note, however, that our results apply to other message-passing algorithms, such as the algorithms proposed in [7]. These algorithms may be viewed as a compromise between Gallager’s hard and soft message-passing algorithms. To this end, we define bad and good leftbound and rightbound messages, such that a necessary condition for goodness is correctness, and then apply Theorem 3.
In order to apply our results to the soft-decoding algorithm, a clipping assumption was imposed. It remains an open question whether this modification in the algorithm is really necessary.

c3) follows by setting large enough.

c3) c2): Since

for all , (9) implies

(11)

Let

be any positive number. Since the function

takes its minimum in the interval

at the boundaries,

(11) implies

. Hence, we have

Thus, plies

. Hence,

im-

for any given

.

APPENDIX PROOF OF LEMMA 1

To prove Lemma 1 we first state and prove an auxiliary lemma.

Lemma 3: Let ables, such that for all

be binary

where any

denotes the vector

random vari-
(12) . Then for

As was noted previously for the hard-decoding algorithm, a

threshold probability

exists such that for any channel

crossover probability

, as long as the tree assumption

holds, the probability of error of the root message approaches

as the tree depth grows to infinity. Now, under the tree as-

sumption, the soft-decoding algorithm yields the optimal (max-

imum-likelihood) estimate of the root message given the values

of the variables in that tree. Hence, the corresponding proba-

bility of error should be smaller than the probability of error

of any other algorithm (e.g., the hard-decoding algorithm) that

considers only that tree’s variables.

Suppose that some binary quantized version of the channel

is such that the probability of uncoded error is less than .

From the discussion above, the error probability of

ap-

proaches as the tree depth goes to infinity. Hence, Condition

c3) in Lemma 2 is satisfied, so that the condition in Theorem

4 is satisfied. Thus, we see that Algorithm 2 with appropriate

clipping is at least as good as Algorithm 1 for any binary quan-

tization of the channel output.

In order to examine whether the condition in Theorem 4 is

satisfied for some given LDPC ensemble and channel, we need

to evaluate the evolution of the message distribution as in [7]. In

fact, this evaluation can be made for Algorithm 2 when clipping

to some value is applied from the beginning. We note that

even though, in this case, the messages are not the log-likelihood

ratios (even under the tree assumption), Theorem 4 still holds.

(13) Proof: For any

(14)

where the second transition is due to the Markov inequality.

Now, for

we have, since is positive and using

(12)

V. CONCLUSION
We showed how expander-based arguments may be used to prove that message-passing algorithms can correct a linear number of erroneous messages. The implication of this result
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:49:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BURSHTEIN AND MILLER: EXPANDER GRAPH ARGUMENTS FOR MESSAGE-PASSING ALGORITHMS

789

Hence, by using the last inequality repeatedly for we obtain

Hence the solution of the constrained optimization (17) is given by

(15)

where

Combining (14) and (15) we have where

The solution is indeed a global maximum due to the convexity

of the objective function in

. Now, by setting

small enough, is made an arbitrarily small negative

number

. Hence it is easy to see that

(16)

as

(19)

Equation (16) holds for all . In order to obtain the tightest bound, we seek for that that minimizes . By straightforward differentiation it is easy to verify that the minimizing is
(note that , since ). The corresponding is
This yields (13).

In order to evaluate , we assume, without loss of gener-

ality, that the specific set of left nodes are the first vertices on the

left. We order the edges according to their position on the left

side of the graph, i.e., the first edge is the first edge of the first

left node, etc. Let be a random variable such that

if the th edge is connected to a right node which is not con-

nected to any previous edge (i.e., an edge with

). Set

. Let

We are now ready to prove Lemma 1.

Proof of Lemma 1: We use the following notation.

denotes the event that some specific set of left nodes in the

graph with edges has at most neighboring right nodes.

is the total number of ways to fix sets of left nodes with

edges. To express , note that is the total number of

left nodes with degree in the graph, and let be the number

of left nodes with degree in . We also denote

,

. Then

be the total number of edges in the graph.

is the

average degree of a left node. Now, for any binary vector

(20)

[Let denote the right node to which the th edge is connected. Then for any

The minimal conditional probability is obtained when is

where in the summation above are all integers. Recall that a set of

different check node indexes, such that all have

where is the entropy function

degree . (20) follows immediately]. Hence

Hence where

s.t.

Employing Lemma 3 we now have

(17)

Now, since

, we have

for

. Hence

(18)

To solve the constrained optimization (17) we define the La-

grange function

as follows:

provided that

(21) . Define

where yields

is a Lagrange multiplier. Differentiating

with respect to and equating to

(22)

Using (19) it is easy to verify that if

sufficiently small,

and

creasing in

.

then for is monotonically in-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:49:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

790

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Denote by the probability that all sets of left nodes with edges have more than neighbors. Then, from (18)
and (21) we have, by employing the union bound

[the second inequality is due to the fact that which follows from (18)] which tends to as
.

, since

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank R. Urbanke for pointing out an inaccuracy in a previous version of the paper, and for some comments that helped to improve the presentation of the paper.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.

[2] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, “Analysis of low density codes and improved designs using irregular graphs,” in Proc. 30th Annu. ACM Symp. Theory of Computing (STOC-98). Dallas, TX: ACM Press, 1998, pp. 249–258.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[4] G. Miller and D. Burshtein, “Bounds on the maximum likelihood decoding error probability of low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, submitted for publication.
[5] R. Motwani and P. Raghavan, Randomized Algorithms. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1995.
[6] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[7] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[8] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of provably good low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, submitted for publication.
[9] L. Bazzi, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Exact thresholds and optimal codes for the binary symmetric channel and Gallager’s decoding algorithm A,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, submitted for publication.
[10] M. Sipser and D. Spielman, “Expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 1710–1723, Nov. 1996.
[11] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shanon limit error correcting coding and decoding: Turbo codes,” in Proc. 1993 IEEE Int. Conf. Communications (ICC’93), Geneva, Switzerland, 1993, pp. 1064–1070.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:49:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

