IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

585

Improved Low-Density Parity-Check Codes Using Irregular Graphs
Michael G. Luby, Michael Mitzenmacher, M. Amin Shokrollahi, and Daniel A. Spielman

Abstract—We construct new families of error-correcting codes based on Gallager’s low-density parity-check codes. We improve on Gallager’s results by introducing irregular parity-check matrices and a new rigorous analysis of hard-decision decoding of these codes. We also provide efficient methods for finding good irregular structures for such decoding algorithms. Our rigorous analysis based on martingales, our methodology for constructing good irregular codes, and the demonstration that irregular structure improves performance constitute key points of our contribution.
We also consider irregular codes under belief propagation. We report the results of experiments testing the efficacy of irregular codes on both binary-symmetric and Gaussian channels. For
example, using belief propagation, for rate 1 4 codes on 16 000
bits over a binary-symmetric channel, previous low-density parity-check codes can correct up to approximately 16% errors, while our codes correct over 17%. In some cases our results come very close to reported results for turbo codes, suggesting that variations of irregular low density parity-check codes may be able to match or beat turbo code performance.
Index Terms—Belief propagation, concentration theorem, Gallager codes, irregular codes, low-density parity-check codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-density parity-check codes, introduced by Gallager in 1962 [7], have been the subject of much recent experimentation and analysis (e.g., [3], [4], [16], [17], [20], [21], [24]). The interest in these codes stems from their near Shannon limit performance, their simple descriptions and implementations, and their amenability to rigorous theoretical analysis
Manuscript received April 22, 1999; revised September 8, 2000. The work of M. G. Luby was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Operating Grant NCR-9416101. The work of M. Mitzenmacher was supported in part by the Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellowship and by the National Science Foundation CAREER Grant CCR-9983832. The work of M. A. Shokrollahi was partially supported by Habilitationsstipendium of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft under Grant Sh 57/1–1. The work of D. A. Spielman was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Mathematical Sciences Postdoctorla Fellowship, NSF CAREER Award CCR-9701304, and a Sloan/Cabot Award from the MIT School of Science. The material in this paper was presented in part at the 20th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, Dallas, TX, May 23–26, 1998.
M. G. Luby and M. A. Shokrollahi were with the International Computer Science Institute, Berkley, CA and Digital Equipment Corporation, Systems Research Center, Palo Alto, CA. They are now with Digital Fountain, Inc., San Francisco, CA 94110 USA (e-mail: luby@digital.fountain.com; amin@digital.fountain.com).
M. Mitzenmacher was with the Digital Equipment Corporation, Systems Research Center, Palo Alto, CA. He is now with Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138 USA (e-mail: michaelm@eecs.harvard.edu).
D. A. Spielman is with the Department of Mathematics, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA (e-mail: spielman@math.mit.edu).
Communicated by F. R. Kschischang, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Publisher Item Identifier S 0018-9448(01)00736-2.

[7], [10]–[13], [16], [20], [21], [24], [25], [27]. Moreover,

there are connections between these codes and turbo codes,

introduced by Berrou, Glavieux, and Thitimajshima [1], as

the latter can be described in the framework of low-density

parity-check codes (see, e.g., [14]). Moreover, the turbo de-

coding algorithm can be understood as a belief propagation

based algorithm [15], [9], and hence any understanding of

belief propagation on low-density parity-check codes may be

applicable to turbo codes as well.

We find it helpful to describe low-density parity-check codes

in terms of bipartite graphs. In the following, we refer to the

nodes on the left and the right of a bipartite graph as its message

nodes and check nodes, respectively. A bipartite graph with

nodes on the left and nodes on the right gives rise to a linear

code of dimension

and block length in the following

way. The bits of a codeword are indexed by the message nodes.

A binary vector

is a codeword if and only if

, where is the

incidence matrix of the graph

whose rows are indexed by the check nodes and whose columns

are indexed by the message nodes. In other words,

is a codeword if and only if for each check node the exclusive-or

of its incident message nodes is zero. (We note that our method-

ology can also be used to construct codes that can be encoded

in linear time with similar rate and error-correction threshold

by using a cascading series of bipartite graphs, as described in

[10], [27]. For convenience, we will not address this issue here.)

More specific details are given in Section II-A.

Most previously studied low-density parity-check codes have

been constructed using sparse regular, or nearly regular, random

bipartite graphs [3], [7], [16], [17]. That is, the degrees of all

message nodes are equal, and the degrees of all check nodes are

equal. This means that the parity-check matrix of the code de-

scribed above contains the same number of ones in each row

and the same number of ones in each column. We call these

codes regular codes. Our improved performance comes from

using codes based on irregular graphs. That is, the degrees of

the nodes on each side of the graph can vary widely. In terms

of the parity-check matrix , the weight per row and column

is not uniform, but instead governed by an appropriately chosen

distribution of weights. By carefully choosing the distributions,

we achieve improved performance. In fact, the codes we de-

scribe use a number of largely disparate weights, suggesting that

often the best distributions are far from those that produce reg-

ular codes.

That irregular structure improves performance is not sur-

prising in light of recent work rigorously proving the power

of irregular graphs in designing erasure correcting codes [10],

[11], [27]. Irregular graphs appear to have been rarely studied

0018–9448/01$10.00 © 2001 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

586

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

in the setting of error-correcting codes because of the difficulty in determining what irregular structures might perform well. The techniques for finding good erasure correcting codes determined in [10], [11], [27] provide the basis for some of the codes and the techniques we develop here.
In the following, we would like to offer some intuition as to why irregular graphs should improve performance. Consider trying to build a regular low-density parity-check code that transmits at a fixed rate. It is convenient to think of the process as a game, with the message nodes and the check nodes as the players, and each player trying to choose the right number of edges. A constraint on the game is that the message nodes and the check nodes must agree on the total number of edges. From the point of view of a message node, it is best to have high degree, since the more information it gets from its check nodes the more accurately it can judge what its correct value should be. In contrast, from the point of view of a check node, it is best to have low degree, since the lower the degree of a check node, the more valuable the information it can transmit back to its neighbors.
These two competing requirements must be appropriately balanced. Previous work has shown that for regular graphs, low-degree graphs yield the best performance [16], [17]. If one allows irregular graphs, however, there is significantly more flexibility in balancing these competing requirements. There is reason to believe that a wide spread of degrees, at least for message nodes, could be useful. Message nodes with high degree tend to correct their value quickly. These nodes then provide good information to the check nodes, which subsequently provide better information to lower degree message nodes. Irregular graph constructions thus have the potential to lead to a wave effect, where high degree message nodes tend to get corrected first, and then message nodes with slightly smaller degree, and so on down the line.
This intuition (which we observe in our experiments) unfortunately does not provide clues as to how to construct appropriate irregular graphs. We meet this challenge in two ways. First, we design a rigorous analysis for both regular and irregular graphs for a hard-decision decoding algorithm also suggested by Gallager. Even though these decoders do not perform as well as belief propagation, as one might expect, such schemes may still be useful in practice, since they are simpler and require less memory. Our main motivation for studying this model, however, is that we can make provable asymptotic statements about the performance of hard-decision decoding of irregular graphs. Using ideas from [11] for studying random processes, we show in Section II-A that with high probability, hard-decision decoding successfully corrects all but an arbitrarily small constant fraction of the message bits. Once the number of erroneous bits is reduced to this level, we switch from Gallager’s algorithm to one used by Spielman and Sipser in [22], and prove in Section II-B that this new hybrid method successfully finishes the decoding with high probability. This analysis easily extends to the irregular codes that we introduce in Section III. Additionally, the bound on the probability of error we derive using this methodology improves upon the bound derived by Gallager for the regular graphs he explicitly constructed. We emphasize that our approach differs strongly from Gallager’s original approach,

since we do not assume our graphs lack small cycles. Instead, our analysis applies to randomly chosen graphs.
From our analysis, we develop in Section III-B methods based on linear programming to find good irregular graph structures using the hard-decision decoding algorithm. The corresponding degree distributions have been tested extensively, and we report on some of these tests in Section IV.
The second way in which we meet the challenge of designing irregular graphs is to test the belief propagation algorithm on graphs that have been proven to be effective for erasure-correcting codes [10], [11], [27]. Intuitively, graphs that work well for erasure-correcting codes should also work well for error-correction codes, since the two are closely related.
As an example of our improved performance, we have found a rate irregular code that, on 16 000 message bits, corrects over 17% random errors with high probability in our experiments. On 64 000 message bits, a similar code corrects up to 18% random errors on our experiments. In contrast, the best regular code corrects up to approximately 16.0% random errors with 16 000 message bits and approximately 16.2% on 64 000 message bits. (The Shannon bound for rate codes is 21.45%.) We report on our experiments and simulations with the belief propagation algorithm in Section V-A.
We note that since this work originally appeared in [12] and [13], a great deal of progress has been made in this area. In particular, the work of Davey and MacKay demonstrates another approach to improving low-density parity-check performance by treating small numbers of bits as elements of an appropriate finite field [4]. By using irregular graphs and this technique, they have in some cases matched turbo code performance. More recent work by Richardson and Urbanke [21] and Richardson, Shokrollahi, and Urbanke [20] extends our analysis in Section II-A to message-passing systems where a message can take on one of a finite number of values. Using their extensions, they have obtained nearly tight provable bounds on regular and irregular codes using belief propagation and have developed techniques for designing irregular graphs that perform well under belief propagation.

II. ANALYZING MESSAGE PASSAGE DECODING
In this section, we consider a message-passing algorithm where in each round one bit is passed in each direction along each edge. This message-passing scheme was analyzed for specific regular codes by Gallager. Our new analysis extends to random regular and irregular graphs. We demonstrate that using irregular graphs can greatly improve performance of this decoding scheme. To ease the presentation, we first detail our arguments for regular graphs.

A. Regular Graphs

As described in Section I, a bipartite graph with message

nodes on the left and check nodes on the right gives rise to

a linear code of dimension

and block length in

the following way: the bits of a codeword are indexed by the

message nodes. A binary vector

is a code-

word if and only if

, where is the

incidence

matrix of the graph whose rows are indexed by the check nodes

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LUBY et al.: IMPROVED LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES USING IRREGUALR GRAPHS

587

and whose columns are indexed by the message nodes. In other

words,

is a codeword if and only if for each check

node the exclusive-or of its incident message nodes is zero. To

allow encoding in linear time, one could allow the nodes on the

right to represent bits rather than restrictions, and then use a

cascading series of bipartite graphs, as described for example

in [10], [27]. In this situation, we know inductively the correct

value of the check nodes in each layer when we correct the mes-

sage nodes, and the check nodes are the exclusive-or of their

incident message nodes. The resulting code has the same rate

and error-correction threshold as the corresponding low-density

parity-check code, although its likelihood of decoding error in-

creases.

In what follows, we again focus on one bipartite graph only,

and assume that only the message nodes are in error. The anal-

ysis that we provide in this case works for either of the two ap-

proaches given above, as we may inductively focus on just one

layer in the context of cascading series of graphs [10], [27].

We now review the hard-decision decoding approach taken

by Gallager in his original analysis [7].

Consider a regular random graph with the message nodes

having degree and the check nodes having degree . With

probability a message node receives the wrong bit. The de-

coding process proceeds in rounds, where in each round first

the message nodes send each incident check node a single bit

and then the check nodes send each incident message node a

single bit. The bit sent from a message node to a check node

at the th step of the decoding is denoted , while the mes-

sage sent from the check node to the message node at round

is denoted . The bit is a guess of the correct bit of

message bit at round . Similarly, is a guess, from the

point of view of the check node , of what the correct value of

should be. The messages passed contain only extrinsic infor-

mation, that is, the value of

depends only on the values

for all check nodes incident to other than . (Simi-

larly, for .) Each message node remembers the received

bit that is purported to be the correct message bit. (Thus,

is not the correct message bit with probability .) We assume

that in the zeroth round of the process messages are sent from

message nodes to check nodes. Each subsequent round consists

Fig. 1. Representing the code as a tree.

of passing messages from check nodes to message nodes and

back. In full detail, each round consists of an execution of the

script at the bottom of this page.

Of course the parallel work can easily be simulated sequen-

tially. Moreover, the work per round can easily be coded so that

it is linear in the number of edges.

The process can run for a preset number of rounds, after

which each message node can determine its most likely value

based on its neighbors. If the check nodes are satisfied, then a

codeword has been found; otherwise, the decoding has failed.

Alternatively, after each round, each message node can deter-

mine its most likely value and a check can be performed to see

if a codeword has been found. If not, the process continues until

the decoder decides to stop with a failure.

To analyze the decoding process, consider an individual edge

between a message node and a check node , and

an associated tree describing a neighborhood of . This tree

is rooted at , and the tree branches out from the check nodes

of excluding , as shown in Fig. 1. For now let us assume

that the neighborhood of is accurately described by a tree for

some fixed number of rounds.

Let be the probability that sends an incorrect value

in round . Initially

. Following the work of Gal-

lager, we determine a recursive equation describing the evolu-

tion of over a constant number of rounds.

Consider the end of the th round, and consider a check node

of other than . The node sends its correct value as

long as there are an even number (including possibly ) message

For all edges Update for

do the following in parallel:

If this is the zeroth round, then set

If this is the th round with

then is computed as follows:

if

equals for all adjacent check nodes of other than then set

else set

Update for

For all edges

set as the exclusive-or of the values

where ranges over all adjacent message nodes of other than

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

588

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

nodes other than sending the wrong bit. As each bit was decoding algorithm is the same.1 Using the same analysis as for

correctly sent to with probability

, it is easy to check (2), we may find a recursive description of the

that the probability that receives an even number of errors is

(1)

Hence, the probability that was received in error and sent

correctly in round

is

(3)

and, similarly, the probability that was received correctly but

sent incorrectly in round

is given by

We choose so as to minimize . To do this we compare the odds of being right initially to the odds of being right using the check nodes and the threshold . As determined by Gallager, the correct choice of is the smallest integer that satisfies

(4) This yields an equation for in terms of

(2)

Gallager’s idea is then to find the supremum of all values

of for which the sequence is monotonically decreasing and

hence converges to . Note, however, that even if converges

to , this does not directly imply that the process necessarily

corrects all message nodes, even with high probability. This is

because our assumption that the neighborhood of

is ac-

curately represented by a tree for arbitrarily many rounds is not

true. In fact, even for any constant number of rounds it is true

only with high probability.

Gallager proves that, as the block length of the code and girth

of the graph grow large, this decoding algorithm works for all

. Since random graphs do not have large girth, Gal-

lager introduced explicit constructions of regular sparse graphs

that do have sufficiently large girth for his analysis to hold. We

shortly provide an analysis that shows that Gallager’s decoding

algorithm successfully corrects a large fraction of errors for a

randomly chosen regular graph with high probability. Then, in

Section II-B, we show how to ensure the decoding terminates

successfully with high probability using a slightly different de-

coding rule.

Gallager notes that the decoding rule can be improved in the

following manner: at each round, there is a universal threshold

value (to be determined below) that depends on the round

number. For each message node and neighboring check node

, if at least neighbors of excluding sent the same bit

to in the previous round, then sends this bit to in this

round; otherwise, sends to its initial bit . The rest of the

Note that is an increasing function of ; this is intuitive, since as decreases, smaller majorities are needed to get an accurate assessment of ’s correct value. Also, note that while the algorithm functions by passing values along the edges, it can also keep a running guess for the value of each message node based on the passed values. The algorithm continues until the proposed values for the message nodes satisfy all the check nodes, at which point the algorithm terminates with the belief that it has successfully decoded the message, or it can fail after a preset number of rounds.
It follows simply from a similar argument in [11] that the recursive description given by (3) is correct with high probability over any constant number of rounds. (We note also that a similar extension of this proof based on the original paper [13] has also appeared in the subsequent work of Richardson and Urbanke [21].)

Theorem 1: Let be an integer constant and let be the

random variable describing the fraction of edges set to pass in-

correct messages after rounds of the above algorithm. Further,

let be as given in the recursion (3). Then there is a constant

(depending on the maximum degree

) such that

for any

and sufficiently large we have

Proof: Let be the number of edges in the graph. We show the equivalent assertion
1The first algorithm, where all of the other neighbors of a message node must disagree with the received bit for it to change its message, is nowadays referred to as Gallager’s Algorithm A. The improvement is often referred to as Gallager’s Algorithm B. Our experiments and analysis apply to Gallager’s Algorithm B in the most general sense; that is, for any predetermined values b . Of course Gallager’s Algorithm A is then just a special case.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LUBY et al.: IMPROVED LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES USING IRREGUALR GRAPHS

589

There are two considerations requiring care. First, the neighbor-

hood around a message bit may not take the form of a tree.

We show that this does not happen too often with an edge expo-

sure martingale argument. Second, even assuming the number

of nontrees is small, we still need to prove tight concentration of

around the expectation given that message bits may be wrong

initially with probability . This follows from a separate mar-

tingale argument, exposing the initial values at each node one

by one.

First, we consider the number of edges

such that if

we expand the neighborhood below for levels, we do not

obtain a tree. For such edges we cannot say anything about their

behavior, so we must show that there are few of them. Note that

as the number of nodes in a tree of levels is exponential in

, this necessarily implies that the number of nodes in the

graph must be exponential in . Recall that in the statement of

the theorem, however, is a fixed constant and is taken to be

sufficiently large.

It is easily seen that there is a constant depending on and

the maximum degree of the graph such that the probability that

the neighborhood of depth stemming from an edge is not a

tree is . To see this, consider the neighborhood stemming

from an edge by expanding outward level by level, one edge

at a time. As there are fewer than

total nodes in the

tree, the probability at any step that an edge in the neighbor-

hood hits a vertex already in the neighborhood is bounded above

by

. From a union bound, the total

probability that the neighborhood fails to be a tree is therefore

bounded above by

two such results. This, in turn, is bounded by the maximum

difference in the value of between any two permutations

that differ in the placement of two edges. That is, consider two

possible results:

and

. There is a

one-to-one correspondence between the remaining possibilities

for and , such that for some

, the correspondence

has

,

, and and agree at all other

places. Hence, the expectation over the two possibilities given

by and differs at most by the maximum difference in the

value of between any two permutations that differ in the

placement of two edges.

Now consider any pair of graphs given by permutations and

, where and differ only on the placement of two edges. In

this case, the difference in for and is bounded by a

constant, since the placement of these edges can only affect a

constant number of trees (this constant depending on and the

maximum degree). Hence the lemma is proved.

Now let be the number of edges from the edges with

valid tree neighborhoods for levels below set to pass incorrect

messages after rounds. Clearly,

. We again

obtain a high probability result using a martingale argument.

We may reveal the initial value received at each node, one at

a time. Again we may define to be the expected value for

, given the results of the first exposures, in which case

the form a standard Doob’s martingale. Here, it is easy to

see that consecutive values of differ only by a constant, as

each revealed node can only affect the edges where in lies in the

corresponding tree. Hence

(6)

for a suitable constant . Hence the expected number of edges

that might fail because their neighborhood structure is not a tree

is only a constant. More concretely, for sufficiently large the

value is less than . Hence, if we let be the number

of edges

for which the neighborhood of up to levels

is a proper tree, we obtain

The assertion follows from the two inequalities (5) and (6), as and hence

for some constant .

We now obtain a concentration result for , by exposing the

edges of the graph one by one using an edge exposure martingale

and applying Azuma’s inequality [18, Sec. 4.4]. In particular,

we think in terms of exposing the permutation that defines

our bipartite graph one entry at a time, in order. We may then

define to be the expected value for , given the results

of the first exposures. In particular,

,

, and the sequence forms a standard Doob’s martingale,

with

Moreover, consecutive values of

differ only by a constant, as we show in the following lemma.

Hence, using Azuma’s inequality

(5)

Lemma 1:

is bounded by a constant.

Proof: Consider all possible results from exposing the

st edge. The value of

is bounded by

the maximum difference in the expectation of from any

Corollary 1: Given a random regular code with as defined by (3), if the sequence converges to , then for any there is a sufficiently large message size such that Gallager’s hard-decision decoding correctly decodes all but at most bits in some constant number of rounds with high probability.
B. Completing the Work: Expander-Based Arguments
In the previous section we have shown that the hard-decision decoding corrects all but an arbitrarily small constant fraction of the message nodes for regular codes with sufficiently large block lengths. The analysis, however, is not sufficient to show that the decoding process completes successfully. In this section, we show how to finish the decoding process with high probability once the number of errors is sufficiently small using slightly different algorithms. Our work utilizes the expander-based arguments in [22] and [23]. Alternatively, one should be able to construct a similar argument using the approach of [26] and [8]. We note that the recent work of Burshtein and Miller [2] shows that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

590

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

the hard-decision decoding algorithm is guaranteed to correct all message nodes once it has corrected a sufficiently large fraction of the message nodes, provided that the underlying graph is a sufficiently good expander. Thus, the change of decoding algorithm suggested in this section is technically unnecessary; we include it for completeness.
We first define what we require in terms of the bipartite graph represented by the code being a good expander.

Definition 1: A bipartite graph has expansion

if for all

subsets of size at most of the vertices on the left, the size

of the neighborhood

of on the right satisfies

, where is the set of edges attached to vertices in .

Following the notation of [22], we call a message node cor-

rupt if it differs from its correct value, and we call a check node

satisfied (respectively, unsatisfied) if its value is (is not) the sum

of the values of its adjacent message nodes. The work of [22]

shows that if the underlying bipartite graph of a code has suffi-

cient expansion for sets of size up to , then both of the fol-

lowing algorithms can correct any set of

errors

Sequential decoding if there is a message node that
has more satisfied than unsatisfied neighbors, flip the value of that message node. Repeat until no such message node remains.

Parallel decoding for each message node, count the
number of unsatisfied check nodes among its neighbors. Flip in parallel each message node with a majority of unsatisfied neighbors.

Note that the above algorithms are very similar to Gallager’s hard-decision decoding algorithm, except that here we need not hold values for each (message node,check node) pair. We call upon the results of [22] to show that once we use hard-decision decoding to correct all but some arbitrarily small fraction of the message nodes, we can finish the process. The next lemma follows from [22, Theorems 10 and 11].

Fig. 2. If the two left nodes are supposed to be 0, and all other nodes are correct, then the majority tells the left nodes not to change.
We note that the restriction in Lemma 3 that the left degrees are at least five appears necessary. For example, it is entirely possible for random graphs with degree three on the left to fail to complete using the proposed sequential and parallel algorithms even after almost all nodes have been corrected. A problem occurs when the graph has a small even cycle. In this case, if all the nodes in the cycle are received incorrectly, the algorithm may fail to terminate correctly (see Fig. 2). Even cycles of any constant length occur with constant probability, so errors remain with constant probability.
To circumvent this problem Gallager designs specific regular graphs with no small cycles [7]. To circumvent this problem in random graphs, we make a small change in the structure of the graph, similar to that in [10], [27]. Suppose that we use the previous analysis to correct all but at most message bits with high probability. We add an additional check nodes, where is a constant that depends on , and construct a regular random graph with degree on the left between all the message nodes and the check nodes. The decoding proceeds as before on the original random graph, correcting all but at most
message bits. We then use the check nodes previously held in reserve to correct the remaining message bits using the Sipser–Spielman algorithm. That this procedure works follows directly from Lemmas 2 and 3. Moreover, as both and can be made arbitrarily small by Corollary 1, the change in the rate of the code due to this additional structure is negligible, and is ignored in the sequel.

Lemma 2: Let

and

for some fixed .

Let be an

expander. Then the sequential and parallel

decoding algorithms correct up to

errors. The sequential

decoding algorithm does so in linear time and the parallel de-

coding algorithm does so in

rounds, with each round

requiring a linear amount of work.

We use the following standard lemma to claim that the graph we choose is an appropriate expander, and hence we can finish off the analysis of the decoding process using the previous lemma.

Lemma 3: Let be a bipartite graph, with nodes divided into

left and right sides. Suppose that a degree is assigned to each

node so that all left nodes have degree at least five, and all right

nodes have degree at most for some constant . Suppose that

a random permutation is chosen and used to match each edge

out of a left node with an edge into a right node. Then, with

probability

, for some fixed

,

, and

, is an

expander.

C. Theoretically Achievable Error Correction

For every rate, and for every possible left degree and corre-

sponding right degree, the value of can be computed by the

above analysis. A natural question to ask is which regular code

can achieve the largest value of . Among rate regular

codes, it turns out that the largest is achieved when all left

nodes have degree and all right nodes have degree , in which

case

. Thus, combining Corollary 1, Lemma 2, and

Lemma 3, we have shown that when the corresponding bipartite

graph is chosen randomly, this code can correct all errors with

high probability when the initial fraction of errors approaches

. All of these regular codes run in linear time if we use

the sequential decoding algorithm in the final stage. This fol-

lows from the fact that we need to run the hard-decision de-

coding only for a constant number of rounds (at linear time per

round), and then the sequential decoding algorithm can fix the

remaining errors in linear time.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LUBY et al.: IMPROVED LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES USING IRREGUALR GRAPHS

591

III. IRREGULAR CODES

A. Analyzing Irregular Codes

We now describe a decoding algorithm for codes based on ir-

regular graphs, which we call irregular codes. We first describe

the construction of such codes. Message nodes are located on

the left and the check nodes on the right. Each message node has

a certain number of edges which connect to check nodes; simi-

larly, each check node has a certain number of edges connecting

to message nodes. The total number of edges in the graph is .

A random permutation of

is chosen, and then, for

all

the edge with index out of the left side is

identified with the edge with index out of the right side.

Note that this may potentially lead to nodes with several edges

between them, or multiedges; often in practice multiedges and

small cycles can be removed to improve performance [16].

Following the notation used in [10] and [27], for an irreg-

ular bipartite graph we say that an edge has degree on the

left (right) if its left (right) hand neighbor has degree . Let us

suppose we have an irregular bipartite graph with some max-

imum left degree and some maximum right degree . We

specify our irregular graph by sequences

and

, where

is the fraction of edges with

left (right) degree . Further, we define

.

Our decoding algorithm in the case of irregular graphs is sim-

ilar to Gallager’s hard-decision decoding as described in Sec-

tion II-A, but generalized to take into account the varying de-

grees of the nodes. Again we look at the process from the point

of view of an edge

. Consider the end of the th round, and

consider a check node of other than . The node sends

its correct value as long as there are an even number (including

possibly ) of other message nodes sending the wrong bit.

As each bit was correctly sent to with probability

, it

is simple to check that the probability that receives an even

number of errors is

(7)

Expression (7) is the generalization of (1), taking into account

the probability distribution on the degree of .

Also similarly to Section II-A, after round a message node

of degree passes its initial value along

to check node

unless at least of the check nodes adjacent to other

than send the same value. Note that now the threshold value

for a node depends on its degree. Also, the value of changes

according to the round.

To analyze the decoding process, consider a random edge

. The left degree of

is with probability . It

thus follows from the same argument as in Section II-A that the

recursive description for is

(8)
We need to determine so as to minimize the value of . As in (4), the best value of is given by the smallest integer that satisfies
(9)
This equation has an interesting interpretation. Note that is a constant fixed by the above equation. The
value

can be interpreted as the difference between the number of check nodes that agree in the majority and the number that agree in the minority. We call this difference the discrepancy of a node. Equation (9) tells us that we need only check that the discrepancy is above a certain threshold to decide which value to send, regardless of the degree of the node.

B. Designing Irregular Graphs

We now describe techniques for designing codes based on

irregular graphs that can handle larger probabilities of error at

potentially some expense in encoding and decoding time. Given

our analysis of irregular codes, our goal is to find sequences

and

that yield

the largest possible value of such that the sequence of de-

creases to for a given rate. We frame this problem in terms

of linear programs. Our approach cannot actually determine the

best sequences and . Instead, our technique allows us to de-

termine a good vector given a vector and the desired rate of

the code. This proves sufficient for finding codes that perform

significantly better than regular codes. (Similarly, we may also

apply this technique to determine a good vector given a vector

and the desired rate; as we explain below, however, this does

not prove useful in this setting.)

Let be fixed. For a given degree sequence

let the real valued function be defined by

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

592
where now

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001
For small values, this is approximately

To maximize this probability, we seek to minimize

and the are variables to be determined. Observe that con-

dition (8) now reads as

. For a given and

right-hand degree sequence , we are interested in finding a de-

gree sequence

such that the corresponding func-

tion satisfies

on the open interval

. We

begin by choosing a set of positive integers which constitute

the range of possible degrees on the left-hand side. To find ap-

propriate ,

, we use the condition

above to

generate linear constraints that the must satisfy by consid-

ering different values of . For example, by examining the con-

dition at

, we obtain the constraint

,

which is linear in the .

We generate constraints of the form

for values of

that are multiples of

for some integer . We also include

the constraints

for all

, as well as the constraint

(10)

where is the rate of the code. This condition expresses the

fact that the number of edges incident to the left nodes equals

the number of edges incident to the right nodes. We then use

linear programming to determine if suitable exist that satisfy

our derived constraints. The choice for the objective function is

arbitrary as we are only interested in the existence of feasible

solutions.

Given the solution from the linear programming problem,

we can check whether the computed satisfy the condition

on

. The best value for is found by binary

search. Due to our discretization, there are usually some conflict

intervals in which the solution does not satisfy this inequality.

Choosing large values for the tradeoff parameter results in

smaller conflict intervals, although it requires more time to solve

the linear program. For this reason, we use small values of

during the binary search phase. Once a value for is found,

we use larger values of for that specific to obtain small

conflict intervals. In the last step, we get rid of the conflict in-

tervals by slightly decreasing the value of .

This linear programming tool allows for efficient search for

good codes. That is, given a vector we can find a good partner

vector . In a similar fashion, we can also find a good partner

vector from a given . However, our experiments reveal that

the best vector for this decoding algorithm is always the one

where the nodes on the right have the same degree (or all nodes

have as close to the same degree as possible).

There is a natural intuition explaining this phenomenon. From

the point of view of a message node , it appears best if the

expected number of other neighbors a neighboring check node

has is as small as possible. This can be seen as follows. At the

end of the th round, the probability that sends the correct vote

to is

which is exactly the expected number of other neighbors

has. This quantity is minimized (subject to the constraints

and (10)) when all check nodes have equal

degree, or as nearly equal as possible.

Using the linear programming technique, we have considered

graphs where the nodes on the left side may have varying de-

grees and the nodes on the right side all have the same degree.

In other words, we have found good codes by considering vec-

tors with just one nonzero entry. As we shall see in Section IV,

this suffices to find codes with significantly better performance

than that given by codes determined by regular graphs.

It remains to show that the codes we derive in this manner in

fact function as we expect. That is, given a vector

,

the right degree , and the initial error probability , if the se-

quence given by (8) is monotonically decreasing and hence

converges to , then the code obtained from the corresponding

irregular random graph corrects a -fraction of errors, with

high probability. We first note that Theorem 1 holds for irreg-

ular graphs as well as for regular graphs, by an entirely similar

proof (modified to take into account the different degrees). That

is, we can use the hard-decision decoding algorithm to decrease

the number of erroneous bits down to any constant fraction.

To finish the decoding, we use the sequential algorithm from

Section II-B. The overall decoding time is linear. (We again

note that Burshtein and Miller [2] have recently shown that the

hard-decision decoding algorithm could be used to finish the

decoding, although this would result in an

time al-

gorithm.)

Lemma 4: Let

and

for some fixed .

Suppose that is an irregular bipartite

expander, and

that is the maximum degree on a left node of . Then the

sequential decoding algorithm corrects up to

errors in

linear time.

Proof: We follow [22, Theorem 10]. We show that the

number of unsatisfied check nodes decreases after each step in

the sequential algorithm. Let be the set of corrupt message

nodes, with

and

. Suppose there are un-

satisfied check nodes and let be the number of satisfied neigh-

bors of the corrupt variables. By the expansion of , we have

As each satisfied neighbor of shares at least two edges with , and each unsatisfied neighbor shares at least one, we have

It follows that

and hence there is some message node with more than of its incident check nodes unsatisfied. Hence at each step the se-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LUBY et al.: IMPROVED LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES USING IRREGUALR GRAPHS

593

TABLE I PARAMETERS OF OUR CODES

not have sufficient expansion for Lemma 3 to hold, we can use

the additional structure discussed in Section II-B to finish the

decoding. For Code all nodes on the right have degree ,

and for Code all nodes on the right have degree . Recall

that

is the best value of that is possible using regular

graphs for rate codes.

IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS FOR GALLAGER’S ALGORITHM

quential algorithm may flip a message node and decrease the

number of unsatisfied check nodes.

Therefore, the only way the algorithm can fail is if the number

of corrupt message nodes increases so that

during the

algorithm. But if

, then

However, initially

is at most

, and decreases throughout the course

of the algorithm, so this cannot happen.

It follows that the irregular codes we derive function as we expect as long as our random graphs have sufficient expansion. This expansion property holds with high probability if we choose the minimum degree to be at least five. However, as stated previously, graphs with message nodes of smaller degree may be handled with a small additional structure in the graph.

C. Theoretically Achievable Error Correction
We have designed some irregular degree sequences using the linear programming methodology described in Section III-B. The codes we describe all have rate . These codes perform well in practice as well as according to our theoretical model. However, it is likely that one could find codes that perform slightly better than codes using our techniques. It is worth noting that the Shannon upper bound (or entropy bound) for for codes of rate is 11.1%. Although the irregular codes we have designed to date are far from this limit, they are still much better than regular codes.
Code and Code , described fully in Table I, are two irregular codes that we designed. For Code , all nodes on the right have degree , and for Code all nodes on the right have degree .2 In both these codes, the minimum degree on the left-hand side is five. This ensures that the graphs have good expansion as needed in Lemma 3, and thus there is no need for the additional structure discussed in Section II-B.
We can achieve even better performance by considering graphs with smaller degrees on the left. While such graphs do
2Actually, to balance the number of edges, we do allow one node on the right to have a different degree.

We include preliminary experimental results for new codes

we have found using the linear programming approach. Our ex-

perimental design is similar to that of [22], whose results can

be compared with ours. We describe a few important details of

our experiments and implementations. We model a binary-sym-

metric channel. To more accurately compare code quality, in-

stead of introducing errors with probability , we introduced the

same number of errors at each trial (corresponding to a fraction

of the block length). This procedure allows for easier compar-

ison with other codes and minimizes the variance in the experi-

ments that might arise from the variance in the number of errors.

Rather than encoding a message for each trial, we use an ini-

tial message consisting entirely of zeros. Since the code is linear

and the decoding algorithm respects its linearity, no generality

is lost.

A different random graph was constructed for each trial. No

effort was made to test graphs and weed out potentially bad

ones, and hence we expect that our results would be slightly

better if several random graphs were tested and the best ones

chosen. Also, following the ideas of [16] and [22], when neces-

sary we remove multiedges from our graphs.

In our implementation, we simply run Gallager’s improved

decoding algorithm (with thresholds ) until it finishes, or

until a prespecified number of rounds pass without success.

Our implementation therefore takes as input a schedule that

determines the discrepancy value

at each round.

This schedule can be calculated according to (9). In practice,

however, the schedule determined by (9) must be slightly

modified. If the discrepancy threshold is changed prematurely,

before enough edges transfer the correct value, the decoding al-

gorithm is significantly more likely to fail. Hence changing the

threshold according to the round as given by (9) often fails to

work well when the block size is small, since the variance in the

number of edges sending the correct value can be significant.

We find that stretching out the schedule somewhat, so that the

discrepancy threshold is changed after a few more rounds than

the equations suggest, prevents this problem, at the expense of

increasing the running time of the decoding algorithm.

In our experiments it turns out that it is unnecessary to switch

to the modified decoding algorithm of Section II-B or use the

additional structure described in Section II-B, as in our experi-

ence the hard-decision decoding algorithm of Gallager finishes

successfully once the number of errors becomes small.

It is worthwhile to note that even when the decoding algo-

rithm fails to decode successfully because too many rounds have

passed, it can report that failure back. We have yet to see the

decoding algorithm produce a codeword that satisfied all con-

straints but was not the original message, although as far as we

know such an event is possible.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

594

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Fig. 3. Percentage of successes based on 2000 trials.

A. Experiments with Hard-Decision Decoding

We first describe experiments on codes of rate with

16 000 message bits and 8000 check bits. In Fig. 3, we describe

the performance of Code and Code that we introduced in

Section III-C. Each data point represents the results from 2000

trials. Recall that the appropriate value of is approximately

for Code and

for Code . Recall that

represents the error rate we would expect to be able to handle

for arbitrarily long block lengths, and that we only expect to

approach asymptotically in practice as the number of nodes

grows.

Our results show that for block lengths of length 16 000 the

codes appear to perform extremely well when a random frac-

tion

(or 720) of the original message bits are in error.

For the 2000 trials, Code never failed, and Code failed

just once. (In fact in 10 000 trials with this number of errors,

Code proved successful every time.) The probability that the

code succeeds falls slowly as the error probability approaches

. Further experiments with larger block lengths demonstrate

that performance improves with the number of bits in the mes-

sage, as one would expect. These codes therefore perform better

than similar regular codes, while still having linear running time.

For instance, as mentioned before, the best regular code of rate

is obtained from random regular bipartite graphs with de-

gree on the left and degree on the right. The performance of

this code is also shown in Fig. 3. Although the value for this

regular code is approximately

, in practice, with 16 000

message bits this regular code failed 23 times in 2000 trials with

a fraction of

errors.

We now consider Code and Code introduced in Sec-

tion III-C (see Fig. 4). The experiments were run on 16 000

message bits and 8000 check bits for 2000 trials. In our ex-

periments, we remove both multiedges and some small cycles,

as suggested in [16]. Recall that the appropriate value of is

approximately

for Code and

for Code .

These codes again perform near what our analysis suggests, and

they significantly outperform previous similar codes with similar decoding schemes, including regular codes.
In summary, irregular codes Code and Code appear superior to any regular code in practice, and irregular codes Code
and Code are far superior to any regular code. We have similarly found irregular codes that perform well at other rates.

V. LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES AND BELIEF PROPAGATION

In this section, we review belief propagation for the low-den-

sity parity-check codes developed by Gallager using the frame-

work of MacKay and Neal [7], [16].

Similar to the hard-decision decoding algorithm of Sec-

tion II-A, only extrinsic information is passed from the message

bits to check bits and back. As explained in [16], the algorithm

runs two alternating phases, in which for each nonzero entry

in with row and column (or, in other terms, for each

edge of the associated bipartite graph) two values and

are iteratively updated. The quantity approximates

the probability that the th bit of the codeword is , given

the information obtained from all checks of other than .

Similarly, the quantity approximates the probability that the

th check node is satisfied when the th bit of the codeword

is and all other message bits associated with check have

a separable distribution given by the appropriate . That is,

we assume that the other message bits are independently

with probability , and use this to calculate . Over a

binary-symmetric channel with crossover probability , all

have initially the value

. In the first phase of a round,

all the values are updated in parallel; then, in the second

phase, all the values are updated in parallel. (These parallel

updates can also be simulated sequentially in a straightforward

manner.) The total amount of work performed in each round is

linear in the number of edges of the graph. If the bipartite graph

defined by contains no cycles of length up to , then after

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LUBY et al.: IMPROVED LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES USING IRREGUALR GRAPHS

595

Fig. 4. Percentage of successes based on 2000 trials.

rounds of updates the algorithm produces the exact posterior probabilities that each message bit is in error based on the neighborhood within a diameter of of the message node. The presence of cycles in the graph skews the probabilities, but in practice the effect on the algorithm appears to be small. More details can be found in [6], [7], [16], and [24].

TABLE II PARAMETERS OF OUR CODES

A. Simulation of Irregular Graph Performance Under Belief Propagation

We describe a few important details of our experiments and

implementations. We performed simulations using two types of

channels for several rates and block lengths. The first channel

we model is a binary-symmetric channel. We use a message

consisting entirely of zeros, introduce a fixed number of errors

corresponding to a fraction of the block length, create a new

random graph for each trial, and remove multiedges as neces-

sary. The second channel type we model is a white Gaussian

channel with binary input and an additive noise of vari-

ance . We report results for the Gaussian channel of rate

and additive noise in terms of the signal-to-noise ratio

expressed as decibels

.

Here represents the average energy per bit

and

represents the noise spectral density

.

In our experiments, we allowed the belief propagation algo-

rithm to run for up to 200 rounds. If the algorithm failed to con-

verge on a codeword within 200 rounds, a failure was reported.

Again, this was in fact the only failure we saw in our experi-

ments; that is, the algorithm never returned a codeword that dif-

fered from the initial message.

We describe the irregular graphs used in Table II, which are

derived from irregular graphs for erasure codes [27]. Note that

given a vector and one can construct a graph with (approx-

imately) the correct edge fractions for any number of nodes,

using the construction method described in Section III. (Some

care must be taken because of rounding and the necessity to have

the number of edges on the left equal the number of edges on

the right; however, this is easily handled.)

B. Binary-Symmetric Channel
Table III compares the performance of regular and irregular codes of rates and . Our results for regular codes (based on graphs in which all nodes on the left have degree ) are slightly better than (but consistent with) previous results reported in [16]. (The differences may be due to our fixing the number of errors, while the results of [16] use a genuine binary-symmetric channel. Of course, there may also be other minor differences in the graph construction.) In the table, represents the block length, represents the rate, represents the fraction of errors introduced, and represents the capacity of the binary-symmetric channel with crossover probability . The results are reported in terms of the number of trials, or blocks decoded, and the number of errors, or the number of blocks for which the decoding algorithm failed to find a solution within 200 rounds.
At rate , our irregular codes perform only slightly better than the regular codes at block lengths of 16 000 bits. They do fail notably less often at higher error rates, however. At 64 000 bits, our code can handle over a half a percent more errors. While it has been previously noted that low-density parity-check codes perform better as the block length increases [16], we believe that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

596

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Fig. 5. Irregular codes versus regular codes and turbo codes: rate 1=2.

TABLE III COMPARING REGULAR AND IRREGULAR GRAPHS

At rate , we have different irregular codes with lower degrees. This code greatly outperforms the regular codes, even at block lengths of 16 000, where they correct approximately 1% more errors. At block lengths of 64 000 bits, the effect is even more dramatic, and the irregular codes appear to correct more than 1% more errors. We note that initial experiments at other rates further validate our contention that irregular codes can outperform regular codes in terms of the number of errors that can be corrected.
When decoding both regular and irregular codes, the number of operations required is proportional to the product of the number of edges in the corresponding graph and the number of rounds until the process terminates. The irregular graphs have approximately 2.5 times as many edges as the regular graphs, and at higher error rates they can take approximately 1.5 times as many iterations to complete. Hence it takes approximately four times as many operations to decode at higher rates. In software implementations, performance can actually be worse than this, however, since the larger graph size for the irregular codes may require more accesses to slower levels of the memory hierarchy. However, we believe the slower running time is not dramatic in light of the improved performance.

C. Gaussian Channel

this effect is magnified for our irregular codes, because the degrees of the nodes can be quite high. For example, our irregular rate codes have nodes on the left of degree and nodes on the right of degree .

Figs. 5 and 6 compare the performance (in terms of the bit-error rate (BER)) of irregular codes of rate and with reported results for turbo codes [5] and regular codes [17] at these rates. Again, our experiments were with block lengths of 16 000 bits, and for this block length each data point is the result of 10 000 trials. (We compare with results using comparable block lengths. The results from [5] are available at http://www331.jpl.nasa.gov/public/TurboPerf.html.) For our

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LUBY et al.: IMPROVED LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES USING IRREGUALR GRAPHS

597

Fig. 6. Irregular codes versus regular codes and turbo codes: rate 1=4.

irregular codes, the belief propagation algorithm terminated

after 200 rounds if the solution was not found.

For rate codes, our irregular codes perform notably better

than regular codes, greatly reducing the gap between the perfor-

mance of low-density parity-check codes and turbo codes. This

gap is further reduced when we move to larger block sizes, as

our codes prove to perform better for larger block lengths in this

setting as well. At block lengths of 64 000 bits, our code never

failed in 1000 trials at both 0.95 and 1.00 dB. Our estimates for

the BER from 1000 trials at 0.9 dB is

and at 0.85 dB

is

. Again, this is much better than the performance

of regular codes at a comparable block length presented in [17].

Our results for irregular codes at rate (Fig. 6) similarly

show significant improvement over regular codes. At this lower

rate and block length, however, turbo codes appear to have a

significant edge. The edge has subsequently been reduced with

further exploration and experimentation [20], [21].

Our irregular codes at this rate again perform significantly

better with larger block lengths. At block lengths of 64 000 bits,

our code never failed in 1000 trials at both 0.70 and 0.60 dB. Our

estimates for the BER from 1000 trials at 0.50 dB is

and at 0.40 dB is

.

VI. CONCLUSION AND FURTHER DEVELOPEMENT
This paper offers two important contributions. First, we demonstrate that low-density parity-check codes based on irregular graphs can substantially outperform similar codes based on regular graphs. We show this both through asymptotic analysis for a hard-decision decoding algorithm and experimentally for belief propagation. Second, we introduce new methods for analyzing low-density parity-check codes using concentration bounds based on martingales.
These contributions have been built upon in subsequent work. Our main “concentration theorem” based on martingales has since been extended to a large class of channel models by Richardson and Urbanke [21]. Based on this approach, they

also developed the “density evolution” algorithm, a numerical procedure to approximate the threshold of noise below which the belief propagation algorithm is asymptotically successful. Indeed, sequences of codes have since been constructed for which the belief propagation algorithm had a performance extremely close to the Shannon capacity, beating the best performing turbo codes known at the time [20].
There remains, however, much more to be done. We suggest one problem in particular. The concentration bounds we use apply to the asymptotic behavior of low-density parity-check codes, but they do not adequately explain the behavior of small codes, say with only thousands of bits. For such small codes, the corresponding bipartite graphs necessarily have small cycles, which is a complication our asymptotic analysis cannot adequately handle. More understanding of small codes could be extremely useful for designing low-density parity-check codes and making them the code of choice in practice.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Communications Conf., 1993.
[2] D. Burshtein and G. Miller, “Expander graph arguments for message passing algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 782–790, Feb. 2001.
[3] J.-F. Cheng and R. J. McEliece, “Some high-rate near capacity codecs for the Gaussian channel,” in 34th Allerton Conf. Communications, Control and Computing, 1996.
[4] M. C. Davey and D. J. C. MacKay, “Low-density parity-check codes over GF (q),” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 2, pp. 165–167, June 1998.
[5] D. Divsalar and F. Pollara, “On the design of turbo codes,” JPL TDA, Progr. Rep. 42-123.
[6] G. D. Forney Jr., “The forward–backward algorithm,” in Proc. 34th Allerton Conf. Communications, Control and Computing, 1996, pp. 432–446.
[7] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[8] S. I. Kovalev, “Decoding of low-density codes,” Probl. Inform. Transm., vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 317–321, 1992.
[9] F. R. Kschischang and B. J. Frey, “Iterative decoding of compound codes by probability propagation in graphical models,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 219–230, Feb. 1998.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

598

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

[10] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, D. A. Spielman, and

V. Stemann, “Practical loss-resilient codes,” in Proc. 29th Annu. Symp.

Theory of Computing, 1997, pp. 150–159.

[11] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, and M. A. Shokrollahi, “Analysis of

random processes via and-or trees,” in Proc. 9th Annu. ACM-SIAM

Symp. Discrete Algorithms, 1998, pp. 364–373.

[12] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, “Im-

proved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs and belief

propagation,” in Proc. 1998 Int. Symp. Information Theory, p. 117.

[13]

, “Analysis of low-density codes and improved designs using irreg-

ular graphs,” in Proc. 30th Annu. Symp. Theory of Computing, 1998, pp.

249–258.

[14] D. J. C. MacKay. (1998) Turbo codes are low-density parity-check

codes. [Online]. Available: http://www.cs.toronto.edu/~mackay/ab-

stracts/-turbo-ldpc.html

[15] D. J. C. MacKay, R. J. McEliece, and J.-F. Cheng, “Turbo coding as

an instance of Pearl’s ‘belief propagation’ algorithm,” IEEE J. Select.

Areas Commun., vol. 17, pp. 1632–1650, Sept. 1999.

[16] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error correcting codes based on very sparse

matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.

[17] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of

low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 1645–1646,

1996.

[18] R. Motwani and P. Raghavan, Randomized Algorithms. Cambridge,

U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1995.

[19] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[20] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[21] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[22] M. Sipser and D. A. Spielman, “Expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 1710–1722, Nov. 1996.
[23] D. A. Spielman, “Linear time encodable and decodable error-correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 1723–1731, Nov. 1996.
[24] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elec. Eng., Univ. Linköping, Sweden, Apr. 1996.
[25] N. Wiberg, H.-A. Loeliger, and R. Kötter, “Codes and iterative decoding on general graphs,” Euro. Trans. Telecommun., vol. 6, pp. 513–526, Sept. 1995.
[26] V. V. Zyablov and M. S. Pinsker, “Estimation of the error-correction complexity of Gallager low-density codes” (in Russia), Probl. Pered. Inform., vol. 11, pp. 23–26, Jan. 1975. English translation in Probl. Inform. Transm., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 18–28. 1976.
[27] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, D. A. Spielman, and V. Stemann, “Efficient erasure correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 569–584, Feb.. 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

