766

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Signal-Space Characterization of Iterative Decoding
Brendan J. Frey, Member, IEEE, Ralf Koetter, Member, IEEE, and Alexander Vardy, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—By tracing the flow of computations in the iterative decoders for low-density parity-check codes, we formulate a signal-space view for a finite number of iterations in a finite-length code. On a Gaussian channel, maximum a posteriori (MAP) codeword decoding (or “maximum-likelihood decoding”) decodes to the codeword signal that is closest to the channel output in Euclidean distance. In contrast, we show that iterative decoding decodes to the “pseudosignal” that has highest correlation with the channel output. The set of pseudosignals corresponds to “pseudocodewords,” only a vanishingly small number of which correspond to codewords. We show that some pseudocodewords cause decoding errors, but that there are also pseudocodewords that frequently correct the deleterious effects of other pseudocodewords.
Index Terms—Codes on graphs, iterative decoding, low-density parity-check codes, message passing, probability propagation, signal space, sum-product algorithm.
I. INTRODUCTION
S IGNAL-SPACE descriptions of coding and modulation form an insightful and utilitarian foundation of digital communication theory [1]. By viewing the operation of a communication system in signal space, we gain an intuitive understanding of how the system manipulates channel signals in an attempt to achieve good performance. This intuitive picture has been used to develop signal-space structures such as signal constellations, set partitions, and code lattices, which are integral parts of many high-performance communication systems [2]–[4].
It turns out that iterative decoders, such as the turbo decoder and Gallager’s decoder, have a signal-space description [5]. We show how a broad framework for describing iterative decoders leads to a signal-space view of iterative decoding. In contrast to analysis of optimal decoding of ensembles of iteratively decodable codes [6], [7], we present a signal-space analysis of the iterative decoders. In contrast to analysis of decoders that use an infinite number of iterations in infinite-length codes [8]–[10], we
Manuscript received December 15, 1999; revised September 28, 2000. The work of B. J. Frey was supported in part by NSERC under Research Grant RGPIN217657-99. The work of R. Koetter was supported in part by the NSF under Grant CAREER-CCR-9984515.
B. J. Frey is with the Faculty of Computer Science, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1, Canada and the Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801-2307 USA (e-mail: frey@uwaterloo.ca).
R. Koetter is with the Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801–2307 USA (e-mail: koetter@csl.uiuc.edu).
A. Vardy is with the Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, San Diego, CA 92093–0428 USA (e-mail: vardy@ece. ucsd.edu).
Communicated by G. D. Forney, Jr., Guest Editor. Publisher Item Identifier S 0018-9448(01)00720-9.

study finite numbers of iterations in finite-length codes. In con-

trast to research on iterative decoding in graphs with single cy-

cles [11]–[13], we study graphs with multiple cycles. We begin

to answer the question, “What are the geometric properties in

signal space of iterative decoding on the Gaussian channel?”

The “computation tree” was used in [14] to describe the flow

of computations involved in decoding a particular codeword bit

in an iterative decoder. To analyze code graphs with a single

cycle, Aji et al. [11], Forney et al. [12], and Weiss [13] used the

computation tree (actually, a chain in this case). Computation

trees for code graphs with a large number of cycles have been

studied by Wiberg [14] and Frey et al. [5].

As shown in [14], the computation tree defines a new code,

called a “pseudocode.” pseudocodewords play a role in the it-

erative decoder that is similar to the role of codewords in max-

imum-likelihood decoding, but pseudocodewords are not gen-

erally codewords of the original code.

We show that each pseudocodeword corresponds to a

“pseudosignal” in signal space and that the decision made for

a particular codeword bit by iterative decoding is given by the

maximum-correlation decision (Viterbi-type decoding) and the

correlation-weighted decision [(Bahl–Cocke–Jelinek–Raviv)

BCJR-type decoding] in signal space. In the latter case, the

weights are given by the exponentials of the correlations

between the pseudosignals and the channel output.

As an example, consider the

code whose optimal

decoder uses four signal-space points corresponding to the four

codewords. These points are located on corners of a cube, as

shown in Fig. 1. For decoding a particular bit, these four points

can be grouped into two points corresponding to a bit decision

of (shown as dark-shaded) and the other two points corre-

sponding to a bit decision of (shown as light-shaded).

We can describe the

code by including an extra

redundant equation in the parity-check matrix,

, and decode it by applying Gallager’s iter-

ative decoding algorithm [15]. Information is alternately passed

from the three codeword bits to the two parity-check equations

and vice versa. Although the

code is easily decoded

optimally (in any sense of the word), it provides a simple ex-

ample whose three-dimensional signal space can be visualized.

At the same time, the iterative decoder is complex enough to

exhibit one of the fundamental properties of the signal-space

structure of iterative decoders: an explosion in the number of

pseudocodewords relative to the number of actual codewords.

Fig. 2 shows the pseudosignals corresponding to a bit deci-

sion of (dark-shaded) and a bit decision of (light-shaded)

for a particular bit after three iterations of iterative decoding.

In this case, the bit decision obtained from Viterbi-type itera-

tive decoding is given by the pseudosignal that has the highest

correlation with the channel output. The marginal a posteriori

0018–9448/01$10.00 © 2001 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:53:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FREY et al.: SIGNAL-SPACE CHARACTERIZATION OF ITERATIVE DECODING

767

Fig. 1. Signal-space positions of the codewords corresponding to a bit decision of 0 (dark-shaded) and a bit decision of 1 (light-shaded) for the (3; 2; 2) code.
Fig. 2. Signal-space positions of the pseudocodewords corresponding to a bit decision of 0 (dark-shaded) and a bit decision of 1 (light-shaded) after three iterations of iterative decoding for the (3; 2; 2) code described by the redundant parity-check matrix H = [1; 1; 1; 1; 1; 1].
bit probability estimate obtained from BCJR-type iterative decoding is given by weighting the decision given by each pseudosignal by the exponential of the correlation with the channel output, scaled by the estimated noise variance.
Comparing Fig. 2 with Fig. 1, note three effects: first, the signals corresponding to codewords are retained by the iterative decoder; second, these signals are skewed, in that in one dimension they have been shrunk away from the hypercube corners

(see the codeword signals); third, decoding performance is de-

termined by a mixture of the effects of the pseudosignals for the

two possible bit decisions. This example shows that there are

“good” pseudosignals, which are positively correlated with cor-

ners of the hypercube that give the correct decision and “bad”

pseudosignals, which are positively correlated with corners of

the hypercube that give the wrong decision.

By studying the pseudosignal structure of a

code

and a Hamming

code, we gain insight into how de-

coding errors occur. For Viterbi-type iterative decoding, errors

may arise when a bad pseudosignal is more highly correlated

with the channel output than the codeword signal. This is the

error mode used to develop a union bound on the error proba-

bility [14]. However, it turns out that in this situation, there are

often good pseudosignals that are more highly correlated with

the channel output than the bad pseudosignals, so that an error

is not made. This result directly challenges the usefulness of the

union bound.

The pseudosignal structure also lends insight into why

BCJR-type iterative decoding improves on Viterbi-type itera-

tive decoding. Even if the most highly correlated pseudosignal

yields the wrong decision, there is often a cloud of highly

correlated pseudosignals that yield the correct decision. In this

case, the weighted average may give the correct decision.

We begin the main part of this paper with background ma-

terial on a broad framework for describing codes using “factor

graphs” and for describing iterative decoders as instances of the

“sum-product” and “max-product” (also known as “min-sum”)

algorithms (Section II). We suggest that readers familiar with

the graphical model view of iterative decoding read only the def-

initions in this background section or see [14]–[16].

See [24] for a review of factor graphs and the sum-product

algorithms.

In Section IV, we use the computation tree to define a “pseu-

docode” that describes iterative decoding and we discuss the

pseudocodes for an iteratively decoded 3-bit repetition code and

a

code. We then show how iterative decoding emerges

as correlation-based decoding in a signal space populated by

“pseudosignals.”

We then study two aspects of the signal space of iterative

decoding: skewness and spurious pseudosignals, which do not

correspond to codewords. In Section V, we show that one source

of error in iterative decoding is caused by unequal scaling of

each dimension of the signal space. We show how to compensate

for “skewness” in a simple code.

Not surprisingly, the analysis of spurious pseudosignals is

quite difficult. In Section VI, we discuss the role of bad pseu-

dosignals, which cause decoding errors, and good pseudosig-

nals, which can correct the errors introduced by bad pseudosig-

nals. We show some examples of how spurious pseudosignals

bear on the decoding performance in the

code and the

Hamming

code. We also give a theorem on how the it-

erative decoder can be modified so that when it converges to a

codeword, this codeword is the maximum a posteriori (MAP)

codeword.

In Section VIII, we summarize our current view on the signal-

space structure of iterative decoding and outline some directions

for further investigation.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:53:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

768

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

II. BACKGROUND

In this section, we review earlier work on factor graphs [17], [24], computation trees [5], [11]–[14], and pseudocodes [14], and introduce our notation.
The trellis has proven to be a powerful graphical tool for understanding a variety of codes [18]–[20]. More recently, graphical models and their corresponding inference algorithms have proven to be very useful in describing the codes and iterative decoders for Gallager codes, turbo codes, serial turbo codes, and product codes [16]. These graphical models include “Tanner graphs” [14], [21], Markov random fields [16], [22], Bayesian networks (a.k.a. belief networks and causal diagrams) [16], [23], and “factor graphs” [17], [24].

Definition 1: A factor graph is a bipartite graph with one

set of vertices corresponding to variables

and another set of vertices corresponding to given local func-

tions

such that the global function corresponding

to the factor graph is given by

Fig. 3. Factor graphs for (a) a (7; 4) Hamming code and (b) a short example of a Gallager code.

It is frequently useful to “fix” or “set” a variable in a factor graph to a particular value. To set to the value , let the singleton function for be

if

if

.

Example 1—

Hamming Code: Fig. 3(a) a shows

a factor graph for a

Hamming code. The light discs

represent codeword bits, whereas the dark discs with plus signs

represent even-parity indicator functions that evaluate to if

their variables have even parity (their sum modulo equals )

and evaluate to otherwise. The global function is

where is the set of variables connected to .

Sometimes, we associate a singleton function with each variable, in which case the global function is given by
(1)

Given a vector of codeword symbols , is a codeword in the Hamming code and
that is not a codeword.

indicates that indicates

where

are the singleton functions. In general, the

functions may evaluate to any semi-ring [25], [24], but in this

paper we will assume they evaluate to the real numbers.

A. Describing Codes with Factor Graphs
Iterative decoding can be viewed as the application of a simple message-passing algorithm in a factor graph that describes the constraints on the codeword symbols. In the simplest case, these constraints are parity-check equations; in more complex cases, the constraints may force the checked bits to be in some general subset. The most direct graphical description of a code is a factor graph for the codeword indicator function.

One simple approach to designing codes that turn out to give

near-Shannon-limit performance is to simply connect parity-

check functions to codeword bits in a nearly random fashion.

If the connectivity is made sparse (corresponding to a low-den-

sity parity-check matrix), we get a Gallager code [8], [15]. If the

average degree of the parity-check nodes is and the average

degree of the codeword bit nodes is , then the rate of the code

is at least

. Equality holds if all of the parity-check

equations are linearly independent. Fig. 3(b) shows a short (and

thus not really sparsely connected) example of a Gallager code.

In this case,

,

, and

.

If the channel corrupts the symbols independently, the poste-

rior distribution over codewords assuming a uniform prior is

Definition 2: A factor graph with codeword symbols is said to “describe” a code , if the global function satisfies

The graphical structure of a code is often simplified by including some extra “state variables,” which are not codeword symbols but help describe the codewords. In general, a state variable in a factor graph for a code identifies subsets of , but is not itself a codeword symbol.
For the sake of clarity, we will focus on graphical models without states (e.g., Gallager codes), but the signal-space concepts presented in this paper can also be applied to graphical models with states (e.g., turbo codes).

where

are the channel likelihoods.

So, if we set the singleton function for each codeword symbol

equal to the channel likelihood

, the resulting global

function is proportional to the posterior distribution over the

codeword symbols.

B. Computation Trees for Iterative Decoders
The standard iterative decoders for Gallager codes [15], [26], turbo codes [27], repeat-accumulate codes [28], product codes [29], and serial turbo codes [30] can be viewed as instances of the sum-product algorithm in various factor graphs [16]. Also, Hagenauer et al.’s “log-likelihood algebra” [31] can be viewed

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:53:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FREY et al.: SIGNAL-SPACE CHARACTERIZATION OF ITERATIVE DECODING

769

Fig. 4. (a) A factor graph for the 3-bit repetition code, where the local functions indicate equality. (b) The computation tree for three iterations of the alternating schedule terminating at c .

Fig. 5. (a) A factor graph for the (3; 2; 2) code, where the local functions indicate even parity. (b) The computation tree for three iterations of the alternating schedule terminating at c .

as an instance of the sum-product update rule. See [29] for further review.
The sum-product algorithm and its close relative the maxproduct algorithm specify how to compute messages representing evidence for values of variables in a graphical model and how to combine these messages locally to make inferences about the values of each variable.
By tracing the computations performed by the sum-product or max-product algorithm backward in time, we can construct a “computation tree” [5], [11]–[14].
Definition 3: The computation tree for an iterative decoder for codeword bit in factor graph is a factor graph constructed by creating a root node corresponding to in
and then recursively adding edges and leaf nodes to that correspond to the messages passed in the iterative decoder. For each vertex that is created in , the corresponding local function or singleton function in is copied.

the child of the copy of just connected in . The final

computation tree for three iterations has six layers of edges. In

this computation tree, the multiplicities are

,

,

and

.

Example 3—A Computation Tree for the

Code: Fig. 5(a) shows a factor graph for the

code. There are two local functions that evaluate to if their

arguments have even parity and evaluate to otherwise. The

computation tree for three iterations of the alternating

schedule terminating at is shown in Fig. 5(b). In this com-

putation tree, the multiplicities are

,

, and

.

C. Pseudocodes for Iterative Decoders
It turns out that iterative decoding is performing optimal decoding in the “pseudocode” defined by the computation tree.

Each vertex in corresponds to a unique vertex in , but each vertex in may have many corresponding vertices in . We use an overbar, “ ” to denote variables and functions in the computation tree.
Definition 4: For a factor graph and a corresponding computation tree , the multiplicity of vertex in is the number of times a copy of appears in .
It is particularly easy to construct the computation tree for a factor graph when the alternating message-passing schedule is used. To construct for iterations, pretend that in is the root of a tree and then copy over to using a breadth-first search—ignoring the cycles—until has layers of edges.
Example 2—A Computation Tree for the 3-Bit Repetition Code: Fig. 4(a) shows an asymmetric factor graph for the 3-bit repetition code. We will use this example throughout this paper. We chose this asymmetric graph to emphasize properties of the decoder to be described later. There are three local functions that evaluate to if their arguments are equal and evaluate to otherwise. The computation tree for three iterations of the alternating schedule terminating at is shown in Fig. 4(b). To produce this graph using a breadth-first search, we begin by copying in and making it the root in (for visual clarity, only the subscript is shown in Fig. 4(b)). Next, copy , , and in and make them children of the root in . For each of these “children” in , copy their “children” over to . For “child” of in , copy it and make it

Definition 5: For an iterative decoder for a codeword bit in a factor graph for a code , the pseudocode is the code described by the corresponding computation tree .

For each codeword

, there is a corresponding pseu-

docodeword

obtained by copying the value of each

codeword bit to the pseudocodeword bits that are copies

of . The pseudocodeword indicator function is a product of

copies of local functions from the original factor graph. For the

configuration the local functions in the original factor graph

all evaluate to . Therefore, the pseudocodeword indicator func-

tion will evaluate to for the word constructed as described

above.

We refer to pseudocodewords that do not have a corre-

sponding codeword as spurious pseudocodewords.

Example 4—A Pseudocode for the 3-Bit Repetition

Code: For the repetition code factor graph shown in Fig. 4(a),

the pseudocode described by the factor graph in Fig. 4(b) is also

a repetition code, but has dimension

instead of

.

Whereas the parameters of the original code are

, the

parameters of the new code are

. This pseudocode

does not have any spurious pseudocodewords.

Example 5—A Pseudocode for the

Code: Unlike the

above example, the pseudocode described by the computation

tree in Fig. 5(b) is very different from the original code. The

pseudocode has dimension

and there are 14 linearly in-

dependent parity checks. For a given pseudocodeword, we can

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:53:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

770

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

obtain another pseudocodeword by flipping the values of any

pair of leaf bits that are connected to the same check in the com-

putation tree. So, the minimum distance is still . The resulting

pseudocode has parameters

, which are very different

from the parameters of the original code. Since the original code

has four codewords, this pseudocode has

spu-

rious pseudocodewords.

TABLE I MULTIPLICITIES FOR THE 3-BIT REPETITION CODE GRAPH, FOR 0 THROUGH 20
ITERATIONS TERMINATING AT BIT 1

The computation tree is constructed by tracing the passage of messages in the original graph back in time. So, by construction, passing messages layer by layer from the leaves of the computation tree to the root gives evidence at the root that is equal to the evidence obtained by iterative propagation in the original graph. Also, since the root of the computation tree has been influenced by all other vertices in the computation tree, the evidence at the root is exact.
It follows that the evidence computed by the sum-product or max-product algorithm for a variable in a factor graph is equal to the exact marginal or maximum for the root variable in the computation tree .
This fact is used later to derive a signal-space view of iterative decoding.
III. NEW RESULTS ON COMPUTATION TREES AND PSEUDOCODES

holds because the vertices at distance have exactly

neighbors. Among these neighbors the vertices at distance

are counted

times. Simplifying the sum,

, with

, we obtain the claimed

recurrence relation.

Example 6—Multiplicities in the Computation Tree for the

3-Bit Repetition Code: Order the vertices in the factor graph

in Fig. 4(a) (Example 2) as

. The ad-

jacency matrix is

For a given computation tree, the multiplicities can be com-

puted using a recursion formula. Consider an augmented multi-

plicity vector whose first components are the multiplicities

of the codeword bits and whose last set of components are the

multiplicities of the local functions. Let be the augmented

multiplicity vector for a computation tree with layers of edges.

(For iterations of decoding, we have

.) For a computation

tree corresponding to a codeword bit , let be defined

as a vector that contains a in the th position and ’s every-

where else. The vector is defined as

,

where is the adjacency matrix of the original graph.

Theorem 1: For the alternating schedule, the vectors satisfy the recurrence

Using the recursion formula of Theorem 1, the multiplicities given in Table I are obtained for 0 through 20 iterations terminating at bit . Asymptotically, both and appear in the tree 0.9156 times as often as .
The recurrence in (2) can be solved for in closed form by introducing generating functions. To this end, let
. From (2) we can derive the following equation:

for

(2)

(4)

where is the adjacency matrix of the original graph, is the diagonal degree matrix of the graph, and is the identity matrix.
Proof: For the th iteration this is obviously true, since the corresponding computation tree consists of a single vertex. A computation tree of depth contains the neighbors of and
itself, which yields the multiplicity vector . Let be the multiplicity vector of the vertices that have distance exactly
from the root vertex. It is straightforward to verify that we have the equations

The matrix

has nonzero determinant in

the field of rational functions in . Hence, (4) can be solved

in the field of rational functions over the integers yielding

for the th component of , where

and

are polynomials in . From the latter expression, we

can derive a closed formula for the coefficients of the vectors

.

It is clear from Table I that even for small codes, the number

of vertices in the computation tree grows very quickly with the

number of layers.

Definition 6: For each component of the vector of vertex

and

multiplicities, let be the maximum modulus solution to

. The growth rate of the computation tree is

For

the relationship

(3)

bounds the multiplicities as follows.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:53:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FREY et al.: SIGNAL-SPACE CHARACTERIZATION OF ITERATIVE DECODING

771

Lemma 1: The numbers and satisfy the inequality

(5)

Proof: The first inequality is trivial. By the properties of

generating functions we know that the numbers

are ob-

tained by adding terms that grow exponentially in . The fastest

growing exponential term is given by

, which is

equivalent to the claimed statement.

Example 7—Example 6 Continued: We can solve for the multiplicities in closed form. The matrix
is shown at the bottom of this page. gives the vector of generating functions for the multiplicities of each vertex in the computation tree

gorithms are exact in trees, this view allows us to study itera-

tive decoding and iteratively decoded codes by studying proper-

ties of the pseudocodes for the corresponding computation trees.

We show that each pseudocodeword has a corresponding “pseu-

dosignal” and that iterative decoders make decisions based on

the correlation between pseudosignals and the channel output.

As a result, iterative max-product (Viterbi-type) decoding is

described by a solid angle tessellation of signal space, which

is quite different from the Voronoi tessellation used by max-

imum-likelihood decoding.

Let

be the mapping of a codeword bit to its

channel signal. For binary antipodal signaling, we use

if

if

.

For the computation tree in Example 6 we find that

When the map is applied to a vector of bits, it produces a

point in . We indicate this by writing in bold. Using this

notation, the channel output vector is a corrupted version of

.

For a given pseudocode, denote the vector of multiplicities

for the original codeword bits by

where “ ” denotes vector transpose. Let

be the number

of times the bits in the pseudocodeword corresponding to bit

in the original code have the value . The vector of these

weights is

. The scalar

represents the weight of codeword bit in the th dimension

of signal space.

Definition 7: The pseudosignal corresponding to a pseu-

docodeword is the vector

.

In comparison, from Table I we have

Since

, we have

These techniques for counting multiplicities are computation-

ally feasible for medium code length. For example, evaluating

(2) requires only multiplications of a vector of length

with sparse

matrices which is easily accom-

plished for factor graphs with thousands of vertices.

IV. THE SIGNAL SPACE OF ITERATIVE DECODERS
As described above, approximate iterative decoding in the factor graph for a code can be viewed as exact decoding in the computation tree derived from the factor graph. This computation tree is also a factor graph, and it describes a new code, called the “pseudocode.” Since the sum-product and max-product al-

e.g., if all the bits in corresponding to have the value , then

. In contrast to the channel signals, which

can take on two values per dimension,

can take

on

values per dimension. For the pseudosignals corre-

sponding to codewords we have

, and they sit

on the corners of the skewed hypercube

. We

note that in general different spurious pseudocodewords map to

the same pseudosignal.

Theorem 2: The bit decision made by iterative max-product decoding is given by the value of the root bit in the pseudocodeword whose pseudosignal has maximum correlation with the channel output

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:53:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

772

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

The probability ratio

for bit computed by it-

erative sum-product decoding is

Proof—Max-Product Decoding: Create a vector

of observations for the pseudocode as follows. Given a channel

output vector

, for

set

for each

pseudocodeword bit that corresponds to codeword bit . As

described above, the bit decision made by iterative max-product

decoding is given by the value of the root bit in

m 0 Fig. 6. A geometric expression for ( 2`(c)) y in signal space.
Proof—Sum-Product Decoding: As described above, the evidence obtained by iterative sum-product decoding is equal to the exact marginal for the root variable of the computation tree

(6)

From Section II, we have

Substituting the Gaussian likelihoods and noting that , we obtain
(7)

where is the pseudocodeword indicator function. Substituting (7) into (6), inserting the Gaussian channel likelihoods

Substituting (9) into this expression proves the theorem.

and noting that

In this view of iterative decoding, there is a pseudosignal

corresponding to each pseudocodeword . When the

correlation between

and is high, the prediction made

by is given high weight.

we obtain

Example 8—Pseudosignals for the 3-Bit Repetition Code:

There are only two pseudocodewords for the computation tree

shown in Fig. 4(b) and both correspond to codewords. It is ev-

ident from the computation tree that after three iterations

. For the all-zero codeword

,

, and we have a pseudosignal

.

For the all-one codeword

,

(8) and we have a pseudosignal

.

The sum over terms is reduced to a sum over the multiplicities as follows:

terms using

Example 9—Pseudosignals for the

Code: Unlike

the 3-bit repetition code, in this case there are many spurious

pseudocodewords. From Example 5, it is clear that after just

three iterations in the factor graph of Fig. 5(a) there are 32 768

pseudosignals. It turns out that only 480 of the pseudosignals

occupy unique positions in signal space and four of these

unique positions correspond to codewords. Fig. 2 shows the

positions of the unique pseudosignals.

Substituting this expression into (8) proves the theorem.

Generally, the pseudosignals sit within a skewed hypercube

with dimensions

. The pseudosignals corre-

sponding to codewords lie on the corners of this skewed hyper-

(9) cube.

Fig. 6 shows a simple way to express

geo-

metrically.

can be viewed as the product of

and the distance from the origin to the point where inter-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:53:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FREY et al.: SIGNAL-SPACE CHARACTERIZATION OF ITERATIVE DECODING

773

Fig. 7. A signal-space view of three decoding iterations in the factor graph
= from Fig. 4 that describes the 3-bit repetition code. The dark-shaded sphere
corresponds to the codeword with c 0, whereas the light-shaded sphere corresponds to the codeword with c = 1:

Fig. 8. A signal-space view of two decoding iterations in the factor graph from Fig. 5(a) that describes the (3; 2; 2) code. The dark-shaded spheres correspond to pseudocodewords that predict c = 0, whereas the light-shaded spheres correspond to pseudocodewords that predict c = 1.

sects the sphere whose diameter is connected from to

. In other words, we project the pseudosignal onto the

one-dimensional space that is spanned by the received vector. If

the signal vector does not intersect the sphere, we rewrite the

correlation as

. Now, the above technique

can be applied using the vector , which does intersect the

sphere. Using this picture, we can visualize iterative decoding

in signal space for low-dimensional codes.

For iterative max-product decoding, the bit decision is given

by the bit prediction corresponding to the pseudocodeword

sphere whose intersection with is furthest from the origin.

Example 10—pseudoSignal Spheres for the Iteratively

Decoded 3-Bit Repetition Code: The spheres used to geo-

metrically determine signal correlations as described above

are shown in Fig. 7. To give a better view, the pair of spheres

have been cut by a plane that goes through

and

. The decision boundary made for by itera-

tive max-product decoding is given by the plane that passes

through the origin and is tangent to the two spheres. Iterative

max-product decoding outputs

for any signal on the

same side of this plane as

and outputs

for any

signal on the opposite side. Iterative sum-product decoding will

average these two decisions using weights determined from

the correlations, as described in Theorem 2. In this case, it is

clear that the decision made by iterative max-product decoding

will be the same as the decision made by iterative sum-product

decoding, since, in the latter case, the weights are equal when

the signal lies on the decision plane used by max-product

decoding.

Example 11—Pseudosignal Spheres for the Iteratively

Decoded

Code: Figs. 8 and 9 show the spheres that

contribute to iterative sum-product decoding and iterative

max-product decoding for two and three iterations in the factor

graph of Fig. 5(a). For iterative sum-product decoding, the

distances given by the intersections of all spheres with the

signal vector are used to obtain the weights used for averaging.

For iterative max-product decoding, only the prediction given by the sphere that gives the largest distance is used.

A. Max-Product Decoding Decodes to Vertices of the Convex Hull of Pseudosignals

Many of the pseudosignal spheres in Figs. 8 and 9 are contained within the spheres of other pseudosignals. These pseudosignals will not affect the output of max-product decoding. Generally, we have the following theorem.

Theorem 3: With probability on a Gaussian channel,

max-product decoding decodes to vertices of the convex hull

of all pseudosignals. Every pseudosignal corresponding to a

codeword is a vertex of this convex hull.

Proof: Let the set of unique pseudosignals be

,

and assume that the decoder decodes to just one of these pseu-

dosignals . Then

Since

is a point in the convex hull of

the other pseudosignals, is outside the convex hull of the other

pseudosignals. So is a vertex of the convex hull of all pseu-

dosignals. The decoder decodes to more than one pseudosignal

when the correlations between the channel output and two or

more pseudosignals are equal. This happens with probability ,

proving the first part of the theorem.

Since the pseudosignals corresponding to codewords sit on

the corners of the skewed hypercube

, within

which all pseudosignals are contained, the pseudosignals corre-

sponding to codewords are vertices of the convex hull.

Theorem 3 allows us to discard most pseudosignals for the code of Fig. 2 in the context of max-product decoding.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:53:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

774

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Fig. 9. A signal-space view of three decoding iterations in the factor graph from Fig. 5 that describes the (3; 2; 2) code. The dark-shaded spheres correspond to pseudocodewords that predict c = 0, whereas the light-shaded spheres correspond to pseudocodewords that predict c = 1.

However, not all spurious pseudosignals are contained in the The boundary between pseudosignals and is given by

convex hull of the codewords. Also, all pseudosignals contribute all channel outputs that satisfy

, or

to the final decision made by the sum-product algorithm.

B. The Solid Angle Tessellation of Max-Product Decoding
Since max-product decoding picks the pseudosignal that is most highly correlated with the channel output, only the direction of the channel output in signal space determines the decoder output. So, instead of the Voronoi tessellation used by maximum-likelihood decoding, iterative max-product decoding uses a solid-angle tessellation, or, equivalently, a tessellation of the surface of the unit hypersphere in signal space.
To determine the boundary of the solid angle claimed by a pseudosignal, we take the intersection of the solid angles claimed by that pseudosignal when compared with each and every other pseudosignal. In fact, only pseudosignals at the vertices of the convex hull need to be considered, since the decoder will not decode to other pseudosignals (see Theorem 3).

So the boundary is given by the hyperplane that goes through the origin and is orthogonal to the line intersecting and , as shown in Fig. 10.
C. Why This Interpretation?
The goal of this paper is to interpret pseudocodes in signal space. The pseudocodewords sit in a very-high–dimensional space, whose dimensionality depends on the number of decoding iterations. In pseudocode space, max-product decoding is equivalent to minimum-distance decoding. As described above, the pseudocodewords can be mapped to the signal space of fixed dimension, at the cost of switching from a minimum-distance geometric interpretation to a maximum-correlation interpretation. A question that arises is what new insights are gained by this description.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:53:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FREY et al.: SIGNAL-SPACE CHARACTERIZATION OF ITERATIVE DECODING

775

out that iterative decoders scale the dimensions of each signal

point unequally and this “skewness”’ leads to decoding errors.

Let

be the fraction of times

in the pseudocode-

word . Thus

(10)

From Theorem 2, the iterative max-product decoder for bit outputs the value of the root bit in the pseudocodeword satisfying

s s Fig. 10. The solid angle boundary between pseudosignals and is given O by the hyperplane that goes through the origin and is orthogonal to the line s s intersecting and .
In pseudocode space, max-product decoding is equivalent to minimum-distance decoding, so it may seem preferable to work in pseudocode space. However, isotropic noise in signal space becomes extremely anisotropic in pseudocode space. In fact, the noise in pseudocode space sits in a vanishingly low-dimensional linear subspace. So, classical characteristics of the pseudocode like weight distributions and minimum distance are moot in the analysis of iterative decoding.
In order to combat this problem, Wiberg introduced the notion of pseudodistance [14], but did not associate with it a geometric interpretation. By projecting the pseudocodewords into signal space, we give pseudodistance a geometric interpretation as shown in Fig. 10. The pseudodistance of from is simply twice the distance of from the marked hyperplane. A consequence that one can immediately derive from this geometric description is that any pseudosignal that lies on the line through and has the same pseudodistance from . These geometric insights are much more difficult to realize in pseudocode space, so we consider this geometric interpretation to be a significant advantage of the signal-space description.
The projection to signal space yields a geometric characterization of the decoding regions in a space where the noise is isotropic and easy to describe. The moderate price that one has to pay for this conversion is that minimum-distance decoding is replaced by the closely related maximum-correlation decoding.
Further, as described below, the interpretation of iterative decoding in signal space reveals a number of characteristics of iterative decoding like skewness, and spurious pseudosignals. Also, it is possible to give the exact shape of the decoding region for any codeword, which allows the computation of exact expressions for the probability of decoding error.
While most of these concepts can also be derived abstractly in the context of a pseudocode alone, we find that the geometric interpretations in signal space help considerably in interpreting the concepts.
V. SKEWNESS IN SIGNAL SPACE
We might hope that if we could remove the spurious pseudocodewords (the pseudocodewords that do not correspond to codewords), the resulting decoder would perform the same as MAP word decoding or MAP bit decoding. However, it turns

where is a diagonal matrix whose diagonal is the vector of

multiplicities and is a vector of ones of length .

Let be the pseudocode obtained by removing all spurious

pseudocodewords. Suppose for

, is the corresponding

codeword. Then,

if

and

if

.

and so

, the true signal for codeword . It

follows that iterative max-product decoding for bit outputs

the value of in

(11)

Clearly, this decoder is a MAP word decoder only if

,

i.e., the multiplicities are equal.

Example 12—Skewed Decision Surface for the Iteratively De-

coded 3-Bit Repetition Code: Since none of the pseudocode-

words for the 3-bit repetition code are spurious, this code clearly

illustrates the effect of skewness. In Example 10, we found that

iterative max-product decoding uses a decision surface that in-

tersects the origin and is tangent to the two spheres shown in

Fig. 7. A normal vector for this plane is

. However,

since the code is a repetition code, the correct decision plane has

a normal vector

, which is not perfectly aligned with the

vector used by the iterative decoder. If we cut the picture shown

in Fig. 7 by the correct decision plane, we get the picture shown

in Fig. 11. Incorrect decisions will be made for those signal vec-

tors that pass through the dark-shaded “cap.”

By prescaling the channel outputs, we can attempt to compensate for skewness. Let the scaled channel output vector be

where is a positive scalar. Replacing with in the derivation of (11), we see that the skewness-compensated decoder will be optimal when there are no spurious pseudocodewords.
Example 13—Compensating for Skewness in the 3-Bit Repetition Code: It was shown in Example 12 that the decision plane used by the iterative max-product decoder is skewed with respect to the optimal decision plane (see Fig. 11). By scaling the channel outputs, we can try to align the decoder’s decision plane

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:53:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

776

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

that the skewness-compensated iterative decoders produce decision boundaries that are closer to the optimal (MAP) decision boundaries.
Example 15—“Compensating” for Skewness in the Hamming Code: Now we compensate for skewness in the signal space corresponding to 10 iterations of max-product decoding for bit in the factor graph shown in Fig. 3(a). Using the recursion formula from Theorem 1, the multiplicity vector after 10 iterations is

A matrix that is proportional to

is

Fig. 11. When the spheres shown in Fig. 7 are cut by the correct decision plane, we see that the iterative decoder is suboptimal.

So, to compensate for skewness, we ought to scale the channel output for bit 4 by and the channel outputs for bits 2, 3, and 6 by . Fig. 14 shows a contour plot of the fraction of times the decision for made by the max-product decoder disagrees with the decision for obtained by MAP codeword decoding, as a function of the two scale factors. Signals were drawn from an isotropic distribution in signal space. Clearly, the best scale factors are quite different from the scale factors needed to compensate for skewness.

This example shows that the effects of skewness and spurious pseudosignals cannot, in general, be treated independently.

VI. SPURIOUS PSEUDOSIGNALS

Fig. 12. Simulated bit-error rate (BER) showing the effect of scaling the channel outputs for bits 2 and 3 on iterative max-product decoding in the 3-bit repetition code factor graph of Fig. 4(a). The horizontal lines give the BERs for optimal decoding; the vertical line gives the theoretical prediction of the scale factor needed to compensate for skewness.
with the optimal decision plane. Here, we consider 20 iterations. From Table I, we have
One choice of gives

Fig. 12 shows the simulated bit-error rate (BER) for bit 1 as a

function of the value of the scale applied to and for three

different noise levels. The empirical optimal scale factors match

the theoretical prediction of

.

Example 14—Compensating for Skewness in the

Code: From Fig. 5, the multiplicity vectors for two and

three iterations of iterative decoding in the

code are

and

. Fig. 13(a) and (b) shows

In the repetition code, there is a one-to-one correspondence

between codewords and pseudocodewords; i.e., there are no

spurious pseudocodewords. Thus, the skewness-compensated

max-product decoder finds the MAP codeword. In general,

max-product decoding will decode to spurious pseudocode-

words. Even for the “simple”

code, the iterative

decoding tessellation leaks onto the wrong side of the optimal

decision boundary, even after compensating for skewness (see

Fig. 13(a) and (b)).

Fig. 15 shows a histogram of the correlations of pseudosig-

nals with a particular channel output, after three iterations of

decoding in the

code in Fig. 5. The bars above the

horizontal axis give the number of pseudosignals that give the

correct bit decision (“good” pseudosignals), whereas the bars

below the horizontal axis give the number of pseudosignals that

give the wrong bit decision (“bad” pseudosignals). The corre-

lations are normalized by subtracting off the correlation of the

pseudosignal corresponding to the MAP codeword. So, correla-

tions greater than (to the right of the vertical dashed line) cor-

respond to spurious pseudosignals introduced by the iterative

decoder that cause the iterative decoder to deviate from MAP

decoding. In this case, we see that the pseudosignal with the

highest correlation gives the wrong bit decision.

In sum-product decoding, the decision is based on a weighted

average of the counts of pseudosignals, where the weights are

the exponentials of the variance-normalized correlations (see

Theorem 2). Fig. 16 was produced by scaling each bar in Fig. 15

by the exponential of the variance-normalized correlation. So,

the sum product algorithm picks the decision that has highest

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:53:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FREY et al.: SIGNAL-SPACE CHARACTERIZATION OF ITERATIVE DECODING

777

Fig. 13. Skewness compensation moves the decision boundary for (a) two iterations and (b) three iterations of max-product decoding in the (3; 2; 2) code closer to the optimal decision boundary. The piecewise-planar surface is the optimal decision surface for the (3; 2; 2) code. The dark-shaded spheres correspond to pseudocodewords that predict c = 0, whereas the light-shaded spheres correspond to pseudocodewords that predict c = 1.

overall weight in this plot. Clearly, the scaled bars above the horizontal axis have more weight than the bars below the axis, so the sum-product algorithm will make a correct bit decision. In fact, even if we just consider the scaled bars for the pseudosignals that have higher correlation than the MAP codeword pseudosignal, the sum-product algorithm correctly decodes.
Fig. 17 shows the correlation histogram for a particular channel output, after three iterations of decoding in the

Hamming code in Fig. 3(a). There are many bad pseudosignals that are more correlated with the channel output than the pseudosignal corresponding to the MAP codeword. Nonetheless, a good pseudosignal leads to a correct decision. The union bound on the error probability introduced in [14] is given by the probability that there exists a bad pseudocodeword that is more highly correlated with the channel output than the pseudosignal corresponding to the MAP codeword. This ex-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:53:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

778

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Fig. 14. Contour plot of the fraction of times the decision for c made after
10 iterations of max-product decoding in Fig. 3 disagrees with the decision for
c obtained by MAP codeword decoding, as a function of two channel output scale factors. The outermost contour corresponds to a disagreement rate of 0:26 and the innermost contour corresponds to a disagreement rate of 0:13.

Fig. 16. Histogram from Fig. 15, with each bar scaled by the exponential of the variance-normalized correlation. For sum-product decoding, the total mass above the horizontal axis competes with the mass below the axis. In this case, sum-product decoding makes the correct decision.

Fig. 15. Histogram of the correlations of pseudosignals with a particular channel output, after three iterations of decoding in the (3; 2; 2) code in Fig. 5. The bars above the horizontal axis give the number of pseudosignals that give the correct bit decision (“good” pseudosignals), whereas the bars below the horizontal axis give the number of pseudosignals that give the wrong bit decision (“bad” pseudosignals). The correlations are normalized by subtracting off the correlation of the pseudosignal corresponding to the MAP codeword. The decoding decision is determined by the pseudosignal with maximal correlation, which corresponds to the rightmost bar in the figure. In this case, max-product decoding makes the wrong decision.
ample directly challenges the validity of the union bound, since the competition is between good and bad pseudosignals, not the MAP codeword pseudosignal and bad pseudosignals.
Fig. 18 shows the histogram for a different channel output, where a bad pseudocodeword has the highest correlation, causing an incorrect max-product decision. If we apply the sum-product algorithm instead, we obtain the scaled histogram shown in Fig. 19, where the good pseudosignals outweigh the bad pseudosignls and give a correct decoding decision.

Fig. 17. Histogram of the correlations of pseudosignals with a particular channel output, after three iterations of decoding in the Hamming (7; 4; 3) code in Fig. 3(a)—a good pseudosignal wins.
VII. ATTENUATING SPURIOUS PSEUDO-SIGNALS
In this section, we show how to attenuate the contributions of spurious pseudosignals for max-product decoding. One of the main problems in the analysis of iterative decoding is that the leaves of the computation tree largely determine the correlation of the corresponding pseudosignal with the channel output. Even simple statements about the behavior of the algorithm are very difficult to state rigorously. In particular, even if maxproduct decoding converges to a codeword, there is no guarantee that the codeword is the MAP codeword [32]. This is because the part of the computation tree that favors a certain codeword decision only contributes a small fraction of the total correlation of the corresponding pseudosignal.
We can attempt to combat the influence of the leaves by “attenuating” the messages that are passed from the leaves in the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:53:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FREY et al.: SIGNAL-SPACE CHARACTERIZATION OF ITERATIVE DECODING

779

For iterations, the correlation of the channel output with the pseudosignal corresponding to pseudocodeword is

(12)
where is constant for all pseudocodewords . So, the formula from Theorem 2 is modified such that the attenuated maxproduct decoder finds the pseudocodeword

Fig. 18. Histogram of the correlations of pseudosignals with a particular channel output, after three iterations of decoding in the Hamming (7; 4; 3) code in Fig. 3(a)—a bad pseudosignal wins.

where is the vector with elements , and

is the

vector with elements

.

Let

be the attenuation-weighted fraction of times that

equals among the bits of pseudocodeword at distance

from the root

(13)

Then the attenuated max-product decoder finds the pseudo codeword

(14)

where is a diagonal matrix with diagonals . By including the effect of , the skewness in the attenuated
decoder can be compensated for in a similar way as it was in the unattenuated case (previous section)

Fig. 19. Histogram from Fig. 18, with each bar scaled by the exponential of the variance-normalized correlation. For sum-product decoding, the total mass above the horizontal axis competes with the mass below the axis. In this case, sum-product decoding makes the correct decision.

computation tree, so that when the decoder converges to a code-

word, the correlation is mostly determined by the portion of the

computation tree that corresponds to a codeword.

We say that an iterative max-product decoder has converged

to a codeword if, for every codeword bit ,

and

corresponding max-product decision , we have

is a neighbor of

By choosing judiciously, we can hope to focus the above maximization on the part of the pseudocodeword that has converged to a codeword, making the above decision optimal.

Theorem 4—Attenuation Theorem: If the attenuated, skew-

ness-compensated max-product decoder converges to a code-

word for some

, then this codeword is the

MAP codeword.

Proof: Suppose that the decoder converges to a codeword

after iterations, so that for

iterations, the bit deci-

sions are constant and correspond to a codeword. For such a

pseudocodeword , denote the corresponding codeword by .

Thus, the codeword in the converged part of the pseudocode-

word (14) can be written

and

.

is the message passed from function (parity

check) to bit .

Suppose that all messages passed in each iteration are expo-

nentiated by the same factor . Let denote the number of

occurrences of bit at distance from the root of the compu-

tation tree, and let

denote the number of times that

equals among the bits of pseudocodeword at distance from

the root.

In the first line we used the fact that all pseudocodeword bits at

distance

from the root that corresponds to have the

same value as , so

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:53:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

780

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

For any Lemma 1 to bound
As

, there is a finite

such that

. Making this substitution and using

, the second term is bounded as follows:

The signal-space description of iterative decoding offers a number of insights into modes of failure and success of iterative decoding. One consequence is the effect of skewness which partially explains why certain symbols in a received word may influence a decoding decision to a larger degree than others. Also, we show that the density of pseudocodewords plays an important roll for the decision regions of the sum-product algorithm.
The signal-space characterization is an exact framework to describe the inner workings of iterative message-passing algorithms. However, as expected, for nontrivial codes and a reasonable number of iterations, our characterization reflects the analytic complexity of iterative decoding. In particular, the number of codewords in the pseudocode grows very fast (it can be shown that under mild conditions on the underlying factor graph the number of pseudocodewords grows doubly exponentially in the number of iterations). For future development of the signalspace characterization, it will be crucial to find descriptions that allow for the efficient treatment of pseudocodes.

REFERENCES

but

can be kept finite (by choosing appropriately),

so this term goes to . Thus, we have

(15)
which is the MAP codeword.
From a small number of experiments, we have some anecdotal evidence for cases where was required to be so small that the attenuated decoder did not converge. However, we are still examining the practical implications of this theorem and cannot make general statements.
VIII. CONCLUSION
Using the computation tree [5], [11]–[14], we derived a signal-space description of iterative decoding. While impressive headway has been made recently in the analysis of maximum-likelihood decoding of codes on graphs [6]–[8] and iterative decoding in infinite-length codes [8]–[10], [33], we focus on the difficult but important case of message-passing algorithms in graphs for codes of finite length.
Using the notion of a pseudocode and a computation tree [14], we characterize the signal space of iterative decoding. In the case of the max-product algorithm, these regions are given by a solid-angle tessellation of signal space with boundaries given by hyperplanes. To our knowledge, this is the first time that the decoding regions of iterative decoding have been characterized.

[1] E. A. Lee and D. G. Messerschmitt, Digital Communication. Norwell, MA: Kluwer, 1994.
[2] G. Ungerboeck, “Channel coding with multilevel/phase signals,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-28, pp. 55–67, Jan. 1982.
[3] A. R. Calderbank and N. J. A. Sloane, “New trellis codes based on lattices and cosets,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-33, pp. 177–195, Mar. 1987.
[4] G. D. Forney Jr., “Coset codes—Part I: Introduction and geometrical classification,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 34, pp. 1123–1151, Sept. 1988.
[5] B. J. Frey, R. Koetter, and A. Vardy, “Skewness and pseudocodewords in iterative decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Cambridge, MA, Aug. 1998, p. 148.
[6] S. Benedetto and G. Montorsi, “Unveiling turbo-codes: Some results on parallel concatenated coding schemes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 409–428, Mar. 1996.
[7] D. Divsalar and R. J. McEliece, “Effective free distance of turbo codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 445–446, Feb. 1996.
[8] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[9] T. J. Richardson, “Turbo-decoding from a geometric perspective,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Cambridge, MA, Aug. 1998, p. 278.
[10] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of provably good low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[11] S. M. Aji, G. B. Horn, and R. J. McEliece, “Iterative decoding on graphs with a single cycle,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Cambridge, MA, Aug. 1998, p. 276.
[12] G. D. Forney Jr., F. R. Kschischang, and B. Marcus, “Iterative decoding of tail-biting trellises,” in Proc. 1998 Information Theory Workshop, 1998.
[13] Y. Weiss, “Correctness of local probability propagation in graphical models with loops,” Neural Comput., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 1–42, 2000.
[14] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Doctoral dissertation, Dept. Elec. Eng., Linköping Univ., Linköping, Sweden, 1996.
[15] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[16] B. J. Frey, Graphical Models for Machine Learning and Digital Communication. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998. See also http://www.cs. utoronto.ca/~frey.
[17] B. J. Frey, F. R. Kschischang, H. A. Loeliger, and N. Wiberg, “Factor graphs and algorithms,” in Proc. 35th Allerton Conf. Communication, Control and Computing ’97, 1998.
[18] G. D. Forney Jr., “The Viterbi algorithm,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 61, pp. 268–277, Mar. 1973.
[19] F. R. Kschischang and V. Sorokine, “On the trellis structure of block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 41, pp. 1924–1937, Nov. 1995.
[20] R. J. McEliece, “On the BJCR trellis for linear block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 1072–1092, July 1996.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:53:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FREY et al.: SIGNAL-SPACE CHARACTERIZATION OF ITERATIVE DECODING

781

[21] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.
[22] F. R. Kschischang and B. J. Frey, “Iterative decoding of compound codes by probability propagation in graphical models,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 219–230, Feb. 1998.
[23] R. J. McEliece, D. J. C. MacKay, and J. F. Cheng, “Turbo-decoding as an instance of Pearl’s ‘belief propagation’ algorithm,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 140–152, Feb. 1998.
[24] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[25] S. M. Aji and R. J. McEliece, “A general algorithm for distributing information in a graph,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, 1997.
[26] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996. Reprinted in Electron. Lett., vol. 33, pp. 457–458, Mar. 1997..
[27] C. Berrou and A. Glavieux, “Near optimum error correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 44, pp. 1261–1271, Oct. 1996.

[28] R. J. McEliece, D. Divsalar, and H. Jin, “Coding theorems for ‘turbolike’ codes,” in Proc. 35th Allerton Conf. Communication, Control and Computing ’97, 1998.
[29] J. Lodge, R. Young, P. Hoeher, and J. Hagenauer, “Separable MAP ‘filters’ for the decoding of product and concatenated codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, 1993, pp. 1740–1745.
[30] S. Benedetto and G. Montorsi, “Iterative decoding of serially concatenated convolutional codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 1186–1188, 1996.
[31] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of binary block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 429–445, Mar. 1996.
[32] R. J. McEliece, E. R. Rodemich, and J.-F. Cheng, “The turbo decision algorithm,” in Proc. 33rd Allerton Conf. Communication, Control and Computing ’96, 1996.
[33] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 585–598, Feb. 2000.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:53:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

