808

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Minimum-Distance Bounds by Graph Analysis
Robert Michael Tanner, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—The parity-check matrix of a linear code is used to define a bipartite code constraint (Tanner) graph in which bit nodes are connected to parity-check nodes. The connectivity properties of this graph are analyzed using both local connectivity and the eigenvalues of the associated adjacency matrix. A simple lower bound on the minimum distance of the code is expressed in terms of the two largest eigenvalues. For a more powerful bound, local properties of the subgraph corresponding to a minimum-weight word in the code are used to create an optimization problem whose solution is a lower bound on the code’s minimum distance. Linear programming gives one bound. The technique is illustrated by applying it
to sparse block codes with parameters [7 3 4] and [42 23 6] .
Index Terms—Code graph, eigenvalues, error-correcting codes, minimum distance bound, linear programming.
I. INTRODUCTION
F OR most existing classes of algebraic codes, the proof of the minimum distance of the code makes heavy use of the algebraic structure of the code. The minimum distance for each class of codes is usually established using a proof technique specific to that particular class, and the minimum distance of codes in a new class may not be easily established. Recent research [4], [7], [8], [10] has shown the efficacy of low-density parity-check codes [3] and iterative decoders at very long block lengths, and Divsalar et al. [2] have shown similar effectiveness for sparse graph “repeat-and-accumulate” codes. Unfortunately, there is no known minimum-distance bound for most sparse-check matrix code constructions, and a code with a low minimum distance will necessarily be impaired in its performance at very high signal-to-noise ratios.
In this paper, we introduce a technique for establishing a lower bound on the minimum distance of an arbitrary binary linear code represented by a bipartite code constraint graph. By analyzing the connectivity of the graph, we create an optimization problem whose solution must lower-bound the minimum distance of the code. The simplest theorems proven here pertain to graphs in which each bit is checked by the same number of parities, and each parity checks the same number of bits. The general analytical technique and bounds apply also for codes and graphs not meeting this condition. Although the argument is very general, the bounds are easiest to calculate when the graph has a large automorphism group, and most accurate when the
Manuscript received December 15, 1999; revised September 22, 2000. This work is an extensively revised version of a paper first submitted to IEEE Transactions on Information Theory in 1982, revised principally when the author was on sabbatical leave at the Department of Electrical Engineering, California Institute of Technology.
The author is with the Department of Computer Science, University of California at Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA 95064 USA (e-mail: tanner@cse.ucsc.edu).
Communicated by R. Koetter, Guest Editor. Publisher Item Identifier S 0018-9448(01)00730-1.

graph is sparse. The mapping of a code to a graph is not unique, and the calculated bounds depend on the particular graph used to represent the code. In general, it may not be possible to find analytical solutions to the optimization problem. However, the method may furnish useful information about any specific graph and code.
Our strategy is to reduce the combinatorial problem of finding a minimum weight using three attributes of the subgraph induced by a minimum-weight codeword. Those attributes can be succinctly expressed in the graph language: First, for the initial bound, we require merely that every parity equation be satisfied by at least two nonzero bits and thus that the codeword-induced subgraph is well connected. The minimum size of a subgraph with that degree of connectivity can be bounded in terms of the eigenvalues of the graph. Second, the size of the problem is collapsed by expressing it in terms of abstract relations that factor out symmetries in the graph. Although a graph analysis bound could be derived directly using a number of variables that is the square of the number of vertices in the graph, the dimension of the optimization problem is greatly reduced for graphs with a large automorphism group. Third, the eigenvalues of the graph are used to impose a feasibility condition on the abstract relation solution that incorporate global connectivity properties of the graph. The form of the argument is similar to that of Delsarte’s linear programming bound ([1], [5, pp. 535–546]) in that it looks for an extremal distribution under a set of constraints on both the distribution and a transformed distribution. Whereas Delsarte studies codewords related by distances to arrive at an upper bound on the number of codewords in a code of a specified length and minimum distance, we study bits related by graph-based equations to arrive at a lower bound on minimum distance.
The bound will be presented in several stages. After introducing the elements of the graph representation of a code and the associated matrices, we will give a pair of simple bounds in which the basic arguments can be seen clearly. Next, the abstract relations defined on the graph nodes will be introduced to shore up the principal weaknesses of the simple argument, leading to an explicit optimization bound on the number of nodes in a minimum-weight word.

II. GRAPH REPERESENTATION

Consider a linear code defined by a parity-check matrix . If

has dimension , a bipartite graph with parity nodes in

one class and bit nodes in the other can be created using as

the real-valued incidence matrix for the two classes. Formally,

the graph is

with the vertices or node set

0018–9448/01$10.00 © 2001 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:52:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANNER: MINIMUM-DISTANCE BOUNDS BY GRAPH ANALYSIS

809

the set of bit vertices,

the set of parity

vertices, and edges

with edge

if and

only if

,

,

. The automorphism

group of is the group of permutations of the vertices that

preserves edges. The orbit of a vertex

is the image of

under the permutations of ,

. The orbit

of an edge is defined similarly.

We will be examining the properties of the subgraph of

induced by a minimum-weight word in the code. A bit vertex

whose associated value in the minimum-weight word is nonzero

will be called an active bit vertex. The edges incident on active

bit nodes will be called active edges, and the parity nodes with at

least one active incident edge will be called active parity nodes.

For the purpose of characterizing the connectivity of the

graph, let be the

real-valued adjacency

matrix for with entry

if and only if the th node is

connected by an edge to the th node. Establishing an ordering

of the nodes, is explicitly

(1)

Converting this to eigenspace representation (6)

(7) Substituting from above

which gives the desired bound for .

To illustrate the use of this theorem, take the matrix for

the

expurgated Hamming code whose th row is the co-

efficients of the polynomial

,

for

. The eigenvectors of

are of the form

, for any complex seventh root of unity.

The eigenvalues are

Since is a real symmetric matrix, it is diagonalizable and

has real eigenvalues. For the purposes of the ensuing discussion,

let

be the ordered distinct eigenvalues of

.

III. A BIT-ORIENTED BOUND

The first bound examines the relationship between bit nodes

in a minimum-weight word, suppressing the parity nodes alto-

gether. Let

be the ordered distinct eigen-

values of

where is the code’s parity-check matrix in-

terpreted as a real matrix of zeros and ones. The eigenvalues are

real-valued because

is symmetric.

Theorem 3.1: If is a regular connected graph with bit nodes of uniform degree , and parity nodes of uniform degree , the minimum distance of the code satisfies

(2)

Proof: Let be a real-valued vector of length corre-

sponding to a minimum-weight codeword, with a one in every

position where the minimum-weight codeword is nonzero and

zeros elsewhere. Since is regular, the first eigenvector can

be taken to be

with

(each

column of has ones, each row ones), and since is con-

nected, it is the unique eigenvector with eigenvalue . Let

be the projection of onto the th eigenspace. Clearly

if if

Thus,

and the bound is

the true minimum distance.

The two places in the proof where the inequalities occur are

the sources of its weakness. First, if there are parity equations

in the minimum-weight word satisfied by four or more nonzero

bits in the code, the inequality (5) will not be tight. Second,

in the derivation all of the smaller eigenvalues are replaced by

the second largest, incurring a loss of accuracy in the bound

whenever the minimum-weight word has nonzero components

in some of these other eigenspaces. In codes with large very

sparse graphs, the assumption that each parity node is adjacent

to only or two nonzero bits in a minimum-weight word may

well be met. The second approximation, however, is only accu-

rate in a very restricted set of graphs. In the

example,

all parities must be satisfied by either or two bits, and there

are only two eigenvalues, and the critical inequalities are in fact

equalities, incurring no loss of accuracy.

To strengthen the bound, Section V will develop a method

for characterizing the distribution of the magnitudes of the

projections of a posited minimum-weight word in the multiple

eigenspaces. With this we can obtain a better estimate of

than results from replacing all

by

.

(3) (4)
assigns an integer weight distribution to parities in . Let be the weight on the th parity. Each nonzero must be even and at least two. Thus
(5)

IV. A PARITY-ORIENTED BOUND

The second bound reverses the perspective and considers

the connectivity between parity nodes, lower-bounding the

number of active parity nodes, those adjacent to any nonzero

bit in a minimum codeword. The counting argument is slightly

different when cast in terms of the connectivity among active

parity nodes. Let

be the ordered distinct

eigenvalues of

, where is the code’s parity-check

matrix interpreted as a real matrix of zeros and ones. (The

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:52:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

810

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

appendix proves that the nonzero eigenvalues of

and

are the same.)

Theorem 4.1: If is a regular connected graph with bit nodes of uniform degree , and parity nodes of uniform degree , the minimum distance of the code satisfies

(8)

4.1 to give a meaningful result. The parity bound is not always

stronger, however. Taking the

Hamming example, the

parity bound says that

and from this

, not the

actual value . In this instance, the inequality of the parity bound

that replaces all weights that are not by is inaccurate; the

values that are not

are , not . The number of active

parity nodes in a codeword subgraph is six, not five.

Proof: Let be a real-valued vector of length that has a

one in every active parity node position and zeros elsewhere.

Let be the number of ones in . Since is regular and

connected, the first eigenvector of

can be taken to be

with

, and it is unique. Let

be the projection of onto the th eigenspace. Analogous

to the bit case,

and

.

assigns an integer weight distribution to bit nodes in , each

weight being either if the bit node is that of a nonzero bit, or

the number of adjacent active parity nodes otherwise. Let be

the weight on the th bit node so that

(9)

The squared weights can be counted by summing over active

parity nodes. Each active node is adjacent to an even number of

nonzero bit nodes. For the th active parity node, let be the

number of adjacent nodes with weight in

,

.

The squared weight to be counted at the th active parity node is

(10)

In summing over all active parity nodes, each value will be

counted times, at the adjacent active bits, hence the factor of

to compensate. Note that

, and

.

There are active parity nodes. Therefore

(11)

Converting this to eigenspace representation (12)

V. GRAPH ANALYSIS BOUND

A. Joint Bit and Parity Indicator Vector

The bound of Section III argued, in effect, that any presumed

codeword for which

cannot have

too small. The ratio between these two inner products places

constraints on the size of the codeword subgraph. In this sec-

tion, the argument is refined and strengthened by examining the

growth rate of a test vector’s inner product when the vector is

multiplied repeatedly by the graph adjacency matrix itself, in-

stead of

. By tracking how the inner product grows as the

vector is multiplied to

times successively by , being

the number of distinct eigenvalues of , the eigenspace decom-

position of the test vector can be completely determined.

The test vector now will be a uniform distribution placing

the same weight on both the bit vertices and the parity vertices

of the graph. Let be a vector of dimension

defining

a distribution on the nodes of that places a one on every bit

node in a minimum-weight codeword and a one on every active

parity node. It might be viewed as an indicator vector for the

subgraph induced by the minimum-weight word.

Let be the inner product growth vector with th compo-

nent

for

. How the compo-

nents

grow as increases can be understood in terms of

the eigenspace decomposition of . Specifically, let be the

projection of onto the th eigenspace of ,

, the

eigenspace associated with eigenvalue . We can now develop

an equation relating and the magnitudes of the , for which

a formal definition is needed.

Definition (Vandermonde Eigenvalue Matrix): The Vander-

monde eigenvalue matrix generated by the distinct eigen-

values

of is the matrix whose

th

row is

for

.

It is well known from linear algebra [5] that a Vandermonde matrix of this form is invertible so long as the defining are distinct, which is our assumption.

Substituting from above

(13) Lemma 5.1 (Growth Vector Spectrum): The growth vector satisfies
(14)

which implies

where

and

gives the stated bound for .

the spectral magnitude decomposition of .

The bounds of Theorem 3.1 and Theorem 4.1 can be com-

Proof: Observe that

pared directly. If

, Theorem 3.1 becomes vacuous,

whereas

may still be positive, allowing Theorem

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:52:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANNER: MINIMUM-DISTANCE BOUNDS BY GRAPH ANALYSIS

811

by the orthogonality of the eigenspaces associated with distinct eigenvalues, and the lemma follows.

Due to the invertibility of , it is easy to see that only the first

components of the growth vector are sufficient to determine

the spectral magnitudes of the eigenspace decomposition of .

Furthermore, once the spectral magnitudes are known, one can

calculate the growth of the inner product

that would

occur for

; each spectral magnitude component is simply

multiplied by the appropriate . The entire growth of the inner

product is determined by the first components.

Analogous to the bounds of Sections III and IV, the fact that

is the indicator vector for a codeword subgraph enables us

to make statements on the initial growth. If there are ones in

the minimum-weight word, and active parities, and the bit

vertices have uniform degree

(15)

(16)

The latter equation is readily grasped by noting that there are two mathematically identical components in the inner product. Multiplying the distribution on the bit nodes by creates a distribution with total weight on the active parities, which is summed by the inner product. The other component may be viewed as the distribution on the bit nodes created similarly by the distribution on the active parities, in an inner product with the nonzero bit node distribution. The inner product sum includes a value of on each of the nodes. This equation, an exact equality, takes the place of the inequality in the simpler bounds, and tightens the conditions on the minimum-weight word. As the arguments are refined, (16) will be dropped in favor of a more general statement valid even when the bit vertex degree is not uniform.

B. Vertex Relations and the Relation Enumerator

Without further scrutiny of the spectral magnitudes that could

arise from a legitimate codeword subgraph, or equivalently, the

components of a for such a word, little progress has been

made from our initial pessimistic assumption that any magni-

tude not in the eigenspace must be in the eigenspace. We

now attack this weakness by characterizing the that might

occur for a distribution on the given graph.

Let

be the index set of the nonzero compo-

nents of the test vector . The growth vector components can

then be written

(17)

Re-interpreting the constituent elements of the successive

powers of , can be regarded as a sum of the contri-

butions due to all the pairs of bits, the components of

. Let

be the -dimensional vector

with th component . Then

(18)

Although the minimum-weight codeword is unknown, and thus

is unknown, one can calculate for the given graph all of the

-dimensional vectors

. There are

such vectors.

For the purposes of determining contributions to , one can

group together all the ordered pairs of indexes from for which

is the same. In fact, for many graphs of interest, the

number of distinct vectors is much smaller than

. This

motivates the introduction of vertex relations between pairs of

vertices, at least one defined for each distinct vector

.

There are four types of relations: between a pair of bit vertices,

between a pair of parity vertices, between a bit vertex and a

parity vertex, or between a parity vertex and a bit vertex.

Definition (Vertex Relations): A bit vertex relation

on ordered pairs of bit vertices in is defined by a -dimen-

sional vector

such that

and

implies

. A parity vertex relation

is defined similarly on ordered pairs of parity vertices, as are

joint bit-parity vertex relations

between a bit vertex and

a parity vertex, and similarly for parity-bit vertex relations .

A set of relations

on the graph vertices will be

called locally consistent if for any pairs of vertices

and

any

there exists a one-to-one mapping between

the neighbors of and the neighbors of that preserves rela-

tions. Specifically, for any such that

is an edge

in the graph, there exists

such that

and

implies

. A set of relations

will be called globally consistent if for any two pairs of vertices

and

there is a permutation in the automor-

phism group of the graph such that

,

,

and preserves relations:

implies

for

any pair of vertices and .

A relation that obtains between a bit and itself (or a parity and

itself) is called reflexive:

for either bit or parity relations.

(There are no reflexive joint bit-parity or parity-bit relations.)

There must be at least one relation for each distinct

to permit the growth vector to be calculated in terms of re-

lations. A growth vector indicates the number of paths in

the graph between a pair of vertices, but the local contexts of

two pairs with the same path densities may be different, and in

ways that impose important limits on the solutions to the code

equations. Local consistency of the relations ensures that the

local graph structure is faithfully represented by the relations

visible at any vertex. Global consistency is a stronger condi-

tion, insisting that the two pairs be isomorphic to be in the same

relation. It should be evident that any globally consistent set of

relations is automatically locally consistent, because a graph au-

tomorphism can always be used as the one-to-one mapping

needed for local consistency. Indeed, the graph automorphism

gives a relation-preserving mapping for all vertices, not just for

the immediate neighbors of the designated vertex. An either lo-

cally or globally consistent set of relations may have multiple

relations with the same

. The only penalty paid for de-

manding greater consistency of the relations is that the number

of relations must be larger and the dimension of the optimiza-

tion problem is increased.

The automorphism group can readily be used to generate

a set of globally consistent relations, almost by definition.

Lemma 5.2: Let be the subgroup of that maps bit vertices to bit vertices and parity vertices to parity vertices. For

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:52:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

812

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

every ordered pair of vertices

, let be the orbit of

under . Define a distinct relation for each such dis-

tinct orbit. Then the set of relations is globally consistent.

Proof: Let

and

for

be two

pairs of vertices that are in the same orbit. They have the same

growth vector, because every path from and is mapped by

to an isomorphic path between

, and serves

as the automorphism-preserving relations as required for global

consistency.

In the event that is trivial and contains only the identity

element, the orbits all have size one, and the procedure generates

a globally consistent set with

relations, the maximum

possible value.

Any unambiguous labeling of the relations can suffice for ref-

erence purposes, but a specific order is needed to define ma-

trices and vectors indexed by them. By default, when necessary,

an inverse lexicographical partial ordering will be used:

implies

in a lexicographical ordering. With this

choice of ordering, two vertices that are more proximate in the

graph will be in a relation at a lower position in the ordering

than are two that are far apart. In any specific case, there may

be a more natural method of denoting and ordering the relations

without confusion.

The introduction of the vertex relations enables the expres-

sion for the eigenspace decomposition of the inner product

growth vector for a putative minimum-weight codeword to be

condensed whenever there is some symmetry to the graph.

A few more constructs are needed to complete this line of

reasoning.

Definition (Relation Growth Matrix): Let be the matrix whose th column is , one column for each bit relation. Similarly, let be the matrix whose th column is , one column for each parity relation, and let be the matrix whose th column is , one column for each joint bit-parity relation, and similarly for . Finally, define the relation growth matrix
to be the concatenation of these four, a matrix, where is the number of relations defined on .

Two ordered pairs of vertices with ones in that are in the same relation will make the same contribution to the growth vector . A relation enumeration vector counts the number of ordered pairs in each relation.

Definition (Relation Enumeration Vector): The relation enumeration vector is defined to be the vector whose th component is the number of ordered pairs of vertices with nonzero values in the indicator vector that are in the th relation of .

Corresponding to , can be written as the concatenation of four enumeration vectors for the four different types of relations, bit, bit-parity, parity-bit, and parity

The following equation is a consequence these definitions, by design:

The product

simply regroups all of the constituents of the

sum.

The procedure for generating globally consistent relations via

the automorphism subgroup can be interpreted as follows:

Consider an

array of cells, an array that is

the same size as the adjacency matrix of the bipartite graph,

with columns and rows corresponding to the columns and rows

of . Associate with the th cell the -dimensional vector of

values

that appears in that position in the successive

powers of . Then label each cell in an orbit of with a relation.

Two cells with different

must have different labels. The

indicator vector of the putative minimum-weight codeword

selects a subset of the columns and a subset of the rows, forming

a grid within the array. The relation enumerator counts the

number of cells with a given relation label within this grid, and

yields the growth vector that results from the distribution

of relations specified by . The reflexive relations are those

appearing on the diagonal of this graph-relation array.

C. Constraints on the Relation Enumerator

In the simple bounds, the connectivity of the subgraph induced by a codeword implied equations governing the spectral magnitude decomposition of the codeword, from which a bound on the minimum size of the subgraph and thus the minimum weight of the code could be derived. We now have the means to characterize more accurately the connectivity of the subgraph. While the specific goal is to lower-bound the number of bit nodes in the subgraph, the technique is to develop constraints on the relative sizes of the components of . If could be determined up to a scalar multiple, then the spectral magnitudes of the test vector would be known up to a scalar multiple, and the initial growth rate of would determine the scalar. The constraints that we can extract from the eigenvalues and the local properties of the graph are not adequate to determine the distribution completely, but they do indirectly imply a lower limit on the number of bit relations.
Knowledge of to this point is summarized in a lemma.

Lemma 5.3 (Enumerator Vector Global Constraints): The

relation enumerator vector

satisfies the

following equations and inequalities:

1)

, being the codeword weight;

2)

, where the inner product sums all

the reflexive bit relations;

3) number of active parities;

, with the

4)

;

5)

, where the inner product sums all

the reflexive parity relations;

6)

and in particular, the first component of

is

;

7)

;

8)

;

(19)

9)

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:52:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANNER: MINIMUM-DISTANCE BOUNDS BY GRAPH ANALYSIS

813

Fig. 1. Bit relations.

Proof: The first five statements are immediate consequences of the definition of relations and the relation enumerator, e.g., there are bit vertices in the graph and thus
ordered relations between bits; each of the bit vertices is in exactly one reflexive relation. The sixth is just (19) and (15). For the remaining statements, apply Lemma 5.1 to a test vector that places a weight on all bits of the codeword and a weight
on all active parities. It will have spectral distribution
where

The seventh follows from setting

follows from setting

and

setting

.

and

. The eighth

, and the ninth from

Local structure of the graph dictates a large set of constraints on the relations and the composition of the relation enumerator. Any counting argument that governs the relative distributions of relation enumerator components may tighten the constraints and improve the resulting minimum-distance bound. The combinatorial strategies that can be employed depend on the specific graph under study and the relations used to describe it.
A general set of constraints can be extracted by observing that, in a codeword, any nonzero bit cannot stand in isolation. The neighboring parity-check equations cannot be satisfied unless there is at least one other nonzero bit connected to

each parity vertex. A minimum-weight codeword solution to the equations must propagate in the graph to at least some extent, especially if the graph is locally tree-like. The relation enumerator components must reflect this propagation. The graph connectivity constraints that force this propagation will be called propagation constraints.
For any given active vertex , the relations of the form in the graph will be counted from the vantage of vertex
. The relations involving can be systematically catalogued by examining the successive levels of a breadth-first tree search of the graph vertices, starting with the given as the root. All vertices at a given distance from appear on the same level. A generic picture of the relations relative to a root bit vertex is shown in Fig. 1.
In essence, the propagation constraints come from the observation that any parity-check equation that cannot possibly be satisfied by active bits closer to the root must be solved by active bits further away, and any active bit that connects to parities further from the root causes those parities to be active. In broadest terms, one can write what might be termed “active edge flow equations” between levels: All active edges leaving vertices at distance from the root and going away from the root must be incident on active vertices at distance , and all active edges going toward the root must be incident on active vertices at distance . In crudest form, all the vertices at distance might be aggregated into a single set , and the number of active edges between and must be the same, whether counted over vertices in or over those in .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:52:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

814

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Fig. 2. Bit-root propagation constraints.

This gross flow conservation equation might be adequate

for some highly regular graphs, but it neglects useful detailed

knowledge of the connections. The active edge flow equations

can be tightened by partitioning each into subsets according

to the relations of the vertices relative to the root , counting

the number of active edges that leave each relation set and

matching them to active edges incident on sets in and on

sets in .

For the remainder of this section, we will assume that the

graph relations are locally consistent. For every active vertex

, let the variable

be the number of active vertices in

relation to ,

, in the minimum-weight word. Define

a partial enumerator vector for , , with

the value of

in the position corresponding to . Similarly, let

as a

variable stand for the number of pairs of vertices in relation

in the minimum-weight word. By definition

(20)

direction. For every active parity vertex in the set, there must

be at least two active edges, each terminating at one of the con-

nected bit vertices. There are at least

edges leaving the

set, and any vertex in the set could terminate at most

of them. Therefore,

, the sum being

over all of distinct adjacent bit relations.

These inequalities hold for all and , including the reflexive

relation of the root bit with itself. For the root bit, there is only

one vertex, the root itself, such that

, so

Also, for parities adjacent to the root bit such that

,

, and the inequality becomes an equality since the root

bit is assumed to be active:

Analogous propagation equations hold in the graph when an

active parity is chosen as the root vertex , but the bit vertices

are now partitioned by joint relations , and the parities are par-

titioned by relations . The active edge propagation constraint

inequalities are written in an exactly analogous way.

These observations are incorporated formally in the following

lemma.

Taking first the case of bit vertex as root, suppose for some

bit ,

. Let be the multiplicity of parity vertices ad-

jacent to such that

. By the assumption of local consis-

tency, is independent of the particular chosen. Similarly,

for some parity vertex such that

, let be the multi-

plicity of bit vertices adjacent to such that

. Partition

all the vertices of the graph according to their relation with .

In the codeword subgraph, the set of vertices contains

active vertices. Fig. 2 shows such a partition, assuming is a

bit vertex . The active vertices are shown with darker circles,

the active edges with darker lines. For every active bit vertex in

the set, there are active edges that terminate in the set.

The number of edges from any vertex in the set connected to

vertices in the set is . There are

active edges

between the set, and they terminate at least

par-

ities. Thus,

. Then consider the reverse

Lemma 5.4 (Propagation Constraints): Let ,

, be a set of locally consistent relations on the vertices of

. Let

be the th component of the relation enumerator

vector corresponding to .

Bit-Root Constraints: For every reflexive relation , se-

lect any bit vertex such that

. The relations of the form

have enumerator values

that satisfy the following

constraints:

1)

for the relations of parities at

distance one in the graph from ,

being the

multiplicity of relation parities at distance one;

2)

for any relation such that

,

being the multiplicity of relation par-

ities adjacent to and

being the multiplicity of

bit nodes in relation adjacent to each relation parity;

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:52:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANNER: MINIMUM-DISTANCE BOUNDS BY GRAPH ANALYSIS

815

3)

, for any relation

for a

parity node , the sum being over all of distinct adjacent

bit relations of bit vertices adjacent to .

Parity-Rooted Constraints: For every reflexive relation

, select any parity vertex such that

. The relations

of the form

have enumerator values

that satisfy

the following constraints:

D. Optimization and Linear Programming Bounds
The graph-counting arguments of the last section further constrain the relation enumerator vector beyond what was established in Lemma 5.3. Collectively, the equations can be converted into an optimization problem by the simple device of normalizing the relation enumerator by the constant , the weight of the minimum weight word.

1)

for any relation such that

, being the multiplicity of relation parities

adjacent to and being the multiplicity of bit nodes

in relation adjacent to each relation parity;

2)

, for any relation

for a

parity node , the sum being over all of distinct adjacent

parity relations of bit vertices adjacent to .

Joint Relations Equalities: The joint bit-parity variables

and the joint parity-bit variables

satisfy

(21)

where the first sum is over all relations with a given growth

vector , and the second is over all relations with the

same .

Proof: The proof for the bit-rooted and parity-rooted con-

straints is outlined in the discussion preceding the lemma. Each

constraint inequality compares the relation enumerators for the

relations of vertices that are adjacent in the graph, and the local

consistency of the relations ensures that the multiplicities are

well defined and the constraint equations prescribed do not de-

pend on the particular representative vertex chosen. The con-

straints hold for each of the partial enumerator vectors for each

of the active vertices in the subgraph, and thus they hold for the

relation enumerator itself because

.

The joint relation equalities are straightforward. An ordered

pair of vertices

is in some with an associated growth

vector, and the reverse ordered pair

must be in a

with the same associated growth vector. From this observation

it follows that the sum of the th components of such that

equals the sum of the th components such

that

.

More powerfully, whenever the relations are globally consis-

tent, the are in one-to-one correspondence with orbits of or-

dered pairs of vertices, as are the , and consequently there is

one-to-one mapping between the two. Under these conditions,

for each relation there is a unique companion relation

such that the variables satisfy

.

We remark that with this set of propagation constraints in

place, there is no longer any need for the assumption that the

bit vertices have uniform degree, the degree information having

been incorporated in the propagation constraint equations.

The outcome of this local graph analysis is a system of in-

equalities and equalities comparing the components of the rela-

tion enumerator vector for the minimum-weight word sub-

graph. Assembled together, these can be written as two matrix

equations

(22)

(23)

Theorem 5.5 (Optimization Distance Bound): Let

being the minimum distance of the code defined by graph . Then is lower-bounded by the solution to the optimization problem.

Minimize

, subject to

1)

, where the inner product

sums all the reflexive bit relations;

2)

;

3)

;

4)

;

5)

, the propagation inequality constraints;

and

6)

, the propagation equality constraints

and the joint relation equalities.

Furthermore

7) the first component of

is

;

8)

, being the

number of active parities;

9)

;

10)

, where the inner product

sums all the reflexive parity relations.

Proof: All the statements are immediate from Lemmas 5.3

and 5.4, with each equation or inequality divided by and

in each instance.

Note that the first six constraints are strictly linear, and the

objective function is also linear. All matrices can be calculated

from the graph and its adjacency matrix. With these alone,

the lower bound to the minimum distance can be found by stan-

dard linear programming. This will be referred to as the linear

programming distance bound. Incorporating the additional four

constraints may increase the value of the minimum, giving a

stronger result.

The last four involve the number of active parities and the

minimum distance , both unknown. If the linear programming

bound alone does not give a satisfactory answer, nonlinear op-

timization methods can be used to include these constraints.

For example,

can be regarded as a parameter, the

linear optimization problem solved for an assumed , then the

minimum found over all allowable values of . For example,

if has bit vertices of uniform degree and for the min-

imum-weight word, all of the parity equations are solved by ex-

actly two nonzero bits, then

, implying

. If

any of the active parities are adjacent to four or more nonzero

bits, the ratio must be smaller than . With fixed, con-

straints 7) and 10) become linear constraints, and 8) and 9) can

be combined, e.g.,

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:52:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

816

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Fig. 3. [7; 3; 4] expurgated Hamming code graph analysis.

VI. EXAMPLES

The use of relations to describe the graph complicates the ex-

position of the general bound, but it can dramatically reduce the

problem size for graphs with strong symmetries. The application

of the bound will be illustrated first with the

expurgated

Hamming code for the purposes of exercising the tools in a very

familiar setting. This will be followed by a

code and

graph for which customary bounding techniques do not furnish

a distance proof. It manifests a good number of the conceptual

elements of the graph analysis distance bounding technique.

A.

Expurgated Hamming Code

In Section III, the simple eigenvalue bound on minimum dis-

tance was illustrated by proving that the

expurgated

Hamming code has minimum distance , using the real eigen-

values of the circulant parity-check matrix and graph formed

by weight words of the dual code. In Fig. 3 we display the full

set of relations and the central elements of the general bound

for this simple example. This is a perfect difference set code

with a distance regular graph, and the set of relations induced

by the distinct growth vectors is locally consistent. Each row of

is identified with a parity-check vertex of the graph, labeled

. There are only two relations of each type, and the re-

lations are subscripted according to the distance between the

vertices in the graph at which they occur. For this circulant ,

, being the all-ones matrix, and the eigenvalues

of

are

and

, from which it follows that the

adjacency matrix has eigenvalues

and

. The propagation constraints of Figs. 1 and 2 are

given at the bottom. For this graph, the constraint

implies

, and then

implies

, and this alone guarantees that the linear functional

of the linear programming bound will have value four or greater.

The relation enumerator for the minimum-weight codeword is

. Dividing by the min-

imum distance,

, the sum of the

first two components being the minimum distance. The number

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:52:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANNER: MINIMUM-DISTANCE BOUNDS BY GRAPH ANALYSIS

817

of active parities in the solution is

, and the inequality

is an equality.

We remark without proof that this code is formed from a pro-

jective geometry, and for the binary codes derived from the pro-

jective geometry PG , which have only two distinct eigen-

values, the simple eigenvalue bound of Section III gives the true

minimum distance .

B. Sparse Example

Codes,

,

We now explore a more challenging application of the graph

analysis bound, introducing a graph-based code construction de-

signed to probe the definitions and illustrate the methodology of

the bounding technique.

Let

be a prime, and let be a primitive element

of the field GF ,

. Let be the

iden-

tity matrix cyclically left-shifted positions:

if

,

otherwise.

Definition (

Sparse Difference Code):

Let be the binary code whose parity-check matrix is a

block matrix of

circulant matrices

...

...

... ...

(24) ...

The code-constraint graph associated with this matrix has an

automorphism group that is one-transitive on bits and one-tran-

sitive on parities. The parity-check vertices can be indexed by

-tuples,

, of the form

representing the th parity row in the th block row when the

is in the th position. The bits can be similarly indexed by

-tuples of the form

, with being the index

of the parity in the th block that checks the bit, and there is an

edge between parity

to share parities in the th row block and the th row block.

Then

and

.

These equations over GF can be solved for and :

implies

,

and

then implies

.

The girth cannot be greater than six. Any parity vertex is con-

nected to

bits, each of which connects to

other

parities, which we have shown to be distinct. If each of these

were connected to

other distinct bits, the total number

of distinct bits would be

,

greater than the number of bits

for

.

The girth of six and the vertex degrees guarantee that any

nonzero bit must be connected to

active parities, all

of which are connected to other distinct bits, and the minimum

distance of the code satisfies

. Conversely,

there is always a solution that has all the bits in two different

column blocks equal to one, so

. For these codes the

minimum distance is

, and in this aspect they are similar

to the perfect difference set codes [6].

Automorphism Group: By construction the graph automor-

phism group contains the permutation , the cyclic shift

,

that maps any

-tuple component to

for

both parities and bits. (We will adopt the convention that is

infinite and is fixed under the addition of any constant or multi-

plication by any constant.) The automorphism group also con-

tains a permutation that maps each -tuple by componentwise

multiplication by the primitive :

This maps the bits in the th column block to the bits in the column block. Finally, the automorphism group
contains a permutation that cyclically shifts all the -tuples by one position while multiplying by :
and similarly for parity -tuples.

in the th block and a bit

if and only if

.

Each bit vertex has degree

and each parity vertex

has degree

. A bit from the th column block has an index

for some

.

There are

rows in , and the sum of all the

rows in any single row block of equations is the all-ones row,

and thus

of the equations are linearly dependent. From

this it follows that

and the code rate is greater than one half. The presence of the all-ones row also implies that the minimum distance of the code must be even.

Lemma 6.1 (Girth): For

, the constraint graph of

has girth

Proof: First we show that

by proving that no two

bits can share more than one parity. Obviously, two bits that are

from the same column block do not share any parities. Suppose a

bit from column block and another from column block were

Lemma 6.2 (Automorphism Group Action): The automor-

phism group of is one-transitive on bit vertices, on parity ver-

tices, and on edges.

Proof: Any bit vertex can be mapped to any other bit

vertex by applications of , which permutes the bit column

blocks, and , which permutes the bits within a given column

block. Any parity vertex can be mapped to any other by

applications of , which permutes the row blocks, and , which

permutes parity vertices within a given row block. Observe

that fixes the bit vertex

while

cyclically permuting all of the parity vertices to which it is

connected. Given any edge

, it can be permuted by the

automorphism to the edge

,

, first

by permuting to , then by permuting the edges incident

on with . Since this is true for any edge, any edge can

be mapped to any other edge and the automorphism group is

one-transitive on edges.

As a result of this transitivity, there is only one reflexive relation on bits, and only one reflexive relation on parities, for any .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:52:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

818

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Fig. 4. [42; 23; 6] bit relation propagation constraints.

The graph analysis bound will now be used to improve the

estimate of the minimum distance for the case and primitive

element

. The code has parameters

and, as

outlined above, the minimum distance satisfies

.

The first linear programming graph analysis bound, framed in

terms of the relations induced by the distinct growth vectors, does

not improve on the simple girth argument for this code. With the

greater precision of globally consistent relations induced by the

automorphism group of the graph, the linear programming bound

yields a bound of . must be an integer, therefore it is at

least , and then overall even parity implies that

. For a

code this short, the minimum distance can be found by exhaustive

search, and such a search confirmed that

.

The distinct real eigenvalues of

, a block matrix of

circulants, are

and . The adjacency matrix has

seven distinct eigenvalues,

,

and these are used to form the Vandermonde eigenvalue matrix.

The growth vectors can be found by extracting the successive

values in a th position of

. Fig. 4

shows all the vertices of and representative edges, the edges

being too numerous to draw easily, even for this sparse graph.

The vertices expanded according to their distance from the root

bit

, with the indexing -tuples shown as columns.

Vertex is fixed by the permutation .

There are seven distinct growth vectors between pairs of bit

vertices, shown in Fig. 4 as seven columns labeled

and three distinct growth vectors be-

tween the root bit and a parity vertex, labeled

.

The columns of are labeled according to the associated

growth-vector-induced bit relations, with the subscript in-

dexing for bits chosen according to the values in the fifth row,

the values in at which all vectors for bits have nonzero

components. The root bit is in the unique reflexive relation .

The th row entry in the column growth vector for are the

number of paths of length between the root and a bit vertex in

relation . Similarly, the th row entry in the growth vector

for are the number of paths of length between the root

and a parity vertex in relation , and the relation subscripts

are chosen according to the values in . All the parities at

distance one from the root are in relation . There are six bits

in relation at distance , shown darkened, and nine bits

in relation . At distance from the root are six parities in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:52:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANNER: MINIMUM-DISTANCE BOUNDS BY GRAPH ANALYSIS

819

Fig. 5. [42; 23; 6] parity relation propagation constraints.

relation and 12 in relation . At distance are 18 bits in

, three in , three in , and two in .

The relations with respect to a parity vertex are simpler and

are shown in an analogous way in Fig. 5. Again, only a handful of

representative edges are shown. The root parity

is fixed by the permutation and is in the unique reflexive rela-

tion . All bits at distance one are in relation ; all parities at

distance two are in . At distance three are 24 bits in relation

and 12 in relation . The remaining parities at distance four

are in relations and , as shown.

Edge flow equations for the relation enumerator that can

be written in terms of these relations are given in the diagram.

For example, each active bit vertex in relation has two active

edges that terminate in parity vertexes in relation , and some

parities in can potentially terminate two edges from bits.

Thus the applicable equation is

.

The growth vector induced relations are not locally consis-

tent, however. Consider, for example, the parity vertex labeled

, which has the growth vector for relation . It is

adjacent to bit

in and to bit

in , whereas

parity vertex

is adjacent to bits

and

,

both in relation . Thus relation as defined is not locally

consistent, the multiplicities of the relations of the adjacent

vertices not being the same.

When the linear programming bound is computed using these

growth-vector-induced relations, the solution gives the bound

. The distribution of relations for this solution posits the

existence of four bits in the reflexive relation, each of these

have three adjacent active parities, those parities being satisfied

by three bits in relation , and those bits have active edges

terminating at three parities in relation . Such a distribution sat-

isfies all of the edge flow equations as written and the eigenvalue

constraints, but no such codeword can exist in the graph.

The edge flow equations for Fig. 4 can be written more pre-

cisely when the richer set of globally consistent relations in-

duced by the graph automorphism group are used. In partic-

ular, the automorphism fixes the root bit and the five bits with

growth vectors and . All other bits are in orbits of three

bits. For example, bits

and

are an orbit

under , and in a globally consistent set of relations, they are in

a single relation which will be labeled

with the growth

vector of . Using the orbits of to define relations, there are

five bit relations at distance from the root, partitioning

into three separate relations and into two. is partitioned

into six distinct relations, into two, and into three, while

is unchanged. The refined relations will be labeled according

to the bit in the orbit on the left of Fig. 5, e.g., becomes

. There is one joint relation with the parities at distance

one, and six joint relations with those at distance three, labeled

Refined edge flow equations using these rela-

tions capture more structure. For example

(25) Similarly, the propagation equations at the distance three pari-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:52:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

820

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

ties can be refined, e.g.,

and

and so forth. These equations in particular no longer admit a

solution confined to three bits at distance two and three parities

at distance three.

The globally consistent relations with respect to a root parity

bit also require a larger number of relations. Automorphism

fixes root parity

and parities

and

and all other vertices are taken in orbits of six, re-

sulting in six parity–parity relations and seven parity–bit joint

relations.

The “linprog” procedure of the optimization package of

Matlab, a commercial software suite from MathWorks, Inc.,

was used to solve the linear programming bound with these

globally consistent relations. The constraints incorporated all

the edge flow equations for the globally consistent relations

according to Figs. 1 and 2, constituting five equality constraints

and a total of 77 inequalities. (Only a subset of the constraints

were active in constraining the optimum found.) The resulting

bound is

, which then implies

, and the even

parity of the code implies

, the true minimum distance.

VII. CONCLUSION
The mounting evidence of the efficacy of graph messagepassing algorithms for codes on graphs portends greater use of such codes in the future. While random graphs have been used in coding systems with impressive performance, there is no assurance that any given random graph defines a good code with a respectable minimum distance. This paper provides a method for analyzing the connectivity and eigenvalues of a code constraint graph of parity and bit vertices in terms of relations between vertices and the eigenvalues of the adjacency matrix, leading to a linear programming problem whose solution is a lower bound on the minimum distance of the associated code. The graph analysis requires the determination of the eigenvalues, the computation of growth vectors, the definition of relations, extraction of flow equations, and the solution of a linear programming problem. Except for classes of graphs with unusually powerful automorphism groups, there is little hope of posing and solving the linear programming problem analytically for an entire class of graphs. Nonetheless, the methods should give valuable bounds in many specific cases. The analysis of the graph needed for the bound can be automated, and none of algorithms involved are likely to be computationally intensive. For random graphs, it is highly likely that the automorphism group will be trivial, and the linear programming problem will be large, perhaps prohibitively large.
The accuracy of the bound might be improved in at least two ways. First, the solution to the linear programming problem allowed real-valued variables. The relation distribution vector

for an actual codeword is integer-valued, and multiplying the

solution vector found for by the integer-valued bound will

produce a vector of integers for any codeword. Conceptually,

then, one could find an initial bound, round to the next larger

integer, then iteratively apply integer programming until an in-

teger solution for consistent with the equations is found.

Second, the assumption underlying the bound is that all active

parity checks are solved by exactly two active bits, and this will

often be violated in graphs that are not very sparse. This limita-

tion could be partially overcome by seeking a solution in which

the active parity nodes in the posited codeword are partitioned

according to the number of adjacent active bits and creating dis-

tinct relations for each, refining the relation distribution vectors,

and making additional inferences about the distribution of rela-

tions that must occur. The price of such a refinement is that the

number of variables could be significantly increased.

The assumption that all active parity checks are satisfied by

exactly two parities weakens the estimate of the minimum dis-

tance. Although this deficiency is an artifact of the graph anal-

ysis method, it is worth commenting that the ability of an iter-

ative, graph message-passing algorithm to correct errors might

well be correlated with the bound, and not the true minimum dis-

tance. Arguing heuristically, if there is a minimum-weight word

in which sizeable fraction of the parities in the codeword sub-

graph have degree four or greater, then there is some set of er-

rors occurring in the bits of that minimum-weight word that will

cause a relatively small number of parities to be violated. Specif-

ically, a set of fewer than

error vertices might them-

selves form a subgraph of the codeword subgraph that closely

resembles a codeword inasmuch as few parities are violated. In-

tuitively, this configuration of errors will be difficult for an iter-

ative algorithm to correct. We hypothesize that the graph anal-

ysis bound might be an indicator of the quality of the graph for

use with iterative decoders. This hypothesis can be empirically

tested.

The graphs most easily amenable to graph analysis of this

paper have valuable algebraic structure, and the heuristic pro-

vided by the simple bound is that a graph with a ratio of second

to first eigenvalues that is small will have a good minimum dis-

tance. Such graphs are known to be good expanders, from which

one can construct good error-correcting codes [9]. Our graph

analysis bound is in some sense a detailed examination and

refinement of the linkage between expander graphs and good

codes. It goes well beyond the simple eigenvalue characteriza-

tion, delving into the subtle distinctions among expander graphs

to discern which ones will engender codes with good minimum

distance. It creates a potentially valuable bridge between spec-

tral graph theory and coding theory.

APPENDIX COMPUTATION OF EIGENVALUE

The calculation of the eigenvalues of the graph adjacency matrix can be a significant hurdle in the application of the bounds. These two lemmas simplify this problem.

Lemma A.1: Let be an arbitrary real matrix. If is an

eigenvector of

with eigenvalue

, then

is an eigenvector of

with the same eigenvalue .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:52:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANNER: MINIMUM-DISTANCE BOUNDS BY GRAPH ANALYSIS

821

Proof:

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

With

, Lemma A.1 shows that

and

same nonzero eigenvalues. From the definition of

(26)
have the in Section II

The author wishes to acknowledge the hospitality of R. J. McEliece at Caltech and the help of Pascal Vontobel, a student at ETH, Zurich. They would also like to acknowledge three anonymous reviewers, who made suggestions to improve the quality of this paper.

(27)

Lemma A.2: Let be the adjacency matrix of a regular con-

nected bipartite graph. The eigenvalues of are

and pos-

sibly , where

are the distinct eigenvalues of

.

Proof: Let

be any nonzero eigenvector

of with eigenvalue . Then

and

. By Lemma A.1, either

or

for some

, and the result follows. Indeed, since the graph is bipartite, it

is easy to verify that

has eigenvalue and

the nonzero eigenvalues are determined.

With these Lemmas, for many algebraically structured codes with highly symmetric graphs, the eigenvalues can be computed comparatively easily.

REFERENCES
[1] P. Delsarte, “Four fundamental parameters of a code and their combinatorial significance,” Inform. Contr., vol. 23, pp. 407–438, 1973.
[2] D. Divsalar, H. Jin, and R. J. McEliece, “Coding theorems for ‘Turbo-like codes’,” in Proc. 36th Allerton Conf. Communications, Control, and Computing, Sept. 1998, pp. 201–210.
[3] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[4] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[5] F. J. MacWilliams and N. J. A. Sloane, The Theory of Error-Correcting Codes, 2nd ed. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North-Holland, 1978.
[6] W. W. Peterson and E. J. Weldon, Jr., Error-Correcting Codes, 2nd ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1972.
[7] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of provably good low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, submitted for publication.
[8] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[9] M. Sipser and D. Spielman, “Expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 1710–1722, Nov. 1996.
[10] D. Spielman, “Linear-time encodeable and decodable error-correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform.Theory, vol. 42, pp. 1723–1731, Nov. 1996.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:52:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

