IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

619

Design of Capacity-Approaching Irregular Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
Thomas J. Richardson, M. Amin Shokrollahi, Member, IEEE, and Rüdiger L. Urbanke

Abstract—We design low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes that perform at rates extremely close to the Shannon capacity. The codes are built from highly irregular bipartite graphs with carefully chosen degree patterns on both sides. Our theoretical analysis of the codes is based on [1]. Assuming that the underlying communication channel is symmetric, we prove that the probability densities at the message nodes of the graph possess a certain symmetry. Using this symmetry property we then show that, under the assumption of no cycles, the message densities always converge as the number of iterations tends to infinity. Furthermore, we prove a stability condition which implies an upper bound on the fraction of errors that a belief-propagation decoder can correct when applied to a code induced from a bipartite graph with a given degree distribution.
Our codes are found by optimizing the degree structure of the underlying graphs. We develop several strategies to perform this optimization. We also present some simulation results for the codes found which show that the performance of the codes is very close to the asymptotic theoretical bounds.
Index Terms—Belief propagation, irregular low-density paritycheck codes, low-density parity-check codes, turbo codes.

I. INTRODUCTION

I N this paper we present irregular low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes which exhibit a performance extremely close

to the best possible as determined by the Shannon capacity for-

mula. For the binary-input additive white Gaussian noise (BI-

AWGN) channel, the best code of rate one-half presented in this

paper has a threshold within 0.06 dB from capacity, and simula-

tion results show that our best LDPC code of length one million

achieves a bit-error probability of

less than 0.13 dB away

from capacity, surpassing the best (turbo) codes known so far.

LDPC codes possess several other distinct advantages over

turbo codes. First, (belief-propagation) decoding for LDPC

codes is fully parallelizable and can potentially be accom-

plished at significantly greater speeds. Second, as indicated in

an earlier paper [1], very low complexity decoders that closely

approximate belief propagation in performance may be (and

Manuscript received May 28, 1999; revised September 1, 2000. The material in this paper was presented in part at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Sorrento, Italy, June 2000.
T. J. Richardson was with Bell Labs, Lucent Technologies, Murry Hill, NJ 07974 USA. He is now with Flarion Technologies, Bedminster, NJ 07921 USA (e-mail: richardson@flarion.com).
M. A. Shokrollahi was with Bell Labs, Lucent Technologies, Murry Hill, NJ 07974 USA. He is now with Digital Fountain, San Francisco, CA 94110 USA (e-mail: amin@digitalfountain.com)
R. Urbanke was with Bell Labs. He is now with EPFL, LTHC-DSC, CH-1015 Lausanne (e-mail: rudiger.urbanke@epfl.ch).
Communicated by F. R. Kschishang, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Publisher Item Identifier S 0018-9448(01)00738-6.

Fig. 1. A (3; 6)-regular LDPC code of length 10 and rate one-half. There are 10 variable nodes and five check nodes. For each check node check node the sum (over GF (2)) of all adjacent variable nodes is equal to zero.

have been) designed for these codes. Third, LDPC decoding

is verifiable in the sense that decoding to a correct codeword

is a detectable event. One practical objection to LDPC codes

has been that their encoding complexity is high. One way to

get around this problem is to slightly modify the construction

of codes from bipartite graphs to a cascade of such graphs, see

[2], [24], [3]. An alternative solution for practical purposes,

which does not require cascades, is presented in [4].

Let us recall some basic notation. As originally suggested by

Tanner [5], LDPC codes are well represented by bipartite graphs

in which one set of nodes, the variable nodes, corresponds to

elements of the codeword and the other set of nodes, the check

nodes, corresponds to the set of parity-check constraints which

define the code. Regular LDPC codes are those for which all

nodes of the same type have the same degree. For example,

a

-regular LDPC code has a graphical representation in

which all variable nodes have degree and all check nodes have

degree . The bipartite graph determining such a code is shown

in Fig. 1. Irregular LDPC codes were introduced in [2], [24]

and were further studied in [6]–[8]. For such an irregular LDPC

code, the degrees of each set of nodes are chosen according to

some distribution. Thus, an irregular LDPC code might have a

0018–9448/01$10.00 © 2001 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:48:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

620

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

graphical representation in which half the variable nodes have degree and half have degree , while half the constraint nodes have degree and half have degree .
For a given length and a given degree distribution, we define an ensemble of codes by choosing edges, i.e., the connections between variable and check nodes, randomly. More precisely, we enumerate the edges emanating from the variable nodes in some arbitrary order and proceed in the same way with the edges emanating from the check nodes. Assume that the number of edges is . Then a code (a particular instance of this ensemble) can be identified with a permutation on letters. By definition, all elements in this ensemble are equiprobable. In practice, the edges are not chosen entirely randomly since certain potentially unfortunate events in the graph construction can be easily avoided.
In [1], an asymptotic analysis of LDPC codes under message-passing decoding was presented. To briefly recall the main results let us assume that we have the following setup.

[Channel] We are given an ordered family of binary-input

memoryless channels parameterized by a real parameter

such that if

then the channel with parameter

is a physically degraded version of the channel with

parameter , see [1]. Furthermore, each channel in this

family is output-symmetric,1 i.e.,

(1)

[Ensemble] We say that a polynomial of the form

is a degree distribution if has nonnegative coefficients

and

. Note that we associate the coefficient to

rather than . We will see that this notation, which

was introduced in [2], leads to very elegant and compact

descriptions of the main results. Given a degree distribution

pair

associate to it a sequence of code ensembles

, where is the length of the code and where

specifies the variable (check)

node degree distribution. More precisely,

repre-

sents the fraction of edges emanating from variable (check)

nodes of degree . For example, for the

-regular

code we have

and

. The maximum

variable degree and check degree is denoted by and ,

respectively. Assume that the code has variable nodes.

The number of variable nodes of degree is then

and so , the total number of edges emanating from all variable nodes, is equal to

1It is reassuring to note that linear binary codes are known to be capable of achieving capacity on binary-input memoryless output-symmetric channels, see [9].

In the same manner, assuming that the code has check nodes, can also be expressed as
Equating these two expressions for , we conclude that

Generically, assuming that all these check equations are linearly independent, we see that the design rate is equal to

as was first shown in [2].

[Message-Passing Decoder] Select a message-passing de-

coder. By definition, messages only contain extrinsic infor-

mation, i.e., the message emitted along an edge does not

depend on the incoming message along the same edge. Fur-

ther, the decoder fulfills the following symmetry conditions.

Flipping the sign of all incoming messages at a variable node

results in a flip of the sign of all outgoing messages. The sym-

metry condition at a check node is slightly more involved.

Let be an edge emanating from a check node . Then flip-

ping the sign of incoming messages arriving at node , ex-

cluding the message along edge , results in a change of

the sign of the outgoing message along edge by

.

In all these cases, only the sign is changed, the reliability

remains unchanged. Finally, we generally require that the

decoder be asymptotically monotonic with respect to the

channel parameter. Roughly speaking, this means that in the

limit of infinitely long codes, the probability of error of the

decoder is nondecreasing in the channel parameter given a

fixed number of iterations. In the case of the belief-propa-

gation decoder, this property is a direct consequence of the

decoder’s asymptotic optimality and the fact that we con-

sider families of channels which can be ordered by phys-

ical degradation (see Section III). For many other decoders

of interest the monotonicity property can be proved directly,

and it seems to hold for virtually all decoders of interest. In

this paper, we are interested almost exclusively in the belief-

propagation decoder, so we shall implicitly assume mono-

tonicity throughout.

Under the above assumptions, with

and the channel

family fixed, there exists a threshold , i.e., a maximum

channel parameter, with the following properties. For any

and

, there exists a length

and a number

such that almost every2 code in

,

, has

bit error probability smaller than assuming that transmission

takes place over the channel with parameter and that

iterations of message-passing decoding are performed. Con-

versely, for any fixed upper bound on the number of iterations,

if the transmission takes place over a channel with parameter

, then almost every code in

has bit-error

2More precisely, the fraction of codes for which the above statement is true
converges exponentially fast (in n) to one.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:48:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RICHARDSON et al.: DESIGN OF CAPACITY-APPROACHING IRREGULAR LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

621

probability larger than some constant

, where does

not depend on the number of iterations performed.3

The main steps taken to arrive at these conclusions are the fol-

lowing. The first shows that if one fixes the number of iterations,

then the performance of the various realizations of the graph

and channel concentrate around their expected value, where this

concentration is exponential in the length of the code. (The ex-

ponent may in general depend on the degree distribution pair

, the chosen message-passing decoder, and the channel

parameter.)4 Therefore, in order to characterize the performance

of (almost all) sufficiently long codes it suffices to determine

their average performance. Unfortunately, it does not seem to

be an easy task to determine this average performance for fi-

nite-length ensembles. In the limit of very long codes, however,

the average performance can be determined as follows. One first

observes that with probability

the decoding neighbor-

hood of a given variable node is tree-like, i.e., it does not con-

tain any repetitions/cycles. When the decoding neighborhood is

a tree, the performance of the decoder is fairly straightforward

to determine because all involved random variables are indepen-

dent. Moreover, under the above mentioned symmetry assump-

tions of the channel and the decoder, one can assume that the

all-one codeword was transmitted, i.e., the conditional bit-error

probability is independent of the transmitted codeword. By con-

vention, we choose the messages in such a way that, under the

all-one codeword assumption, positive messages signify correct

messages whereas negative messages indicate errors. This is,

e.g., the case for belief-propagation decoders where the mes-

sages are log-likelihood ratios of the form

. The

distribution of the messages initially emitted is determined by

the channel and it has an associated probability of error. Under

the above independence assumption, we now track the evolution

of the message distributions as they progress up the tree, i.e., to-

ward the root. In particular, one is interested in the evolution of

the error probability as a function of the iteration number. The

threshold is then defined as the “worst” channel parameter such

that the message distribution evolves in such a way that its as-

sociated probability of error converges to zero as the number of

iterations tends to infinity. This procedure of tracking the evo-

lution of the message distribution is termed density evolution.

In [1], an efficient numerical procedure was developed to im-

plement density evolution for the important case of belief-prop-

agation decoders and to therewith efficiently compute the asso-

ciated threshold to any desired degree of accuracy. Also in [1],

threshold values and simulation results were given for a variety

of noisy channel models but the class of LDPC codes consid-

ered was largely restricted to regular codes. In this paper, we

present results indicating the remarkable performance that can

be achieved by properly chosen irregular codes.

The idea underlying this paper is quite straightforward. As-

sume we are interested in transmission over a particular family of

binary-input memoryless output-symmetric channels using a par-

3We conjecture that actually the following much stronger statement is true—namely, that all codes in a given LDPC ensemble have bit-error probability of at least 
 regardless of their length and regardless of how many iterations are performed.
4In our proofs, however, the obtained exponent depends only on the degree distribution pair (; ):

ticular message-passing decoder. Since any given pair

of

degree distributions has an associated threshold, call it

,

it is natural to search for those pairs that maximize this threshold.5

This was accomplished, with great success, in the case of the

erasure channel [2], [24], [10], [11]. For most other memory-

less channels of interest the situation is much more complicated

and new methods must be brought to bear on the optimization

problem. Fig. 2 compares the performance of an instance of the

-regular LDPC ensemble (which is the best regular en-

semble) with the performance of an instance of the best irregular

LDPC ensemble we found in our search and with the perfor-

mance of an instance of the standard parallel concatenated en-

semble introduced by Berrou, Glavieux, and Thitimajshima [12].

All three codes have rate one-half and their performance under

belief-propagation decoding over the BIAWGNC is shown for a

code word length of . Also shown is the Shannon limit and the

threshold value of our best LDPC ensemble

. It is

evident from this figure that considerable benefit can be derived

from optimizing degree distribution pairs. For

and a

bit-error probability of , our best LDPC code is only 0.13

dB away from capacity. This even surpasses the performance of

turbo codes. Even more impressive, the threshold, which indi-

cates the performance for infinite lengths, is a mere 0.06 dB away

from the Shannon capacity limit.

The empirical evidence presented in Fig. 2 together with

the results presented in Section II beg the question of whether

LDPC codes under belief-propagation decoding can achieve

capacity over a given binary-input memoryless output-sym-

metric channel.6 The only definitive results in this direction

are those of [2], [24], [15], which give explicit sequences of

degree distribution pairs whose thresholds over the binary

erasure channel (BEC) converge to the Shannon capacity limit.

The following theorem, due to Gallager, imposes, at least for

the binary symmetric channel (BSC), a necessary condition on

LDPC codes that would achieve capacity: their maximum check

degree must tend to infinity.7 Although this result bounds

the performance of LDPC codes away from capacity, the gap is

extremely small and the gap converges to zero exponentially

fast in . Hence, although of great theoretical interest, the

theorem does not impose a significant practical limitation.8

Theorem 1 [13, p. 37]: Let

be an LDPC code

of rate . Let be used over a BSC with crossover probability

and assume that each codeword is used with equal probability. If

, where is the binary entropy function

and

5We may also optimize degree distribution pairs under various constraints. For example, the larger the degrees used, the larger the code size needs to be in order to approach the predicted asymptote. Therefore, it is highly desirable to look for the best degree distribution pair with some a priori bound on the size of the degrees.
6In the case of maximum-likelihood decoding this was answered in the affirmative by Gallager and McKay, see [13], [14].
7We conjecture that a similar statement (and proof) can be given for continuous channels.
8In fact, a similar theorem holds also for the erasure channel [15, Theorem 1], and yet, there are capacity-achieving sequences of degree distributions for that channel.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:48:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

622

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Fig. 2. Comparison of the error rates achieved by a (3; 6)-regular LDPC code, turbo code, the and optimized irregular LDPC code. All codes are of length 10
and of rate one-half. The bit-error rate for the BIAWGNC is shown as a function of E =N (in decibels), the standard deviation , as well as the raw input bit-error probability P .

then the (block or bit)-error probability is bounded away from zero by a constant which is independent of .

Discussion: Note that the capacity of the BSC is equal to

. Since

for any finite , we have

and, therefore,

. A quick calcu-

lation shows that the gap to capacity is well approximated by

which decreases to zero exponentially fast in

. Gallager stated the above theorem for

-regular codes.

An examination of the proof reveals, however, that it remains

valid for the case of irregular codes with interpreted as the

maximum check node degree. The key to the proof lies in the

realization that the entropy of the received word can be bounded

as follows: given a received word, describe it by specifying the

value of systematic bits (which is equivalent to specifying a

codeword) plus the value of the

parities (which will

specify the coset). Since a parity is one with probability

,

which is strictly less than one-half, the entropy of the received

word is strictly less than bits, which gives rise to the stated

upper bound. Details of the proof can be found in [13, p. 39].9

satisfy a certain symmetry condition which is invariant under density evolution. Many simplifications arise in this symmetric channel case and they afford us considerable insight into the nature of density evolution. In particular, we will derive a stability condition which gives rise to an upper bound on the threshold for the case of general binary-input memoryless output-symmetric channels. We also show that the threshold can, at least partially, be characterized by the (non)existence of fixed points of density evolution. Finally, in Section IV, we describe the numerical optimization techniques which were used to generate the tables in Section II. Throughout the paper we will motivate many definitions and statements for general binary-input memoryless output-symmetric channels with their counterpart for the BEC channel. We will see that despite the simplicity of the BEC model many of its iterative decoding properties are shared by the general class of channels considered in this paper.
II. CAPACITY-APPROACHING DEGREE DISTRIBUTION PARIS
A. Optimization Results

The outline of this paper is as follows. We start by presenting tables of some very good degree distribution pairs in Section II. Although we focus mostly on the BIAWGNC and rate one-half, we also give a few examples for different channels and rates. We discuss some simulation results that show that the promised performance can be closely achieved for reasonably long codes. In Section III, we describe and study properties of density evolution. Under the assumption that the input distribution arises from a symmetric channel, we show that the message distributions
0 9We note that a slightly sharper bound can be given if we replace d with the
average degree of the (1 r)-fraction of highest degree nodes. However, since
the improvement is usually only slight and since the exact size of the gap is not significant in practice, we leave the details to the interested reader.

Using numerical optimization techniques described in some

detail in Section IV, we searched for good degree distribution

pairs of rate one-half with various upper bounds on the max-

imum variable degree . The result of our search for the BI-

AWGNC is summarized in Tables I and II. Table I contains those

degree distribution pairs with

, whereas Table II

contains degree distribution pairs with

and

. In each table, columns correspond to one particular degree

distribution pair. For each degree distribution pair, the coeffi-

cients of and are given as well as the threshold ,10 the

6 / 10We assume standard pulse-amplitude modulation (PAM) signaling y = x+
z with x = 1 and z N (0;  ).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:48:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RICHARDSON et al.: DESIGN OF CAPACITY-APPROACHING IRREGULAR LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

623

TABLE I
GOOD DEGREE DISTRIBUTION PAIRS OF RATE ONE-HALF FOR THE BIAWGNC WITH MAXIMUM VARIABLE NODE DEGREES d = 4; 5; 6; 7; 8; 9; 10; 11; and 12. FOR EACH DEGREE DISTRIBUTION PAIR THE THRESHOLD VALUE  , THE CORRESPONDING ( ) IN DECIBELS, AND
p = Q(1= ) (i.e., THE INPUT BIT-ERROR PROBABILITY OF A HARD-DECISION DECODER) ARE GIVEN. ALSO LISTED IS  , THE MAXIMUM STABLE VALUE OF  FOR THE GIVEN  (1) AND FOR  = 

corresponding value of

in decibels, and finally the raw

bit-error probability of the input if it were quantized to 1 bit,

i.e.,

, where

is the well-known -func-

tion. In Section III-E, we will show that, given the channel and

, there is a maximum stable value of , call it . More

precisely, we will show that for any degree distribution pair with

strictly larger than the probability of bit error cannot con-

verge to zero, regardless of how many iterations are performed.

This value is also listed in the tables. As required, we can

see that for every listed degree distribution

, and the

two values are fairly close.

The results are quite encouraging. Compared to regular

LDPC codes for which the highest achievable threshold for

the BIAWGNC is

, irregular LDPC codes have sub-

stantially higher thresholds. The threshold increases initially

rapidly with and for the largest investigated degree

,

the threshold value is only 0.06 dB away from capacity!

It is quite tempting to conjecture that the threshold will con-

verge to the ultimate (Shannon) limit (which, up to the precision

given, is equal to

for rate one-half codes) as

tends to infinity. Unfortunately, as of this moment, we only have

this empirical evidence to support this conjecture.

Although in this paper we focus mainly on the BIAWGNC

and binary codes of rate one-half, the following examples show

that the same techniques can be used to find very good degree

distribution pairs for other memoryless channels and different

rates. We note that, for a particular rate, degree distribution pairs

that were optimized for the BIAWGNC are usually very good

degree distribution pairs for a large class of channels, including

the binary-input Laplace channel (BILC) and the BSC. Nev-

ertheless, optimizing a degree distribution pair for a particular channel will generally give even better results.

Example 1 [BIAWGNC;

]: In this example, we con-

sider codes of rate

for the BIAWGNC channel. For this

rate, the Shannon bound for is

. We found

the following degree distribution pair which has a theoretical

threshold of

:

and

Allowing higher degrees would almost certainly result in degree distribution pairs with larger thresholds.

Example 2 [BSC;

]: The ultimate threshold,

i.e., the Shannon limit, for the BSC and rate one-half is

. The best degree distribution pair we have

found so far has

and is given by

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:48:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

624

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

TABLE II GOOD DEGREE DISTRIBUTION PAIRS OF RATE ONE-HALF FOR THE BIAWGNC
WITH MAXIMUM VARIABLE NODE DEGREES d = 15; 20; 30; AND 50. FOR EACH DEGREE DISRRIBUTION PAIR THE THRESHOLD VALUE  , THE CORRESPONDING ( ) IN dB AND p = Q(1= ) (i.e., THE
INPUT BIT-ERROR PROBABILITY OF A HARD-DECISION DECODER) ARE
GIVEN. ALSO LISTED IS  , THE MAXIMUM STABLE VALUE OF  FOR THE GIVEN  (1) AND FOR  = 

and

. The maximum variable node

and check node degrees are again and , respectively.

B. Simulation Results

and variable node degree of of .

. Here we allowed a maximum and a maximum check node degree

Example 3 [BILC;

]: Consider the binary-input La-

place channel (BILC) with continuous output alphabet and addi-

tive noise. More precisely, the channel is modeled by

,

where

and where is a random variables with prob-

ability density

The ultimate threshold for the BILC of rate (as given by the

Shannon formula) is equal to

. We found the

following degree distribution pair which has a threshold above

:

The concentration results proved in [1] guarantee that for

sufficiently large block lengths almost every code in the given

ensemble will have vanishing probability of bit error for

channels with parameters below the calculated threshold. Nev-

ertheless, the lengths required by the proofs are far beyond any

practical values and one might expect that medium-sized codes

will deviate significantly from the predicted performance.

Given that the maximum possible number of loop-free itera-

tions grows only logarithmically in the block length, it seems

a priori doubtful that simulation results for practical lengths

can closely match the predicted asymptotic performance. For

regular LDPC codes, however, it was demonstrated in [1] that

the actual convergence is much faster and that realistically sized

block codes already perform close to the asymptotic value.

For irregular codes, finite-length effects not only include the

deviation of the input variance from its mean and a nonzero

probability of small loops but also the deviation of a given sup-

port tree from its average, i.e., for a given node the fraction

of neighbors of this node with a given degree might deviate

from its expected value. This effect is expected to influence the

finite-length performance more severely for larger and

Also, when operating very close to a degree distribution pair’s

threshold, it will require a large number of iterations (one thou-

sand or more) to reach target bit-error probabilities of, say, .

(In the limit the number of iterations converges to .) Fortu-

nately, however, a small margin from a degree distribution pair’s

threshold is typically enough to drastically reduce the required

number of iterations.

Simulation results show that even in the irregular case the ac-

tual convergence of the performance of finite-length codes to

the asymptotic performance is much faster than predicted by

the bounds appearing in the analysis. Fig. 3 shows the perfor-

mance of particular LDPC codes. The chosen lengths start at one

thousand and go up to one million. More precisely, the lengths

presented are , , , and . The maximum variable

degrees appearing are

and respectively. In each

case, we let the decoder run for enough iterations to get the

best possible performance. (The number of practically useful

iterations is a function of length and, since our interest here is

in the question of parameter design, we shall not address this

issue.) For length , the error rates are given for systematic

bits. (A specific encoder was constructed.) For length and

above, the error rate is given over all of the bits in the code-

word. These graphs were not chosen entirely randomly. The de-

gree-two nodes were made loop-free for lengths less than

and, in the length case, all of them correspond to nonsys-

tematic bits. The length graph was randomly constructed

except that double edges and loops with two variable nodes

were avoided. For shorter lengths some small loop removal was

performed. We note that, particularly for small lengths, better

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:48:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RICHARDSON et al.: DESIGN OF CAPACITY-APPROACHING IRREGULAR LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

625

Fig. 3. Comparison between bit-error rates achieved by turbo codes (dashed curves) and LDPC codes (solid curves) of lengths n = 10 ; 10 ; 10 ; and 10 .
All codes are of rate one-half. Observe that longer LDPC codes outperform turbo codes and that the gap becomes the more significant the larger n is chosen. For
short lengths, it appears that the structure of turbo codes gives them an edge over LDPC codes despite having a lower threshold.

performance can be achieved by using degree distribution pairs

with smaller values of even though such degree distribution

pairs have a smaller threshold.11 We see that for

, the

actual performance is quite close to the predicted asymptotic

performance and that for longer lengths these codes handily

beat the best known turbo code of the same length. At one mil-

lion bits, the code is less than 0.13 dB away from capacity at

bit-error probabilities of . Given that LDPC codes have

slightly lower complexity, are fully parallelizable, and allow

many different decoding algorithms with a far ranging tradeoff

between performance and complexity, LDPC codes can be con-

sidered serious competitors to turbo codes.

Although we spent a considerable amount of computing time

on the optimization it is clear that any given degree distribution

pair can be further (slightly) improved given enough patience.12

III. ANALYTIC PROPERTIES OF DENSITY EVOLUTION
In this section, we will study and exhibit some analytic properties of density evolution for belief-propagation decoders. Without loss of generality, we will assume that the all-one codeword was transmitted and that the messages are represented as log-likelihood ratios. Under the independence assumption we will then give a compact mathematical description of the evolution of the message densities as they proceed up the tree. In doing so we largely follow [1]. We will show that for output-symmetric channels the received message
11The degree distribution pairs presented here are those giving the highest threshold under a maximum degree constraint. For small graphs it is not always best to pick the degree distribution pair with the highest threshold. When designing degree distribution pairs for small graphs, it can be advantageous to look for the highest possible threshold under an appropriate constraint on the allowed number of iterations.
12Indeed this has been accomplished in [16].

distribution is symmetric and that this symmetry is preserved under belief-propagation decoding. Further, we will discuss a stability condition of density evolution which stems from analyzing the convergence behavior of density evolution under the assumption that small error probabilities have already been achieved in the evolution process. Finally, we will give a partial characterization of the threshold in terms of the (non)existence of fixed points of the density evolution recursion. For each topic, we will motivate our definitions/statements by considering the equivalent definitions/statements for the simple case of the BEC. Quite surprisingly, given the uncharacteristically simple nature of the BEC, we will find that many results extend to the general case.
A. Belief Propagation
The main result of this section, stated in Theorem 2, is an explicit recursion which connects the distributions of messages passed from variable nodes to check nodes at two consecutive iterations of belief propagation. In the case of the BEC, this task has been accomplished in [2], [24], [10] where it was shown that the expected fraction of erasure messages which are passed in the th iteration, call it , evolves as

For general binary-input memoryless output-symmetric chan-

nels, the situation is much more involved since one has to keep

track of the evolution of general distributions, which usually

cannot be parameterized by a single parameter.

Let us begin by recalling the belief-propagation algorithm.

We will use the standard binary PAM map

,

throughout. At each iteration, messages are passed along the

edges of the graph from variable nodes to their incident check

nodes and back. The messages are typically real-valued but they

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:48:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

626

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

can also take on the values , reflecting the situation where

some bits are known with absolute certainty.

Generically, messages which are sent in the th iteration

will be denoted by . By we denote the message sent

from the variable node to its incident check node , while by

we denote the message passed from check node to its

incident variable node . Each message represents a quantity

, where

,

,

is the random variable describing the codeword bit value

associated to the variable node , and is the random variable

describing all the information incorporated into this message.

By Bayes rule we have

since is equally likely . The message is the log-likelihood ratio of the random variable (under the independence assumption).
As we will see shortly, to represent the updates performed by check nodes an alternative representation of the messages is appropriate. Let us define a map

GF

as follows. Given

,

, let

(2)

Several remarks are in order. We define

.

Further, we make the following slightly unconventional proba-

bilistic definition of the sign function:

if

assumptions, the conditional error probability is independent

of the transmitted codeword, see [1]. In the sequel, we will

only be interested in output-symmetric channels and we

will therefore always assume that the all-one codeword was

transmitted. Note that in this case any actually observed

must fulfill

. It follows that the log-likelihood

ratios

take values in the range

.A

short glance at the above update equations then shows that all

messages sent during the course of belief propagation lie in this

range, i.e., that no message can ever take on the value .

B. Distributions

For some channels, e.g., the BEC and the BSC, the density

of received log-likelihood ratios is discrete. For others, e.g., the

BIAWGNC, the density is continuous. In the first case, the mes-

sage densities will themselves be discrete and in the second case,

the message densities will be continuous. In order to be able to

treat all these cases in a uniform manner we shall work with a

fairly general class of distributions. The reader only casually

interested in the technical aspects of this paper is advised to

think of smooth densities and their associated continuous dis-

tributions and to only skim the current section.

Let denote the space of right-continuous, nondecreasing

functions defined on satisfying

and

. To each

we associate a random

variable over

. The random variable has law or

distribution , i.e.,

with probability if

with probability if

if

.

The sign assignment when

does not effect the belief-

propagation algorithm but it is useful for certain definitions to

follow.

Let be the log-likelihood ratio of the codeword bit

associated to the variable node conditioned only on

the channel observation of this bit. The update equations for

the messages under belief propagation are then the following:

The reason we allow

rather than

is to permit to have some probability

mass at , indeed

A random variable over

is completely specified

by its distribution

. Given an element

we define

to be the left limit of at , i.e.,

if

if

(3)

(4)
where is the set of check nodes incident to variable node , and is the set of variable nodes incident to check node .13
It is easy to check that the belief-propagation decoder as defined above fulfills the symmetry conditions discussed in Section I. Therefore, if we restrict ourselves to output-symmetric channels, then we can assume that the all-one codeword was transmitted without loss of generality since, under these
1 01 13The reader might wonder how ((+ ) + ( )) is defined in (3), but it 1 01 is impossible under belief propagation for a node to receive both the message
+ and the message : (Either message implies absolute certainty of the value of the associated bit but with opposite signs.)

Note that is left continuous.

We will work with “densities” over

which, for-

mally, can be treated as (Radon–Nikodyn) derivatives of ele-

ments of . The derivative, when it exists, is the density of the

associated random variable over

although there

may be an additional point mass at : recall

. We will use densities primarily in the following

way. The Lebesgue–Stieltjes integral

is well-de-

fined for, e.g., nonnegative continuous functions and

.

If is the density corresponding to the distribution we will

write

as a proxy for

.14

Consider the update equations of belief propagation given in

(3) and (4). Note that they consist of the following two com-

0 14If lim

F (x) < 1 and lim

h(x) exists then one could/should

include the term (1 lim

F (x))(lim

h(x)) in the definition of

h(x)f (x) dx. For our purposes, however, it will always be the case when

we use this notation that either lim

F (x) = 1 or lim

h(x) = 0,

so we need not be concerned with this issue.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:48:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RICHARDSON et al.: DESIGN OF CAPACITY-APPROACHING IRREGULAR LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

627

ponents: i) summation of messages, where these messages are

either in log-likelihood ratio representation or represented as

“sign-and-reliability” and ii) change of representation. We are

interested in the evolution of the message distributions under the

independence assumption. Therefore, we will now discuss how

distributions evolve when independent random variables (in ei-

ther representation) are summed and when the representation of

such variables is changed.

Given

their convolution

is defined

by15

This generalizes the notion of convolution of densities for if

and have corresponding densities and , respectively, then

is the distribution corresponding to the density .

We write

for arbitrary densities to indicate the density as-

sociated to the distribution

. It is easy to check that

if and are independent random variables over

with distributions and , respectively, then the distribu-

tion of

is

(as is the case for independent

random variables defined over

).

Now, suppose we have a random variable over

with distribution and we wish to describe the “distribution”

of the random variable

, where

and

are defined as in (2). We approach this problem by

assigning two connected distributions associated to

under

the conditions

and

, respectively.

Any function over GF

can be written as

where

denotes the characteristic function of the set

, i.e.,

if

and

otherwise.

Let denote the space of functions over GF

such

that

and

are nondecreasing and right continuous

and such that

and

ditions correspond to the conditions

for functions in

Given a random variable

we define the “distribution” of

. (The last two conand
.) with distribution
as

(5)

where

and

Thus

Note that

, and, in particular

Let speak of densities over GF

be an element of . We

by substituting for and their associated densities. The

definition is analogous to that used for except that, here,

has a point mass at

of magnitude

and

both and have point masses at

of magnitude

. For

this corre-

sponds to assigning

to

equally likely. We shall

only be interested in densities over GF

that sat-

isfy these conditions.

The function has a well-defined inverse. Given

we have

(6) and

It is easy to check that

and that

for all

. Further, and are additive operators on the

spaces and , respectively.

For convenience, although it constitutes an abuse of notation,

we will apply and to densities. It is implicitly understood

that the notation is a representation of the appropriate operation

applied to distributions.

The space has a well-defined convolution. Here, the

convolution of two distributions

and

is the distribution

where, here, denotes the (one-sided) convolution of standard

distributions. In other words, the new convolution is a convolu-

tion over the group GF

. By abuse of notation,

we denote this new convolution by the same symbol . Again,

we shall allow the convolution operator to act on the densities

associated to elements of with the implicit understanding that

the above provides the rigorous definition.

If and are independent random variables over GF

with distributions

, respectively, then the

distribution of

is

.

and
15The integral is defined for almost all x and right continuity determines the
rest.

Example 4: Let us give a few examples of densities of in-

terest. By

, we denote the density corresponding to

the distribution

. In other words,

,

where denotes the Dirac delta function. A special case is

which corresponds to the distribution

.

The density

is given by

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:48:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

628

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Expressed using distributions, we have

.

The density

is given by

.

Expressed using distributions, we have

.

C. Description of Density Evolution

The symbols and will be shorthand notations for the

densities of the random variables and , respectively.

We will use the notation and to denote the associated

distributions.

By (4), we see that the random variable describing the mes-

sage passed from check node to variable node is the image

under of a sum of random variables from GF

.

These random variables are independent by the independence

assumption. So, the density of their sum is the convolution of

their densities.

Let the graph have degree distribution pair

where

variable nodes to the check nodes at the th iteration of belief propagation then, under the independence assumption

(9)

where the operators and spectively.

are defined in (5) and (6), re-

Discussion: The result of the previous theorem is in complete agreement with the result for the erasure channel obtained previously in [2], [10]; in fact, it contains it as a special case. Indeed, using distributions in this case, we have
. It is easily seen that

We then obtain

and

and

Recall that the fraction of edges connected to a variable node of

degree is , and the fraction of edges connected to a check

node of degree is . Thus, a randomly chosen edge in the

graph is connected to a check node of degree with probability

. Therefore, with probability the sum in (4) has

terms, corresponding to the edges connecting to all its neigh-

bors other than . We conclude that, in this case, the density of

is equal to

. Summing up over all the

possibilities for the degrees of the check node , we see that the

density of the message equals

Finally

and we recover

which is the same as the formula proved in [2], [24], [10].

D. Symmetry Definition 1 [Symmetry]: We call

symmetric if

(7)

This equation also explains the unusual definition

(rather than

) for .

A recursion for in terms of is derived similarly and is

quite straightforward. The density of the message passed from

check node to variable node at round is equal to . At the

incoming messages from all check nodes other than are added

to , the received value for , and the result is sent back to

. Since, by the independence assumption the random variables

describing these messages are independent, the density of this

message equals

(8)

for any function for which the integral exists. For densities,

the equivalent statement is that the density is symmetric if

for

.

Example 5: and are symmetric.

Our aim in this section is to prove that the density functions of messages passed from variable to check nodes during the belief propagation are symmetric, provided that the channel is output-symmetric.

Theorem 3: For a given binary-input memoryless output-

symmetric channel let denote the initial message density

of log-likelihood ratios, assuming that the all-one word was

transmitted. For a fixed degree distribution pair

define

where is the density of the random variable describing the channel.
Combining (7) and (8) we obtain the desired recursion for in terms of .

Theorem 2: For a given binary-input output-symmetric

memoryless channel let denote the initial message density

of log-likelihood ratios, assuming that the all-one codeword

was transmitted. If, for a fixed degree distribution pair

,

denotes the density of the messages passed from the

Then is symmetric.

First note the following immediate corollary. For a distribution with density we define the error probability operator
.

Corollary 1: .

converges to zero iff converges16 to

16For a definition of convergence see Section III-F

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:48:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RICHARDSON et al.: DESIGN OF CAPACITY-APPROACHING IRREGULAR LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

629

Before proceeding with the proof of Theorem 3, we exemplify the symmetry of some well-known noise densities.

Example 6 [BEC]: For the erasure channel the initial mes-

sage density is

. Since linear combina-

tions of symmetric functions are symmetric, the result follows,

as and are symmetric.

Lemma 1: The convolution of symmetric distributions is symmetric.
Proof: Let and be two symmetric densities. Then

Example 7 [BSC]: For the BSC with crossover probability the initial message density is

For

we have

symmetry we only need to prove that

which is straightforward.

, so to show ,

Example 8 [BIAWGNC]: Here the initial message density is

Consider the iteration formula of Theorem 2
We already know that is symmetric. Hence, we can prove by induction that is symmetric for all if we show that
is symmetric when is.

The symmetry condition is then verified by

Definition 2: We say

is symmetric if

for any nonnegative continuous function .

Example 9 [BILC]: As a final example, the initial message density for the Laplace channel is given by
Again, it is easy to check that the symmetry condition is fulfilled.

Proposition 2:

1) The function

is symmetric if and only if

is symmetric.

2) If

are symmetric distributions over GF

, then so is their convolution

.

Proof:

1) Let be the density associated to , i.e.,

and

. Then we have

For the proof of Theorem 3, we proceed in several steps. We will first establish the symmetry of the initial message density under general conditions. Once this is done, we will prove that symmetry is preserved under convolutions. Using Theorem 2, it then remains to show that if is symmetric, then is symmetric as well. To do this, we first characterize symmetry in and prove that, also in this representation, symmetry is preserved under convolutions. We will present the proofs of the next three results using densities. A rigorous proof can be obtained by formally translating the subsequent proof into the language of distributions.

Using the symmetry condition for , we see that
so is symmetric. 2) By definition, the convolution of and is the density
where

Proposition 1: Consider a binary-input memoryless outputsymmetric channel and let be the initial message density in log-likelihood ratio form under the all-one word assumption. Then is symmetric.
Proof: From the channel symmetry condition we obtain

We need to show that is symmetric, we have
Also

. Since , so

Therefore

We, therefore, have

Next we will show that symmetry is preserved under convolutions.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:48:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

630

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Since is the sum of the above two quantities and their difference we obtain

is This stability condition has far-reaching implications in the case of the BEC. To name just the most important one, it immediately gives rise to the bound

and we are done.

We are now able to prove our main theorem.

Proof of Theorem 3: As outlined above, we use induc-

tion and the density evolution formula of Theorem 2. The in-

duction is anchored by Proposition 1: is symmetric. As-

sume now that

is symmetric. By Proposition 2 part 1),

is symmetric, and by part 2) of the same proposition

is also symmetric. Part 1) of that proposition implies

that

is symmetric. Finally, Lemma 1 shows

that

is symmetric as well.

E. Stability

Consider density evolution for the BEC. Recall that, for a

given degree distribution pair

, the evolution of the ex-

pected fraction of erasure messages emitted in the th iteration,

call it , is given by

(12)

Further, it was shown in [17, Theorem 3.1] that for any sequence of capacity achieving degree distribution pairs this inequality becomes tight.

Given the important role that the stability condition plays in the case of the BEC it is natural to ask whether an equivalent condition can be formulated for general binary-input memoryless output-symmetric channels. Fortunately, the answer is in the affirmative and our main result along this line is summarized in the following.

Theorem 5 [General Stability Condition]: Assume we are

given a degree distribution pair

and a symmetric density

. For

define

(10) Let

where , the initial fraction of erasures, is equal to the era-

sure probability of the channel. Recall further that the threshold

was defined as the supremum of all values ,

,

such that

converges to zero as tends to infinity. It is easy

to derive an upper bound on by looking at the behavior of this

recursion for small values of . Expanding the right-hand side

of (10) into a Taylor series around zero we get

and assume that borhood of zero.
[Necessity] If ,

for all in some neigh-

then there exists a constant

, such that for all ,

.

(11)

Clearly, for sufficiently small , the convergence behavior

will be determined by the term linear in . More precisely, the

convergence will depend on whether

is smaller or

larger than one. The precise statement is given in the following.

Theorem 4 [Stability Condition for the BEC—[15]]17 : As-

sume we are given a degree distribution pair

and a real

number ,

. For

define

[Sufficiency] If

stant

,

then

to infinity.

then there exists a con-

, such that if for some

,

converges to zero as tends

Discussion: As for the BEC, the stability condition gives rise to an upper bound on the threshold. Assume that the channel family is parameterized by the real parameter and assume further that there exists a unique number such that

[Necessity] If ,

then there exists a constant

, such that for all ,

.

[Sufficiency] If stant
then finity.

then there exists a con-

,

, such that if, for some

,

converges to zero as tends to in-

Discussion: Note that

for any initial

erasure fraction , so that zero is a fixed point of the recursion

given in (10). Therefore, it is natural to think of the above con-

dition as a stability condition of the fixed point at zero.

17The result proved in [15] does not follow the derivation as in the theorem.
0 0 Rather, it uses the condition that the decoding is successful if and only if the
inequality x (1 (1 x)) < x is valid on (0; x ).

where

is the message density of the received values cor-

responding to the channel with parameter . Then

.

We note that for some codes, e.g., cycle codes, the stability con-

dition determines the threshold exactly, see [18], [19] for some

specific examples.

In this paper, we will only prove the necessity of the stated stability condition. Demonstrating sufficiency is quite involved and the proof can be found in [20]. Before venturing into the proof of the necessity of the stability condition let us calculate the stability condition explicitly for various channels.

Example 10 [BEC]: For the BEC (see Example 6) we have

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:48:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RICHARDSON et al.: DESIGN OF CAPACITY-APPROACHING IRREGULAR LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

631

Therefore, the stability condition18 reads
as stated above and as previously obtained in [15]. Example 11 [BSC]: For the BSC (see Example 7) we have

To that effect, consider a density

.

Note that this density is symmetric and that

After a complete iteration of density evolution this density will evolve to

More generally, if we consider iterations of density evolution It follows that the stability condition19 for the BSC is given by we see that the density will evolve to

Example 12 [BIAWGNC]: For the BIAWGNC (see Example 8) we have

We are interested in the error probability associated to ,

i.e., we are interested in

. To this end note that if

for all in some neighborhood of zero

then

Thus, the stability condition20 reduces to Example 13 [BILC]: For the BILC (see Example 9) we have

(13)
is well-defined, see [21]. Therefore, if we assume that then there exists an integer such that

It then follows that for this

The stability condition for the BILC can, therefore, be written as

if
where is a positive constant depending only on Now assume that for some iteration we have
. We claim that then

and . ,

The reader might have noticed that for all of the above examples is equal to the constant which appears in the Bhattacharyya bound. This is no coincidence. The constant is simply the exponent in the Chernoff bound when we ask for the probability that the sum of independent samples with common density is negative.

Proof of Theorem 5: Recall that in the case of the BEC

we observed that zero was a fixed point of the recursion and by

linearizing the recursion around this fixed point we were able to

analyze its stability. For the general case we will proceed along

the same lines. Recall further that we deal with distributions

of log-likelihood ratios. From Corollary 1 we know that a zero

probability of error corresponds to the density . Clearly, if

for some

then

for any , so

that is indeed a fixed point of density evolution. To analyze

local convergence to this fixed point we shall again consider a

linearization of density evolution about this fixed point.

18Equivalently, we get
  (; )  which is nontrivial only if  (0) (1) 1.

19Formulated as an upper bound, this gives

 0 0  (; )

(1

1

)

 which is well-defined if  (0) (1) 1.

20This gives rise to
 p  (; )

which is well-defined if  (0) (1) > 1.

a contradiction, since as shown in [1], the error probability is

a nonincreasing function in the number of iterations. This will

show that if

then

for some suitable

positive constant for all

.

To show that

we argue as follows. Con-

sider a random tree of depth

with variable nodes at the

leaves and a variable node at the root. Let the leaf nodes have

observations which correspond to samples from the density

and let the internal variable nodes have observations which cor-

respond to samples from the density . The density of the mes-

sage emitted at the root node is then . Now compare this

to the scenario where we use the same setup but where we let

the leaf nodes take observations which correspond to samples

from the density . In this case, the density of the message

emitted at the root node will be . Note that in both cases

the estimate of the root node message is a maximum-likelihood

(ML) estimate. In Appendix B we show in Lemma 4 that one

can think of the samples from the density as physically de-

graded samples from the density . We claim that this implies

. To see this, assume to the contrary that

. In words, we can improve our estimate

emitted at the root nodes in the first scenario by adding noise

to the observations corresponding to the leaf nodes and then ap-

plying an ML estimate to these new observations rather than

by applying an ML estimate to the original observations. This

contradicts the well-known fact that for a uniform prior ML es-

timates have minimum probability of error.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:48:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

632

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

It remains to prove that

as stated. A general large-deviation principle (see, e.g., [21])

implies that

, where

.

Since is symmetric we have

fulfills

and

. Therefore, if no fixed point

with

exists then

converges to zero as tends

to infinity, which proves the first assertion. To prove the second

assertion, note that if is a fixed point with

then

where we have used the fact that function in its first argument for tion it then follows that

is a nondecreasing . By finite induc-

for all

We close this subsection by posing two fundamental open questions.

• Is it generally true that for any sequence of capacity-achieving degree distribution pairs the stability condition becomes tight as is the case for the BEC?

• Is it possible to formulate higher order stability conditions and to show that each of them becomes tight for any sequence of capacity-achieving degree distribution pairs as is again the case for the BEC, [17, Theorem 3.1].

F. Fixed Points of Density Evolution
The main result of this section states that density evolution for belief propagation always converges to a fixed point.
Consider again the example of the BEC and its associated density evolution recursion given in (10). In this case, we have the following complete characterization of the threshold in terms of fixed points of (10).

Theorem 6 [Fixed-Point Characterization of the Threshold

for the BEC—[2]]21 : For a given degree distribution pair

let

. For any

and

define

. Define

It remains to discuss the characterization of the threshold in

terms of fixed points. First note that, as remarked earlier,

is a fixed point of the recursion for any

and that

is a fixed point for

. It follows that both charac-

terizations are well-defined. Finally, the equivalence of the two

characterizations follows from the fact that

is strictly

increasing in for

and

.

At first it might appear that this behavior is special to the BEC

case since this is the only (known) belief-propagation decoder

for which density evolution has a one-dimensional description.

So it is quite surprising that at least the sufficiency part has a

complete analog in the general case.

In order to generalize the above results we must generalize

various notions used in the proof. One crucial ingredient in the

above argument is the monotonicity of

. Since

is

a sequence of real numbers, this monotonicity guarantees the

convergence of

to some fixed point of the recursion. For

the general case of density evolution, we have to assert the con-

vergence of distributions. We will now show that there exists a

large family of monotonicity conditions which we will later use

to prove convergence.

Theorem 7: Let and be symmetric densities on and for a given degree distribution pair
define

[Sufficiency] For any

solution of

with

for all

to zero as tends to infinity.22

, , then

converges to a . Therefore, if
converges

[Necessity] If there exists an ,

, then

for all

, such that .23

[Fixed-Point Characterizations of the Threshold]

i)

solution in

.

ii)

solution in

.

has no has a

Proof: First note that for any

,

is non-

increasing and therefore converges to a point, call it . Clearly,

21Although the exact statement differs from the one given in [15], the result is nevertheless an easy consequence of the statements given there.
 22Hence, x (; ) x .  23Therefore, if x > 0 then x (; ) x .

Then

is a nonincreasing function of .

Proof: The message of which is the density represents

a conditional probability of a particular bit value. Assume that

an independent observation of the same bit value is available

to the decoder and assume that this independent observation is

obtained by passing the bit through a channel

which ful-

fills the symmetry condition and has

. By

Lemma 3 and under the assumption that the all-one codeword

was transmitted, the conditional density of the bit log-likelihood

ratios, conditioned on all information incorporated in and the

independent observation, has density

. Since the new den-

sity corresponds again to a maximum a posteriori (MAP) esti-

mate conditioned on information which is nondecreasing in ,

the stated monotonicity condition follows.

In the above theorem we can use any symmetric density for . It will prove useful in the sequel to consider the family of densities

(14)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:48:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RICHARDSON et al.: DESIGN OF CAPACITY-APPROACHING IRREGULAR LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

633

Clearly,

is a symmetric density for any

any symmetric density we define

by

. If for

for all

and such that is

a fixed point of (9), then

converges to zero as

tends to infinity, or, equivalently,

.

then we immediately have the following.

Corollary 2: For a given symmetric density

degree distribution pair

define

and a given

Then

is a nonincreasing function of for every

We will now show that a symmetric density is uniquely

determined by the “basis” of functionals

.

Lemma 2 [Basic Lemma]: A symmetric density is

uniquely determined by

.

Proof: Let

be the distribution associated to . Let

be a point of continuity of . Then

(15)

It is not too hard to check that

is differentiable

at , and that the symmetry condition implies that the derivative

is

. In particular,

al-

most everywhere. Since

, we recover

. Since is symmetric, the proof is now complete.

Finally, to generalize the above convergence results for the

BEC we must provide a precise definition of the notion of

“convergence” for general symmetric densities. In particular,

convergence to

must be well-defined. Let denote

the set of all right-continuous nondecreasing functions

with

and

. Note that

. We say that a sequence

,

,

converges to

if the sequence converges pointwise at all

points of continuity of . Convergence in this sense implies

weak convergence of the associated Lebesgue–Stieltjes mea-

sure. That is, if

then

for any suitable function . An important property of the

space is that it is sequentially compact. Given any infinite

sequence from , then, by the Helley selection principle,

see [22, Theorem 25.9], there exists a subsequence which

converges to some element of .

Let denote the subset of consisting of symmetric func-

tions. Note that is sequentially compact since, i.e., if

is a limit point of ,

with

then

,

since from the definition of symmetry given in Definition 1 we

see that weak convergence immediately implies symmetry of

the limit. We say that a sequence of symmetric densities con-

verges to if the corresponding distributions converge, i.e., if

converges to

.

Proof: Consider the sequence of message densities.

By sequential compactness of , some subsequence converges

to a symmetric limit density, call if . If the original sequence

does not converge to then there must exist another

subsequence which converges to a distinct symmetric limit

. It follows from the basis lemma that, for some ,

. But this is a contradiction since

is a monotonic function for every by Theorem 7 and cannot,

therefore, possess two distinct limits. We now conclude that

converges to .

The density is a fixed point of (9) since the update

equations are continuous under our notion of convergence.

Furthermore, since the sequence

is monotonically

nonincreasing for each

, we have

. If

for any

and if is a symmetric density then

. We conclude that if there does not exist a fixed-point

of (9) satisfying

then

.

IV. OPTIMIZATION
In this section, we briefly describe the optimization techniques that we used to obtain degree distribution pairs with large thresholds.
The following general remarks apply to any numerical optimization technique. First, formally, the threshold is defined as the supremum of all channel parameters for which the probability of error under density evolution converges to zero. By Corollary 1, this is equivalent to requiring that the message distribution converges to . In practice, we can verify at best that the probability of error reaches a value below a prescribed . From Theorem 5 we know that if we choose small enough then this automatically implies convergence to zero probability of error. In practice, the issue of convergence is not of great concern since we always allow a finite (but small) probability of error.
Secondly, in order to perform the computations we need to quantize the quantities involved. This quantization leads to a quantization error and this error might accumulate over the course of many iterations, rendering the computations useless. This problem can be circumvented in the following way. By carefully performing the quantization one can ensure that the quantized density evolution corresponds to the exact density evolution of a quantized message-passing scheme. Since belief propagation is optimal, such a quantized version is suboptimal and, hence, the reported thresholds can be thought of as lower bounds on the actual thresholds.

Theorem 8 [Partial Fixed-Point Characterization of the

Threshold for General Channels]: For a given degree distribu-

tion pair

and for a given symmetric density define

[Sufficiency] For any symmetric density , the sequence of densities converges to a symmetric density
which is a fixed-point solution to (9). Therefore, if there does not exist a symmetric density such that

A. Local Optimization
To find good degree distribution pairs we started with the following simple hill-climbing approach. Fix a small target error probability and a maximum number of iterations . Start with a given degree distribution pair and determine the maximum admissible channel parameter, i.e., the maximum channel parameter such that the error probability after iterations is below . Now apply a small change to the degree distribution pair and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:48:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

634

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Fig. 4. Evolution of the bit-error probability under density evolution as a function of the iteration number.

Fig. 5. The decrease of the bit-error probability as a function of the current bit-error probability.

check if it has either a larger admissible channel parameter or at least a smaller target error probability after iterations. If so, declare the new degree distribution pair to be the currently best degree distribution pair, otherwise keep the original degree distribution pair. The same basic step is then repeated a large number of times.
The search for good degree distribution pairs can be substantially accelerated by appropriately limiting the search space. We found, for example, that very good degree distribution pairs exist with only a few nonzero terms. In particular, it suffices to allow two or three nonzero check node degrees (and these degrees can be chosen consecutively) and to limit the nonzero variable node degrees to the maximum such degree , and, possibly, a few well-chosen degrees in-between.

A further substantial savings in running time can be achieved

as follows. For a particular degree distribution pair

, Fig. 4

shows the evolution of the bit-error probability as a function

of the iteration number. An even clearer picture emerges if we

plot the decrease of the bit-error probability as a function of the

current bit error probability . This is shown in Fig. 5.

As can be seen in these figures, after an initial swift decrease

in the bit-error probability the procedure almost comes to a halt

at

with decreases in bit-error probability of only

per iteration. The convergence then speeds up again

until it hits another low at

and then later again at

. At these three critical points, the outgoing mes-

sage distribution is almost a fixed point of the equation system

corresponding to one iteration. Indeed, if the parameter were

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:48:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RICHARDSON et al.: DESIGN OF CAPACITY-APPROACHING IRREGULAR LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

635

slightly increased then the iteration could not overcome any of its mass on the degree . Note that the actual error probability those points and one can verify that there arise corresponding after the th iteration, , can be expressed in terms of as fixed points of density evolution.

Provided that the fixed points are stable, the message distributions at these points are continuous functions of the degree distribution pair. Hence, a small change in the degree distribution pair causes only small changes in the associated fixed-point distributions. Furthermore, if the fixed points are stable, then this affords a certain memorylessness to the density evolution process because they serve as local attractors. Small perturbations to the path will not matter once the domain of convergence of the fixed point is entered and, once the fixed point is found, the path that leads to it is irrelevant.
In practice, we observe that the points at which the density evolution gets stuck are indeed stable fixed points. The fixed point theorem in Section III-F shows that fixed points which are limits of density evolution must be at least marginally stable. The above considerations suggest the following scheme. Assume we determine the critical points (near fixed points, or likely fixed points for a slightly worse initial distribution) for a particular degree distribution pair and we would like to determine the merit of a particular small change of the degree distribution pair. Rather than starting with the initial distribution and then checking if (and how fast) this initial distribution converges to , one can memorize the distributions at the critical points of the original degree distribution pair and then determine how the proposed change affects the speed of convergence locally at these points. Once a promising change has been found, the merit of this change can be verified by starting with the initial degree distribution pair. Typically, only a few iterations are necessary at each critical point to determine if the change of the degree distribution pair improves the convergence or not. This has to be compared to hundreds of iterations or even thousands of iterations which are necessary if one starts with the initial distribution.
In the optimization scheme we just described we made use of the distributions at the “critical points” to find promising changes of the degree distribution pair. The following schemes extend this idea even further; the resulting algorithms are reminiscent of the algorithms used in the BEC case. For simplicity, we will only describe the optimization of the variable node degree distribution. The extension to the check node degree distribution and to joint optimization should be quite apparent.

Let us define a function polating the , setting

for

by linearly inter-

. Define

We interpret as the number of iterations required to take the

initial probability of error down to . Using the expression

above, we can write down the gradient of

with respect to

. In particular, for a perturbation we can compute

as

Returning to the discrete representation this is equivalent to

Thus, we observe that the gradient of is given by
There are two ways we can exploit this expression. One is to use the (negative) gradient direction to do hill climbing, and the other is to globally optimize the linearized approximation of In either case, we must incorporate the constraints on .
Let be an alternative degree distribution. Clearly, has to be a probability mass function, i.e.
(16)
and, further, it has to correspond to a code of equal rate, i.e.

Assume that we are given a degree distribution pair

,a

particular channel parameter , and a target probability of error

. Let

be the sequence of error probabilities of the be-

lief-propagation algorithm. More precisely, is the initial error

probability, is the probability of error after the th iteration,

and

. Assume that we want to find a new degree

distribution which achieves the target probability of error in

fewer iterations or achieves a lower target in the same number

of iterations.

Define a matrix ,

,

. The entry is

the error probability which results if we run the belief-propaga-

tion decoder for

steps assuming that the variable node de-

gree distribution is followed by one step in which we assume

that the variable node degree distribution is a singleton with all

(17)

Let be the negative gradient direction of . If we set

(for positive ) then the above constraints may not be sat-

isfied. However, among degree distributions satisfying the con-

straints the one closest to

in Euclidean distance can be

easily computed by alternating projections. Two projections are

required: the first is orthogonal projection of onto the sub-

space determined by

(total probability constraint)

and

(rate constraint), and the second projection

sets

if, prior to the projection,

. Note

that an alternative interpretation is to project the gradient direc-

tion onto the convex polytope of admissible directions. One

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:48:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

636

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

can then compute the maximum step size for which the constraints remain satisfied and then recompute the projection at that point. In this way, one can easily walk along the projected gradient direction to look for an improved degree distribution.
Let us now consider the second way to exploit the gradient expression for . Let
Then we have

as

, where and are uniquely

determined via the equations

and

This way, we are guaranteed to obtain a degree distribution which respects the rate-constraints for the code.
By allowing fractional degrees we, in effect, force the program to choose (close to) optimal degrees. This results in a significant reduction of the dimensionality of the parameter space, hence the running time, and also in the sparsity of the degree distributions obtained.

(18)

APPENDIX A

CHANNEL EQUIVALENCE LEMMA

This approximation is valid as long as does not differ too much from , i.e., assuming that the message distributions corresponding to and are not too different, if

(19)

where

, and if

(20)

Recall that we want to minimize . Since the right-hand side of (18) is (up to a constant) a linear function in the degree distribution and since the constraints stated in (16), (17), (19), and (20) are also linear, this can be (approximately) accomplished by means of a linear program. The same procedure is then applied repeatedly in an attempt to converge to a good degree distribution. Since both approaches are local optimizations it is appropriate to repeat the optimization with various initial conditions.

We say that two binary-input memoryless output-symmetric channels are equivalent if they have the same density of loglikelihood ratios. It is often convenient to pick one representative from each equivalence class. This can be done as shown in the following lemma.

Lemma 3 [Channel Equivalence Lemma]: Let

be a

symmetric density. The binary-input memoryless output-sym-

metric channel

with

(and, hence, by

symmetry

) has an associated density of

log-likelihood ratios equal to .

Proof:

APPENDIX B THE ERASURE DECOMPOSITION LEMMA

B. Global Optimization

The code design problem as described above belongs to the

class of nonlinear constraint satisfaction problems with contin-

uous space parameters. Many general algorithms for solving

such problems have been developed. We experimented with an

algorithm called Differential Evolution (DE) [23] that has al-

ready been successfully applied to the design of good erasure

codes [11]. DE is a robust optimizer for multivariate functions.

We will not describe the details here, suffice it to say that the al-

gorithm is in part a hill climbing algorithm and in part a genetic

algorithm.

Our goal is to maximize the cost function which we define to

be the threshold value for the channel. Since such optimizers,

and DE in particular, operate best in a continuous parameter

space of not too large dimension, and since frequent function

evaluations are required in the optimization, we found it con-

venient to let the parameter space be a continuous space of

small dimension. To accomplish this, we introduced fractional

phantom distributions. Let the polynomials and take on the

general form

(similarly for ), where now both the

and the degree could take any positive real value. The real

degree distribution is obtained from this phantom distribution

Lemma 4 [Erasure Decomposition Lemma]: Let be

a binary-input memoryless output-symmetric channel. Let

denote its associated distribution of log-likelihood ratios

. Then the channel can be represented as the

concatenation of an erasure channel with erasure probability

and a ternary-input memoryless output-symmetric

channel , i.e., is a physical degraded version of an erasure

channel.

Proof: Recall from Lemma 3 that, without loss of gener-

ality, we may assume that

and hence, by

symmetry,

. Let denote an erasure and

let

denote bit values. Let denote a channel whose input

alphabet is

. Further, let have real output and set

and
It is easy to check that these quantities are well-defined densities. Let denote the concatenation of the erasure channel with the channel , i.e., the output of the erasure channel is fed into .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:48:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RICHARDSON et al.: DESIGN OF CAPACITY-APPROACHING IRREGULAR LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

637

Note that for equally likely inputs the output of the erasure

channel, and hence the input to , have probabilities

,

, and

, respectively. Then we have

and

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank Sae-Young Chung and Igal Sason as well as the reviewers for their detailed comments and many helpful suggestions.
REFERENCES
[1] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2000.
[2] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, D. Spielman, and V. Stemann, “Practical loss-resilient codes,” in Proc. 29th Annu. ACM Symp. Theory of Computing, 1997, pp. 150–159.
[3] D. Spielman, “Linear-time encodeable and decodable error-correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 1723–1731, Nov. 1996.
[4] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 638–656, Feb. 2000.
[5] M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.
[6] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, “Analysis of low density codes and improved designs using irregular graphs,” in Proc. 30th Annu. ACM Symp. Theory of Computing, 1998, pp. 249–258.

[7]

, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs

and belief propagation,” in Proc. 1998 IEEE Int. Symp. Information

Theory, Cambridge, MA, Aug. 1998, p. 117.

[8] D. MacKay, S. Wilson, and M. Davey, “Comparison of constructions

of irregular Gallager codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, pp.

1449–1454, Oct. 1999.

[9] R. G. Gallager, Information Theory and Reliable Communica-

tion. New York: Wiley, 1968.

[10] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, and A. Shokrollahi, “Analysis of random

processes via and-or tree evaluation,” in Proc. 9th Annu. ACM-SIAM

Symp. Discrete Algorithms, 1998, pp. 364–373.

[11] A. Shokrollahi and R. Storn, “Design of efficient erasure codes with

differential evolution,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Information Theory, Sorrento,

Italy, June 2000.

[12] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit

error-correcting coding and decoding,” in Proc. Int. Communications

Conf. (ICC’93), Geneve, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.

[13] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA:

MIT Press, 1963.

[14] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error correcting codes based on very sparse

matrices,” IEEE Trans. Information Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar.

1999.

[15] A. Shokrollahi, “New sequences of linear time erasure codes ap-

proaching the channel capacity,” in Proc. 13th Conf. Applied Algebra,

Error Correcting Codes, and Cryptography (Lecture Notes in Computer

Science). Berlin, Germany: Springer Verlag, 1999, pp. 65–76.

[16] S.-Y. Chung, J. G. D. Forney, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the de-

sign of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon

limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.

[17] A. Shokrollahi, “Capacity-achieving sequences,” in Codes, Systems, and

Graphical Models (IMA Volumes in Mathematics and Its Applications),

B. Marcus and J. Rosenthal, Eds. New York: Springer-Verlag, 2000,

vol. 123, pp. 153–166.

[18] L. Decreusefond and G. Zémor, “On the error-correcting capabilities of

cycle codes of graphs,” Comb., Probab., Computing, no. 6, pp. 27–38,

1997.

[19] G. Horn, “Iterative decoding and pseudocodewords,” Ph.D. dissertation,

Dept. Elect. Eng., Calif. Inst. Technol., Pasedena, CA, May 1999.

[20] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “A proof of the stability condition for

LDPC codes,” paper, in preparation.

[21] A. Shwartz and A. Weiss, Large Deviations for Performance Anal-

ysis. London, U.K.: Chapman & Hall, 1995.

[22] P. Billingsley, Probability and Measure, 3rd ed. New York: Wiley,

1995.

[23] K. Price and R. Storn, “Differential evolution—A simple and efficient

heuristic for global optimization over continuous spaces,” J. Global Op-

timiz., vol. 11, pp. 341–359, 1997.

[24] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, D. Spielman, and V. Ste-

mann, “Practical loss-resilient codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol.

47, pp. 569–584, Feb. 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:48:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

