918

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, MAY 2001

Applications of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes to Magnetic Recording Channels
Hongxin Song, Student Member, IEEE, Richard M. Todd, and J. R. Cruz, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper, we consider the use of high-rate low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes for magnetic recording. We design and evaluate the performance of a magnetic recording system, which uses an LDPC code as the error-correcting code, in conjunction with a rate 16/17 quasimaximum-transition-run (QMTR) channel code on a modified E2PR4 (ME2PR4)-equalized channel. Iterative decoding between the partial response channel and the LDPC code is performed. Simulations show that an additional four-dB gain over the QMTR code can be obtained by the LDPC code. The algorithms used to design this LDPC code are also discussed.
Index Terms—Iterative decoding, low-density parity-check codes, magnetic recording.
I. INTRODUCTION
F OLLOWING the invention of turbo codes [1], turbo decoding for magnetic recording channels has been investigated in two different ways: 1) using a classical turbo code with at least two component codes, often including iterative decoding between the partial response (PR) channel and the turbo code, which is sometimes referred to as turbo equalization [2], [3]; or 2) using a single convolutional code serially concatenated with a PR channel which plays the role of a second constituent code of rate one [4]. In the first approach, a soft-in-soft-out (SISO) a posteriori probability (APP) decoder, called the channel decoder, undoes the effects of the partial response channel, supplying the input for the turbo decoder, which in turn is also an SISO APP decoder. If turbo equalization is not implemented, there is no information feedback from the turbo decoder to the channel decoder. The channel decoder has no a priori knowledge at the beginning but the soft output information from the turbo decoder may provide a priori information for the channel decoder. If turbo equalization is implemented, the “extrinsic” information from the turbo decoder is fed back to the channel decoder as a priori information. Bahl et al.’s algorithm, often referred to as the BCJR algorithm, is suitable for decoding welldefined trellis structures and therefore can be applied to both a PR channel and a convolutional code [5]. Since the turbo decoder requires two separate decoders, three APP decoders are needed for this approach. In the second approach, only two APP decoders are needed, one for the channel decoder and another for the convolutional code. The channel APP decoder provides the input for the convolutional code APP decoder, which in turn
Manuscript received April 28, 2000; revised January 18, 2001. This paper was presented in part at the IEEE International Magnetics Conference (INTERMAG), Toronto, ON, Canada in April 2000.
The authors are with the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, the University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK 73019 USA.
Publisher Item Identifier S 0733-8716(01)03899-9.

provides the a priori information for the channel APP decoder. This iteration process is a form of turbo equalization. Both systems perform significantly better than uncoded systems but the second system is simpler.
In this paper, instead of using a single weak convolutional code, we investigate the use of a powerful block code, namely a low-density parity-check (LDPC) code [6]–[8], and its iterative decoding with an efficient decoding algorithm. The channel model we used is a PR-equalized Lorentzian channel, precoded by a quasimaximum-transition-run (QMTR) code to reduce channel errors. A similar configuration has been considered in [9], in which the channel is assume to be perfectly equalized but white Gaussian noise was assumed after equalization. Also, the performance of LDPC codes for a generalized PR channel was studied in [10] with reduced-complexity decoding for LDPC codes.
The performance gains are evaluated in terms of bit-error rate (BER); block-error-rate comparisons would give larger gains due to the fact that in our proposed LDPC system there are many bit errors in an erroneous block, as shown in Section IV. In [10], an LDPC coded system was compared with a conventional magnetic recording system, which uses a Reed–Solomon code, in terms of block error rate.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we provide some background on LDPC codes. In Section III, a practical LDPC system with turbo equalization for magnetic recording is described. In Section IV, we present the simulation results for the proposed system. In Section V, we discuss the design of the LDPC code used in the system. Conclusions are given in Section VI.

II. LDPC CODE BACKGROUND

Recently, a category of linear block codes, initially investi-

gated by Gallager [6], was rediscovered by MacKay [7], [8].

These codes are binary LDPC codes which can be specified by a

sparse parity check matrix with the elements from

. For

a regular LDPC code, has uniform column Hamming weights

and uniform row Hamming weights . An -row and

-column parity check matrix with and defines a

length , rate

code, provided that is of full

rank. The ensemble average minimum distance of LDPC codes

increases linearly with for fixed rate and [8].

The belief propagation (BP) algorithm can be used with an

LDPC code, giving excellent performance. McEliece et al. have

shown that the BP algorithm and the turbo decoding algorithm

are essentially the same algorithm [11]. The matrix can be

described by a graph containing two types of nodes, message

0733–8716/01$10.00 © 2001 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SONG et al.: APPLICATIONS OF LDPC CODES TO MAGNETIC RECORDING CHANNELS

919

Fig. 1. Block diagram of a PR channel with an LDPC code.

nodes, and check nodes. Each code symbol is represented by

a message node and each check equation by a check node. An

edge connects a message node and a check node if that symbol

participates in the check. For each check, one can construct a

“subcode” involving only the message symbols that participate

in the check. Information is passed from the message nodes to

the check nodes by decoding these subcodes, while combining

the check nodes connected to a message node passes the infor-

mation in the other direction. For details of the BP algorithm,

see [7], [8].

By representing the probabilities in log-likelihood ratio

(LLR), the BP algorithm may be expressed in the logarithmic

domain [6], and is referred to as the Log-BP algorithm, which

is used in this paper. The Log-BP algorithm is outlined below.

Suppose a codeword

is transmitted through

an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel with an-

tipodal symbols +1 and 1. The received channel vector is

. The set of bit symbols participating in check m is

denoted by

. The set of checks that bit

n participates in is denoted by

. Let

(1)

where is the sign and is the absolute value. Similarly, we define and .

• Initialization:

for all and .

• Horizontal step, information passing from message nodes

to check nodes

(2)

• Vertical step, information passing from check nodes to message nodes
(3)

where • Pseudoposteriori LLR

. (4)

The hard decision

is made based on ,

namely

if

.

The max-approximation method may be used to simplify the

calculation of

, or it can be done

by table-lookup [12].

III. MAGNETIC RECORDING SYSTEMS WITH LDPC CODES

In this section, a practical magnetic recording system using an LDPC code is described. Fig. 1 shows the system block diagram.

• The proposed system is based on a modified extended

EPR4 (ME PR4) channel [13]. The channel response for

ME PR4 is

.

• To avoid soft decoding of the QMTR code, in contrast to

current recording systems, the modulation code and the

error-correcting code are reversed in order in this system.

This scheme can be traced to [14]. On the recording

end, the incoming user data block is first encoded by a

rate 16/17 QMTR code [13]. The QMTR code has at

most three consecutive ones and at most eleven consec-

utive zeros. It greatly reduces the dominant errors on

the ME PR4 channel and provides a run-length-limit

constraint. The resultant block from the QMTR encoder

is further encoded by a high-rate LDPC code. Before

recording, the sequence of LDPC check bits is inserted

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

920

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, MAY 2001

tween the channel detector and the LDPC decoder. The schedule we used is not optimized. Mittelholzer et al. studied the optimal schedule for a particular configuration [10]. Intuitively, the schedule with just one iteration in the LDPC loop utilizes the channel information best, and is closest to maximum likelihood performance. However, given that the complexity of the channel detector is higher than that of the LDPC decoder, we consider only schedules with many iterations in the LDPC loop.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS

Fig. 2. Flow chart for iterative decoding.

with guard bits so that both run-length conditions are

satisfied. The

precoder is used to translate the

ones into transitions.

• On the reading end, a Log-MAP APP decoder matched

to the precoded ME PR4 is used for the PR channel. The

Log-MAP decoder takes the channel vector and the a

priori LLR vector

with

and computes the a posteriori LLR vector

with

• The LDPC decoder is implemented using the Log-BP al-

gorithm described in Section III. It takes the a posteriori

LLR of the channel decoder as input in (1), and out-

puts the pseudo-posteriori LLR

in (4).

• From and , define

as the

extrinsic LLR. is fed back to the PR channel decoder

as the a priori LLR. Therefore turbo decoding between the

channel and the LDPC code is made possible.

The decoding process has two iteration loops, as shown in the

flow chart of Fig. 2. One is the LDPC loop, which is within the

LDPC decoder. After each iteration of LDPC decoding, the de-

coder checks the syndrome . If a valid codeword is found,

the LDPC decoding is finished, and the whole decoding process

stops. The other iteration loop is the channel loop. It is the turbo

equalization between the PR channel and the LDPC code [15].

The channel loop iteration takes place only when the maximum

number of LDPC loop iterations is reached without finding a

valid codeword. Therefore, the decoding process halts when ei-

ther a valid LDPC codeword is found or the maximum number

of channel loop iterations is reached.

Different turbo equalization schedules, i.e., number of LDPC

iterations in the LDPC loop, are possible for the iteration be-

In our simulation of the system shown in Fig. 1, the

Lorentzian channel with isolated pulse

is assumed. User density is defined as

, where

is the 50% peak level pulse width of the isolated Lorentzian

pulse and is the user bit duration. The channel is equalized to

the ME PR4 channel response, and additive Gaussian noise is

assumed before the equalizer.

We investigate two LDPC codes. LDPC1 is a rate 0.9358 code

with block length 4376 and 4095 information bits given in [16].

Its column weight is

. We designed LDPC2, with rate

0.9402, block length 4629 and 4352 information bits, also with

column

. This code is by no means optimal for this

system. And a code with

was also obtained. The code

was constructed using the method discussed in Section V.

The proposed system with LDPC2 has overall code rate

0.8674 and user block size 4096 bits, whereas the system with

LDPC1 has code rate 0.8622 and user block size 3854 bits.

In Fig. 1, a maximum of 50 LDPC iterations are performed

before the algorithm branches back to the channel detector and

a maximum of 100 channel iterations are allowed. The system

is evaluated at two different user densities. Fig. 3(a) shows

the performance at user density 2.505 and Fig. 3(b) shows the

performance at user density 2.8. Also plotted in these figures

are the performance of the rate 16/17 RLL coded ME PR4

channel, the QMTR coded ME PR4 channel, and the LDPC1

and QMTR coded ME PR4 channel, all at the same user

density. The channel signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is defined as

the ratio of the squared amplitude of the isolated Lorentzian

pulse and the noise variance of the additive white Gaussian

channel noise.

The simulation results show that our proposed system

achieved a significant gain. At user density 2.505, LDPC2

provides an additional four-dB gain over the QMTR code at a

BER of 10 . At user density 2.8 LDPC2 provides a 3.5-dB gain.

As can be seen later in this section, there are many bit errors

(twenty or more in some instances) when a block error occurs,

while this number is smaller for the uncoded channel. Therefore,

larger performance gains would be obtained if block error rates

were used for terms of comparison.

The decoding of the LDPC codes has a particularly nice prop-

erty. As discussed in Section III, the whole decoding process

stops if a valid LDPC codeword is found, or if the maximum

number of iterations is reached without finding a valid code-

word. This provides us with a natural stopping criterion for the

iterative decoding as well as a flag indicating that a particular

block contains errors, which is a distinct advantage over systems

using convolutional codes. An undetected error occurs when a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SONG et al.: APPLICATIONS OF LDPC CODES TO MAGNETIC RECORDING CHANNELS

921

Fig. 4. Performance with few channel iterations. (a) User density S = 2.505. (b) User density S = 2.8.

Fig. 3. Performance of LDPC codes on PR channels. (a) User density S = 2.505. (b) User density S = 2.8.
valid LDPC codeword different from the correct LDPC codeword is obtained by the LDPC decoder. Throughout our simulation, all errors were detected, and no undetected errors were observed. This may be due to the large minimum distance of the LDPC codes.
The advantage of the Log-BP algorithm over the BP algorithm is also observed. Under the same conditions, the Log-BP algorithm does not have the numerical difficulties exhibited by the BP algorithm. Moreover, under some conditions, with the Log-BP algorithm the turbo equalization was able to correct all errors, which it was not able to do with the BP algorithm.
The impact of the maximum number of channel iterations was investigated. If this number is set to one, the channel decoder works once and no turbo equalization occurs. Fig. 4 shows the performance of the LDPC2 coded system with 1, 2, 3, and 100 maximum channel iterations. Additionally, the performance of the uncoded ME PR4 system at the same user density is also shown as a comparison.

At both user densities 2.505 and 2.8, compared with 100 maximum channel iterations, the performance degradation is about 0.5 dB if no turbo equalization is allowed. This number is close to a similar result for magnetic recording systems with a convolutional turbo code [3].
The total number of LDPC iterations for a block is the sum of the LDPC iterations in each channel iteration. Although the maximum number of LDPC iterations is 50 in the simulations above, the average total number of LDPC iterations is much smaller. Fig. 5 shows the average number of channel iterations and LDPC iterations actually performed if the maximum number of channel iterations is 1, 2, and 3 for user density 2.8. At BER 10 , the average number of channel iterations is 1, 1.2, and 1.5, or equivalently the turbo equalization is performed 0, 0.2, and 0.5 times per block on average. The average number of LDPC iterations is about 5, 20, and 35 respectively. From Fig. 4, it can be seen that at BER 10 , the gain for a maximum of three channel iterations is about 0.3 dB over a single channel iteration or in other words without turbo equalization. Assuming that the computation time is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

922

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, MAY 2001

Fig. 5. Average number of iterations actually performed.

Fig. 7. Error burst statistics.

Fig. 6. Histogram of the number of bit errors in a block.
proportional to the average number of LDPC iterations, it will take a factor of seven increase in computation to obtain this small gain.
The histogram of the number of bit errors in a block is shown in Fig. 6. The user density is 2.8 and the BER is around 10 . No turbo equalization is performed. Notice that when a block has errors, there are many bit errors.
Fig. 7 shows the error burst statistics of the system without turbo equalization at user density 2.8 and BER around 10 . An error event delimiter of eight bits is assumed. It can be seen that long error bursts are rare.
V. LDPC CODE DESIGN ALGORITHM

The code design algorithm is based on an idea from [17].

We create a random mapping between codeword bits and parity

checks corresponding to a parity check matrix with the de-

sired dimensions and column weight. We check this mapping

for any four-cycles and if we find any, we randomly permute el-

ements of the mapping until we finally achieve a result without

any four-cycles. It has been found, both theoretically and empir-

ically, that four-cycles are detrimental to the BER performance

of LDPC codes [8]. Once that is done, we take the resulting ma-

trix and rearrange its columns so that the right hand

section of is invertible, and then create the generator matrix

from . (Strictly speaking, one only needs an matrix that is

full rank in order to create a corresponding ; we only imposed

the stronger requirement of the right-hand side being invertible

because the software we used to create matrices required

matrices with this form.)

The above algorithm is admittedly rather ad hoc in nature and

whether the algorithm is likely to actually converge in any given

situation is by no means obvious. In practice, it appears that the

algorithm converges much less rapidly as one attempts to create

codes of rates much above 0.95, codes of very short length, and

codes with

.

VI. CONCLUSION
A serial concatenated system using our LDPC code and iterative decoding has been introduced for use on a ME PR4-equalized Lorentzian channel. Simulation results show that a gain of four-dB over the uncoded system on top of the QMTR code at a bit error rate of 10 can be obtained. These significant gains over uncoded systems make LDPC coded systems very attractive as an alternative to turbo coded magnetic recording systems.

In order to carry out our simulations, we wanted to use a code with properties a little different from those of the publicly available LDPC1 code in [16]. Specifically, we wanted a code with a longer block length, one just long enough to hold a standard 4096-bit disk sector after passing through the rate 16/17 QMTR encoder, and we wanted a code rate around 0.94.

REFERENCES
[1] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Geneva, Switzerland, 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[2] W. E. Ryan, “Performance of high rate turbo codes on a PR4-equalized magnetic recording channel,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Atlanta, GA, 1998, pp. 947–951.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SONG et al.: APPLICATIONS OF LDPC CODES TO MAGNETIC RECORDING CHANNELS

923

[3] W. E. Ryan, L. L. McPheters, and S. W. McLaughlin, “Combined turbo coding and turbo equalization for PR4-equalized Lorentzian channels,” in Proc. Conf. Inform. Sciences and Systems, Princeton, NJ, 1998, pp. 489–494.
[4] T. Souvignier, A. Friedman, M. Oberg, P. H. Siegel, R. E. Swanson, and J. K. Wolf, “Turbo decoding for PR4: Parallel versus serial concatenation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Vancouver, BC, Canada, 1999, pp. 1638–1642.
[5] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-20, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[6] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1968.
[7] D. J. C. MacKay, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 33, pp. 457–458, Mar. 1997.
[8] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 46, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[9] J. Fan, A. Friedmann, E. Kurtas, and S. McLaughlin, “Low density parity check codes for magnetic recording,” in Proc. 37th Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Computing, Monticello, IL, 1999.
[10] T. Mittelholzer, A. Dholakia, and E. Eleftheriou, “Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes for generalized partial response channels,” IEEE Trans. Mag., to be published.
[11] R. J. McEliece, D. J. C. MacKay, and J.-F. Cheng, “Turbo decoding as an instance of Pearl’s ‘belief propagation’ algorithm,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 140–152, Feb. 1998.
[12] P. Robertson, E. Villebrun, and P. Hoeher, “A comparison of optimal and suboptimal MAP decoding algorithms operating in the log domain,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Seattle, WA, 1995, pp. 1009–1013.
[13] T. Nishiya, K. Tsukano, T. Hirai, T. Nara, and S. Mita, “TurboEEPRML: An EEPR4 channel with an error-correcting post-processor designed for 16/17 rate quasi-MTR code,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., Sydney, Australia, 1998, pp. 2868–2873.
[14] W. G. Bliss, “Circuitry for performing error correction calculations on baseband encoded data to eliminate error propagation,” IBM Tech. Disclosure Bulletin, vol. 10, pp. 4633–4634, Mar. 1981.
[15] C. Douillard, M. Jezequel, C. Berrou, A. Picart, P. Didier, and A. Glavieux, “Iterative correction of intersymbol interference: Turbo-equalization,” European Trans. Telecommun., vol. 6, pp. 507–511, Sept./Oct. 1995.
[16] D. J. C. MacKay.. [Online]. Available: http://wol.ra.phy.cam.ac.uk/ mackay/codes/EN/C/.
[17] D. J. C. MacKay, S. T. Wilson, and M. C. Davey, “Comparison of constructions of irregular Gallager codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, pp. 1449–1454, Oct. 1999.

Hongxin Song was born in Jiangsu, China, in 1970. He received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical engineering from Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in 1991 and 1994, respectively. He is working toward the Ph.D. degree at the University of Oklahoma, Norman, in the area of coding for the magnetic recording channel.
Richard M. Todd was born in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, in 1966. He received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Oklahoma, Norman, in 1987 and 1994, respectively. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree at the University of Oklahoma.
His research interests include low-density paritycheck codes, soft decoding, and coding for the magnetic recording channel.
J. R. Cruz (S’75–M’79–SM’85–F’01) received the B.S. degree from the University of Porto, Portugal, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Houston, Houston, TX, in 1974, 1977, and 1980, respectively, all in electrical engineering.
From 1980 to 1981, he was with Computer Sciences Corporation, NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX, and from 1981 to 1982 with Motorola, Inc., as a Project Engineer in the Research Department of the Mobile Products Division, Ft. Worth, TX. In 1982, he joined the University of Oklahoma, Norman, where he is currently Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering, and Director of the Communications Signal Processing Laboratory (CSPLab). His current research interests include applications of signal processing to wireless communications and data storage. Prof. Cruz is a member of Eta Kappa Nu, Sigma Xi, Phi Kappa Phi, and American Association for the Advancement of Science, and a Fellow of the Radio Club of America. He is a former Editor-in-Chief of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, and a member of the Board of Editors for the INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF WIRELESS INFORMATION NETWORKS, and the ACM/BALTZER JOURNAL ON WIRELESS NETWORKS. He is the recipient of the 1995 Outstanding Service Award from the IEEE Vehicular Technology Society, and the IEEE Third Millennium Medal.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

