800
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001
Zigzag Codes and Concatenated Zigzag Codes
Li Ping, Member, IEEE, Xiaoling Huang, and Nam Phamdo, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—This paper introduces a family of error-correcting
codes called zigzag codes. A zigzag code is described by a highly
structured zigzag graph. Due to the structural properties of
the graph, very low-complexity soft-in/soft-out decoding rules
can be implemented. We present a decoding rule, based on the
Max-Log-APP (MLA) formulation, which requires a total of
only 20 addition-equivalent operations per information bit, per
iteration. Simulation of a rate-1 2 concatenated zigzag code with
four constituent encoders with interleaver length 65 536, yields a
bit error rate (BER) of 10
5 at 0.9 dB and 1.4 dB away from the
Shannon limit by optimal (APP) and low-cost suboptimal (MLA)
decoders, respectively. A union bound analysis of the bit error
probability of the zigzag code is presented. It is shown that the
union bounds for these codes can be generated very efficiently. It is
also illustrated that, for a fixed interleaver size, the concatenated
code has increased code potential as the number of constituent
encoders increases. Finally, the analysis shows that zigzag codes
with four or more constituent encoders have lower error floors
than comparable turbo codes with two constituent encoders.
Index Terms—Low-complexity decoding, parallel-concatenated
codes, turbo codes, zigzag codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
T
URBO codes, [1], [2], have attracted much interest due
to their powerful performance. At a bit error rate (BER)
of
, a 16-state rate-
turbo code with interleaver length
65 536 is 0.5 dB away from the Shannon limit for a binary-
input additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel [1], [2].
However, the turbo decoder based on the a posteriori proba-
bility (APP) algorithm [3] is highly complex. To achieve the
aforementioned performance, the required decoder complexity
is about 192 floating-point operations per information bit, per
iteration (FLOP/IB/Iter).1
Alternative low-complexity concatenated codes based on
single-parity-check (SPC) codes have been explored [4]. Near-
Manuscript received December 15, 1999. The material in this paper was
presented in part at the IEEE Information Theory and Networking Workshop,
Metsovo, Greece, June/July 1999.
L. Ping is with the Department of Electronic Engineering, City University of
Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong (e-mail: eeliping@cityu.edu.hk).
X. Huang is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
State University of New York at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, NY 11794-2350
USA (e-mail: xhuang@ece.sunysb.edu).
N. Phamdo was with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
State University of New York at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, NY 11794-2350.
He is now with the Applied Physics Laboratory, The Johns Hopkins University,
Laurel, MD 20723 USA (e-mail: nam.phamdo@jhuapl.edu).
Communicated by R. J. McEliece, Guest Editor.
Publisher Item Identifier S 0018-9448(01)00716-7.
1A FLOP involves a multiplication and an addition. The complexity is esti-
mated as follows: (16 states)  (two branches entering and leaving each state)
 (once going forward + once going backward)  (two constituent encoders)
 (1=2 FLOP for  + 1 FLOP for ) see [1], [2]. Approximately 20 iterations
are needed to achieve the best performance. This is true for all decoding rules
discussed in this paper.
capacity performance has been reported for such codes at high
rates [4]. Due to the simple structure of the SPC codes, the
related decoding cost is very low. For example, the suboptimal
Max-Log-APP (MLA) algorithm in [4] requires only 16
addition-equivalent operations (AEOs)2 per information bit,
per iteration (AEO/IB/Iter) for a code with four constituent
encoders. Concatenated SPC codes, however, perform well
only at high rates [4]. They also have relatively high error
floors.
In this paper, we present a class of codes called zigzag
codes and their concatenation schemes. The performance
of the concatenated zigzag codes are close to the standard
turbo codes (with only about 0.3-dB difference). However,
the decoding complexity of the concatenated zigzag codes is
considerably lower. For instance, the MLA algorithm costs
only 20 AEO/IB/Iter for rate-
concatenated zigzag codes
with four constituent encoders. (As a comparison, according
to [5], the MLA decoding of an
-state turbo code with
two constituent encoders costs about
AEO/IB/Iter.) The
proposed codes work well for medium to high rates (rates of
and higher). They also have very low error floors, which
appear to be lower than turbo codes.
II. DESCRIPTION OF THE CODE
Adopting the framework of [6], a zigzag code can be
described graphically as shown in Fig. 1. Here, white
nodes represent information bits:
. Black nodes represent parity bits:
. We call
a segment. The parity bits are chosen such that each segment
on the graph contains an even number of ones. The code is sys-
tematic with coding rate
. The encoding process is
straightforward. The parity bits are formed progressively as fol-
lows:
(1)
Note that the zigzag code is completely parameterized by the
pair
. The error-correcting capability of the zigzag code
itself is weak since it has minimum distance
for any
2An AEO (addition-equivalent operation) is either an addition, a subtraction,
or a comparison.
0018–9448/01$10.00 © 2001 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:52:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
PING et al.: ZIGZAG CODES AND CONCATENATED ZIGZAG CODES
801
Fig. 1.
Graph representation of zigzag code; white nodes represent
information bits; black nodes represent parity bits; each segment has even
parity; J = 3.
pair
. However, as we will later see, it is very useful in a
concatenated construction.
III. RELATION WITH OTHER CODES
There are several other ways of looking at the zigzag code, as
listed below.
A. Modified SPC Code
One can consider the zigzag code as a modified form of the
parallel SPC code array used in [4]. In the parallel SPC code,
one parity-check bit is added to every row of data
(2)
The zigzag check bits
could be obtained from the SPC
check bits
as follows:
(3)
B. Two-State Convolutional Code
One can also consider the zigzag code as a two-state rate-
systematic convolutional code with generator polynomial ma-
trix
. The parity sequence is punctured
so that only one parity bit is transmitted for every
information
bits—thus, reducing the rate to
. The trellis-based APP
and MLA decoders of the convolutional code, however, is much
less efficient than the alternative algorithms based on the zigzag
representation.
C. Low-Density Parity-Check Code
It is obvious that for small values of
, the zigzag code has a
very sparse parity-check matrix. Therefore, the zigzag code can
be regarded as a special case of the low-density parity-check
(LDPC) code considered in [7]. Actually, it is a graphical form
of semirandom LDPC codes [8]. Due to its regular structure,
we can develop exact formulas for the APP and MLA decoders
for the zigzag code. Furthermore, the encoding process and the
analysis of zigzag code are much simpler than LDPC code.
IV. EFFICIENT SOFT-IN/SOFT-OUT DECODING OF
ZIGZAG CODES
The zigzag code falls into the general code family with tree
structures [6]. The two-way schedule described in [6] can be ap-
plied to develop its APP decoding algorithm. For the constituent
SPC code, the local decoding can be accomplished based on
the parity probability ratio (ppr) function studied in [9]. The re-
sultant global APP decoder of the zigzag code requires about
multiplications and three additions per information
bit. We will derive a very efficient MLA decoding algorithm
below. Its performance is slightly worse (about 0.5 dB) than the
APP decoder, but its cost is only
AEO/IB.
Let
be an
array of information bits and
let
be the
parity vector. Let
be the
-modulated codeword (“zero”
, “one”
) and
be the noisy received vector. Let
(4)
and assume that the implementation of the MLA decoding al-
gorithm is as follows [4], [5], [10]–[13].
1) Calculate the forward MLA of the parity bits
(5)
2) Calculate the backward MLA of the parity bits
(6)
3) Determine the MLA of the information bits as follows:
(7)
Consider one segment of the code and ignore the operations
for taking the absolute value and negation. The evaluation of (5)
requires
comparisons and one addition. The result of (5) can
be used for evaluating (6) with one comparison and one addition.
The evaluation of
in (7) is performed once for the whole
segment. We first find the elements among
with the minimum and the second minimum amplitudes. This
costs
comparisons [Notice that the minimum element can
be found with only one extra comparison based on the result
of (6) and the second minimum requires
comparisons]. The
output of
in (7) is either the minimum or the second min-
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:52:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
802
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001
Fig. 2.
Performance of concatenated zigzag codes with APP and MLA
decoding; for rate-1=2, (I; J; K) = (16 384; 4; 4), and the Shannon limit
is 0.2 dB; for rate-4=5, (I; J; K) = (4096; 16; 4) and the Shannon limit is
2.1 dB.
imum values obtained above with the appropriate sign (see [4,
eq. (6)]). Finally, (7) requires
additions per segment. Since
there are
information bits per segment, the overall complexity
of the MLA decoder is
AEO/IB.
V. CONCATENATED ZIGZAG CODES
A concatenated zigzag code is described by a triplet
. Let
be an interleaved version of the
data matrix
,
(the number of constituent
encoders). For each
, we form an
parity column vector
according to (1). The transmitted codeword consists of
and the overall code rate is
,
i.e.,
. For each constituent code, we use
the soft-in/soft-out MLA algorithm described in the previous
section. The overall decoding structure of the concatenated
zigzag code is exactly the same as in [4].
For concatenated codes, we need one additional AEO/IB/Iter
to process the extrinsic information before the MLA decoding
of each constituent encoder [4]. Therefore, the decoding cost
for a concatenated zigzag code with
constituent encoders is
AEO/IB/Iter, e.g., with
, the decoding
cost is 20 AEO/IB/Iter.
VI. SIMULATION PERFORMANCE
In Fig. 2, we present simulation results of the rate-
and rate-
concatenated zigzag codes. The interleaver
length (i.e., the number of information bits involved) is 65 536
in both cases. For each point on the performance curves, we
simulate a minimum of 100 bit errors. The results presented are
for 20 iterations. Note that MLA decoding is inferior to APP
decoding by approximately 0.5 dB.
Fig. 3.
(a) Performance of concatenated zigzag code with (I; J; K)
=
(100; 4; 4). (b) (I; J; K) = (256; 4; 4). MLA with 1, 2, 3, 5, 10, and 20
iterations (?); zigzag union bound (solid lines); APP with 20 iterations ();
turbo code (23; 37) with APP and 18 iterations (4); SPC MLA 20 iterations
(}); SPC union bound (dotted line).
In Fig.
3(a)
and
(b), we
present
simulation
results
of
the
rate-
codes
with
interleaver
length
of
400
and interleaver length of 1024
, respectively. We also plot in these
figures the performance with fewer (than 20) iterations and the
union bound of the code assuming a random uniform interleaver
and maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding. The derivation of the
union bound is based on [14] and is described in the following
section. Also presented in this figure is the performances of the
16-state turbo code with two constituent encoders in octal form
with 18 iterations of APP decoding [15]. No attempt
has been made to optimize the interleavers. One can see clearly
from Fig. 3(a) and (b) that for low
, the performances
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:52:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
PING et al.: ZIGZAG CODES AND CONCATENATED ZIGZAG CODES
803
of the concatenated zigzag codes are slightly (
0.3 dB) worse
than those of the turbo code.
Finally, comparing the performance of the concatenated
zigzag code with the concatenated SPC code [with component
codes defined in (2)] [4], we see that the zigzag code has a
much better performance.
VII. BER BOUNDS
The simulation results presented in the previous section
are valid for low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) in the range of
4 dB and below. For higher SNR, a union bound
analysis is used to obtain performance results. In the following,
we use
to represent the constituent code and
to represent
the concatenated code with
constituent encoders.
A. General Parallel-Concatenated Codes
The following is an outline of the procedure developed in [14]
for finding the BER union bound of a general parallel-concate-
nated code. Let
(8)
be the input-redundancy weight enumerating function (IRWEF)
for an
linear systematic block code
, where
is
the number of codewords with input weight
, parity weight ,
and codeword weight
. Numerically, the coefficients of
can be represented by a matrix of size
, with row and column indexes corresponding to
and , respectively.
The conditional weight enumerating function (CWEF) [14]
for
is defined as
(9)
Numerically, the coefficients of
form the
th row of
the matrix for
. Based on the uniform interleaver as-
sumption of [14], the CWEF of
can be found from that of
as
(10)
where
is the interleaver size. Using the coefficients of
as the
th row, we can find
for the
concatenated code
. Finally, the union bound on BER for
is given by [14]
(11)
where
is the code rate and
is the bit SNR.
(Note that
is the conditional BER given that a
-type
decoding error has occurred.) In (11), we have assumed binary-
phase shift keying (BPSK) modulation, an AWGN channel, and
soft-decision ML decoding.
The key issue for the method outlined above is to derive the
IRWEF for the constituent code
. This can be a complicated
issue for a general code (e.g., a general convolutional code).
However, we will show in the following that, due to the simple
code structures of the SPC arrays and zigzag codes, their IRWEF
can be generated by some very simple formulas.
B. Parallel-Concatenated Zigzag Codes
In the following, we will develop a recursive method for gen-
erating the IRWEF of a zigzag code. Let
be the
IRWEF of a zigzag code with
rows and
columns. We can
decompose
into even and odd parts as
(12)
where
(resp.
) includes all the terms
with even (resp., odd) powers of
. Clearly, for
(13)
(14)
Suppose that
is known and consider an extra th row. Notice that from (1)
(15)
Thus,
actually indicates the parity of the total input weight
from row
to row . Let
be the parity of
.
corresponds to two situations:
and
are
both even or they are both odd. In either case,
is zero. This
leads to
(16)
Similarly,
corresponds to the situation where
is odd and
is even, or vice versa. In either case,
is one. This leads to
(17)
Finally, the IRWEF,
, of the parallel-concatenated
zigzag code can be obtained by applying the one-dimensional
convolution
times to each row of
and then
dividing by
, just as in(10).
C. Some Numerical Issues
In computing the union bound, we may encounter two numer-
ical problems when the interleaver size
is large. The first
is that the values of
may be extremely large (well be-
yond the limit of IEEE floating-point numbers, which is
[16]). The second problem is that the number of terms in
the double sum in (11) is very large—resulting in a significant
amount of computation. The first problem is solved by repre-
senting each value of
by a floating-point number (man-
tissa) and a 16-bit integer (exponent). Special C subroutines
are written for multiplication/division and addition/subtraction.
The second problem is solved by approximating the double sum
in (11) by a smaller sum, which includes only those values of
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:52:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
804
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001
Fig. 4.
Effects of D
on the union bound of parallel-concatenated zigzag codes. (I; J; K) = (256; 16; 4), (n; k) = (5120; 4096), and rate = 4=5.
for which
. Note that with this ap-
proach, the whole matrix
need not be calculated.
This approach is similar to that in [14], and is based on the ob-
servation that the upper bound is dominated by the codewords
with low and moderate Hamming weights. To obtain an accurate
analysis, the value of
must be sufficiently large. Fig. 4 re-
ports the effects of
on the bound of parallel-concatenated
zigzag code with
. The figure illus-
trates that setting
will yield sufficiently accurate
results. In the following, we report some analytical results on
parallel-concatenated SPC arrays and zigzag codes according
to this approximation. In all cases, we choose
.
VIII. ANALYTICAL RESULTS
Fig. 5 presents the analytical union bounds of parallel-con-
catenated zigzag codes (with four constituent encoders) with a
fixed rate of
and different interleaver sizes (
and
). For comparison purposes, we include the union
bounds of comparable concatenated SPC codes [4]. The latter
is similar to the concatenated zigzag codes except that the
parity bits are generated based on (2) instead of (1). Note that
for the concatenated SPC codes, increasing the interleaver size
does not improve the performance much in the medium
range. The reason for this is explained below [17].
There are two terms in (11) which dominate the performance
of parallel-concatenated SPC array.
• The first term,
, corresponds to codewords with input
weight one and parity weight
(
each
has Hamming weight one). There are
such codewords,
so
.
• The second term,
, corresponds to the situation where
the input weight is two, and furthermore the only two
’s appear in the same segment in every constituent code
(hence
are all zeros). It can be shown that
We observed that these two terms dominate the performance of
a concatenated SPC array and their relative effects are different
in different
ranges. For medium
, the first term
dominates since typically (for sufficiently large
)
is
much larger than
. In this case, the BER performance can
be approximated by
(18)
This approximation, shown by the dashed line in Fig. 6 for
, is quite accurate for
from 4
to 10 dB. Notice that (18) is independent of the interleaver size
. Hence increasing the interleaver size beyond
will not
improve the performance of a concatenated SPC array in this
range.
At very high
, the effect of the second term takes over
since it has lower weight. In this case, the BER performance can
be approximated by
(19)
The above approximation is shown by the dotted line in Fig. 6
for
. Increasing interleaver length can
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:52:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
PING et al.: ZIGZAG CODES AND CONCATENATED ZIGZAG CODES
805
Fig. 5.
Upper bounds to the BER of parallel-concatenated SPC and zigzag codes with different interleaver size. Fixed number of constituent encoders K = 4
and rate = 1=2. D
= 500.
Fig. 6.
Union bounds, approximations of the union bounds, and MLA simulation results of concatenated SPC and zigzag codes. (I; J; K) = (256; 4; 4),
(n; k) = (2048; 1024), rate = 1=2, and D
= 500.
normally improve the performance in this range, since the larger
, the smaller
(assuming that
and
are fixed and
is
increased).
Notice that (18) does not apply to the concatenated zigzag
code. In fact, for the latter case, a weight-
input sequence
results in a parity vector of the form
.
The nonzero section starts from the segment containing the
only nonzero input bit. This implies that for weight-
input
sequences, the codeword weight increases with high probability
as the interleaver size increases. Consequently, the performance
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:52:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
806
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001
Fig. 7.
Upper bounds to the bit error probability of parallel-concatenated zigzag codes with different number of constituent encoders K and (37; 21) and (23; 37)
turbo codes. (n; k) = (2400; 1200), rate = 1=2, and D
= 500.
of concatenated zigzag code is only dominated by (19). This
results in much better performance for the zigzag-code-based
schemes in medium
range, as seen in Fig. 6. At very
high
, the performances of the concatenated SPC array
and zigzag code converge since they are both dominated by
(19).
Fig. 7 compares the BER upper bounds for parallel-con-
catenated zigzag codes with different
, fixed interleaver size
, and fixed code rate
. This figure illustrates
that as the number of constituent encoders
increases, the
code potential increases, assuming optimal (ML) sequence
decoding. This phenomenon can be attributed to the constant
in (10) which grows exponentially in
. Similar
results were found for other interleaver sizes and code rates.
This finding suggests that to achieve a low BER with a small
interleaver (hence low latency), a code with a large number of
constituent encoders can be used. However, it is worthwhile
to mention that the suboptimality of the iterative decoding
algorithms described in [1], [2], [4], and in Section IV becomes
more enhanced as
increases. Furthermore, the decoding cost
increases approximately linearly with
(see Section V). From
our simulation experiments,
seems to be a good choice
for rate-
codes.
In Fig. 7, we also show the union bound of the
[1],
[2] and
[15] turbo codes with the same interleaver
length (1200 bits). All the codes shown are not terminated. The
rate-
turbo code is achieved by puncturing all the parity
bits with odd indexes (the last parity bit is not punctured). This
figure illustrates that the concatenated zigzag codes with four
or more constituent encoders can achieve lower error floor
than turbo codes (with two constituent encoders) for the range
of median
. It is noted that the union bound analysis
yields an accurate assessment of the code performance only at
reasonably high
. For very low
, the simulation
results in Section VI show that the
turbo code is better
than the zigzag code with four constituent encoders by 0.2–0.3
dB at
BER.
IX. CONCLUSION
We present a class of graphical codes called zigzag codes.
The structural properties of these codes result in a very low-cost
iterative decoding. The performances of the zigzag codes are
within 1.0–1.5 dB of the Shannon limit. These codes perform
well for medium to high rates. Finally, the error floors of the
concatenated zigzag codes with multiple constituent encoders
are lower than that of turbo codes.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit
error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo codes,” in Proc. 1993 IEEE
Int. Conf. Communications, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[2] C. Berrou and A. Glavieux, “Near optimum error correcting coding and
decoding: Turbo codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 44, pp. 1261–1271,
Oct. 1996.
[3] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear
codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory,
vol. IT-20, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[4] L. Ping, S. Chan, and K. L. Yeung, “Iterative decoding of multi-dimen-
sional concatenated single parity check codes,” in Proc. 1998 IEEE Int.
Conf. Communications, June 1998, pp. 131–135.
[5] P. Robertson, E. Villebrun, and P. Hoeher, “A comparison of optimal and
sub-optimal MAP decoding algorithms operating in the log domain,” in
Proc. 1995 IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, June 1995, pp. 1009–1013.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:52:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
PING et al.: ZIGZAG CODES AND CONCATENATED ZIGZAG CODES
807
[6] F. R. Kschischang and B. J. Frey, “Iterative decoding of compound codes
by probability propagation in graphical models,” IEEE J. Select. Areas
Commun., vol. 16, pp. 219–230, Feb. 1998.
[7] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform.
Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[8] L. Ping, W. K. Leung, and N. Phamdo, “Low density parity check codes
with semi-random parity check matrix,” IEE Electron. Lett., vol. 35, no.
1, pp. 38–39, Jan. 1999.
[9] L. Ping, “Modified turbo codes with low decoding complexity,” IEE
Electron. Lett., vol. 34, no. 23, pp. 2228–2229, Nov. 1998.
[10] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H. A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and
the sum-product algorithm,” , vol. 47, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[11] L. Ping and N. Phamdo, “Zigzag codes and concatenated zigzag codes,”
in Proc. IEEE Information Theory and Networking Workshop, Metsovo,
Greece, June/July 1999.
[12] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of binary
block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42,
pp. 429–445, Mar. 1996.
[13] X. Huang, “Turbo codes and zigzag codes: Performance analysis and
simulation,” Ph.D. dissertation, State Univ. New York at Stony Brook,
Stony Brook, NY, Dec. 2000.
[14] S. Benedetto and G. Montorsi, “Unveiling turbo codes: Some results
on parallel concatenated coding schemes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory,
vol. 42, pp. 409–428, Mar. 1996.
[15] S. Benedetto, R. Garello, and G. Montorsi, “A search for good convolu-
tional codes to be used in the construction of turbo codes,” IEEE Trans.
Commun., vol. 46, pp. 1101–1105, Sept. 1998.
[16] W. H. Press, S. A. Teukolsky, W. T. Vetterling, and B. P. Flannery,
Numerical Recipes in C: The Art of Scientific Computing, 2nd
ed.
Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1992.
[17] X. Huang, N. Phamdo, and L. Ping, “BER bounds on parallel concate-
nated single parity check arrays and zigzag codes,” in Proc. 1999 IEEE
GLOBECOM, Brazil, Dec. 1999, pp. 2436–2440.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:52:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
