498

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Factor Graphs and the Sum-Product Algorithm
Frank R. Kschischang, Senior Member, IEEE, Brendan J. Frey, Member, IEEE, and Hans-Andrea Loeliger, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Algorithms that must deal with complicated global functions of many variables often exploit the manner in which the given functions factor as a product of “local” functions, each of which depends on a subset of the variables. Such a factorization can be visualized with a bipartite graph that we call a factor graph. In this tutorial paper, we present a generic message-passing algorithm, the sum-product algorithm, that operates in a factor graph. Following a single, simple computational rule, the sum-product algorithm computes—either exactly or approximately—various marginal functions derived from the global function. A wide variety of algorithms developed in artificial intelligence, signal processing, and digital communications can be derived as specific instances of the sum-product algorithm, including the forward/backward algorithm, the Viterbi algorithm, the iterative “turbo” decoding algorithm, Pearl’s belief propagation algorithm for Bayesian networks, the Kalman filter, and certain fast Fourier transform (FFT) algorithms.
Index Terms—Belief propagation, factor graphs, fast Fourier transform, forward/backward algorithm, graphical models, iterative decoding, Kalman filtering, marginalization, sum-product algorithm, Tanner graphs, Viterbi algorithm.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HIS paper provides a tutorial introduction to factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm, a simple way to understand a large number of seemingly different algorithms that have been developed in computer science and engineering. We consider algorithms that deal with complicated “global” functions of many variables and that derive their computational efficiency by exploiting the way in which the global function factors into a product of simpler “local” functions, each of which depends on a subset of the variables. Such a factorization can be visualized using a factor graph, a bipartite graph that expresses which variables are arguments of which local functions.
Manuscript received August 3, 1998; revised October 17, 2000. The work of F. R. Kschischang was supported in part, while on leave at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, by the Office of Naval Research under Grant N00014-96-1-0930, and by the Army Research Laboratory under Cooperative Agreement DAAL01-96-2-0002. The work of B. J. Frey was supported, while a Beckman Fellow at the Beckman Institute of Advanced Science and Technology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, by a grant from the Arnold and Mabel Beckman Foundation. The material in this paper was presented in part at the 35th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, September 1997.
F. R. Kschischang is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3G4, Canada (e-mail: frank@comm.utoronto.ca).
B. J. Frey is with the Faculty of Computer Science, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1, Canada, and the Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801-2307 USA (e-mail: frey@.uwaterloo.ca).
H.-A. Loeliger is with the Signal Processing Lab (ISI), ETH Zentrum, CH-8092 Zürich, Switzerland (e-mail: loeliger@isi.ee.ethz.ch).
Communicated by T. E. Fuja, Associate Editor At Large. Publisher Item Identifier S 0018-9448(01)00721-0.

The aim of this tutorial paper is to introduce factor graphs and to describe a generic message-passing algorithm, called the sum-product algorithm, which operates in a factor graph and attempts to compute various marginal functions associated with the global function. The basic ideas are very simple; yet, as we will show, a surprisingly wide variety of algorithms developed in the artificial intelligence, signal processing, and digital communications communities may be derived as specific instances of the sum-product algorithm, operating in an appropriately chosen factor graph.
Genealogically, factor graphs are a straightforward generalization of the “Tanner graphs” of Wiberg et al. [31], [32]. Tanner [29] introduced bipartite graphs to describe families of codes which are generalizations of the low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes of Gallager [11], and also described the sum-product algorithm in this setting. In Tanner’s original formulation, all variables are codeword symbols and hence “visible”; Wiberg et al., introduced “hidden” (latent) state variables and also suggested applications beyond coding. Factor graphs take these graph-theoretic models one step further, by applying them to functions. From the factor-graph perspective (as we will describe in Section III-A), a Tanner graph for a code represents a particular factorization of the characteristic (indicator) function of the code.
While it may seem intuitively reasonable that some algorithms should exploit the manner in which a global function factors into a product of local functions, the fundamental insight that many well-known algorithms essentially solve the “MPF” (marginalize product-of-functions) problem, each in their own particular setting, was first made explicit in the work of Aji and McEliece [1]. In a landmark paper [2], Aji and McEliece develop a “generalized distributive law” (GDL) that in some cases solves the MPF problem using a “junction tree” representation of the global function. Factor graphs may be viewed as an alternative approach with closer ties to Tanner graphs and previously developed graphical representations for codes. Essentially, every result developed in the junction tree/GDL setting may be translated into an equivalent result in the factor graph/sum-product algorithm setting, and vice versa. We prefer the latter setting not only because it is better connected with previous approaches, but also because we feel that factor graphs are in some ways easier to describe, giving them a modest pedagogical advantage. Moreover, the sum-product algorithm can often be applied successfully in situations where exact solutions to the MPF problem (as provided by junction trees) become computationally intractable, the most prominent example being the iterative decoding of turbo codes and LDPC codes. In Section VI we do, however, discuss strategies for achieving exact solutions to the MPF problem in factor graphs.

0018–9448/01$10.00 © 2001 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KSCHISCHANG et al.: FACTOR GRAPHS AND THE SUM-PRODUCT ALGORITHM

499

There are also close connections between factor graphs and graphical representations (graphical models) for multidimensional probability distributions such as Markov random fields [16], [18], [26] and Bayesian (belief) networks [25], [17]. Like factor graphs, these graphical models encode in their structure a particular factorization of the joint probability mass function of several random variables. Pearl’s powerful “belief propagation” algorithm [25], which operates by “message-passing” in a Bayesian network, translates immediately into an instance of the sum-product algorithm operating in a factor graph that expresses the same factorization. Bayesian networks and belief propagation have been used previously to explain the iterative decoding of turbo codes and LDPC codes [9], [10], [19], [21], [22], [24], the most powerful practically decodable codes known. Note, however, that Wiberg [31] had earlier described these decoding algorithms as instances of the sum-product algorithm; see also [7].
We begin the paper in Section II with a small worked example that illustrates the operation of the sum-product algorithm in a simple factor graph. We will see that when a factor graph is cycle-free, then the structure of the factor graph not only encodes the way in which a given function factors, but also encodes expressions for computing the various marginal functions associated with the given function. These expressions lead directly to the sum-product algorithm.
In Section III, we show how factor graphs may be used as a system and signal-modeling tool. We see that factor graphs are compatible both with “behavioral” and “probabilistic” modeling styles. Connections between factor graphs and other graphical models are described briefly in Appendix B, where we recover Pearl’s belief propagation algorithm as an instance of the sumproduct algorithm.
In Section IV, we apply the sum-product algorithm to trellis-structured (hidden Markov) models, and obtain the forward/backward algorithm, the Viterbi algorithm, and the Kalman filter as instances of the sum-product algorithm. In Section V, we consider factor graphs with cycles, and obtain the iterative algorithms used to decode turbo-like codes as instances of the sum-product algorithm.
In Section VI, we describe several generic transformations by which a factor graph with cycles may sometimes be converted—often at great expense in complexity—to an equivalent cycle-free form. We apply these ideas to the factor graph representing the discrete Fourier transform (DFT) kernel, and derive a fast Fourier transform (FFT) algorithm as an instance of the sum-product algorithm.
Some concluding remarks are given in Section VII.

II. MARGINAL FUNCTIONS, FACTOR GRAPHS, AND THE SUM-PRODUCT ALGORITHM

Throughout this paper we deal with functions of many vari-

ables. Let ,

be a collection of variables, in which,

for each , takes on values in some (usually finite) domain

(or alphabet) . Let

be an -valued function

of these variables, i.e., a function with domain

and codomain . The domain of is called the configuration

space for the given collection of variables, and each element of

is a particular configuration of the variables, i.e., an assign-

ment of a value to each variable. The codomain of may in

general be any semiring [2], [31, Sec. 3.6]; however, at least ini-

tially, we will lose nothing essential by assuming that is the

set of real numbers.

Assuming that summation in is well defined, then associ-

ated with every function

are marginal func-

tions

. For each

, the value of

is obtained by

summing the value of

over all configurations of

the variables that have

.

This type of sum is so central to this paper that we introduce

a nonstandard notation to handle it: the “not-sum” or summary.

Instead of indicating the variables being summed over, we indi-

cate those variables not being summed over. For example, if is

a function of three variables , , and , then the “summary

for ” is denoted by

In this notation we have

i.e., the th marginal function associated with

is

the summary for of .

We are interested in developing efficient procedures for com-

puting marginal functions that a) exploit the way in which the

global function factors, using the distributive law to simplify the

summations, and b) reuses intermediate values (partial sums).

As we will see, such procedures can be expressed very natu-

rally by use of a factor graph.

Suppose that

factors into a product of several

local functions, each having some subset of

as

arguments; i.e., suppose that

(1)

where is a discrete index set, is a subset of

and

is a function having the elements of

ments.

, as argu-

Definition: A factor graph is a bipartite graph that expresses the structure of the factorization (1). A factor graph has a variable node for each variable , a factor node for each local function , and an edge-connecting variable node to factor node
if and only if is an argument of .

A factor graph is thus a standard bipartite graphical representation of a mathematical relation—in this case, the “is an argument of” relation between variables and local functions.

Example 1 (A Simple Factor Graph): Let be a function of five variables, and suppose that can
be expressed as a product

(2)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

500

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Fig. 2. An expression tree representing x(y + z).

Fig. 1. A factor graph for the product f (x )f (x )f (x ; x ; x ) 1 f (x ; x )f (x ; x ).

of five factors, so that

,

,

,

,

, and

. The factor graph that corresponds to (2) is shown in

Fig. 1.

A. Expression Trees

In many situations (for example, when

rep-

resents a joint probability mass function), we are interested in

computing the marginal functions

. We can obtain an ex-

pression for each marginal function by using (2) and exploiting

the distributive law.

To illustrate, we write

from Example 1 as

or, in summary notation

(3) Similarly, we find that

(4)

In computer science, arithmetic expressions like the

right-hand sides of (3) and (4) are often represented by or-

dered rooted trees [28, Sec. 8.3], here called expression trees,

in which internal vertices (i.e., vertices with descendants)

represent arithmetic operators (e.g., addition, multiplication,

negation, etc.) and leaf vertices (i.e., vertices without descen-

dants) represent variables or constants. For example, the tree of

Fig. 2 represents the expression

. When the operators

in an expression tree are restricted to those that are completely

symmetric in their operands (e.g., multiplication and addition),

it is unnecessary to order the vertices to avoid ambiguity in

interpreting the expression represented by the tree.

In this paper, we extend expression trees so that the leaf ver-

tices represent functions, not just variables or constants. Sums

and products in such expression trees combine their operands in

the usual (pointwise) manner in which functions are added and

multiplied. For example, Fig. 3(a) unambiguously represents the

expression on the right-hand side of (3), and Fig. 4(a) unambigu-

ously represents the expression on the right-hand side of (4). The

operators shown in these figures are the function product and the

summary, having various local functions as their arguments.

Also shown in Figs. 3(b) and 4(b), are redrawings of the factor

graph of Fig. 1 as a rooted tree with and as root vertex,

respectively. This is possible because the global function de-

fined in (2) was deliberately chosen so that the corresponding

factor graph is a tree. Comparing the factor graphs with the cor-

responding trees representing the expression for the marginal

function, it is easy to note their correspondence. This observa-

tion is simple, but key: when a factor graph is cycle-free, the

factor graph not only encodes in its structure the factorization

of the global function, but also encodes arithmetic expressions

by which the marginal functions associated with the global func-

tion may be computed.

Formally, as we show in Appendix A, to convert a cycle-free

factor graph representing a function

to the cor-

responding expression tree for

, draw the factor graph as

a rooted tree with as root. Every node in the factor graph

then has a clearly defined parent node, namely, the neighboring

node through which the unique path from to must pass. Re-

place each variable node in the factor graph with a product op-

erator. Replace each factor node in the factor graph with a “form

product and multiply by ” operator, and between a factor node

and its parent , insert a

summary operator. These

local transformations are illustrated in Fig. 5(a) for a variable

node, and in Fig. 5(b) for a factor node with parent . Trivial

products (those with one or no operand) act as identity opera-

tors, or may be omitted if they are leaf nodes in the expression

tree. A summary operator

applied to a function with a

single argument is also a trivial operation, and may be omitted.

Applying this transformation to the tree of Fig. 3(b) yields the

expression tree of Fig. 3(a), and similarly for Fig. 4. Trivial op-

erations are indicated with dashed lines in these figures.

B. Computing a Single Marginal Function
Every expression tree represents an algorithm for computing the corresponding expression. One might describe the algorithm as a recursive “top-down” procedure that starts at the root vertex and evaluates each subtree descending from the root, combining the results as dictated by the operator at the root. Equivalently, we prefer to describe the algorithm as a “bottom-up” procedure that begins at the leaves of the tree, with each operator vertex

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KSCHISCHANG et al.: FACTOR GRAPHS AND THE SUM-PRODUCT ALGORITHM

501

Fig. 3. (a) A tree representation for the right-hand side of (3). (b) The factor graph of Fig. 1, redrawn as a rooted tree with x as root.

Fig. 4. (a) A tree representation for the right-hand side of (4). (b) The factor graph of Fig. 1, redrawn as a rooted tree with x as root.

combining its operands and passing on the result as an operand

for its parent. For example,

, represented by the ex-

pression tree of Fig. 2, might be evaluated by starting at the leaf

nodes and , evaluating , and passing on the result as an

operand for the operator, which multiplies the result with .

Rather than working with the expression tree, it is simpler

and more direct to describe such marginalization algorithms in

terms of the corresponding factor graph. To best understand

such algorithms, it helps to imagine that there is a processor

associated with each vertex of the factor graph, and that the

factor-graph edges represent channels by which these proces-

sors may communicate. For us, “messages” sent between pro-

cessors are always simply some appropriate description of some

marginal function. (We describe some useful representations in

Section V-E.)

We now describe a message-passing algorithm that we will

temporarily call the “single- sum-product algorithm,” since it

computes, for a single value of , the marginal function in a rooted cycle-free factor graph, with taken as root vertex.
The computation begins at the leaves of the factor graph. Each leaf variable node sends a trivial “identity function” message to its parent, and each leaf factor node sends a description of
to its parent. Each vertex waits for messages from all of its children before computing the message to be sent to its parent. This computation is performed according to the transformation shown in Fig. 5; i.e., a variable node simply sends the product of messages received from its children, while a factor node with parent forms the product of with the messages received from its children, and then operates on the result with a summary operator. By a “product of messages” we mean an appropriate description of the (pointwise) product of the corresponding functions. If the messages are parametrizations of the functions, then the resulting message is the parametrization of the product function, not (necessarily) literally the numerical

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

502

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Fig. 5. Local substitutions that transform a rooted cycle-free factor graph to an expression tree for a marginal function at (a) a variable node and (b) a factor node.

product of the messages. Similarly, the summary operator is ap-

plied to the functions, not necessarily literally to the messages

themselves.

The computation terminates at the root node , where the

marginal function

is obtained as the product of all mes-

sages received at .

It is important to note that a message passed on the edge

, either from variable to factor , or vice versa, is a

single-argument function of , the variable associated with the

given edge. This follows since, at every factor node, summary

operations are always performed for the variable associated with

the edge on which the message is passed. Likewise, at a variable

node, all messages are functions of that variable, and so is any

product of these messages.

The message passed on an edge during the operation of the

single- sum-product algorithm can be interpreted as follows. If

is an edge in the tree, where is a variable node

and is a factor node, then the analysis of Appendix A shows

that the message passed on during the operation of the sum-

product algorithm is simply a summary for of the product of

the local functions descending from the vertex that originates

the message.

Fig. 6. A factor-graph fragment, showing the update rules of the sum-product algorithm.
single- algorithm, once these messages have arrived, is able to compute a message to be sent on the one remaining edge to its neighbor (temporarily regarded as the parent), just as in the single- algorithm, i.e., according to Fig. 5. Let us denote this temporary parent as vertex . After sending a message to
, vertex returns to the idle state, waiting for a “return message” to arrive from . Once this message has arrived, the vertex is able to compute and send messages to each of its neighbors (other than ), each being regarded, in turn, as a parent. The algorithm terminates once two messages have been passed over every edge, one in each direction. At variable node , the product of all incoming messages is the marginal function
, just as in the single- algorithm. Since this algorithm operates by computing various sums and products, we refer to it as the sum-product algorithm.
The sum-product algorithm operates according to the following simple rule:
The message sent from a node on an edge is the product of the local function at (or the unit function if is a variable node) with all messages received at on edges other than , summarized for the variable associated with .

C. Computing All Marginal Functions
In many circumstances, we may be interested in computing for more than one value of . Such a computation might
be accomplished by applying the single- algorithm separately for each desired value of , but this approach is unlikely to be efficient, since many of the subcomputations performed for different values of will be the same. Computation of for all simultaneously can be efficiently accomplished by essentially “overlaying” on a single factor graph all possible instances of the single- algorithm. No particular vertex is taken as a root vertex, so there is no fixed parent/child relationship among neighboring vertices. Instead, each neighbor of any given vertex is at some point regarded as a parent of . The message passed from to is computed just as in the singlealgorithm, i.e., as if were indeed the parent of and all other neighbors of were children.
As in the single- algorithm, message passing is initiated at the leaves. Each vertex remains idle until messages have arrived on all but one of the edges incident on . Just as in the

Let

denote the message sent from node to node

in the operation of the sum-product algorithm, let

denote the message sent from node to node . Also, let

denote the set of neighbors of a given node in a factor graph.

Then, as illustrated in Fig. 6, the message computations per-

formed by the sum-product algorithm may be expressed as fol-

lows:

(5)

(6)

where

is the set of arguments of the function .

The update rule at a variable node takes on the particularly

simple form given by (5) because there is no local function to

include, and the summary for of a product of functions of is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KSCHISCHANG et al.: FACTOR GRAPHS AND THE SUM-PRODUCT ALGORITHM

503

Termination:

Fig. 7. Messages generated in each (circled) step of the sum-product algorithm.

simply that product. On the other hand, the update rule at a local function node given by (6) in general involves nontrivial function multiplications, followed by an application of the summary operator.
We also observe that variable nodes of degree two perform no computation: a message arriving on one (incoming) edge is simply transferred to the other (outgoing) edge.

In the termination step, we compute

as the product of

all messages directed toward . Equivalently, since the message

passed on any given edge is equal to the product of all but one

of these messages, we may compute

as the product of the

two messages that were passed (in opposite directions) over any

single edge incident on . Thus, for example, we may compute

in three other ways as follows:

D. A Detailed Example

Fig. 7 shows the flow of messages that would be generated by the sum-product algorithm applied to the factor graph of Fig. 1. The messages may be generated in five steps, as indicated with circles in Fig. 7. In detail, the messages are generated as follows.
Step 1:
Step 2:
Step 3: Step 4:
Step 5:

III. MODELING SYSTEMS WITH FACTOR GRAPHS

We describe now various ways in which factor graphs may be

used to model systems, i.e., collections of interacting variables.

In probabilistic modeling of systems, a factor graph can be

used to represent the joint probability mass function of the vari-

ables that comprise the system. Factorizations of this function

can give important information about statistical dependencies

among these variables.

Likewise, in “behavioral” modeling of systems—as in the

work of Willems [33]—system behavior is specified in set-the-

oretic terms by specifying which particular configurations of

variables are valid. This approach can be accommodated by a

factor graph that represents the characteristic (i.e., indicator)

function for the given behavior. Factorizations of this charac-

teristic function can give important structural information about

the model.

In some applications, we may even wish to combine these

two modeling styles. For example, in channel coding, we model

both the valid behavior (i.e., the set of codewords) and the a

posteriori joint probability mass function over the variables that

define the codewords given the received output of a channel.

(While it may even be feasible to model complicated channels

with memory [31], in this paper we will model only memoryless

channels.)

In behavioral modeling, “Iverson’s convention” [14, p. 24]

can be useful. If is a predicate (Boolean proposition) in-

volving some set of variables, then is the

-valued

function that indicates the truth of , i.e.

if is true otherwise.

(7)

For example, takes a value of if the condition otherwise.

is the function that is satisfied, and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

504

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

If we let denote the logical conjunction or “AND” operator, then an important property of Iverson’s convention is that

(8)

(assuming

and

). Thus, if can be written

as a logical conjunction of predicates, then can be factored

according to (8), and hence represented by a factor graph.

A. Behavioral Modeling

Let

be a collection of variables with config-

uration space

. By a behavior in ,

we mean any subset of . The elements of are the valid

configurations. Since a system is specified via its behavior ,

this approach is known as behavioral modeling [33].

Behavioral modeling is natural for codes. If the domain of

each variable is some finite alphabet , so that the configuration

space is the -fold Cartesian product

, then a behavior

is called a block code of length over , and the valid

configurations are called codewords.

The characteristic (or set membership indicator) function for

a behavior is defined as

Obviously, specifying is equivalent to specifying . (We

might also give a probabilistic interpretation by noting that

is proportional to a probability mass function that is uniform

over the valid configurations.)

In many important cases, membership of a particular config-

uration in a behavior can be determined by applying a series

of tests (checks), each involving some subset of the variables.

A configuration is deemed valid if and only if it passes all tests;

i.e., the predicate

may be written as a logical

conjunction of a series of “simpler” predicates. Then factors

according to (8) into a product of characteristic functions, each

indicating whether a particular subset of variables is an element

of some “local behavior.”

Example 2 (Tanner Graphs for Linear Codes): The characteristic function for any linear code defined by an paritycheck matrix can be represented by a factor graph having variable nodes and factor nodes. For example, if is the binary linear code with parity-check matrix

(9)

then is the set of all binary -tuples

that satisfy three simultaneous equations expressed in matrix

form as

. (This is a so-called kernel representation,

since the linear code is defined as the kernel of a particular linear

transformation.) Membership in is completely determined by

checking whether each of the three equations is satisfied. There-

fore, using (8) and (9) we have

Fig. 8. A Tanner graph for the binary linear code of Example 2.

where denotes the sum in GF . The corresponding factor

graph is shown in Fig. 8, where we have used a special symbol

for the parity checks (a square with a “ ” sign). Although

strictly speaking the factor graph represents the factorization

of the code’s characteristic function, we will often refer to the

factor graph as representing the code itself. A factor graph

obtained in this way is often called a Tanner graph, after [29].

It should be obvious that a Tanner graph for any

linear

block code may be obtained from a parity-check matrix

for the code. Such a parity-check matrix has columns and

at least

rows. Variable nodes correspond to the columns

of and factor nodes (or checks) to the rows of , with an

edge-connecting factor node to variable node if and only if

. Of course, since there are, in general, many parity-

check matrices that represent a given code, there are, in general,

many Tanner graph representations for the code.

Given a collection of general nonlinear local checks, it may be a computationally intractable problem to determine whether the corresponding behavior is nonempty. For example, the canonical NP-complete problem SAT (Boolean satisfiability) [13] is simply the problem of determining whether or not a collection of Boolean variables satisfies all clauses in a given set. In effect, each clause is a local check.
Often, a description of a system is simplified by introducing hidden (sometimes called auxiliary, latent, or state) variables. Nonhidden variables are called visible. A particular behavior with both auxiliary and visible variables is said to represent a given (visible) behavior if the projection of the elements of
on the visible variables is equal to . Any factor graph for is then considered to be also a factor graph for . Such graphs were introduced by Wiberg et al. [31], [32] and may be called Wiberg-type graphs. In our factor graph diagrams, as in Wiberg, hidden variable nodes are indicated by a double circle.
An important class of models with hidden variables are the trellis representations (see [30] for an excellent survey). A trellis for a block code is an edge-labeled directed graph with distinguished root and goal vertices, essentially defined by the property that each sequence of edge labels encountered in any directed path from the root vertex to the goal vertex is a codeword in , and that each codeword in is represented by at least one such path. Trellises also have the property that all paths from the root to any given vertex should have the same fixed length
, called the depth of the given vertex. The root vertex has depth , and the goal vertex has depth . The set of depth vertices can be viewed as the domain of a state variable . For example,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KSCHISCHANG et al.: FACTOR GRAPHS AND THE SUM-PRODUCT ALGORITHM

505

Fig. 9. (a) A trellis and (b) the corresponding Wiberg-type graph for the code of Fig. 8.

Fig. 9(a) is a trellis for the code of Example 2. Vertices at the

same depth are grouped vertically. The root vertex is leftmost,

the goal vertex is rightmost, and edges are implicitly directed

from left to right.

A trellis divides naturally into sections, where the th trellis

section is the subgraph of the trellis induced by the vertices

at depth

and depth . The set of edge labels in may be

viewed as the domain of a (visible) variable . In effect, each

trellis section defines a “local behavior” that constrains the

possible combinations of , , and .

Globally, a trellis defines a behavior in the configuration

space of the variables

. A configu-

ration of these variables is valid if and only if it satisfies the

local constraints imposed by each of the trellis sections. The

characteristic function for this behavior thus factors naturally

into factors, where the th factor corresponds to the th trellis

section and has , , and as its arguments.

The following example illustrates these concepts in detail for

the code of Example 2.

Example 3 (A Trellis Description): Fig. 9(a) shows a

trellis for the code of Example 2, and Fig. 9(b) shows the

corresponding Wiberg-type graph. In addition to the visible

variable nodes

, there are also hidden (state)

variable nodes

. Each local check, shown as a

generic factor node (black square), corresponds to one section

of the trellis.

In this example, the local behavior corresponding to the

second trellis section from the left in Fig. 9 consists of the fol-

lowing triples

:

(10)

where the domains of the state variables and are taken to

be

and

, respectively, numbered from bottom

to top in Fig. 9(a). Each element of the local behavior corre-

sponds to one trellis edge. The corresponding factor node in

the Wiberg-type graph is the indicator function

.

It is important to note that a factor graph corresponding to a trellis is cycle-free. Since every code has a trellis representa-

Fig. 10. Generic factor graph for a state-space model of a time-invariant or time-varying system.
tion, it follows that every code can be represented by a cycle-free factor graph. Unfortunately, it often turns out that the state-space sizes (the sizes of domains of the state variables) can easily become too large to be practical. For example, trellis representations of turbo codes have enormous state spaces [12]. However, such codes may well have factor graph representations with reasonable complexities, but necessarily with cycles. Indeed, the “cut-set bound” of [31] (see also [8]) strongly motivates the study of graph representations with cycles.
Trellises are basically conventional state-space system models, and the generic factor graph of Fig. 10 can represent any state-space model of a time-invariant or time-varying system. As in Fig. 9, each local check represents a trellis section; i.e., each check is an indicator function for the set of allowed combinations of left (previous) state, input symbol, output symbol, and right (next) state. (Here, we allow a trellis edge to have both an input label and an output label.)
Example 4 (State-Space Models): For example, the classical linear time-invariant state-space model is given by the equations

(11)

where

is the discrete time index,

are the time- input variables,

are the time- output variables,

are

the time- state variables, , , , and are matrices of ap-

propriate dimension, and the equations are over some field .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

506

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Any such system gives rise to the factor graph of Fig. 10. The time- check function

is

In other words, the check function enforces the local behavior defined by (11).

B. Probabilistic Modeling
We turn now to another important class of functions that we will represent by factor graphs: probability distributions. Since conditional and unconditional independence of random variables is expressed in terms of a factorization of their joint probability mass or density function, factor graphs for probability distributions arise in many situations. We begin again with an example from coding theory.

Example 5 (APP Distributions): Consider the standard

coding model in which a codeword

is

selected from a code of length and transmitted over a

memoryless channel with corresponding output sequence

. For each fixed observation , the joint

a posteriori probability (APP) distribution for the com-

ponents of (i.e.,

) is proportional to the function

, where

is the a priori distribution

for the transmitted vectors, and

is the conditional

probability density function for when is transmitted.

Since the observed sequence is fixed for any instance of

“decoding” a graph we may consider to be a function of

only, with the components of regarded as parameters. In other

words, we may write

or

as

, meaning that

the expression to be “decoded” always has the same parametric

form, but that the parameter will in general be different in

different decoding instances.

Assuming that the a priori distribution for the transmitted

vectors is uniform over codewords, we have

,

where

is the characteristic function for and is the

number of codewords in . If the channel is memoryless, then

factors as

Fig. 11. Factor graph for the joint APP distribution of codeword symbols.
For example, if is the binary linear code of Example 2, then we have

whose factor graph is shown in Fig. 11.

Various types of Markov models are widely used in signal processing and communications. The key feature of such models is that they imply a nontrivial factorization of the joint probability mass function of the random variables in question. This factorization may be represented by a factor graph.

Example 6 (Markov Chains, Hidden Markov Models): In

general, let

denote the joint probability mass

function of a collection of random variables. By the chain rule

of conditional probability, we may always express this function

as

For example, if

, then

which has the factor graph representation shown in Fig. 12(b).

In general, since all variables appear as arguments of

, the factor graph of Fig. 12(b) has no ad-

vantage over the trivial factor graph shown in Fig. 12(a). On the

other hand, suppose that random variables

(in

that order) form a Markov chain. We then obtain the nontrivial

factorization

Under these assumptions, we have

(12)

Now the characteristic function

itself may factor into a

product of local characteristic functions, as described in the pre-

vious subsection. Given a factor graph for

, we obtain a

factor graph for (a scaled version of) the APP distribution over

simply by augmenting with factor nodes corresponding to the

different

factors in (12). The th such factor has only

one argument, namely , since is regarded as a parameter.

Thus, the corresponding factor nodes appear as pendant vertices

(“dongles”) in the factor graph.

whose factor graph is shown in Fig. 12(c) for

.

Continuing this Markov chain example, if we cannot observe

each directly, but instead can observe only , the output of a

memoryless channel with as input, then we obtain a so-called

“hidden Markov model.” The joint probability mass or density

function for these random variables then factors as

whose factor graph is shown in Fig. 12(d) for

. Hidden

Markov models are widely used in a variety of applications;

e.g., see [27] for a tutorial emphasizing applications in signal

processing.

Of course, since trellises may be regarded as Markov models

for codes, the strong resemblance between the factor graphs of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KSCHISCHANG et al.: FACTOR GRAPHS AND THE SUM-PRODUCT ALGORITHM

507

Fig. 12. Factor graphs for probability distributions. (a) The trivial factor graph. (b) The chain-rule factorization. (c) A Markov chain. (d) A hidden Markov model.

Fig. 12(c) and (d) and the factor graphs representing trellises (Figs. 9(b) and 10) is not accidental.
In Appendix B we describe very briefly the close relationship between factor graphs and other graphical models for probability distributions: models based on undirected graphs (Markov random fields) and models based on directed acyclic graphs (Bayesian networks).

IV. TRELLIS PROCESSING

Fig. 13. The factor graph in which the forward/backward algorithm operates: the s are state variables, the u are input variables, the x are output variables, and each y is the output of a memoryless channel with input x .

As described in the previous section, an important family of factor graphs contains the chain graphs that represent trellises or Markov models. We now apply the sum-product algorithm to such graphs, and show that a variety of well-known algorithms—the forward/backward algorithm, the Viterbi algorithm, and the Kalman filter—may be viewed as special cases of the sum-product algorithm.

A. The Forward/Backward Algorithm

We start with the forward/backward algorithm, sometimes re-

ferred to in coding theory as the BCJR [4], APP, or “MAP” al-

gorithm. This algorithm is an application of the sum-product

algorithm to the hidden Markov model of Example 6, shown

in Fig. 12(d), or to the trellises of examples Examples 3 and 4

(Figs. 9 and 10) in which certain variables are observed at the

output of a memoryless channel.

The factor graph of Fig. 13 models the most general situ-

ation, which involves a combination of behavioral and prob-

abilistic modeling. We have vectors

,

, and

that represent, re-

spectively, input variables, output variables, and state variables

in a Markov model, where each variable is assumed to take on

values in a finite domain. The behavior is defined by local check

functions

, as described in Examples 3 and

4. To handle situations such as terminated convolutional codes,

we also allow for the input variable to be suppressed in certain

trellis sections, as in the rightmost trellis section of Fig. 13.

This model is a “hidden” Markov model in which we cannot

observe the output symbols directly. As discussed in Example 5,

the a posteriori joint probability mass function for , , and given the observation is proportional to

where is again regarded as a parameter of (not an argument).

The factor graph of Fig. 13 represents this factorization of .

Given , we would like to find the APPs

for each .

These marginal probabilities are proportional to the following

marginal functions associated with :

Since the factor graph of Fig. 13 is cycle-free, these marginal functions may be computed by applying the sum-product algorithm to the factor graph of Fig. 13.
Initialization: As usual in a cycle-free factor graph, the sumproduct algorithm begins at the leaf nodes. Trivial messages are sent by the input variable nodes and the endmost state variable nodes. Each pendant factor node sends a message to the corresponding output variable node. As discussed in Section II, since the output variable nodes have degree two, no computation is performed; instead, incoming messages received on one edge are simply transferred to the other edge and sent to the corresponding trellis check node.
Once the initialization has been performed, the two endmost trellis check nodes and will have received messages on three of their four edges, and so will be in a position to create an output message to send to a neighboring state variable node.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

508

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

The and messages have a well-defined probabilistic inter-

pretation:

is proportional to the conditional probability

mass function for given the “past”

; i.e., for

each state

,

is proportional to the condi-

tional probability that the transmitted sequence passed through

state

given the past. Similarly,

is proportional to

the conditional probability mass function for given the “fu-

ture”

, i.e., the conditional probability that the

transmitted sequence passed through state . The probability

that the transmitted sequence passed through a particular edge

is thus given by

Fig. 14. A detailed view of the messages passed during the operation of the forward/backward algorithm.

Again, since the state variables have degree two, no computation

is performed; at state nodes messages received on one edge are

simply transferred to the other edge.

In the literature on the forward/backward algorithm (e.g.,

[4]), the message

is denoted as , the message

is denoted as , and the message

is denoted as . Additionally, the message

will

be denoted as .

The operation of the sum-product algorithm creates two nat-

ural recursions: one to compute

as a function of

and

and the other to compute

as a function of

and . These two recursions are called the forward

and backward recursions, respectively, according to the direc-

tion of message flow in the trellis. The forward and backward

recursions do not interact, so they could be computed in parallel.

Fig. 14 gives a detailed view of the message flow for a single

trellis section. The local function in this figure represents the

trellis check

.

The Forward/Backward Recursions: Specializing the gen-

eral update equation (6) to this case, we find

Termination: The algorithm terminates with the computa-

tion of the

messages.

Note that if we were interested in the APPs for the state variables or the symbol variables , these could also be computed by the forward/backward algorithm.
B. The Min-Sum and Max-Product Semirings and the Viterbi Algorithm
We might in many cases be interested in determining which valid configuration has largest APP, rather than determining the APPs for the individual symbols. When all codeword are a priori equally likely, this amounts to maximum-likelihood sequence detection (MLSD).
As mentioned in Section II (see also [31], [2]), the codomain of the global function represented by a factor graph may in general be any semiring with two operations “ ” and “ ” that satisfy the distributive law
(14)
In any such semiring, a product of local functions is well defined, as is the notion of summation of values of . It follows that the “not-sum” or summary operation is also well-defined. In fact, our observation that the structure of a cycle-free factor graph encodes expressions (i.e., algorithms) for the computation of marginal functions essentially follows from the distributive law (14), and so applies equally well to the general semiring case. This observation is key to the “generalized distributive law” of [2].
A semiring of particular interest for the MLSD problem is the “max-product” semiring, in which real summation is replaced with the “max” operator. For nonnegative real-valued quantities
, , and , “ ” distributes over “max”

These sums can be viewed as being defined over valid trellis

edges

such that

. For each edge

, we let

,

, and

.

Denoting by

the set of edges incident on a state in the

th trellis section, the and update equations may be rewritten

as

Furthermore, with maximization as a summary operator, the maximum value of a nonnegative real-valued function
is viewed as the “complete summary” of ; i.e.

(13)
The basic operations in the forward and backward recursions are therefore “sums of products.”

For the MLSD problem, we are interested not so much in determining this maximum value, as in finding a valid configuration
that achieves this maximum. In practice, MLSD is most often carried out in the negative log-likelihood domain. Here, the “product” operation becomes a “sum” and the “ ” operation becomes a “ ” operation,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KSCHISCHANG et al.: FACTOR GRAPHS AND THE SUM-PRODUCT ALGORITHM

509

so that we deal with the “min-sum” semiring. For real-valued quantities , , , “ ” distributes over “min”

We extend Iverson’s convention to the general semiring case

by assuming that contains a multiplicative identity and a

null element such that

and

for all

.

When is a predicate, then by we mean the

-valued

function that takes value whenever is true and otherwise.

In the “min-sum” semiring, where the “product” is real addition,

we take

and

. Under this extension of Iverson’s

convention, factor graphs representing codes are not affected by

the choice of semiring.

Consider again the chain graph that represents a trellis, and

suppose that we apply the min-sum algorithm; i.e., the sum-

product algorithm in the min-sum semiring. Products of posi-

tive functions (in the regular factor graph) are converted to sums

of functions (appropriate for the min-sum semiring) by taking

their negative logarithm. Indeed, such functions can be scaled

and shifted (e.g., setting

where

and are constants with

) in any manner that is con-

venient. In this way, for example, we may obtain squared Eu-

clidean distance as a “branch metric” in Gaussian channels, and

Hamming distance as a “branch metric” in discrete symmetric

channels.

Applying the min-sum algorithm in this context yields the

same message flow as in the forward/backward algorithm. As in

the forward/backward algorithm, we may write an update equa-

tion for the various messages. For example, the basic update

equation corresponding to (13) is

(15)

so that the basic operation is a “minimum of sums” instead of a “sum of products.” A similar recursion may be used in the backward direction, and from the results of the two recursions the most likely sequence may be determined. The result is a “bidirectional” Viterbi algorithm.
The conventional Viterbi algorithm operates in the forward direction only; however, since memory of the best path is maintained and some sort of “traceback” is performed in making a decision, even the conventional Viterbi algorithm might be viewed as being bidirectional.

C. Kalman Filtering
In this section, we derive the Kalman filter (see, e.g., [3], [23]) as an instance of the sum-product algorithm operating in the factor graph corresponding to a discrete-time linear dynamical system similar to that given by (11). For simplicity, we focus on the case in which all variables are scalars satisfying

where , , , and are the time- state, output, input,

and noise variables, respectively, and , , , and are

assumed to be known time-varying scalars. Generalization to the

case of vector variables is standard, but will not be pursued here.

We assume that the input and noise are independent white

Gaussian noise sequences with zero mean and unit variance, and

that the state sequence is initialized by setting

. Since

linear combinations of jointly Gaussian random variables are Gaussian, it follows that the and sequences are jointly Gaussian.
We use the notation
to represent Gaussian density functions, where and represent the mean and variance. By completing the square in the exponent, we find that
(16) where
and
Similarly, we find that

(17)

As in Example 5, the Markov structure of this system permits

us to write the conditional joint probability density function of

the state variables

given

as

(18)

where

is a Gaussian density with mean

and variance

, and

is a Gaussian density with

mean

and variance . Again, the observed values of the

output variables are regarded as parameters, not as function ar-

guments.

The conditional density function for given observations up

to time is the marginal function

where we have introduced an obvious generalization of the

“not-sum” notation to integrals. The mean of this conditional

density,

is the minimum mean-

squared-error (MMSE) estimate of given the observed

outputs. This conditional density function can be computed

via the sum-product algorithm, using integration (rather than

summation) as the summary operation.

A portion of the factor graph that describes (18) is shown

in Fig. 15. Also shown in Fig. 15 are messages that are

passed in the operation of the sum-product algorithm.

We denote by

the message passed to from

. Up to scale, this message is always of the form

, and so may be represented by the

pair

. We interpret

as the MMSE

prediction of given the set of observations up to time .

According to the product rule, applying (16), we have

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

510

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Fig. 15. A portion of the factor graph corresponding to (18).
where

or LDPC codes—arise precisely in situations in which the underlying factor graph does have cycles. Extensive simulation results (see, e.g., [5], [21], [22]) show that with very long codes such decoding algorithms can achieve astonishing performance (within a small fraction of a decibel of the Shannon limit on a Gaussian channel) even though the underlying factor graph has cycles.
Descriptions of the way in which the sum-product algorithm may be applied to a variety of “compound codes” are given in [19]. In this section, we restrict ourselves to three examples: turbo codes [5], LDPC codes [11], and repeat–accumulate (RA) codes [6].

A. Message-Passing Schedules

and
Likewise, applying (17), we have
where
(19) and
In (19), the value
is called the filter gain. These updates are those used by a Kalman filter [3]. As men-
tioned, generalization to the vector case is standard. We note that similar updates would apply to any cycle-free factor graph in which all distributions (factors) are Gaussian. The operation of the sum-product algorithm in such a graph can, therefore, be regarded as a generalized Kalman filter, and in a graph with cycles as an iterative approximation to the Kalman filter.
V. ITERATIVE PROCESSING: THE SUM-PRODUCT ALGORITHM IN FACTOR GRAPHS WITH CYCLES
In addition to its application to cycle-free factor graphs, the sum-product algorithm may also be applied to factor graphs with cycles simply by following the same message propagation rules, since all updates are local. Because of the cycles in the graph, an “iterative” algorithm with no natural termination will result, with messages passed multiple times on a given edge. In contrast with the cycle-free case, the results of the sum-product algorithm operating in a factor graph with cycles cannot in general be interpreted as exact function summaries. However, some of the most exciting applications of the sumproduct algorithm—for example, the decoding of turbo codes

Although a clock may not be necessary in practice, we assume that messages are synchronized with a global discrete-time clock, with at most one message passed on any edge in any given direction at one time. Any such message effectively replaces previous messages that might have been sent on that edge in the same direction. A message sent from node at time will be a function only of the local function at
(if any) and the (most recent) messages received at prior to time .
Since the message sent by a node on an edge in general depends on the messages that have been received on other edges at
, and a factor graph with cycles may have no nodes of degree one, how is message passing initiated? We circumvent this difficulty by initially supposing that a unit message (i.e., a message representing the unit function) has arrived on every edge incident on any given vertex. With this convention, every node is in a position to send a message at every time along every edge.
A message-passing schedule in a factor graph is a specification of messages to be passed during each clock tick. Obviously a wide variety of message-passing schedules are possible. For example, the so-called flooding schedule [19] calls for a message to pass in each direction over each edge at each clock tick. A schedule in which at most one message is passed anywhere in the graph at each clock tick is called a serial schedule.
We will say that a vertex has a message pending at an edge if it has received any messages on edges other than after the transmission of the most previous message on . Such a message is pending since the messages more recently received can affect the message to be sent on . The receipt of a message at from an edge will create pending messages at all other edges incident on . Only pending messages need to be transmitted, since only pending messages can be different from the previous message sent on a given edge. In a cycle-free factor graph, assuming a schedule in which only pending messages are transmitted, the sum-product algorithm will eventually halt in a state with no messages pending. In a factor graph with cycles, however, it is impossible to reach a state with no messages pending, since the transmission of a message on any edge of a cycle from a node will trigger a chain of pending messages that must return to , triggering to send another message on the same edge, and so on indefinitely. In practice, all schedules are finite. For a finite schedule, the sum-product algorithm terminates by computing, for each , the product of the most recent messages received at variable

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KSCHISCHANG et al.: FACTOR GRAPHS AND THE SUM-PRODUCT ALGORITHM

511

Fig. 16. Turbo code. (a) Encoder block diagram. (b) Factor graph.

node . If has no messages pending, then this computation is equivalent to the product of the messages sent and received on any single edge incident on .

B. Iterative Decoding of Turbo Codes

A “turbo code” (“parallel concatenated convolutional code”) has the encoder structure shown in Fig. 16(a). A block of data to be transmitted enters a systematic encoder which produces , and two parity-check sequences and at its output. The first parity-check sequence is generated via a standard recursive convolutional encoder; viewed together, and would form the output of a standard rate convolutional code. The second parity-check sequence is generated by applying a permutation
to the input stream, and applying the permuted stream to a second convolutional encoder. All output streams , , and are transmitted over the channel. Both constituent convolutional encoders are typically terminated in a known ending state.
A factor graph representation for a (very) short turbo code is shown in Fig. 16(b). Included in the figure are the state variables for the two constituent encoders, as well as a terminating trellis section in which no data is absorbed, but outputs are generated. Except for the interleaver (and the short block length), this graph is generic, i.e., all standard turbo codes may be represented in this way.
Iterative decoding of turbo codes is usually accomplished via a message-passing schedule that involves a forward/backward computation over the portion of the graph representing one constituent code, followed by propagation of messages between encoders (resulting in the so-called extrinsic information in the turbo-coding literature). This is then followed by another forward/backward computation over the other constituent code, and propagation of messages back to the first encoder. This schedule of messages is illustrated in [19, Fig. 10]; see also [31].

C. LDPC Codes

LDPC codes were introduced by Gallager [11] in the early

1960s. LDPC codes are defined in terms of a regular bipartite

graph. In a

LDPC code, left nodes, representing code-

word symbols, all have degree , while right nodes, representing

checks, all have degree . For example, Fig. 17 illustrates the

factor graph for a short

LDPC code. The check enforces

the condition that the adjacent symbols should have even overall

parity, much as in Example 2. As in Example 2, this factor graph

is just the original unadorned Tanner graph for the code.

Fig. 17. A factor graph for a LDPC code.

LDPC codes, like turbo codes, are very effectively decoded using the sum-product algorithm; for example MacKay and Neal report excellent performance results approaching that of turbo codes using what amounts to a flooding schedule [21], [22].

D. RA Codes

RA codes are a special, low-complexity class of turbo codes

introduced by Divsalar, McEliece, and others, who initially de-

vised these codes because their ensemble weight distributions

are relatively easy to derive. An encoder for an RA code op-

erates on input bits

repeating each bit times,

and permuting the result to arrive at a sequence

.

An output sequence

is formed via an accumulator

that satisfies

and

for .

Two equivalent factor graphs for an RA code are shown in

Fig. 18. The factor graph of Fig. 18(a) is a straightforward repre-

sentation of the encoder as described in the previous paragraph.

The checks all enforce the condition that incident variables sum

to zero modulo . (Thus a degree-two check enforces equality

of the two incident variables.) The equivalent but slightly less

complicated graph of Fig. 18(b) uses equality constraints to

represent the same code. Thus, e.g.,

, corre-

sponding to input variable and state variables , , and

of Fig. 18(a).

E. Simplifications for Binary Variables and Parity Checks
For particular decoding applications, the generic updating rules (5) and (6) can often be simplified substantially . We treat here only the important case where all variables are binary (Bernoulli) and all functions except single-variable functions are parity checks or repetition (equality) constraints, as in Figs. 11, 17, and 18. This includes, in particular, LDPC codes and RA codes. These simplifications are well known, some dating back to the work of Gallager [11].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

512

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Fig. 18. Equivalent factor graphs for an RA code.

The probability mass function for a binary random variable

may be represented by the vector

, where

.

According to the generic updating rules, when messages

and

arrive at a variable node of degree three,

the resulting (normalized) output message should be

Likelihood Difference (LD):

Definition:

.

(20) Signed Log-Likelihood Difference (SLLD):

Definition:

.

Similarly, at a check node representing the function

(where “ ” represents modulo- addition), we have

if

(21)

We note that at check node representing the dual (repetition con-

straint)

, we would have

if

i.e., the update rules for repetition constraints are the same as

those for variable nodes, and these may be viewed as duals to

those for a simple parity-check constraint.

We view (20) and (21) as specifying the behavior of ideal

“probability gates” that operate much like logic gates, but with

soft (“fuzzy”) values.

Since

, binary probability mass functions can be

parametrized by a single value. Depending on the parametriza-

tion, various probability gate implementations arise. We give

four different parametrizations, and derive the and

functions for each.

Likelihood Ratio (LR):

Definition:

.

In the LLR domain, we observe that for
Thus, an approximation to the function (22) is
which turns out to be precisely the min-sum update rule. By applying the equivalence between factor graphs illustrated
in Fig. 19, it is easy to extend these formulas to cases where variable nodes or check nodes have degree larger than three. In particular, we may extend the and functions to more than two arguments via the relations

Log-Likelihood Ratio (LLR):

Definition:

.

(23)

Of course, there are other alternatives, corresponding to the var-

ious binary trees with leaf vertices. For example, when

we may compute

as

which would have better time complexity in a parallel implementation than a computation based on (23).

VI. FACTOR-GRAPH TRANSFORMATIONS
In this section we describe a number of straightforward trans(22) formations that may be applied to a factor graph in order to
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KSCHISCHANG et al.: FACTOR GRAPHS AND THE SUM-PRODUCT ALGORITHM

513

factor graph. Also notice that there are two local functions con-

necting to

.

The local functions in the new factor graph retain their de-

pendences from the old factor graph. For example, although

is connected to and the pair of variables

, it does not ac-

tually depend on . So, the global function represented by the

new factor graph is

Fig. 19. Transforming variable and check nodes of high degree to multiple nodes of degree three.

modify a factor graph with an inconvenient structure into a more convenient form. For example, it is always possible to transform a factor graph with cycles into a cycle-free factor graph, but at the expense of increasing the complexity of the local functions and/or the domains of the variables. Nevertheless, such transformations can be useful in some cases; for example, at the end of this section we apply them to derive an FFT algorithm from the factor graph representing the DFT kernel. Similar general procedures are described in [17], [20], and in the construction of junction trees in [2].

which is identical to the global function represented by the old factor graph.
In Fig. 20(b), there is still one cycle; however, it can be removed by clustering function nodes. In Fig. 20(c), we have clustered the local functions corresponding to , , and
(24)
The new global function is

A. Clustering

It is always possible to cluster nodes of like type—i.e.,

all variable nodes or all function nodes—without changing

the global function being represented by a factor graph. We

consider the case of clustering two nodes, but this is easily

generalized to larger clusters. If and are two nodes being

clustered, simply delete and and any incident edges from

the factor graph, introduce a new node representing the pair

, and connect this new node to nodes that were neighbors

of or in the original graph.

When and are variables with domains and , re-

spectively, the new variable has domain

. Note that

the size of this domain is the product of the original domain

sizes, which can imply a substantial cost increase in computa-

tional complexity of the sum-product algorithm. Any function

that had or as an argument in the original graph must be

converted into an equivalent function that has

as an

argument, but this can be accomplished without increasing the

complexity of the local functions.

When and are local functions, by the pair

we mean

the product of the local functions. If and denote the sets

of arguments of and , respectively, then

is the set

of arguments of the product. Pairing functions in this way can

imply a substantial cost increase in computational complexity of

the sum-product algorithm; however, clustering functions does

not increase the complexity of the variables.

Clustering nodes may eliminate cycles in the graph so that

the sum-product algorithm in the new graph computes marginal

functions exactly. For example, clustering the nodes associated

with and in the factor graph fragment of Fig. 20(a) and con-

necting the neighbors of both nodes to the new clustered node,

we obtain the factor graph fragment shown in Fig. 20(b). No-

tice that the local function node connecting and in the

original factor graph appears with just a single edge in the new

which is identical to the original global function.

In this case, by clustering variable vertices and function ver-

tices, we have removed the cycles from the factor graph frag-

ment. If the remainder of the graph is cycle-free, then the sum-

product algorithm may be used to compute exact marginals. No-

tice that the sizes of the messages in this region of the graph have

increased. For example, and have alphabets of size and

, respectively, and if functions are represented by a list of

their values, the length of the message passed from to

is equal to the product

.

B. Stretching Variable Nodes

In the operation of the sum-product algorithm, in the mes-

sage passed on an edge

, local function products are sum-

marized for the variable associated with the edge. Outside of

those edges incident on a particular variable node , any func-

tion dependency on is represented in summary form; i.e., is

marginalized out.

Here we will introduce a factor graph transformation that

will extend the region in the graph over which is represented

without being summarized. Let

denote the set of nodes

that can be reached from by a path of length two in . Then

is a set of variable nodes, and for any

, we

can pair and , i.e., replace with the pair

, much as

in a clustering transformation. The function nodes incident on

would have to be modified as in a clustering transformation, but,

as before, this modification does not increase their complexity.

We call this a “stretching” transformation, since we imagine

node being “stretched” along the path from to .

More generally, we will allow further arbitrary stretching of

. If is a set of nodes to which has been stretched, we will

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

514

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Fig. 20. Clustering transformations. (a) Original factor graph fragment. (b) Variable nodes y and z clustered. (c) Function nodes f , f , and f clustered.

Fig. 21. Stretching transformation. (a) Original factor graph. (b) Node x is stretched to x and x . (c) The node representing x alone is now redundant and can be removed.

allow to be stretched to any element of

, the set of vari-

able nodes reachable from any node of by a path of length

two. In stretching in this way, we retain the following basic

property: the set of nodes to which has been paired (together

with the connecting function nodes) induces a connected sub-

graph of the factor graph. This connected subgraph generates a

well-defined set of edges over which is represented without

being summarized in the operation of the sum-product algo-

rithm. This stretching leads to precisely the same condition that

define junction trees [2]: the subgraph consisting of those ver-

tices whose label includes a particular variable, together with

the edges connecting these vertices, is connected.

Fig. 21(a) shows a factor graph, and Fig. 21(b) shows an

equivalent factor graph in which has been stretched to all

variable nodes.

When a single variable is stretched in a factor graph, since

all variable nodes represent distinct variables, the modified vari-

ables that result from a stretching transformation are all distinct.

However, if we permit more than one variable to be stretched,

this may no longer hold true. For example, in the Markov chain

factor graph of Fig. 12(c), if both and are stretched to all

variables, the result will be a factor graph having two vertices

representing the pair

. The meaning of such a peculiar

“factor graph” remains clear, however, since the local functions

and hence also the global function are essentially unaffected by

the stretching transformations. All that changes is the behavior

of the sum-product algorithm, since, in this example, neither

nor will ever be marginalized out. Hence we will permit

the appearance of multiple variable nodes for a single variable

whenever they arise as the result of a series of stretching trans-

formations.

Fig. 12(b) illustrates an important motivation for introducing

the stretching transformation; it may be possible for an edge, or

indeed a variable node, to become redundant. Let be a local

function, let be an edge incident on , and let be the set

of variables (from the original factor graph) associated with .

If is contained in the union of the variable sets associated

with the edges incident on other than , then is redundant. A

redundant edge may be deleted from a factor graph. (Redundant

edges must be removed one at a time, because it is possible for

an edge to be redundant in the presence of another redundant

edge, and become relevant once the latter edge is removed.) If

all edges incident on a variable node can be removed, then the

variable node itself is redundant and may be deleted.

For example, the node containing alone is redundant

in Fig. 21(b) since each local function neighboring has a

neighbor (other than ) to which has been stretched. Hence

this node and the edges incident on it can be removed, as shown

in Fig. 21(c). Note that we are not removing the variable

from the graph, but rather just a node representing . Here,

unlike elsewhere in this paper, the distinction between nodes

and variables becomes important.

Let be a variable node involved in a cycle, i.e., for which

there is a nontrivial path from to itself. Let

be the last two edges in , for some variable node and some

function node . Let us stretch along all of the variable nodes

involved in . Then the edge

is redundant and hence can

be deleted since both and

are incident on . (Actually,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KSCHISCHANG et al.: FACTOR GRAPHS AND THE SUM-PRODUCT ALGORITHM

515

Fig. 22. The DFT. (a) Factor graph. (b) A particular spanning tree. (c) Spanning tree after clustering and stretching transformation.

there is also another redundant edge, corresponding to traveling in the opposite direction.) In this way, the cycle from to
itself is broken. By systematically stretching variables around cycles and then
deleting a resulting redundant edge to break the cycle, it is possible to use the stretching transformation to break all cycles in the graph, transforming an arbitrary factor graph into an equivalent cycle-free factor graph for which the sum-product algorithm produces exact marginals. This can be done without increasing the complexity of the local functions, but comes at the expense of an (often quite substantial) increase in the complexity of the variable alphabets.
C. Spanning Trees

variable nodes appearing in each path from to a local function having as an argument. Intuitively, is not marginalized out in the region of in which is “involved.”

D. An FFT

An important observation due to Aji and McEliece [1], [2] is

that various fast transform algorithms may be developed using

a graph-based approach. We now show how we may use the

factor-graph transformations of this section to derive an FFT.

The DFT is a widely used tool for the analysis of dis-

crete-time signals. Let

be a complex-

valued -tuple, and let

, with

, be a prim-

itive th root of unity. The DFT of is the complex-valued

-tuple

where

A spanning tree for a connected graph is a connected, cycle-free subgraph of having the same vertex set as . Let be a connected factor graph with a spanning tree and for every variable node of , let denote the set of function nodes having as an argument. Since is a tree, there is a unique path between any two nodes of , and in particular between and every element of . Now suppose is stretched to all variable nodes involved in each path from to every element of
, and let be the resulting transformed factor graph. It turns out that every edge of not in is redundant and all such edges can be deleted from . Indeed, if is an edge of not in , let be the set of variables associated with , and let be the local function on which is incident. For every variable
, there is a path in from to , and is stretched to all variable nodes along this path, and in particular is stretched to a neighbor (in ) of . Since each element of appears in some neighboring variable node not involving , is redundant. The removal of does not affect the redundant status of any other edge of not in , hence all such edges may be deleted from
. This observation implies that the sum-product algorithm can be used to compute marginal functions exactly in any spanning tree of , provided that each variable is stretched along all

(25)

Consider now the case where is a power of two, e.g.,

for concreteness. We express variables and in (25) in

binary; more precisely, we let

and let

, where and take values from

.

We write the DFT kernel, which we take as our global function,

in terms of these variables as

where

and we have used the

relations

,

, and

. We see

that the DFT kernel factors into a product of local functions as

expressed by the factor graph of Fig. 22(a).

We observe that

(26) so that the DFT can be viewed as a marginal function, much like a probability mass function. When is composite, sim-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

516

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

ilar prime-factor-based decompositions of and will result in similar factor graph representations for the DFT kernel.
The factor graph in Fig. 22(a) has cycles. We wish to carry out exact marginalization, so we form a spanning tree. There are many possible spanning trees, of which one is shown in Fig. 22(b). (Different choices for the spanning tree will lead to possibly different DFT algorithms when the sum-product algorithm is applied.) If we cluster the local functions as shown in Fig. 22(b), essentially by defining

then we arrive at the spanning tree shown in Fig. 22(c). The vari-

ables that result from the required stretching transformation are

shown. Although they are redundant, we have included variable

nodes and . Observe that each message sent from left to

right is a function of three binary variables, which can be repre-

sented as a list of eight complex quantities. Along the path from

to

first , then , and then are marginalized

out as , , and are added to the argument list of the func-

tions. In three steps, the function is converted to the func-

tion . Clearly, we have obtained an FFT as an instance of the

sum-product algorithm.

Factor graphs afford great flexibility in modeling systems. Both Willems’ behavioral approach to systems and the traditional input/output or state-space approaches fit naturally in the factor graph framework. The generality of allowing arbitrary functions (not just probability distributions or characteristic functions) to be represented further enhances the flexibility of factor graphs.
Factor graphs also have the potential to unify modeling and signal processing tasks that are often treated separately in current systems. In communication systems, for example, channel modeling and estimation, separation of multiple users, and decoding can be treated in a unified way using a single graphical model that represents the interactions of these various elements, as suggested by Wiberg [31]. We believe that the full potential of this approach has not yet been realized, and we suggest that further exploration of the modeling power of factor graphs and applications of the sum-product algorithm will prove to be fruitful.

APPENDIX A FROM FACTOR TREES TO EXPRESSION TREES

Let

be a function that can be repre-

sented by a cycle-free connected factor graph, i.e., a factor tree

. We are interested in developing an expression for

VII. CONCLUSION
Factor graphs provide a natural graphical description of the factorization of a global function into a product of local functions. Factor graphs can be applied in a wide range of application areas, as we have illustrated with a large number of examples.
A major aim of this paper was to demonstrate that a single algorithm—the sum-product algorithm—based on only a single conceptually simple computational rule, can encompass an enormous variety of practical algorithms. As we have seen, these include the forward/backward algorithm, the Viterbi algorithm, Pearl’s belief propagation algorithm, the iterative turbo decoding algorithm, the Kalman filter, and even certain FFT algorithms! Various extensions of these algorithms—for example, a Kalman filter operating on a tree-structured system—although not treated here, can be derived in a straightforward manner by applying the principles enunciated in this paper.
We have emphasized that the sum-product algorithm may be applied to arbitrary factor graphs, cycle-free or not. In the cycle-free finite case, we have shown that the sum-product algorithm may be used to compute function summaries exactly. In some applications, e.g., in processing Markov chains and hidden Markov models, the underlying factor graph is naturally cycle-free, while in other applications, e.g., in decoding of LDPC codes and turbo codes, it is not. In the latter case, a successful strategy has been simply to apply the sum-product algorithm without regard to the cycles. Nevertheless, in some cases it might be important to obtain an equivalent cycle-free representation, and we have given a number of graph transformations that can be used to achieve such representations.

i.e., the summary for of . We consider to be the root of , so that all other vertices of are descendants of .
Assuming that has neighbors in , then without loss of generality may be written in the form

where

is the product of all local functions in the sub-

tree of that have the th neighbor of as root, and is the

set of variables in that subtree. Since is a tree, for

,

and

, i.e.,

is a partition of

. This decom-

position is represented by the generic factor tree of Fig. 23, in

which

is shown in expanded form.

Now, by the distributive law, and using the fact that

are pairwise disjoint, we obtain

i.e., the summary for of is the product of the summaries for of the functions.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KSCHISCHANG et al.: FACTOR GRAPHS AND THE SUM-PRODUCT ALGORITHM

517

The problem of computing the summary for of the product of the local subtree descending from is a problem of the same general form with which we began, and so the same general approach can be applied recursively. The result of this recursion justifies the transformation of the factor tree for with root vertex into an expression tree for
, as illustrated in Fig. 5.

APPENDIX B OTHER GRAPHICAL MODELS FOR PROBABILITY DISTRIBUTIONS
Factor graphs are by no means the first graph-based language for describing probability distributions. In the next two examples, we describe very briefly the close relationship between factor graphs and models based on undirected graphs (Markov random fields) and models based on directed acyclic graphs (Bayesian networks).

Fig. 23. A generic factor tree.

Consider the case

. To compute the summary for of

, observe that, without loss of generality,

can be

written as

A. Markov Random Fields

A Markov random field (see, e.g., [18]) is a graphical model

based on an undirected graph

in which each node

corresponds to a random variable. The graph is a Markov

random field (MRF) if the distribution

satisfies

the local Markov property

(27)

where, for convenience, we have numbered the arguments

of so that

is the first neighbor of .

This decomposition is illustrated in Fig. 23. We note that

is a partition of . Again,

using the fact that these sets are pairwise-disjoint and applying

the distributive law, we obtain

where denotes the set of neighbors of . In words, is an MRF if every variable is independent of nonneighboring variables in the graph, given the values of its immediate neighbors. MRFs are well developed in statistics, and have been used in a variety of applications (see, e.g., [18], [26], [16], [15]).
A clique in a graph is a collection of vertices which are all pairwise neighbors. Under fairly general conditions (e.g., positivity of the joint probability density is sufficient), the joint probability mass function of an MRF may be expressed as the product of a collection of Gibbs potential functions, defined on the set of cliques in the MRF, i.e.

(28)

where is a normalizing constant, and each

is a

clique. For example (cf. Fig. 1), the MRF in Fig. 24(a) may be

used to express the factorization

In words, we see that if

is a neighbor of ,

to compute the summary for of the product of the local func-

tions in the subtree of descending from , we should do the

following:

1) for each neighbor of (other than ), compute the summary for of the product of the functions in the subtree descending from ;

Clearly, (28) has precisely the structure needed for a factor graph representation. Indeed, a factor graph representation may be preferable to an MRF in expressing such a factorization, since distinct factorizations, i.e., factorizations with different
’s in (28), may yield precisely the same underlying MRF graph, whereas they will always yield distinct factor graphs. (An example in a coding context of this MRF ambiguity is given in [19].)
B. Bayesian Networks

2) form the product of these summaries with , summa- Bayesian networks (see, e.g., [25], [17], [10]) are graphical

rizing the result for .

models for a collection of random variables that are based on

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

518

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Fig. 24. Graphical probability models. (a) A Markov random field. (b) A Bayesian network. (c) A factor graph.

directed acyclic graphs (DAGs). Bayesian networks, combined with Pearl’s “belief propagation algorithm” [25], have become an important tool in expert systems. The first to connect Bayesian networks and belief propagation with applications in coding theory were MacKay and Neal [21]; more recently, [19], [24] develop a view of the “turbo decoding” algorithm [5] as an instance of probability propagation in a Bayesian network model of a code.
Each node in a Bayesian network is associated with a random variable. Denoting by the set of parents of (i.e., the set of vertices from which an edge is incident on ), by definition, the distribution represented by the Bayesian network may be written as

Fig. 25. Messages sent in belief propagation.

(29)

If

(i.e., has no parents), we take

.

For example (cf. (2)) Fig. 24(b) shows a Bayesian network that

expresses the factorization

(30)

Again, as with Markov random fields, Bayesian networks ex-

press a factorization of a joint probability distribution that is

suitable for representation by a factor graph. The factor graph

corresponding to (30) is shown in Fig. 24(c); cf. Fig. 1.

It is a straightforward exercise to translate the update

rules that govern the operation of the sum-product algorithm

to Pearl’s belief propagation rules [25], [17]. To convert a

Bayesian network into a factor graph: simply introduce a

function node for each factor

in (29) and draw

edges from this node to and its parents . An example

conversion from a Bayesian network to a factor graph is shown

in Fig. 24(c).

Equations similar to Pearl’s belief updating and bottom-

up/top-down propagation rules [25, pp. 182–183] may be de-

rived from the general sum-product algorithm update equations

(5) and (6) as follows.

In belief propagation, messages are sent between “variable

nodes,” corresponding to the dashed ellipses for the particular

Bayesian network shown in Fig. 25. In a Bayesian network, if an

edge is directed from vertex to vertex , then is a parent of

and is a child of . Messages sent between variables are always

functions of the parent . In [25], a message sent from to is

denoted

, while a message sent from to is denoted as

, as shown in Fig. 25 for the specific Bayesian network of

Fig. 24(c).

Consider the central variable in Fig. 25. Clearly, the mes-

sage sent upwards by the sum-product algorithm to the local

function contained in the ellipse is, from (5), given by the

product of the incoming messages, i.e.

The message sent from to is, according to (6), the product

of with the other messages received at summarized for .

Note that this local function is the conditional probability mass

function

; hence

Similarly, the message taining is given by

sent from to the ellipse con-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KSCHISCHANG et al.: FACTOR GRAPHS AND THE SUM-PRODUCT ALGORITHM

519

In general, let us denote the set of parents of a variable by , and the set of children of by . We will have, for
every

(31) and, for every

(32) The termination condition for cycle-free graphs, called the “belief update” equation in [25], is given by the product of the messages received by in the factor graph

BEL
(33) Pearl also introduces a scale factor in (32) and (33) so that the resulting messages properly represent probability mass functions. The relative complexity of (31)–(33) compared with the simplicity of the sum-product update rule given in Section II provides a strong pedagogical incentive for the introduction of factor graphs.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The concept of factor graphs as a generalization of Tanner graphs was devised by a group at ISIT ’97 in Ulm, Germany, that included the authors, G. D. Forney, Jr., R. Kötter, D. J. C. MacKay, R. J. McEliece, R. M. Tanner, and N. Wiberg. The authors benefitted greatly from the many discussions on this topic that took place in Ulm. They wish to thank G. D. Forney, Jr., and the referees for many helpful comments on earlier versions of this paper.
The work of F. R. Kschischang took place in part while on sabbatical leave at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). He gratefully acknowledges the support and hospitality of Prof. G. W. Wornell of MIT. H.-A. Loeliger performed his work while with Endora Tech AG, Basel, Switzerland. He wishes to acknowledge the support of F. Tarköy.

REFERENCES

[1] S. M. Aji and R. J. McEliece, “A general algorithm for distributing infor-

mation on a graph,” in Proc. 1997 IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory,

Ulm, Germany, July 1997, p. 6.

[2]

, “The generalized distributive law,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory,

vol. 46, pp. 325–343, Mar. 2000.

[3] B. D. O. Anderson and J. B. Moore, Optimal Filtering. Englewood

Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1979.

[4] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear

codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory,

vol. IT-20, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.

[5] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannonlimit

error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo codes,” in Proc. 1993

IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp.

1064–1070.

[6] D. Divsalar, H. Jin, and R. J. McEliece, “Coding theorems for ‘turbo-

like’ codes,” in Proc. 36th Allerton Conf. Communications, Control, and

Computing, Urbana, IL, Sept. 23–25, 1998, pp. 201–210.

[7] G. D. Forney Jr., “On iterative decoding and the two-way algorithm,” in

Proc. Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sept.

1997.

[8]

, “Codes on graphs: Normal realizations,” IEEE Trans. Inform.

Theory, vol. 47, pp. 520–548, Feb. 2001.

[9] B. J. Frey and F. R. Kschischang, “Probability propagation and iterative

decoding,” in Proc. 34th Annu. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control,

and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 1–4, 1996.

[10] B. J. Frey, Graphical Models for Machine Learning and Digital Com-

munication. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998.

[11] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA:

MIT Press, 1963.

[12] R. Garello, G. Montorsi, S. Benedetto, and G. Cancellieri, “Interleaver

properties and their applications to the trellis complexity analysis of

turbo codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., to be published.

[13] M. R. Garey and D. S. Johnson, Computers and Intractability: A Guide

to the Theory of NP-Completeness. New York: Freeman, 1979.

[14] R. L. Graham, D. E. Knuth, and O. Patashnik, Concrete Mathe-

matics. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1989.

[15] G. E. Hinton and T. J. Sejnowski, “Learning and relearning in Boltz-

mann machines,” in Parallel Distributed Processing: Explorations in

the Microstructure of Cognition, D. E. Rumelhart and J. L. McClelland,

Eds. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1986, pp. 282–317.

[16] V. Isham, “An introduction to spatial point processes and Markov

random fields,” Int. Stat. Rev., vol. 49, pp. 21–43, 1981.

[17] F. V. Jensen, An Introduction to Bayesian Networks. New York:

Springer-Verlag, 1996.

[18] R. Kindermann and J. L. Snell, Markov Random Fields and Their Ap-

plications. Providence, RI: Amer. Math. Soc., 1980.

[19] F. R. Kschischang and B. J. Frey, “Iterative decoding of compound codes

by probability propagation in graphical models,” IEEE J. Select. Areas

Commun., vol. 16, pp. 219–230, Feb. 1998.

[20] S. L. Lauritzen and D. J. Spiegelhalter, “Local computations with prob-

abilities on graphical structures and their application to expert systems,”

J. Roy. Statist. Soc., ser. B, vol. 50, pp. 157–224, 1988.

[21] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Good codes based on very sparse

matrices,” in Cryptography and Coding. 5th IMA Conference (Lecture

Notes in Computer Science), C. Boyd, Ed. Berlin, Germany: Springer,

1995, vol. 1025, pp. 100–111.

[22] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse

matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.

[23] P. S. Maybeck, Stochastic Models, Estimation, and Control. New

York: Academic, 1979.

[24] R. J. McEliece, D. J. C. MacKay, and J.-F. Cheng, “Turbo decoding as

an instance of Pearl’s ‘belief propagation’ algorithm,” IEEE J. Select.

Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 140–152, Feb. 1998.

[25] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems, 2nd ed. San

Francisco, CA: Kaufmann, 1988.

[26] C. J. Preston, Gibbs States on Countable Sets. Cambridge, U.K.: Cam-

bridge Univ. Press, 1974.

[27] L. Rabiner, “A tutorial on hidden Markov models and selected appli-

cations in speech recognition,” Proc. EEE, vol. 77, pp. 257–286, Feb.

1989.

[28] K. H. Rosen, Discrete Mathematics and its Applications, 4th ed. New

York: WCB/McGraw-Hill, 1999.

[29] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE

Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.

[30] A. Vardy, “Trellis structure of codes,” in Handbook of Coding Theory,

V. S. Pless and W. C. Huffman, Eds. Amsterdam, The Netherlands:

Elsevier, 1998, vol. 2.

[31] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation,

Linköping Univ., Linköping, Sweden, 1996.

[32] N. Wiberg, H.-A. Loeliger, and R. Kötter, “Codes and iterative de-

coding on general graphs,” Eur. Trans. Telecomm., vol. 6, pp. 513–525,

Sept./Oct. 1995.

[33] J. C. Willems, “Models for Dynamics,” in Dynamics Reported, Volume

2, U. Kirchgraber and H. O. Walther, Eds. New York: Wiley, 1989, pp.

171–269.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

