IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 7, NOVEMBER 2001

2711

Low-Density Parity-Check Codes Based on Finite Geometries: A Rediscovery and New Results
Yu Kou, Student Member, IEEE, Shu Lin, Fellow, IEEE, and Marc P. C. Fossorier, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper presents a geometric approach to the construction of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. Four classes of LDPC codes are constructed based on the lines and points of Euclidean and projective geometries over finite fields. Codes of these four classes have good minimum distances and their Tanner graphs
have girth 6. Finite-geometry LDPC codes can be decoded in var-
ious ways, ranging from low to high decoding complexity and from reasonably good to very good performance. They perform very well with iterative decoding. Furthermore, they can be put in either cyclic or quasi-cyclic form. Consequently, their encoding can be achieved in linear time and implemented with simple feedback shift registers. This advantage is not shared by other LDPC codes in general and is important in practice. Finite-geometry LDPC codes can be extended and shortened in various ways to obtain other good LDPC codes. Several techniques of extension and shortening are presented. Long extended finite-geometry LDPC codes have been constructed and they achieve a performance only a few tenths of a decibel away from the Shannon theoretical limit with iterative decoding.
Index Terms—Bit flipping decoding, column splitting, cyclic code, Euclidean geometry, iterative decoding, low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes, projective geometry, quasi-cyclic code, rowsplitting, shortening.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-density parity-check (LDPC) codes were first discovered by Gallager [1], [2] in the early 1960s and have recently been rediscovered and generalized [3]–[14]. It has been shown that these codes achieve a remarkable performance with iterative decoding that is very close to the Shannon limit [4], [9]–[14]. Consequently, these codes have become strong competitors to turbo codes [23]–[26] for error control in many communication and digital storage systems where high reliability is required.
An LDPC code is defined as the null space of a parity-check matrix with the following structural properties: 1) each row consists of “ones”; 2) each column consists of “ones”; 3) the number of “ones” in common between any two columns, denoted , is no greater than ; 4) both and are small compared to the length of the code and the number of rows in [1],
Manuscript received October 15, 1999; revised June 5, 2001. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grants CCR-0096191, CCR-0098029, and by NASA under Grants NAG 5-9025 and NAG 5-10480.
Y. Kou and S. Lin are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Davis, CA 95616 USA (e-mail: ykou@att.net; shulin@ece.ucdavis.edu).
M. P. C. Fossorier is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA (e-mail: marc@ spectra.eng.hawaii.edu).
Communicated by F. R. Kschischang, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Publisher Item Identifier S 0018-9448(01)08588-1.

[2]. Since and are small, has a small density of “ones” and hence is a sparse matrix. For this reason, the code specified by is called an LDPC code. The LDPC code defined above is known as a regular LDPC code. If not all the columns or all the rows of the parity-check matrix have the same number of “ones” (or weights), an LDPC code is said to be irregular.
Although LDPC codes have been shown to achieve outstanding performance, no analytic (algebraic or geometric) method has been found for constructing these codes. Gallager only provided a class of pseudorandom LDPC codes [1], [2]. Good LDPC codes that have been found are largely computer generated, especially long codes. Encoding of these long computer-generated LDPC codes is quite complex due to the lack of code structure such as cyclic or quasi-cyclic structure. Furthermore, their minimum distances are either poor or hard to determine.
In this paper, we investigate the construction of LDPC codes from a geometric approach. The construction is based on the lines and points of a finite geometry. Well-known finite geometries are Euclidean and projective geometries over finite fields. Based on these two families of finite geometries, four classes of LDPC codes are constructed. Codes of these four classes are either cyclic or quasi-cyclic, and, therefore, their encoding can be implemented with linear feedback shift registers based on their generator (or characterization) polynomials [27], [28]. This linear time encoding is very important in practice and is not shared by other LDPC codes in general. We call codes of these four classes finite-geometry LDPC codes.
Finite-geometry LDPC codes have relatively good minimum distances and their Tanner graphs do not contain cycles of length . They can be decoded with various decoding methods, ranging from low to high complexity and from reasonably good to very good performance. These decoding methods include: one-step majority-logic (MLG) decoding [28], [31], Gallager’s bit flipping (BF) decoding [2], weighted MLG decoding [49], weighted BF decoding, a posteriori probability (APP) decoding [2], and iterative decoding based on belief propagation (commonly known as sum-product algorithm (SPA)) [10], [11], [15], [20]–[22]. Finite-geometry LDPC codes, especially high-rate codes, perform very well with the iterative SPA decoding.
A finite-geometry LDPC code can be extended by splitting each column of its parity-check matrix into multiple columns. This column splitting results in a new sparse matrix and hence a new LDPC code of longer length. If column splitting is done properly, the extended code performs amazingly well using the SPA decoding. An error performance only a few tenths of a decibel away from the Shannon limit can be achieved. New LDPC codes can also be constructed by splitting each row of the

0018–9448/01$10.00 © 2001 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2712

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 7, NOVEMBER 2001

parity-check matrix of a finite-geometry LDPC code into multiple rows. Combining column and row splittings of the paritycheck matrices of finite-geometry LDPC codes, we can obtain a large class of LDPC codes with a wide range of code lengths and rates. A finite-geometry LDPC code can also be shortened by puncturing the columns of its parity-check matrix that correspond to the points on a set of lines or a subgeometry of the geometry based on which the code is constructed. Shortened finite-geometry LDPC codes also perform well with the SPA decoding.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II presents a construction method of LDPC codes based on the lines and points of a finite geometry. Two types of codes are constructed and their minimum distances are lower-bounded. Section III gives the construction and characterization of LDPC codes based on Euclidean and projective geometries. Various decoding methods for finite-geometry LDPC codes are discussed in Section IV. A simple weighted BF decoding algorithm and a two-stage hybrid soft/hard decoding scheme are presented. Section V presents simulation results of error performance of some finite-geometry LDPC codes using various decoding methods. Techniques for extending and shortening finite-geometry LDPC codes are given in Sections VI and VII, respectively. Section VIII discusses the possible combinations of finite-geometry LDPC codes and turbo codes in concatenation form. Finally, Section IX concludes this paper with some remarks and suggestions of further research work.

that any two rows have at most one “ -component” in common. The density of this matrix, denoted , is defined as the ratio of the total number of “ones” in to the total number of entries

in . Then we readily see that

. If and are

small compared to and , then

is a low-density matrix

which has all the structural properties defined in Section I.

The null space over GF of gives a binary LDPC code of length . Such a code is called the type-I geometry- LDPC

code, denoted . The rows of

are not necessarily lin-

early independent. Let be the rank of . Then is a

binary

linear code with

as its parity-check

matrix.

Let

be the transpose of , i.e.,

.

Then is also a low-density matrix with row weight and

column weight . The null space over GF of

gives a

binary LDPC code of length , denoted . Since

and

have the same rank , is a binary

linear

code. This code is called the type-II geometry- LDPC code.

and are called companion codes and have the same

number of parity-check symbols.

Let

be the rows of where

for

An -tuple geometry- LDPC code the inner product

is a codeword of the type-I specified by if and only if

II. FINITE-GEOMETRY LDPC CODES AND THEIR GENERAL

(1)

STRUCTURE

This section presents a simple construction of LDPC codes

based on the lines and points of finite geometries. Two types

of codes are constructed and their general structural properties

are investigated. Lower bounds on their minimum distances are

derived.

Let be a finite geometry with points and lines which has

the following fundamental structural properties: 1) every line

consists of points; 2) any two points are connected by one

and only one line; 3) every point is intersected by lines (i.e.,

every point lies on lines); and 4) two lines are either parallel

(i.e., they have no point in common) or they intersect at one

and only one point. There are two families of finite geometries

which have the above fundamental structural properties, namely,

Euclidean and projective geometries over finite fields.

Form a

matrix

over GF whose rows

and columns correspond to the lines and points of the finite ge-

ometry , respectively, where

if and only if the th line

of contains the th point of and

, otherwise. A row

in

simply displays the points on a specific line of and

has weight . A column in

simply displays the lines that

intersect at a specific point in and has weight . The rows of

are called the incidence vectors of the lines in , and the

columns are called the intersecting vectors of the points in .

Therefore,

is the incidence matrix of the lines in over

the points in . It follows from the second structural property of

that every two columns have exactly one “ -component” in

common, and it follows from the fourth structural property of

for

. The sum given by (1) is called a parity-check

sum (or simply check sum), which is simply a linear sum of a

subset of code bits. A code bit is said to be checked by the

sum

(or the row ) if

. Let be the set

of rows in that check on the code bit . Let denote the

set of check sums formed by the rows in . It follows from the

structural properties of that the code bit is contained in

every check sum in and any of the other

code bits is

contained in at most one check sum in . The check sums in

(or the rows in ) are said to be orthogonal on the code bit

[28], [31]. The check sums in are called the orthogonal check

sums on code bit and the rows in are called the orthogonal

vectors on . For

, each code bit is checked by

exactly orthogonal check sums. These orthogonal check sums

can be used for majority-logic decoding of the code [28], [31].

The code is capable of correcting any error pattern with

or

fewer errors using one-step majority-logic decoding [28], [31].

As a result, the minimum distance of the type-I geometry-

LDPC code is at least . Similarly, it can be shown that there are check sums orthog-
onal on each code bit of a codeword in the type-II geometry-

code . Therefore, is also one-step majority-logic de-

codable and has a minimum distance at least .

For a linear block code of length specified by a parity-check

matrix of rows, a graph can be constructed to display the re-

lationship between its code bits and the check sums that check

on them. This graph consists of two levels of vertices. The first

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KOU et al.: LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES BASED ON FINITE GEOMETRIES

2713

level consists of vertices which represent the code bits of

the code. These vertices, denoted

are called the

code-bit (or variable) vertices. The second level consists of

vertices which represent the check sums,

, that

the code bits must satisfy. These vertices are called the check

sum vertices. A code-bit vertex is connected to a check sum

vertex by an edge, denoted

, if and only if the code

bit is contained in the check sum . No two code-bit vertices

are connected and no two check sum vertices are connected.

This graph is a bipartite graph [32] which was first proposed by

Tanner [3] to study the structure and iterative decoding of LDPC

codes, and hence it is called the Tanner graph. The number of

edges that are connected to (or incident at) a code-bit vertex ,

called the degree of , is simply the number of check sums that

contain . The number of edges that are incident at the check

sum vertex , called the degree of , is simply the number of

code bits that are checked by the check sum . For a regular

LDPC code, the degrees of all the code-bit vertices are the same

and the degrees of all the check-sum vertices are the same. Such

a Tanner graph is said to be regular.

A cycle in a graph of vertices and edges is defined as a sequence of connected edges which starts from a vertex and ends at the same vertex, and satisfies the condition that no vertex (except the initial and the final vertex) appears more than once [32]. The number of edges on a cycle is called the length of the cycle. The length of the shortest cycle in a graph is called the girth of the graph. The Tanner graph of a linear block code contains no cycles of length and no cycles of odd lengths. Therefore, the girth of the Tanner graph of a linear block code is at least .

In decoding a linear block code with the SPA decoding, the performance very much depends on cycles of short lengths in its Tanner graph. These short cycles, especially cycles of length
, make successive decoding iterations highly correlated and hence severely limit the decoding performance [3], [10], [11], [20], [33]–[35]. Therefore, to use the SPA for decoding, it is important to design codes without short cycles in their Tanner graphs, especially cycles of length .

Both types of geometry- LDPC codes are regular and

hence their Tanner graphs are regular. Since the row and

column weights of

are and , respectively, the degrees

of each check-sum vertex and each code-bit vertex in the

Tanner graph of the type-I geometry- LDPC code

are

and , respectively. Since is the transpose of , the

degrees of each check-sum vertex and each code-bit vertex

in the Tanner graph of the type-II geometry- code

are

and , respectively. In fact, the Tanner graphs of the type-I

and type-II geometry- LDPC codes are dual graphs, i.e., the

code-bit vertices of one graph become the check-sum vertices

of the other graph and the check-sum vertices of one graph

become the code-bit vertices of the other graph.

It follows from the structural properties of the parity-check

matrices

and

that no two code bits are checked si-

multaneously by two check sums. This implies that the Tanner

graphs of both types of geometry- LDPC codes do not contain

cycles of length . However, they do contain cycles of length .

To show this, we use the fundamental property of a finite geom-

etry that any two points are connected by a line. Let and

be any two points in the finite geometry . Then there is a line

connecting and . Let be a third point in but not

on . Then there is a line connecting and and a line

connecting and . These three lines enclose a triangle

with

and as the vertices. In the Tanner graph of the

type-I geometry- LDPC code, these three lines , , and

correspond to three check-sum vertices, say

and and

the three points

and correspond to three code-bit ver-

tices, say

and . Each of these three check-sum vertices,

and is connected to only two of the three code-bit

vertices

and . Since no two check-sum vertices are

connected to the same pair of code-bit vertices, the edges con-

necting

and to

and form a cycle of length

in the Tanner graph of the type-I geometry- code . The

number of cycles of length is equal to the number of triangles

in which can be enumerated and is

(2)

Since the Tanner graphs of type-I and type-II geometry- codes are dual, they have the same girth and the same cycle distribution. The above analysis shows that the girth of the Tanner graph of an LDPC code constructed based on the lines and points of a finite geometry is .

III. EUCLIDEAN AND PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY LDPC CODES
Euclidean and projective geometries over finite fields form two large families of finite geometries. The structures of these two families of finite geometries have been well studied and can be found in any major text in combinatorics or groups of finite order. References [36]–[38] give a good exposition of this subject. A simple discussion of these two types of finite geometries can also be found in [28]. To make this paper self-contained, the fundamental structural properties of lines and points of these two types of geometries are briefly described before the code construction.
Based on the lines and points of Euclidean and projective geometries, four classes of finite geometry LDPC codes can be constructed. They are: 1) type-I Euclidean geometry (EG)LDPC codes; 2) type-II EG-LDPC codes; 3) type-I projective geometry (PG)-LDPC codes; and 4) type-II PG-LDPC codes. Among these four classes of codes, two are cyclic and two are quasi-cyclic.

A. Type-I EG-LDPC Codes

Let EG

be an -dimensional Euclidean geometry

over the Galois field GF where and are two positive

integers. This geometry consists of

points, each point

is simply an -tuple over GF . The all-zero -tuple

is called the origin. The

-tuples over

GF that represent the points of EG

form an -di-

mensional vector space over GF . Therefore, EG

is

simply the -dimensional vector space of all the

-tuples

over GF . A line in EG

is either a one-dimensional

(1-D) subspace of EG

or a coset of a 1-D subspace.

Therefore, a line in EG

consists of points. There are

(3)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2714

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 7, NOVEMBER 2001

lines in EG

. Every line has

to it. For any point in EG

, there are

lines parallel

(4)

lines intersecting at this point.

Let GF

be the extension field of GF . Each element

in GF

can be represented as an -tuple over GF .

Therefore, the elements in GF

may be regarded as the

points in EG

and hence GF

may be regarded

as the Euclidean geometry EG

. Let be a primitive

element of GF

. Then

form the points of EG

, where

is the origin.

Let be a nonorigin point in EG

. Then, the points

GF

form a line in EG

. Since for

,

the line contains the origin as a point. We say that

passes through the origin. Let and be two linearly indepen-

dent points in EG

. Then the collection of the following

points:

GF

form a line in EG

that passes through the point . Lines

and

do not have any point in common and

hence they are parallel. Let be a point which is linearly inde-

pendent of and . Then lines

and

intersect at the point .

Let

be a matrix over GF whose rows are the

incidence vectors of all the lines in EG

that do not pass

through the origin and whose columns correspond to the

nonorigin points in EG

. The columns are arranged

in the order of

, i.e., the th column

corresponds to the point . Then

consists of

columns and

(5)

rows.

has the following structures: 1) each row

has weight

; 2) each column has weight

; 3) any two columns have at most one “ -com-

ponent” in common, i.e.,

; 4) any two rows have at most

one “ -component” in common. The density of

is

which is small for

and . Therefore,

is a low-density matrix.

Let

be the null space of

. Then

is a regular LDPC code of length

.

We call this code the type-I -dimensional EG-LDPC code.

Since the column weight of

is

the minimum distance of

is at least

It turns out that this EG-LDPC code is the one-step majority-

logic decodable

th-order EG code constructed based on

EG

[28], [39], [40] and is the dual code of a polynomial

code [40]–[43]. Therefore, it is cyclic and its generator polyno-

mial is completely characterized by its roots in GF

.

Let be a nonnegative integer less than . Then can be

expressed in radix- form as follows:

where

for

. The weight of , denoted

, is defined as the following sum:

(6)

For a nonnegative integer , let be the remainder resulting

from dividing by

. Then

.

Let

be the generator polynomial of the type-I -di-

mensional EG-LDPC code. Let be a primitive element of

GF . Then is a root of

if and only if [28], [39],

[40]

(7)

From the above characterization of the roots of

, it has

been shown [40] that

has the following sequence of

consecutive powers of :

as roots. It follows from the Bose–Chaudhuri–Hocquenghem (BCH) bound [27]–[30] that the minimum distance of the type-I
-dimensional EG-LDPC code is lower-bounded as follows:

(8)

This bound is exactly the same as the bound given above based

on majority-logic decoding.

The number of parity-check symbols of the type-I -dimen-

sional EG-LDPC code is, of course, equal to the degree of its

generator polynomial

. However, a combinatorial ex-

pression for this number has been derived by Lin [42].

A special subclass of EG-LDPC codes is the class of type-I

two-dimensional (2-D) EG-LDPC codes

. For any pos-

itive integer

, the type-I 2-D EG-LDPC code has the fol-

lowing parameters [28], [40]:

Length

Number of parity bits

Minimum distance

Row weight of the

parity-check matrix

Column weight of the

parity-check matrix

(9)

For this special case, the geometry EG

contains

lines that do not pass through the origin. Therefore, the parity-

check matrix

of the type-I 2-D EG-LDPC code is

a

square matrix. Actually,

can be constructed easily by taking the incidence vector of

a line in EG

that does not pass through the origin and

then cyclically shifting this incidence vector

times. This

results in

incidence vectors for the

distinct

lines in EG

that do not pass through the origin. The in-

cidence vector and its

cyclic shifts form the rows of

the parity-check matrix

. Therefore,

is a

square circulant matrix. A list of type-I 2-D EG-LDPC codes is

given in Table I.

Example 1: Consider the 2-D Euclidean geometry

EG

. Let be a primitive element of GF

.

The incidence vector for the line

is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KOU et al.: LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES BASED ON FINITE GEOMETRIES

2715

TABLE I A LIST OF TYPE-I 2-D EG-LDPC CODES

In general, for

,

is not cyclic but it can be

put in quasi-cyclic form. To see this, consider the

lines in EG

that do not pass through the origin. The

incidence vectors of these lines can be partitioned into

(11)

This vector and its 14 cyclic shifts form the parity-check matrix

. The null space of this matrix is the

type-I

2-D EG-LDPC code, the first code given in Table I.

It follows from the analysis of finite-geometry LDPC codes given in Section II that the Tanner graph of the type-I -dimensional EG code does not contain cycles of length . With some modifications to (2) (due to the exclusion of the origin), we find that the number of cycles of length is

(10) We see that the Tanner graph of the code contains many cycles of length .
B. Type-II EG-LDPC Codes Let

Then

is a matrix with

rows and

cyclic classes. Each of these cyclic classes contains

incidence vectors of lines which are obtained by cyclically

shifting any incidence vector in the class

times. For

each cyclic class of incidence vectors of lines, we can choose

a representative and the rest of the incidence vectors are gen-

erated by cyclically shifting this representative. Now we con-

struct a

matrix , whose columns are the

representative incidence vectors of the cyclic classes. For

, let be a

matrix whose

columns are the th (downward) cyclic shifts of the columns of

. Form the following matrix:

(12)

Then the null space of

gives a quasi-cyclic type-II

-dimensional EG-LDPC code

. Every cyclic

shifts of a codeword in

is also a codeword in

. Encoding of quasi-cyclic codes can also be

achieved with linear feedback shift registers [27].

C. Type-I PG-LDPC Codes

The construction of PG-LDPC codes for both types is based

on the lines and points of projective geometries (PGs) over finite

fields. For the purpose of code construction, a brief description

of this family of finite geometries is given here.

Let GF

be the extension field of GF . Let be

a primitive element of GF

. Let

(13)

columns. The rows of this matrix correspond to the nonorigin

points of EG

and the columns correspond to the lines

in EG

that do not pass through the origin. Its column

and row weights are

and

respectively. Any two rows of this matrix have exactly one

“ -component” in common, and any two columns have at most

one “ -component” in common.

The null space of

gives an LDPC code of length

. This code is called the type-II -dimensional EG-LDPC

code. This code is also one-step majority-logic decodable

and has minimum distance

at least

. Since

and

have the same rank,

and

have the same number of parity-check sym-

bols. Since the Tanner graphs of

and

are dual, they have the same cycle distribution. For

,

since the parity-check matrix

of the type-I 2-D

EG-LDPC code

is a square matrix whose rows are

the cyclic shifts of the first row, the rows of

are

simply permutations of the rows of

. Therefore,

and

are identical.

and

. Then the order of is

. The elements

form all the elements of GF . Con-

sider the first powers of ,

.

Partition the nonzero elements of GF

into disjoint

subsets as follows:

(14)

for

. Each set consists of

elements and each

element is a multiple of the first element in the set. Represent

each set by its first element as follows:

with

. For any

GF

, if

with

, then is in and represented by .

If we represent each element in GF

as an

-tuple over GF , then consists of

-tu-

ples over GF . The

-tuple for represents the

-tuples in . The

-tuple over GF that rep-

resents may be regarded as a point in a finite geometry over

GF . Then the points

form

an -dimensional projective geometry over GF , denoted

PG

[28], [36]–[38]. Note that the

elements in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2716

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 7, NOVEMBER 2001

are considered to be the same point

in PG

and a PG does not have an origin.

Let and be any two distinct points in PG

.

Then, the line passing through (or connecting) and

consists of points of the following form:

, where

and are from GF and are not both equal to zero. Since

and

are the same point, there-

fore, each line in PG

consists of

TABLE II A LIST OF TYPE-I 2-D PG-LDPC CODES

(15)

points.

Let be a point not on the line

. Then,

the line

and the line

have

as a common point (the only common point). We say that Then

has

they intersect at . The number of lines in PG

that

and

intersect at a given point is

as a root if and only if is divisible by (18)

(16)

There are

(17)

lines in PG

.

Form a matrix

whose rows are the incidence vec-

tors of the lines in PG

and whose columns correspond

to the points of PG

. The columns are arranged in the

order , , ,

.

has rows and

columns. It follows from the structural properties of lines and

points described above that

has the following struc-

tural properties: 1) each row has weight

; 2) each

column has weight

; 3) any two columns

have exactly one “ -component” in common; and 4) any two

rows have at most one “ -component” in common. The density

of

is

For

, is relatively small. Therefore,

is a

sparse matrix.

Let

be the null space of

. Then

is a regular LDPC code, called the type-I -di-

mensional PG-LDPC code. Since the column weight of

is

the minimum distance

of

is at least

. This regular LDPC code turns out

to be the one-step majority-logic decodable

th order PG

code constructed based on the lines and points of PG

discovered in the late 1960s [28], [44], [45] and is the dual

of a nonprimitive polynomial code [40]–[43]. It is cyclic and,

therefore, can be encoded with a linear feedback shift register

based on its generator polynomial.

Let be a nonnegative integer less than

. For a

nonnegative integer , let be the remainder resulting from

dividing by

. The -weight of ,

, is

defined by (6). Let

be the generator polynomial of

the type-I -dimensional PG-LDPC code constructed based

on PG

. Let be a primitive element of GF

.

with

[28], [40], [44]. Let

. The order

of is then

. From the characteriza-

tion of the roots of

given by (18), it can be shown [39],

[40] that

has the following consecutive powers of :

(19)

as roots. Therefore, it follows from the BCH bound that the minimum distance of the type-I -dimensional PG-LDPC code is lower-bounded as follows:

(20)

This bound is exactly the bound derived based on one-step ma-

jority-logic decoding.

The number of parity-check symbols of the type-I -dimen-

sional PG-LDPC for a given can be enumerated by deter-

mining the roots of its generator polynomial. A combinatorial

expression for this number can be found in [42].

A special subclass of PG-LDPC codes is the class of type-I

2-D PG-LDPC codes constructed based on PG

for var-

ious . For any positive integer , the type-I 2-D PG-LDPC

code has the following parameters [28], [42], [46], [47]:

Length Number of parity bits

Minimum distance

Row weight of the

parity-check matrix

Column weight of the

parity-check matrix

(21)

It is a difference-set code [28], [46]. The parity-check matrix

of this code is a

square

matrix, which can be formed by taking the incidence vector of

a line in PG

and its

cyclic shifts as rows. A list

of type-I 2-D PG-LDPC codes is given in Table II.

D. Type-II PG-LDPC Codes

Let

be the transpose of

. Then the

rows and columns of

correspond to the points and

lines of PG

, respectively.

is also a low-den-

sity matrix with row weight

and column

weight

. The null space of

gives a regular

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KOU et al.: LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES BASED ON FINITE GEOMETRIES

2717

LDPC code, called the type-II -dimensional PG-LDPC code,

denoted

. This code is also one-step majority-logic

decodable with minimum distance

at least

.

For

,

is a square matrix whose rows are

the cyclic shifts of the first row, and the rows of

are simply permutations of the rows of

. As a result,

and

are identical. In general, for

,

is not cyclic but it can be put in quasi-cyclic form

in a similar manner as for the type-II -dimensional EG-LDPC

code.

Example 2: Let

and

. The three-dimensional

(3-D) projective geometry PG

has 85 points and 357

lines. To construct the type-I 3-D PG-LDPC code

,

we form the parity-check matrix

whose rows are the

incidence vectors of all the 357 lines in PG

and whose

columns correspond to all the 85 points in PG

. The ma-

trix

can be put in the following form:

where is the

identity matrix and each is an

circulant matrix. The circulant matrices

have the following vectors (in polynomial form) as their first

rows, respectively:

The matrix

has row weight

and column

weight

. The null space of

gives a

type-I 3-D PG-LDPC code

. The companion code of

this code is the null space of the parity-check matrix

The matrix

has row weight

and column

weight

.

has the same number of parity-check

bits as

. Hence, it is a

with minimum distance at least .

PG-LDPC code

It follows from (2), (13), and (15) that the number of cycles of length in the Tanner graph of an -dimensional (type-I or II) PG-LDPC code is

IV. DECODING OF FINITE-GEOMETRY LDPC CODES

Finite-geometry LDPC codes can be decoded in various

ways, namely one-step MLG decoding [28], [31], BF decoding

[1], [2], weighted MLG decoding, weighted BF decoding,

APP decoding [2], [31] and SPA decoding [10], [11], [15],

[20], [22]. These decoding methods range from low to high

decoding complexity and from reasonably good to very good

error performance. They provide a wide range of tradeoffs

among decoding complexity, decoding speed, and error perfor-

mance. MLG and BF decodings are hard-decision decoding

and they can be easily implemented. Since finite-geometry

LDPC codes have relatively good minimum distances, they

provide relatively large coding gains over the uncoded system.

MLG decoding has the least decoding delay and very high

decoding speed can be achieved. APP and the SPA decodings

are soft-decision decoding schemes. They require extensive

decoding computation but they provide the best error perfor-

mance. Weighted MLG and BF decodings are between hard-

and soft-decision decodings. They improve the error perfor-

mance of the MLG and BF decodings with some additional

computational complexity. They offer a good tradeoff between

error performance and decoding complexity. The SPA decoding

gives the best error performance among the six decoding

methods for finite-geometry LDPC codes and yet is practically

implementable.

The first MLG decoding algorithm was devised by Reed [48]

for decoding Reed–Muller codes [27]. Later Reed’s algorithm

was reformulated and generalized by Massey for decoding both

block and convolutional codes [31]. A thorough discussion of

various types and implementation of MLG decoding can be

found in [28]. Therefore, we will not describe this decoding

method here. APP decoding also gives minimum error perfor-

mance, however, it is computationally intractable and hence it

will not be discussed here for decoding finite-geometry LDPC

codes. A good presentation of APP decoding can be found in

[1], [2].

Suppose a finite-geometry (EG- or PG-) LDPC code is

used for error control over an additive white Gaussian noise

(AWGN) channel with zero mean and power spectral density

. Assume binary-phase shifrt keying (BPSK) signaling

with unit energy. A codeword

is

mapped into a bipolar sequence

before its transmission where

for

and

for

with

.

Let

be the soft-decision received

sequence at the output of the receiver matched filter. For

where is a Gaussian

random variable with zero mean and variance

. Let

be the binary hard-decision received

sequence obtained from as follows:

for

and

for

.

Let be the parity-check matrix of the finite-geometry

LDPC code with rows and columns. Let

,

denote the rows of , where

for

. Then

(22)

(23)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2718

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 7, NOVEMBER 2001

gives the syndrome of the received sequence , where the th syndrome component is given by the check sum

(24)

The received vector is a codeword if and only if

. If

, errors in are detected. A nonzero syndrome component

indicates a parity failure. The total number of parity failures

is equal to the number of nonzero syndrome components in .

Let

Step 1
Step 2
Step 3 Step 4 Step 5

Compute the parity-check sums (syndrome bits). If all the parity-check equations are satisfied (i.e., all the syndrome bits are zero), stop the decoding. Find the number of unsatisfied parity-check equations for each code bit position, denoted ,
. Identify the set of bits for which is the largest. Flip the bits in set . Repeat Steps 1) to 4) until all the parity-check equations are satisfied (for this case, we stop the iteration in Step 1) or a predefined maximum number of iterations is reached.

Then is the error pattern in . This error pattern syndrome satisfy the condition
where

(25) and the
(26)
(27)

BF decoding requires only logical operations. The number

of logical operations

performed for each decoding itera-

tion is linearly proportional to (or ), say

,

where the constant depends on the implementation of the

BF decoding algorithm. Typically, is less than three. The

simple BF decoding algorithm can be improved by using adap-

tive thresholds ’s. Of course, this improvement is achieved at

the expense of more computations. EG- and PG-LDPC codes

perform well with the BF decoding due to the large number of

check sums orthogonal on each code bit.

for

.

B. Weighted MLG and BF Decodings

A. BF Decoding

BF decoding of LDPC codes was devised by Gallager in the

early 1960s [1], [2]. When detectable errors occur during the

transmission, there will be parity failures in the syndrome

and some of the syndrome bits are equal to

. BF decoding is based on the change of the number of parity

failures in

when a bit in the received

sequence is changed.

First, the decoder computes all the parity-check sums based

on (24) and then changes any bit in the received vector

that is contained in more than some fixed number of un-

satisfied parity-check equations. Using these new values, the

parity-check sums are recomputed, and the process is repeated

until the parity-check equations are all satisfied. This decoding

is an iterative decoding algorithm. The parameter , called

threshold, is a design parameter which should be chosen to

optimize the error performance while minimizing the number

of computations of parity-check sums. The value of depends

on the code parameters

and the signal-to-noise

ratio (SNR).

If decoding fails for a given value of , then the value of

can be reduced to allow further decoding iterations. For error

patterns with number of errors less than or equal to the error

correcting capability of the code, the decoding will be com-

pleted in one or a few iterations. Otherwise, more decoding iter-

ations are needed. Therefore, the number of decoding iterations

is a random variable and is a function of the channel SNR. A

limit may be set on the number of iterations. When this limit is

reached, the decoding process is terminated to avoid excessive

computations. Due to the nature of LDPCs, the above decoding

algorithm corrects many error patterns with number of errors

exceeding the error correcting capability of the code.

A very simple BF decoding algorithm is given as follows.

The simple hard-decision MLG and BF decodings can be improved to achieve better error performance by including some kind of reliability information (or measure) of the received symbols in their decoding decisions. Of course, additional decoding complexity is required for such performance improvement.
Consider the soft-decision received sequence

For the AWGN channel, a simple measure of the reliability of a

received symbol is its magnitude . The larger the magni-

tude , the larger the reliability of the hard-decision digit .

Many algorithms for decoding linear block codes based on this

reliability measure have been devised. In the following, this re-

liability measure is used to modify the one-step majority logic

decoding and the BF decoding.

Again consider a finite-geometry LDPC code specified by a

parity-check matrix with rows,

. For

and

, define

(28)

and

(29)

where is the set of check sums orthogonal on bit position .

The value is simply a weighted check sum that is orthogonal

on the code bit position . Let

be the

error pattern to be estimated. Then the one-step MLG decoding

can be modified based on the weighted check sum as follows:

for (30)
for

for

. The above decoding algorithm is called

weighted-MLG decoding and was first proposed by Kolesnik in

1971 [49] for decoding majority logic decodable codes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KOU et al.: LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES BASED ON FINITE GEOMETRIES

2719

The decision rule given by (30) can be used in BF decoding. In this case, the decoding is carried out as follows.

Step 1:
Step 2: Step 3: Step 4: Step 5:

Compute the check sums. If all the parity-check

equations are satisfied, stop the decoding.

Compute based on (29), for

.

Find the bit position for which is the largest.

Flip the bit .

Repeat Steps 1 to 4. This process of BF continues

until all the parity-check equations are satisfied or a

preset maximum number of iterations is reached.

This modified BF algorithm is called weighted BF decoding

algorithm.

The above weighted decoding algorithms are in a way soft-

decision decoding algorithms and require real addition opera-

tions to compute the weighted check sums ’s to make deci-

sions. Since a real addition operation is much more complex

than a logical operation, the computational complexities of both

weighted MLG and BF decodings are dominated by the total

number of real additions needed to decode a received sequence.

From (29), we can readily see that for weighted MLG decoding,

the number of real additions required for decoding a received

sequence is

where

is a constant. How-

ever, for weighted BF decoding, the number of real additions

needed for each decoding iteration is

. Since

(or ) is the total number of -entries in the parity-check

matrix of the code, the computational complexities of both

weighted-MLG and -BF decodings are linearly proportional to

the total number of -entries in .

The implementation of the SPA decoding [10] is based on the

computation of marginal a posteriori probabilities

’s for

. Then the LLR for each code bit is given by

(32)

Let

and

be the prior probabil-

ities of

and

, respectively.

For

and each

, let

be the

conditional probability that the transmitted code bit has value

, given the check sums computed based on the check vectors in

at the th decoding iteration. For

and

, let

be the conditional probability that the

check sum is satisfied, given

( or ) and the other

code bits in

have a separable distribution

i.e.,

(33)

The computed values of

of

as follows:

are then used to update the values (34)

C. The Sum–Product Algorithm

The sum–product algorithm (SPA) [17]–[20], [33] is an it-

erative decoding algorithm based on belief propagation [10],

[11], [20]–[22] which is extremely efficient for decoding LDPC

codes. Like MAP probability decoding algorithm [50], it is a

symbol-by-symbol soft-in/soft-out decoding algorithm. It pro-

cesses the received symbols iteratively to improve the reliability

of each decoded code symbol based on the parity-check sums

computed from the hard decisions of the received symbols and

the parity-check matrix that specifies the code. The reliability

of a decoded symbol can be measured by its marginal posteriori

probability, its log-likelihood ratio (LLR), or the value of its cor-

responding received symbol. The computed reliability measures

of code symbols at the end of each decoding iteration are used

as inputs for the next iteration. The decoding iteration process

continues until a certain stopping condition is satisfied. Then,

based on the computed reliability measures of code symbols,

hard decisions are made.

Again we consider a finite-geometry LDPC code of

length specified by a parity-check matrix with rows,

. For

, define the following index set

for :

(31) which is called the support of .

where

is chosen such that

.

At the th iteration step, the pseudo-posterior probabilities are

given by

(35)

where is chosen such that

.

Based on these probabilities, we can form the vector

as the decoded candidate with

for otherwise.

Then compute

If

, stop decoding the

iteration process and output as the decoded codeword.

The SPA decoding in terms of probability consists of the fol-

lowing steps.

Initialization: Set

, maximum number of iterations to

. For every pair

such that

with

and

, set

Step 1: Step 2:

and

.

For

and each

,

compute the probabilities,

and

.

Go to Step 2.

For

and each

,

compute the values of

and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2720

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 7, NOVEMBER 2001

Fig. 1. Bit-error probabilities of the type-I 2-D (255; 175) EG-LDPC code and (273; 191) PG-LDPC code based on different decoding algorithms.

Step 3:

and the values of

and

. Form

and test

. If

or the

maximum iteration number

is reached,

go to Step 3. Otherwise, set

and

go to Step 1.

Output

as the decoded codeword and

stop the decoding process.

In the above SPA decoding, real number addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, exponential, and logarithm operations are needed. In implementation, the last four types of operations are more complex than addition and subtraction. For this reason, we simply ignore the number of additions and subtractions in analyzing the computational complexity. From (33)–(35), we find that the number of multiplications and divisions needed in each iteration of the SPA decoding is of the order and the number of exponential and logarithm operations needed for each iteration of decoding is of the order . A detail exposition of the SPA can be found in [10], [17]–[20], [33].

D. Two-Stage Hybrid Decoding

brid soft/hard decoding scheme. At the first stage, a code is decoded with the SPA with a small fixed number of iterations, say . At the completion of the th iteration, hard decisions of decoded symbols are made based on their LLRs. This results in a binary sequence of estimated code bits. This sequence
is then decoded with the simple one-step MLG decoding. This two-stage hybrid decoding works well for finite-geometry LDPC codes because they have large minimum distances and SPA decoding of these codes converges very fast. Simulation results for many codes show that the performance gap between five iterations and 100 iterations is within 0.2 dB. Therefore, at the first stage, we may set the number of iterations for the SPA decoding to five or less (in many cases, two iterations are enough). The resulting estimated code sequence may still contain a small number of errors. These errors will be corrected by the one-step MLG decoding at the second stage due to the large majority-logic error-correcting capability of the finite-geometry LDPC codes.
The two-stage hybrid soft/hard decoding scheme offers a good tradeoff between error performance and decoding complexity. Furthermore, it reduces decoding delay.

The SPA decoding is computationally expensive. Each decoding iteration requires many real number computations. If decoding of a code with the SPA converges slowly, a large number of iterations is needed to achieve the desired performance. A large number of iterations results in a large number of computations and long decoding delay which is not desirable in highspeed communications. However, for finite- geometry LDPC codes, this difficulty can be overcome by using a two-stage hy-

V. PERFORMANCE OF FINITE-GEOMETRY LDPC CODES
To demonstrate the error performance of finite-geometry LDPC codes, we select several EG- and PG-LDPC codes of various lengths and decode them with various decoding methods. Figs. 1–8 show the error probabilities of these codes.
Fig. 1 gives the bit-error performance of the type-I 2-D EG-LDPC code and the type-I 2-D

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KOU et al.: LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES BASED ON FINITE GEOMETRIES

2721

Fig. 2. Bit-error probabilities of the (255; 175) EG-LDPC code, (273; 191) PG-LDPC code and two computer generated (273; 191) Gallager codes with the SPA decoding.
Fig. 3. Bit- and block-error probabilities of the type-I 2-D (1023; 781) EG-LDPC code and (1057; 813) PG-LDPC code based on different decoding algorithms.
PG-LDPC code given in Tables I and II, respectively. These which they are constructed. They have about the same rate two codes are equivalent in terms of geometries based on and minimum distance. The EG-LDPC code is decoded with
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2722

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 7, NOVEMBER 2001

Fig. 4. Bit-error probabilities of the (1023; 781) EG-LDPC code, (1057; 813) PG-LDPC code and two computer-generated (1057; 813) Gallager codes with the SPA decoding.

Fig. 5. Bit- and block-error probabilities of the type-I 2-D (4095; 3367) EG-LDPC code and (4161; 3431) PG-LDPC code based on different decoding algorithms.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KOU et al.: LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES BASED ON FINITE GEOMETRIES

2723

Fig. 6. Error performances of the type-I 3-D (511; 139) EG-LDPC code and the type-II 3-D (4599; 4227) EG-LDPC code with the SPA decoding.

Fig. 7. Error performance of the type-II five-dimensional (5-D) (86955; 85963) EG-LDPC code with the SPA decoding. Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2724

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 7, NOVEMBER 2001

Fig. 8. Convergence of the SPA decoding for the type-I 2-D (4095; 3367) EG-LDPC code.

various decoding methods but the PG-LDPC code is only

decoded with the SPA decoding. From Fig. 1, we see that these

two codes have almost the same error performance with the

SPA decoding. We also see that the SPA decoding gives the best

error performance at the expense of computational complexity.

The hard-decision BF decoding achieves relatively good error

performance with much less computational complexity. It

outperforms the simple one-step MLG decoding by 0.45 dB

at the bit-error rate (BER) of

. With some additional

computational complexity, the weighted BF decoding achieves

0.75- and 1.20-dB coding gains over the hard-decision BF and

MLG decodings at the BER of , respectively, and it is

only 1.2 dB away from the performance of the SPA decoding.

It requires much less computational complexity than that of

the SPA decoding. Therefore, weighted BF decoding provides

a very good tradeoff between the error performance of the

SPA decoding and the complexity of the simple one-step MLG

decoding. Fig. 2 gives a comparison of the error performance

of the two finite-geometry LDPC codes and that of two

best computer-generated

Gallager’s LDPC codes

[10] with equals to and , respectively. All codes are

decoded with the SPA decoding. For the two finite-geometry

LDPC codes, the maximum number of decoding iterations

is set to 50, however, for Gallager’s codes, the maximum

number of decoding iterations is set to 200. We see that both

finite-geometry LDPC codes outperform their corresponding

computer-generated Gallager’s codes. The Gallager’s code

with

also shows an error floor. This indicates that the

code has poor minimum distance.

Fig. 3 shows the bit-error performance of the type-I 2-D

EG-LDPC code and the type-I 2-D

PG-LDPC code given in Tables I and II, respectively. These

two codes are equivalent in terms of the code construction

geometries and they have about the same rate and minimum

distance. Again, the EG-LDPC code is decoded with various

decoding methods and the PG-LDPC code is only decoded with

the SPA decoding. The two codes perform almost the same

with the SPA decoding. At the BER of , the performance

of both codes is only 1.7 dB away from the Shannon limit

(with binary-input constraint computed based on the rate of

the

code). For codes of length and rate ,

this performance is amazingly good. Again, we see that the

weighted BF performs very well and provides a good tradeoff

between the error performance of the SPA decoding and the

decoding complexity of the simple one-step MLG decoding.

The block error performance of both codes with the SPA de-

coding is also shown in Fig. 3. They both perform well. Fig. 4

gives a comparison of the error performance of the two finite

geometry LDPC codes and that of two best computer-generated

Gallager’s LDPC codes with equals to and

, respectively. All codes are decoded with the SPA decoding.

We see that the two finite-geometry LDPC codes slightly

outperform their corresponding Gallager’s codes.

The next two codes being evaluated are the type-I 2-D

EG-LDPC code and the type-I 2-D

PG-LDPC code, the fifth codes given in Tables I and II,

respectively. Both codes have rates about . Their error

performances with various types of decoding are shown in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KOU et al.: LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES BASED ON FINITE GEOMETRIES

2725

Fig. 9. Bit-error probabilities of the type-I 2-D (4095; 3367) EG-LDPC code based on two-stage hybrid decoding.

Fig. 5. With the SPA decoding, they perform 1.5 dB from the

Shannon limit at the BER of .

For

, the type-I 3-D EG-LDPC code

is a

code with minimum distance at least . Its

parity-check matrix

is a

matrix with

row weight

and column weight

. Then,

is a

matrix with row weight and column

weight . The null space of

gives the type-II 3-D

EG-LDPC code which is a

code with minimum

distance at least and rate . The type-I code is a low-rate

code but the type-II code is a high-rate code. Both codes have

372 parity-check bits. The bit- and block-error performances of

both codes with the SPA decoding are shown in Fig. 6. We see

that the

type-II EG-LDPC code performs very

well. At BER of , its performance is only 1 dB away from

the Shannon limit.

For

and

, the type-II five-dimensional (5-D)

EG-LDPC code

constructed based on the lines and

points of EG

is an

code with rate

and minimum distance at least . With the SPA decoding, this

code performs only 0.4 dB away from the Shannon limit at the

BER of

as shown in Fig. 7. Its block error performance is

also very good.

In decoding the finite-geometry LDPC codes with the SPA

decoding, we set the maximum number of decoding iter-

ations to 50. Many codes have been simulated. Simulation re-

sults of all these codes show that the SPA decoding converges

very fast. For example, consider the type-I 2-D EG-LDPC code, the fifth code given in Table I. Fig. 8 shows the convergence of the SPA decoding for this code with
. We see that at BER of , the performance gap between five and 100 iterations is less than 0.2 dB, and the performance between 10 and 100 iterations is less than 0.05 dB. This fast convergence of the SPA decoding for finite-geometry LDPC codes is not shared by the computer-generated Gallager’s codes whose parity-check matrices have small column weights, or .
To demonstrate the effectiveness of the two-stage hybrid soft/hard-decoding scheme for finite-geometry LDPC codes, we consider the decoding of the type-I 2-D EG-LDPC code. Fig. 8 shows that decoding this code with the SPA, the performance gap between two iterations and 100 iterations is about 0.5 dB at the BER of . Therefore, in two-stage hybrid decoding, we may set the first stage SPA decoding to two iterations and then carry out the second stage with the one-stage MLG decoding. The code is capable of correcting 32 or fewer errors with one-step MLG decoding. Fig. 9 shows that the code performs very well with the two-stage hybrid decoding.
The parity-check matrix of a type-I finite-geometry LDPC code in general has more rows than columns. This is because the number of lines is larger than the number of points in either EG or PG, except for the 2-D case. Therefore, the number of rows is larger than the rank of the matrix. In decoding a finitegeometry LDPC code with the SPA (or BF decoding), all the rows of its parity-check matrix are used for computing check sums to achieve good error performance. If we remove some redundant rows for the parity-check matrix, simulation results

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2726

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 7, NOVEMBER 2001

Fig. 10. Bit- and block-error probabilities of the extended (65520; 61425) EG-LDPC code with the SPA decoding.

show that the error performance of the code will be degraded. Therefore, finite-geometry LDPC codes in general require more computations than their equivalent computer-generated LDPC codes with small row and column weights (often column weight is or and the row weight is ).

VI. CODE CONSTRUCTION BY COLUMN AND ROW SPLITTING OF THE PARITY-CHECK MATRICES OF FINITE-GEOMETRY LDPC CODES

A finite-geometry (type-I or type-II) LDPC code of length

can be extended by splitting each column of its parity-check

matrix into multiple columns. This results in a new parity

matrix with smaller density and hence a new LDPC code. If the

column splitting is done properly, very good extended finite-ge-

ometry LDPC codes can be obtained. Some of the extended fi-

nite-geometry LDPC codes constructed perform amazingly well

with the SPA decoding. They achieve an error performance only

a few tenths of a decibel away from the Shannon limit. They are

the first known algebraically constructed codes approaching the

Shannon limit.

Let

denote the columns of the parity-check

matrix . First we consider splitting each column of into

the same number of columns. All the new columns have the

same length as the original column. The weight (or “ones”) of

the original column is distributed among the new columns. A

regular column weight distribution can be done as follows. Let

be a positive integer such that

. Dividing by ,

we have

, where

. Split each column

of into columns

,

such that the first

columns,

,

, have weight

and the next

columns,

,

, have weight . The

distribution of “ones” of into

,

is carried

out in a rotating manner. In the first rotation, the first “ ” of

is put in , the second “ ” of is put in , and so on. In

the second rotation, the

th “one” of is put in , the

th “one” of is put in , and so on. This rotating

distribution of the “ones” of continues until all the “ones” of

have been distributed into the new columns.

The above column splitting results in a new parity-check ma-

trix

with columns which has the following structural

properties: 1) each row has weight ; 2) each column either has

weight or has weight

; 3) any two columns have at

most one “ ” in common. If the density of is , the density

of

is then . Therefore, the above column splitting re-

sults in a new parity-check matrix with smaller density. The null

space of

gives an extended finite-geometry LDPC code

. If is not divisible by , then the columns of have

two different weights, and

. Therefore, a code bit of

the extended code is either checked by check sums or

by

check sums. In this case, the extended LDPC code

is an irregular LDPC code.

Example 3: For

and , the type-I 2-D EG-LDPC

code

is a

code with minimum distance

, the fifth code given in Table I. The parity-check matrix of

this code has row weight

and column weight

, re-

spectively. Its error performance is shown in Fig. 5. At the BER

of , the required SNR is 1.5 dB away from the Shannon

limit. Suppose we split each column of the parity-check ma-

trix of this code into 16 columns with rotating column weight

distribution. This column splitting results in a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KOU et al.: LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES BASED ON FINITE GEOMETRIES
TABLE III EXTENDED CODES CONSTRUCTED FROM THE TYPE-I 2-D (4095; 3367) EG-LDPC CODE

2727

extended type-I EG-LDPC code whose parity-check matrix has

row weight

and column weight

. The rate of this

new code is

. This code decoded with the SPA decoding

achieves an error performance which is only 0.42 dB away from

the Shannon limit at the BER of

as shown in Fig. 10. We

see that it has a sharp waterfall error performance. In decoding,

the maximum number of decoding iterations is set to 50, but the

decoding converges very fast. The performance gap between 10

and 50 iterations is less than 0.1 dB.

Given a base finite-geometry LDPC code , it can be ex-

tended into codes of many different lengths. All these extended

codes have different rates and behave differently. Consider the

type-I 2-D

EG-LDPC code discussed in Example

3. Suppose we split each column of its parity-check matrix into

various numbers of columns from two to 23. Table III shows

the performances of all the extended codes in terms of SNRs

required to achieve the BER

and the gaps between the

required SNRs and their corresponding Shannon limits. We see

that splitting each column of the parity-check matrix of the base

code into 16 or 17 columns gives the best performance in terms

of the Shannon limit gap.

Example 4: For

and , the type-I 2-D EG-LDPC

code is a

code with minimum distance ,

the sixth code in Table I. The column and row weights of its

parity-check matrix are both . Suppose we split each column

of the parity-check matrix of this code into 32 columns. We ob-

tain a

extended type-I EG-LDPC code with

rate

. The bit-error performances of this extended code

and its base code are shown in Fig. 11. At the BER of ,

the performance of the extended code is 0.3 dB away from the

Shannon limit.

Example 5: Let

. The type-I 3-D EG-LDPC

code constructed based on the lines and points of EG

is a

code with minimum distance at least and rate

. It is a low-rate code. Its parity-check matrix is a

matrix with row weight

and column weight

.

Suppose this code is extended by splitting each column of its

parity-check matrix into 24 columns. Then the extended code

is a

LDPC code with rate

. The bit-error

performances of this extended code and its base code are shown

in Fig. 12. The error performance of the extended code is only

1.1 dB away from the Shannon limit at the BER of .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2728

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 7, NOVEMBER 2001

Fig. 11. Error performances of the type-I 2-D (16383; 14197) EG-LDPC code and the extended (524256; 507873) EG-LDPC code with the SPA decoding.

Given a finite-geometry LDPC code specified by a parity-

check matrix , each column of can be split in different

manner and into different numbers of columns. Consequently,

many extended finite-geometry LDPC codes can be obtained by

splitting columns of the parity-check matrix . If the columns

are split differently, the resultant extended code is an irregular

LDPC code.

Column splitting of the parity-check matrix of a finite-geom-

etry LDPC code may result in an extended code which is nei-

ther cyclic nor quasi-cyclic. However, if we arrange the rows of

the parity-check matrix into circulant submatrices and then split

each column into a fixed number of new columns with column

weight distributed in a rotating and circular manner, the resul-

tant extended code can be put in quasi-cyclic form. To see this,

we consider a type-I EG-LDPC code of length . Let be the

parity-check matrix of this code with rows and columns.

The rows of can be grouped into

circulant subma-

trices,

where

. Each circulant sub-

matrix is obtained by cyclically shifting the incidence vector

of a line times. Therefore, can be put in the following form:

...

(36)

Now we split each column of into columns in a similar manner as that described earlier in this section. However, the

-components in a column of must be labeled in a specific

circular order. For

, let be the th column of

the th circulant matrix . Then the th column of is

obtained by cascading

with one on top

the other. We label the -components of the th column of

as follows. The first -component of on or below the main diagonal line of circulant and inside is labeled as the first -component of the th column of . The first

-component of on or below the main diagonal line of circulant and inside is labeled as the second -component of . Continue this labeling process until we label the

first -component of on or below the main diagonal line of circular and inside as the th -component of column . Then we go back to circulant and start the second round of the labeling progress. The second -compo-

nent of below the main diagonal line of and inside

is labeled as the

th -component of . The second

-component of below the main diagonal line of circulant

is labeled as the

th -component of . Continue the

second round labeling process until we reach the th circulant

again. Then we loop back to circulant and continue

the labeling process. During the labeling process, whenever we

reach down to the bottom of a circulant matrix , we wrap

around to the top of the same column of . The above labeling process continues until all the -components of are labeled. Once the labeling of -components of is completed, we distribute the -components of into the new columns in the same rotating manner as described earlier in this sec-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KOU et al.: LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES BASED ON FINITE GEOMETRIES

2729

Fig. 12. Error performance of the type-I 3-D (511; 139) EG-LDPC code and the extended (12264; 7665) EG-LDPC code with the SPA decoding.

Fig. 13. Graph decomposition by column/row splitting.

tion. So the weight of each column of is distributed into new

columns in a doubly circular and rotating manner. Clearly, the

labeling and weight distribution can be carried out at the same

time. Let

be the new matrix resulting from the above

column splitting. Then consists of

submatrices

. For

, the rows of

are cyclic shifts of the first row bits at a time. As a

result, the null space of gives an extended finite-geometry

LDPC code in quasi-cyclic form. Type-II EG-LDPC codes can

be extended and put in quasi-cyclic form in a similar manner.

For PG-LDPC codes, may not be divisible by . In this

case, not all the submatrices of the parity-check matrix of a

type-I PG-LDPC code can be arranged as

square circu-

lant matrices. Some of them are nonsquare circulant matrices as

shown in Example 2. The rows of such a matrix are still cyclic

shifts of the first row and the number of rows divides . In reg-

ular column splitting, the labeling and distribution of -compo-

nents of a column in a nonsquare circulant submatrix still follow

the 45 diagonal and wrap back to the top order. When we reach

the last row, move back to the first row and start to move down

from the next column. After column splitting, each extended

submatrix is still a circulant matrix and the extended code is

in quasi-cyclic form. The columns of the parity-check matrix of

a type-II PG-LDPC code can be split in a similar manner.

The last three examples show that splitting each column of the

parity-check matrix of a finite-geometry LDPC code into

multiple columns properly results in an extended LDPC code

which performs very close to the Shannon limit with the

SPA decoding. A reason for this is that column splitting reduces

the degree of each code-bit vertex in the Tanner graph of the

base code and hence reduces the number of cycles in the graph.

Splitting a column of into columns results in splitting a

code-bit vertex of the Tanner graph of the base code into

code-bit vertices in the Tanner graph of the extended code

. Each code-bit vertex in

is connected to a smaller

number of check-sum vertices than in . Fig. 13(a) shows that

splitting a column in into two columns results in splitting

a code-bit vertex in the Tanner graph into two code-bit ver-

tices in the Tanner graph . The original code-bit vertex has

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2730

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 7, NOVEMBER 2001

Fig. 14. Cycle decomposition.

also break many cycles in the Tanner graph of the base code. An example of cycle breaking by check-sum vertex splitting is shown in Fig. 14(b). Clearly, a combination of column and row splitting will break many cycles in the Tanner graph of the base code. This may result in a very good LDPC code.

Example 6: Consider the

type-I EG-LDPC 2-D

code given in Table I. Its performance is shown in Fig. 1. The

column and row weights of the parity-check matrix are both

. If each column of is split into five columns and each row

of is split into two rows, we obtain a parity-check matrix

whose columns have two weights, and , and whose rows have

weight . The null space of gives a

LDPC code

whose error performance is shown in Fig. 16.

Example 7: Again we consider the

type-I

2-D EG-LDPC code

given in Table I. If we split

each column of the parity-check matrix of this code into 16

columns and each row of into three rows, we obtain a new

parity-check matrix with column weight and row weights

and . The null space of gives a

extended LDPC code. This extended code and its base code

have about the same rate. Its error performance is shown in

Fig. 17, and it is 0.7 dB away from the Shannon limit at the

BER of . However, the performance of its base code is

1.5 dB away from the Shannon limit. This example shows that

by a proper combination of column and row splittings of the

parity-check matrix of a base finite-geometry LDPC code, we

may obtain a new LDPC code which has about the same rate

but better error performance.

VII. SHORTENED FINITE-GEOMETRY LDPC CODES

Fig. 15. Decomposition of a cycle of length 6 by column splitting.
a degree of but each code bit after splitting has a degree of . This code bit splitting breaks some cycles that exist in the
Tanner graph of the base code . Figs.14(a) and 15 show the breaking of cycles of lengths and . Therefore, column splitting of a base finite-geometry LDPC code breaks many cycles of its Tanner graph and results in an extended LDPC code whose Tanner graph has many fewer cycles. This reduction in cycles in the Tanner graph improves the performance of the code with the SPA decoding. In fact, breaking cycles with column splitting of the parity-check matrix can be applied to any linear block code. This may result in good LDPC codes.
LDPC codes can also be obtained by splitting each row of the parity-check matrix of a base finite-geometry LDPC code into multiple rows. The resultant code has the same length as the base code but has a lower code rate. Furthermore, proper row splitting also preserves the cyclic or quasi-cyclic structure of the code. Clearly, LDPC codes can be obtained by splitting both columns and rows of the parity-check matrix of a base finitegeometry code.
Splitting a row in the matrix is equivalent to splitting a check sum vertex in the Tanner graph of the code and hence reduces the degree of the vertex as shown in Fig. 13(b). Therefore, row splitting of the parity-check matrix of a base code can

Both types of finite-geometry LDPC codes can be shortened

to obtain good LDPC codes. This is achieved by deleting prop-

erly selected columns from their parity-check matrices. For a

type-I code, the columns to be deleted correspond to a prop-

erly chosen set of points in the finite geometry based on which

the code is constructed. For a type-II code, the columns to be

deleted correspond to a properly chosen set of lines in the finite

geometry. In this section, several shortening techniques are pre-

sented.

First, we consider shortening type-I finite-geometry LDPC

codes. We use a type-I EG-LDPC code to explain the short-

ening techniques. The same techniques can be used to shorten

a type-I PG-LDPC code. Consider the type-I EG-LDPC

code

constructed based on the -dimensional

Euclidean geometry EG

. Let EG

be an

-dimensional subspace (also called an

-flat) of

EG

[28], [36]–[38]. If the points in EG

are removed from EG

, we obtain a system , denoted

EG

EG

, that contains

points. Every line (or -flat) contained in EG

is

deleted from EG

. Every line that is completely outside

of EG

remains in and still contains points.

Every line not completely contained in contains only

points, since by deleting an EG

from EG

we also delete a point in EG

from each such line.

The columns of

that correspond to the points

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KOU et al.: LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES BASED ON FINITE GEOMETRIES

2731

Fig. 16. Bit- and block-error probabilities of the extended (1275; 765) LDPC code with the SPA decoding.

Fig. 17. Bit-error probabilities of the extended (65520; 53235) EG-LDPC code and the type-I 2-D (4095; 3367) EG-LDPC code with the SPA decoding. Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2732

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 7, NOVEMBER 2001

Fig. 18. Bit-error probabilities of the (255; 175) EG-LDPC code, the (239; 160) and (224; 146) shortened EG-LDPC codes with the SPA decoding.

in the chosen

-flat EG

are deleted, the

rows in

that correspond to the lines contained in

EG

become rows of zeros in the punctured matrix,

the rows of

that correspond to the lines contained

in become rows in the punctured matrix with weight , and

the rows of

that correspond to lines not completely

contained in become rows in the punctured matrix with

weight

. Removing the rows of zeros from the punctured

matrix, we obtain a new matrix

that has

(37)

rows and

columns. Every column of

still has weight , but the rows of

have two different weights,

and . The matrix

still has low density of “ones” and the null space

of

gives a shortened EG-LDPC code whose

minimum distance is at least the same as that of the original

EG-LDPC code.

Consider the EG-LDPC code constructed based on the

2-D Euclidean geometry EG

. Its parity-check matrix

is a

matrix whose rows are

the incidence vectors of the lines in EG

that do not pass

through the origin. The weight of each column of

is

and the weight of each row of

is

.

Let be a line in EG

that does not pass through the

origin. Delete the columns in

that correspond to the

points on . This results in a matrix with

columns. The row in

that corresponds to the line

becomes a row of zeros in . Removing this zero row

from , we obtain a

matrix

. Each column of

still has weight

. Removing a column of

that correspond a

point on will delete a “one” from

rows in

which are the incidence vectors of the lines that intersect with

line at the point . Therefore, there are

rows in

with weight

. There are

lines

in EG

not passing through the origin of EG

that

are parallel to . Deleting the columns of the

that

correspond to the points on does not change the weights

of the rows that are the incidence vectors of the

lines

parallel to . Therefore, there are

rows in

with weight

. Any two columns in

still

have at most one “ ” in common. The density of

is

. Therefore,

is still a low-density

matrix. The null space of

is a shortened EG-

LDPC code with minimum distance at least

.

Example 8: Consider the type-I 2-D

EG-LDPC

code constructed based on EG

. The code has rate

.

A line in EG

has 16 points. Puncturing this EG-LDPC

code based on a line in EG

not passing through the origin

results in a

LDPC code with rate . Note that the

puncturing removes 15 information bits and one parity-check

bit from the

EG-LDPC code. Fig. 18 shows that the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KOU et al.: LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES BASED ON FINITE GEOMETRIES

2733

error performance of this punctured code is slightly better than that of the original code.

Puncturing can also be achieved with combination of re-

moving columns and rows of the low-density parity-check

matrix

. For example, let be a set of lines in

EG

not passing through the origin that intersect at a

common point , where

Let be the set of lines in EG

that are parallel to the

lines in . Suppose we puncture as follows: 1) remove all the

rows in

that are the incidence vectors of the lines

in and ; and 2) remove the columns that correspond to the

points on the lines in . The total number of distinct points on

the lines in is

. The total number of lines in

and is

. Therefore, the puncturing results

in a matrix

with

rows

and

columns.

(this code was discussed in Section V). The parity-check ma-

trix

of this code is a

matrix. In circu-

lant form, this matrix consists of nine

circulant sub-

matrices. Suppose we delete one circulant submatrix (any one)

from this matrix. The null space of the resultant shortened ma-

trix gives a

LDPC code with minimum distance at

least and rate . The error performance of this shortened

code is shown in Fig. 19. At the BER of , its error perfor-

mance is 1.1 dB away from the Shannon limit. If we remove

any three circulant submatrices from

, we obtain a

LDPC code with rate . Its error performance

is also shown in Fig. 19. If we delete any six circulant subma-

trices from

, we obtain a

LDPC code

with rate . Its error performance is 1.9 dB away from the

Shannon limit at the BER of . For comparison, the error

performance of the original

base code is also in-

cluded in Fig. 19.

Example 9: Consider puncturing the

EG-LDPC

code. Let and be two lines in EG

not passing

through the origin that intersect at the point . There are

28 lines not passing through the origin parallel to either

or . Puncturing the parity-check matrix

of the

EG-LDPC code based on , , and their parallel

lines results in a

matrix

. The LDPC

code generated by

is a

code with

minimum distance at least . Its error performance is shown

in Fig. 18.

Clearly, shortening of a type-I finite-geometry LDPC code

can be achieved by deleting columns from its parity-check ma-

trix that correspond to the points in a set of parallel

-flats. Zero rows resulting from the column deletion are re-

moved. This results in a shortened LDPC code of length of

or

depending whether

the

-flat that contains the origin is included in the dele-

tion.

To shorten a type-II -dimensional EG-LDPC code, we first

put its parity-check matrix

in circulant form

(38) where

and is a

circulant matrix whose

columns are cyclic shifts of the incidence vector of a line. For

any integer with

, we select circulant submatrices

from

and delete them. This deletion results in a new

matrix

with

rows and

columns. The column and row weights of this matrix are and

, respectively. Its null space gives a shortened type-II

EG-LDPC code which is still quasi-cyclic. This shortened code

has minimum distance at least

. A type-II PG-LDPC code

can be shortened in the same manner.

Example 10: For

, the type-II EG-LDPC code

constructed based on EG

is a

code with

minimum distance whose error performance is shown in Fig. 6

VIII. A MARRIAGE OF LDPC CODES AND TURBO CODES

Turbo codes with properly designed interleaver achieve an

error performance very close to the Shannon limit [23]–[26].

These codes perform extremely well for BERs above (wa-

terfall performance), however, they have a significant weakened

performance at BERs below due to the fact that the compo-

nent codes have relatively poor minimum distances, which man-

ifests itself at very low BERs. The fact that these codes do not

have large minimum distances causes the BER curve to flatten

out at BERs below . This phenomenon is known as error

floor. Because of the error floor, turbo codes are not suitable for

applications requiring extremely low BERs, such as some scien-

tific or command and control applications. Furthermore, in turbo

decoding, only information bits are decoded and they cannot be

used for error detection. The poor minimum distance and lack

of error-detection capability make these codes perform badly in

terms of block error probability. Poor block error performance

also makes these codes not suitable for many communication

applications. On the contrary, finite-geometry LDPC codes do

not have all the above disadvantages of turbo codes, except that

they may not perform as well as the turbo codes for BERs above

.

The advantage of extremely good error performance of

turbo codes for BERs above

and the advantages of

finite-geometry LDPC codes such as no error floor, possessing

error detection capability after decoding, and good block error

performance, can be combined to form a coding system that

performs well for all ranges of SNRs. One such system is

the concatenation of a turbo inner code and a finite-geometry

LDPC outer code. To illustrate this, we form a turbo code

that uses the

distance- Hamming code as the two

component codes. The bit and block error performances of

this turbo code are shown in Fig. 20 from which we see the

error floor and poor block error performance. Suppose this

turbo code is used as the inner code in concatenation with the

extended

EG-LDPC code given in Example

3 as the outer code. The overall rate of this concatenated

LDPC–turbo system is . It achieves both good waterfall

bit and block error performances as shown in Fig. 20. At

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2734

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 7, NOVEMBER 2001

Fig. 19. Bit-error probabilities of the (4088; 3716); (3066; 2694); and (1533; 1161) shortened EG-LDPC codes and the type-II 3-D EG-LDPC code with the SPA decoding.

Fig. 20. Bit- and block-error performance of a concatenated LDPC–turbo coding system with a turbo inner code and an extended EG-LDPC outer code.

the BER of , its performance is 0.7 dB away from the a concatenated system in which a Reed–Solomon (RS) code,

Shannon limit. This concatenated system performs better than say the NASA standard

RS code over GF , is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KOU et al.: LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES BASED ON FINITE GEOMETRIES

2735

used as the outer code and decoded algebraically or decoded based on a reliability-based decoding algorithm.
Another form of the marriage of turbo coding and a finitegeometry code is to use finite-geometry codes as component codes in a turbo coding setup.

IX. CONCLUSION AND SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER WORK

In this paper, a geometric approach to the construction of

LDPC codes has been presented. Four classes of LDPC codes

have been constructed based on the lines and points of the well-

known Euclidean and projective geometries over finite fields.

These codes have been shown to have relatively good minimum

distances and their Tanner graphs have girth . They can be de-

coded with various decoding methods, ranging from low to high

decoding complexity, from reasonably good to very good error

performance. A very important property of these four classes

of finite-geometry LDPC codes is that they are either cyclic

or quasi-cyclic. Encoding of cyclic and quasi-cyclic codes is a

linear time process and can be achieved with simple feedback

shift registers. This linear time encoding is very important in

practice. This advantage is not shared by other LDPC codes

in general, especially the randomly computer-generated LDPC

codes and irregular LDPC codes.

The finite-geometry LDPC codes can be extended or short-

ened in various ways to form many other good LDPC codes

of various lengths and rates. Extension by column splitting

of the parity-check matrix of a finite-geometry LDPC code is

a powerful method to construct long powerful LDPC codes.

Some long extended finite-geometry LDPC codes have been

constructed and they achieve a performance that is only a few

tenths of a decibel away from the Shannon limit. Techniques

for column splitting and deletion have been proposed so that

both the extended and shortened finite-geometry LDPC codes

can be put in quasi-cyclic form.

In this paper, it has been shown that finite geometry is a

powerful tool for constructing good LDPC codes. Finite geom-

etry is a branch in combinatorial mathematics; there are other

important branches in combinatorial mathematics which may

also be useful in constructing LDPC codes. One such branch

is balanced incomplete block design (BIBD) [37], [38], [52],

[53]. Let

be a set of objects. A

BIBD of is a collection of -subsets of , denoted by

and called the blocks, such that the following

conditions are satisfied: 1) each object appears in exactly of

the blocks; and 2) every two objects appear simultaneously

in exactly of the blocks. Such a BIBD can be described by

its incidence matrix , which is a

matrix with ’s and

’s as entries. The columns and rows of the matrix corre-

spond to the objects and the blocks of , respectively. The

entry at the th row and th column of is “ ” if the object

is contained in the block and is “ ” otherwise. If

and both and are small, then and its transpose are

sparse matrices and they can be used as the parity-check ma-

trices to generate LDPC codes whose Tanner graphs does not

contain cycles of length . Over the years, many such BIBDs

have been constructed. For example, for any positive integer

such that

is a power of a prime, there exists a BIBD with

,

and

. The set of integers for which

is a power

of a prime is

which is infinite. For this class of BIBDs, the incidence ma-

trix is a

matrix with density

, a sparse matrix. Then and generate two

LDPC codes. Of course, column- and row-splitting techniques

can be applied to and to generate other LDPC codes.

The above construction based on BIBDs may yield good LDPC

codes. In fact, one such code of length and dimension

has been constructed, which performs very well, 2 dB away

from the Shannon limit. This construction approach should be a

direction for further research.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank the referees for their valuable and constructive comments that improved the presentation of this paper.

REFERENCES

[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform.

Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.

[2]

, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,

1963.

[3] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE

Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.

[4] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance

of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp.

1645–1646, 1996.

[5] M. Sipser and D. Spielman, “Expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform.

Theory, vol. 42, pp. 1710–1722, Nov. 1996.

[6] D. Spielman, “Linear-time encodable error-correcting codes,” IEEE

Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 1723–1731, Nov. 1996.

[7] M. C. Davey and D. J. C. MacKay, “Low density parity check codes over
GF (q),” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 2, pp. 165–167, June 1998.

[8] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman,

“Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs and

belief propagation,” in Proc. 1998 IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory,

Cambridge, MA, Aug. 16–21, 1998, p. 171.

[9] D. J. C. MacKay, “Gallager codes that are better than turbo codes,”

in Proc. 36th Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, and Computing,

Monticello, IL, Sept. 1998.

[10]

, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,”

IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–432, Mar. 1999.

[11] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-

approaching irregular codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp.

619–637, Feb. 2001.

[12] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-

check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform.

Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.

[13] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low density parity check codes based

on finite geometries: A rediscovery,” in Proc. 2000 IEEE Int. Symp. In-

formation Theory, Sorrento, Italy, June 25–30, 2000.

[14]

, “Construction of low density parity check codes: A geometric ap-

proach,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest,

France, Sept. 4–7, 2000, pp. 137–140.

[15] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of

Plausible Inference. San Mateo, CA: Kaufmann, 1988.

[16] S. L. Lauritzen and D. J. Spiegelhalter, “Local computations with prob-

abilities on graphical structures and their application to expert systems,”

J. Roy. Statist. Soc. B, vol. 50, pp. 157–224, 1988.

[17] N. Wiberg, H.-A. Loeliger, and R. Kötter, “Codes and iterative decoding

on general graphs,” Europ. Trans. Telecommun., vol. 6, pp. 513–526,

1955.

[18] R. J. McEliece, D. J. C. MacKay, and J.-F. Cheng, “Turbo decoding as an

instance of Pearl’s belief propagation algorithm,” IEEE J. Select. Areas

Commun., vol. 16, pp. 140–152, Feb. 1998.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2736

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 7, NOVEMBER 2001

[19] F. R. Kschischang and B. J. Frey, “Iterative decoding of compound codes by probability propagation in general models,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 219–230, Feb. 1998.
[20] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum–product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[21] M. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, pp. 673–680, May 1999.
[22] R. Lucas, M. Fossorier, Y. Kou, and S. Lin, “Iterative decoding of one-step majority logic decodable codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 48, pp. 931–937, June 2000.
[23] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo codes,” in Proc. 1993 IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[24] C. Berrou and A. Glavieux, “Near optimum error correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 44, pp. 1261–1271, Oct. 1996.
[25] S. Benedetto and G. Montorsi, “Unveiling turbo codes: Some results on parallel concatenated coding schemes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 409–428, Mar. 1996.
[26] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of binary block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 429–445, Mar. 1996.
[27] W. W. Peterson and E. J. Weldon, Jr., Error-Correcting Codes, 2nd ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1972.
[28] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Jr., Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1983.
[29] R. C. Bose and D. J. Ray-Chaudhuri, “On a class of error correcting binary group codes,” Inform. Contr., vol. 3, pp. 68–79, Mar. 1960.
[30] E. R. Berlekamp, Algebraic Coding Theory. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1968.
[31] J. L. Massey, Threshold Decoding. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963. [32] N. Deo, Graph Theory With Applications to Engineering and Computer
Science. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1974. [33] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. disser-
tation, Dept. Elec. Eng., Univ. Linköping, Linköping, Sweden, Apr. 1996. [34] T. Etzion, A. Trachtenberg, and A. Vardy, “Which codes have cycle-free Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 2173–2181, Sept. 1999.

[35] G. D. Forney, Jr., “Codes on graphs: Normal realizations,” IEEE Trans.

Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 520–548, Feb. 2001.

[36] R. D. Carmichael, Introduction to the Theory of Groups of Finite

Order. New York: Dover, 1956.

[37] A. P. Street and D. J. Street, Combinatorics of Experimental De-

sign. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford Sci., Clarendon, 1987.

[38] H. B. Mann, Analysis and Design of Experiments. New York: Dover,

1949.

[39] E. J. Weldon, Jr., “Euclidean geometry cyclic codes,” in Proc. Symp.

Combinatorial Mathematics. Chapel Hill, NC, Apr. 1967.

[40] T. Kasami, S. Lin, and W. W. Peterson, “Polynomial codes,” IEEE Trans.

Inform. Theory, vol. IT-14, pp. 807–814, Nov. 1968.

[41] S. Lin, “On a class of cyclic codes,” in Error Correcting Codes, H. B.

Mann, Ed. New York: Wiley, 1968.

[42]

, “On the number of information symbols in polynomial codes,”

IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-18, pp. 785–794, Nov. 1972.

[43] T. Kasami and S. Lin, “On majority-logic decoding for duals of prim-

itive polynomial codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-17, pp.

322–331, May 1971.

[44] E. J. Weldon, Jr., “New generations of the Reed–Muller codes, Part

II: Non-primitive codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-14, pp.

199–205, May 1968.

[45] L. D. Rudolph, “A class of majority logic decodable codes,” IEEE Trans.

Inform. Theory, vol. IT-13, pp. 305–307, Apr. 1967.

[46] E. J. Weldon, Jr., “Difference-set cyclic codes,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol.

45, pp. 1045–1055, Sept. 1966.

[47] F. L. Graham and J. MacWilliams, “On the number of parity checks in

difference-set cyclic codes,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 45, pp. 1056–1070,

Sept. 1966.

[48] I. S. Reed, “A class of multiple-error-correcting codes and the decoding

scheme,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-4, pp. 38–49, Sept. 1954.

[49] V. D. Kolesnik, “Probability decoding of majority codes,” Probl. Pered.

Inform., vol. 7, pp. 3–12, July 1971.

[50] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear

codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory,

vol. IT-20, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.

[51] R. Lucas, M. Bossert, and M. Breitbach, “On iterative soft-decision de-

coding of linear block codes and product codes,” IEEE J. Select. Areas

Commun., vol. 16, pp. 276–296, Feb. 1998.

[52] C. J. Colbourn and J. H. Dinitz, The CRC Handbook of Combinatorial

Designs. Boca Raton, FL: CRC, 1996.

[53] H. J. Ryser, Combinatorial Mathematics. New York: Wiley, 1963.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

