IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

791

Concatenated Tree Codes: A Low-Complexity, High-Performance Approach
Li Ping, Member, IEEE, and Keying Y. Wu

Abstract—This paper is concerned with a family of concatenated tree (CT) codes. CT codes are special low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes consisting of several trees with large spans. They can also be regarded as special turbo codes with hybrid recursive/nonrecursive parts and multiple constituent codes. CT codes are decodable by the belief-propagation algorithm. They combine many advantages of LDPC and turbo codes, such as low decoding cost, fast convergence speed, and good performance.
Index Terms—Bayesian networks, graph codes, iterative decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, multidimensional concatenated codes, Tanner graphs, turbo codes.

I. INTRODUCTION

L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes [1]–[10] and turbo codes [11]–[15] are similar in many respects. They

both belong to the general class of powerful concatenated codes

employing pseudo-random encoders and iterative decoders. For

very long interleaver lengths (say, interleaver lengths

),

it has been reported [8], [16] that irregular LDPC codes can

outperform turbo codes. For shorter lengths, turbo codes appear

to have better performance [8].

For an LDPC code, each constituent code [a single-parity-

check (SPC) code] typically involves only several bits. Reli-

able information builds up relatively slowly during the iterative

decoding process, so global convergence is slow. On the other

hand, each constituent code in a turbo code (a recursive convo-

lutional code) involves all the information bits. Decoding infor-

mation spreads very fast in a turbo decoder, which leads to rel-

atively fast convergence speed. However, a turbo decoder based

on the Bahl–Cocker–Jelinek–Raviv (BCJR) algorithm [17], [18]

typically requires more memory and more operations per itera-

tion than an LDPC decoder.

It has been demonstrated that increasing the number of

constituent codes is an efficient technique for low-complexity

turbo-type code design [12], [15]. However, more constituent

codes imply lower rate. Although heavy puncturing can be

used to compensate for the rate loss, the resultant performance

loss may offset the benefit. Thus the schemes considered in

[12], [15] are most suitable for relatively low rates (say, less than ).
This paper is concerned with a family of concatenated tree (CT) codes, improved over those in [20]–[23]. Graphically, a CT code can be seen as a special LDPC code consisting of several trees with large spans. Locally optimal soft-in/soft-out decoding can be carried out over an entire constituent tree code (which represents a large portion of an overall CT code). Consequently, decoding convergence is fast for CT codes. For interleaver lengths less than 10 000, CT codes also demonstrate better performance than common LDPC codes. CT codes are most suitable for medium to high rates (say, greater than ), since tree codes constructed from SPC codes inherently have high rates.
CT codes are also closely related to turbo codes. Some good CT codes can be seen as the turbo-type concatenation of unconventional two-state convolutional codes with both recursive and nonrecursive parts. By using multiple constituent codes and properly balancing the recursive and nonrecursive parts, the performance loss due to the use of very simple constituent codes can be recovered. CT codes can achieve performance comparable to that of standard turbo codes. However, a CT decoder using the belief-propagation algorithm is much simpler (in terms of both operations per iteration and memory usage) than a turbo decoder using the BCJR algorithm. These two types of decoders have similar convergence speeds. Consequently, the overall complexity of a CT decoder is considerably lower than that of a turbo decoder.
This paper is structured as follows. In Section II, we will derive a graphical model for the local encoder and a turbo-type global encoder for the overall CT code. Section III is concerned with parallel and serial decoding strategies for CT codes. We will present some design principles and performance comparisons for CT codes in Section IV. We will compare CT codes with turbo codes and LDPC codes in Section V.
II. CT CODES

Manuscript received December 14, 1999; revised September 1, 2000. This work was supported in part by City University of Hong Kong under Strategic Research Grant 7001044 and under grant from Motorola. The material in this paper was presented at the International Symposium on Turbo Codes, Brest, France, September 2000.
L. Ping is with the Department of Electronic Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong (e-mail: eeliping@cityu.edu.hk).
K. Y. Wu is with the National Key Lab of ISN, Xidian University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China (e-mail: ymwang@ns2.xidian.edu.cn).
Communicated by G. D. Forney, Jr., Guest Editor. Publisher Item Identifier S 0018-9448(01)00719-2.

A. Tanner Graphs and Tree Codes
The Tanner graph [2], [3] for a linear binary code consists of variable nodes and check nodes as in Fig. 1. A variable node, denoted by a circle, represents a bit in the codeword. A check node, denoted by a square, represents a parity-check constraint. The variable nodes connected to a given check node form an SPC code. In this paper, we assume that the code is systematic. We will use white and black circles to represent information and parity bits, respectively. Parity bits can be punctured for rate

0018–9448/01$10.00 © 2001 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:48:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

792

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Fig. 1. The Tanner graph for a binary linear code. White, black, and crossed circles represent information, unpunctured parity, and punctured parity bits, respectively. Square blocks represent parity-check constraints.

Fig. 2. The Bayesian network for the same code as in Fig. 1. White, black, and crossed circles represent information, unpunctured parity, and punctured parity bits, respectively.

adjustment, as denoted by the crossed circles “ ” in Fig. 1. A punctured bit may be considered to be a hidden or state variable.
The degree of a node is the number of edges connected to it. The degree of a variable node is thus the number of parity checks involving the variable. For example, in Fig. 1, the information nodes, the unpunctured parity nodes and the punctured parity nodes have degrees and respectively. In this paper, we only consider codes with low nodal degrees which belong to the general category of LDPC codes. If a Tanner graph does not contain any loop, like the one in Fig. 1, it is called a tree. The corresponding code is called a tree code.
B. Bayesian Networks
A Bayesian network [6] as in Fig. 2 is an alternative graphical representation of a code. It is convenient to use a Bayesian network to illustrate the encoding procedure of a tree code. Here, every node represents a bit in the code. If a node has no incoming edges (a white circle), it is an information node whose value can be independently assigned. Otherwise, the node is the parity check of the starting nodes of its incoming edges. A tree code can be easily encoded following the edge directions in the Bayesian network. In contrast, with general LDPC codes, encoding can be a complicated process.

Fig. 3. A CT encoder with M constituent codes.

C. CT Codes
Simple tree codes can be concatenated in a turbo-type manner [11], [12], [20], [21], as in Fig. 3. The parallel encoder in Fig. 3 consists of local tree encoders. Let

denote interleaved versions of an information sequence .

For each , the th local encoder generates a tree code de-

fined as above with the parity sequence . The overall code-

word is formed by

. The pair

Fig. 4. The trellis representation of the tree code in Fig. 1. Here each state represents a valid value of p and each branch label represents a valid value of fd ; d ; d ; p g.
is referred to as the th constituent code. The resultant code is called a CT code, which can still be seen as an LDPC code for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:48:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PING AND WU: CONCATENATED TREE CODES

793

Fig. 5. Two examples of tree codes. They can both be encoded from the bottom upward. They can also be extended indefinitely following the same patterns.

Fig. 6. The global CT decoder: “T ” denotes a delay of one iteration and “” denotes an interleaver.

small . The degrees of the information nodes in the overall CT code are increased by times from those in the constituent codes. In general, there will be loops in a CT code. It is known that good LDPC codes generally have loopy graphs [1]–[8].

D. Connection with Turbo Codes

Some tree codes have simple trellis representations. For ex-

ample, the two-state trellis shown in Fig. 4 represents the code

in Fig. 1. Here, the state variables at depth are the two valid

values of the punctured bit . The branch labels are the valid

values of the coded bits in the segment

.

The trellis representation indicates a connection between

some tree codes and convolutional codes. Note that the code

in Fig. 4 is different from a conventional convolutional code

in two respects. First, the trellis contains parallel branches.

For example, let

, then four combinations of

can lead to

, namely

and

Second, this particular code contains both recursive and nonrecursive parts, as will be elaborated in Section IV-A.
Many tree codes may not have simple trellis representations. Fig. 5 illustrates two such examples.

III. BELIEF-PROPAGATION DECODING OF CT CODES
A. Parallel Decoder
Being Tanner graph codes, CT codes can be decoded by belief-propagation decoders [1], [3]–[6]. With a parallel realization, messages are exchanged only among neighboring nodes during each iteration [1], [4], [6]. We will show later that a parallel decoder has relatively slow convergence speed.

B. Serial Decoder

Due to the special structure of CT codes, a serial turbo-type

decoder [20] as in Fig. 6 can be employed. It consists of

looped local decoders, each responsible for one constituent

code. Between two local decoders, log-likelihood ratios (LLRs)

of information bits are exchanged during decoding. Due to the

tree structure, the local decoder can be implemented by the

belief-propagation algorithm based on the two-way schedule

[6]. It can achieve a locally optimal solution for each constituent

code within each decoding and is suitable for a serial processor.

A detailed discussion of various global decoder structures for

general concatenated codes can be found in [12], [24]. There

may be a convergence problem for such decoders (see [12]).

From our observation, this problem becomes very serious for

parallel concatenated codes with

. A damping method

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:48:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

794

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Fig. 7. The constituent tree code used in the simulation. J (J ) is the number of information bits involved in each horizontal (vertical) segment.

using a factor

together with a simulated annealing tech-

nique have been suggested in [12] to treat this problem. How-

ever, empirically, we find that the serial decoder of Fig. 6 of-

fers a simple as well as very robust solution without the need of

damping factors.

The variables involved in Fig. 6 are

initial a priori LLR vector for the information bits;

a priori LLR vector for the information bits in the

th constituent code;

a posteriori LLR vector for the information bits in

the th constituent code;

a priori LLR vector for the parity bits in the th

constituent code;

extrinsic LLR vector for the th constituent code,

defined by [11]

where is the total length of the code (including all the con-

stituent codes) and is the average degree of nodes, (see ap-

pendix). This applies (approximately) to both parallel and se-

rial decoders. Let be the code rate. The normalized decoding

complexity is

multiplications and

ad-

ditions per information bit per iteration. For small and with

similar performance and convergence speeds, the complexity of

a CT decoder is much lower than that of a turbo decoder; see

Section V. Some additional remarks are as follows.

• The lookup table technique [18] applies equally to both turbo and CT codes.
• The decoding complexity of CT codes decreases at higher rates.
• It can be shown that the memory usage of a belief-propagation decoder is generally much lower than that of a turbo decoder.

where

is the extrinsic LLR vector for the th con-

stituent code generated in the last iteration (with zero initial

values).

At the start, is fed into DEC-0. The local a posteriori

probability (APP) decoders operate successively. The a pos-

teriori LLR vector

from DEC-

is used, after

appropriate interleaving, as the a priori LLR vector

for

DEC- .

is fed back to DEC-0 for the second iteration.

The process is then repeated iteratively. For the first iteration

(1)

and after the first iteration

IV. SOME DESIGN PRINCIPLES

Except where specified otherwise, the discussion in this sec-

tion is carried out based on the tree structure in Fig. 7, since

it is regular and easy to analyze. The rate of the code is

. For the concatenation of constituent

codes, the overall rate is

. Some

other tree structures will be briefly compared at the end of this

section.

We will use for rate, for the number of constituent codes,

for interleaver length, and for iteration number. As ex-

plained below, the bit-error rate (BER) bound analysis for CT

codes is a complicated issue that is still under investigation.

Most of our discussion will be heuristic.

A. Recursive and Nonrecursive Parts

(2)

Notice that

is generated by DEC- , so it should be pre-

vented from circulating back to DEC- again. This is realized

by the subtraction of delayed

from

shown in Fig. 6.

C. Decoding Complexity
The complexity of the belief-propagation decoding algorithm is about multiplications and additions per iteration,

We divide the information nodes into recursive and nonre-

cursive ones. For a nonrecursive node, such as in Fig. 7,

changing its value will affect a fixed number of parity nodes. On

the other hand, changing the value of a recursive node, such as

in Fig. 7, will affect an indefinite number of parity nodes,

depending on code length. The sets of

and

are

called the nonrecursive and recursive parts, respectively.

In terms of graph theory, the recursive nodes belong to

directed paths that grow with the graph length. Along such

a path, an information sequence with finite weight may pro-

duce a codeword with infinite weight (when the code length

approaches infinity). Recall that a standard turbo code is

the concatenation of two recursive convolutional codes. A

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:48:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PING AND WU: CONCATENATED TREE CODES

795

nonrecursive code tends to link low parity weights with low information weights. For a recursive code, such combinations are reduced. With random interleavers, the resultant codewords are more like those in random codes and, as is well known, random codes can approach the channel capacity. For CT codes, a similar principle applies. Furthermore, we find that a hybrid recursive and nonrecursive structure can lead to improved performance for CT codes, as discussed below.

B. A Design Criterion for CT Codes

According to [11], [13], the recursive encoders play a fundamental role in turbo codes. If at least two recursive constituent codes are used which are separated by random interleavers, multiplicities of low-weight codewords are greatly reduced after concatenation. This effect is referred to as the interleaving gain. As pointed out in [13], the interleaving gain is critical to good performance of turbo codes. Take a weight- information sequence as an example and consider constituent encoders with only recursive parts (such as for an ordinary turbo code). The parity weight generated by such an input word is approximately proportional to the distance between the positions of the two information ones. With at least two recursive constituent codes and random interleavers, the probability that the two information ones are close to each other in all encoders is small. Based on the same principle, to achieve good performance, every information bit in a CT code should appear in the recursive part at least twice.

C. Interleaver Design

Suppose that one random interleaver per constituent code is

used for a CT code. There is a possibility that some informa-

tion bits may appear in the nonrecursive part for all the con-

stituent codes, which is not preferred according to Section IV-B.

The following interleaver design can avoid such an event. For

convenience, assume that

and

are both integers for the code in Fig. 7. Also

assume that divides interleaver length . Divide the infor-

mation array into subsets of equal size

Define

(3) modulo . For the th constituent code, define

and let be the complement of in . Two independent random interleavers are applied to and , respectively, to obtain the recursive and nonrecursive parts. In this way, every bit will appear in and exactly and times, respectively. This interleaver design is adopted throughout the discussions below.
In [13], an elegant technique has been developed to generate the distance spectra of turbo codes based on the assumption that a “uniform” interleaver is used for each constituent code. However, as mentioned above, two independent interleavers should

= Fig. 8. Performance comparison for the CT codes based on Fig. 7. Rate R
1=2, interleaver length L = 1024, iteration number It = 18, (J ; J ) =
(2; 0); (3; 0); (4; 0); (5; 0); (6; 0), and (7; 0) for M = 2; 3; 4; 5; 6; and 7,
respectively.

be used separately for the recursive and nonrecursive parts to ensure good performance for a CT code. Therefore, the formulas in [13] are not directly applicable here, although the principles are still useful.

D. Selection of the Number of Constituent Codes

Fig. 8 examines the impact of the number of constituent tree

codes on CT codes. Performance improves as the number of

constituent codes increases up to

, and then starts to

decline. Similar observations have been made for other param-

eters, such as different choices of the

pair or the inter-

leaver length . Notice that, after concatenating tree codes

with the structure in Fig. 7, the degree of an information node

is simply . Define

. With

, we have

, and the average degree of the variable nodes (in-

cluding the punctured nodes and considering all the constituent

codes) is

(4)

For

and we have

and

respectively. The values for

and are close to

the common choice of

for LDPC codes [4].

We conjecture that more constituent codes may lead to a

lower error floor but this is difficult to verify using simulation.

We are currently trying to find bounds.

Also notice that increases with in (4). From the appendix,

the decoding complexity is proportional to . Therefore, more

constituent codes imply higher decoding cost.

In view of the above discussion, we will fix

below.

E. Relative Sizes of Recursive and Nonrecursive Parts

We use the codes with

and

as examples.

In this case,

and

can be chosen as

and

. The corresponding

codes will be distinguished by the

pair below.

Clearly, the

and

codes are not good choices, since

every information bit appears in the recursive part fewer than

two times in these two codes (see Section IV-B and Fig. 9). We

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:48:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

796

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

= Fig. 9. Performance comparison for different CT codes with R 1=2, M =
4, L = 1024, and It = 18. Performance of two punctured turbo codes with
R = 1=2, M = 2, L = 1024, and It = 18 are included as references. Their
generators are (21; 37) and (37; 23). The (37; 23) turbo code has a low error
floor [25].

Fig. 10. Simulated performance for the CT codes with M = 4, L = 65 536, It = 18, and (J ; J ) = (3; 1) for R = 1=2, (J ; J ) = (9; 3) for R = 3=4, (J ; J ) = (27; 9) for R = 9=10. Theoretical limits: (R; E =N ) = (1=2; 0.2 dB), (3=4, 1.63 dB), and (9=10, 3.2 dB).

will only compare

and

codes. For these

codes, the codewords with minimum distance are all generated

by weight- information sequences. (Note that a weight-

information sequence will generate at least one nonzero parity

bit per constituent code.) For the

CT code, the minimum

distance is , corresponding to the event that the two ones

(more precisely, their corresponding nodes in the Tanner graph)

are connected to a common check node in every constituent

tree code and produce zero parity. This is referred to as the

zero-parity event. Similarly, it can be shown that the

code

also has a minimum distance of . Notice that here we assume

random interleavers. The probability of the zero-parity event is

small but not zero.

For the

CT code, every information bit will appear in

the nonrecursive part once (using the interleaver design of Sec-

tion IV-C). Two parity ones will be produced when two infor-

mation ones are in the nonrecursive part. Thus the minimum

distance of the

code is . This implies an advantage com-

pared with the

and

CT codes, which can be seen

from the simulation results shown in Fig. 9. The performance

of the

CT code is better than that of the

CT code

by about 0.3 dB at BER equal to . The other choices of

pairs clearly result in performances with worse error

floors.

For the punctured

and

turbo codes [11], [25]

compared in Fig. 9, the minimum distances are and , respec-

tively. This implies that for very high

, the

turbo

code may have an advantage. However, for LDPC/turbo-type

concatenated codes, performance is also strongly affected by

the multiplicities of codewords with small weights, in addition

to the minimum distance. (Recall that an ideal random code can

have codewords with very small weights and very small mul-

tiplicities.) A detailed discussion of this issue can be found in

[13], [14] for turbo codes. From [14], increasing the number of

constituent codes can further reduce the multiplicities of code-

words with small weights. This explains the good performance

of the CT codes that use more constituent codes than the turbo

codes, although the former have lower minimum distances. As

seen from Fig. 9, the

CT code and the

turbo code

have very similar performance over a quite wide range. It is also

interesting that the

CT code and the

turbo code

have very similar performance.

For a thorough performance analysis, especially in the error

floor range, a BER bound technique such as the one developed

in [13], [14] for turbo codes can be employed. However, as men-

tioned above, the uniform interleaver assumption introduced in

[13] is not applicable to CT codes using the two-interleaver tech-

nique outlined in Section IV-C. We are now investigating the

issue of generating a weight-distribution function for general

CT codes.

F. High-Rate CT Codes

Fig. 10 shows the performance of CT codes with different

rates, which are all about a half decibel away from the theo-

retical limits. Based on the discussion in Section III-C, the de-

coding costs of CT codes decrease for higher rate. This is in con-

trast to punctured turbo codes, for which decoding complexity

remains the same regardless of the puncturing rate [26]. In the

limiting case of

, the complexity ratio between a CT code

and a 16-state turbo code [26] is about a fraction of . (Note

that for

,

for a CT code with

constituent

codes.)

G. Other Tree Structures
CT codes can also be generated using more general tree structures than the one in Fig. 7. Furthermore, different structures can be used for different constituent codes. Fig. 11 includes the simulation results for some CT codes based on the tree structures of Fig. 5. Some of these are quite close to (but not better than) the best ones in Fig. 9.

V. COMPARISONS WITH TURBO CODES AND LDPC CODES

Fig. 12 is a comparison of CT codes with turbo codes with

different interleaver lengths. All the other parameters are fixed

as for those in Fig. 9. We only include the

and

CT

codes for clarity. It is seen that the performance curves of the

and

CT codes are, respectively, quite close to those

of the

and

turbo codes.

For the CT codes considered, the ratio between the total num-

bers of edges and the total number of information nodes is eight

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:48:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PING AND WU: CONCATENATED TREE CODES

797

Fig. 11. Simulated performance for some CT codes based on the tree structures of Fig. 5. Here we use “a” and “b” to indicate the tree structures in Fig. 5(a) and (b), respectively. For example, “aaab” means the structure of Fig. 5(a) is used
= in three constituent codes and the structure of Fig. 5(b) in one constituent code,
etc. R 1=2, L = 1022, and It = 18.

Fig. 13. Convergence comparison for CT and turbo codes with R = 1=2, L = 200 and It = 1; 2; 3; 5; 18 . The parameters of the CT code are M = 4 and (J ; J ) = (3; 1). The parameters of the turbo code are M = 2 and the generator = (21; 37). The solid lines are for the CT code and the dashed lines are for the turbo code.

Fig. 12. Simulated performance of CT and turbo codes with R = 1=2, It = 18, L = 200; 400; 1000; 3000; and 60 000; with M = 4 for the CT codes and M = 2 for the turbo codes.

(using the Tanner graph, not the Bayesian network, to count de-

gree). There is no operation required for the edges connected

to the unpunctured parity nodes of degree . Considering this,

and using the results of the appendix, the decoding cost of a CT

code is about 42 multiplications and 35 additions per informa-

tion bit per iteration. This is about six times lower than the de-

coding complexity of 16-state turbo codes. (The latter is about

256 multiplications and 192 additions per information bit per it-

eration, including normalization.)

Fig. 13 compares the convergence properties of the

CT

code and the

turbo code, both with

and

. The convergence speeds of the two codes are quite similar.

Fig. 14 is a comparison between CT codes and some LDPC

codes reported in the literature, including the repeat–accumulate

(RA) code. An RA code consists of an inner repetition code, a

random interleaver, and an outer two-state convolutional code.

This is somehow similar to the CT code based on Fig. 7 with

, except that the RA code employs a single interleaver

for the whole code (which makes it easier to analyze).

The performance curves of the LDPC codes and the RA code

are taken from the respective references listed blow. Some de-

tails for the code structures compared in Fig. 14 are as follows.

• RA1024: the RA code in [19], .

,

,

Fig. 14. Simulated performance of various codes decodable by the belief-propagation algorithm. All the CT codes have four constituent codes with the structure shown in Fig. 7.

• CT1024: a hybrid

-

consisting of alternative

,

,

.

CT code [each tree code

and

sections],

• LDPC4986: the LDPC code in [9], .

,

,

• CT5000: the .

CT code,

,

,

• LDPC10000: the LDPC code in [8],

,

.

• CT10000: the .

CT code,

,

,

From Fig. 14, it is seen that the CT codes outperform the RA

code and the LDPC code for interleaver lengths of

and

about . For an interleaver length of

, the LDPC code

has better performance [8]. All the codes compared in Fig. 14

are decodable by the belief-propagation algorithm. However, for

serial processing, the CT codes exhibit faster convergence due

to the use of the two-way schedule (see Fig. 15).

The influence of different decoder structures is also an inter-

esting issue. Fig. 15 compares the serial and parallel decoders

(see Sections III-A and III-B) for the same CT code. The serial

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:48:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

798

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

to the variables used in [4] bearing the same names. They are

initialized as

and

.

Message from a check node :

(5)

Message from a variable node :

(6a)

= Fig. 15. Comparison of the convergence speeds for serial and parallel

decoders. The same CT code (based on Fig. 7) is used with M

4,

(J ; J ) = (4; 0), and L = 1024. The solid lines are for the serial decoder in

Fig. 4, and the dashed lines for the parallel decoder based on [4].

decoder demonstrates better convergence speed as expected. This implies that, for a serial processor, the convergence speed of a general LDPC code may also be improved if it can be decomposed into several trees with large spans (so that the two-way schedule can be applied).

Also update

and

(6b)

Consider the evaluation of (5). For every , we first compute (7)

VI. CONCLUSION
In summary, CT codes can be encoded straightforwardly. They are decodable by the belief-propagation algorithm like common LDPC codes, but exhibit faster convergence speed and better performance for short interleaver length. They achieve performance comparable to turbo codes, but with significantly lower decoding cost.
For further research, the capacity analysis of general CT codes is still an issue. Some tree structures have simple trellis representations (see Fig. 4), based on which their distance spectra can be generated. For codes with only a recursive part and employing one interleaver per constituent code, the uniform interleaver assumption of [13] is applicable. A BER bound analysis for this special case can be found in [23]. However, for general CT codes with both recursive and nonrecursive parts, the uniform interleaver assumption is not applicable if the interleaver design is based on the technique (two random interleavers per constituent code) outlined in Section IV-C. This complicates the problem of analyzing the weight distribution function. We will discuss this issue elsewhere.

APPENDIX THE BELIEF-PROPAGATION DECODING ALGORITHM
[4], [6], AND [27]

Consider a Tanner graph. Denote by and the check

and variable nodes, respectively. Denote by

the edge

between and . Let

be the set of edges connected

to a node and let

be excluding . Let and

be the a priori probabilities of being and , respectively,

based on the observation of an individual channel output. Define

.

For every edge

, two messages are defined below. It is

easy to verify that and in the following are equivalent

The product in (5) can then be generated by

for every

in

. With this technique, (5)

costs (approximately) three additions and three multiplications

per edge.

Similarly, for (6), let

(8)

Then

for every

in

. It is easy to

verify that (6a) and (6b) cost three multiplications and two ad-

ditions per edge. Incidentally, is the a posteriori likelihood

ratio for and its logarithm is the LLR used in Section III-B.

In belief-propagation decoding, (5) and (6) are evaluated iter-

atively. With the parallel (flooding) schedule, one iteration con-

sists of evaluating (5) concurrently for all the check nodes and

then evaluating (6) concurrently for all the variable nodes. With

the serial (two-way) schedule, (5) and (6) are evaluated alter-

natively following a proper sequential order within an iteration,

according to the tree structure. For a detailed discussion of the

two methods, see [6] and [27]. In both cases, each of the two

messages above is generated once for every edge. Let be the

total number of variable nodes (i.e., the code length) and the

average variable nodal degree. Based on the analysis above, the

total cost (for either parallel or serial schedule) is thus mul-

tiplications and additions per iteration.

As a final note, the algorithm above is based on the manipu-

lation of the difference between two probability values. Such an

approach is sensitive to quantization. A modified method is dis-

cussed in [28] to overcome the difficulty by operating on likeli-

hood ratios. The latter requires considerably fewer quantization

bits and so lower decoding cost. The two methods are equiva-

lent with perfect arithmetic precision and have similar operation

counts.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:48:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PING AND WU: CONCATENATED TREE CODES

799

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank the anonymous reviewers for the detailed comments and corrections from . They would also like to acknowledge help from W. K. Leung and J. K. S. Ho.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.
[3] N. Wiberg, H. A. Loeliger, and R. Kotter, “Codes and iterative decoding on general graphs,” Euro. Trans. Telecommun., vol. 6, pp. 513–526, Sept. 1995.
[4] D. J. C. McKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low-density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 457–458, Mar. 1997.
[5] R. J. McEliece, D. J. C. MacKay, and J. F. Cheng, “Turbo decoding as an instance of Pearl’s ‘belief propagation’ algorithm,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 140–152, Feb. 1998.
[6] F. R. Kschischang and B. J. Frey, “Iterative decoding of compound codes by probability propagation in graphical models,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 219–230, Feb. 1998.
[7] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs and belief propagation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory (ISIT’98), Cambridge, MA, Aug. 1998, p. 117.
[8] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of provably good low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, to be published.
[9] D. J. C. MacKay, S. T. Wilson, and C. D. Matthew, “Comparison of constructions of irregular Gallager codes,” IEEE Trans. Commu., vol. 47, pp. 1449–1454, Oct. 1999.
[10] I. Kanter and D. Saad, “Error-correcting codes that nearly saturate Shannon’s bound,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 83, no. 13, pp. 2660–2663, Sept. 1999.
[11] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Ccommunications Conf. (ICC’93), vol. 2, 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[12] D. Divsalar and F. Pollara, “Multiple turbo codes,” in Proc. IEEE MILCOM’95, vol. 1, 1995, pp. 279–285.

[13] S. Benedetto and G. Montorsi, “Unveiling turbo codes: Some results on parallel concatenated decoding schemes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 409–428, Mar. 1996.
[14] S. Benedetto, D. Divsalar, G. Montorsi, and F. Pollara, “Analysis, design, and iterative decoding of double serially concatenated codes with interleavers,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commu., vol. 16, pp. 231–244, Feb. 1998.
[15] C. Berrou, M. Jézéquel, and C. Douillard, “Multidimensional turbo codes,” in IEEE Int. Workshop Information Theory, Metsovo, Greece, June 1999.
[16] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney Jr., T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low density parity-check codes within 0.0051 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., to be published.
[17] L. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-20, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[18] P. Robertson, E. Villebrun, and P. Hoeher, “A comparison of optimal and sub-optimal MAP decoding algorithms operating in the log domain,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Communications Conf. (ICC’95), June 1995, pp. 1009–1013.
[19] D. Divsalar, H. Jin, and R. McEliece, “Coding theorems for ‘turbo-like’ codes,” in Proc. 1998 Allerton Conf., 1998, pp. 201–210.
[20] L. Ping, S. Chan, and K. L. Yeung, “Iterative decoding of multi-dimensional concatenated single parity check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Communications Conf. (ICC’98), June 1998, pp. 131–135.
[21] L. Ping, “Modified turbo codes with low decoding complexity,” Electron. Lett., vol. 34, no. 23, pp. 2228–2229, Nov. 1998.
[22] L. Ping, W. K. Leung, and N. Phamdo, “Low density parity check codes with semi-random parity check matrix,” IEE Electron. Lett., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 38–39, Jan. 1999.
[23] L. Ping, X. L. Huang, and N. Phamdo, “Zigzag codes and concatenated zigzag codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, submitted for publication.
[24] S. Benedetto, D. Divsalar, G. Montorsi, and F. Pollara, “Soft-input softoutput modules for the construction and distributed iterative decoding of code networks,” Euro. Trans. Telecommun., vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 157–172, Mar.–Apr. 1998.
[25] S. Benedetto, R. Garello, and G. Montorsi, “A search for good convolutional codes to be used in the construction of turbo codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 46, pp. 1101–1105, Sept. 1998.
[26] Ö. F. Açtkel and W. E. Ryan, “Punctured turbo- codes for BPSK/QPSK channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, pp. 1315–1323, Sept. 1999.
[27] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[28] L. Ping and W. K. Leung, “Decoding low density parity check codes with finite quantization bits,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 4, pp. 62–64, Feb. 2000.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:48:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

