A 220mW 1Gb/s 1024-Bit Rate-1/2 Low Density Parity Check Code Decoder
Chris Howland and Andrew Blanksby
High Speed Communications VLSI Research Department Agere Systems
Holmdel NJ 07733 Email: [ howland,blanksby } @agere.com

Abstract
A 1024 bit rate-1/2 Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) code decoder has been implemented that matches the coding gain of equivalent turbo codes. The parallel decoder architecture supports throughputs up to I Gb/s and convergence in the decoding algorithm translates into extremely low switching activity with power dissipation under 220mW.
Introduction
Error correcting codes are used to increase the bandwidth and power efficiency of communications systems [ 1J. The invention of turbo codes and block turbo codes has moved the limit of achievable coding gain much closer to the Shannon limit
for low and high code rates' respectively[2, 31. However, the iterative nature of the decoding algorithms for turbo codes and block turbo codes present significant implementation challenges. Each pass through the data block to perform a decoder iteration requires the fetching, computation, and storage of large amounts of state information. Performing multiple iterations to achieve high coding gain reduces throughput and increases power dissipation [4].
The interest in iterative decoding algorithms has led to the rediscovery of Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes. LDPC codes were invented by Gallager in 1962 but were not pursued for due to implementation complexity [ 5 ] .It has been recently shown that LDPC codes are asymptotically superior to turbo codes with respect to coding gain [6]. The most powerful code currently known is a I million bit, rate- 11'2 ,LDPC code, achieving a capacity which is only 0.13dB from the Shannon
limit for a bit error probability (BER) of [6].However, unlike turbo and block turbo codes it is possible to decode LDPC codes using a block-parallel algorithm instead of a block-serial algorithm.
In this paper we present a parallel architecture for LDPC decoders that achieves both very high throughput and extremely low power dissipation. This architecture is demonstrated through the implementation of a 1024 bit, rate- 1/2 , soft decision LDPC decoder.
1. The rate of a code I S defined :is the ratio of the information bits Io the sum of the information and parity hits A low-rate code has a large redunddncy overhead while ii high-rate code has a small overhead,

Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) Codes Low density parity check codes are linear block codes thus the set of all codewords, x , span the null space of a parity check matrix H :

Hx = 0

(1)

The parity check matrix H for LDPC codes is a sparse binary matrix where the set row and column elements are chosen to satisfy a desired row and column weight profile [6],and maximize the length of cycles in the graph representation of the matrix [7, 81. The general structure of H is shown in Fig. 1.
N columns -----+

II I I

II

II

II

Fig. I . General structure of a low-density parity check matrix H.

Each row of H corresponds to a parity check and a set ele-

ment (2, j ) indicates that data symbol j participates in parity

check i . In a block of N bits or symbols, there are M redun-

dant parity symbols and the code rate R IS given by:

R = (N-M)/N

(2)

A . Graph Representation of LDPC Codes
Low density parity check codes can also be represented using a bipartite graph, where one set of nodes represents the parity check constraints and the other set represents the data symbols or variables as illustrated in Fig. 2.
M check nodes

11 N variable nodes received symbol

decoded symbol

Fig. 2. Example of the bipartite graph representation for a LDPC code and information flow in the message passing algorithm.

0-7803-6591-7/01/$10.00 0 2001 IEEE

13-3-1
IEEE 2001 CUSTOM INTEGRATED CIRCUITS CONFERENCE

293

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:44:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

A variable node v i , corresponding to column J in H , is con-
nected to check node c, , corresponding to row i in H , if the
entry ( i ,j ) in H is set, i.e. non zero.
B. The Message Passing Algorithm
The message passing algorithm is an iterative algorithm for decoding LDPC codes best understood with reference to the graph representation of an LDPC code [SI. It can be summarized as follows: I .Initialize all variable nodes and their outgoing variable mes-
sages to the value of the corresponding received bit. 2. Propagate the variable messages from the variable nodes to
the check nodes along the edges of the graph. 3.Perform a parity check (XOR) on the incoming variable
messages at the check nodes. Form each check message as the XOR of the incoming variable message and the panty check result. This is the value all other connected variables imply the variable corresponding to each edge should take. 4. Pass the check messages from the check nodes back to the variable nodes along the edges of the graph. 5. At the variable nodes update estimates of the decoded bit and outgoing variable messages for each edge connected to the variable node using a weighted majority function or summation. 6.Repeat steps 2-5 until a termination condition is met. Possible iteration termination conditions include:
The estimated decoded block x satisfies (1).
The current messages passed to the parity check nodes satisfy all of the parity checks. This does not guarantee that ( I ) is satisfied but is almost sufficient and is simple to test. 9 Stop decoding after a fixed number of iterations.
Both hard and soft decision forms of the message passing algorithm are possible.
A Parallel 1024 bit, Rate 112 Soft Decision LDPC Decoder
A parallel architecture for the message passing algorithm can be obtained by directly instantiating the LDPC graph in hardware. As seen in Fig. 2 the computational dependencies for any node depend only on nodes of the opposing type. Therefore, all variable nodes and all check nodes can alternately be updated in a block-parallel fashion supporting very high throughput.
To demonstrate the utility of a parallel architecture for decoding LDPC codes a prototype decoder was implemented for a 1024 bit, rate- 1 /2 LDPC code. This data point corresponds to
one of the block size and code rates proposed for 3rdgeneration (3G) wireless turbo codes [9].To achieve the highest possible coding gain at low signal-to-noise ratios (SNR) the decoder uses a soft decision version of the message passing
algorithm. The parity check matrix H for the code has an

average column weight of 3.25, with columns of weight t=3,6, 7 and 8. This corresponds to an average row weight of 6.5 and 256 weight k=6 and 256 weight k=7 parity checks were chosen to satisfy this constraint and the code rate of I /2 .
Although the coding gain of a 1024 bit, rate- I /2 LDPC code is theoretically inferior to that of a turbo code 161,implementation restrictions o n the number of turbo code decoder iterations do not enable the realization of this difference. In Fig. 3 the coding gain of the LPDC decoder is compared to the 1024 bit rate- I /2 turbo code i n the 3G proposal decoding using the SOVA and MAP decoding algorithms [ I O , 1 I ] . The coding performance of the LDPC code is comparable to that of the turbo code when decoded with 6 iterations of a MAP decoder for packet error rates (PER) lower than I %.

-e- Turbo-MAP, 6 iter
- D . Turbo-MAP, 20 iter
-c Turbo-SOVA, 6 iter - 0 . Turbo-SOVA 20 iter

c c0a, U:
b
L
G'

IY
0 L2
i

0

P

t

Io-~L

b,

0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4

Fig. 3. 1024-bit, rate-l/2, LDPCcode (4-bit messages) and 3G wireless turbo

code using MAP and SOVA decoders (full floating point precision)'

Although the decoder was intended to be compared to 3G turbo codes which have a throughput of 1-2Mb/s, the prototype was designed to achieve a maximum throughput of
1 Gb/s to demonstrating the extremely high throughput capability of the parallel architecture.

A. Data Input/Output
The parallel decoder can be considered as a three block pipeline. While one block is being iteratively decoded, the next block is loaded into the decoder, and the previous block is read-out from the decoder. Data is loaded and unloaded from the decoder using a scan chain, with a width of w samples and
depth d , such that:

w.d = N

(3)

The number of decoder iterations performed on all blocks is set to d . The columns of H ,and hence the variable nodes, are divided into w groups, each separated by w bits as shown in

I . One decoder iteration for the turbo codes is taken io mean one constitu en[ codes trellis decoding.

13-3-2
294

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:44:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 4. The decoder was implemented with w = 16 and

d = 6 4 , performing 64 decoder iterations for every packet.

To achieve the desired throughput of 1Gb/s the required clock frequency is only 64MHz.

Variable
node I+ w

Variable nodejt(d-l)w

---

Variable Nodes

4
Variable node j

4
Variable node 1t2w

Fig. 4. Architecture of variable scan g r o u p j

B. Check Node Architecture

Each check node performs a parity check across all variables

in a row of H . As shown in Fig. 5(a) the row parity is XOR’d

with each check node input to calculate the value that all other

variables in the group imply each individual variable node

should take. Along with the parity determination, an implied

reliability of the parity in the Log-Likelihood domain is calcu-

lated as shown in Fig. 5(b). The reliability update is performed

on the log of the incoming log-likelihoods so that the calcula-

tion can be performed using additions. At the output the result

is canverted back into the log-likelihood domain. This arith-

metic conversion is similar to the log-MAP implementation of

MAP decoders [ 111. The approximate logarithm is performed

by a few gates of combinatorial logic. The exponentiation is

r&m approximated as a leading zeros count.
row j parity input 0

row j pari! output o

; bits O..k-I ;
’ 1 row jpa’rity input k-I

rap: : Row Parity bitsO..k-l row j parit; output k-1

k-inpui XOR

4-k by 2-input XOR

row j reliability input 0
3-bit reliabilities
(log domain)

(a) Parity Update
.

row i reliabililv 0,iitput 0 ‘

row j reliability input k-I

a-blt iog-iog
(b) Reliability Update

rowj reliability output k

Fig. 5. Check node implementation

C. Variable Node Architecture
The architecture of the variable nodes is shown in Fig. 6. The variable nodes contain all of the latches in the decoder, both the scan-chain latches and decoder message latches. At the packet start signal the decoding of a new packet is commenced

and the previous packets results are loaded into the output scan

chain. For the first decoding iteration the messages sent to the

check nodes are the signed magnitude representations of the

received value, since for a Gaussian channel the received val-

ues are the log-likelihoods. All messages passed between the

variable and check nodes are represented as a sign bit and 3

magnitude bits. For subsequent iterations, each message enter-

ing the variable node together with the received value are con-

verted to 2’s complement and summed. The sign of the sum

represents the decoders current estimate of the decoded bit at

each variable node. Outgoing messages are then formed as the

group sum minus each individual edge’s input message. This

is the value all other connected checks and the received value

imply each check should use for the next parity update. All

values are converted back to a signed magnitude representa-

tion and latched, to be used by the check nodes connected to

the variable node in the next decoder iteration. In the case that

the group sum is zero or the outgoing messages sum is zero,

the sign-bit used is that of the received bit, as this is the most

--- w probable value for the decoded bit. -+r--k

var node

t by 2-input
subtractors

LJI
receivedscan in
decoded scan in

pM-s(BrtI
x4 .

J 4-bit received values MSB

received scan o*ut *
decoded scan out

Fig. 6. Variable node implementation
D. Packet Error Detection
A packet error signal is derived by performing an OR operation of all row parities from the last decoder iteration, approximating a test of equation (1). The satisfaction of all parity checks in the final iteration is not equivalent to testing the parity using the final decoded bits but the difference is insignificant.
E. Physical Design
The decoder is being fabricated in a 0.16 pm, 1S V CMOS process with 5 levels of metal. The variable and check nodes were synthesized from a VHDL description. As discussed in Section A the 1024 variable nodes were grouped into 16 macros, denoted vgrp0 to vgrpl5, to simplify the chip I/O and clock distribution. Macros were also created for the weight 6 and weight 7 check nodes. The main implementation challenge was the placement and routing of the macros at the top level with more than 26000 wires of average length 3mm representing the messages. Custom algorithms were developed to

13-3-3
295

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:44:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

place the macros and insert buffers to reduce the route lengths, reduce routing congestion. and achieve timing closure. The decoder was designed for a maximum clock frequency of 64MHz under worst case slow operating conditions. The layout of the decoder is shown in Fig. 7. The chip area is 7.5” x 7.0” and the utilization of 50% was limited by routing congestion.
Fig. 7. Layout of the parallel 1024-bit. rate- 1/2. soft decision LDPC decoder.
F: Switching Activity and Power Dissipation It is shown in Fig 8 that the decoder rapidly converges to a stable solution, particularly when the input bit error rate (BER) is low
-4 Switching Actiwty __Pa.c- ket Error Rate
Fig. 8. Switching activity of message bits in a 1024-bit, R=1/2 soft decision LDPC decoder with 4-bit messages.
Once the decoder has converged to a stable result the only switching activity in subsequent iterations is that of the scan chains and clock. At this time the messages between nodes stop switching, reducing the power consumption of the decoder. From Fig. 8 for a packet error rate (PER) of 1% the

switching activity factor is found to be only I % , and for 100% PER the activity factor is 9%.Together with the extracted parasitics, these operating points can be used to estimate the average and worst case power dissipation of the decoder respectively. At a maximum clock frequency of 64MHz and
1Gb/s throughput the average total power dissipation of the decoder is calculated to be 220mW with a worst case value of
500mW. However, if a throughput of only 1M b/s is required, e.g. j G wireless data rate, the clock frequency is 64KHz and the power dissipation is a miserly 220pW average and 500pW worst case. This compares extremely favorably with 170mW reported for a turbo decoder performing 3 iterations with a block size of 256 bits and throughput of IMbit/s implemented in O.6pn, 3.3V CMOS technology [4].
Conclusion
A parallel architecture for decoding 1,DPC codes has been presented that achieves comparable coding performance to equivalent turbo codes. The spectacular throughput and power dissipation advantages of the parallel architecture have been demonstrated through the implementation of a 1024 bit, rate-
l A LDPC decoder that achieves power dissipation of
220mW and for a throughput of 1Gb/s , and 220pW for a
throughput of 1M b/s . The design represents a unique tradeoff of area for high throughput and low power dissipation.
References
M. Bossert. Chunnel Coding for Telecommunicurions, John Wiley & Sons, 1999. C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting codes and decoding”, Pruo. Inr. Conf: Comm. ‘93, pp 1064-1070, May 1993. R. Pyndiah, A. Glavieux. A. Picart, and S. Jacq. “Near optimum decoding of product codes”, Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM ‘94,pp 339-343, 1994. S . Hong and W. Stark, “Design and implementation of a low complexity VLSI turbo-code decoder architecture for low energy mobile wireless communications”. J. VLSI Six.Proc.. Vol. 24, pp 43-57. 2000. R . Gallager, “Low density parity check codes”, IRE Truns. Info. Theory, Vol. IT-8, pp 21-28. Jan. 1962. T. Richardson, A . Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of provably good low-density panty check codes”. submitted to IEEE Truns. Inf’ Theoq, March 1999. F.R. Kschischang and B.J. Frey, “Iterative Decoding of Compound Codes by Probability Propagation in Graphical Models”, IEEE Journul on Selected Areas in Communications, Vol. 16. No. 2 , pp 219-30, Feb. 2000. C.J. Howland and A.J. Blanksby, ”Parallel Decoding Architectures for Low Density Parity Check Codes”, Proc. IEEE ISCAS 2001, 2001. ‘‘3r‘’ Generution Purtnership Project (3GPP); Technical Specifcution Group Radio Access Nerwork Multiplexing and channel coding (TDD)”,available at http://www.3gpp.org J. Hagenauer and P. Hoeher, ‘‘ A Viterbi algorithm with soft-decision outputs and its applications”. Proc. GLOBECUM 19x9, pp 1680-1686, 1989. L.R. Bahl, J . Cocke. F. Jelinek, and J . Raviv, “Optimal Decoding of Linear Codes for Minimizing Symbol Error Rate”, IEEE Truns on Inf: Theory pp 363-77, March 1974.

13-3-4
296

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:44:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

