Decoding Low-Density Parity-Check Codes with 
Probabilistic Schedule 
Yongyi Mao, Student Member, IEEE, and Amir H. Banihashemi, Associate Member, IEEE 
Abstract- 
T h e  best known practical algorithm for the 
decoding of low-density parity-check (LDPC) 
codes is the 
iterative sum-product or belief propagation algorithm, 
operating on a Tanner graph (TG) of the code. Conven- 
tionally, in each iteration, all t h e  symbol nodes and subse- 
quently all t h e  check nodes in t h e  TG pass, new messages 
to their neighbors (the so-called ”Hooding schedule”). In 
this work, we propose a new message-passing schedule, 
called “probabilistic schedule.” Unlike flooding, the prob- 
abilistic schedule operates based on the structure of the 
T G ,  and probabilistically balances t h e  frequency at which 
different symbol nodes update their outgoing messages in 
accordance with their girths. O u r  results show that, par- 
ticularly for short block lengths, t h e  new schedule offers 
a much better performance/complexity trade-off. For a 
particular example of a (1268,456) code, at no cost in com- 
plexity, the probabilistic schedule not only decreases both 
the bit and message error rates by a n  order of magnitude, 
but also reduces the number of undetected errors consid- 
erably. 
This work shows t h e  importance of scheduling in 
the performance of iterative decoding algorithms and 
suggests that a schedule which matches the struc- 
ture of the T G  can substantially improve the perfor- 
mance/complexity trade-off in t h e  decoding of short LD- 
PC codes. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The significance of the rediscovery of low-density 
parity-check (LDPC) codes [l], [2] not only resides on 
its pushing the performance of error correction codes 
extremely close to the Shannon limit [3], [4], but it 
also has invoked great interest in a class of power- 
ful low-complexity decoding algorithms, i.e., the itera- 
tive message-passing algorithms operating on the graph- 
s defining the codes. In the context of decoding LDPC 
codes, the graph refers to the Tanner graph (TG) and 
the message-passing algorithm usually refers to the iter- 
ative belief propagation, or sum-product algorithm[5]. 
This work was partly supported by an NSERC grant, and part- 
ly by an OGSST scholarship. Y. Mao was with the Department 
of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University. He is 
now with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, 
University of Toronto, 10 King’s College Road, Toronto, Ontari- 
o, Canada M5S 3G4. A. H. Banihashemi is with the Broadband 
Communication and Wireless Systems (BCWS) Center and the 
Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton U- 
niversity, 1125 Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1S 
5B6. 
0-7803-7080-5/0 
1/$10.00 0200 1 IEEE 
The TG of a linear block code is a bipartite graph 
constructed from the parity-check matrix of the code. 
The graph consists of two sets of nodes, namely, symbol 
nodes and check nodes. Each symbol node represents a 
symbol in a codeword and each check node represents a 
parity-check constraint. Every check node is connected 
by an edge to the symbol nodes it checks. The TGs 
of LDPC codes are usually sparsely connected since the 
“density” of the non-zero elements in the parity-check 
matrix is low. 
In the sum-product algorithm, each node in the T- 
G passes messages to its neighbors along the connect- 
ing edges. For a binary code, a message contains the 
likelihood information on whether a bit is zero or one. 
Assuming equally likely transmission of zeros and ones, 
and a memoryless channel, the initial message, or local 
message, mu, at a symbol node U is the log-likelihood- 
ratio 
m, := logP,[r~O]/P,[r~l] 
(1) 
where P,[T~O] 
and P,[TI~] 
represent the conditional prob- 
ability density functions of receiving value r for symbol 
U given zero and one are sent, respectively. This initial 
message can be computed when the characteristics of the 
channel are known. The message-passing rules between 
a symbol node U and a check node c are as follows [6]: 
(3) 
where mz-ty, for any pair of connected nodes x and y, is 
the message sent from x to y, and N ( . )  represents the set 
of the neighboring nodes. At the beginning of the decod- 
ing, all the incoming messages to the symbol nodes are -- 
initialized to zero. The algorithm is then performed by 
passing messages between the check nodes and the sym- 
bol nodes in a certain order, referred to as an updating 
rule, or a schedule. 
119 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:37:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Conventionally, the message-passing schedule for de- 
coding LDPC codes can be considered as a version of the 
so-called flooding schedule, in which, in each iteration, all 
the symbol nodes, and subsequently all the check nodes, 
pass new messages to their neighbors. For a cycle-free 
TG, applying this schedule along with the sum-product 
algorithm results in the optimal a posteriori probability 
(APP) decoding [5]. On a cycle-free TG of diameter D, 
messages along all the edges reach a steady state after 
Dl2 iterations. In this case, the summary message, mu, 
at any symbol node U corresponds to the log-APP-ratio 
for symbol U being zero and one, where mu is given by 
riz, = m, + 
mv+u 
(4) 
V € N ( U )  
However, cycle-free TGs do not support good codes [7]. 
In fact, a typical LDPC code has many cycles in any of 
its underlying TGs. In general, as messages are passed 
through cycles, in some occasions, the steady state is 
never reached and in other occasions, even if the the 
algorithm converges, it may not converge to the APP 
values. 
Despite sacrificing optimality, iterative sum-product 
algorithm does offer a good complexity/performance 
tradeoff for decoding LDPC codes. Especially at large 
block lengths, the cycles in the TGs of LDPC codes are 
usually large with respect to the required number of de- 
coding iterations and therefore, the TGs can be con- 
sidered to be virtually cycle-free [6]. This results in a 
quasi-optimal performance for the sum-product decod- 
ing of long LDPC codes. However, for LDPC codes at 
short block lengths (10000 bits or shorter), since the un- 
derlying TGs often contain many small cycles, the sum- 
product algorithm performs presumably further away 
from the optimal. 
It has been noted that various schedules may be ap- 
plied for iterative message-passing decoding (see, e.g., 
[5] and [SI). In the literature, however, to the best 
of our knowledge, only the application of the flooding 
schedule is reported. As was pointed out by Forney 
[5]: “an open question is whether a different schedule 
could improve their (iterative decoding algorithms’) per- 
formance/complexity tradeoff.” 
In this article, in an attempt to answer this question, 
we present a new scheduling scheme for the sum-product 
decoding of LDPC codes, called probabilistic schedule. 
Fundamentally different from the flooding schedule, the 
probabilistic schedule is tailored to the TG of the code by 
adjusting the frequency of message passing at each sym- 
bol node U according.to the length of the shortest cycle 
passing through U (girth of U). The smaller the girth, 
the less frequently U sends new messages. We show by 
simulation that this new scheduling scheme significantly 
improves upon the flooding schedule with similar or even 
lower complexity. Moreover, our work suggests that for 
a given code and a given TG of the code, the message- 
passing schedule is essential to the performance of the 
sum-product decoder and significant gain in the perfor- 
mance/complexity tradeoff may be obtained by carefully 
designing a schedule based on some graph property rel- 
evant to the sub-optimality of the decoder. 
11. PROBABILISTIC 
SCHEDULE 
In a previous work [9], we introduced “girth distribu- 
tion” as an important entity associated with the TG of 
a code, which relates the performance of iterative be- 
lief propagation algorithm to the structure of the graph. 
Girth distribution was then used to design short LDPC 
codes with good performance under belief propagation 
decoding. In this work, we use girth distribution to de- 
vise a probabilistic decoding schedule for message pass- 
ing in a given TG of a given code. One of the main results 
of this research is to show that changing the message- 
passing schedule can greatly improve the performance 
of iterative decoding algorithms at no cost in complexi- 
ty. 
To show how the girths of a TG can be exploited to 
improve the decoding performance through the modifi- 
cation of scheduling, we start with a careful examination 
of the message-passing dynamics in the sum-product al- 
gorithm with the flooding schedule: 
Let gmaz and gmin be the largest and the smallest 
girths in the TG, respectively. Assuming that node U in 
the TG has girth gmin, it takes gmin/2 iterations for the 
message sent from U to propagate back to node U itself. 
Before this number of iterations is reached, the message- 
passing operations at all symbol nodes and check nodes 
are performed optimally. The reason for this is that, 
assuming independent information bits and memoryless 
channel, for each node, all the incoming messages and 
the local message are independent of each other (in- 
deed, it is precisely this independence that guarantees 
the sum-product algorithm to result in APP decoding 
for cycle-free graphs). However, at iteration gnin/2, the 
incoming messages to node U ,  and any other node with 
girth gmin, along their shortest cycles are dependent on -- 
the local messages at those nodes. At this time, when 
node U passes message, the optimality of the algorith- 
m would be violated. Notice that at this iteration, the 
message-passing operations at other nodes with larger 
120 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:37:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
girths still preserve their optimality. However, the viola- 
tion of optimality at node U (and other nodes with girth 
gmin) would affect the global optimality, in the sense 
that there is no guarantee that the algorithm converges 
to the APP solution. 
A partial remedy to this problem could be to synchro- 
nize the timing at which different nodes pass presumably 
non-optimal messages. To implement this, node U (and 
other nodes with smallest girth) would not update their 
messages at iteration gmin/2 and instead, wait until the 
iteration gmax/2 is reached. By the same token, any oth- 
er node U ,  with gmin < gv < gmaz, would stop updating 
their messages at iteration g,/2. Therefore, at iteration 
9,,,/2 
- 1, only nodes with girth gmor would pass new 
information. When the iteration gmax/2 is reached, all 
the nodes would be activated again and resume updating 
their outgoing messages. 
There are two advantages to this strategy: First, we 
maximize the number of iterations in which only “op 
timal” messages are passed through the graph. (The 
maximum value is gmax/2 - 1.) Second, at iteration 
gmaz/2, when every node v resumes updating its outgo- 
ing messages, the incoming messages to v contain more 
“optimal” global information than they did at iteration 
g,/2. In other words, information from farther away in 
the graph are inputted to v when v restarts sending new 
messages. 
It is worth noting that the -aforementioned updating 
schedule is consistent with the intuitive notion of “equal- 
ly double counting” the initial messages at different sym- 
bol nodes, discussed in [lo]. The idea is to feed back the 
initial message at every symbol node to itself with the 
same frequency. It has been shown in [lo] that in graphs 
with a single cycle, although this “equally double count- 
ing” of initial messages might lead to over-confident APP 
results, the final assignment of codewords is still optimal 
in MAP sense. 
Incorporating the “equal double counting” condition 
in the message passing scheduling for a TG with multiple 
cycles could be very complicated. In this work, as the 
first-order approximation, we just focus on the shortest 
cycles that pass through symbol nodes, and try to e- 
qualize the frequency of message passing through these 
cycles. In other words, for any symbol node v and for 
every gmax/2 iterations, a message sent by v propagates 
back to v itself exactly once along its smallest cycle. 
With this being the only constraint, there are many 
different deterministic ways to accordingly modify the 
flooding schedule, including the one we just described. 
A more natural approach however, is to implement the 
“equal double counting” randomly (probabilistically) , 
hence the name “probabilistic schedule” : 
To each symbol node U ,  we associate a probability 
pu = gu/gmaz. At each iteration (except for the first), 
first, each symbol node U updates its outgoing messages 
with probability p ,  and stays idle with probability 1-p,; 
then all the check nodes pass messages. For the first iter- 
ation, we follow the conventional flooding schedule, i.e., 
all the symbol nodes pass messages then all the check 
nodes pass messages. This is to allow all the initial mes- 
sage to be inputted to the graph from the beginning of 
the decoding. 
With this probabilistic implementation, on average, 
for every gmax/2 iterations, a message sent by a node 
propagates back to the node itself once along its smallest 
cycle. 
In the following section, we will see how the perfor- 
mance of iterative sum-product algorithm can be signif- 
icantly improved using the probabilistic schedule. 
111. SIMULATION 
RESULTS 
Simulations are performed on a (1268, 456) LDPC 
code constructed by construction 2A [2]. This code was 
designed for the transport of ATM cells in an industri- 
al project and its performance was previously reported 
in [9], [ll]. In our simulations, BPSK-modulated code- 
words are transmitted through AWGN channel and the 
received vectors are decoded simultaneously using two 
sum-product decoders, one with the flooding schedule 
and the other with the probabilistic schedule. The de- 
coding is stopped when a codeword is reached or at the 
500th iteration. For both schedules, the bit error rate 
(BER) and message error rate (MER) are plotted in 
Figure 1, and the statistics for the number of decod- 
ing iterations are shown in Table I. The percentages of 
undetected errors and detected errors are also listed in 
Table 11. 
It can be seen that the probabilistic schedule provides 
a significant improvement in performance over the con- 
ventional flooding schedule. As the SNR increases, the 
BER and MER for the probabilistic schedule decrease 
much more rapidly than those for the flooding sched- 
ule. At the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of 2.5 dB, com- 
pared with the flooding schedule, the error rates for the 
probabilistic schedule are reduced by more than an or- -- 
der of magnitude. It is also observed that at low SNRs, 
most undetected errors resulting from the convention- 
al flooding schedule are removed by this new schedul- 
ing scheme (note that both decoders process exactly the 
121 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:37:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
same received vectors). This is particularly useful when 
a feedback channel is available and an ARQ scheme is 
employed. 
The average number of decoding iterations for the 
new scheme is slightly greater than that for the flooding 
schedule (by 3 iterations or less, for all SNRs). Howev- 
er, with the new schedule, since not all the nodes update 
messages in each iteration, the average total number of 
computations is estimated to be comparable or even s- 
maller than what is required for the flooding schedule. 
In fact, in each iteration, the new schedule only updates 
E + Cg,d,/g,,, 
messages on average, as compared 
to 2E- messages in the conventional flooding schedule, 
where E is the total number of edges in the TG and d, 
is the degree of symbol node U. 
Simulations are also performed on LDPC codes at oth- 
er rates and block lengths, and similar results are ob- 
served. 
IV. CONCLUSION 
Building upon the relationship between the girths of 
a TG and the sub-optimality of the belief propagation 
decoder, we propose a new message-passing schedule, 
referred to as “probabilistic schedule”. This schedule 
is based on randomly balancing the frequency at which 
different symbol nodes in the TG update their outgo- 
ing messages in accordance with their girths. We show 
by simulation that probabilistic schedule, at no cost in 
complexity, improves substantially upon the convention- 
al flooding schedule, both in decreasing the overall BER 
and MER, and also in reducing the undetected errors. 
Our work also shows that scheduling plays a very 
important role in the performance of iterative belief- 
propagation decoders. For a given TG of an LDPC code, 
there appears to be a great potential for performance im- 
provement, particularly at short block lengths, through 
a careful design of the message-passing schedule. 
The results of this work confirm that for pushing the 
performance of iterative belief-propagation algorithms to 
their limit, a properly devised message-passing schedule, 
which matches the underlying graph, is a necessity. As 
the first attempt in this direction, we hope this work 
inspires more interest and research in this area. 
REFERENCES 
[I] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes, Number 21 
in Research Monograph Series. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 
1963. 
D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit per- 
formance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., 
vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 457458, Mar. 1997. 
[2] 
[3] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error correcting codes based on very 
sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, no. 
2, pp. 399-431, Mar. 1999. 
[4] T. Richarson and R. Urbanke, 
“Design of provably good 
low density parity check codes,” submitted to IEEE Trans. 
Inform. Theory, 1999. 
Jr. G. D. Forney, “On iterative decoding and the two-way 
algorithm,” in Proc. Int. Symp. on Turbo Codes and Related 
Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 1997. 
T. Richarson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low density 
parity check codes under message-passing decoding,” submit- 
ted to IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, 1998. 
T. Etzion, A. Trachtenbeg, and A. Vardy, “Which codes have 
cycle-free tanner graphs?,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 
45, no. 6, pp. 2173-2181, Sept. 1999. 
F. R. Kschischang and B. J. Frey, “Iterative decodingof com- 
pound codes by probability propagation in graphical model- 
s,” J. Selected Areas Comm., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 219-230, Feb. 
1998. 
Y. Mao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Search for good low-density 
parity-check codes using girth distribution,” accepted for p- 
resentation in IEEE ICC 2001. 
“Correctness of local probability propagation in 
graphical models with loops,” Neural Computation, vol. 12, 
pp. 1-41, 2000. 
“Comparison 
between low-density parity-check codes and turbo product 
codes for delay and complexity sensitive applications,” in 
Proc. 20th Biennial Symp. Comm., Kingston, Ontario, May 
[SI 
[6] 
[7] 
[SI 
[9] 
[lo] Y. Weiss, 
[Ill Y. Mao, A. Banihashemi, and M. Landolsi, 
2000, pp. 151-153. 
122 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:37:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
1 oa 
. .... . ........................ 
,... .. ..... ..... 
~ ...... , 
to*! 
112 
1:4 
1:s 
1:s 
; 
2:2 
214 
2:s 
2:8 
1 
- 
(a) 
Fig. 1. BER ( 0 )  and MER ( X )  for the probabilistic schedule (solid line) and the flooding schedule (dashed line). 
TABLE I 
STATISTICS OF THE NUMBER OF DECODING ITERATIONS 
TABLE I1 
BREAKDOWN 
OF ERROR EVENTS INTO DETECTED AND UNDETECTED 
. 
123 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:37:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
