58

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 5, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

On the Design of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon Limit
Sae-Young Chung, Member, IEEE, G. David Forney, Jr., Fellow, IEEE, Thomas J. Richardson, and Rüdiger Urbanke

Abstract—We develop improved algorithms to construct good low-density parity-check codes that approach the Shannon limit very closely. For rate 1/2, the best code found has a threshold within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit of the binary-input additive white Gaussian noise channel. Simulation results with a somewhat simpler code show that we can achieve within 0.04 dB of the Shannon limit at a bit error rate of 10 6 using a block length of 107.
Index Terms—Density evolution, low-density parity-check codes, Shannon limit, sum-product algorithm.
I. INTRODUCTION
R ICHARDSON et al. [1] constructed irregular low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes that easily beat the best known turbo codes when the block length of the code is large. This shows that LDPC codes—originally invented by Gallager [2], forgotten for decades, rediscovered by many [3], [4]—can now outperform powerful turbo codes [5] if designed properly.
They also showed that for many interesting channels, including additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels, one can use an algorithm called density evolution [6] to calculate a threshold value for a randomly constructed irregular LDPC code which determines the boundary of the error-free region asymptotically as the block length tends to infinity. (Density evolution based on combinatorial or Monte Carlo approaches had been previously attempted by Gallager [2], Spielman [7], and MacKay [8].)
In this letter, we develop an improved implementation of density evolution called discretized density evolution [9]. We show that this improved algorithm models the exact behavior of discretized sum-product decoding. Using this algorithm and an improved optimization algorithm, we design good rate-1/2 irregular LDPC codes for binary-input AWGN channels that approach the Shannon limit very closely.

Let be a log-likelihood ratio (LLR) message from a degree- variable node to a check node. Under sum-product decoding, is equal to the sum of all incoming LLRs; i.e.,

(1)

where

are the incoming LLR’s from the

neighbors of the variable node except the check node that gets

the message , and is the observed LLR of the output bit

associated with the variable node.

The message update rule for check nodes can be obtained by

observing the duality between variable and check nodes and the

resulting Fourier transform relationship [10]. From this, we get

the following well known “tanh rule” (see [11]):

(2)

where

are the incoming LLR’s from

neighbors of a degree- check node, and is the output

LLR message sent to the remaining neighbor.

From now on, we assume a random ensemble of irregular

codes specified by two degree distributions

and ,

where

and

. Here,

is the fraction of edges that belong to degree- variable

nodes, is the fraction of edges that belong to degree-

check nodes, is the maximum variable degree, and is the

maximum check degree.

Let

be the quantized message of , i.e.,

II. DISCRETIZED DENSITY EVOLUTION
Our derivation of discretized density evolution is based on the “local tree assumption” of [1], which is validated by the general concentration theorem of [1].
Manuscript received July 20, 2000. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was Dr. M. Fossorier.
S.-Y. Chung was with the Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA. He is now with Airvana, Inc., Chelmsford, MA 01824 USA (e-mail: sae-young.chung@airvananet.com).
G. D. Forney, Jr. is with the Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA (e-mail: forney@lids.mit.edu).
T. J. Richardson is with Flarion Technologies, Bedminster, NJ 07921 USA (e-mail: richardson@flarion.com).
R. Urbanke is with the Communications Theory Lab, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland (e-mail: Rudiger.Urbanke@epfl.ch).
Publisher Item Identifier S 1089-7798(01)02122-6.

if

if

otherwise

where is the quantization operator; is the quantization in-

terval; is the largest integer not greater than ; and is

the smallest integer not less than .

Discretized sum-product decoding is defined as sum-product

decoding with all input and output messages quantized in this

way. Under discretized sum-product decoding, (1) becomes

, where

and

for

. We denote the probability mass function

1089–7798/01$10.00 © 2001 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHUNG et al.: ON THE DESIGN OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

(pmf) of a quantized message by

for

. Then, is related to its input pmf’s by

59
TABLE I QUANTIZATION EFFECT

where is the pmf of ; is the pmf of ; and is discrete

convolution. Since the ’s are independent and identically dis-

tributed (i.i.d.) for

, the above can be rewritten as

where

,

and is discrete convolution. This

calculation can be done efficiently using an FFT.

We define the following two-input operator :

= 100 200 8000 TABLE II
GOOD RATE-1/2 CODES WITH d

;

;

where and are quantized messages. Note that this operation can be done using a pre-computed table, which is the key step for making discretized density evolution computationally efficient. Using this operator, we calculate the quantized message of (2) as follows:

where we assume that discretized sum-product decoding at

check nodes is done pairwise.

Let

. The pmf of is given by

Abusing notation, we write this as

.

Since the ’s are all equal, we define

for any

, and write

as

. Note that we can reduce the number of opera-

tions to do this by properly nesting this calculation.1 By defining

and

for any

pmf , we can write discretized density evolution as follows:

Theorem 1: Discretized density evolution is described by

where the initial pmf has all mass at 0 and is the iteration number.
To run this algorithm, without loss of generality, we first assume that the all-0 codeword was sent. Then, we fix the channel parameter, namely noise power, and we run the above algorithm iteratively until either the density of tends to the “point mass at infinity” (equivalently, the probability of error tends to zero), or it converges to a density having a finite probability of error, which is defined as the probability of being negative. The

1Although for finite quantization different nesting might produce slightly dif-

1 ! 0 ferent results, it still corresponds to some valid decoding algorithm and asymp-

totically, as

, it will converge to continuous belief propagation.

threshold is defined as the maximum noise level such that the

probability of error tends to zero as the number of iterations

tends to infinity.

The complexity of this calculation is of order

due to

the calculations at check nodes, where is the number of quan-

tization levels. However, this is actually faster than the calcula-

tion based on changing of measures between LLR and

domains as in [1], which requires finer quantization due to nu-

merical problems when changing measures. As a result, our al-

gorithm is more accurate and also realizes the discretized ver-

sion of the sum-product algorithm exactly. This implies that the

threshold predicted by our algorithm is always a lower bound,

since it is exact for a sub-optimal decoding.

Table I shows how the threshold values are affected by quan-

tization for the rate-1/2

code in Table II. Number of

bits used for quantization versus threshold values in (noise

standard deviation) and errors in dB relative to the threshold

value for 14-bit quantization are shown. All threshold values

are rounded down. When 14 bits are used to quantize the LLR

values into 16 384 levels, we observe that the threshold has

6-digit precision.

III. OPTIMIZATION
In this letter, we use a slightly different optimization technique than the iterative linear programming used in [1] to opti-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

60

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 5, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

restrictive for the AWGN channel [12]. The average check

degree is used in Table II to parametrize

where

.

In Fig. 2, we show simulation results for the

codes in Table II. A block length of was used, and the code

graph was constructed randomly, except that cycles of length 2

and 4 were avoided. At BER = , the

code operates

within 0.04 dB of the Shannon limit. The maximum allowed

number of iterations was 2000. When decoding was successful,

about 800–1100 iterations were needed. No undetected errors

occurred.

At a BER of about 10 , we decoded 249 and 371 blocks

for the

and

codes, respectively—i.e., about

1.2 10 and 1.8 10 decoded bits, respectively.

More results and an online demonstration of density evolution

are available at http://truth.mit.edu/~sychung.

Fig. 1. Threshold (SNR ) of rate-1/2 LDPC codes with maximum variable degree = 20; . . . ; 8000.

IV. CONCLUSIONS
We have designed LDPC codes for binary-input AWGN channels that approach the Shannon limit very closely. Our design is based on discretized density evolution and optimization of degree distributions via iterative linear programming. Our design can be used to design LDPC codes of arbitrary rates between 0 and 1 for many interesting channels.
Our results strongly suggest that optimal LDPC codes under sum-product decoding for AWGN channels may approach the Shannon limitasymptotically as the block length tends to infinity.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT This work is based on S.-Y. Chung’s Ph.D. dissertation.

Fig. 2. Simulation results for the d = 100 and d = 200 codes of Table II, using a block length of 10 .

mize , which seems to be better for designing codes, espe-

cially when is large. We maximize the rate of the code while

maintaining the following constraints: 1)

; 2) the new

is not significantly different from the old one (required

to guarantee that the linear programming formulation is valid);

and 3) the new is better than the old one (produces smaller

probability of error). For details of this algorithm, see [9].

Thresholds for some good rate-1/2 codes with maximum vari-

able degrees 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 85, 100, 200, 500, 1000,

2000, 4000, and 8000 are given in Fig. 1 [9], where

is defined as the distance from the Shannon limit in dB. Table II

gives the degree distributions for some of these codes, where

threshold values are rounded down and

values are

rounded up. The Shannon limit is

at rate 1/2.

We used concentrated

’s only, where

for some integer

. This restric-

tion not only makes it easier to optimize , especially

for large maximum variable degrees, but also is not too

REFERENCES
[1] T. J. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, Feb. 2001.
[2] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[3] M. Sipser and D. A. Spielman, “Expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 1710–1722, Nov. 1996.
[4] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.
[5] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[6] T. J. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, Feb. 2001.
[7] D. A. Spielman, “Finding good LDPC codes,” in Proc. 36th Allerton Conf. Commun. Contr., and Comput., Sept. 1998.
[8] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[9] S.-Y. Chung, “On the construction of some capacity-approaching coding schemes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 2000.
[10] G. D. Forney Jr., “Codes on graphs: Normal realizations,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, Feb. 2001.
[11] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of binary block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 429–445, Mar. 1996.
[12] S.-Y. Chung, T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Analysis of sum-product decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, Feb. 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

