ISIT2001, Washington, DC, June 24-29, 2001 
Decoding of Low-Density Parity Check Codes over 
Finite- St at e Binary Markov Channels 
Javier Garcia-Frias’ 
Department of ECE 
University of Delaware 
Newark, DE 19716, USA 
e-mail: jgarciaQee .udel. edu 
Abstract - We propose a modified algorithm for de- 
coding of low-density parity check codes over finite- 
state binary Markov channels. The hidden Markov 
model representing the channel is incorporated into 
the bipartite graph of the low-density parity check 
code, and the message passing algorithm is modified 
accordingly. This approach clearly outperforms sys- 
tems in which the channel statistics are not exploited 
in the decoding, allowing reliable communication at 
rates which are above the capacity of a memoryless 
channel with the same stationary bit error probabil- 
ity as the Markov channel. Moreover, we introduce a 
joint estimation/decoding method that allows the es- 
timation of the parameters of the channel when they 
are not known a priori. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Many practical digital communications channels exhibit sta- 
tistical dependencies among errors. The error pattern of the 
discrete channel (modulator-real channel-demodulator) can be 
modeled using finite-state binary Markov channels. It is intu- 
itive that the presence of memory in Markov channels leads 
to increased capacity relative to memoryless channels with 
the same stationary bit error probability. However, exploiting 
the higher capacity of Markov channels in practice has proven 
to be challenging. In this paper we propose the modifica- 
tion of the message passing decoding algorithm to exploit the 
structure of finite-state binary Markov channels in low-density 
parity check (LDPC) codes. 
11. DECODER 
MODIFICATIONS FOR FINITE-STATE 
BINARY MARKOV 
CHANNELS 
The possibility of incorporating Markov channels in the de- 
coding of codes defined over general graphs is suggested in [l], 
although no results are presented there. The basic idea is to 
“link” the error pattern nodes of the LDPC code with the hid- 
den Markov model. The whole structure can then be consid- 
ered as a Bayesian network, and decoding can be performed by 
proceeding with the message passing algorithm (belief prop- 
agation) [2]. The introduction of the hidden Markov model 
produces an increase in the number of cycles in the network. 
However, as we will see in Section 111, these additional cycles 
do not seem to strongly affect the performance of the decoding 
algorithm. Notice that due to the structure of LDPC codes, 
the use of a channel interleaver is unnecessary. 
The order in which messages are passed through the net- 
work (instantiation of the belief propagation algorithm) is the 
‘This work was supported by the University of Delaware Re- 
search Foundation. 
following: The messages proceeding from the check nodes 
arrive to the error pattern nodes. 
There, they are pro- 
cessed and propagated to the nodes representing the hidden 
Markov model, where belief propagation is performed in a for- 
ward/ba.ckward manner. The resulting messages are returned 
to the error pattern nodes, where they are combined with the 
messages proceeding from the check nodes. The new mes- 
sages will be propagated to the check nodes, closing one full 
iteration in the decoding process. 
111. SIMULATION 
RESULTS 
In order to assess the performance of the proposed method, we 
consider a finite-state binary Markov channel with two states 
(GilberbElliot channel). The transition probability of going 
from the good state to the bad state is b = .0044 and the 
probability of going from the bad state to the good state is 
g = .0156. The bit error probability in the bad state is fixed 
to PB = .5. The performance of the system is studied as a 
function of the value of PG, the bit error probability in the 
good sta,te. Notice that, since all the other parameters are 
fixed, there is a one to one correspondence between PG and 
the stationary bit error probability, p. 
We use a rate 1/2 (3,6) regular LDPC code with 35000 
coded bits. By utilizing the proposed method, a BER less 
than 
is obtained when p = ,124. Notice that if the mem- 
ory of t.he channel is ignored, it is impossible to send reliable 
informat,ion when p > .11. We obtain the same performance, 
although more iterations are required, when the parameters 
of the hidden Markov model are not known a priori and are 
jointly estimated with decoding (we assume an initial hidden 
Markov model with parameters bin = 
PAn = 
and Pin = .3). When the hidden Markov model 
is not considered in decoding, the resulting BER for p = .ll 
(which corresponds to a value of PG = 0) is .l. The same 
LDPC code applied over a BSC achieves a BER around lo-’ 
for values of bit error probability slightly less than ,085, which 
gives an idea of the improvement obtained with the approach 
presented in this paper. 
It is interesting to note that convergence does not become 
slow after a small number of iterations. This seems to indicate 
that the additional cycles introduced by the hidden Markov 
model do not seem to strongly affect the performance of the 
decoding algorithm. 
gin = 2 x 
REFERENCES 
[l] N. Wiberg, “Codes and Decoding on General Graphs,” no. 440, 
Dept. of Electrical Engineering, Linkoping University, Sweden 
1996. 
[2] J. Pearl, “Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Net- 
works of Plausible Inference,” Morgan Kaufmann, 1988. 
72 
0-7803-7123-2/01/$10.00 02001 IEEE 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:36:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
