Optimizing the Mapping of Low-Density Parity Check Codes on Parallel Decoding Architectures

Ghazi Al-Rawi, John Cioffi, and Mark Horowitz

Department of Electrical Engineering

Stanford University,Stanford, CA 94305

pmwi@stcinford.edii

ciofjri@stemforcl.eeiu

horowitz @stunford.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of optimizing the mapping of LDPC codes on parallel machines to minimize the communication cost. To reduce the search space, the problem is solved in two stages: clustering, and cluster allocation. We propose a simplified clustering technique based on a modified min-cut algorithm that reduces the search complexity from O(n2)to O(n). It was found that most of the locality is exploited by the clustering operation, which results in 40-52% improvement in the total communication cost over random mapping. For large networks, cluster allocation is much more costly and results in only 1-8% additional improvement in unidirectional and bi-directional torus topologies. We compared the pevormance of two di’erent approaches f o r cluster allocation. The first one is based on min-cut algorithm, and the second one is based on a genetic algorithm. It was found the min-cut based approach is better for small network sizes. For large network sizes with number of clusters 2 64, the genetic based approach becomes more attractive.
1. Introduction
The process of decoding LDPC codes using iterative techniques is known to have a large amount of inherent parallelism [ 11 that can be efficiently exploited using appropriate parallel implementations. This becomes more attractive as VLSI integration density and transistor speed continue to increase and the cost per transistor continues to decrease. Interconnects, however, are known to be scaling at a slower rate compared to transistor speed [ 2 ] , which makes the performance of most parallel VLSI applications communication-limited. This suggests exploiting locality in these applications to reduce communication costs and improve the overall performance. In [3], a domain programmable, codeindependent, parallel architecture was proposed for implementing the LDPCC iterative decoding algorithm.

It was shown there that the amount of exploited parallelism is mainly limited by the communication between processing nodes. This communication pattern is determined by the code, and the way it is mapped onto the architecture. Therefore, in this paper we investigate the problem of optimizing the mapping of LDPC codes on parallel machines so as to minimize the overall execution time and communication cost.
A regular ( M , N , tc, t,) LDPCC is defined by a M x N parity check matrix H that has 0 entries everywhere except for t,. 1’s in each column and t,. 1’s in each row, where the numbers t,. and t,. are small relative to the matrix dimensions. A LDPC code can be modeled using a factor graph [4] that consists of N variable nodes corresponding to the N bits of the codeword, and M function nodes corresponding to the M parity checks, with an edge between the appropriate variable and function nodes for each 1 entry in the parity check matrix. In a regular ( M , N,f,., f,.) LDPC code, each variable node has a degree t,.,
and each function node has a degree t,. In an irregular
LDPC code, represented here as ( M , N , i,.1-t,.2.-..-tcp,t,.i-t,2...-t,J, each variable node has a degree j E { t c l rtc2,...,t,.,,), and each function node has a degree k g { t , ~ ,t , ~ ,...,t r q ) .
The parallel tasks in the iterative LDPCC decoding algorithm can be modeled using the Task Interaction Graph (TIC) abstraction GI= (VI,FI,E / ) presented in [ 5 ] , which can be directly obtained from the factor graph of the code by assigning appropriate weights to the vertices and edges. Function and variable nodes of the TIC are referred to as logical function and variable nodes to differentiate them from physical processing nodes of the implementation architecture. The 1 subscript is used to indicate that. Since in the LDPCC iterative decoding algorithm all messages communicated between tasks are of the same length, all edges of the TIC are assumed to
have a unit weight. The vertex weight of each node corresponds to the computational load associated with that node. Figure 1 shows the TIG of the iterative algorithm for decoding a regular (4, 8, 2,4) LDPC code.

578 0-7695-1062-0/01 $10.00 02001 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:45:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

I

I

Figure 1: Task Interaction Graph (TIG) of a regular (4, 8, 2,

4) LDPC code

2. Description

2.1. Target implementation architecture

The parallel processing system is modeled as a graph G,=(V,, E,), where the vertices represent the physical processing nodes and the edges represent the physical communication links between nodes.

2.2. The problem to be solved

The problem at hand is that given a TIG of an arbitrary LDPC code G,=(V,, F,, E,), and a graph of a parallel processing system G,=(V,,, E,), what is the best mapping of logical variable and function nodes to physical nodes that will minimize the overall execution time and communication cost. This combinatorial optimization problem is known to be NP-hard, even in its simplest form [6]. Therefore, we will only be interested in polynomial time heuristic approaches that can result in

close to optimal solutions in reasonable times. Since the TIG that characterizes the LDPCC decoding algorithm is static, we are only interested in static mappings.
In iterative parallel programs like the algorithm at hand, minimization of the completion time of each iteration step associated with the slowest process will minimize the

overall execution time of the parallel program. We use a similar cost function to the one used in [ 5 ] , which is expressed as a sum of two terms: one representing the deviation from ideal load balancing, and another representing the total communication cost associated with
the mapping.
Cost = Penalty due to computation imbalance + k, .

communication cost

(1)

where k, is a weighting coefficient to account for the

computation to communication cost ratio.

Different types of processing are required for logical

function nodes and variable nodes. Computational

resources of a physical processing node can be separated

in space by using different processing units for different

logical node types, or in time by reusing a single

reconfigurable processing unit for both logical node types

at different times. To ensure even computational load

distribution over physical processing nodes, we distribute

the two different processing loads associated with

function and variable node processing equally among

physical nodes. The first term in (1) can be divided into

two sub-terms as follows:

Penalty due to computation imbalance = Penalty due to
fun. computation imbalance + k, . Penalty due to var.

computation imbalance

(2)

where kf is weighting coefficient to account for the ratio

of function to variable processing complexity. Therefore,

c - = C l L , ( P , ) W d C " / 1+k , ' C ( L , ( P ; )- W,d(

VlJ,EV"

VP,SVp

+k, . ( W ( l v ,),f (Fj1)).cij

(3)

.v, VUV, ) E 4

where G/=(V,,F,, E,) is the TIG of the code, and G,=(V,,

E,) is the processing system graph, f is the mapping

function that maps a logical node &E F/ or l v ;V~/ to a

physical node pi€ V,. ,!,,,(PI) is a function that gives the total function processing load in physical node p I , and

similarly L&) gives the total variable processing load in

pi. LF,dell,and LVldrulare the ideal function and variable processing loads per physical node, respectively. D(pi,p,)

is a distance function that gives the routing distance

between physical nodes pI and pj, which is defined as the

minimum number of physical links to be traversed to get

from pi to p,. The total communication load between
logical nodes lv, and 4 is C,, which is the weight of the
edge connecting lvi and If; in the TIG. Since all edges of
the TIC have a unit weight, then:
C,= 1 if there is an edge between lvi and 4 in the TIG
= 0 if there is no edge between lvi and rf; in the TIG

No pre-assumptions are made here about the values of

the coefficients k, and k,, and the different terms of the

cost function are reported separately, because the emphasis of this paper is on minimizing the

communication cost while achieving a reasonable

computational load balance. This way we can abstract the

actual computational complexities of variable and

function node processing and speak in relative terms only.

The processing complexity of a single variable node is

proportional to: the degree of the variable node plus one.

The one is added, because a variable node needs to

include the prior information in its processing in each

iteration. Function processing complexity is proportional

to the degree of the function node. Therefore,

(4)

579

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:45:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

where IE,I is the total number of edges in the T I C of the code, N P is the number of processors or clusters, and N is the number of variable nodes.

L, ( P , )= C d M l f , )

(6)

'doc,

L,(P,>= C [ d e g ( f v , ) + I l

(7)

V/V,€C,

where C , is the cluster of logical function and variable

nodes mapped to p , , and deg(x) is a function that returns the degree of the logical node x.

2.3. The proposed solution

Our proposed solution is based on mapping almost equal number of logical function and variable nodes to each physical node. This simplifies the clustering operation as will be shown later. It guarantees optimal computational load balancing across physical nodes in regular LDPC codes. Most irregular LDPC codes have one type of logical nodes with almost uniform degree, since this aids in the process of constructing good codes. For this class of irregular codes, the proposed solution results in very close to optimal computational load balance.
Let us define the following parameters as follows: nfp, is the number of logical function nodes mapped to

physical node p ,

(8)

nvp, is the number of logical variable nodes mapped to

physical node p ,

(9)

K,c = LM/NPJ

(10)

K, =LNINPI

(11)

where LxJ is the maximum integer less than x.

We impose the following restrictions on the mapping

function3

KFS nfp,S K d l

(12)

K v I nvp, IK f i l

(13)

This restriction reduces the configuration space, and

allows us to purely focus on the total communication cost.

The mapping problem, therefore, reduces to allocating

appropriate logical nodes of a predetermined type and

number to each physical node so as to reduce the total

communication cost. Therefore, the cost function reduces

to the following:

c= C(D(f(lv,),f(lf,))).C,f

(14)

v(lv,.V, EE,

Despite the above load-balancing restrictions, the configuration space for LDPC codes with moderate block lengths ( N z 1000) is still extremely large and unmanageable. The size of the search space can be found as follows:

i=n

Notice that the permutation of logical nodes mapped to the same physical node does not affect the cost function. The huge size of the search space makes it extremely difficult to find good solutions in reasonable time using flat global search algorithms that are based on minimizing an explicit cost function.
Several domain heuristics have been suggested in the literature to find good solutions to mapping problems with large task graphs similar to the one addressed in this paper in reasonable amounts of time [5, and references therein]. We adopted the approach suggested in [ 5 ]to significantly reduce the size of the search space by decomposing the mapping problem into two sub-problems of task

clustering and cluster allocation. In the task clustering

phase the objective is to minimize inter-cluster

communication, while in the cluster allocation phase the

objective is to minimize the total cost of inter-processor

communications.

During the task clustering phase, we imposed the load

balancing restriction mentioned above. Each cluster is

composed of nF logical function nodes, and nV logical

variable nodes, where KFSnFSK+ 1, and K v S n V S K f i 1.

For regular codes this clearly guarantees optimal load

balancing. For irregular codes with one type of nodes

having almost a uniform degree, when we assign almost

equal number of nodes with uniform degree to each

cluster, we optimize the load balance of nodes with fixed

degree. We are also in effect assigning almost equal

number of edges to each cluster connecting to this type of

nodes. Now since the clustering algorithm is trying to

make most of the communication local within the cluster,

it will consequently push for the right mix of degrees of

the other type of nodes with varying degrees in each

cluster, thereby indirectly optimizing the load balance of

nodes with varying degrees as well. This leads to very

small overall computational load imbalance. In section 3,

we present a simplified algorithm for partitioning the TIC

of an LDPCC code into N P clusters so as to minimize

inter-cluster communication while satisfying the above

load balancing restriction.

During cluster allocation phase, the size of the

configuration space is:

S' =NP!

(16)

which is much smaller of the original size, and is

independent of the size of the TIC of the code, and hence

the block length of the code N. It only depends on the

number of clusters, which is equal to the number of

physical nodes in the processing system, NP. Therefore,

the use of cost function based heuristic algorithms is

justified at this stage, whereby close to optimal solutions

can be achieved within reasonable execution times. In

section 4 and 5 , we present and compare the performance

580

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:45:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

of two different approaches to optimize cluster allocation, one uses the min-cut algorithm proposed first in [ 5 ] , and the other is based on a genetic algorithm.
3. Clustering
In this section, we present an algorithm for partitioning the task graph into NP clusters so as to minimize intercluster communications, while at the same time ensuring that each cluster has nF logical function nodes, and nV logical variable nodes, where KFSnFIKfil, and
K v l n V S K ~ l . As shown in Figure 2, the partitioning process starts with the entire TIC viewed as a single cluster by setting the loop variable num, which is the number of end-clusters in the current cluster, to N P . Then, if num is even, the current cluster is recursively partitioned, using a modified version of the recursive clustering algorithm presented in [ 5 ] , into two equally weighted partitions with minimal number of edges cut by the partition. If num is odd, the current cluster is partitioned into num end-clusters using flat partitioning based on the algorithm presented in [7]. Experimental results show that recursive partitioning always results in better clustering quality than flat partitioning. Therefore, we proceed with recursive partitioning as far as possible, and then use flat partitioning at the last step. If NP is a power-of-2, then partitioning will be done recursively all the way to the end. On the other hand, if NP is odd, then partitioning will be done in a single step of flat partitioning.
The recursive clustering algorithm presented in [5] was modified to account for the existence of two different types of tasks in the TIC, one associated with logical variable nodes and the other associated with logical function nodes. Logical nodes of the same type are initially divided equally between the two partitions in an arbitrary manner. We then do node swapping only between logical nodes of the same type, instead of node movements. A dummy function or variable logical nodes is added to the cluster to be equally partitioned into two halves when the number of actual function or variable logical nodes in the cluster is odd. Dummy nodes do not share edges in the TIC with other nodes, i.e., C,, = 0, if lv, or lJ is a dummy node. They are used only as placeholders during node swappings. At the beginning of each partitioning step, we remove any dummy variable and function node that may have been added to the cluster in the last partitioning iteration, and then, if necessary, add a dummy function or variable node. The pseudo code of the modified recursive partitioning algorithm is shown in Figure 2. Node swapping is done based on the Kernighan-Lin min-cut heuristic algorithm presented in (71. The pseudo code of the modified min-cut algorithm is shown in Figure 3. Due to the special characteristic of the TIC of LDPCC decoding algorithm, and factor graphs

for that sake, where an edge cannot exist between two logical nodes of the same type, the process of finding the two logical nodes that their swapping between the two clusters would result in the maximum gain is considerably simplified compared to the general case discussed in [7]. As shown in Figure 3, the search for the two nodes that result in the maximum swapping gain is done by locally searching for the nodes with D,,, within each cluster separately, instead of doing a global search among the two clusters, thereby reducing the search complexity from O(n2>to O(n).
Flat partitioning is done by randomly partitioning the current cluster into num clusters that each has at least KF
logical function nodes and Kv logical variable nodes.
Then the min-cut optimization procedure presented in Figure 3 is applied pair-wise between these clusters. If one of the clusters in the pair to be mutually optimized has more than KF logical function nodes or Kv logical variable nodes, dummy function or variable nodes are added to the other cluster to make the number of each type of logical nodes equal across the two clusters before applying the min-cut optimization procedure. Dummy nodes are then removed from the two resulting new clusters after completing the min-cut optimization process. Two or three passes of pair-wise cluster optimization are generally enough, because gain from additional passes beyond that is usually negligible [7]. The pseudo code of this algorithm is shown in Figure 2.
,Igorithmclustering(G1,NLF,NLv, 9
/’ S is a set of NP clusters constructed by partitioningthe Graph GLwhilc iinimizing inter-clustercommunication. NLFand NLv are the total number o )gicalfunction and variable nodes, respectively. */
S = {@I;
num = NP; offset = 0; Recursive-partitioning(G1, NLF,NLv,num)
,Igorithm recursive-pattitioning(G, sizef, sizeV, num) /’ sizeFand sizeVare the number of logicalfunction and variable nodes in G spectively. ’I
if (G has a dummy function node) Remove it, and update s i z e F e sizef-1
if (G has a dummy variable node) Remove it, and update s k e V t sizeV-l
if (sizeFs KFt1) S = S U G
else ( if (num is even) [ nsizeV t sizeV/2tsizek?/2
nsizef t sizeF12tsizeP/02
Assign the first nsizeF function nodes and nsizeV variable nodes of G to GI, and the rest to Gz. if (skePh2 != 0) Add a dummy function node to Gz
if (sizelPl02!= 0) Add a dummy variable node to GZ
min-cut(Gl, Gz) recursive-partitioning( GI, nsizef, nsizeV, num/2) recursive-partitioning( Gz, nsizef, nsizeV, nud2)j else FlatPartition(G,sizeF, sizeV, num))

581

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:45:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ilgorithm flat-partitioning(G, sizeF, sizeV, num)

else (
Assume fr' and fiare swapped, and mark them as locked

I' sizeFand sizeVare the number of logicalfunction and variable nodes in G,

Update the gain of all unlockedvariable nodes as follows:

espectively. */
Partition G randomly into num clusters GI, i = offset, ..., offseknum that each have nFfunction nodes and nVvariable nodes, where KKnKKF+l, and K6nVSKvtl.

+ V V , VI D , t Dv,

2C v, tl'

-

A'

. VVEVZ D , t Dv8 + 2 C -2C I

Vtfi

v, h

Recordthe status of the swap

for(k=O; k < MAX-PASSES; k++)

gain[seqno] t Dfr,mXt DIZ, max)

for(toffset ; koffseknum; it+) forkoffset; j<offset+num; jtt)( Make number of logical nodes of the same type equal across the two clusters G, and G, by adding minimum number of dummy functionand variable nodes to the appropriatecluster

) while(there are unlockedfunctionor variable nodes) k
Choose k: G* = M A X , ( 2g U h [ i ] )
I=]
If (G> 0) perform all node swaps from 1 to k

! min-cut(Gl, G,) Remove dummy function and variable nodes from the
optimized GI and G, returned by min-cut)
:igofufsreet+2=:nTuhme; clustering algorithm

) while(G > 0)
Figure 3: Modified min-cut algorithm
4. Cluster allocation

Llgorithm min-cut(G;r, Gz)
P GI=G( VI, FI,Et),and GFG(VZ, Fz, E4 7

Associate a gain value Dtor Dvto each functionand variable node in GI and GZand initializeit to zero

do( Mark all nodes as unlocked
V VE VI compute D , = E,,, - I , ,

where E , = C C,,> ,and I , = C C,,,,

f,eFz

fr-=F,

I' D, ISthe total reductionin the cost of the cut when v, is
I
movedfrom GI to GZ'/ Similarly,

V ~ E FcIompute D, = E , -I, ,

where E - I; Cv\f,and I , = I; Cv,f,

f, -d,

v.e",

V VE Vzcompute D, = E, - I , ,

where E,, = I: Cy,,,,and I,, = C

f,EF!

fleFZ

V f~FzcomputeDf, = E f , - I , , ,

where Er, = C

,and I,, = C

b,-=V!

V,-=Vz

seqno t 0

do ( s e g n o t segnot 1 Identifyunlockedvariable nodes v; and v i in VI and VZwith

the maximumgain values max and Dv2 max
Identifyunlockedfunctionnodes f; and fiin FI and FZwith the

maximum gain values Dtr and DE mdl

+ if (&I mar De max > DfI m a r t 012 m u ) ( Assume VI' and vi are swapped, and mark them as locked
Updatethe gain of all unlockedfunction nodes as follows

V f E F i D,, t D f , + 2 C * -2C

"1 1,

v2 f ,

V fE FZD j , t D,$ + 2Cv2f,* - 2Cyl-f,

Record the status of the swap
gain(seqno1t D ~mIax + Dv2 max)

Once clusters are formed, the next step is to allocate each cluster to a physical processing node so as to minimize inter-processor communication. We compare the performance of two different approaches to optimize the allocation of clusters to processors.
4.1. Approach 1: Using min-cut heuristic
This approach uses the cluster allocation algorithm presented in [5] without modifications.
4.2. Approach 2: Using a genetic algorithm
Many researchers have demonstrated the usage of
genetic algorithms [8] for solving the general mapping
problem [9-121. Unlike many traditional optimization techniques, GAS do not require knowledge about the search space, and can easily be parallelized to achieve a linear speedup [ 121. The pseudo code of a simple genetic algorithm is shown in Figure 4. A normalized reciprocal of the cost function in (14) is used for measuring the fitness of a solution.
Initialize do (
create-new-generation ) while(terminationnot true)
IOutput the best among current generation ction create-new-generation
do ( Select parent strings Apply crossover operator Apply mutation operator Evaluate the fitness of offspring solutions Add offspringsolutionsto new-generation as determinedby the acceptance policy)
1)

582

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:45:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 4: A simple genetic algorithm
4.2.1. Encoding. An integer string, or a chromosome, of length NP represents the mapping of logical node clusters onto physical nodes. The cardinal value of an integer in the string gives the cluster identity while its ordinal value gives the identity of the processor to which it has been mapped. Only one cluster can be mapped to a processor, hence the encoding integer string is considered legal only if it does not have any repeated integer value. This is called permutation encoding.
4.2.2. Selection of parents. Parent strings for crossover are selected on the basis of fitness, i.e. the probability of a string to be selected as a parent is proportional to its fitness. This is implemented as a linear search through a roulette wheel with slots weighted in proportion to the string fitness values. Rank selection [131 based on fitness rank instead of absolute fitness value was found by experimentation to lead to a faster convergence for our problem. In this case, the selection procedure was based on the following probability distribution:
where [ k ] is the kth solution in the ascending order of fitness, and Q is the population size.
4.2.3. Crossover operator. Because of our acceptance policy that is based on selecting the fittest among parent and offspring solutions as shown below, we used a crossover probability of loo%, where the chosen parent strings are always subject to the crossover operator. Single and two-point crossover operators were tried and they had almost similar performance. Since we are using permutation representation for our solutions, Partially Mapped Crossover (PMX) [14] was used to avoid producing illegal solutions by the crossover operation.
4.2.4. Mutation operator. This operator is applied probabilistically after the crossover operator. It is applied by randomly selecting two positions in the integer string representing a solution, and exchanging the integer values in these two positions. This guarantees that the resulting solution is a legal one. A mutation probability of 5% was adopted based on some experimentation.
4.2.5. Acceptance policy. There are several possible criteria to accept or reject the offspring solutions that have been evolved using crossover and mutation operators. Such acceptance policies constitute the pressure on the evolution scheme to evolve improved generations of solutions. In our case, the acceptance policy was based on selecting the fittest among parent and offspring solutions. A generation gap G=l was used.

4.2.6. Population size and generations. Through limited experimentation, it was found that a fixed population size of 3 times the chromosome length (3NP), and a number of generations of 20 times the chromosome length (20NP) were adequate for producing cluster allocation solutions that are usually as good as those obtained using the mincut heuristic.
5. Simulation results and discussion
The algorithms were implemented in C++ on a Windows NT PC machine with 650MHz K7 AMD processor and 5120f RAM. The input to the algorithms is an irregular (510, 1020, 2-3-7, 7) LDPC code with a block length of 1020 and rate %. Bi-directional and unidirectional 2-D tori of different sizes were chosen as interconnection topologies of the implementation architecture for this experimentation. The algorithms, however, are general enough to work with other topologies as well.
Since some of the algorithms are inherently randomized, several executions over the same input were done. The mean and standard deviation of the mapping evaluation function (14) over these repeated executions provide a reasonable means to compare the performance of these algorithms. Notice that the average routing distance can be obtained by dividing the expression at (14) by the total number of edges in the TIG. Table 1 reports the mean and standard deviation of the mapping evaluations of the optimized mappings using the above clustering and cluster allocation algorithms versus that of completely random mappings. Results under clustering column are those obtained by arbitrarily allocating the resulting clusters, i.e., before optimizing cluster allocation. Figure 5 shows the percentage improvement in the average routing distance, obtained by clustering, and the incremental improvement due to optimizing cluster allocation using the min-cut (MC) and genetic (GA) based approaches. The overall % improvement in average routing distance due to mapping optimization is obtained by adding the % improvements due to clustering and cluster allocation.
We notice that most of the improvement in the mapping cost function is attributed to the clustering operation, where 40-52% improvement is obtained, indicating that most of the communication locality is exploited through communication within clusters. Relatively less improvement is obtained as the total number of clusters increases leading to less number of logical nodes per cluster. In general, recursive partitioning results in more gain compared to flat partitioning. This can be noticed from the N P = 81 and NP = 121 cases, where a single step of flat partitioning is used, because NP is odd. For that reason, the clustering algorithm presented in section 3 tries to proceed with recursive partitioning before resorting to flat partitioning. The additional improvement

583

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:45:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

in the cost function obtained by optimizing cluster allocation to physical nodes is, in general, less significant. More additional improvement (3-8%) is obtained when clustering with flat partitioning is used compared to only I-3.5% additional improvement when fully recursive partitioning is used. This is attributed to the fact that recursive partitioning results in closer to optimal clustering than does flat partitioning, which relies more on local optimization. The two cluster allocation approaches have, in general, comparable performance. The additional % improvement obtained using the MC based approach increases consistently with the network size. The CA based approach results in more % improvement when flat partitioning is used during clustering stage.

approach, which increases linearly with the number of clusters. Moreover, for larger network sizes, the execution time of the MC based algorithm becomes much less predictable and very susceptible to the random starting state. This makes the CA based approach more attractive for larger networks with NP264.

16

36

€4 NP

1W

121

igure 6: Comparison of mean execution times for the MC and GA based cluster allocation algorithms.

16

36

64

NP

100

121

igure 5: Incremental percentage improvement over
random mapping due to clustering and cluster allocation using the MC and GA based approaches.

Table 2 shows the mean and standard deviation of execution times taken in CPU seconds for the different algorithms. Clustering with pure flat partitioning (NP=8 1 and NP=121) takes less execution time than recursive partitioning, because number of logical nodes per cluster is smaller on an average, hence much less execution time is needed for the min-cut optimization of a pair of clusters. Recursive partitioning has execution time that is almost independent of the number of clusters.
Figure 6 and 7, respectively, show the mean and standard deviation of the execution times of the cluster allocation operation using the M C and GA based approaches. As the network size increases, the execution time of the clustering operation becomes negligible compared to that of the cluster allocation due to the increasing number of clusters. For small networks with
NP164, optimizing cluster allocation using the MC based algorithm is more efficient than the CA based approach.
For larger network sizes, however, the execution time of
the MC based algorithm increases dramatically, much faster than the increase in execution time of the CA based

..

..

..

..

16

36

64

81

100

121

NP

rigure 7: Comparison of standard deviation of execution times for the MC and GA based cluster allocation
algorithms.

The variable and function computation imbalance is measured as a percentage of the total variable and function loads, respectively, as follows:
% var. comp. imbalance =

~~wi)-Wdcdl

QP,€Vp

XlOO

(18)

IE/+( N

%fun. comp. imbalance =

CIL,(Pi) - LF,,",I

QP,'PVP
IIEI

x 100

(19)

Since some of the algorithms are inherently random, the

maximum variable and function computation imbalance

over multiple executions of the clustering algorithm are

reported in Table 3. Obviously, the computation

584

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:45:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

imbalance is only dependent .on the number of clusters N P , and is independent of the network topology of the processing system and cluster allocation. Function computation imbalance is fixed and is not varying over multiple executions of the algorithm, because function nodes have a uniform degree in the code at hand. We notice a quantization effect, which causes computation imbalance even in the function nodes case, even though they have a fixed degree. The ideal loads per cluster in (4) and (5) are measured in terms of edges and fractions of edges. On the other hand, when the mapping is done, there is a quantization granularity of nodes or collection of edges (7 edges in the case of function nodes, for example). This quantization effect causes computation imbalance to be more evident when:
a. The number of nodes is not divisible by the number of clusters. This is more important for nodes with regular degrees and is clear in function load imbalance in Table 3.
b. The number of clusters increases and the number of nodes per cluster decreases, leading to less aggregation. This is more general and can be noticed more clearly in variable load imbalance in Table 3.
In general, we notice that the computation imbalance is fairly small, less than 16% for 121 clusters with only 8-9 variable nodes and 4-5 function nodes per cluster, and widely varying variable node degrees (2-7). Therefore, it does not pose a significant problem to our simplified mapping approach when applied to irregular LDPC codes.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, we have investigated the problem of optimizing the mapping of LDPC codes on parallel decoding architectures to exploit communication locality and enhance the overall performance. The problem is solved in two stages: clustering followed I- y cluster allocation to reduce the initially huge configuration space. We presented a simplified clustering technique that reduces the maximum search complexity of the min-cut algorithm from O(n2) to O(n). Compared to flat partitioning, recursive partitioning leads to better results, but it is limited to a power-of-2 number of clusters. This limitation was overcome by using a hybrid approach, where recursive partitioning is fully exploited before resorting to flat partitioning at the last step. We compared the performance of two different algorithms for cluster allocation, one based on the min-cut heuristic, and the other is based on a genetic algorithm. Comparable mapping qualities can be obtained using the two cluster allocation algorithms. The min-cut based approach is more attractive for small network sizes with number of clusters NP 2 6 4 . The genetic based approach becomes

more attractive for larger network sizes. Even though cluster allocation is much more costly than the clustering operation for large network sizes, it results in relatively very small additional improvement in the communication cost function that might not be enough to justify it. This indicates that most of the communication locality is already exploited by communication within clusters.
We addressed the issue of computational load imbalance caused by our simplified mapping approach. Quantization effect leads to computation imbalance even in regular codes. For the same code, larger number of clusters leads to more computation imbalance, because it results in less aggregation. In general, the computation imbalance was found to be fairly small, and does not pose a significant disadvantage to our simplified mapping approach when applied’toirregular codes.
In general, there is a significant advantage for optimizing the code mapping on parallel decoding architectures in terms of reducing the total communication cost. It reduces the average routing distance by 45-52%, resulting in a much more local communication pattern. The techniques presented in this paper can be applied for optimizing the mapping of other iterative algorithms that can be modeled using factor graphs.

7. References

[11 R. G. Gallager, “Low-Density Parity-Check Codes”, IRE

Trans. on Information Theory,Jan. 1962, pp. 21-28.

[2] W. J. Dally, “Interconnect-limitedVLSI architecture,”IEEE

Inter. Con6 on Interconnect Technology,May 1999, pp. 15-17.

[3] G. AI-Rawi and John Cioffi, “A highly efficient domain

programmable parallel architecture for LDPCC decoding”,

ITCCZOOI, Las Vegas, April 2001.

[4] K. Kschischang, et al., “Factor graphs and the sum-product

algorithm”, submitted to IEEE Trans. on Information Theory,

July 1998.

Available on the web at:

httr,:l/ww~~~.coinin.utoronto.ca/fran~lfactorl

[5] P. Sadayappan and Fikrel Ercal, “Cluster-partitioning

approach to mapping parallel programs onto a hybercube”, Int.

Con&on Supercomputing, Athens, June 1987, pp. 475-97.

[6] B. Shirazi, B., et al. “Analysis and evaluation of heuristic

methods for static task scheduling”, Journal of Parallel and

Distributed Computing, vol. IO, Nov. 1990, pp. 222-232.

[7] B. W. Kamighan and S. Lin, “An efficient heuristic for

partitioning graphs”, Bell System Technical Journal, vol. 49,

Feb. 1970, pp. 291-308.

[8] J. H. Holland, “Adaptation in natural and artificial systems”,

Univ. of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, Mich., 1975.

[9] C. P. Ravikumar, et al., “Genetic algorithm for mapping

tasks onto a reconfigurable parallel processor”, IEE

Proceedings-Computers and Digital Techniques, Mar. 1995,

vol. 142, pp. 8 1-6.

[IO] M. J. Baxter, et al., “An investigation of the heterogeneous

mapping problem using genetic algorithm”, Int. Con$ on

Control, Exeter, UK, Sep. 1996,pp. 448-53.

585

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:45:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

[ 1 I] E-G. Talbi, et al., “Hill-climbing, simulated annealing and genetic algorithms: a comparative study and application to the mapping problem”, Hawaii Int. Cont on System Sciences, Jan. 1993, pp. 565-73. [I21 M. Alaoui, et al., “ A parallel genetic algorithm for task mapping on parallel machines” Symposium on Parallel and

Distributed Processing, San Juan, Puerto Rico, Apr. 1999, pp. 201-9. [ 131 J. Baker, “Adaptive selection methods for genetic algorithms”, Proc. of Genetic Algorithms and their Applications, 1985,pp. 101-111. [ 141D. E. Goldberg, “Genetic algorithms in search, optimization and machine learning”, Addison-Wesley, 1989.

I 11 x 11 ITni-dirertinnnl I 121 I 71606.7 I 281.4 I 44232.1 I 265.5 I 41276.4 I 635.7 I 41115.8 I 224.3 I

Table 3: Maximum variable and function computational imbalance

1 1 NP I Max. % Var. Comp. 1 Max. % Fun. Comp.

Imbalance

Imbalance

I .85

10.47

2.1

11.95

6.56

100

14.3

131

14 9

I15

586

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:45:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

