IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 37, NO. 2, MARCH 2001

721

Reduced-Complexity Decoding of Low Density Parity Check Codes for Generalized Partial Response
Channels
Thomas Mittelholzer, Ajay Dholakia, and Evangelos Eleftheriou

Abstract—The performance of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes serially concatenated with generalized partial response channels is investigated. Various soft-input/soft-output detection schemes suitable for use in iterative detection/decoding systems are described. A low-complexity near-optimal detection algorithm that incorporates soft-input reliability information and generates soft-output reliability information is presented. A reduced-complexity algorithm for decoding LDPC codes is described. Simulation results on the performance of high-rate LDPC codes on generalized PR channels at various recording densities are presented. These results indicate that a judicious selection of the inner detector target polynomial and the choice of a good LDPC code are important in optimizing the performance of the overall recording system. Furthermore, the results also show that iterative detection/decoding schemes using LDPC codes can outperform hard-decision decoding of Reed–Solomon codes
by over 2 dB at a sector error rate of 10 3.
Index Terms—Dual-max algorithm, iterative detection/decoding, LDPC codes, NPML, sum–product decoding.

I. INTRODUCTION

A T HIGH recording densities, generalized partial-response (PR) monic polynomials with noninteger coeffi-

cients match the recording channel more accurately

than the conventional PR class-4 (PR4) channel shaping

[1], leading to less noise enhancement at the equal-

izer output. In particular, polynomials of the form

and

,

where

is a noise

whitening filter, render the total noise at the input of the detector

approximately white, provided the equalizer and the predictor

filter, , are sufficiently long. This class of polynomials

is significant in practice, and when combined with sequence

detection, gives rise to noise-predictive maximum likelihood

(NPML) systems [2], [3]. Specifically, sixteen-state NPML

detectors and simple single or dual parity coding schemes

combined with traditional run-length-limited (RLL) codes

have become state-of-the-art in commercial hard-disk drives.

Efficient decoding of these simple coding schemes is achieved

by utilizing some form of reliability or soft information [4], [5].

Turbo codes [6] and low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes

[7], [8] are recent breakthroughs in coding theory that promise

to push the areal density of the magnetic recording channel to its

limits. In particular, LDPC codes have been shown to approach the capacity of the memoryless additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel within 0.1 dB [9]. Iterative detection and decoding algorithms for turbo, turbo-like, and LDPC codes are being investigated for use in many diverse communication and data storage systems where intersymbol interference (ISI) and noise are the limiting impairments.
Considerable work in investigating turbo decoding schemes for the magnetic recording channel has recently been reported in [10]–[13]. In particular, application of turbo codes and combined turbo decoding and turbo equalization [14] to magnetic recording is presented in [11]. A simplified serial turbo decoder structure, in which the inner code is the precoded PR4 channel and the outer code is a single convolutional code, has been considered in [13]. Finally, a reverse-order concatenation scheme that involves maximum-transition-run (MTR) and LDPC codes has been studied in [12].
In this paper, we investigate serial concatenation of inner generalized PR channels and outer LDPC codes in detail (see also [15]). We consider LDPC codes of various block lengths and rates and investigate reduced-complexity detection and decoding algorithms. Simulations results on the performance of high-rate LDPC codes on a generalized PR channel with iterative NPML detection and decoding are presented. Finally, the potential gains of LDPC codes over the traditional hard-decision decoded Reed–Solomon (RS) codes are discussed. Note that although it is often necessary to incorporate RLL constraints in practice, we do not include them in our study in order to focus on the performance gains achieveable solely by using LDPC outer codes.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II outlines the iterative detection/decoding system model used in this paper. Section III describes various soft-input/soft-output detection schemes that can be employed in such a system, including a modified dual-max detection algorithm, which incorporates a priori reliability information as soft input and delivers near-optimal performance. Section IV is devoted to LDPC codes and iterative decoding in which a reduced-complexity decoding algorithm is described. Section V presents the simulations results, and conclusions are given in Section VI.

Manuscript received October 24, 2000. The authors are with IBM Research, Zurich Research Laboratory, Säumerstrasse 4, CH-8803 Rüschlikon, Switzerland. Publisher Item Identifier S 0018-9464(01)02384-6.

II. SYSTEM CONFIGURATION
The basic recording system with an LDPC encoder and a serially concatenated detector/decoder configuration is shown

0018–9464/01$10.00 © 2001 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

722

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 37, NO. 2, MARCH 2001

III. SOFT-INPUT/SOFT-OUTPUT DETECTORS

Fig. 1. System model for LDPC encoder, channel, detector, and LDPC decoder.

in Fig. 1. A block of binary data

is en-

coded by a rate-

LDPC encoder into a binary codeword

and then mapped to antipodal encoded data

symbols

,

, which are written

on the disk at a rate of . Adopting a linear model for the

write/read process on a magnetic disk and assuming the pres-

ence of thermal noise only, the magnetic recording channel is

modeled by a Lorentzian channel model with AWGN. The data

signal is read back via a low-pass filter (LPF) and shaped such

that the overall discrete-time transfer function, including the

head/disk-medium characteristics, the analog LPF, and the sam-

pler, closely matches the generalized PR polynomial . The

shaped channel-output samples are then passed to the de-

tector. The detector produces soft information about the encoded

data symbols by using the channel constraints. By taking the

code constraints into account, the decoder computes an estimate

together with (soft) extrinsic information for the encoded data

symbols . The extrinsic information may be fed back directly

to the decoder or passed to the detector, depending on the de-

tection/decoding schedule that has been adopted.

The channel detector can be any soft-input soft-output

detector based on the BCJR algorithm [16], on the soft-output

Viterbi algorithm (SOVA) [17] (see also [18], [19]), or on

any simplified version of either of these two algorithms. In

our iterative detection and decoding system, the detector

is based on a modified dual-max algorithm [20] and the

LDPC code is decoded using a reduced-complexity version

[21] of the sum–product algorithm (SPA) [7], [22], [8]. The

dual-max algorithm offers near-optimum performance at

significantly reduced implementation complexity. It provides

a path for a natural evolution from existing hard-decision

or soft-output-only detectors that are being used in practice.

Besides the latency due to the additional backward processing

step, the dual-max algorithm has exactly the same structure

as the Viterbi algorithm. This feature is particularly attractive

in that many parts of the existing hardware design can be

reused in a new design. Similarly, our reduced-complexity

algorithm for decoding LDPC codes is also very attractive from

an implementation perspective and delivers performance very

close to that of the full SPA.

Traditional detectors for signals impaired by ISI and noise employ maximum likelihood sequence detection (MLSD) based on the Viterbi Algorithm (VA) [23]. In magnetic storage systems the recording channel is shaped to a specific polynomial or target response such as (extended partial-response maximum likelihood, EPRML) or
(NPML) and the data detector operates on the 8-state or 16-state trellis, respectively. Although these detectors process soft information from the channel, they only provide hard decisions at the output for further processing by a decoder to perform error correction. It is known that using soft decisions in the form of a posteriori probabilities (APP) or log-likelihood ratios (LLR) at the detector output can provide additional performance gain when utilized by a soft-input decoder. Furthermore, if the decoder also has the capability to provide soft decisions, then the detector and decoder operating in an iterative fashion can offer substantial performance improvement. Clearly, the detector in such a system must be able to accept additional soft inputs in the form of APP or LLR. In this section, we describe how the various detector algorithms can be modified to incorporate a priori reliability information as soft inputs.

A. Soft-Input/Soft-Output Viterbi Detector

Let the memory of the ISI channel be represented by a finite

state machine (FSM), with the state at time

denoted by

and at time by . Then, the VA is described by the following

recursive equation

(1)

where

represents the metrics associated with the state

at time , and

denotes the branch metric associated

with the transition from state to state at time . The soft

a priori reliability information can be included in the branch

metric computation, and the resulting algorithm is known as

APRI-VA [24]. For a generalized partial response (PR) shaped

signal in the presence of noise, i.e.,

(2)
where is the encoded data symbol at time , is the generalized PR polynomial and
is a white Gaussian noise sample at the input of the detector with variance , the branch metric is given by

(3)

Note that in the case of additive noise with another

non-Gaussian distribution the metric in (3) can be easily

reformulated. The Viterbi detector operating on and the a

priori probability

of the independent recorded symbols

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MITTELHOLZER et al.: REDUCED-COMPLEXITY DECODING OF LDPC CODES

723

finds the sequence metric:

that minimizes the following

C. Dual-Max Detector for Generalized PR Channels
A sub-optimal soft-output detection approach known as the dual-max algorithm [20] can be obtained by using the standard approximation

(10)

(4)

Soft-output capability can be incorporated using the SOVA or

improved SOVA principles [17]–[19].

in (9). The resulting computation is

B. APP Detector for Generalized PR Channels

The soft-output APP detector based on the BCJR algorithm

operating on the ISI trellis computes the symbol APP’s

, where

is the sequence of channel

output samples. The symbol with the maximum APP values

is selected as the data decision at each time instance . As de-

scribed in [25], the key idea is to partition the joint probability

(11)

where is an approximation of the a posteriori LLR and

and

are the forward and backward state metrics,

respectively. The recursive algorithm computes in a forward

pass

(12)

and in a backward pass

(5)

(13)

where

and

denote the portions of the sequence

received before and after the th channel output sample ,

respectively. Then, the APP of the symbol is obtained by

summing over all state pairs

for which is , i.e.,

(6)

where

and

are the forward and backward state

metrics, respectively, computed recursively as follows:

where, again, the branch metric

is given by (3) and

incorporates the a priori information as an additional soft input.

For a terminated trellis, the initial conditions for the forward

pass are

and

,

, and for the

backward pass are

and

,

,

where is the length of the terminated trellis. In certain cases

such as the nonterminated ISI trellis, the initial state metrics

for the backward pass are

, where is the

memory of the ISI channel, and is the length of the block

of channel output samples processed together by the dual-max

detector.

IV. ITERATIVE DECODING OF LDPC CODES

(7)

(8)

The branch metric

in (5)–(8) is given by (3) and incor-

porates the a priori information as an additional soft input.

It is often convenient to work with a posteriori LLR for the

th symbol, given by

High-rate LDPC codes appear to have certain advantages over convolutional or turbo codes when used as outer codes. For instance, LDPC codes appear not to suffer from error floors at bit error rates of . Furthermore, the sparseness of the parity-check matrices of LDPC codes results in decoding algorithms that are competitive in terms of complexity compared to serially concatenated systems with convolutional outer codes. Finally, no interleaver is needed between the LDPC encoder and the channel, because interleaving can be implicitly incorporated into the LDPC code.
A. Construction of LDPC Codes

A binary low-density parity-check (LDPC) code [7], [8] is a linear block code described by a sparse parity-check matrix , i.e., has a low density of 1’s. The class of LDPC matrices must satisfy the following regularity constraint: Each column contains a small fixed number of 1’s and each row contains a small fixed number of 1’s. Equivalently, an LDPC matrix with
rows and columns can be described by a bipartite graph (9) with two kinds of nodes: There are symbol nodes, which

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

724

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 37, NO. 2, MARCH 2001

correspond to each bit in the codeword, and check nodes, which correspond to the parity checks represented by the rows of the matrix. The connectivity of the graph is such that the paritycheck matrix is the incidence matrix of the bipartite graph [22]. The regularity constraint implies that each symbol node is connected to check nodes and each check node is connected to symbol nodes.
Codes defined by graphs can be decoded by the sum–product algorithm (SPA) [7], [26]. However, the SPA performs well and essentially achieves the performance of a maximum-likelihood decoder only for graphs without short cycles and, therefore, one requires that the graph has no 4-cycles [27]. This 4-cycle-free condition translates into the condition that the corresponding parity-check matrix has no two rows that have overlapping 1’s in more than one position. High-rate 4-cycle free LDPC matrices only exist if their rate satisfies a combinatorial bound [27], viz., for a given number of rows, the block length is upperbounded by

(14)

Binary high-rate LDPC codes without 4-cycles can be con-

structed by randomly generating columns, which contain ex-

actly 1’s [27]. The parity-check matrix is built up iteratively

by adding a new column if this column does not form a 4-cycle

with the previously generated columns of . In general, this

method does not provide matrices with a fixed row weight .

An alternative method was proposed by Gallager [7], [27],

where the

matrix is built from sub-matrices of size

, which are themselves LDPC matrices with column

weight 1 and row weight . In particular, must be a multiple

of .

These random constructions provide codes with reasonable

distance properties for

but it is difficult to find codes

for which the bound (14) is tight [27]. An alternative determin-

istic construction of LDPC matrices has been proposed that is

based on finite geometries [28]. With this deterministic con-

struction, one can achieve the bound (14). Furthermore, these

codes hold the promise of an analytic approach to the distance

properties of the code; e.g., for

the minimum distance and

its multiplicity have been determined [29]. Owing to the ease of

construction of these codes we have used the deterministically

constructed codes.

B. Reduced-Complexity Decoding of LDPC Codes
The graphical representation of LDPC codes is useful in describing iterative decoding based on the SPA. The SPA operates by passing messages between symbol nodes and check nodes according to a suitable schedule. The messages themselves can be APP’s or LLR’s. A convenient and commonly used message passing schedule is one in which the update computations of all the nodes of the same kind (say, check nodes) are carried out first and the resulting messages are sent to the neighboring nodes. Next, the update computations of all the nodes of the other kind (say, symbol nodes) are carried out. The resulting messages are then sent to the neighboring nodes, completing one round or iteration of message passing. At this point the next iteration begins,

and the SPA proceeds in this manner until a specified stopping

criterion is met.

In the serially concatenated detector/decoding scheme shown

in Fig. 1, the detector passes soft-information in the form of ex-

trinsic information to the LDPC decoder. These extrinsic infor-

mation terms about code bit

are determined

from the a priori knowledge

of the detector about

and from the APP’s (6) or, equivalently, from the LLR’s (9) or

approximated LLR’s (11) that are produced by the channel de-

tector at each iteration step, i.e.,

(15)

where

or 1.

The SPA is itself an iterative algorithm using these extrinsic

informations as inputs. In the initial step of the SPA, each

symbol node generates messages

, and

passes them to all check nodes that are connected to symbol

node . The core of the SPA consists of two local update rules

for check and symbol nodes [7], [8]. The connectivity of the

graph can be described as follows. Check node is connected

to all symbol nodes ,

, that are checked by

the th parity check

(16)

The update of the messages sent from check node to all

symbol nodes

,

, is given by

(17)

where

and the product is taken over all symbol nodes

. The update of the messages sent from symbol

node to the check nodes , which check symbol , is given

by

(18)

where the product is taken over all check nodes

that

are connected to symbol node , and the normalizing constants

are chosen such that

. In the last

decoding step, the SPA computes the “pseudo-posterior proba-

bilities”

,

, given by

(19)

where is chosen such that

.

In general, the check node update (17) is much more com-

plex than the symbol node update (18). An efficient way to per-

form the update at check node is to apply the BCJR algo-

rithm to a two-state trellis with trellis sections for the single

parity check equation

determined by (16). In

the probability domain, the branch metric for the th component

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MITTELHOLZER et al.: REDUCED-COMPLEXITY DECODING OF LDPC CODES

725

of the codeword

is given by

. The

metrics

of state

at time in the forward recursion

of the BCJR algorithm are updated by

(20)

with initial conditions

,

. For a fixed

time , the state metric

is a probability distribution, viz.,

is the probability of reaching state in the forward recur-

sion, when each branch is chosen according to the branch metric

(probability)

. Similar update rules hold for the state

metrics

of the backward recursion, which again have an

interpretation as probabilities. The combining pass of the BCJR

algorithm yields the messages that are sent from check node

to symbol node :

= Fig. 2. Comparison of iterative detection/decoding schedule for
(21) N 508 LDPC code at fixed SNR = 14 dB (pw =T = 2:995).

One can reduce the complexity of the BCJR algorithm by working in the LLR domain, i.e., by making use of

(22)

Note that the LLR’s

and

can be viewed as the forward and backward

difference-metrics in the log domain, respectively. Using (10),

the update rules (20) can be rewritten [21] as

sgn sgn

if otherwise,

(23)

where sgn denotes the sign of the argument. One can show in a similar manner that the backward recursion and the combining pass are given by

sgn sgn

if otherwise.

(24)

and
sgn sgn

if otherwise.

(25)

When replacing these tight approximations by equalities, one obtains an efficient difference-metric based dual-max algorithm for the two-state trellis. Finally, it is possible to apply a correction term to each update computation in the forward and backward passes, which results in essentially no loss in performance compared to the full SPA [21].

V. SIMULATION RESULTS
The error rate performance of the magnetic recording system employing LDPC codes serially concatenated with generalized PR channels has been studied by computer simulations. Except for the performance results corresponding to the EPR4 system,

the target polynomial is

, which

gives rise to a 16-state trellis. The read-back signal is first fil-

tered by a 5th-order low-pass Butterworth filter and is then fed to

a very long zero-forcing PR4 equalizer (with 200 taps). The co-

efficients and are obtained by applying minimum-mean-

squared error prediction to the noise component of the signal at

the output of the PR4 equalizer. The signal-to-noise ratio (SNR)

is defined as the ratio of the energy of the encoded data symbol

and the variance of the AWGN at the input of the low-pass filter.

A. Selection of Iterative Detection/Decoding Schedule
Fig. 2 shows the performance as a function of the total number of LDPC decoder iterations for various message-passing schedules. The detector uses the modified dual-max algorithm and the decoder uses the SPA. The SNR is fixed at 14 dB and
. Similar families of curves are obtained for different values of the SNR.
The message-passing schedule starts by executing forward, backward, and combining passes once in the dual-max detector, followed by one or more rounds of symbol and check updates in the LDPC decoder. This constitutes one “outer” iteration. Five different message-passing schedules are compared in Fig. 2. Curves 1 through 4 correspond to schedules in which an outer iteration consists of one detector iteration followed by a fixed number 1, 4, 16, and 64 of decoder iterations, respectively, and one or more outer iterations are performed. Curve 5 corresponds to the schedule with only one outer iteration and a varying number of LDPC decoder rounds. Note that the abscissa in Fig. 2 represents the total number of LDPC decoder iterations, independent of the schedule. Hence, for example, 32 total LDPC decoder iterations can be carried out by performing 8 outer iterations using the schedule corresponding to curve 2, 2 outer iterations using the schedule corresponding to curve 3, or 32 LDPC decoder iterations using the schedule corresponding to curve 5.
The results show that for a given total number of LDPC decoder iterations, the best schedule is the one in which only one

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

726

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 37, NO. 2, MARCH 2001

= Fig. 3. Comparison of BCJR and dual-max detectors for N 508 LDPC Fig. 4. Comparison of decoders for N = 508 LDPC code (pw =T =

code (pw =T = 2:6 and 2:995).

2:995).

LDPC decoder iteration is carried out in each outer iteration. It appears desirable to pass the results of each round of symbol and check updates in the sum–product algorithm to the detector, which can combine the updated a priori LLR and the channel outputs to generate more reliable soft symbol information for the next outer iteration.
The message-passing schedule employed in obtaining the rest of the simulation results reported below performs only one LDPC decoder round in each outer iteration and a maximum of 30 such outer iterations are carried out.

B. Reduced-Complexity Detection Algorithm

We have seen above that using the dual-max detector leads to

a considerable reduction in computational complexity. It is nat-

ural to ask whether this simplification incurs any performance

penalty. Fig. 3 compares the performance of 16-state BCJR and

dual-max detectors at two different user densities. The

LDPC code is used with a decoder based on SPA. The iter-

ation schedule alternates between the detector and decoder after

each round and the maximum number of outer iterations is lim-

ited to 30. It can be seen that the loss of performance is approxi-

mately 0.05 dB or less. Similar behavior was also observed with

the

LDPC code.

C. Reduced-Complexity Decoding Algorithm

Fig. 4 shows the performance comparison of various de-

coding algorithms for the LDPC codes. The 16-state dual-max

detector is used along with the

LDPC code at

. Curve 1 corresponds to the SPA, whereas

curve 2 depicts the simplified difference-metric algorithm. A

loss of around 0.1 dB is incurred. Finally, curve 3 shows the

performance of the difference-metric algorithm including the

correction term [21], which is seen to be almost identical to

the performance of the full SPA. Thus, the reduced-complexity

decoding algorithm described in the previous section is a good

choice for practical implementations.

Fig. 5. Performance comparison of LDPC codes on 16-state NPML and EPR4 systems (pw =T = 2:6).

D. BER Performance

Figs. 5 and 6 show bit error probabilities of a simulated it-

erative dual-max detector and LDPC decoder for a Lorentzian

channel with

and

,

respectively.

In Fig. 5, curve 1 indicates the performance of an 8-state

EPR dual-max detector with the

LDPC code.

Curve 3 shows the performance of the 16-state noise-

predictive dual-max detector in conjunction with the same

LDPC code. Curves 2 and 4 depict the performance

of the 8-state EPR and 16-state NPML dual-max detectors

with

LDPC code, respectively. In all cases, the user

is kept constant at 2.6 and the SNR has not been

adjusted for rate loss. At a symbol error probability of ,

the system with 16-state NPML detector gains 1.0 to 1.5 dB

over the system employing 8-state EPR detector.

In Fig. 6, curve 1 indicates the performance of an uncoded

system using a 16-state NPML detector. Curve 2 shows the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MITTELHOLZER et al.: REDUCED-COMPLEXITY DECODING OF LDPC CODES

727

assumed 3-way byte-level interleaving and an overall rate of . Recall that the LDPC code used in the
simulations has about the same rate as the RS code, viz., 0.936. The results indicate that at a sector error rate of , iteratively decodable LDPC codes offer more than 2 dB gain compared to the traditional RS-encoded hard-disk drive systems.

= Fig. 6. Performance comparison of LDPC codes and uncoded NPML system

(pw =T

2:995).

VI. CONCLUSIONS
We have investigated the performance of LDPC codes with iterative detection and decoding for generalized partial response channels. The low-complexity dual-max algorithm modified to incorporate soft-input reliability information performs recursive computations similar to the VA and hence is extremely important from an implementation point of view. Moreover, the reduced-complexity difference-metric based decoding algorithm described in this paper is also a good candidate for practical, high-speed decoding of LDPC codes. The choice of the inner detector target polynomial is important in obtaining the full benefit of the outer LDPC codes for the overall recording system. Performance results have shown that iterative detection/decoding schemes using LDPC codes can outperform hard-decision decoding of Reed–Solomon codes by over 2 dB at a sector error rate of . We believe that iterative detection/decoding schemes, and in general soft-input/soft-output algorithms, can have a tremendous impact on increasing the areal density of future hard-disk drives.

REFERENCES

Fig. 7. Performance comparison of LDPC codes (pw =T = 3:2) and RS code (pw =T = 3:17).

performance of the 16-state noise-predictive dual-max detector

in conjunction with the rate-0.8839 (

,

)

LDPC code. Curve 3 shows the performance of the 16-state

noise-predictive dual-max detector in conjunction with the rate-

0.936 (

,

) LDPC code. In all cases, the

is kept constant at 2.995 and the SNR has not been

adjusted for rate loss. At a symbol error probability of ,

the

LDPC code delivers nearly 4 dB gain over the

reference uncoded NPML system. Moreover, compared to the

capacity bound [30] shown in curve 4, the performance of this

LDPC code lags by approximately 1.5 dB.

E. SER Performance
Fig. 7 compares the sector error rate performance of LDPC codes and Reed–Solomon codes with hard-decision decoding. In hard-disk drive systems, a sector corresponds to 516 information bytes and is typically encoded into three RS codewords, each with 10 bytes of redundancy. In our simulations, we have

[1] R. D. Cideciyan, F. Dolivo, R. Hermann, W. Hirt, and W. Schott, “A PRML system for digital magnetic recording,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 10, pp. 38–56, Jan. 1992.
[2] P. R. Chevillat, E. Eleftheriou, and D. Maiwald, “Noise-predictive partial-response equalizers and applications,” in Proc. IEEE ICC ’92, Chicago, IL, June 1992, pp. 942–947.
[3] E. Eleftheriou and W. Hirt, “Noise predictive maximum-likelihood (NPML) detection for the magnetic recording channel,” in Proc. IEEE ICC ’96, June 1996, pp. 556–560.
[4] R. D. Cideciyan, J. D. Coker, E. Eleftheriou, and R. L. Galbraith, “NPML detection combined with parity-based post-processing,” IEEE Trans. Magn., pt. 1, vol. 37, no. 1.
[5] T. Conway, “A new target response with parity coding for high density magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 2382–2486, July 1998.
[6] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” in Proc. IEEE ICC’93, Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[7] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check code,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[8] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[9] T. J. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of provably good low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, Apr. 1999, submitted for publication.
[10] W. E. Ryan, “Performance of high rate turbo codes on a PR4-equalized magnetic recording channel,” in Proc. IEEE ICC’98, Atlanta, GA, June 1998, pp. 947–951.
[11] W. E. Ryan, L. L. McPheters, and S. W. McLaughlin, “Combined turbo coding and turbo equalization for PR4-equalized Lorentzian channels,” in Proc. Conf. Info. Sci. Sys., Princeton, NJ, Mar. 1998, pp. 489–493.
[12] H. Song, R. M. Todd, and J. R. Cruz, “Low density parity check codes for magnetic recording channels,” in Proc. IEEE Intermag 2000, Toronto, Canada, Apr. 2000.
[13] T. Souvignier, A. Friedmann, M. Oberg, P. H. Siegel, R. E. Swanson, and J. K. Wolf, “Turbo decoding for PR4: parallel versus serial concatenation,” in Proc. IEEE ICC’99, Vancouver, Canada, June 1999, pp. 1638–1642.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

728

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 37, NO. 2, MARCH 2001

[14] C. Douillard, M. Jezequel, and C. Berrou, “Iterative correction of intersymbol interference: Turbo-equalization,” European Trans. Telecommun., pp. 507–511, Sept./Oct. 1995.
[15] A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, and T. Mittelholzer, “Iterative detection/decoding techniques for the magnetic recording channel,” in Dig. 11th Annu. Magnetic Recording Conf. (TMRC 2000), Santa Clara, CA, Aug. 2000, p. D6.
[16] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-20, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[17] J. Hagenauer and P. Hoeher, “A Viterbi algorithm with soft-decision outputs and its applications,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom’89, 1989, pp. 1680–1686.
[18] M. P. C. Fossorier, F. Burkert, S. Lin, and J. Hagenauer, “On the equivalence between SOVA and Max-Log-MAP decodings,” IEEE Comm. Letters, vol. 2, no. 5, pp. 137–139, May 1998.
[19] L. Lin and R. S. Cheng, “Improvements in SOVA-based decoding for turbo codes,” in Proc. IEEE ICC’97, 1997, pp. 1473–1478.
[20] A. J. Viterbi, “An intuitive justification and a simplified implementation of the MAP decoder for convolutional codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 260–264, Feb. 1998.
[21] E. Eleftheriou, T. Mittelholzer, and A. Dholakia, “A reduced-complexity decoding algorithm for low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Lett., Oct. 2000, submitted for publication.
[22] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 27, pp. 533–548, Sept. 1981.

[23] G. D. Forney Jr., “Maximum likelihood sequence detection in the presence of intersymbol interference,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 18, pp. 363–378, May 1972.
[24] J. Hagenauer, P. Robertson, and L. Papke, “Iterative (‘Turbo’) decoding of systematic convolutional codes with MAP and SOVA algorithms,” in Proc. ITG Conf., Oct. 1994, pp. 41–48.
[25] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of binary block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 429–445, Mar. 1996.
[26] G. D. Forney Jr., “The forward-backward algorithm,” in Proc. 1996 Allerton Conf., Allerton, IL, Sept. 1996.
[27] D. J. C. MacKay and M. C. Davey, “Evaluation of Gallager codes for short block length and high rate applications,” in Codes, Systems, and Graphical Models, B. Marcus and J. Rosenthal, Eds. Heidelberg: Springer, 2000, vol. 123, pp. 113–130.
[28] T. Mittelholzer, “Construction of Steiner systems and high-rate LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, June 2000, submitted for publication.
[29] D. Hösli, E. Svensson, and D. Arnold, “High-rate low-density paritycheck codes: Construction and application,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, Brest, France, Sept. 2000, pp. 447–450.
[30] A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, and T. Mittelholzer, “On iterative decoding for magnetic recording channels,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, Brest, France, Sept. 2000, pp. 219–226.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

