638

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Efficient Encoding of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
Thomas J. Richardson and Rüdiger L. Urbanke

Abstract—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes can be considered serious competitors to turbo codes in terms of performance and complexity and they are based on a similar philosophy: constrained random code ensembles and iterative decoding algorithms.
In this paper, we consider the encoding problem for LDPC codes. More generally, we consider the encoding problem for codes specified by sparse parity-check matrices. We show how to exploit the sparseness of the parity-check matrix to obtain efficient encoders. For the (3 6)-regular LDPC code, for example, the complexity of encoding is essentially quadratic in the block length. However, we show that the associated coefficient can be made quite small, so that encoding codes even of length 100 000 is still quite practical. More importantly, we will show that “optimized” codes actually admit linear time encoding.
Index Terms—Binary erasure channel, decoding, encoding, parity check, random graphs, sparse matrices, turbo codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes were originally invented and investigated by Gallager [1]. The crucial innovation was Gallager’s introduction of iterative decoding algorithms (or message-passing decoders) which he showed to be capable of achieving a significant fraction of channel capacity at low complexity. Except for the papers by Zyablov and Pinsker [2], Margulis [3], and Tanner [4] the field then lay dormant for the next 30 years. Interest in LDPC codes was rekindled in the wake of the discovery of turbo codes and LDPC codes were independently rediscovered by both MacKay and Neal [5] and Wiberg [6].1 The past few years have brought many new developments in this area. First, in several papers Luby, Mitzenmacher, Shokrollahi, Spielman, and Stemann introduced new tools for the investigation of message-passing decoders for the binary-erasure channel (BEC) and the binary-symmetric channel (BSC) (under hard-decision message-passing decoding) [9], [10], and they extended Gallager’s definition of LDPC codes to include irregular codes (see also [5]). The same authors also exhibited sequences of codes which, asymptotically in the block length, provably achieve
Manuscript received December 15,1999; revised October 10, 2000. This work was performed while both authors were at Bell Labs, Lucent Technologies, Murray Hill, NJ 07974 USA.
T. J. Richardson was with Bell Labs, Lucent Technologies, Murray Hill, NJ 07974 USA. He is now with Flarion Technologies, Bedminster, NJ 07921 USA (e-mail: richardson@flarion.com).
R. L. Urbanke was with Bell Labs, Lucent Technologies, Murray Hill, NJ 07974 USA. He is now with EPFL, LTHC-DSC, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland (e-mail: rudiger.urbanke@epfl.ch).
Communicated by D. A. Spielman, Guest Editor. Publisher Item Identifier S 0018-9448(01)00739-8.
1Similar concepts have also appeared in the physics literature [7], [8].

capacity on a BEC. It was then shown in [11] that similar analytic tools can be used to study the asymptotic behavior of a very broad class of message-passing algorithms for a wide class of channels and it was demonstrated in [12] that LDPC codes can come extremely close to capacity on many channels.
In many ways, LDPC codes can be considered serious competitors to turbo codes. In particular, LDPC codes exhibit an asymptotically better performance than turbo codes and they admit a wide range of tradeoffs between performance and decoding complexity. One major criticism concerning LDPC codes has been their apparent high encoding complexity. Whereas turbo codes can be encoded in linear time, a straightforward encoder implementation for an LDPC code has complexity quadratic in the block length. Several authors have addressed this issue.

1) It was suggested in [13] and [9] to use cascaded rather than bipartite graphs. By choosing the number of stages and the relative size of each stage carefully one can construct codes which are encodable and decodable in linear time. One drawback of this approach lies in the fact that each stage (which acts like a subcode) has a length which is, in general, considerably smaller than the length of the overall code. This results, in general, in a performance loss compared to a standard LDPC code with the same overall length.

2) In [14] it was suggested to force the parity-check matrix to have (almost) lower triangular form, i.e., the ensemble of codes is restricted not only by the degree constraints but also by the constraint that the parity-check matrix have lower triangular shape. This restriction guarantees a linear time encoding complexity but, in general, it also results in some loss of performance.

It is the aim of this paperto showthat,even without cascade con-

structions or restrictions on the shape of the parity-check matrix,

the encoding complexity is quite manageable in most cases and

provably linear in many cases. More precisely, for a -reg-

ular code of length the encoding complexity seems indeed to

be of order but the actual number of operations required is

no more than

, and, because of the extremely

small constant factor, even large block lengths admit practically

feasible encoders. We will also show that “optimized” irregular

codes have a linear encoding complexity and that the required

amount of preprocessing is of order at most .

The proof of these facts is achieved in several stages. We

first show in Section II that the encoding complexity is upper-

bounded by

, where , the gap, measures in some way to

be made precise shortly, the “distance” of the given parity-check

matrix to a lower triangular matrix. In Section III, we then dis-

cuss several greedy algorithms to triangulate matrices and we

0018–9448/01$10.00 © 2001 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:47:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RICHARDSON AND URBANKE: EFFICIENT ENCODING OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

639

show that for these algorithms, when applied to elements of a

given ensemble, the gap concentrates around its expected value

with high probability. As mentioned above, for the -reg-

ular code the best greedy algorithm which we discuss results in

an expected gap of

. Finally, in Section IV, we prove that

for all known “optimized” codes the expected gap is actually of

order less than , resulting in the promised linear encoding

complexity. In practice, the gap is usually a small constant. The

bound can be improved but it would require a significantly

more complex presentation.

We finish this section with a brief review of some basic no-

tation and properties concerning LDPC codes. For a more thor-

ough discussion we refer the reader to [1], [11], [12].

LDPC codes are linear codes. Hence, they can be expressed

as the null space of a parity-check matrix , i.e., is a codeword

if and only if

The modifier “low-density” applies to ; the matrix should

be sparse. For example, if has dimension

, where is

even, then we might require to have three ’s per column and

six ’s per row. Conditioned on these constraints, we choose

at random as discussed in more detail below. We refer to the as-

sociated code as a -regular LDPC code. The sparseness of

enables efficient (suboptimal) decoding, while the random-

ness ensures (in the probabilistic sense) a good code [1].

Example 1. [Parity-Check Matrix of -Regular Code of Length ]: The following matrix will serve as an example.

Fig. 1. Graphical representation of a (3; 6)-regular LDPC code of length 12. The left nodes represent the variable nodes whereas the right nodes represent the check nodes.

For example, for the degree distribution pair

, which

corresponds to the -regular LDPC code, the rate is .

Given a pair

of degree distributions and a natural

number , we define an ensemble of bipartite graphs

in the following way. All graphs in the ensemble

will

have left nodes which are associated to and right nodes which

are associated to . More precisely, assume that

(1) and

In the theory of LDPC codes it is customary and useful not

to focus on particular codes but to consider ensembles of codes.

These ensembles are usually defined in terms of ensembles of

bipartite graphs [13], [15]. For example, the bipartite graph

which represents the code defined in Example 1 is shown in

Fig. 1. The left set of nodes represents the variables whereas

the right set of nodes represents the constraints. An ensemble

of bipartite graphs is defined in terms of a pair of degree distri-

butions. A degree distribution

is simply a

polynomial with nonnegative real coefficients satisfying

. Typically, denotes the fraction of edges in a graph which

are incident to a node (variable or constraint node as the case

may be) of degree . In the sequel, we will use the shorthand

to denote

This quantity gives the inverse of the average node degree. As-

sociated to a degree distribution pair

is the rate

defined as

(2)

We can convert these degree distributions into node perspective by defining
and

Each graph in

has left nodes of degree and

right nodes of degree . The order of these nodes is

arbitrary but fixed. Here, to simplify notation, we assume that

and are chosen in such a way that all these quantities

are integer. A node of degree has sockets from which the

edges emanate and these sockets are ordered. Thus, in total there

are

ordered sockets on the left as well as on the right. Let be a

permutation on

. We can associate a graph

to such a permutation by connecting the th socket on the left

to the th socket on the right. Letting run over the set of

permutations on generates a set of graphs. Endowed with the

uniform probability distribution this is the ensemble

.

Therefore, if in the future we choose a graph at random from the

ensemble

then the underlying probability distribution

is the uniform one.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:47:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

640

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

It remains to associate a code to every element of

.

We will do so by associating a parity-check matrix to each

graph. At first glance, it seems natural to define the parity-

check matrix associated to a given element in

as

that

-matrix which has a nonzero entry at row and

column if and only if (iff) the th right node is connected

to the th left node. Unfortunately, the possible presence of

multiple edges between pairs of nodes requires a more careful

definition. Since the encoding is done over the field GF , we

define the parity-check matrix as the

matrix which

has a nonzero entry at row and column iff the th right

node is connected to the th left node an odd number of times.

As we will see, the encoding is accomplished in two steps, a

preprocessing step, which is an offline calculation performed

once only for the given code, and the actual encoding step

which is the only data-dependent part. For the preprocessing

step it is more natural to work with matrices which contain the

multiplicities of edges and, therefore, we define the extended

parity-check matrix as that matrix which has an entry at

row and column iff the th right node is connected to the

th left node by edges. Clearly, is equal to modulo .

In the sequel, we will also refer to these two matrices as the

adjacency matrix and the extended adjacency matrix of the

bipartite graph. Since for every graph there is an associated

code, we will use these two terms interchangeably so we will,

e.g., refer to codes as elements of

.

Most often, LDPC codes are used in conjunction with mes-

sage- passing decoders. Recall that there is a received mes-

sage associated to each variable node which is the result of

passing the corresponding bit of the codeword through the given

channel. The decoding algorithm proceeds in rounds. At each

round, a message is sent from each variable node to each neigh-

boring check node, indicating some estimate of the associated

bit’s value. In turn, each check node collects its incoming mes-

sages and, based on this information, sends messages back to

the incident variable nodes. Care must be taken to send out only

extrinsic information, i.e., the outgoing message along a given

edge must not depend on the incoming message along the same

edge. As we will see, the preprocessing step for the encoding is

closely related to the message-passing decoder for the BEC. We

will therefore review this particular decoder in more detail.

Assume we are given a code in

and assume that we

use this code to transmit over a BEC with an erasure probability

of . Therefore, an expected fraction of the variable nodes will

be erasures and the remaining fraction

will be known.

We first formulate the iterative decoder not as a message-passing

decoder but in a language which is more suitable for our current

purpose, see [9].

Decoder for the Binary Erasure Channel:

This decoder can equivalently be formulated as a message-

passing decoder. Messages are from the set

with a in-

dicating that the corresponding bit has not been determined yet

(along the given edge). We will call a message an erasure mes-

sage. At a variable node, the outgoing message along an edge

is the erasure message if the received message associated to this

node is an erasure and if all incoming messages (excluding the

incoming message along edge ) are erasure messages, other-

wise, the outgoing message is a . At a check node, the outgoing

message along an edge is the erasure message if at least one of

the incoming messages (excluding the incoming message along

edge ) is the erasure message, and a otherwise. If we declare

that an originally erased variable node becomes known as soon

as it has at least one incoming message which is not an erasure

then one can check that at any time the set of known variable

nodes is indeed identical under both descriptions.

It was shown in [16] that (asymptotically in ) the expected

fraction of erasure messages after the th decoding round is

given by

(3)

where

. Let

, called the threshold of the degree

distribution pair, be defined as

where

(4)

Note first that the function

is in-

creasing in both its arguments for

. It follows by

finite induction that if

then

for any

. If we choose

, then the asymptotic ex-

pected fraction of erasure messages converges to zero. Conse-

quently, the decoder will be successful with high probability in

this case. If, on the other hand, we choose

then,

with high probability, the decoding process will not succeed. We

will see shortly that, correctly interpreted, this decoding proce-

dure constitutes the basis for all preprocessing algorithms that

we consider in this paper. Example 2. [(3, 6)-Regular Code]: Let

Then

. The exact threshold

was de-

termined in [17] and can be expressed as follows. Let be given

by

where

0 . [Intialization]

1 . [Stop or Extend] If there is no known variable node and no check node of degree one then output the (partial) codeword and stop. Otherwise, all known variable nodes and all their adjacent edges are deleted.
2 . [Declare Variables as Known] Any variable node which is connected to a degree one check node is declared to be known. Goto 1.

and Then

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:47:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RICHARDSON AND URBANKE: EFFICIENT ENCODING OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

641

Fig. 2. An equivalent parity-check matrix in lower triangular form.

Fig. 3. The parity-check matrix in approximate lower triangular form.

II. EFFICIENT ENCODERS BASED ON APPROXIMATE LOWER TRIANGULATIONS

In this section, we shall develop an algorithm for con-

structing efficient encoders for LDPC codes. The efficiency

of the encoder arises from the sparseness of the parity-check

matrix and the algorithm can be applied to any (sparse)

. Although our example is binary, the algorithm applies

generally to matrices whose entries belong to a field . We

assume throughout that the rows of are linearly independent.

If the rows are linearly dependent, then the algorithm which

constructs the encoder will detect the dependency and either

one can choose a different matrix or one can eliminate the

redundant rows from in the encoding process.

Assume we are given an

parity-check matrix over .

By definition, the associated code consists of the set of -tuples

over such that

term is typically very small so that the encoding complexity stays manageable up to very large block lengths.
Our proposed encoder is motivated by the above example. Assume that by performing row and column permutations only we can bring the parity-check matrix into the form indicated in Fig. 3. We say that is in approximate lower triangular form. Note that since this transformation was accomplished solely by permutations, the matrix is still sparse. More precisely, assume that we bring the matrix in the form

(5)

where is

, is

, is

,

is

, is , and, finally, is

. Further,

all these matrices are sparse2 and is lower triangular with ones

along the diagonal. Multiplying this matrix from the left by

Probably the most straightforward way of constructing an en-

coder for such a code is the following. By means of Gaussian

elimination bring into an equivalent lower triangular form

as shown in Fig. 2. Split the vector into a systematic part ,

, and a parity part ,

, such that

.

Construct a systematic encoder as follows: i) Fill with the

desired information symbols. ii) Determine the

parity-check symbols using back-substitution. More precisely,

for

calculate

(6) we get

(7)

Let

where denotes the systematic part,

and combined denote the parity part, has length , and

has length

. The defining equation

splits

naturally into two equations, namely

(8)

What is the complexity of such an encoding scheme? Bringing

the matrix into the desired form requires

operations of

preprocessing. The actual encoding then requires

opera-

tions since, in general, after the preprocessing the matrix will no

longer be sparse. More precisely, we expect that we need about

XOR operations to accomplish this encoding, where

is the rate of the code.

Given that the original parity-check matrix is sparse, one

might wonder if encoding can be accomplished in . As we

will show, typically for codes which allow transmission at rates

close to capacity, linear time encoding is indeed possible. And

for those codes for which our encoding scheme still leads to

quadratic encoding complexity the constant factor in front of the

and (9)

Define

and assume for the moment that

is nonsingular. We will discuss the general case shortly. Then

from (9) we conclude that

Hence, once the

matrix

has been precomputed, the determination of can be accom-

plished in complexity

simply by performing

O n 2More precisely, each matrix contains at most ( ) elements.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:47:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

642

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

0 0 TABLE I
EFFICIENT COMPUTATION OF p =  ( ET A + C)s

0 TABLE II
EFFICIENT COMPUTATION OF p = T (As + Bp )

a multiplication with this (generically dense) matrix. This

complexity can be further reduced as shown in Table I. Rather

than precomputing

and then multiplying

with we can determine by breaking the computation into

several smaller steps, each of which is efficiently computable.

To this end, we first determine , which has complexity

since is sparse. Next, we multiply the result by .

Since

is equivalent to the system

this can also be accomplished in

by back-substitu-

tion, since is lower triangular and also sparse. The remaining

steps are fairly straightforward. It follows that the overall com-

plexity of determining is

. In a similar manner,

noting from (8) that

, we can accom-

plish the determination of in complexity

as shown step

by step in Table II.

A summary of the proposed encoding procedure is given in

Table III. It entails two steps. A preprocessing step and the ac-

tual encoding step. In the preprocessing step, we first perform

row and column permutations to bring the parity-check matrix

into approximate lower triangular form with as small a gap

as possible. We will see, in subsequent sections, how this can

be accomplished efficiently. We also need to check whether

is nonsingular. Rather than premultiplying

by the matrix

, this task can be accomplished effi-

ciently by Gaussian elimination. If, after clearing the matrix

the resulting matrix is seen to be singular we can simply per-

form further column permutations to remove this singularity.

This is always possible when is not rank deficient, as as-

sumed. The actual encoding then entails the steps listed in Ta-

bles I and II.

We will now demonstrate this procedure by means of our run-

ning example.

matrix into an approximate lower triangular form with

(10) We now use Gaussian elimination to clear . This results in

We see that

is singular. This

singularity can be removed if we exchange e.g., column 5 with

column 8 which gives

. In terms of the original order

the final column order is then 1, 2, 3, 4, 10, 6, 7, 5, 11, 12, 8, 9,

and the resulting equivalent parity-check matrix is

Example 3. [Parity Check Matrix of -Regular Code of

Length ]: For this example if we simply reorder the columns

such that, according to the original order, we have the ordering

1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11, 12, 8, 9, then we put the parity-check

(11)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:47:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RICHARDSON AND URBANKE: EFFICIENT ENCODING OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

643

TABLE III SUMMARY OF THE PROPOSED ENCODING PROCEDURE. IT ENTAILS TWO STEPS: A PREPROCESSING STEP AND THE ACTUAL ENCODING STEP

Assume now we choose

. To determine

we follow the steps listed in Table I. We get

and
In a similar manner, we execute the steps listed in Table II to determine . We get

angulation. Hence, for a given parity-check matrix we are in-

terested in finding an approximate lower triangulation with as

small a gap as possible. Given that we are interested in large

block lengths, there is little hope of finding the optimal row and

column permutation which results in the minimum gap. So we

will limit ourselves to greedy algorithms. As discussed in the

previous section, the following greedy algorithms work on the

extended adjacency matrices since these are, except for the or-

dering of the sockets, in one-to-one correspondence with the un-

derlying graphs.

To describe the algorithms we first need to extend some of

our previous definitions. Recall that for a given pair

of

degree distributions we associate to it two important parameters.

The first parameter

is the rate of the degree distribution

pair and is defined in (2). Note that

and

(13)

Therefore the codeword is equal to

A quick check verifies that

, as required.

III. APPROXIMATE UPPER TRIANGULATION VIA GREEDY ALGORITHMS

We saw in the previous section that the encoding complexity

is of order

, where is the gap of the approximate tri-

The second parameter

is called the threshold of the

degree distribution pair and is defined in (4). If

,

as we have tacitly assumed so far, then we can think of

as the degree distribution pair of an ensemble of LDPC codes

of rate

. Further, as discussed in Section I, in this case it

was shown in [9] that

is the threshold of this ensemble

when transmitting over the BEC assuming a belief propagation

decoder. In general,

may be negative and, hence, the

degree distribution pair does not correspond to an ensemble of

LDPC codes. Nevertheless, the definitions are still meaningful.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:47:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

644

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Example 4: Let

. In this case, we

have

and, using the techniques described in

[17], the threshold can be determined to be

In a similar way, the definition of the ensemble

as

well as the association of (extended) adjacency matrices to ele-

ments of

carry over to the case

. Assume

now that, for a given ensemble

, we create a new en-

semble by simply exchanging the roles of left and right nodes.

This new ensemble is equivalent to the ensemble

0 0 0 Fig. 4. Approximate lower triangulation of the matrix A with row gap
(1 r)l k and column gap l k achieved by a greedy algorithm.

where we have used (13). For the associated (extended) adja-

cency matrices this simply amounts to transposition.

Assume we are given a matrix of dimension

with elements in , where is some real-valued parameter with

. We will say that a row and a column are connected if

the corresponding entry in is nonzero. Furthermore, we will

say that a row (column) has degree if its row (column) sum

equals . Assume now that we want to bring into approximate

lower triangular form. The class of greedy algorithms that we

will consider is based on the following simple procedure. Given

the

matrix and a fixed integer ,

, permute, if possible, the rows and columns in such a way

that the first row has its last nonzero entry at position

. If this first step was successful then fix the first row and

permute, if possible, the remaining rows and all columns in such

a way that the second row has its last nonzero entry at position

. In general, assuming that the first steps were

successful, permute at the th step, if possible, the last

rows and all columns in such a way that the th row has

its last nonzero entry at position

. If this procedure

does not terminate before the th step then we accomplished an

approximate lower triangulation of the matrix . We will say

that is in approximate lower triangular form with row gap

and column gap , as shown in Fig. 4.

A. Greedy Algorithm A

We will now give a precise description of the greedy algo-

rithm A. The core of the algorithm is the diagonal extension

step.

Diagonal Extension Step: Assume we are given a matrix

and a subset of the columns which are classified as known. In

all cases of interest to us, either none of these known columns

are connected to rows of degree one or all of them are. As-

sume the latter case. Let

denote the known columns

and let

be degree-one rows such that is connected

to .3 Reorder, if necessary, the rows and columns of such

that

form the leading rows of and such that

form the leading columns of as shown in Fig. 5,

where denotes the submatrix of which results from deleting

the rows and columns indexed by

and

.

Note that after this reordering the top-left

submatrix of

has diagonal form and that the top rows of have only this

one nonzero entry.

3 may not be determined uniquely.

Fig. 5. Given the matrix A let ; . . . ; denote those columns which are connected to rows of degree one and let ; . . . ; be degree-one rows such that is connected to . Reorder the rows and columns in such a way that
2 ; . . . ; form the first k rows and such that ; . . . ; form the first k
columns. Note that the top-left k k submatrix has diagonal form and that the first k rows have only this one nonzero entry.

By a diagonal extension step we will mean the following. As

input, we are given the matrix and a set of known columns.

The algorithm performs some row and column permutations

and specifies a residual matrix . More precisely, if none of

the known columns are connected to rows of degree one then

perform a column permutation so that all the known columns

form the leading columns of the matrix . Furthermore, delete

these known columns from the original matrix and declare

the resulting matrix to be . If, on the other hand, all known

columns are connected to rows of degree one then perform a

row and column permutation to bring into the form depicted

in Fig. 5. Furthermore, delete the known columns

and the rows

from the original matrix and declare

the resulting matrix to be .

In terms of this diagonal extension step, greedy algorithm A

has a fairly succinct description.

Greedy Algorithm A:

0. [Initialization] Given a matrix declare each column inde-

pendently to be known with probability

or, otherwise,

to be an erasure. Let

.

1. [Stop or Extend] If contains neither a known column nor a row of degree one then output the present matrix. Otherwise, perform a diagonal extension step.

2. [Declare Variables as Known] Any column in which is connected to a degree one row is declared to be known. Goto 1.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:47:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RICHARDSON AND URBANKE: EFFICIENT ENCODING OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

645

0 0 Fig. 6. (a) The given matrix A. (b) After the first application of step one, the (1 )l known columns are reordered to form the first (1 )l columns of the
matrix A. (c) After the second application of step one, the k new known columns and their associated rows are reordered to form a diagonal of length k. (d) If the
0 0 procedure does not terminate prematurely then the diagonal is extended to have length l and, therefore, the row gap is equal to (1 r )l and the column gap 0 is equal to (1 )l.

To see that greedy algorithm A indeed gives rise to an approx-

imate triangulation assume that we start with the

matrix as shown in Fig. 6(a). In the initialization step, an ex-

pected fraction

of all columns are classified as known

and the rest is classified as erasures. The first time the algorithm

performs step one these

known columns are reordered to

form the leading columns of the matrix as shown in Fig. 6(b).

Assuming that the residual matrix has rows of degree one, the

columns connected to these degree-one rows are identified in the

second step. Let these columns be

and let

be degree-one rows such that is connected to . During the

second application of step one these new known columns and

their associated rows are ordered along a diagonal as shown in

Fig. 6(c). Furthermore, in each additional iteration this diagonal

is extended further. If this procedure does not stop prematurely

then the resulting diagonal has expected length and, there-

fore, the row gap has expected size

and the column

gap has expected size

as shown in Fig. 6(d). If, on

the other hand, the procedure terminates before all columns are

exhausted then we get an approximate triangulation by simply

reordering the remaining columns to the left. Assuming that the

remaining fraction of columns is equal to then the resulting

expected row gap is equal to

and the resulting

expected column gap is equal to

.

Lemma 1 [Performance of Greedy Algorithm A]: Let

be a given degree pair and choose

. Pick a graph

at random from the ensemble

and let be its extended

adjacency matrix. Apply greedy algorithm A to the extended

adjacency matrix . Then (asymptotically in ) the row gap is

concentrated around the value

and the column gap

is concentrated around the value

. Letting

, we

see that the minimum row gap achievable with greedy algorithm

A is equal to

and that the minimum column gap

is equal to

.

Proof: Assume we are given a graph and an associated

extended adjacency matrix from the ensemble

.

Assume first that

so that

represents an en-

semble of LDPC codes of rate

. For the same code/graph

consider the process of transmission over an erasure channel

with erasure probability followed by decoding using the

message-passing decoder described in Section I. Compare this

procedure to the procedure of the greedy algorithm A. Assume

that the bits erased by the channel correspond to exactly those

columns which in the initial step are classified as erasures.

Under this assumption, one can see that those columns which

are declared known in the th round of greedy algorithm A

correspond exactly to those variable nodes which are declared

known in the th round of the decoding algorithm. Hence, there

is a one-to-one correspondence between these two algorithms.

As discussed in Section I, if

then (asymptot-

ically in ) with high probability the decoding process will be

successful. Because of the one-to-one correspondence we con-

clude that in this case (asymptotically in ) greedy algorithm A

will extend the diagonal to (essentially) its full length with

high probability so that the row and column gaps are as stated

in the Lemma.

In the case that

we cannot associate an ensemble

of codes to the degree distribution pair

. Nevertheless,

recursion (3) still correctly describes the expected progress of

greedy algorithm A. It is also easy to see that the concentration

around this expected value still occurs. It follows that the same

analysis is still valid in this case.

1) Greedy Algorithm AH: By greedy algorithm AH we mean the direct application of greedy algorithm A to the extended parity-check matrix of a given LDPC code. The gap we are interested in is then simply the resulting row gap.

Corollary 1 (Performance of Greedy Algorithm AH): Let

be a given degree distribution pair with

and choose

. Pick a code at random from the

ensemble

and let be the associated extended

parity-check matrix. Apply greedy algorithm A to . Then

(asymptotically in ) the gap is concentrated around the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:47:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

646

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

value

. Letting

, we see that the

minimum gap achievable with greedy algorithm A is equal to

.

Example 5 [Gap for the -Regular Code and Greedy Al-

gorithm AH]: From Example 2, we know that

and that

. It follows that the minimum

expected gap size for greedy algorithm AH is equal to

.

Note that greedy algorithm A establishes a link between the error-correcting capability on a BEC using a message-passing decoder and the encoding complexity. In simplified terms: Good codes have low encoding complexity!
2) Greedy Algorithm AHT: Rather than applying greedy algorithm A directly to the extended parity-check matrix of an LDPC code we can apply it to the transpose of the extended parity-check matrix. In this case, the gap we are interested in is equal to the resulting column gap.

Corollary 2 (Performance of Greedy Algorithm AHT): Let

be a given degree distribution pair with

and

choose

. Pick a code at random from the ensemble

and let be the associated extended parity-check ma-

trix. Apply greedy algorithm A to . Recall that this is equiv-

alent to applying greedy algorithm A to a randomly chosen ex-

tended adjacency matrix from the ensemble

.

Therefore, (asymptotically in ) the gap is concentrated around

the value

. Letting

, we see that the min-

imum gap achievable with greedy algorithm AHT is equal to

.

Example 6 [Gap for the -Regular Code and Greedy Al-

gorithm AHT]: From Example 4, we know that

and that

. It follows that the minimum

expected gap size for greedy algorithm AHT is equal to

Lemma 2: Let

be a degree distribution pair. Then

if and only if for all

(14)

Furthermore, if (14) holds and

, then

(15)

Proof: Clearly, if (14) holds then for any

we

have

By a compactness argument if follows that

as defined in

(3) converges to as tends to infinity. Hence,

.

Assume now that

. This means that for any

we have that

. We want to show that

(14) holds. Let

and note that for

,

is an increasing function in both its ar-

guments. Note that because

is increasing in it follows

that a necessary condition for

to converge to zero is that

, i.e., that at least in the first iteration the erasure

probability decreases. We will use contraposition to prove (14).

Hence, assume that there exist a strictly positive and an ,

, such that

. Since

and

since is continuous this implies that there exists a strictly pos-

itive and an ,

, such that

. Then

It follows by finite induction that

and, therefore,

does not converge to zero as tends to

infinity, a contradiction.

Finally, for close to one we have

Example 7 (Gap for an “Optimized” Code of Maximal De-

gree and Greedy Algorithm AHT): Let us determine the

threshold

for one of the “optimized” codes listed in

[12]. We pick the code with

whereas for tending to zero we have This yields the stability conditions stated in (15).

and

Quite surprisingly we get

! This means that for

any

we can start the process by declaring only an

fraction of all columns to be known and, with high probability,

the process will continue until at most an fraction of all

columns is left. Therefore, we can achieve a gap of for any

. We will later prove a stronger result, namely, that in this

case the gap is actually at most of order , but we will need

more sophisticated techniques to prove this stronger result.

B. Greedy Algorithm B
For greedy algorithm A, the elements of the initial set of known columns are chosen independently from each other. We will now show that by allowing dependency in the initial choice, the resulting gap can sometimes be reduced. Of course, this dependency makes the analysis more difficult.
In order to describe and analyze greedy algorithm B we need to introduce some more notation. We call a polynomial

The above example shows that at least for some degree dis- with real nonnegative coefficients in the range

a weight

tribution pairs

we have

. When does this distribution, and we denote the set of all such weight distribu-

happen? This is answered in the following lemma.

tions by . Let

be a map which maps a pair

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:47:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RICHARDSON AND URBANKE: EFFICIENT ENCODING OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

647

consisting of a degree distribution and a weight distribution

into a new degree distribution

. This map is defined as

We are now ready to state greedy algorithm B.

Greedy Algorithm B:

0. [Initialization] We are given a matrix and a weight dis-

tribution . For each row in perform the following: if

the row has weight then select this row with probability .

For each selected row of weight declare a random subset

of size

of its connected columns to be known. All

remaining columns which have not been classified as known

are classified as erasures. Let

.

1. [Stop or Extend] If neither contains a known column nor a row of degree one then output the present matrix. Otherwise, perform a diagonal extension step.

2. [Declare Variables as Known] Any column in which is connected to a degree one row is declared to be known. Goto 1

Clearly, greedy algorithm B differs from greedy algorithm A only in the choice of the initial set of columns.

Lemma 3 (Analysis of Greedy Algorithm B): Let

be a

given degree distribution pair. Let be a weight distribution

such that

. Define

.

Pick a graph at random from the ensemble

and let

be its extended adjacency matrix. Apply greedy algorithm B to

the extended adjacency matrix . Then (asymptotically in ) the

row gap is concentrated around the value

tribution to

. Therefore, the new graph is an element

of the ensemble

. Further, one can check that this

map is reversible and, therefore, one-to-one. A closer look re-

veals now that applying greedy algorithm B to an extended ad-

jacency matrix picked randomly from the ensemble

is equivalent to applying greedy algorithm A with

to

the transformed extended adjacency matrix, i.e., the resulting

residual graphs (which could be empty) will be the same. Now,

since

it follows that the greedy algorithm B will

get started and since by assumption

we

know from the analysis of greedy algorithm A that with high

probability the diagonalization process will continue until the

diagonal has been extended to (essentially) its full length. In

this case, the resulting column gap is equal to the size of the set

which was initially classified as known. To determine the size of

this set we first determine the probability that a randomly chosen

edge is one of those edges which connect a selected right node

to one of its

declared known neighbors. A quick calcula-

tion shows that this probability is equal to

.

Therefore, the probability that a given left node of degree is

connected to at least one of these edges is equal to

.

From this the stated row and column gaps follow easily.

1) Greedy Algorithm BH: Following our previous notation, by greedy algorithm BH we mean the direct application of greedy algorithm B to the extended parity-check matrix of a given LDPC code. The gap we are interested in is then simply the resulting row gap.

Corollary 3 (Performance of Greedy Algorithm BH): Let

be a given degree distribution pair with

. Let

be a weight distribution such that

.

Define

and the column gap is concentrated around the value

Pick a code at random from the ensemble

and let

be its extended parity-check matrix. Apply greedy algorithm B

to the extended parity-check matrix . Then (asymptotically in

) the gap is concentrated around the value

Proof: The elements of the initial set of known columns

are clearly dependent (since groups of those columns are con-

nected to the same row) and therefore we cannot apply our pre-

vious methods directly. But as we will show now there is a

one-to-one correspondence between applying greedy algorithm

B to the ensemble

with a weight distribution

and applying greedy algorithm A to the transformed ensemble

.

Assume we are given the ensemble

and a weight dis-

tribution . Assume further that we are given a fixed set of

selected right nodes (rows)

and that the fraction of

selected right nodes of degree is equal to . Given a graph

from

transform it in the following way: replace each

selected right node of degree by right nodes of degree . One

can check that this transformation leaves the left degree distri-

bution unchanged and that it transforms the right degree dis-

Let
Then we see that the minimum gap achievable with greedy algorithm BH is equal to

Example 8 [Gap for the -Regular Code and Greedy Al-

gorithm BH]: We have

and

and since

has only one nonzero term it follows that we can param-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:47:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

648

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

eterize

as

. Therefore, we have

and since

, it follows that we need to

find the smallest value of , call it , such that

. From Lemma (14) we see that a necessary

and sufficient condition is given by

Example 9 [Gap for the -Regular Code and Greedy Al-

gorithm BHT]: We have

and

and since

has only one nonzero term we can parameterize as

. Therefore, we have

and since

it follows that we need to find the smallest

value of , call it , such that

.

From Lemma 2 (14) we see that a necessary and sufficient con-

dition is given by

Equivalently, we get

Differentiating shows that the right-hand side takes on its min-

imum at the unique positive root of the polynomial

. If we call this root , with

, then

we conclude that

which simplifies to
By differentiating minimum at by

we find that it takes its . Thus, the critical value of is given

We then get equal to

and, therefore, the gap is We then get

. This corresponds to a gap of

Note that in this case the gap is larger than the corresponding gap for greedy algorithm AH.

2) Greedy Algorithm BHT: Again as for greedy algorithm A, rather than applying greedy algorithm B directly to the extended parity-check matrix of an LDPC code we can apply it to the transpose of the extended parity-check matrix. In this case, the gap we are interested in is equal to the resulting column gap.

Corollary 4 (Performance of Greedy Algorithm BHT): Let

be a given degree distribution pair with

.

Let be a weight distribution such that

Define

. Pick a code at random from the en-

semble

and let be its extended parity-check matrix.

Apply greedy algorithm B to . Recall that this is equivalent

to applying greedy algorithm B to a randomly chosen extended

adjacency matrix from the ensemble

. There-

fore, (asymptotically in ) the gap is concentrated around the

value

Let

Then we see that the minimum gap achievable with greedy algorithm BHT is equal to

This is significantly better than the corresponding gap for greedy algorithm AHT.

C. Greedy Algorithm C

Let

be the given degree distribution pair. Recall that

for greedy algorithm B we chose the weight distribution

in such a way that

. Hence, with high prob-

ability, the greedy algorithm will extend the diagonal to (essen-

tially) its full length.

Alternatively, we can try to achieve an approximate tri-

angulation in several smaller steps. More precisely, assume

that we pick the weight distribution

in such a way that

. Then with high probability the greedy

algorithm will not complete the triangulation process. Note

that, conditioned on the size and on the degree distribution pair

of the resulting residual graph, the edges of this residual graph

are still random, i.e., if the residual graph has length and a

degree distribution pair

then we can think of it as an

element of

. This is probably easiest seen by checking

that if the destination of two edges which are contained in the

residual graph are interchanged in the original graph and if the

greedy algorithm B is applied to this new graph then the new

residual graph will be equal to the old residual graph except

for this interchange. Therefore, if we achieve a triangulation by

applying several small steps, then we can still use the previous

tools to analyze the expected gap.

There are obviously many degrees of freedom in the choice of

step sizes and the choice of weight distribution. In our present

discussion, we will focus on the limiting case of infinitesimal

small step sizes and a constant weight distribution. Therefore,

assume that we are given a fixed weight distribution

and

let ,

, be a small scaling parameter for the weights such

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:47:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RICHARDSON AND URBANKE: EFFICIENT ENCODING OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

649

that

. Assume that we apply greedy algo-

rithm B to a randomly chosen element of the ensemble

where

. We claim that the expected degree

distribution pair of the residual graph, call it

, is given by

iff at least one of its incoming messages is not an erasure—otherwise, it stays and retains its degree. Using (16) we see that a node of degree has a probability of

of being expurgated. Since in the original graph the number of left degree nodes is proportional to it follows that in the residual graph the number of left degree nodes is proportional to

To see this, first recall from the analysis of greedy algorithm

B that the degree distribution pair of the equivalent trans-

formed graph is equal to

. Since by assumption

, the recursion given in (3) (with

)

will have a fixed point, i.e., there exists a real number ,

,

such that

From an edge perspective the degree fraction of the residual graph is, therefore, proportional to
After normalization we find that the left degree distribution of the residual graph, call it , is given by

To determine this fixed point note that if we expand the above

in

around

we obtain

Therefore, letting denote is

, the fixed-point equation

We next determine the right degree distribution of the residual

graph. Recall that the equivalent transformed graph has a right

degree distribution of

. We are only interested in nodes

of degree at least two. Hence we have

From a node perspective these fractions are proportional to

It follows that

In the language of message-passing algorithms,

is the

expected fraction of erasure messages passed from left to right

at the time the algorithm stops. The fraction of erasure messages

which are passed at that time from right to left is then

Define the erasure degree of a right node to be equal to the number of incoming edges which carry erasure messages. To first order in , a node of erasure degree can stem either from a node of regular degree all of whose incoming messages are erasures or it can stem from a node of regular degree which has one nonerasure message. Hence, at the fixed point the fraction of right nodes with an erasure degree of is proportional to

Converting back to an edge perspective we see that these frac(16) tions are proportional to

We start by determining the residual degree distribution of left nodes. Note that a left node will not appear in the residual graph
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:47:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

650

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Summing the above over

we obtain

Noting that

and normalizing we see that the residual

right degree distribution, call it , is given by

in which case we are interested in the resulting column gap or we can apply it to the transpose of the extended paritycheck matrix in which case we are interested in the column gap. We call these algorithms CH and CHT, respectively.

Example 10 [Gap for

-Regular Code and Greedy Al-

gorithm CHT]: We choose

and let

where

is some very small quantity. Solving the system of differential

equations reveals that the resulting gap is equal to

. We

see that this is the smallest expected gap for all the presented

algorithms.

We are ultimately interested in the resulting row and column gaps. Since one can easily be determined from the other we will only write down an expression for the row gap. If we take the expression for the row gap, call it from greedy algorithm B, and keep only the terms which are linear in then we see that the row gap increased according to
The length of the code itself evolves as

D. A Practical Greedy Algorithm
In practice, one implements a serial version of greedy algorithm CHT. At each stage, if the residual graph has a degree-one variable node then diagonal extension is applied. If no such degree-one variable node exists then one selects a variable node of lowest possible degree, say, from the residual graph, and declares (assuming no multiple edges) of its neighbors to be known. The residual graph now has at least one degree-one node and diagonal extension is applied.
There are many practical concerns. For example, variable nodes which are used in the diagonal extension step correspond to nonsystematic variables. Typically, degree-two nodes have the highest bit-error rates. Thus, it is preferable to use as many low-degree variables in the diagonalization step as possible, e.g., if the subgraph induced by only the degree-two variables has no loops then all degree-two variables can be made nonsystematic using the above algorithm.

IV. CODES WITH LINEAR ENCODING COMPLEXITY

Collecting all results we see that as a function of the independent variable all quantities evolve according to the system of differential equations

We saw in the preceding section that degree distributions

giving rise to codes that allow transmission close to capacity

will have gaps that are smaller than an arbitrarily small linear

fraction of the length of the code. To prove that these codes

have linear encoding complexity more work is needed, namely,

one has to show that the gap satisfies

with high

probability for large enough . More precisely, we will prove

the following.

Theorem 1 (Codes with Linear Encoding Complexity): Let

be a degree distribution pair satisfying

,

with minimum right degree

, and satisfying the strict

inequality

. Let be chosen at random from

the ensemble

. Then is encodable in linear time with

probability at least

for some positive constants and

, where

.

with the value of the initial quantities equal to , , , and , respectively.
As before, we can apply greedy algorithm C directly to the extended parity-check matrix chosen randomly from an ensemble

Discussion: We note that all optimized degree distribution pairs listed in [12] fulfill the conditions of Theorem 1. Furthermore, in experiments when applying the practical greedy algorithm to graphs based on these degree distribution pairs, the resulting gap is typically in the range of one to three! This is true even for very large lengths like one million. By correctly choosing the first degree-two variable, the gap can nearly always be lowered to one. The primary reason for these very small gaps is the large number of degree-two variable nodes in these degree distributions. The number of degree-two variable nodes is suf-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:47:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RICHARDSON AND URBANKE: EFFICIENT ENCODING OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

651

ficiently large so that, with very high probability, the subgraph induced by these nodes has a large (linear size) connected component. Once a single check node belonging to this component is declared known then the remainder of the component will diagonalize in the next diagonal extension step. The diagonalization process then typically completes without further increasing the gap.

Proof: In order to show that under the stated conditions

elements of the ensembles

are linear time encod-

able (with high probability) it suffices to show that their

corresponding

can be brought into approximate lower

triangular form with a gap of no more than

(with high

probability). Note that we are working on the transpose of

the parity-check matrix. Although one can prove that such an

approximate triangulation is achieved by the practical greedy

algorithm it will be more convenient to consider a slightly

different greedy algorithm.4 The algorithm we consider has

three phases which we will have to investigate separately:

startup, main triangulation, and cleanup. In the startup phase,

we will declare at most

of the check nodes to be known.

Each time we declare one check node to be known we apply

the diagonal extension step repeatedly until either there are no

degree one variable nodes left or until (we hope) the number of

degree-one variable nodes has grown to a linear-sized fraction.

Assuming the latter, we then enter the main triangulation

process. With exponential probability, the process will continue

until we are left with at most a small linear fraction of nodes.

Now we enter the cleanup phase. Here, we will show that with

high probability at most

check nodes will be left when

the algorithm terminates. So overall, with high probability the

gap will be no more than

, which will prove the claim.

We will now discuss these three phases in detail.

Recall that our aim is to bring a given , where is a

random element from

, into approximate lower trian-

gular form with gap at most

by applying a greedy algo-

rithm.

Startup: Let be a randomly chosen degree-two variable node

and let and be its connected check nodes. Declare to be

known. Now perform the diagonal extension step. After this step,

the columns which correspond to and will form the first

two columns of the matrix (assuming does not have a double

edge) and the row corresponding to will form the first row of the

matrix. Consider the residual matrix (with the first two columns

and the first row deleted) and the corresponding residual graph. If

this residual matrix contains a degree-one row then we can apply

another diagonal extension step and so on. It will simplify our

description if we perform the diagonal extension step to one de-

gree-one variable node at a time, instead of to all degree-one vari-

able nodes in parallel. More precisely, we start out with one de-

gree-two variable node which we convert into a degree-one vari-

able node by declaring one of its neighbors to be known. Then, at

any stage of the procedure, choose one of the degree-one variable

nodes (assuming that at least one such node exists) and perform

the diagonal extension step only on this variable.

Let denote the number of degree-one variable nodes after

the th such step, where we have

. If by , we denote

the number of additional degree-one variable nodes which are

generated in the th step then we get

(17)

where the term stems from the fact that one degree-one vari-

able node is used up during the diagonal extension step. Equa-

tion (17) is an instance of a branching process. Note that the

process continues until

, i.e., until there are no more

degree-one variable nodes available for the diagonal extension

step. We would like the process to continue until has reached

“linear size,” i.e., until is a small fixed fraction of the number

of variable nodes.

Assume that we have performed at most steps. Let

denote the residual degree distribution pair. If is

small, it is intuitively clear that

is “close” to

.

Indeed, in Lemma 4 in Appendix A it is shown that, given a

degree distribution pair

such that

, then there

exists an

and a

such that

regardless which check nodes have been removed, as long as

their total number is no more than .

So, assume that we have performed at most steps. What is

the expected value of ? Consider an edge emanating from a

degree-one variable node. With probability it is connected to

a degree- check node, call this node . This check node has

other edges, each of which has probability of being connected

toadegree-twonode.Therefore,if hasdegree thentheexpected

number of new degree-one nodes that will be generated is equal

to

. Averaging over all degrees we get that has

expected value

. In other words, we have

for

. Furthermore,

is upper-bounded by the maximum right degree .

Let us define

to be the stopping time

of . We will say that the branching process stops prematurely

if

and we will say that it is successful if

and

, where can be chosen freely in the range

. Assume now that we employ the following

strategy. Start a process, by choosing a degree-two variable node

and declaring one of its neighbors to be known. If this process

stops prematurely then start another process if the number of

prematurely stopped processes so far is less than

or de-

clare a failure otherwise. If the current process has not stopped

prematurely then declare a success if

and

and stop the process at that time, and declare a failure otherwise.

Note that the total number of steps taken for this strategy is at

most

. Although the branching process

which we consider always stops at a finite time and although

we will only be interested in the process for at most steps it

is convenient to think of an infinite process

with the

property that

4In Appendix C, we define the notion of a “stopping set.” Stopping sets determine the termination points of diagonal extension steps regardless of the implementation of the diagonal extension. Thus, the particular three-phase formulation used here is only for convenience of presentation.

This will allow us to write statements like

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:47:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

652

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

The probability of failure can be easily bounded in the following way. From iv) Lemma 5 in Appendix B, the probability that a process has stopping time less than , i.e.,
, can be upper-bounded by

a partial lower triangulation with at most a small fraction of

check nodes left. In Lemma 6 in Appendix C it is now shown

that the probability at

actually fewer than check

nodes will be left.

Combining all these statements we see that the probability

that the gap exceeds is at most , where .

Therefore, the probability that

processes have stopping

time less than has an upper bound of the form ,

.

Using i), ii), and iii) of Lemma 5, the probability that a process

failed assuming that it did not stop prematurely can be upper-

bounded as follows:

for some constants

and

for some

,

and a constant

defined in Appendix B. Combining these

two results, we conclude that the probability of failure is upper-

bounded by

for some constant and

.

Main Upper Triangulation: With high probability we will

have succeeded in the startup phase. Consider now the output

of this startup phase assuming it was successful. From Lemma

4 in Appendix A we know that the residual degree distribution

pair fulfills

and

. Furthermore, it

is easy to see that conditioned, on

and the length

, the resulting residual graph can be thought of as an ele-

ment of

. This is most easily seen as follows:

Given the original graph, the residual graph is the result of re-

moving a certain set of edges, where the choice of these edges is

the result of certain random experiments. Consider another ele-

ment of

which agrees with the original graph in those

edges but is arbitrary otherwise. Assume now that we run the

startup phase on this new graph with the same random choices.

It is easy to see that the sequence of degree distribution pairs

will be the same and that at each step the probability for the

given choice of node which gets chosen is identical. So the re-

sulting residual graphs will have identical degree distribution

pairs, identical length, and the same probability of being gener-

ated. Further, each element of

is reachable and,

by the above discussion, they have equal probability of being

generated, which proves the claim. Since

it follows

that we can now simply use greedy algorithm AHT to continue

the lower triangulation process. From the analysis of greedy al-

gorithm AHT we know that, with exponential probability, the

process will not stop until at most a small linear fraction of

check nodes is left, where this fraction can be made as small

as desired.

Cleanup Operation: So far we have increased the gap to at

most

and, with high probability, we have accomplished

APPENDIX A RESIDUAL DEGREE DISTRIBUTION PAIRS

Lemma 4: Let

be a degree distribution pair satisfying

, the strict inequality

and

.

Let be the set of all residual degree distribution pairs ob-

tainable from

by removing at most an fraction of check

nodes from a graph with degree distribution pair

. Then,

for sufficiently small, there exists a

such that any

will satisfy

and the strict inequality

. If, moreover, for some

we have

then

.

Proof: The conclusion

is immediate since

and since we either remove a check node completely or leave

its degree unchanged. By continuity and since, for some

,

, it is also clear that

if is

sufficiently small.

It remains to show that

if

for

some

. Let

. Let be a positive number

such that

. It follows by continuity that for

small enough we have

Define

and note that

.

Since

we have

for

sufficiently small. Hence, for sufficiently small, we have

In a similar manner

In the compact range

,

is a continuous function in the perturbation and since the de-

gree distribution pair

fulfills the strict inequality (14) in

this range, it follows that there exists an such that it

then

in this range. Let us fur-

ther assume

. Then it follows that on the interval

we have

and hence .

. This shows that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:47:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RICHARDSON AND URBANKE: EFFICIENT ENCODING OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

653

APPENDIX B BRANCHING PROCESSES

Let

be a sequence of independent and identi-

cally distributed (i.i.d.) random variables. Define the sequence

by the recursion

and

and let be the least time such that

. If no such time

exists then we define

. The process

is usually

referred to as a branching process and originated in the context

of the study of population growths [18]. It is well known that

if

then

but that if

then

. We will now show that under suitable

conditions the same conclusions hold even if we allow (limited)

dependency within the process

.

where the last step follows from the well-known Markov in-

equality. We proceed by bounding

.

Recall the following basic fact from the theory of linear

programming, [19]. A primal linear program in normal form,

, has the associated dual linear

program

. Further, if and are

feasible solutions for the primal and dual linear program such

that their values are equal, i.e.,

, then and are

optimal solutions.

Now note that

Lemma 5 (Branching Processes): Let quence of random variables taking values in that

be a sesuch

for all

. Define the branching process

, by

and

, . Let the stopping time

be defined by

, where

if

no such exists.

i) For any

ii) Define iii) For any

. Then

The last step warrants some remarks. First, we rewrote the max-

imization as a minimization to bring the linear program into

normal form. Second, a simple scaling argument shows that

one can replace the equality condition

with the

inequality

without changing the value of the

linear program. The linear program in the last line is our primal

problem. It is easy to check that this primal problem has the fea-

sible solution

iv) Define Then

with value
(18)
To see that this solution is optimal consider the associated dual program

Proof: We start with a proof of the tail inequality. For any we have

The solution

gives rise to the same

value as in (18). Hence, to prove optimality it suffices to prove

that this solution is feasible. For this we need to show that

This is trivially true for

and for

this is equivalent to

The claim now follows since

for

.

is a decreasing function in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:47:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

654
We get

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

But It follows that

The desired inequality now follows by choosing

.

Next we show that

The proof will be very similar to the preceding one and we will be short.

Now for

we have

so that

It follows that

To prove that for any , and
that

note that from we conclude
. Therefore

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:47:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RICHARDSON AND URBANKE: EFFICIENT ENCODING OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

655

It remains to prove that we have

. Note that for any

count as follows: first choose out of the variable nodes.

These chosen variable nodes have at most

sockets.

Choose of these sockets and connect to them the edges in any

order. From this argument we see that the probability that the

chosen set of edges is doubly connected is upper-bounded by

(19)

Note that for sufficiently small , (19) is decreasing in . Now consider a set of check nodes. There are

APPENDIX C NO SMALL STOPPING SETS
Given a bipartite graph with constraint set we define a stopping set to be any subset of with the property that there does not exist a variable node in with exactly one edge into
. The union of any two stopping sets is a stopping set. Hence, there exists a unique maximal stopping set. Thus, if the graph
is operated on by the diagonal extension stage of an approximate upper triangulation algorithm which looks for degree-one variable nodes, then it always terminates with the residual graph determined by the maximal stopping set. That is, after a diagonal extension stage, the residual graph consists of the constraint nodes in , the maximal stopping set, the edges emanating from
and the variable nodes incident to these edges. Thus, one can show that the diagonal extension step will not terminate prematurely if one can show that there are no stopping sets.

such sets. Each such set has at least edges and therefore, assuming that is sufficiently small, we see from (19) that the probability that one such set is a stopping set is at most

By the union bound it follows that the probability that a ran-

domly chosen element of

does have a stopping set of

size is upper-bounded by

where we defined

Lemma 6 (No Small Stopping Sets): Let

be an en-

semble of LDPC codes with

. Then there exist a positive

number and a natural number such that for all

,

a randomly chosen element of

has probability at most

of containing a stopping set of size in the range

.

Proof: Recall the following simple estimates which we

will use frequently in the sequel:

It remains to show that there exist constants

and

such that for all

and for all

we have

. Recall that

. Therefore, if

and

then

as well as the fact that

, for

.

Recall that the total number of edges is equal to

. Con-

sider edges. More precisely, fix check node sockets and for

each such check node socket choose a variable node socket at

random. Clearly, this can be done in

where the second step is true if we choose small enough and the third step is true for sufficiently large .

REFERENCES

ways. We will say that the edges are doubly connected if each variable is either not connected at all or connected at least twice (with respect to these edges). We claim that there are at most
doubly connected constellations. To see this claim note that a doubly connected constellation with edges involves at most
variable nodes. Therefore, we get an upper bound if we

[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963. Available at http://justice.mit.edu/people/gallager.html.
[2] V. Zyablov and M. Pinsker, “Estimation of the error-correction complexity of Gallager low-density codes,” Probl. Pered. Inform., vol. 11, pp. 23–26, Jan. 1975.
[3] G. A. Margulis, “Explicit construction of graphs without short cycles and low density codes,” Combinatorica, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 71–78, 1982.
[4] R. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.
[5] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.
[6] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Dissertation no. 440, Dept. Elect. Eng. Linköping Univ., Linköping , Sweden, 1996.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:47:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

656

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

[7] N. Sourlas, “Spin-glass models as error-correcting codes,” Nature, no. 339, pp. 693–695, 1989.
[8] I. Kanter and D. Saad, “Error-correcting codes that nearly saturate shannon’s bound,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 83, pp. 2660–2663, 1999.
[9] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, D. Spielman, and V. Stemann, “Practical loss-resilient codes,” in Proc. 29th Annual ACM Symp. Theory of Computing, 1997, pp. 150–159.
[10] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, “Analysis of low density codes and improved designs using irregular graphs,” in Proc. 30th Annu. ACM Symp. Theory of Computing, 1998, pp. 249–258.
[11] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[12] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[13] M. Sipser and D. Spielman, “Expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 1710–1722, Nov. 1996.

[14] D. J. C. MacKay, S. T. Wilson, and M. C. Davey, “Comparison of constructions of irregular Gallager codes,” in Proc. 36th Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, and Computing, Sept. 1998.
[15] D. Spielman, “Linear-time encodeable and decodable error-correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 1723–1731, Nov. 1996.
[16] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, and A. Shokrollahi, “Analysis of random processes via and-or tree evaluation,” in Proc. 9th Annu. ACM-SIAM Symp. Discrete Algorithms, 1998, pp. 364–373.
[17] L. Bazzi, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Exact thresholds and optimal codes for the binary symmetric channel and Gallager’s decoding algorithm A,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, to be published.
[18] N. Alon, J. Spencer, and P. Erdös, The Probabilistic Method. New York: Wiley, 1992.
[19] A. Schrijver, Theory of Linear and Integer Programming. New York: Wiley, 1986.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:47:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

