IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 37, NO. 2, MARCH 2001

737

A Low-density Generator Matrix Interpretation of Parallel Concatenated Single Bit Parity Codes
Travis R. Oenning and Jaekyun Moon

Abstract—A coding scheme that concatenates, in parallel, multiple single bit parity check block codes is considered for use in high areal density magnetic recording. The coding scheme can be viewed as a low- density generator matrix and decoded as a lowdensity parity check code. Results are obtained using a Lorentzian channel model with and without transition noise that is modeled as first order position jitter. Results show SNR gains over uncoded EPR4 are nearly identical to those using low-density parity-check codes. Having demonstrated similar performance, the practical advantage of decreased encoding complexity and increased decoder architecture flexibility is emphasized.
Index Terms—Iterative decoding, LDGM, LDPC, media noise, parity check coding.
I. INTRODUCTION
T URBO coding [1] and low-density parity-check (LDPC) coding [2], [3] are two powerful coding methods that have received considerable attention recently for their ability to offer large coding gains using practical iterative decoding methods. As first introduced, the encoding of turbo codes is much less complex than the encoding of LDPC codes, whereas, the decoding of LDPC codes is much less complex than the decoding of turbo codes. Note that the complexity referred to here is measured in the number of mathematical operations required per bit, and does not account for the memory requirements needed in implementation. The coding scheme considered in this paper combines ideas from both, resulting in a code that is both easy to encode and decode.
The idea is to concatenate, in parallel, multiple single bit parity check codes using random interleavers. The encoding structure is similar to that originally proposed for the encoding of parallel-concatenated turbo codes, except the recursive systematic component codes are replaced with single bit parity check block codes. Decoding can be viewed from a LDPC perspective by considering the parity check matrix that corresponds to the encoding structure. The structure of this coding method also allows for a large amount of flexibility in terms of decoding complexity and high-speed hardware implementation tradeoffs.
In [4], a single bit parity check code was used in a configuration similar to serial concatenated turbo coding. The code considered here is identical to that considered in [5], although the parallel decoding method used here is different. The code used
Manuscript received June 20, 2000. This work was supported in part by an IBM Cooperative Fellowship and NSF Grant CCR-9805195.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455 USA (e-mail: moon@ece.umn.edu).
Publisher Item Identifier S 0018-9464(01)02386-X.

here is also similar to that considered in [6], which concatenates in parallel two single bit parity codes and decodes serially.
It turns out that the encoder structure considered here results in a low-density generator matrix (LDGM). Coding using LDGM’s were considered in [7], but the additional structure imposed by the encoding scheme here was not specifically considered. Note that LDGM codes are not expected to have good asymptotic performance [8]. This does not necessarily mean, however, that desirable error rates are not achievable.
The paper is organized as follows. First, the channel model and SNR definition used in modeling the magnetic recording channel is presented. Next, the soft channel decoder, which takes into account the presence of pattern dependent noise, is presented. Following this, the encoding and decoding process is described. Next, the flexibility in terms of various decoder architectures is presented. The final two sections present simulation results and then conclusions.

II. DISCRETE TIME CHANNEL MODEL

The magnetic recording channel with signal dependent

transition noise is modeled using a first order position jitter

width variation (PJWV) model [9], [10]. Let

denote

the response to an isolated magnetic transition recorded in a

thin film longitudinal media where is time and is half the

width of the pulse at half height. Let

denote the

bits to be stored and

the corresponding

transition sequence. Assuming transition noise can be decom-

posed into solely position jitter and width variation, the read

back waveform with additive white Gaussian noise can be

expressed as

(1)

where and are modeled as independent Gaussian

random variables and represent the amount of position jitter

and width variation, respectively, and is the amount of

time between written bits. The first order PJWV model

uses the first order approximation

. Fig. 1 shows the

discrete time equivalent model used after matched filtering and

sampling, i.e.,

in the figure. Closed

form expressions for the filters , , , and in Fig. 1 are

given in [11] when is assumed to be Lorentzian.

When comparing the performance of different

codes/detectors operating at different symbol densities

it is important that the definition of signal to noise ratio

(SNR) be independent of the symbol density. Unlike other

communication channels where code rate loss can be thought

0018–9464/01$10.00 © 2001 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:53:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

738

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 37, NO. 2, MARCH 2001

Fig. 1. Block diagram of discrete time channel used to model a magnetic recording channel with transition noise.

information. The purpose of this section is not to describe

the BCJR algorithm, as that has been done quite suitably

elsewhere, but rather present a method of using the algorithm

in the presence of pattern dependent noise.

There are three parameters that are computed in the BCJR

algorithm and then used to compute a posteriori probabilities.

Following commonly used notation (see for example [16], [17]),

they are

,

, and

, where and correspond

to states and is a time index. When noise is pattern dependent,

the method of recursively computing

and

remains

unchanged compared to the additive Gaussian noise case, but

the computation of

requires modification. Recall from

[16] that

of as coming about from an increased noise bandwidth [12], in magnetic recording there is additional loss due to decreased signal energy. The code rate penalty in other communication systems is typically proportional to the inverse of the code rate. The code rate penalty in magnetic recording systems, however, is shown to be roughly proportional to the square of the inverse of the code rate in [12], [13]. The code rate penalty becomes even more severe at high symbol densities where the maximum likelihood bound separates from the matched filter bound due to increased intersymbol interference.
It is extremely important that the code rate penalty is accurately reflected in the definition of SNR. The introduction of transition noise into the channel model only complicates this matter further. The SNR definition used in this paper takes into account these objectives by using the SNR definition proposed in [12]. The definition may be stated as

SNR

(2)

where

is the power spectral density of the electronics

noise,

is the average energy of the noise associated with a

transition, and

. Further justification

and explanation of this SNR definition can be found in [12].

III. CHANNEL DECODER

(3)

where the correspond to the bits to be detected and the

to the received samples after transmission through the noisy

channel. That is,

is the joint probability of the received

sample and the current state being at time conditioned on the

previous state being . Consider the case when the noise is ad-

ditive, Gaussian, and independent of the sequence at the channel

input. In this case, is Gaussian with mean

, where de-

notes the branch connecting state and state and

is the

noiseless output corresponding to this branch. The formula for

is therefore given by

(4)

In the case of pattern dependent noise arising from first order

position jitter and/or width variation it is straightforward to see

that

is also given by a Gaussian distribution character-

ized by a conditional mean and variance. The conditional mean

can be approximated quite well by a predictor filter with a fixed

finite number of coefficients. The resulting formula for

can therefore be written as

(5) where represents predicted noise and is given by

This section describes the soft pattern dependent noise-predictive detector used in simulations. Note that the pattern dependent noise-predictive method presented in this section is the same as that described in [14] for the Viterbi algorithm. Also note that [15] also concerns modifying the BCJR algorithm for pattern dependent noise and results in an identical algorithm. The difference is that [15] assumes that certain Markov assumptions apply to the channel so that the resulting detector is optimal. A different perspective is taken here which makes no such assumptions. The tradeoff is that the resulting algorithm is no longer optimal, but the derivation is more straightforward.
The algorithm used is the BCJR algorithm of [16] (also known as the forward–backward algorithm). This algorithm provides the a posteriori probabilities (APP) of the coded bits sent through the channel, which in turn can be used as soft

(6)

and is the predictor error variance. Using

,

, and

the appropriate

given above, the BCJR algorithm can

be used to compute the a posteriori probabilities needed in

iterative decoding.

IV. ENCODER
The systematic parallelly concatenated parity check (PCPC) encoder structure depicted in Fig. 2 is considered here for use in magnetic recording systems with media noise. Reminiscent of parallelly concatenated turbo codes the P parallel paths in Fig. 2 each employ different, randomly constructed, permutations of the systematic codeword bits. The parity check blocks operate independently on blocks much smaller than the codeword size

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:53:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

OENNING AND MOON: A LOW-DENSITY GENERATOR MATRIX INTERPRETATION

739

Fig. 4. Structure of parity check matrix corresponding to encoder structure
of Fig. 2 with P = 4 and using rate 32/33 single bit parity check encoders.
The largest rectangular box represents the parity check matrix and rectangular boxes inside represent submatrix partitions. The diagonal in the box on the left represents an identity matrix. The other four submatrices contain in a random fashion only zeros or ones with the property indicated in the figure. Note that this figure is not drawn to scale.

Fig. 2. Block diagram of the parallel concatenated single bit parity check encoder.

0 Fig. 3. Single bit even parity check encoder implementation. Use output and
load zero every k 1 input bits. Load a one for an odd parity check encoder.

to generate single parity bits and enforce either an odd or even

parity constraint.

The PCPC encoder maps length message bit se-

quences to where is a bit sequence of length

and

. Encoding is systematic so that

. Message bits

are interleaved using randomly (or otherwise) constructed

interleavers denoted by

resulting in

permutated sequences

.

After interleaving parity check block codes operating on k-1

bit blocks output single bits to enforce even (or odd) parity.

Codeword lengths are chosen so that

is an

integer. Using this notation denote the length parity bit

sequence for interleaver path as . The overall code rate is,

therefore, given by

, the component single

bit parity check codes have rate

, and

.

Note that each of the single bit parity check component codes

can be efficiently implemented using a simple logical exclusive-

OR operation. Depending on the size of , a single memory

element with feedback to a modulo-2 adder, as shown in Fig. 3,

may be a preferred alternative.

As an example, consider the rate 8/9 code with block size

used in simulations. These code parameters corre-

spond uncoded bit blocks of

. After scrambling rate

32/33 single bit parity check codes operate on 136 sub-blocks

of size

each. When four different permutation

paths are used this results in a total of

parity bits being

generated and the desired code rate of 8/9.

From the perspective of timing recovery, it is desirable that

the maximum number of consecutive coded bits with the same

value be limited to some small number

. An efficient

method of doing this is to enforce odd parity on an encoder path

that does not use any interleaving, a modification which is not

expected to affect performance. As an example, consider the following two situations. 1) Use a rate 16/17 outer code to enforce a run length constraint. Place parity bits generated from a PCPC code using four rate 32/33 component codes in such a way that maintains the smallest value. 2) Use four rate 23/24 odd parity component codes. The benefit of the second approach is that it ensures a finite value while incurring no extra rate loss penalty. In fact, the second method has the double benefit of a higher overall code rate while using lower rate component codes. While this example serves well to illustrate the point, to be fair, for the code rates chosen the first approach will yield a lower value. It should also be noted that the resulting code is no longer in a systematic form since the parity bits are placed throughout the codeword.

V. DECODER

The decoding procedure to be described is that used in sim-

ulations and in decoding LDPC codes. In order to do this the

parity check matrix that corresponds to the encoding described

in the previous section needs to be determined. As can easily be

verified, the parity check matrix is given by

,

where denotes an identity matrix, and is given by

. for

is an all zeros

matrix except for a sparse number of ones in the positions de-

scribed next. Row of contains ones in column positions

determined by

(7)

where

is used to denote the set of integers from to

, that is

. Note that is already

in systematic form so that the generator matrix is given by

where

.

An example of the structure of the parity check matrix

corresponding to a rate 8/9 code with

is depicted in

Fig. 4. Note that not only is the parity check matrix sparse

(low- density) but the generator matrix is sparse as well.

Decoding can be thought of as message passing on a bipar-

tite graph representation of the parity check matrix. The graph

is obtained by drawing a node for every column and row of the

parity check matrix, which we refer to as check and bit nodes,

respectively. The nodes are connected with edges in correspon-

dence with ones in the parity check matrix. Decoding can be

done as follows. First, a priori information

is obtained from the channel decoder and values

associated with every edge in the graph

are initialized to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:53:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

740

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 37, NO. 2, MARCH 2001

Fig. 6. Simulation results using EPR4 equalization, user density of 2.5, and 100% AWGN.

Fig. 5. Bipartite graph representation of PCPC codes used in decoding. Nodes drawn as boxes correspond to check nodes and circles to bit nodes. Bit nodes drawn below checks correspond to message bits and those above to parity bits. (a) Graph for entire code using three interleaved encoder paths. (b) Graph corresponding to a single encoding path with bit nodes appropriately re-ordered. (c) Graph corresponding to a single bit parity check block code.
zero. For iteration we start by going to each check node indexed by and update every edge from that check according to:
(8)

in Fig. 5(c). APP decoding for this graph can be efficiently realized using the forward–backward algorithm on a stage 2-state trellis with the same start and end state. Or alternatively, the update equations given above may be used. Note that these decoders can also be done in either a serial or parallel fashion thereby increasing the number of implementation option combinations even further.
While it is not the topic of this paper to investigate to what degree, we note that not all of the aforementioned decoding options are equivalent. As such, they can behave differently and result in different levels of performance. As example, parallel turbo coding was found to give improved performance over serial turbo decoding in [18].

The last step in each iteration is to compute an updated log APP

ratio for each bit according to

. Decoding

iterations can stop when a valid codeword has been reached.

VI. DECODER FLEXIBILITY

In this section we comment on the wide variety of implemen-

tation options available to the hardware designer. We do this

with the aid of Fig. 5. The top graph in this figure shows a graph

corresponding to a code using three interleaved paths (

).

The decoding procedure described above can be used directly on

this graph in a highly parallel manner. That is, a separate pro-

cessing unit may be used at each node in the graph and run in

parallel. Doing this allows for an extremely high-speed imple-

mentation at the cost of implementing a very large number of

parallel processing units. Of course, decoding can also be done

in a serial fashion on the graph (as described above) as well.

Using appropriate (according to corresponding encoder in-

terleaving) re-ordering of systematic bit nodes, the graph in

Fig. 5(a) can be drawn as separate graphs like that shown in

Fig. 5(b). Using this decomposition, various decoding methods

developed for turbo decoding can be used. That is, APP mod-

ules that decode based on the graph of Fig. 5(b) can be arranged,

for example, in a serial, pipelined, or parallel fashion exactly as

has been proposed for turbo decoding.

The graph in Fig. 5(b) can be further broken down into (using

the same notation used earlier) separate graphs like that shown

VII. SIMULATION RESULTS

Simulation results were obtained using PCPC codes with

and LDPC codes of comparable size constructed

with an overlap constraint and column weight of four [8]. All

coded results use an 8/9 code rate and are compared with the

performance of uncoded EPR4. The PCPC code achieves the

8/9 code rate by using four rate 32/33 single bit parity check

codes in parallel. Note that no channel precoding was used.

Fig. 6 compares rate 8/9 LDPC and PCPC codes with block

size 4896. Decoding iterations included the channel decoder. A

Lorentzian channel model with 100% additive white Gaussian

noise (AWGN) equalized to an EPR4 response was used. The

overall SNR gain over uncoded EPR4 at a BER of

is ap-

proximately 3 dB using either coding method.

Fig. 7 shows results obtained using a Lorentzian magnetic

recording channel model with 90% media noise modeled as first

order position jitter. Coded results were obtained using belief

propagation decoding along with a 64-state BCJR channel de-

tector using 4-tap signal-dependent noise prediction and a 1-D

target. Legend labels indicate whether or not soft information

was iterated back to the channel. Block size is also indicated

in the figure legend, results are shown for block sizes of 4896,

about 1024, and 512. The results indicate a SNR gain over un-

coded EPR4 at a BER of

just over 3dB when using the

pattern dependent noise predictive detection by itself (no code).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:53:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

OENNING AND MOON: A LOW-DENSITY GENERATOR MATRIX INTERPRETATION

741

jitter. Simulation results indicated substantial SNR gains over uncoded EPR4 when the coding method is used in conjunction with an appropriately optimized channel decoder. Results also showed that at error rates simulated PCPC codes offer almost identical performance as LDPC with the practical advantage of decreased encoding complexity and increased decoder architecture flexibility.

Fig. 7. Simulation results with user density of 2.5 and 90% media noise all due to position jitter.

Additional SNR gains of 4 dB and just over 5 dB are obtained

using PCPC codes of size 4896 and 1024, respectively. The

overall SNR gain over EPR4 at a BER of

is 8.5 dB and

7 dB using block sizes of 4896 and 1024, respectively. As in

the 100% AWGN case, results are nearly identical to those ob-

tained using LDPC codes with comparable block sizes down to

the error rates simulated.

Note that the choice of

was not completely arbitrary.

From existing results in LDPC and turbo coding we expected

this choice would result in lower error floors [19]. This along

with the parallel decoding algorithm used may be why no error

flooring effect was seen down to the error rates we were able to

simulate. In attempt to gather more information about possible

error floors bits were simulated at an SNR in dB of 16.5 and

17.5 with 90% media noise using the 4896 and 1024 block sizes,

respectively. In the bits no errors were found, indicating that

if there is an error floor for these codes it is likely below at least

a

error rate.

VIII. CONCLUSIONS
A coding scheme that concatenates, in parallel, multiple single bit parity check block codes was considered for use in high areal density magnetic recording. The effectiveness of this method was determined when using a Lorentzian channel model with 90% transition noise modeled as first order position

REFERENCES
[1] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” in Proc. IEEE Intl. Conf. Commun., Geneva, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[2] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes: M.I.T. Press, 1963. [3] D. J. C. MacKay and R. Neal, “Near shannon limit performance of low
density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 33, pp. 457–458, Mar. 1997. [4] M. Oberg and P. H. Siegel, “Parity check codes for partial response channels,” Globecom, pp. 717–722, 1999. [5] L. Ping, S. Chan, and K. L. Yeung, “Iterative decoding of multi-imensional concatenated single parity check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 1998. [6] H. Sawaguchi and J. K. Wolf, “Turbo decoding for high-rate concatenated parity-check codes on PRML channels,” Intermag 2000, submitted for publication. [7] J.-F. Cheng and R. J. McEliece, “Frequency-efficient coding with lowdensity generator matrices,”, Aug. 10, 1997. unpublished. [8] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999. [9] J. Moon, L. R. Carley, and R. R. Katti, “Density dependence of noise in thin metallic longitudinal media,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 63, no. 8, April 1988. [10] J. Moon, “Discrete-time modeling of transition-noise- dominant channels and study of detection performance,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 4573–4578, Nov. 1991. [11] T. Oenning and J. Moon, “Modeling the lorentzian magnetic recording channel with transition noise,” IEEE Trans. Magn., to be published. [12] J. Moon, “SNR definition for magnetic recording channels with transition noise,” IEEE Trans. Magn., to be published. [13] W. Ryan, “Optimal code rates for concatenated codes on a PR4-equalized magnetic recording channel,” in Proc. Conf. Inform. Syst. Sciences, 1999. [14] J. Moon and J. Park, “Near-maximum likelihood sequence detection in pattern dependent noise,”. [15] A. Kavcic, “Soft-output detector for channels with intersymbol interference and Markov noise memory,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecom. Conf., Dec. 1999. [16] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 20, pp. 248–287, Mar. 1974. [17] W. E. Ryan, “A turbo code tutorial”. [18] S. Kim and S. B. Wicker, “Improved turbo decoding through belief propagation,” Globecom, pp. 2597–2601, 1999. [19] T. Oenning and J. Moon, “The performance of parallel concatenated single bit parity check codes,” unpublished.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:53:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

