Decoding Low-Density Parity Check Codes with Normalized APP-Based Algorithm

Jinghu Chen and Marc P.C. FossorierВҪ Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Hawaii,
Honolulu, HI 96822, USA e-mail:jinghu,marc@spectra.eng.hawaii.edu

Abstract- In this paper, we propose a normalized a posteriori probability (APP) based algorithm for the decoding of low-density parity check (LDPC) codes. The normalized APP-based algorithm utilizes normalization to improve the accuracy of the soft values delivered by the simplified APP-based algorithm from one iteration to another during the iterative decoding, and can achieve very good tradeoff between decoding complexity and performance.
I. INTRODUCTION Low-density parity check (LDPC) codes [1], first proposed by Gallager in the 1960вҖҷs, and later rediscovered by MacKay and Neal [2, 3], can achieve near Shannon limit error performance [4, 5] and represent a very promising prospect for error control coding.
One popular way to describe a LDPC code is by means of a bipartite graph, with one subset of nodes being all the bits, and the other subset of nodes being all the checks [6]. Each bit node
Г’, Г’ ВҪ Вҫ ГҶ , has ГҳВҙГ’Вө nodes connected to it, which are all check nodes; we denote the set of these ГҳВҙГ’Вө check nodes as
Г…ВҙГ’Вө. Similarly each check node Г‘, Г‘ ВҪ Вҫ Г… , has ГҶ ГҳГ–ВҙГ‘Вө bit nodes connected to it; this set is denoted as ВҙГ‘Вө.
This graph representation can facilitate the analysis and design of LDPC codes, as well as their decoding.
Some majority logic decodable codes can be regarded as a special family of regular LDPC codes. Among many such codes are one-step majority logic decodable (OSMLD) codes, including difference-set cyclic (DSC) codes [7]. These kinds of codes are referred to as geometric LDPC codes since they can be constructed systematically based on finite geometries [8, 9]. They are competitive candidates for high rate LDPC codes of medium length, as it has been shown that the performances of these codes are better than those of regular LDPC
codes with the same block length ГҶ and dimension Гғ. An-
other advantage of these codes is that they are cyclic or quasicyclic codes. As a result, the encoding complexity can be greatly reduced compared to that of conventional LDPC codes, since cyclic code encoders can be easily implemented with register circuits. However, these codes have check sums with comparatively larger weights than those of conventional Gallager codes, and have more checks on each bit. Consequently, the degrees of both the bit nodes and check nodes in the bipartite graph are larger than that of conventional Gallager codes, resulting in a greater decoding complexity.
ВҪThis research was supported by NSF under Grants CCR-97-32959 and CCR-00-98029, and by the Hawaii Center for Advanced Communications (HCAC).

LDPC codes can be decoded with a soft decision iterative decoding algorithm called belief propagation (BP) algorithm [12], or sum-product algorithm. The BP algorithm is a kind of message passing algorithm working on a bipartite graph. Each node in the bipartite graph can be regarded as a message processor, which accepts messages from its neighbor nodes, processes them and sends updated messages back to its neighbors. We can simplify the processing in either bit nodes or check nodes, or both, and obtain different simplified versions of the BP algorithm. In [10, 11], the uniformly most powerful (UMP) BP-based algorithm is introduced which actually simplifies the processing of BP in check nodes. The simplification causes degradation in performance, especially for LDPC codes with check sums of large weights, such as geometric LDPC codes. In [15], the authors suggest a way to improve the UMP BP-based algorithm by normalization. The normalized BP-based algorithm can nearly achieve the same error performance as BP decoding with reduced complexity. Also presented in [10] is the UMP a posteriori probability (APP) based algorithm which simplifies the processing in both bit and check nodes. Unfortunately, the UMP APP-based algorithm can not achieve very good performance for LDPC codes in general. In this paper, we propose to improve the error performance of the UMP APP-based algorithm by normalization. The proposed normalized UMP APP-based algorithm is effective for both LDPC codes with check sums of small weights such as Gallager codes, and those with check sums of large weights such as geometric codes. It can further reduce the decoding complexity of the UMP BP-based algorithm of [15] by a factor
proportional to ГҳВҙГ’Вө.

II. THE BP ALGORITHM AND ITS SIMPLIFICATIONS

In the following, we assume BPSK modulation which maps

a codeword

ВҙВҪ Вҫ

a transmitted sequence Гң

ГңГ’ Вҫ Г’ ВҪ, for Г’ ВҪ Вҫ

ГҶ Вө, with Г’ Вј or 1, into
ВҙГңВҪ ГңВҫ ГңГҶ Вө, according to ГҶ Then Гң is transmitted over

a channel corrupted by additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN)

with zero mean and power spectral
received value corresponding to ГңГ’

density

ГҶВј
Вҫ

W/Hz.

The

after the demodulator is

ГқГ’ ГңГ’ В· Г’, where Г’ is a random variable with zero mean

and

variance

ГҶВј
Вҫ

.

At each iteration of BP decoding, each check node receives

messages from all bit nodes connected to it, and after process-

ing, it sends messages back to these bit nodes. Then a similar

procedure is applied to each bit node. We assume all the mes-

sages passing between bit and check nodes are in the form of

0-7803-7206-9/01/$17.00 В© 2001 IEEE

1026
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:38:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

log-likelihood ratios (LLRвҖҷs). Moreover, we define the follow-

ing notations associated with a given iteration:

ВҜ Г’: The LLR of bit Г’ which is derived from the received

value ГқГ’. In BP decoding, we initially set Г’ ГҶВј ГқГ’.

ВҜ Г„Г‘Г’: The LLR of bit Г’ which is sent from check node

Г‘ to
Вҫ ГҶ Г’ ГһГ‘Г’Вј

bitГ’nВј ode

Г’. It is obtained from the information ВҙГ‘Вө Г’ , where the notation ГһГ‘Г’ will be

ГҶ Г’ introduced next and ВҙГ‘Вө Г’ is the set of all bit nodes

connected to check node Г‘ with bit node Г’ excluded.

ВҜ ГһГ‘Г’: The LLR of bit Г’ which is sent from the bit node

Г’ to check node Г‘.
Вҫ information Г’ and

It the

is obtained from the
information Г„Г‘ВјГ’

a

Г‘prВјiori

Г… Г’ Г… Г’ ВҙГ’Вө Г‘ , where ВҙГ’Вө Г‘ is the set of all check nodes

connected to bit node Г’ with check node Г‘ excluded.

ВҜ ГһГ’: The a posteriori LLR of bit Г’ computed at each it-

Вҫ Г… eration. It is obtained from the a priori information Г’

and the information Г„Г‘ Г’ Г‘

ВҙГ’Вө .

A BP Algorithm

The BP algorithm can be described as follows.

Вҫ Г… Initialization: For each Г’ and each Г‘

ВҙГ’Вө, set ГһГ‘ Г’

Г’.

Iterative processing: For each iteration, the processing in-

cludes three consecutive steps.

1. Processing in check nodes: (See Fig. 1 (a))
For each check node Г‘ and each bit node Г’ con-
nected to node Г‘, Г’ Вҫ ГҶ ВҙГ‘Вө, update Г„Г‘Г’ by

ГҢГ‘Г’ Г„Г‘Г’

Гһ ВҪ ГңГ”Вҙ Г‘Г’Вј Вө

ГҶ Гһ Вҫ Г’ Г’Вј

ВҙГ‘Вө Г’ ВҪ В· ГңГ”Вҙ Г‘Г’Вј Вө

(1)

ГҗГ’

ВҪ ВҪ

В·

ГҢГ‘Г’ ГҢГ‘Г’

(2)

2. Processing in bit nodes: (See Fig. 1 (b))
For each bit node Г’ and each check node Г‘ con-
nected to node Г’, Г‘ Вҫ Г…ВҙГ’Вө, update ГһГ‘ Г’ by

ГһГ‘ Г’

Г’В·

Г„Г‘ВјГ’ (3)

Г… Г‘ВјВҫ ВҙГ’ВөГ’Г‘

Also, for each Г’, update ГһГ’ for hard decision by

ГһГ’

Г’В·

Г„Г‘Г’

(4)

Г… Г‘Вҫ ВҙГ’Вө

3. Hard decision and stopping criterion test:
Create the hard decision vector Гң ГңГ’ such that ГңГ’ ВҪ if ГһГ’ Вј, and ГңГ’ Вј if ГһГ’ Вј. If Гң
is a codeword, it is considered as a valid decoded
word and the decoding process ends; if the number
of iterations exceeds some maximum number and Гң is not a valid codeword, a failure is declared and the decoding process ends; otherwise the decoding
repeats from Step 1.

B BP-Based Algorithm

The processing in the check nodes for BP algorithm can be

Вҫ ГҶ simplified. First, for Г’

ВҙГ‘Вө, define Г‘Г’ as the hard

decision according to ГһГ‘Г’ , i.e., Г‘Г’

ВҪ if ГһГ‘Г’

Вј;

Г‘Г’ Вј, otherwise. Also, define Г‘ as the modulo-2 sum

of the hard decisions of all the bits of the check sum Г‘, ac-

ГҲ ГҶ cording to ГһГ‘Г’ , i.e., Г‘

Г’ Вҫ ВҙГ‘Вө Г‘Г’ mod 2. Then

ВЁ Г‘ Г‘Г’ represents the modulo-2 sum of the hard decisions

ГҶ Г’ of
Вҙ

all
ВҪВө

tГ‘ heВЁbiГ‘tsГ’

in ВҙГ‘Вө Г’ .
. Therefore,

Note

that

the

sign

of

ГҢГ‘Г’

in (1) is

Гһ ВҪ ГңГ”Вҙ Г‘Г’Вј Вө

ГҶ Гһ Вҫ Г’ Г’Вј

ВҙГ‘Вө Г’ ВҪ В· ГңГ”Вҙ Г‘Г’Вј Вө

ВЁ Вҙ ВҪВө Г‘ Г‘Г’

ГҶВҫ ГңГ”ВҙГ‘ Г’Г’Вј ГҶВҫ ГңГ”ВҙГ‘ Г’Г’Вј

ВҙГ‘ВөГ’Г’ ВҙГ‘ВөГ’Г’

ГһГ‘Г’Вј Вө ВҪ ГһГ‘Г’Вј Вө В· ВҪ

(5)

Based on (5), (2) can be simplified into

Г„Г‘Г’

ГҶ ВЁ Гһ Вҙ ВҪВө Г‘ Г‘Г’

Г‘Г’

Г‘Г’Вј

Вҫ Г’ Г’Вј ВҙГ‘Вө Г’

(6)

Replacing (2) with (6) for the processing in check nodes, we
obtain the BP-based algorithm of [10, 11], which performs ad-
ditions only. The BP-based algorithm also reduces the storage
requirement, since for each check node Г‘, only the smallest two amplitudes of all ГһГ‘Г’ need to be stored for representation of all Г„Г‘Г’ . In addition, the positive factor ГҶВј in Г’
can be omitted and no a priori information about the AWGN
channel is required.

C Iterative APP Algorithm

The iterative APP algorithm can be regarded as a simplifica-

tion of the BP algorithm, and the simplification is done for the

processing in bit nodes. In the BP algorithm, the processing in
each bit node Г’ includes two calculations: (i) for each check node Г‘ connected to it, following (3), the a priori message Г’

is added to the incoming messages from all check nodes con-
nected to it except for that from check node Г‘ , such that ГһГ‘ Г’, the outgoing message to check node Г‘ , is somewhat uncorrelated with the incoming message Г„Г‘ Г’ from check node Г‘ ;

Г… (ii) following (4), the a priori message Г’ is added to all the
messages from check nodes ВҙГ’Вө to obtain the a posteriori information ГһГ’ used to make hard decision for bit Г’.

In the iterative APP algorithm, we only do calculation (ii) to

Вҫ Г… compute ГһГ’вҖҷs. Then the ГһГ’вҖҷs are not only used for hard deci-

sion, but also substituted for all ГһГ‘ Г’ (Г‘

ВҙГ’Вө), as shown

in Fig. 1 (c). Indeed, with this simplification, correlation is in-

troduced between the bidirectional messages along each edge.

On the other hand, the computational complexity and storage

size of the iterative APP algorithm can be greatly reduced since

we only need to compute and store one value for each bit node.

Note that this decoding can be viewed as an iterative imple-

mentation of [14].

1027
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:38:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

D Iterative APP-Based Algorithm
Since the processing in check nodes for iterative APP algorithm is the same as that for BP algorithm, it can also be simplified with (6) to avoid exponential and logarithmic operations and to reduce storage requirement. This results in the UMP iterative APP-based algorithm.
III. NORMALIZED ITERATIVE APP-BASED ALGORITHM For conventional LDPC codes, the iterative APP algorithm has much worse performance than that of the BP algorithm. For example, it has been shown in [10] that for (504, 252) and (1008,
504) Gallager codes with ГҳГ– and Гҳ Вҝ, the performance
with the iterative APP algorithm is more than 1.0 dB worse than that of the BP algorithm. The reason lies in the fact that
the degree of each bit node, which is equal to Гҳ, is very small,
and hence for every bit node, the correlation between the out-
going and incoming messages along each of the Гҳ edges is very
significant. However, for geometric LDPC codes, because the degree of each node is usually very large, the fore-mentioned correlation is somewhat reduced, and it doesnвҖҷt have predominant effect on the error performance. As a result, the iterative APP algorithm is not a bad choice for geometric LDPC codes since it can provide good tradeoff between decoding complexity and performance. It has been shown in [8, 13] that the gap between the error performances of BP decoding and iterative APP decoding is only about 0.2 dB for the (273, 191) DSC code.
Furthermore, the iterative APP algorithm can tremendously reduce the storage requirement and computational complexity of BP decoding. For example, for the (1057, 813) DSC code
Вў with ГҳГ– Гҳ ВҝВҝ, if BP decoding is adopted, then ВҪВј
ВҝВҝ units are needed to store ГһГ‘Г’ and the same amount of
Вў units are needed to store Г„Г‘Г’ . However, with iterative APP
algorithm, we only need 1057 and ВҪВј ВҝВҝ units to store
ГһГ’ and Г„Г‘Г’ , respectively. Nevertheless the total storage
is only reduced by nearly one half. The decoding is also faster since the processing in bit nodes is greatly simplified.
As mentioned in Section II-D, the iterative APP algorithm can be further simplified to iterative APP-based algorithm if the processing in check nodes is approximated with (6). Consequently, for the fore-mentioned code, 1057 units to represent
ГһГ’ and Г„Г‘Г’ are now required, corresponding to a reduction of ГҳГ– Гҳ. Unfortunately, while for conventional LDPC
codes, the iterative APP-based algorithm brings no degradation to the already bad performance of iterative APP decoding, for geometric LDPC codes, the performance of the iterative APP-based decoding is much worse than that of iterative APP decoding. Consequently, the approximation and resulting complexity reduction is paid at the expense of a severe performance degradation. Fortunately, this degradation can be reclaimed with the same normalization approach as that of [15], as considered below.
For a given pair of Г‘ and Г’ , denote Г„ВҪ and Г„Вҫ as the value Г„Г‘Г’ computed by (2) and (6), respectively. It can be shown
that the two following facts hold [15]:

Fig. 1: (a) Processing in check nodes; (b) Processing in bit nodes with BP algorithm;(c) Processing in bit nodes with APP algorithm.

1. sgnВҙГ„ВҪВө sgnВҙГ„ВҫВө; 2. Г„Вҫ Г„ВҪ .
We have shown in [15] that with these two facts, the BP-based algorithm can be improved by normalization, i.e. by dividing
Г„Вҫ by a factor В« greater than 1 to get a much better approximation of Г„ВҪ. The theoretical computation of В« has been derived
in [15] and is reviewed below. Since the iterative APP-based algorithm has the same processing in check nodes as BP-based algorithm, this suggests that the iterative APP-based algorithm can be improved with the same normalization approach. We refer to this algorithm as normalized iterative APP-based algorithm.
We propose to determine the scaling factors for the normalized iterative APP-based algorithm by the same method as proposed in [15], i.e., by forcing the mean of the normalized mag-
nitude Г„Вҫ В« to equal the mean of the magnitude Г„ВҪ , or

В«

EВҙ Г„Вҫ Вө EВҙ Г„ВҪ Вө

(7)

The scaling factors depend on the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). For the first iteration, they can either be determined based on Monte Carlo simulations, or obtained theoretically with the formulas derived in [15]. Also, for a given LDPC code, we can

1028
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:38:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BER BER

100

10вҲ’1

10вҲ’2

10вҲ’3

10вҲ’4 10вҲ’5

BP 1000 itr APPвҲ’based 50 itr Normalized BPвҲ’based 200 itr, factor=1.4 Normalized APPвҲ’based 50 itr, factor=1.4 Normalized APPвҲ’based 200 itr, factor=2.6

10вҲ’6

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

Eb/No (in dB)

Fig. 2: Bit error performance for iterative decoding of the (504, 252)

LDPC code with BP, APP-based, normalized BP-based and

normalized APP-based algorithms.

100

10вҲ’1

10вҲ’2

10вҲ’3

10вҲ’4 10вҲ’5 10вҲ’6

BP 200 itr APP 200 itr APPвҲ’based 200 itr Normalized BPвҲ’based 200 itr Normalized APPвҲ’based 200 itr

10вҲ’7

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

Eb/No (in dB)

Fig. 3: Bit error performance for iterative decoding of the (273, 191)

DSC code with BP, APP, APP-based, normalized BP-based and

normalized APP-based algorithms.

choose one scaling factor for all iterations and all SNR values, so that the normalized iterative APP-based algorithm becomes independent of the SNR value.
In iterative APP-based decoding, correlation values are in-
troduced by: (i) the overestimation of the values Г„ based on
(6) in the processing at the check nodes; (ii) the approximation of BP by APP in the processing at the bit nodes. This suggests that even larger scaling values than for BP-based decoding should be chosen for the APP-based algorithm, especially when the number of check sums is small.
Normalization is not a new concept. For example, in [16], the authors propose to clip and scale numbers in the VLSI design of a decoder for the (73, 45) DSC code and use the same simplification of (3) by (4) discussed in Section II-C. However, the scaling is mainly intended to represent numbers efficiently in hardware implementation and the entire a posteriori values rather than only the extrinsic information values are scaled. In [17, 18], the authors show that the performance of SOVA decoding can be improved by normalization, since the soft values delivered by the SOVA algorithm are usually overestimated, compared to those of Max-Log-MAP algorithm. Normalization values have also been proposed in [19, 20] to approach the error performance of Max-Log-MAP decoding with a suboptimum version of the Max-Log-MAP algorithm applied to iterative decoding of block product codes. However, for the Max-Log-MAP algorithm, the two facts discussed above and essential to the effectiveness of our proposed scaling method no longer hold [15].
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In the following, the maximum number of iterations has been chosen as the smallest value for which near convergence performance of the algorithm considered is achieved. Fig. 2 shows the bit error performance of different algorithms for the regu-
lar (504, 252) LDPC code with ГҳГ– and Гҳ Вҝ. If we only consider the overestimation of the values Г„ based on (6), then

the scaling factor В« ВҪ is chosen for both normalized BP-

based and normalized APP-based algorithms. However, with

this factor, the performance of the normalized iterative APP-

based algorithm is still much worse than that of BP and nor-

malized BP-based algorithms, since due to the small number
of check sums Гҳ Вҝ, the correlation introduced by approxi-

mating BP with APP is very serious. By increasing this factor
to В« Вҫ , the normalized iterative APP-based algorithm can

achieve its best performance which is only about 0.3 dB worse

than that of the BP algorithm.

Fig. 3 and 4 depict the bit error performance of the (273,

191) and (1057, 813) DSC codes, respectively. Similar curves

were obtained for block error performances. For the normal-

ized iterative APP-based algorithm, we choose the scaling fac-
tors В« Вҫ Вј for the former code and В« Вј for the latter one,

as we computed for the normalized BP-based algorithm based

on the analysis of [15]. Fig. 3 shows that for the (273, 191)

DSC code, the performance of the normalized iterative APP-

based algorithm is almost the same as that of the iterative APP

algorithm. It is about 0.6 dB better than that of the iterative

APP-based algorithm, and only about 0.2 dB worse than that

of the BP algorithm. No noticeable improvements are observed

by changing the scaling factor for this code. Fig. 4 shows that

the performance of the normalized iterative APP-based algo-

rithm is more than 1.0 dB better than that of the iterative APP-

based algorithm, and only slightly worse than that of the BP

algorithm. Surprisingly, the performance of the normalized it-

erative APP-based algorithm is even about 0.15 dB better than

that of the iterative APP algorithm.

We also simulated the (4161, 3431) DSC code for which

ГҳГ– Гҳ

. In this case, we compute the scaling factor

В«

Вј based on [15]. The performance of the normalized

iterative APP-based is only about 0.1 dB worse than that of the

BP algorithm as shown in Fig. 5.

V. CONCLUSION

1029
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:38:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

100

10вҲ’1

10вҲ’1 10вҲ’2

10вҲ’2

BER BER

10вҲ’3

10вҲ’3

10вҲ’4 10вҲ’5

BP 200 itr APP 200 itr APPвҲ’based 10 itr Normalized BPвҲ’based 200 itr Normalized APPвҲ’based 200 itr

10вҲ’4

BP 1000 itr Normalized APPвҲ’based 1000 itr

10вҲ’6

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

Eb/No (in dB)

Fig. 4: Bit error performance for iterative decoding of the (1057, 813)

DSC code with BP, APP, APP-based, normalized BP-based and

normalized APP-based algorithms.

In this paper, we have summarized different simplifications of the BP algorithm for decoding LDPC codes. We proposed a normalized iterative APP-based algorithm to improve the performance of the iterative APP-based algorithm. The simulation results shows that the normalized iterative APP-based algorithm can achieve good performance for both conventional LDPC codes with check sums of small weights and geometric LDPC codes with check sums of large weights. However, while for the latter the scaling factors can be derived based on [15], larger scaling factors than those derived in [15] are needed to achieve the best error performance for the former codes.
From these results, we conclude that for LDPC codes with check sums of large weights, the proposed normalized iterative APP-based decoding performs nearly as well as BP decoding. For LDPC codes with check sums of small weights, the approach of [15] is needed to achieve nearly the same error performance as BP decoding, while the proposed approach provides good trade-off between error performance and decoding complexity.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors wish to thank R.M. Tanner for interesting discussions and providing [16].
REFERENCES
[1] R.G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press, 1963.
[2] D.J.C. MacKay, вҖңGood Error-Correcting Codes Based on Very Sparse Matrices,вҖқ IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399-431, Mar. 1999.
[3] D.J.C. MacKay and R.M. Neal, вҖңNear Shannon Limit Performance of Low Density Parity Check Codes,вҖқ Electronics Letters 32(18), pp. 16451646, Aug. 1996.
[4] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, вҖңThe Capacity of Low-Density Parity Check Codes under Message-Passing Decoding,вҖқ IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599-618, Feb. 2001.
[5] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi and R. Urbanke, вҖңDesign of CapacityApproaching Irregular Low-Density Parity Check Codes,вҖқ IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619-637, Feb. 2001.

10вҲ’5

2.8

3

3.2

3.4

3.6

3.8

4

Eb/No (in dB)

Fig. 5: Bit error performance for iterative decoding of the (4161,

3431) DSC code with BP and normalized APP-based algorithms.

[6] R. M. Tanner, вҖңA Recursive Approach to Low Complexity Codes,вҖқ IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 27, pp. 533-547, Sept. 1981.
[7] E. J. Weldon, вҖңDifference-Set Cyclic Codes,вҖқ Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 45, pp. 1045-1055, Sept. 1996.
[8] R. Lucas, M. Fossorier, Y. Kou and S. Lin, вҖңIterative Decoding of OneStep Majority Logic Decodable Codes Based on Belief Propagation,вҖқ IEEE Trans. Comm., vol. 48, pp. 931-937, June 2000.
[9] Y. Kou, S. Lin and M. Fossorier, вҖңLow Density Parity Check Codes Based on Finite Geometries: A Rediscovery and More,вҖқ IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, to appear.
[10] M. Fossorier, M. MihaljevicВҙ and H. Imai, вҖңReduced Complexity Iterative Decoding of Low Density Parity Check Codes Based on Belief Propagation,вҖқ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, pp. 673-680, May 1999.
[11] A. J. Felstrom and K. S. Zigangirov, вҖңTime-Varying Periodic Convolutional Codes with Low-Density Parity-Check Matrix,вҖқ IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 2181-2191, Sept. 1999.
[12] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[13] R. Lucas, M. Bossert, and M. Breitbach, вҖңOn Iterative Soft-Decision Decoding of Linear Binary Block Codes And Product CodesвҖқ, IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp.276-296, Feb. 1998.
[14] J. L. Massey, Threshold Decoding. Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press, 1963.
[15] J. Chen and M. Fossorier, вҖңNear Optimum Universal Belief Propagation Based Decoding of LDPC Codes,вҖқ IEEE Trans. Commun., to appear.
[16] K. Karplus and H. Krit, вҖңA Semi-Systolic Decoder for the PDSC73 Error-Correcting Code,вҖқ Discrete Applied Mathematics 33, NorthHolland, pp. 109-128, 1991.
[17] L. Papke and P. Robertson, вҖңImproved Decoding with the SOVA in a Parallel Concatenated (Turbo-code) Scheme,вҖқ Proc. ICC96, pp. 102-106, June 1996.
[18] L. Lin and R. S. Cheng, вҖңImprovements in SOVA-Based Decoding for Turbo Codes,вҖқ Proc. ICC97, pp. 1473-1478, June 1997.
[19] R. M. Pyndiah, вҖңNear Optimum Decoding of Product Codes: Block Turbo Codes,вҖқ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 46, pp.1003-1010, Aug. 1998.
[20] P. A. Martin and D. P. Taylor, вҖңOn Multilevel Codes and Iterative Multistage Decoding,вҖқ IEEE Trans. Commun., to appear.

1030
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:38:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

