736

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

On the Optimality of Solutions of the Max-Product Belief-Propagation Algorithm in Arbitrary Graphs
Yair Weiss, Member, IEEE, and William T. Freeman, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Graphical models, such as Bayesian networks and Markov random fields (MRFs), represent statistical dependencies of variables by a graph. The max-product “belief propagation” algorithm is a local-message-passing algorithm on this graph that is known to converge to a unique fixed point when the graph is a tree. Furthermore, when the graph is a tree, the assignment based on the fixed point yields the most probable values of the unobserved variables given the observed ones.
Recently, good empirical performance has been obtained by running the max-product algorithm (or the equivalent min-sum algorithm) on graphs with loops, for applications including the decoding of “turbo” codes. Except for two simple graphs (cycle codes and single-loop graphs) there has been little theoretical understanding of the max-product algorithm on graphs with loops.
Here we prove a result on the fixed points of max-product on a graph with arbitrary topology and with arbitrary probability distributions (discrete- or continuous-valued nodes). We show that the assignment based on a fixed point is a “neighborhood maximum” of the posterior probability: the posterior probability of the maxproduct assignment is guaranteed to be greater than all other assignments in a particular large region around that assignment. The region includes all assignments that differ from the max-product assignment in any subset of nodes that form no more than a single loop in the graph. In some graphs, this neighborhood is exponentially large. We illustrate the analysis with examples.
Index Terms—Bayesian networks, belief propagation, maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimate, Markov random fields (MRFs), maxproduct, min-sum.
I. INTRODUCTION
P ROBLEMS involving probabilistic belief propagation arise in a wide variety of applications, including error-correcting codes, speech recognition, and image understanding. Typically, a probability distribution is assumed over a set of variables and the task is to infer the values of the unobserved variables given the observed ones. The assumed probability distribution is described using a graphical model [14]—the qualitative aspects of the distribution are specified by a graph structure. The graph may either be directed as in a Bayesian network [18], [12] or undirected as in a Markov random field (MRF) [18], [10].
Manuscript received January 3, 2000. This work was supported under Grants MURI-ARO-DAAH04-96-1-0341, MURI N00014-00-1-0637, and NSF IIS-9988642
Y. Weiss is with the Computer Science Division, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720-1776 USA (e-mail: yweiss@cs.berkeley.edu).
W. T. Freeman is with MERL, Mitsubishi Electric Research Labs., Cambridge, MA 02139 USA (e-mail: freeman@merl.com).
Communicated by B. J. Frey, Guest Editor. Publisher Item Identifier S 0018-9448(01)00724-6.

Here we focus on the problem of finding an assignment for the unobserved variables that is most probable given the observed ones. In general, this problem is NP-hard [19] but if the graph is singly connected (i.e., there is only one path between any two given nodes) then there exist efficient local message-passing schemes to perform this task. Pearl [18] derived such a scheme for singly connected Bayesian networks. The algorithm, which he called “belief revision,” is identical to his algorithm for finding posterior marginals over nodes except that the summation operator is replaced with a maximization. Aji et al. [2] have shown that both of Pearl’s algorithms can be seen as special cases of generalized distributive laws over particular semirings. In particular, Pearl’s algorithm for finding maximum a posteriori (MAP) assignments can be seen as a generalized distributive law over the max-product semiring. We will henceforth refer to it as the “max-product” algorithm.
Pearl showed that for singly connected networks, the maxproduct algorithm is guaranteed to converge and that the assignment based on the messages at convergence is guaranteed to give the optimal assignment values corresponding to the MAP solution.
Several groups have recently reported excellent experimental results by running the max-product algorithm on graphs with loops [23], [6], [3], [20], [6], [11]. Benedetto et al. used the max-product algorithm to decode “turbo” codes and obtained excellent results that were slightly inferior to the original turbo decoding algorithm (which is equivalent to the sum-product algorithm). Weiss [20] compared the performance of sum-product and max-product on a “toy” turbo code problem while distinguishing between converged and unconverged cases. He found that if one considers only the convergent cases, the performance of max-product decoding is significantly better than sum-product decoding. However, the max-product algorithm converges less often so its overall performance (including both convergent and nonconvergent cases) is inferior.
Progress in the analysis of the max-product algorithm has been made for two special topologies: single-loop graphs, and “cycle codes.” For graphs with a single loop [23], [20], [21], [5], [2], it can be shown that the algorithm converges to a stable fixed point or a periodic oscillation. If it converges to a stable fixed point, then the assignment based on the fixed-point messages is the optimal assignment. For graphs that correspond to cycle codes (low-density parity-check codes, in which each bit is checked by exactly two check nodes), Wiberg [23] gave sufficient conditions for max-product to converge to the transmitted codeword and Horn [11] gave sufficient conditions for convergence to the MAP assignment.

0018–9448/01$10.00 © 2001 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WEISS AND FREEMAN: SOLUTIONS OF THE MAX-PRODUCT BELIEF-PROPAGATION ALGORITHM

737

We will assume, without loss of generality, that each node has a corresponding node that is connected only to .
Thus
(2)

The restriction that all the variables are observed and

none of the variables are is just to make the notation

(a)

simple—

may be independent of (equivalent

to being unobserved) or

may be

(equivalent to being observed, with value ).

In describing and analyzing belief propagation, we assume

the graphical model has been preprocessed so that all the

cliques consist of pairs of units. Any graphical model can

be converted into this form before doing inference through a

suitable clustering of nodes into large nodes [21]. Fig. 1 shows

an example—a Bayesian network is converted into an MRF in

which all the cliques are pairs of units.

Equation (2) becomes

(b)
Fig. 1. Any Bayesian network can be converted into an undirected graph with pairwise cliques by adding cluster nodes for all parents that share a common child. (a) A Bayesian network. (b) The corresponding undirected graph with
pairwise cliques. A cluster node for (x ; x ) has been added. The potentials
can be set so that the joint probability in the undirected graph is identical to that in the Bayesian network. In this case, the update rules presented in this paper reduce to Pearl’s propagation rules in the original Bayesian network [21].
In this paper, we analyze the max-product algorithm in graphs of arbitrary topology. We show that at a fixed point of the algorithm, the assignment is a “neighborhood maximum” of the posterior probability: the posterior probability of the max-product assignment is guaranteed to be greater than all other assignments in a particular large region around that assignment. These results motivate using this powerful algorithm in a broader class of networks.
II. THE MAX-PRODUCT ALGORITHM IN PAIRWISE MARKOV RANDOM FIELDS
Pearl’s original algorithm was described for directed graphs, but in this paper, we focus on undirected graphs. Every directed graphical model can be transformed into an undirected graphical model before doing inference (see Fig. 1). A undirected graphical model (or an MRF) is a graph in which the nodes represent variables and arcs represents compatibility relations between them. Assuming all probabilities are nonzero, the Hammersley–Clifford theorem (e.g., [18]) guarantees that the probability distribution will factorize into a product of functions of the maximal cliques of the graph.
Denoting by the values of all unobserved variables in the graph, the factorization has the form
(1)

(3)
where the first product is over connected pairs of nodes. The important property of MRFs that we will use throughout
this paper is the Markov blanket property. The probability of a subset of nodes given all other nodes in the graph depends only on the values of the nodes that immediately neighbor . Furthermore, the probability of given all other nodes is proportional to the product of all clique potentials within and all clique potentials between and its immediate neighbors
(4)

(5)

The advantage of preprocessing the graph into one with pair-

wise cliques is that the description and the analysis of belief

propagation becomes simpler. For completeness, we review the

belief propagation scheme used in [21]. As we discuss in the Ap-

pendix, this belief propagation scheme is equivalent to Pearl’s

belief propagation algorithm in directed graphs, the Generalized

Distributive Law algorithm of [1] and the factor graph propaga-

tion algorithm of [13]. These three algorithms correspond to the

algorithm presented here with a particular way of preprocessing

the graph in order to obtain pairwise potentials.

At every iteration, each node sends a (different) message

to each of its neighbors and receives a message from each

neighbor. Let and be two neighboring nodes in the graph.

We denote by

the message that node sends to node

, by

the message that sends to , and by

the belief at node .

The max-product update rules are

where is a subset of that form a clique in the graph and

is the potential function for the clique.

(6)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

738

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

(7)

where denotes a normalization constant and

means

all nodes neighboring , except .

The procedure is initialized with all message vectors set to

constant functions. Observed nodes do not receive messages and

they always transmit the same vector—if is observed to have

value then

. The normalization of

in (6) is not necessary—whether or not the message is normal-

ized, the belief will be identical. However, normalizing the

messages avoids numerical underflow and adds to the stability

of the algorithm. We assume throughout this paper that all nodes

simultaneously update their messages in parallel.

For singly connected graphs it is easy to show the following.

• The algorithm converges to a unique fixed point regardless of initial conditions in a finite number of iterations.

• At convergence, the belief for any value of a node is

the maximum of the posterior, conditioned on that node

having the value :

.

• Define the max-product assignment, by

Here again, if iterations of (8) converge to then satisfies

.

The equation

is a highly nonlinear equation and

it is not obvious how many solutions exist or how to charac-

terize them. Horn [11] showed that in single-loop graphs,

can be considered as matrix multiplication over the max-product

semiring and fixed points correspond to eigenvectors of that ma-

trix. Thus even in single-loop graphs, one can construct exam-

ples with any number of fixed points.

The main result of this paper is a characterization of how

well the max-product assignment approximates the MAP as-

signment. We show that the assignment must be a neighbor-

hood maximum of

: that is,

for all

in a particular large region around . This condition is weaker

than a global maximum but stronger than a local maximum.

To be more precise. we define the single loops and trees (SLT)

neighborhood of an assignment in a graphical model to

include all assignments that can be obtained from by the

following.

• Choosing an arbitrary subset of nodes in that consists of disconnected combinations of trees and single loops.

(assuming a unique maximizing value exists). Then is the MAP assignment.
The max-product assignment assumes there are no “ties”— that a unique maximizing exists for all . Ties can arise when the MAP assignment is not unique, e.g., when there are two assignments that have identical posterior and both maximize the posterior. For singly connected graphs, the converse is also true: if there are no ties in then the MAP assignment is unique. In what follows, we assume a unique MAP assignment.
In particular applications, it might be easier to work in the log domain so that the product operation in (7) is replaced by a sum operations. Thus, the max-product algorithm is sometimes referred to as the max-sum algorithm or the min-sum algorithm [23], [5]. If the graph is a chain, the max-product is a two-way version of the Viterbi algorithm in hidden Markov models and is closely related to concurrent dynamic programming [4]. Despite this connection to well-studied algorithms, there has been very little analytical success in characterizing the solutions of the max-product algorithm on arbitrary graphs with loops.

III. WHAT ARE THE FIXED POINTS OF THE MAX-PRODUCT ALGORITHM?

Each iteration of the max-product algorithm can be thought

of as an operator that inputs a list of messages and out-

puts a list of messages

. Thus running belief

propagation can be thought of as an iterative way of finding a

solution to the fixed-point equations

with an initial

guess in which all messages are constant functions.

Note that this is not the only way of finding fixed points.

Murphy et al. [17] describe an alternative method for finding

fixed points of . They suggested iterating

(8)

• Assigning arbitrary values to —the chosen subset of nodes. The other nodes have the same assignment as in .

Claim 1: For an arbitrary graphical model with arbitrary po-

tentials, if is a fixed point of the max-product algorithm and

is the assignment based on then

for

all

in the SLT neighborhood of .

Fig. 2 illustrates example configurations within the SLT

neighborhood of the max-product assignment. It shows ex-

amples of subsets of nodes that could be changed to arbitrary

values and the posterior probability of the assignment is guar-

anteed to be worse than that of the max-product assignment.

To build intuition, we first describe the proof for a specific

case, the diamond graph of Fig. 3. The general proof is given in

Section III-B.

A. Specific Example

We start by giving an overview of the proof for the diamond

graph shown in Fig. 3(a). The proof is based on the unwrapped

tree—the graphical model that the loopy belief propagation is

solving exactly when applying the belief propagation rules in

a loopy network [9], [23], [21], [22]. In error-correcting codes,

the unwrapped tree is referred to as the “computation tree”—it

is based on the idea that the computation of a message sent by a

node at time depends on messages it received from its neigh-

bors at time

and those messages depend on the messages

the neighbors received at time , etc.

Fig. 3 shows an unwrapped tree around node for the di-

amond-shaped graph on the left. Each node has a shaded ob-

served node attached to it that is not shown for simplicity. Each

node has a shaded observed node attached to it that is not shown

for simplicity. We use to refer to unwrapped quantities.

To simplify notation, we assume that , the assignment

based on a fixed point of the max-product algorithm is equal

to zero

. The periodic assignment lemma from [22]

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WEISS AND FREEMAN: SOLUTIONS OF THE MAX-PRODUCT BELIEF-PROPAGATION ALGORITHM

739

(a) (a)

(b)

Fig. 3. (a) An MRF with multiple loops. (b) The unwrapped graph cor-
9( ) responding to this structure. The unwrapped graphs are constructed by
replicating the potentials x ; x and observations y while preserving the
local connectivity of the loopy graph. They are constructed so that the messages received by node x after t iterations in the loopy graph are equivalent to those that would be received by x in the unwrapped graph. An observed node y , not shown, is connected to each depicted node.
(b)

We now show that the global optimality of

and the

method of construction of the unwrapped tree guarantee that

for all in the SLT neighborhood of .

Referring to Fig. 3(a), suppose that

By the Markov property of the diamond figure, this means that

(10)

(c)

25 2 25 Fig. 2. (a) A

grid of points. (b) and (c) Examples of subsets of nodes

that form no more than a single loop. In this paper, we prove that changing such

a subset of nodes from the max-product assignment will always decrease the

posterior probability.

guarantees that we can modify

for the leaf nodes so

that the optimal assignment in the unwrapped tree is all zeros

Note that node has exactly the same neighbors in the unwrapped graph as has in the loopy graph. Furthermore, by the method of construction, the potentials between and each of its neighbors is the same as the potentials between and its neighbors. Thus, (10) implies that

(11)

in contradiction to (9). Hence, no change of a single can im-

prove the posterior probability.

What about changing two at a time? If we change a pair

that is not connected in the graph, say and , then by the

Markov property this is equivalent to changing one at a time.

Thus, suppose

this again implies that

(9)

and we have shown earlier that this leads to a contradiction. Thus

[The

are modified to include the messages from the no change of assignment in two unconnected nodes can improve

nodes to be added at the next stage of the unwrapping.]

the posterior probability.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

740

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

If the two are connected, say

then the same argument

holds with respect to the pair of nodes

. Note that the

subgraph is isomorphic to the subgraph and the two

subgraphs have the same neighbors. Hence

(12)

implies that

(13)

and this is again in contradiction to (9). Thus, no change of

assignment in two connected nodes can improve the posterior

probability.

Similar arguments show that no change of assignment in any

subtree of the graph can improve the posterior probability (e.g.,

changing the values of or changing the values of and

).

These arguments no longer hold, however, when we change

a subset of nodes that form a loopy subgraph of . For ex-

ample, the subgraph

is not isomorphic to the sub-

graph

. Indeed since the unwrapped tree is a tree,

it cannot have a loopy subgraph. Hence we cannot equate the

probabilities of the two subgraphs given their neighbors.

If the subset forms a single loop, however, then there ex-

ists an arbitrarily long chain in the unwrapped tree that corre-

sponds to the unwrapping of that loop. For example, note the

chain

in Fig. 3(b). Using a similar argu-

ment to that used in proving optimality of max-product in a

single-loop graph [23], [20], [2], [5] we can show that if we can

improve the posterior in the loopy graph by changing the value

of

then we can also improve the posterior in the

unwrapped graph by changing the values of the arbitrarily long

chain. This again leads to a contradiction.

B. Proof of Claim 1

We denote by the original graph and by the unwrapped

graph. We use for nodes in the original graph and for nodes

in the unwrapped graph. We define a mapping from nodes in

to nodes in . This mapping will say for each node in what

is the corresponding node in :

.

The unwrapped tree is, therefore, a graph and a correspon-

dence map. We now give the method of constructing both.

Pick an arbitrary node in , say . Set

. Iterate

times:

• gind all leaves of (start with the root);

• for each leaf , find all nodes in that neighbor

;

• add

nodes as children to , corresponding to all

neighbors of

except

, where is the parent

of .

The potential matrices and observations for each node in the

unwrapped network are copied from the corresponding nodes in

the loopy graph. That is, if

then

, and

(14)

Note that the unwrapped tree around after iterations is a

subtree of the unwrapped tree around after

iterations.

If we let the number of iterations

then the unwrapped

tree becomes a well-studied object in topology: the universal

covering of [16]. Roughly speaking, it is a topology that pre-

serves the local topology of the graph but is singly connected.

It is precisely this fact, that max-product gives the global op-

timum on a graph that has the same local topology as , that

makes sure that is a neighborhood maximum of

.

We now state some properties of .

1) Equal Neighbors Property: Every nonleaf node in has

the same number of neighbors as the corresponding node in

and the neighbors are in one-to-one correspondence. If

then for each

,

and for each

there exists

such that

.

This follows directly from the method of constructing .

2) Equal Conditional Probability Property: The probability

of a nonleaf node given its neighbors in is equal to the

probability of

given its neighbors. Formally, if

then

(15)

This follows from the Markov blanket property of MRFs [see

(5)] and the equal neighborhood property.

3) Isomoprhic Subtree Property: For any subtree

,

then for sufficiently large unwrapping count there exists an

isomorphic subtree

. The nodes of the subtrees are in

one-to-one correspondence: for each

there exists a

such that

and for each

,

.

To prove this we pick the root node of , as the initial node

around which to expand the unwrapped tree. By the method of

construction, the unwrapped tree after a number of iterations

equal to the depth of will be isomoprhic to and in one-to-one

correspondence. This gives us . For any other choice of initial

node for , the unwrapped tree starting with is a subtree of

.

4) Infinite Chain Property: For any loop

, there exists

an arbitrarily long chain

that is the unwrapping of .

Furthermore, if we denote by the length of the chain divided

by the length of the loop and by and the two endpoints

of the chain then

(16)

with the “boundary potentials”

(17)

Note that is independent of . and refer to all node

variables in the sets and , respectively.

The existence of the arbitrarily long chain follows from the

equal neighbor property, while (16) follows from the Markov

blanket property for MRFs [see (5)].

Another property of the unwrapped tree that we will need was

proven in [22]:

5) Periodic Assignment Lemma: Let be a fixed-point of

the max-product algorithm and the max-product assignment

in . Let be the unwrapped tree. Suppose we modify the ob-

servation potentials at the leaf nodes to include the messages

from the nodes to be added at the next stage of unwrapping.

Then, the MAP assignment in is a replication of : if

then

.

Using these properties, we can prove the main claim. To sim-

plify notation, we again assume that , the assignment based

on a fixed point of the max-product algorithm, is equal to zero

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WEISS AND FREEMAN: SOLUTIONS OF THE MAX-PRODUCT BELIEF-PROPAGATION ALGORITHM

741

. The periodic assignment property guarantees that we

can modify

for the leaf nodes so that the optimal as-

signment in the unwrapped tree is all zeros

(18)

Now, assume that we can choose a subtree of

and

change the assignment of these nodes to another value and

increase the posterior. Again, to simplify notation , assume that

maximizing value is

. By the Markov property, this

means that

(19)

Now, by the isomorphic subtree property we know that there

exists

that is isomorphic to . We also know that has

the same conditional probability given its neighbors as does.

Thus, (19) implies that

(20) in contradiction to (18). Hence, changing the value of a subtree from the converged values of the max-product algorithm cannot increase the posterior probability.
Now, assume we change the value of a single loop and increase the posterior probability. This means that

Fig. 4. Turbo code structure.
IV. EXAMPLES Claim 1 holds for arbitrary topologies and arbitrary potentials (both discrete and continuous nodes). We illustrate the implications of Claim 1 for specific networks.
A. Gaussian Graphical Models A Gaussian graphical model is one in which the joint distribu-
tion over is Gaussian. Weiss and Freeman [22] have analyzed belief propagation on such graphs. One of the results given there can also be proved using our Claim 1.

(21) By the infinite chain property, we know that for arbitrarily large

(22)

Therefore, (21) implies that

(23)

in contradiction to the optimality of

. Hence, changing

the value of a single loop cannot improve the posterior proba-

bility over .

Now we take two disconnected components

and assume that changing the values of

improves the

posterior probability. Again, by the Markov property

Corollary 1: For a Gaussian graphical model of arbitrary topology. If belief propagation converges, then the posterior marginal means calculated using belief propagation are exact.
Proof: For Gaussians, max-product and sum-product are identical. The posterior means calculated by belief propagation are therefore identical to the max-product assignment. By Claim 1, we know that this must be a neighborhood maximum of the posterior probability. But Gaussians are unimodal, hence, it must be a global maximum of the posterior probability. Thus, the max-product assignment must equal the MAP assignment, and the posterior means calculated using belief propagation are exact.
B. Turbo Codes

(24) but since and are not connected, this implies
(25) This implies that either
(26) or
(27) Thus, if or are either a tree or a single loop this leads to a contradiction. Hence, we cannot simultaneously change the values of two subtrees or of a subtree and a loop or of two disconnected loops and increase the posterior probability. Similarly, we can show that changing the value of any finite number of disconnected trees or single loops will not increase the posterior. This proves Claim 1.

Fig. 4 shows the pairwise Markov network corresponding to

the decoding of a turbo code with seven unknown bits. The top

and bottom nodes represent the two transmitted messages (one

for each constituent code). Thus, in this example, the top and

bottom nodes can take on 128 possible values. The potentials

between the message nodes and their observations give the pos-

terior probability of the transmitted word given one message,

and the potentials between the message nodes and the bit nodes

impose consistency. For example,

if

the first bit of

is equal to and zero otherwise. It

is easy to show [21] that sum-product belief propagation on this

graph gives the turbo decoding algorithm and max-product be-

lief propagation gives the modified turbo decoding algorithm of

[3].

Corollary 2: For a turbo code with arbitrary constituent codes. Let be a fixed-point max-product decoding. Then
for all within Hamming distance of . Proof: This follows from the main claim. Note that whenever we change any bits in the graph we also have to change the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

742

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

two message nodes so changing more than two bits will give

two loops.

An obvious consequence of Corollary 2 is that for a turbo

code with arbitrary constituent codes, the max-product decoding

is either the MAP decoding or at least Hamming distance

from the MAP decoding. In other words, the max-product al-

gorithm cannot converge to a decoding that is “almost” right: if

it is wrong, it must be wrong in at least three bits. In order for

max-product to converge to a wrong decoding, there must exist

a decoding that is at least distance from the MAP decoding,

and that decoding must have higher posterior probability than

anything in its neighborhood. If no such wrong decoding exists,

the max-product algorithm must either converge to the MAP de-

coding or fail to converge to a fixed point.

This behavior can be contrasted with the behavior of

“greedy” iterative decoding which increases the posterior

probability of the decoding at every iteration. Greedy iterative

decoding checks all bits and compares the posterior probability

with the current value of that bit versus flipping that bit. If the

posterior probability improved with flipping, the algorithm

flips it (this is equivalent to free energy decoding [15] at zero

temperature). This greedy decoding algorithm is guaranteed to

converge to a local maximum of the posterior probability.

To illustrate these properties we ran the following simu-

lations. We simulated transmitting turbo-encoded codewords

of length 7 bits over a Gaussian channel. We compared the

max-product decoding and the greedy decoding to the MAP

decoding (since we were dealing with such short block lengths

we could calculate the MAP decoding using exhaustive search).

We varied the noise of the Gaussian channel.

Fig. 5 shows the results. Fig. 5(b) shows the probability of

convergence for both algorithms. Convergence was determined

numerically for both algorithms: if the standard deviation of the

messages over 10 successive iterations was less than

we

declared convergence. If this criterion was not achieved in 100

iterations, we called that run a failure to converge.

Fig. 5(a) shows the probability of a correct decoding (i.e., a

decoding equal to the MAP decoding) for the two algorithms

on the cases for which both converged. When max-product con-

verges, it always finds the MAP decoding. In contrast, greedy

decoding very frequently converges to a wrong decoding.

C. Two-Dimensional (2-D) Grids
Fig. 2(a) shows a 2-D grid. For 2-D grids, it is easy to show the following corollaries.
Corollary 3: For 2-D grids of arbitrary size and arbitrary potentials. Any configuration is either 1) in the SLT region of the max-product assignment or 2) in the SLT region of an assignment that is in the SLT region of the max-product assignment.
Corollary 4: For 2-D grids of size . The size of the SLT neighborhood increases exponentially with .
Both corollaries follow from the fact that we can change the value of all the even (or odd) rows to an arbitrary value.
We compared greedy decoding to max-product decoding on the grid. Max-product found the MAP decoding in 99% of the runs and when it was wrong, its assignment was always the

(a)
(b) Fig. 5. Results of small turbo-code simulation. (a) Percent correct decodings for max-product algorithm, compared with greedy gradient ascent in the posterior probability. (b) Comparison of convergence results of the two algorithms.
second best. In comparison, greedy decoding found the MAP assignment only on 44% of the runs and the ranking was anywhere between 4 and 61.
V. DISCUSSION The idea of using the computation tree to prove properties of the max-product assignment was also used in [23], [20], [8], [11]. The main tool in those analyses was the fact that the maxproduct assignment was the global optimum in the unwrapped tree. There are two problems with generalizing this approach to arbitrary topologies. First, the global optimum depends on the numerosity of node replicas in the unwrapped tree. That is, different nodes in may have a different number of replicas in . This leads to a distinction between balanced (or nonskewed) graphs [20], [8] and unbalanced (or skewed) graphs. Balanced graphs are those for which all nodes in have asymptotically the same number of replicas in . For unbalanced graphs, it is much more difficult to relate global optimality in to optimality in . Second, the global optimum in the unwrapped tree contains contributions from the interior nodes (that have exactly the same neighbors in as do their corresponding nodes in ) and contributions from the leaf nodes (that are missing some of the neighbors in ). Unfortunately, for most graphs , the number of leaf nodes grows at the same rate as the nonleaf nodes and cannot be neglected from the analysis.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WEISS AND FREEMAN: SOLUTIONS OF THE MAX-PRODUCT BELIEF-PROPAGATION ALGORITHM

743

• find all of degree . For each such remove it from the

graph and directly connect the two variables nodes that

were connected to those function nodes. That is, if is

a degree– node connected to

we directly connect

and and set

.

• for all of degree

, replace the node with a new

variable node . The variable node

represents

the joint configuration of all the that were connected

to . That is, if is connected to

then the

new variable is a vector with three components

(a)

. Set the potentials

Finally, add an observation node

and set

It is easy to show that 1) the joint distribution over the vari-

ables

in the pairwise Markov graph is exactly

and 2) the belief propagation algorithm in the pairwise Markov

graph is equivalent to the belief propagation algorithm in [7].

(b)
Fig. 6. Any factor graph can be converted into an MRF with pairwise potentials that represents exactly the same probability distribution over variables. When this conversion is done, the belief propagation algorithm for the pairwise Markov graph is equivalent to the belief propagation algorithm on the factor graph.

B. Converting a Junction Graph to a Pairwise Markov Graph

A junction graph [1] is a graph in which vertices represent

“local domains” of a global function. Thus, if

fac-

torizes so that

(28)

In this analysis, on the other hand, we used primarily the local properties of the computation tree. No matter what the topology of is, it is always the case that the local structure of is the same as the local structure of . Thus, the numerosity of the nodes in and the ratio of leaf nodes to nonleaf nodes is irrelevant. In this way, we can analyze the max-product assignment in arbitrary topologies.
Although we exploited the local properties, we would like to extend our analysis using the global properties as well. Our simulation results indicate that the max-product assignment is better than our analytical results guarantee. For example, in the turbo-code simulations we found that the posterior probability often contained two SLT maxima but for all these cases, maxproduct found the global maximum (and not the second SLT maximum). In current work, we are looking into using the global properties of the computation tree to extend our analysis.
APPENDIX RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN BELIEF-PROPAGATION SCHEMES
A. Converting a Factor Graph to a Pairwise Markov Graph

then the two local domains are

and

Edges between these vertices correspond to “communication

links” in a message-passing scheme for calculating marginals

of .

Aji et al. showed that for such a message-passing algorithm

to exist, the junction graph must possess the “running intersec-

tion property”—the subset of nodes whose domains include

together with the edges containing these nodes must form a con-

nected graph. We now show that junction graphs are equivalent

to pairwise Markov graphs.

To show this, we leave the graph between unchanged and

add “observation” nodes such that

. We

set

if the two nodes agree on the value of any

that exists in both domains and zero otherwise. Note that the

running intersection property guarantees that any two nodes (not

necessarily neighboring) must agree on the value of a common

for the joint distribution to be nonzero. When the potentials

are set in this way, it is easy to see that the joint distribution

over in the pairwise Markov graph is exactly and that the

belief propagation algorithm in the Markov graph is equivalent

to the GDL algorithm in [1].

A factor graph [7] is a bipartite graph (see Fig. 6) with function nodes denoted by filled squares and variable nodes denoted by unfilled circles. The function nodes denote a decomposition of a “global” function into a product of “local” functions . We will assume that represents a joint distribution over the variable nodes. The method of converting a factor graph into a pairwise Markov graph is to remove the function nodes. Specifically

REFERENCES
[1] S. M. Aji and R. J. McEliece, “The generalized distributive law,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 46, pp. 325–343, Mar. 2000.
[2] S. M. Aji, G. B. Horn, and R. J. McEliece, “On the convergence of iterative decoding on graphs with a single cycle,” in Proc. 1998 IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Cambridge, MA, Aug. 1998, p. 276.
[3] S. Benedetto, G. Montorsi, D. Divsalar, and F. Pollara, “Soft-output decoding algorithms in iterative decoding of turbo codes,” Jet Propulsion Lab., Pasadena, CA, Tech. Rep. 42-124, JPL TDA, 1996 .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

744

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

[4] D. P. Bertsekas, Dynamic Programming: Deterministic and Stochastic

Models. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1987.

[5] G. D. Forney, F. R. Kschischang, and B. Marcus, “Iterative decoding of

tail-biting trellisses,” presented at the 1998 Information Theory Work-

shop, San Diego, CA, 1998 .

[6] W. T. Freeman, E. C. Pasztor, and O. T. Carmichael, “Learning to es-

timate scenes from images,” Int. J. Comput. Vision, vol. 40, pp. 25–47,

Nov. 2000.

[7] B. J. Frey, R. Koetter, and A. Vardy, “Skewness and pseudocodewords in

iterative decoding,” in Proc. 1998 IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory,

Cambridge, MA, Aug. 1998 , p. 148.

[8]

, “Signal space characterization of iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans.

Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 766–781, Feb. 2001.

[9] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA:

MIT Press, 1963 .

[10] S. Geman and D. Geman, “Stochastic relaxation, Gibbs distributions,

and the Bayesian restoration of images,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Ma-

chine Intell, vol. PAMI-6, pp. 721–741, Nov. 1984 .

[11] G. B. Horn, “Iterative decoding and pseudocodewords,” Ph.D. disserta-

tion, Dept. Elec. Eng., Calif. Inst. Technol., Pasadena, CA, May 1999 .

[12] F. V. Jensen, An Introduction to Bayesian Networks. Berlin, Germany:

Springer-Verlag, 1996 .

[13] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and

the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp.

498–519, Feb. 2001.

[14] S. Lauritzen, Graphical Models. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford Univ. Press,

1996 .

[15] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse

matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.

[16] J. R. Munkres, Topology: A First Course. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Pren-

tice-Hall, 1975 .

[17] K. P. Murphy, Y. Weiss, and M. I. Jordan, “Loopy belief propagation

for approximate inference: An empirical study,” in Proc. Uncertainty in

Artificial Inrwlligence, 1999 .

[18] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of

Plausible Inference. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.

[19] S. E. Shimony, “Finding the MAPs for belief networks is NP-hard,” Ar-

tificial Intell., vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 399–410, 1994 .

[20] Y. Weiss, “Belief propagation and revision in networks with loops,” MIT

AI Lab., Tech. Rep. 1616, 1997 .

[21]

, “Correctness of local probability propagation in graphical models

with loops,” Neural Comput., vol. 12, pp. 1–42, 2000.

[22] Y. Weiss and W. Freeman, “Correctness of belief propagation in

Gaussian graphical models of arbitrary topology,” Neural Comp., to be

published.

[23] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation,

Dept. Elec. Eng., Univ. Linköping, Linköping, Sweden, 1996.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

