924

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, MAY 2001

Performance Analysis and Code Optimization of Low Density Parity-Check Codes on Rayleigh Fading
Channels
Jilei Hou, Student Member, IEEE, Paul H. Siegel, Fellow, IEEE, and Laurence B. Milstein, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—A numerical method has recently been presented to determine the noise thresholds of low density parity-check (LDPC) codes that employ the message passing decoding algorithm on the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. In this paper, we apply the technique to the uncorrelated flat Rayleigh fading channel. Using a nonlinear code optimization technique, we optimize irregular LDPC codes for such a channel. The thresholds of the optimized irregular LDPC codes are very close to the Shannon limit for this channel. For example, at rate one-half, the optimized irregular LDPC code has a threshold only 0.07 dB away from the capacity of the channel. Furthermore, we compare simulated performance of the optimized irregular LDPC codes and turbo codes on a land mobile channel, and the results indicate that at a block size of 3072, irregular LDPC codes can outperform turbo codes over a wide range of mobile speeds.
Index Terms—Code optimization, density evolution, low-density parity-check codes, Rayleigh fading channels.
I. INTRODUCTION
R ECENT advances [1], [2] in error correcting codes have shown that, using the message passing decoding algorithm, irregular low density parity-check (LDPC) codes can achieve reliable transmission at signal-to-noise ratios (SNR) extremely close to the Shannon limit on the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, outperforming turbo codes of the same block size and code rate. LDPC codes have certain advantages, such as simple descriptions of their code structure and fully parallelizable decoding implementations. With iterative message passing decoders, LDPC codes exhibit an interesting noise threshold effect [1]: if the noise level of the channel is smaller than a certain noise threshold, the bit error probability goes to zero as the block size goes to infinity; if the noise level is above the noise threshold, the probability of error is always bounded away from zero. Gallager [3] first presented this result for regular LDPC codes for the binary symmetric channel (BSC). Luby et al. [4] showed that the noise threshold effect also exists for irregular LDPC codes, and they designed some irregular LDPC codes whose performance is very close
Manuscript received May 1, 2000; revised November 10, 2000. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant NCR-9725568. This paper was presented in part at the Thirty-Eighth Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, October 4–6, 2000.
The authors are with the Center for Wireless Communications, Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0407 USA (e-mail: jhou@cwc.ucsd.edu, psiegel@cwc.ucsd.edu, milstein@ece.ucsd.edu).
Publisher Item Identifier S 0733-8716(01)03904-X.

to the Shannon limit on the erasure channel. Richardson, et al. [1] generalized this idea to a variety of message passing decoding algorithms, including the full version of the belief propagation algorithm [5] which can be applied to a very broad class of binary-input symmetric channels, such as the AWGN channel. They developed a numerical technique, called density evolution, to analyze the performance of the belief propagation decoding algorithm, enabling the determination of noise thresholds to any desired degree of accuracy. In this paper, we apply this technique to the uncorrelated flat Rayleigh fading channel.
The code optimization of irregular LDPC codes is a nonlinear cost function minimization problem, a problem where differential evolution has been shown to be effective and robust [7]. This technique has been successfully applied to the design of good irregular LDPC codes for both the erasure channel [8] and the AWGN channel [2]. We show that this technique is also effective in the code optimization of irregular LDPC codes for the uncorrelated Rayleigh fading channel, and the threshold values of the optimized codes are extremely close to the capacity of this channel.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II briefly reviews the basic concepts of LDPC codes. In Section III, we review the decoding of LDPC codes and the technique of density evolution for threshold calculations on the AWGN channel. We then extend and apply this method to the uncorrelated flat Rayleigh fading channel. Section IV addresses two important properties related to the convergence of density evolution: symmetry and stability. We discuss the code optimization technique in Section V. In Section VI, we present the threshold calculations and code optimization results for the uncorrelated Rayleigh fading channel. We also compare simulation results for the optimized irregular LDPC codes and turbo codes on an uncorrelated, as well as correlated, Rayleigh fading channel. In Section VII, we present our conclusions.

II. LOW DENSITY PARITY-CHECK (LDPC) CODES

An LDPC code is a linear block code specified by a very

sparse parity-check matrix. As a linear block code, an LDPC

code can be represented by a bipartite graph. Suppose the low

density parity-check matrix has columns and rows (the

designed code rate

); the corresponding bipar-

tite graph consists of bit nodes, check nodes, and a certain

number of edges. Each bit node, called a “left node”, represents

a bit of the codeword. Each check node, called a “right node”,

0733–8716/01$10.00 © 2001 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HOU et al.: PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS AND CODE OPTIMIZATION OF LOW DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES ON RAYLEIGH FADING CHANNELS

925

Fig. 1. Bipartite graph representations of LDPC codes.

Fig. 2. Message passing decoder of LDPC codes.

represents a parity check of the code. An edge exists between a

bit node and a check node if and only if there is a 1 in the corre-

sponding entry in the parity-check matrix. We refer to the corre-

sponding bit node and check node as the left and right neighbor

nodes of the edge.

Regular LDPC codes are those for which all nodes of the

same type have the same degree, where the degree of a node

is the number of edges for which it is a neighbor node. A

regular LDPC code has a bipartite graph in which all bit nodes

have degree and all check nodes have degree . Correspond-

ingly, in the parity-check matrix , all the column weights are

and all the row weights are . Shown below is a parity-check

matrix of a

regular LDPC code. Fig. 1(a) shows its asso-

ciated bipartite graph.

For irregular LDPC codes, the bit nodes (correspondingly the

check nodes) can have different degrees. We say an edge has left

(resp., right) degree if its left (resp., right) neighbor node has

degree . An irregular LDPC code ensemble is specified by a

degree distribution pair

or its corresponding generating

functions

and

,

where (resp., ) is the fraction of edges with left (resp.,

right) degree and

(resp.,

) is the maximal left

(resp., right) degree of any edge. The bipartite graph for an irreg-

ular LDPC code is shown in Fig. 1(b), where

, and

. The intuition behind the use of

irregular LDPC codes is quite simple: in the decoding process

of irregular LDPC codes, there exists a phenomenon called the

“wave effect” [4], whereby the bit nodes with high degrees tend

to approach their correct values very quickly, and in turn, they

provide more reliable information to the check nodes and sub-

sequently to the bit nodes with lower degrees.

III. DECODING ANALYSIS

The decoding algorithm for LDPC codes is based on the idea

of belief propagation [5]. As described in [2] and [9], for each

edge of the underlying bipartite graph, the decoding algorithm

iteratively updates two types of log a posteriori probability ratio

(LAPPR) messages, and . The quantity is the message sent

from the bit node to the check node along a connecting edge

, which is expressed as

,

where denotes the value of the bit node, and denotes all the

messages coming from the channel and the edges connected to

the bit node, other than edge . The quantity is the message

sent from the check node to the bit node along an edge , which

is defined as

, where

denotes the messages coming from the edges connected to the

check node, other than edge . It is important to note that during

the message updating, the incoming message along edge is ex-

cluded in determining the outgoing message along edge . That

is, similar to turbo decoding [10], only extrinsic information is

circulated, which turns out to be an important property of good

message passing decoders and which also makes the analysis of

the decoding algorithm feasible [1]. Fig. 2 illustrate the basic

operations in the decoding algorithm.

After such iterations, the algorithm would produce the exact

LAPPRs of all the bits if the bipartite graph defined by the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

926

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, MAY 2001

parity-check matrix contains no loops of length up to [9].

If we assume that the graph is loop-free, we can analyze the

decoding algorithm directly because the incoming messages to

every node are independent. Also, by the general concentration

theorem of [1], for almost all the graphs in a code ensemble

and almost all inputs, the decoder performance will con-

verge to that of a corresponding loop-free graph as the codeword

length approaches infinity.

Based on the assumption above, the following decoding anal-

ysis tries to track the average fraction of incorrect messages that

is passed in each iteration of the decoding algorithm. Here, the

fraction of incorrect messages is averaged over all the bits of a

codeword.

First, we consider a regular

LDPC code. Using the fact

that LDPC codes are linear block codes and both the channel and

the decoding algorithm considered are symmetric [1], we as-

sume that the all-zero codeword is sent. Assuming BPSK mod-

ulation

, it is easy to see that the fraction of

incorrect messages that is passed is equal to the fraction of mes-

sages with negative signs. Considering the message passed from

the bit node to the check node, we have [2]

(1)

where is the initial message conditioned on the channel

output, and

, are the incoming LAPPR

messages from all the incident edges, other than edge . Since

and are all random variables, the density function of is

the convolution of the density functions of all the elements in

(1). This convolution can be efficiently computed in the Fourier

domain. Let denote the density of

denote the density

of after iterations, and denote the density of after

iterations. Letting denote the Fourier transform operation

(2)

we need to apply logarithm operations on both sides of (4) to change the product into the pair of summations

and

(5)

where the sign function

if

, and

other-

wise. Note that the summation for (5) is the mod-2 summation

of the sign parts and the real summation of the magnitude parts.

Therefore, the density of can be computed in the Fourier do-

main in a manner similar to the computation of the density of

in (2).

This two-phase computation algorithm, called density evolu-

tion, makes it possible to track the fraction of incorrect mes-

sages,

. At a certain noise level, we can run this algorithm

iteratively until the error probability

either goes to zero

or stops at a finite probability of error. The noise threshold, ,

denotes the supremum of all values of the noise level such

that

, where is the standard deviation of

the noise.

The density evolution algorithm can be extended to the ir-

regular LDPC codes with only minor modifications, taking into

consideration the irregular degree distribution pair. For example,

at a bit node, we have

(6)

where

is as defined above. In the fol-

lowing, we briefly review the application of the algorithm above

to the AWGN channel, and then show how to apply it to the un-

correlated Rayleigh fading channel.

where

can be set to , and is defined as 1 if

and if

. We can write

, where is sup-

ported on

and is supported on

. Therefore,

the fraction of incorrect messages after iterations can be de-

fined as1

A. AWGN
If the code symbol is mapped into the signal point , the sampled matched filter output has the conditional
probability density function (pdf)

(7) (3)

where

is the variance of the noise, and

On the other hand, considering the message passed from the is the code rate. Assuming

,

check node to the bit node , we have [2]

the message observed from the channel can be expressed as

(4)

(8)

where

are the incoming LAPPRs from the

neighbor edges, other than edge . To use the same method as

described for the bit node to calculate the density function ,

In the decoding analysis, since we assume the all-zero codeword

is sent, i.e.,

, a change of variable in (7) yields the density

function of

1In general, if density function P has a point mass at zero, half of the mass

(9)

should be included into P e(l).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HOU et al.: PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS AND CODE OPTIMIZATION OF LOW DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES ON RAYLEIGH FADING CHANNELS

927

which is a Gaussian density with mean and variance , Averaging over the density function of , we get and this density function can be used in the density evolution analysis.

B. Uncorrelated Rayleigh Fading
For the uncorrelated Rayleigh fading channel, the conditional pdf of the matched filter output is
(16)

(10) where

and

.

where is the normalized Rayleigh fading factor with

and density function

.

1) Ideal Side Information (SI): When we have ideal SI, the

initial message passed from the bit node to the check node is

(11)

In the decoding analysis, assuming tional density function

has the condi-

IV. SYMMETRY AND STABILITY

Symmetry is an important property associated with the mes-

sage distribution in the density evolution of belief propagation.

As defined in [2], a density function on

is sym-

metric if it satisfies

for all

, and

it is shown that the initial message distributions for all the bi-

nary-input symmetric channels discussed in [2] satisfy this con-

dition. For the initial message density function of the AWGN

channel, (9), it is easy to verify that

(12)

To get the unconditional density function of over the density function of so that

, we average (12) (13)

(17)

It was shown in [2] that the symmetry property is invariant

under density evolution, i.e., if is symmetric, then the density

functions of and calculated in density evolution are also

symmetric. It was next proved in [2] that if the density function

of is symmetric, the average fraction of incorrect messages

as defined in (3) is a nonincreasing function of and will always

converge to a certain value, which might be zero.

In [2], the symmetry property is then used to prove another

important property of density evolution, which is summarized

as follows: There exists an

such that if density evolution

is initialized with a symmetric message density satisfying

, the fraction of incorrect messages will con-

verge to zero under density evolution if

(18) 2) No Side Information (No SI): When no SI is available,

following [11], we assume that

is Gaussian distributed where the parameter is defined as

in the region of the most probable , and we approximate as

(19) (14)

where function is

. The corresponding conditional density (15)

Conversely, if

, then the fraction of incorrect

messages is strictly bounded away from 0.

In [2], (18) is referred to as the stability condition for the

channel with initial message density . For example, for the

AWGN channel, the stability condition is given by [2]

(20)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

928

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, MAY 2001

We now show that the initial message density function of the uncorrelated Rayleigh fading channel with SI also satisfies the symmetry property, and then we derive the stability condition for this channel. For the density function of the uncorrelated Rayleigh fading channel with SI, as defined in (13), it is easily verified that
(21) That is, the initial message density function of the uncorrelated Rayleigh fading channel with SI satisfies the symmetry condition. From (19) and (13), we have

V. CODE OPTIMIZATION: DIFFERENTIAL EVOLUTION

Since we can determine the threshold value for each LDPC

code ensemble defined by its degree distribution pair , we

try to find the degree distribution pair which yields the largest

possible noise threshold for a given channel. This problem is

a nonlinear cost function minimization problem with contin-

uous space parameters, a problem where differential evolution

has been shown to be effective and robust [7]. This technique

has been successfully applied to the design of good irregular

LDPC codes for both the erasure channel [8] and the AWGN

channel [2]. For the AWGN channel, Richardson et al. [2] found

the best degree distribution pair for rate- codes, which has a

threshold within 0.06 dB of capacity! We now show that this

method is also very effective in the design of good irregular

LDPC codes for a Rayleigh fading channel with SI.

Before describing the differential evolution technique, we

need to remove the dependencies among the components of

the degree distribution pair. It is easy to verify that the degree

distribution pair

satisfies the following constraint

(24)

where

and is the code rate. Also, we have

(25)

(22)
i.e., the stability condition for the uncorrelated Rayleigh fading channel with SI is
(23)
In the next section, we will numerically optimize the degree distribution pair for this channel, and we will verify empirically that they fulfill condition (23). As to the Rayleigh fading channel without SI, the initial density function (16) does not have the symmetry property. This is because the expression (14) for the message, , is only an approximation. Nevertheless, as shown in the numerical results, the density evolution technique for determining the thresholds still works quite well for this channel.

Using (24) and (25) to solve for

gives (26), shown at the

bottom of the page.

Next, let denote the number of free elements of the degree

distribution pair

. The dependences (25) and (26), com-

bined with the fact that

, show that

. We form an -dimensional parameter vector

, and our goal is to optimally

choose the elements of this vector so that the corresponding de-

gree distribution pair yields the largest noise threshold.

Differential evolution is a parallel direct search technique.

Starting from an initial set of vectors, the algorithm iteratively

updates each vector in the set simultaneously until a superior

vector is found which has the best cost function value. By up-

dating all the vectors of the set in parallel, the algorithm can

help the vectors escape local minima and prevent misconver-

gence. The differential evolution algorithm that we used in the

code optimization is based on [8] with minor modifications. In

the following, we briefly review it.

1) Initialization — We start with a certain noise level ,

which is the standard deviation of the noise. For the first

generation

, we randomly choose

-dimen-

sional vectors

, where

is a constant that remains fixed during the optimiza-

tion process [7]. For each vector , we run the den-

(26)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HOU et al.: PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS AND CODE OPTIMIZATION OF LOW DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES ON RAYLEIGH FADING CHANNELS

929

sity evolution as discussed in Section III for a certain

number of iterations (e.g., 1000) and record its residual

error

, i.e., the fraction of incorrect messages as de-

fined by (3). We label the vector with the smallest

as the best vector,

.

2) Mutation — For the next generation,

, new vec-

tors are generated according to the following mutation

scheme. For each

, randomly choose

distinct integers

and from

, each

different from the index , and define

(27)

where is a real constant which controls the amplifica-

tion of the differential variation. We choose

in

our optimization [8]. The use of two vector differences

increases the variation, thereby helping to prevent the al-

gorithm from getting into a local minimum. For each new

vector, we run the density evolution for the same number

of iterations and record its residual error,

.

3) Selection — For each

, com-

pare

and

. If

is larger than

is set to

. Otherwise,

is set to . We denote the vector with the smallest

residual error by

.

4) Stopping criterion — If the residual error

of

the vector

is not zero (practically, if it is not

less than a very small value, e.g., ), return to step 2.

Otherwise, increase the noise level slightly, and return

to step 1. If the noise level is increased to a value for which

the residual error of the best vector does not converge to

zero after a very long running time, the process is stopped.

We label the vector whose residual error goes to zero at

the highest possible noise level as the best vector, and the

corresponding noise level as the noise threshold .

VI. RESULTS

A. Threshold Calculation and Code Optimization

Using the density evolution technique discussed in Section

III, we can calculate the threshold values of LDPC codes for

both the AWGN channel and the uncorrelated Rayleigh fading

channel with or without SI. For convenience, in the following

results, we will express the threshold by both and its cor-

responding

(dB). Since

,

the threshold can also be defined as the smallest

such

that

. Fig. 3 compares the thresholds and

the simulation results of rate- regular

LDPC codes

on both the AWGN channel and the uncorrelated Rayleigh

fading channel, where both ideal SI and no SI are considered.

As shown, the thresholds for regular

LDPC codes on

the AWGN channel, the fading channel with SI, and the

fading channel with no SI, are 1.10 dB, 3.06 dB, and 4.06 dB,

respectively. The

LDPC codes used in the simulations

are of block size2

and . The numerical threshold

results are very consistent with the simulation results, and we

2In the simulation results, the block size used is codeword block size.

Fig. 3. Comparison of thresholds and simulation results for rate-1=2; (3; 6) regular LDPC codes on the AWGN channel, and the uncorrelated Rayleigh fading channels with or without SI. The codes used in simulations are of block size 10 and 10 .

conjecture that as the block size goes to infinity, the simulation

results will converge to the thresholds. If the conjecture is

true, the threshold can be considered as the capacity of the

corresponding code parameters, i.e., the best performance that

such an LDPC code can achieve with the message passing

decoder. The results show that the regular

LDPC code

suffers a loss of nearly 2 dB and 3 dB, respectively, in the

fading channels with SI and without SI, relative to the AWGN

channel.

Combining the density evolution and differential evolution

techniques as described above, we searched for good degree dis-

tribution pairs with constraints on the maximal left degree

for the uncorrelated Rayleigh fading channel with SI. Similar

to what has been observed for the erasure channel [8] and the

AWGN channel [2], we found that for the fading channel with

SI, good degree distribution pairs exist with only a few nonzero

terms. Therefore, in the results shown, we use only three con-

secutive nonzero right degrees and limit the nonzero degrees on

the left to the degrees 2, 3,

, and several carefully chosen

degrees in-between, which greatly reduces the search space and

consequently saves on search time.

The resulting degree distribution pairs of rate- codes for

the Rayleigh fading channel with SI are shown in Table I for

, and . Each column corresponds to one

particular degree distribution pair. For each degree distribution

pair, the coefficients of and are given, as well as the noise

threshold , and the corresponding

in dB. Also

listed is , the maximal value of satisfying the stability

condition (23). As can be seen,

for every degree

distribution pair in the table, which confirms that these degree

distribution pairs satisfy the stability condition. Also, the higher

the maximal left degree, the better the performance of the code.

Similar to the results that Richardson et al. [2] obtained for the

AWGN channel, the thresholds of the degree distribution pairs

optimized for the fading channel with SI are very close to the ca-

pacity of this channel (the capacity can be calculated following

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

930

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, MAY 2001

TABLE I

GOOD DEGREE DISTRIBUTION PAIRS OF RATE-1=2 FOR THE UNCORRELATED

RAYLEIGH FADING CHANNELS WITH SI AND WITH CONSTRAINTS ON THE

MAXIMAL LEFT DEGREES d

= 10; 20; 30 AND 50. FOR EACH

 DISTRIBUTION PAIR THE NOISE THRESHOLD VALUE AND THE

CORRESPONDING (E =N ) (dB) ARE GIVEN. THE MAXIMAL VALUE OF

 SATISFYING CONDITION (23),  , IS GIVEN FOR  =  AND THE

GIVEN  (1). NOTE THAT THE CAPACITY FOR THIS CHANNEL AT CODE

RATE 1=2 IS 1.830 dB

Fig. 4. Comparison of the threshold values on the AWGN channel of the
rate-1=2 degree distribution pairs optimized for the AWGN channel and the
fading channel with SI. For each distribution pair, the gap between its threshold
value for the AWGN channel and the capacity of this channel is shown. Note
that the capacity for the AWGN channel at rate 1=2 is 0.1870 dB.

the method introduced in [12]). At rate , the capacity of the

fading channel with SI is 1.830 dB. The degree distribution pair

with

has the threshold of 1.900 dB, which is only

0.07 dB away from the capacity! Compared to the regular

LDPC code whose threshold on this channel is 3.06 dB, opti-

mized irregular LDPC codes have much better thresholds.

It is interesting to see how the degree distribution pairs op-

timized for the fading channel with SI perform on the AWGN

channel, and vice-versa. We compare the rate- degree distri-

bution pairs optimized for the AWGN channel (refer to [2] for

the detailed degree distribution pairs) and the degree distribution

pairs optimized for the fading channel with SI in Figs. 4 and 5.

In Fig. 4, for each degree distribution pair, we show the gap be-

tween its threshold value for the AWGN channel and the AWGN

channel capacity for rate . In Fig. 5, for each degree distri-

bution pair, we show the gap between its threshold value for the

fading channel with SI and the capacity for that channel for rate

. It can be seen that the degree distribution pairs optimized

for the fading channel with SI are also very good distribution

pairs on the AWGN channel, e.g., considering the degree distri-

bution pair with

optimized for the fading channel

with SI, its threshold value for the AWGN channel is only 0.18

dB away from the channel capacity. Similar results can be ob-

served from Fig. 5 for the converse situation. As suggested in

[4], in the construction of block codes, it is better to have high

degree for the bit nodes, since the more information a bit node

Fig. 5. Comparison of the threshold values on the fading channel with SI of
the rate-1=2 degree distribution pairs optimized for the AWGN channel and the
fading channel with SI. For each distribution pair, the gap between its threshold
value for the fading channel with SI and the capacity of this channel is shown.
Note that the capacity for the fading channel with SI at rate 1=2 is 1.830 dB.

gets from its check nodes, the more reliably it can provide its

own correct value. On the other hand, it is better for a check

node to have low degree, in order to provide more accurate infor-

mation to its bit nodes. These two competing requirements will

have different balances for different channels. The degree distri-

bution pair with

optimized for the AWGN channel

[2] has average right degree 10.24. However, the degree distribu-

tion pair with

optimized for the fading channel with

SI has average right degree 9.66. The results suggest that, com-

pared to the AWGN channel, the fading channel with SI favors

lower average right degree. The same relations can be observed

for the degree distribution pairs with

, and .

Tables II and III give the rate- degree distribution pairs we

optimized for the AWGN channel and the uncorrelated Rayleigh

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HOU et al.: PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS AND CODE OPTIMIZATION OF LOW DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES ON RAYLEIGH FADING CHANNELS

931

TABLE II

GOOD DEGREE DISTRIBUTION PAIRS OF RATE-1=3 FOR THE AWGN

CHANNELS AND WITH CONSTRAINTS ON THE MAXIMAL LEFT DEGREES

d

= 10; 16; 30 AND 50. FOR EACH DISTRIBUTION PAIR THE NOISE

THRESHOLD VALUE  E AND THE CORRESPONDING ( =N ) (dB) ARE

GIVEN. THE MAXIMAL VALUE OF  SATISFYING CONDITION (20),  , IS

0 GIVEN FOR  =  AND THE GIVEN  (1). NOTE THAT THE CAPACITY FOR
THIS CHANNEL AT CODE RATE 1=3 IS 0:4954 dB.

TABLE III
= GOOD DEGREE DISTRIBUTION PAIRS OF RATE-1 3 FOR THE UNCORRELATED

RAYLEIGH FADING CHANNEL WITH SI AND WITH CONSTRAINTS ON THE

MAXIMAL LEFT DEGREES d

= 10; 16; 30 AND 50. FOR EACH

 DISTRIBUTION PAIR THE NOISE THRESHOLD VALUE AND THE

CORRESPONDING (E =N ) (dB) ARE GIVEN. THE MAXIMAL VALUE of

 SATISFYING CONDITION (23),  , IS GIVEN FOR  =  AND THE

GIVEN  (1). NOTE THAT THE CAPACITY FOR THIS CHANNEL AT CODE

RATE 1=3 IS 0.4885 dB.

fading channel with SI. Similar to the rate- case, the thresh-

olds of the degree distribution pairs approach the corresponding

channel capacities. The threshold of the degree distribution pair

optimized for the AWGN channel with

is only

0.07 dB away from the channel capacity. The threshold of the

degree distribution pair with

optimized for the

fading channel with SI is only 0.08 dB away from the capacity

of the corresponding channel. Again, we compare both classes

of rate- degree distribution pairs on the AWGN channel and

the fading channel with SI in Figs. 6 and 7, respectively. It turns

out that, as for rate- degree distribution pairs, the rate-

degree distribution pairs optimized for the fading channel with

SI are also very good distribution pairs for the AWGN channel

and vice-versa.

B. BER Simulation Results

As shown in Fig. 3, the threshold values precisely predict the

asymptotic performance as the block length of the LDPC codes

approaches infinity. We are also interested in the performance

of the optimized irregular LDPC codes when finite block size is

considered. In the following results, we considered four rate-

LDPC codes at a block size of 3072. The first one, LDPC ir1,

is constructed according to the degree distribution pair with

optimized for the AWGN channel, as shown in

Table II. The degree distribution pair has thresholds of

dB and 0.78 dB on the AWGN channel and the fading channel

with SI, respectively. Note that the capacities for these two chan-

nels are

dB and 0.488 dB, respectively. The second one,

LDPC ir2, is constructed according to the degree distribution

pair with

optimized for the fading channel with

SI, as shown in Table III, with thresholds of

dB and 0.68

dB on the AWGN and fading channel with SI, respectively. The

third one, LDPC ir3, is constructed according to a degree distri-

bution pair3 with

, which has thresholds of

dB and 0.96 dB on the AWGN and fading channel with SI, re-

spectively. The last one, a quasi-regular4 LDPC code R with all

bit nodes degree-3, half of the check nodes degree-4, and half of

the check nodes degree-5, has thresholds of 0.85 dB and 2.13 dB

on the AWGN channel and the fading channel with SI, respec-

tively. Among the four codes, ir1, ir2, and ir3 are all very good

codes on both the AWGN channel and the fading channel with

SI, whereas ir1 has the best threshold on the AWGN channel and

ir2 has the best threshold on the fading channel with SI. In the

construction of the parity-check matrices for the three irregular

LDPC codes, we made all the degree-2 nodes loop-free and all

of them correspond to nonsystematic bits. For all four codes, we

3This degree distribution pair was taken from Sae-Young Chung’s web site: http://truth.mit.edu/~sychung/gaopt.html, which is an irregular LDPC codes design applet for design of good LDPC codes on an AWGN channel. The design method assumes Gaussian message densities, which is suboptimal since it is not true for the messages passed from check nodes to bit nodes. However, it turns out that this approximation makes the design much faster, yet still very effective. Refer to [6] for details.
4For rate-1=3 (j; k) regular LDPC codes, if we choose j = 3, we cannot make k to be an integer by the constraints of (24). Therefore, we choose half of
the check nodes degree-4 and half of the check nodes degree-5. We denote this
code as a rate-1=3 quasi-regular LDPC code.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

932

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, MAY 2001

Fig. 6. Comparison of the threshold values on the AWGN channel of the rate-1=3 degree distribution pairs optimized for the AWGN channel and the fading channel with SI. For each distribution pair, the gap between its threshold
0 value for the AWGN channel and the capacity of this channel is shown. Note
that the capacity for the AWGN channel at rate 1=3 is 0:4954 dB.

Fig. 8. Simulation of rate-1=3, block size 3072, quasi-regular LDPC code R, irregular LDPC codes ir1, ir2, and ir3 on both an AWGN channel and an uncorrelated Rayleigh fading channel with SI.

Fig. 7. Comparison of the threshold values on the fading channel with SI of the rate-1=3 degree distribution pairs optimized for the AWGN channel and the fading channel with SI. For each distribution pair, the gap between its threshold
value for the fading channel with SI and the capacity of this channel is shown. Note that the capacity for the fading channel with SI at rate 1=3 is 0.4885 dB.

avoided length-4 loops in the parity-check matrices. For the ir-

regular codes, the bit error rates (BER) are given for systematic

bits only. For the regular code, the BER is given for all bits.

Fig. 8 compares the simulation results of these four LDPC

codes on both an AWGN channel and an uncorrelated Rayleigh

fading channel with SI. It is shown that all three irregular LDPC

codes achieve excellent performance on both channels. Note

that the simulation results reflect the same relative performance

as predicted by the computed threshold values. Furthermore, the

irregular codes perform much better than the regular code. For

example, at a BER of

, ir2 outperforms the regular

LDPC code on the AWGN channel and fading channel with SI

by about 0.7 dB and 1.0 dB, respectively.

Fig. 9. Simulation of rate-1=3, block size 3072, Turbo code, irregular LDPC codes ir1 and ir2 on both an AWGN channel and an uncorrelated Rayleigh fading channel with SI.

In Fig. 9, ir1 and ir2 are compared to a

turbo code [13] of the same block size and the same code rate

on both an AWGN channel and an uncorrelated fading channel

with SI. We can see that ir1 and ir2 achieve virtually the same

performance as the turbo code. On the AWGN channel, ir1 is

slightly better than the other two codes, while on the fading

channel with SI, ir2 is slightly better.

Since both LDPC codes and turbo codes have excellent

performance, they are being considered as potential candidates

for mobile communications systems. The following results

consider one such scenario—a land mobile channel with a

delay constraint [13]. We assume the carrier frequency is 900

MHz, the source rate is 9.6 kb/s, the code rate is , and the

codeword block size is 3072. Therefore, the delay of the system

is 106.7 ms. Three typical mobile speeds are considered: 4 m/h,

30 m/h, and 70 m/h; the corresponding normalized Doppler

shifts

are

, and

,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HOU et al.: PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS AND CODE OPTIMIZATION OF LOW DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES ON RAYLEIGH FADING CHANNELS

933

Fig. 10. Simulation of rate-1=3, block size 3072, turbo code with interleaver,
irregular LDPC codes ir2 with and without interleaver on the correlated Rayleigh fading channel with SI, speed = 4; 30 and 70 mph.

Fig. 11. Simulation of rate-1=3, block size 3072, irregular LDPC codes ir2
and ir3, both with and without interleaver on the correlated Rayleigh fading channels with SI, speed = 4; 30 and 70 mph.

respectively. Here, is the Doppler shift, and is the coded symbol duration. In our simulation work, a modified Jakes model [14] is used as the channel model. In the decoding of turbo codes, every bit needs to make use of the information of its neighbor bits to update its own likelihood information. Therefore, a channel block interleaver is introduced to break up the correlation of channel fades among the consecutive bits for the turbo coding schemes. However, in the decoding of LDPC codes, when bit updates its related information from a parity check, e.g., check , it only makes use of the information from those bits participating in check . Because the parity-check matrix of the LDPC code is randomly constructed, the probability that these bits will be the neighbors of bit is very small. Therefore, when bit is in a deep fade, it is very likely that some of these bits will not be in a deep fade and they can provide more reliable information for bit . The random construction of the parity-check matrix and its sparseness property suggest that the decoder of LDPC codes has a built-in “interleaver,” implying that LDPC codes should achieve very good performance on correlated fading channels even without using a channel interleaver.
In Fig. 10, three coding schemes are considered: a turbo code with a channel block interleaver, and LDPC
code ir2 with and without a channel block interleaver. The same block interleaver is used for both codes, where the encoded symbols are read in row-by-row and read out column-by-column. At a speed of 70 m/h, the ir2 code with the interleaver performs the best. Interestingly, the ir2 code without the interleaver shows the same performance as the turbo code, and only suffers a loss of about 0.25 dB relative to the ir2 code with the interleaver. At a speed of 30 m/h, the ir2 code with the interleaver performs better than the turbo code by about 0.6 dB over a wide range of BER, and even the ir2 code without the interleaver shows slightly better results than the turbo code. When the speed of the mobile slows down to 4 m/h, the performance gap between the ir2 code with the interleaver and the turbo code becomes wider. At a BER of , the ir2 code with the interleaver has as much

as a 1.2 dB gain over the turbo code. The ir2 code without the interleaver still performs slightly better than the turbo code.
All these results demonstrate that, implicitly, there is a built-in “interleaver” in the parity-check matrix . In principle, it is possible to design this “interleaver,” i.e., to design the matrix
such that all the nonzero entries in are distributed so as to achieve the maximal “interleaver” gain. Another conclusion drawn from these comparisons is that for fading channels with moderate-to-slow variations, that is, where less time diversity can be exploited from the coding schemes compared to the uncorrelated fading channel, the irregular LDPC codes can perform better than the turbo codes.
In Fig. 11, four coding schemes are compared: LDPC code ir2 with and without a channel block interleaver, and LDPC code ir3 with and without a channel block interleaver. As can be seen, the ir2 code with the interleaver always has a gain about
dB over the ir3 code with the interleaver at any mobile speed considered here. Similar results can be observed for the ir2 code without the interleaver compared to the ir3 code without the interleaver. The results show that the LDPC codes which have better thresholds in the uncorrelated fading channel achieve better simulation performance in the correlated fading channels as well.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have shown that the numerical analysis technique for calculating the threshold of the LDPC codes for the AWGN channel can be applied to the uncorrelated flat Rayleigh fading channel. In addition, using the nonlinear optimization technique of differential evolution, we optimized the degree distribution pairs for the uncorrelated Rayleigh fading channel and showed that their threshold values are extremely close to the capacity of this channel. Simulation results for moderate block size showed that the optimized LDPC codes can achieve excellent performance on the Rayleigh fading channel, and can outperform turbo codes on the correlated Rayleigh fading channels.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

934

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, MAY 2001

We also demonstrated that even without a channel interleaver, the LDPC codes still can achieve very good performance on correlated fading channels. This phenomenon may be a reflection of the built-in “interleaver” in the parity-check matrix .
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank T. J. Richardson, R. Urbanke, S. Y. Chung, and H. D. Pfister for their helpful comments about the decoding analysis, and K. Tang for providing the simulation results for turbo codes.
REFERENCES
[1] T. J. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[2] T. J. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[3] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[4] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Speilman, “Analysis of low density codes and improved designs using irregular graphs,” in Proc. ACM Symp., 1998, pp. 249–258.
[5] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[6] S. Y. Chung, R. Urbanke, and T. J. Richardson, “Analysis of sum-product decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 657–670, Feb. 2001.
[7] R. Storn and K. Price, “Differential evolution—A simple and efficient heuristic adaptive scheme for global optimization over continuous spaces,” J. Global Optimization, vol. 11, pp. 341–359, 1997.
[8] A. Shokrollahi and R. Storn, “Design of efficient erasure codes with differential evolution,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Sorrento, Italy, June 2000, p. 5.
[9] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[10] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo codes,” Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., pp. 1064–1070, May 1993.
[11] J. Hagenauer, “Viterbi decoding of convolutional codes for fading- and burst-channels,” in Proc. Int. Zurich Seminar Digital Commun., Zurich, Switzerland, Mar. 1980, pp. 1–7.
[12] E. K. Hall and S. G. Wilson, “Design and analysis of turbo codes on Rayleigh fading channels,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 160–174, Feb. 1998.
[13] K. Tang, P. H. Siegel, and L. B. Milstein, “On the performance of turbo coding for the land mobile channel with delay constraints,” in Proc. 33rd Asilomar Conf. SSC, Pacific Grove, CA, Oct. 1999, pp. 1659–1665.
[14] P. Dent, G. E. Bottomley, and T. Croft, “Jakes fading model revisited,” IEE Electron. Lett., vol. 29, no. 13, pp. 1162–1163, June 1993.
Jilei Hou (S’00) received the B.E. degree (with highest honors) and M.E. degree in radio engineering from Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in 1995 and 1998, respectively. Since 1998, he has been pursuing the Ph.D. degree at the University of California, San Diego.
His research interests are in the areas of communication theory, information theory, channel coding, and spread-spectrum.

Paul H. Siegel (M’82–SM’90–F’97) received the B.S. degree in mathematics in 1975 and the Ph.D. degree in mathematics in 1979, both from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA. He held a Chaim Weizmann fellowship during a year of postdoctoral study at the Courant Institute, New York University, New York.
He was with the IBM Research Division from 1980 to 1995. He joined the Faculty of the School of Engineering, University of California, San Diego in July 1995, where he is currently Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering. He is affiliated with the Center for Wireless Communications and became Director of the Center for Magnetic Recording Research in September 2000. His primary research interest is the mathematical foundations of signal processing and coding, especially as applicable to digital data storage and communications. He holds several patents in the area of coding and detection for digital recording systems. Prof. Siegel was a co-recipient of the 1992 IEEE Information Theory Society Paper Award and the 1993 IEEE Communications Society Leonard G. Abraham Prize Paper Award. He was a member of the Board of Governors of the IEEE Information Theory Society from 1991 to 1996. He served as Co-Guest Editor of the May 1991 Special Issue on “Coding for Storage Devices” of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, and was an Associate Editor for Coding Techniques from 1992 to 1995. Prof. Siegel is a member of Phi Beta Kappa.
Laurence B. Milstein (S’66–M’68–SM’77–F’85) received the B.E.E. degree from the City College of New York, NY, in 1964 and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the Polytechnic Institute, Brooklyn, NY, in 1966 and 1968, respectively.
From 1968 to 1974, he was with by the Space and Communications Group, Hughes Aircraft Company, and from 1974 to 1976, he was a Member of the Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY. Since 1976, he has been with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, where he is a Professor and former Department Chairman, working in the area of digital communication theory with special emphasis on spread-spectrum communication systems. He has also been a consultant to both government and industry in the areas of radar and communications. Dr. Milstein was an Associate Editor for Communication Theory for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, an Associate Editor for Book Reviews for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, an Associate Technical Editor for the IEEE COMMUNICATIONS MAGAZINE, and the Editor-in-Chief of the IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS. He was the Vice President for Technical Affairs in 1990 and 1991 of the IEEE Communications Society and has been a member of the Board of Governors of both the IEEE Communications Society and the IEEE Information Theory Society. He has been a Member of the IEEE Fellows Selection Committee since 1996, and he currently is the Chair of that committee. He is also the Chair of ComSoc’s Strategic Planning Committee. He is a recipient of the 1998 MILCOM Long-Term Technical Achievement Award, an Academic Senate 1999 UCSD Distinguished Teaching Award, an IEEE Third Millennium Medal, and the 2000 IEEE Communications Society Edwin Armstrong Achievement Award.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:46:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

