Low Density Parity Check Coding for Magnetic Recording Channels with Media Noise
Travis R. Oenning and Jaekyun Moon
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455

Abstract-Theapplication of low-densitypanty-check(LDPC) codes for use in high-density magnetic recording channels is considered. A first order position jitter model is assumed in order to include the effect of signal dependent transition noise present in high density longitudinal thin film recording. Coding gains using pattern dependent noise-predictivesoft detection to account for the transition noise are also determined via simulation. Results show that LDPC code performance degrades in equalized (colored) additive noise, but exhibits remarkable performance in the presence of signal dependent transition noise, especiallywhen used in conjunction with an appropriately optimized detector.
I. INTRODUCTION
Iterative decoding techniques have received considerable attention recently due to their ability to perform practical decoding of high performance codes that would otherwise be far too complex to decode. The introduction of turbo codes in 1993 by Berrou, et. al. [ l ] marks the start of much of the interest in this area of research today. Turbo codes and other iterative decoding methods work by iteratively exchanging probabilistic (soft) information. The resulting performance has been shown to be close to the theoretical limits when using a memoryless additive white Gaussian noise channel. This remarkable behavior has motivated the study of turbo codes in many communication applications including magnetic recording channels.
Recently, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes (also known as Gallager codes) have received considerable attention. These codes also use an iterative decoding method and were first introduced in 1962 by Gallager [ 2 ] but were largely forgotten until a recent publication by MacKay showing that their performance was almost as close to the Shannon limit as turbo codes [3]. Since the rediscovery of LDPC codes much research has been done and LDPC codes have now been found which outperform turbo codes for large block sizes.
Mast iterative decoding results in the literature use very low code rates by magnetic recording standards. In order to apply iterativedecoding methods to magnetic storage systems higher code rates must be considered.One reason for this, as will be emphasized below, is the more severe code rate penalty in magnetic recording. Another reason low code rates are unattractive is that intemal clock
rates of read channels scale inversely with code rate. A low code
rate, therefore, means a large practical disadvantage in hardware design.Furthermore, due to thermal instabilities in the media at high
This work was supported in part by an IBM cooperative fellowship and NSIC (National Storage industry Consortium).

areal densities, it may not be passible to reliably record at the higher symbol densitiesrequired by low coderates.
This paper considers LDPC code performance for high density
magnetic recording channels.The only other work done in applying
LDPC codes to magneticrecordingcan be found in [4,5,6,7]. These. works established that LDPC codes still give coding gains when code rates are increased and block lengths are decreased. The work of [4,5] established that they also work in IS1 channels and showed
that burst errors due to thermal asperities do not severely affect
LDPC decoding performance.
Salient features of this paper include the use of a more realistic model for the magnetic recording channel. This allows the performance of LDPC codes to be determined in the presence of both colored noise (due to equalization) as well as signal dependent transition noise. Many additional simulation results are provided including the result of varying code rate and block size. The overall gain achieved using LDPC coding in conjunction with pattern dependent noise prediction is also determined.
The paper is organized as follows. First, the channel
model and S N R definition used in modeling the magnetic
recording channel is presented. Next, the soft channel decoder, which takes into account the presence of pattern dependent noise, is presented. This is followed by the introduction of LDPC codes along with a decoding algorithm. The final two sections present simulation results and then conclusions.

11. DISCRETTEIMECHANNEMLODEL

The magnetic recording channel with signal dependent transition noise is modeled using a first order position jitter model [8,9]. Let h(r) denote the response to an isolated
magnetic transition recorded in a thin film longitudinal media. Let b, E (+1} denote the bits to be stored and

U, = ?h(bk-b,-,) the corresponding transition sequence.
Assuming transition noise can be decomposed into solely position jitter, the read-back waveform with additive white Gaussian noise n(t) can be expressed as

r(t>= C n a , h ( t + j , - U ) + n ( t > ,

(1 1

where j , is modeled as a sequence of independent Gaussian
random variables and represents the amount of position jitter, and T is the amount of time between written bits. The first
order jitter model uses the first order approximation h(t + j k )

0-7803-7097-1 101/$10.00 02001 IEEE

2189

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:36:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

z h(t) + j , d h ( t ) / d t . Fig. 1 shows the discrete time

equivalent model used after matched filtering and sampling,

i.e. zk = r ( t )* h(-t)

in the figure. Closed form

expressions for the filters h;‘ , h l , and /7/ in Fig. I are given

in [IO] when h ( t ) is assumed to be Lorentzian.

When comparing the performance of different codes/ detectors operating at different symbol densities it is important that the definition of signal to noise ratio (SNR) be independent of the symbol density. Unlike other communication channels where code rate loss can be thought of as coming about from an increased noise bandwidth [ I 13, in magnetic recording there is additional loss due to decreased signal energy. The code rate penalty in other communication systems is typically proportional to the inverse of the code rate. The code rate penalty in magnetic recording systems, however, is shown to be roughly proportional to the square of the inverse of the code rate in [11,121. The code rate penalty becomes even more severe at high symbol densities where the maximum likelihood bound separates from the matched filter bound due to increased intersymbol interference.

Fig. I . Block diagram of discrete time channel used to model a magnetic recording channel with transition noise.

It is extremely important that the code rate penalty is accurately reflected in the definition of SNR. The introduction of transition noise into the channel model only complicates this matter further. The SNR definition used in this paper takes into account these objectives by using the SNR definition proposed in [ I I]. The definition may be stated as

A , SNR = __E_ t _ =

No+Mo Na

where E, is the energy Of an

transition,

(2) I 2 is the

spectral height of the electronics noise, M O/ 2 is the average
energ--y of the noise associated with a transition, and a =1 0 0 x M o / ( N o+ M O ) , Further justification and

explanation of this S N R definition can be found in [I 11.

111. CHANNEDLECODER
This section describes the soft pattern-dependent noisepredictive detector used in simulations. Note that the patterndependent noise-predictive method presented in this section is the same as that described in [131 for the Viterbi algorithm.

Also note that [I41 also concerns modifying the BCJR algorithm for pattern dependent noise and results in an identical algorithm. The difference is that [141 assumes that certain Markov assumptions apply to the channel so that the resulting detector is optimal. A different perspective is taken here which makes no such assumptions. The tradeoff is that the resulting algorithm is no longer optimal, but the derivation is more straightforward.
The algorithm used is the BCJR algorithm of [I51 (also known as the forward-backward algorithm). This algorithm provides the a posteriori probabilities (APP) of the coded bits sent through the channel, which in turn can be used as soft information. The purpose of this section is not to describe the BCJR algorithm, as that has been done quite suitably elsewhere, but rather present a method of using the algorithm in the presence of pattern dependent noise.
There are three parameters that are computed in the BCJR algorithm and then used to compute a posteriori probabilities. Following commonly used notation (see for example
[15,16]), theyare a , ( $ ) ,/?,(s), and y,(s’,s), where s and

s‘ correspond to states and k is a time index. When noise is pattern dependent, the method of recursively computing a k ( s ) and P , ( s ) remains unchanged compared to the additive Gaussian noise case, but the computation of yk(s’,s) requires modification. Recall from [I51 that

(s’fs) = p(sX = s, zh I Sk-1 = s’) = p ( z / , I s’,s)p(b, ) > ( 3 ) where the b, correspond to the bits to be detected and the z , to the received samples after transmission through the noisy channel. That is, y,(s’,s) is the joint probability of the received sample and the current state being s at time k conditioned on the previous state being s’. Consider the case when the noise is additive, Gaussian, and independent of the sequence at the channel input. In this case, zk is Gaussian
with mean d, (4) , where 9 denotes the branch connecting

state s‘ and state s and d k ( @ )is the noiseless output

corresponding to this branch. The formula for y,(s‘,s) is therefore given by

y, (s’,s) = - 1

(zx -d,(4N2
2a;

In the case of pattern dependent noise arising from first order position jitter and/or width variation it is straightforward to see that 3 i ; ( s ’ , ~ ) is also given by a Gaussian distribution
characterized by a conditional mean and variance. The conditional mean can be approximated quite well by a predictor filter with a fixed finite number of coefficients ci.
The resulting formula for yk(s’,s) can therefore be written as

I yk(s’,s) = ____

(zk -dk(@)-4k(@))2

P@,) 9 (5)

2 0 ; (4)

;, where represents predicted noise is given by

0-7803-7097-1/01/$10.0002001 IEEE

2190

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:36:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

and 0; is the predictor error variance. Using ak(s), pk(s) ,
and the appropriate yk(s',s) given above, the BCJR algorithm can be used to compute the a posteriori probabilities needed in iterative decoding.

IV. LDPC CODES

A low-density parity-check (LDPC) code is defined by a

large, very sparse, non-systematic, parity-check matrix. An

(N, j , k) LDPC code is defined by a parity check matrix with

N columns, j ones in every column, k ones in every row, and

zeros everywhere else. The parity check matrix completely

describes the code by requiring valid codewords to satisfy

Hc=h,

(11)

where c is an N by 1 codeword with zero-one entries, and all

arithmetic is modulo-2. The vector h has zero-one entries

corresponding to whether even or odd parity is imposed by

each parity check equation.

It is not necessary that all columns (or all rows) of a LDPC

matrix have the same number of ones. If it does, however, it

is called a regular LDPC code. If an LDPC code is not

regular it is referred to as irregular.

prediction. All results are for a Lorentzian channel with user density of 2.5 and BCJR detection. All media noise was due to position jitter. Results using an 8/9 code that do not correspond to an 819 LDPC code were obtained using the 819 FUL(0,4/4) of [17]. All LDPC code results correspond to a rate 819 code with block size 4896, unless otherwise mentioned. Iterative results were obtained by allowing up to 20 iterations. Note that lines connecting simulation points are included only to make plots visually pleasing and are not intended to reflect actual results. Also note that no channel precoding was used.
A. Equalized EPR4 with A WGN The results shown in Fig. 2 were obtained using a
Lorentzian channel equalized to the EPR4 target given by (1D)(I+D)'. The fact that the channel is equalized to a desired target means the noise at the input to the detector is colored. The SNR gain over uncoded EPR4 at a BER of is just over 3dB. This is about a 2dB loss compared to the gain seen for the ideal EPR4 channel used in [ 5 ] . This loss can be attributed to a combination of code rate loss, noise enhancement, and noise coloring.
-0 5
I

V. LDPC DECODING

Decoding can be thought of as message passing on a bipartite graph representation of the parity check matrix. The graph is obtained by drawing a node for every column and row of the parity check matrix, which we refer to as check and bit nodes, respectively. The nodes are connected with edges in correspondence with ones in the parity check matrix. Decoding can be done as follows. First, a priori information
/sp =log(P(x,= l)/P(x, =O)) is obtained from the channel
decoder and values associated with every edge in the graph
C:,! are initialized to zero. For iteration I we start by going

to each check node indexed by nz and update every edge from

that check according to:

= 2(-1) CA/

'l'''tCiH'J'r

1 tanh-'[E tanh[(/2:;' -C1,;!)12] . (7)

The last step in each iteration is to compute an updated log

APP ratio for each bit according to 2; =Ay + c j C : .

Decoding iterations can stop when a valid codeword has been reached.

VI. SIMULATIROENSULTS This section presents the various simulation results obtained along with some discussion. Results will be presented for an equalized EPR4 channel with AWGN, an equalized EPR4 channel with 90% media noise, and results for 90% media noise using pattern dependent noise

-35;

\\\

A5.

I

\

\

. . : i L J - - L ' t , 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26

E J N ~ids)

Fig. 2. Rate 8/9 LDPC code with 4896 bit codeword and Lorentzian channel equalizedto EPR4 target with user density of 2.5.

B. Equalized EPR4 with 90% Media Noise Results shown in Fig. 3 were obtained in exactly the same
way as the equalized EPR4 with AWGN results, except that 90% of the noise power is now due to position jitter. The SNR gain over uncoded EPR4 at a BER of is about 5dB. The observed increase in coding gain seems to be due to the difference in slope in the uncoded BER vs. SNR curves from the threshold point where the LDPC code starts to converge
to the S N R required for a error rate. Note that turbo
codes were also found to have larger gains in the presence of media noise in [18], a result consistent with that observed here.

C. Resultsf o r 90% Media Noise and PDNP Results will now be presented for when pattern dependent
noise prediction (PDNP) is used. First, results were obtained using only PDNP and no coding by equalizing the channel to a 1-D target and using 4-tap noise prediction. Note that the predictor coefficients and predictor error variances were obtained using a long training sequence and were not

0-7803-7097-1/011$10.00 02001 IEEE

2191

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:36:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

assumed to be known a priori. The results are shown in Fig. 4 using the PDNP version of the BCJR algorithm presented earlier. Results are shown for both 32 and 64 state detection. The only other difference between the two is the data window used in determining the length 4 prediction filter coefficients used. The results show a 3dB gain over uncoded EPR4 at a BER of IO". This result matches exactly with the independently obtained result in [13] using a PDNP Viterbi algorithm. The reason for switching from the EPR4 target to a shorter 1-D target is that the number of states required in detection grows exponentially with target length and predictor length. Choosing a shorter target requires fewer states. The tradeoff is that longer noise prediction filters may be needed (which in turn increases the number of states needed). The configuration used here was chosen based on results in [131 indicating it would give the best performance.
Fig. 4 also shows the result of using LDPC coding in conjunction with 64 state PDNP. The results show about a 7%dB gain over uncoded EPR4 at a BER of Also shown is the result obtained when soft information is iterated only within the LDPC decoder and not back to the channel. The results for this case show that only about a '/dB gain is obtained by iterating back to the channel. This is a small loss compared to the hardware complexity and latency reduction associated with not needing to repeatedly (for each iteration) decode the channel.
D. Results for 90% Media Noise, PDNP, and different code rates
Simulations were also run to compare rate 415, 819, and 16/17 codes. The results are shown in Fig. 5 and were obtained in exactly the same way as described in the previous subsection, except that different code rates and different codes constructed for these code rates were used. The results show that for this detection method, user density, noise environment, and block size the 8/9 code is the best code rate choice.
E. Results for 90% Media Noise, PDNP, arid varying block sizes Simulations were also run to compare codes with block sizes of 4896, 2240, and 1024. The results are shown in Fig. 6 and were obtained using the same type of pattern dependent noise-prediction used in earlier presented results. The results
show that as block size decreases there is up to a 1dB S N R
loss at a BER of 1O?
F. Comments on the First Order Position Jitter Model A comment is in order regarding the validity of the first
order assumption used in modeling the transition noise. A more accurate model would include higher order terms in the approximation. The noise power associated with these additional terms, however, is very small relative to the first order terms and therefore may be thought to have very little effect on simulation results. When using pattern dependent noise-prediction as presented here, however, the effect of

higher order terms is significant. For the gains reported here to be achieved in practice, therefore, a pattern dependent noise-predictive detector optimized for an even more accurate channel model would be needed. Results (not shown) for the case in which a more appropriately optimized detector is not used were simulated. This result showed that with the second order model, detection based on pattern dependent noise
prediction, as discussed in this paper, provides an S N R gain of about 2dB relative to uncoded EPR4, as compared to 3 dB
in the first order model. The rate 819 LDPC code, however, still provides a 4dB SNR gain. The overall resulting gain compared to uncoded EPR4 in this case is just over 6dB in S N R at a BER of IO". Adding the second order jitter terms to the noise model yielded virtually the same simulations results as the noise model that actually shifted transition positions.
VII. CONCLUSIONS The results presented in this paper show that although there is a performance degradation associated with going from an ideal EPR4 channel to an equalized EPR4 channel there is still a 3dB LDPC coding gain at LDPC coding with (and without) PDNP was found to be particularly suitable in the presence of media noise showing gains as large as 7%dB relative to uncoded, EPR4 equalized Viterbi detection, given the first order jitter model (this gain reduces to about 6%dB with the more accurate second order model). This is an attractive feature considering that continually increasing areal densities are expected to be accompanied by an increasing amount of signal dependent transition noise. In addition to large coding gains, LDPC coding has many other advantages. Decoding is far less complex than using constituent BCJR decoders as is common in turbo decoding. Exact complexity requirements in terms of number of operations per bit per iteration is quantified in [4]. Another large advantage in terms of hardware implementation is that not only are there relatively few decoding operations required but these operations are also fully parallelizable. This facilitates very high-speed implementations. Yet another advantage comes in terms of complexity from the fact that iterating back to the channel is not crucial to decoding
performance as in the case of turbo equalization. A practical direction for future work is to consider further
reduction in complexity. Since iterations back to the channel were found to increase performance by only %dB less complex implementations of the PDNP channel decoder can be explored. Results in [1-31 show that performance similar to the 64-state noise predictive detector can be obtained using only 8 states by application of reduced state techniques. This would significantlyreduce complexity, but it would remain to investigate the effect that the resulting error propagation would have on LDPC decoding. Given the multiple, randomly constructed parity protection of a given bit, it is quite possible that LDPC coding is capable of compensating these effects.
Note that when LDPC decoding fails there are typically a large number of bit errors in the code word. In fact, the bit

0-7803-7097-11011$10.00 02001 IEEE

2192

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:36:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

error rate conditioned on decoder failure is very near that of

-05-

the channel output with no code. This means that when

decoding fails, however rarely, there are simply too many

errors for direct use of typical outer error correction codes

such as Reed-Solomon codes t o be beneficial.

VIII. REFERENCES
C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” in Proc. IEEE Intl. Con$ Commun., (Geneva), pp. 1064-70, May 1993. R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes, M.I.T. Press, 1963. D. J . C . MacKay and R. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density panty check codes,” Electron Lett, vol. 33, pp. 457-8, Mar 1997. J . Fan, A. Friedmann, E. Kurtas, S. McLaughlin, “Low density panty check codes for magnetic recording,” submitted to lnt. Conf. Commun., 2000. J. L. Fan, E. Kurtas, A. Friedman, and S. McLaughlin, “Lowdensity parity-check codes for magnetic storage,” Allerton Conference, Sept. 1999. D. J. C. MacKay and M. C. Davey, “Evaluation of Gallager codes for short block length and high rate applications,” to appear in proceedings of IMA workshop on Codes, Systems
and Graphical Models, 1999. H. Song, R. M. Todd, J. R. Cruz, “Low density parity check codes for magnetic recording channels,” Intermag, 2000. J . Moon, L. R. Carley, and R. R. Katti, “Density dependence of noise in thin metallic longitudinal media,” J. Appl. Phys. 63 (8), April 1988. J. Moon, “Discrete-time modeling of transition-noise-dominant channels and study of detection performance,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 27, no. 6. ~u.4573-4578,Nov. 1991. [IO] T. Gnning, and J. Moon, “Modeling the lorentzian magnetic
recording channel with transition noise,” to appear in IEEE Trans. Magn. January 2001. [I I ] J. Moon, “SNR definition for magnetic recording channels with transition noise,” to appear in IEEE Trans. Magn.. [12] W. Ryan, “Optimal code rates for concatenated codes on a PR4-equalized magnetic recording channel,” Roc. of 3 r d
Conf. on Info. Sciences and Systems (CISS’99). [13] J . Moon and J. Park, “Near-maximum likelihood sequence
detection i n pattem dependent noise,” submitted to IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications. [14] A. Kavcic, “Soft-Output Detector for Channels with Intersymbol Interference and Markov Noise Memory,“ Proc. IEEE Global Telecom. Conf., December 1999.
[I51 L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans Info Theory, vol. 20, pp. 248-87, Mar 1974.
[16] W. E. Ryan, “A turbo code tutorial,” unpublished. [I71 Eggenberger, et al., “Method and apparatus for implementing
optimum PRML codes,” U. S. Patent 4,707,681, Nov. 17, 1987. [18] T. Souvignier, J. Caroselli, A. Dati, and J. K. Wolf, “Turbo
decoding for parital response channels with media noise,” Proc. IEEE Global Telecom. Conf., 1999.

Fig. 3 . Rate 8/9 LDPC code with 4896 bit codeword, Lorentzian channel, EPR4 equalization,user density of 2.5, and 90% position jitter media noise.
15-2-25.
I,
3;
BI
45: 4I
46. .5-
Fig. 4. Rate 8/9 LDPC code with 4896 bit codeword, Lorentzian channel, user density of 2.5, 1-D equalizationwith pattern dependent noise prediction and 90% position jitter media noise.
Fig. 5. Rate 4/5, 8/9, and 16/17 LDPC codes with 4896 bit codeword, Lorentzian channel, user density of 2.5, l-D equalization with pattern dependent noise prediction and 90% position jitter media noise.
-1 I
+ 543x4896R=O 8891 27112448 R=O 8893
I
I
-5;-

Elmsl (dBJ
Fig. 6. Rate 8/9 LDPC codes with varying codeword sizes, Lorentzian channel, user density of 2.5, I-D equalization with pattern dependent noise prediction and 90% position jitter media noise.

0-7803-7097-1101/$10.00 02001 IEEE

2193

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:36:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

