Constrained Iterative Decoding: Performance and Convergence Analysis
Jun Heo and Keith M. Chugg
Communication Sciences Institute Electrical Engineering-Systems Dept.
L University of Southern California Los Angeles, CA 90089-2565
junh@scf.usc.edu, chuggQusc.edu

Abstmct- We introduce a modification to the standard iterative decoding (message passing) algorithm that yields improved performance at the cost of higher complexity. This modification is to run multiple iterative decoders, each with a different constraint on a system variable (e.g., input value, state value, etc.). This Constrained Iterative Decoding (CID) implements optimal MAP decoding for systems represented by single-cycle graphs (e.g., tail-biting convolutional codes). For more complex graphical models, the CID is suboptimal, but outperforms the standard decoding algorithm because it negates the effects of some cycles in the model. In this paper, we show that the CID outperforms the standard ID for a Serially Concatenated Convolution Code (SCCC) system and Low-Density-Parity-Check (LDPC) code system, especially when the interleaver size is small. Density evolution analysis is used to show how CID improves the convergence relative to that of standard ID by showing that the threshold of the CID is lower than that of the standard ID.
I. INTRODUCTION
Since turbo codes were introduced, Iterative Decoding (ID) has been researched to develop effective algorithms to yield either better performance or low complexity. These ID algorithms were understood as Belief Propagation (BP) algorithms which were known to be optimal for a graph
without cycles [l],[2], [3]. However, the ID algorithms are
suboptimal, because they are devolped ignoring the cycles of codes (e.g., turbo codes, LDPC codes, SCCC etc). There have been several attempts to find an optimal decoding algorithm for a code with cycles. As a special case, the optimal decoding of a tail-biting code, which has a single cycle, was investigated in [4], [5].
When all cycles are removed from a code, the BP algorithm is optimal on the modified system. As a method of removing the cycles, we propose to put constraint on nodes (i.e., system variables) of cycles. In other words, each constraint of those nodes is represented by a set of values and the BP algorithm is repeatedly applied based on each constraint. We call this modified ID algorithm Constraint Iterative Decoding (CID). The tail-biting code is a good example of a single cycle code which is easily cut by putting a constraint on the node (the initial and final state variable). Therefore, CID is optimal for the tail-biting code. As a example with multiple cycles which

are easily cut as well, we present a 4-cycle tail-biting code. This example simply shows that an optimal decoding is still possible when a code has more than one cycle.
This CID algorithm can be applied to decode more complex codes with many cycles, for example turbo codes, LDPC codes, and SCCC etc. Generally, optimal CID algorithms are not possible for these codes because too many constraints are required to cut all the cycles. Although the CID is not optimal for these codes, it outperforms the standard ID algorithm because it negates the effects of some cycles in the graphical representation of the codes.
Along with the development of ID algorithms, analysis has been successful to unveil the characteristics of ID. Particularly, recently developed density evolution techniques have achieved the asymptotic capacity of Turbo codes, when the interleaver size and the number of iteration go to infinity [6], [7].This asymptotic capacity was empirically obtained based on input-output SNR evolution curves of each iterative decoder. It was shown that the threshold (capacity) is well matched to the region where the bit error curves start to fall down [7]. Density evolution was used to explain many mysteries of turbo codes and SCCC in [SI, for example, the importance of systematic bits and recursive constitutent codes etc. The method of SNR evolution is based on the fact that the exchanged soft information is well modeled by a Gaussian random variable.
In this paper, we present CID algorithms with multiple constraint marginalization options. A tail-biting code and 4-cycle tail-biting code are given as examples where CID is optimal. The performance of CID is compared to that
of standard tail-biting ID [9]. For more complex codes like
SCCC and LDPC codes, it is shown that the suboptimal CID yields better performance at the cost of larger complexity. Because of the parallel structure of CID, it could potentially achieve the standard ID performance with less latency (less interleaver size). In addition, the density evolution technique is used to show how CID improves the
convergence compared to that of standard ID. Specifically,
the SNR evolution curves of CID shows lower threshold than that of standard ID.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section

0-7803-7147-X/01/$10.0002001E E E

275

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:38:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 1. The state constrained decoding on tail-biting code with 4-state non-recursive convolution code
11,the CID algorithm is developed as either optimal or sub-
optimal decoding algorithm depending on codes. Multiple constraint marginalization methods are suggested as weIl.
The performance of CID for the optimal and suboptimal cases are shown in Section 111.The simulation results show
a tradeoff between the complexity and the performance in
CID.Some concluding remarks are given in Section IV.

all possible constraints. Given a constraint q,p(bk,zlci) can be obtained by either a sum-product algorithm or a min-sum algorithm as:

p(bk,

p ( z l b ,ci)p(blci) (sum -produd)

b:bk
p(bk,21s) = maxp(zlb, c i ) p ( b l s ) (min- sum)
b:bk

As an another example where CID is optimal, we present
a 4-cycle tail-biting code. The 4-cycle tail-biting code consists of 4 data segments and the first segment is exactly same as a standard tail-biting code. After the first segment, the tail-biting bits of the first segment are appended at the end of each data segment to have the same starting and ending state. This example shows that optimal decoding is possible when a code has more than one cycle and those cycles can be easily cut by constraints. Fig. 2 represents the data and tail bit arrangement of both tailbiting and 4-cycle tail-biting codes. In Fig.2, the shaded bits represent the tail-biting bits repeatedly used in multiple data segments and the capital letters A to B and A' to E' represent the starting and ending state of each segment.

A

8

A'

8'

C'

Iy

G

11. CID ALGORITHMS
A. Optimal CID Algorithms
When only a small number of nodes axe shared by all cycles of a code and each node has only a small number of
configurations, CID can be optimal and feasible. For example, each node can take two values and there are M nodes common to all cycles, then the number of possible constraints is 2 M , with each constraint can be represented by
an M x l vector. One simple example is a tail-biting code which has only one common node (start and end states:
M = 1)of a single cycle and the number of condition val-
ues for the state variable is the number of configurations for that node. [4].In Fig. 1,the concept of state constrained decoding is illustrated for the 4-state non-recursive convolution code.
There are two ways to perform constrained marginalization:
Sum-marginalization[4]:

P(bk,Z) = P(bk,zls)P(Ci) 3 P(bk1ZICi)

c, E C

C,EC

Max-marginalization:

d b k ,Z ) = m a P ( b k ,Z l S ) P ( S )5 E g P ( b k ,Z1.i)
CiEC
where b and z represent the information sequence and noisy observation sequence, respectively, and C is a set of

OAd

(4

(b)

Fig. 2. Data and tail bit arrangement with graph (a)tail-biting code (b)Ccycle tail-biting code

B. Suboptimal CID Algorithms

When it is not possible to consider all constraint values of all common nodes, a small number of nodes can be selected and, for these selected nodes, CID may be applied as a suboptimal decoding algorithm. In other words, a few of the many cycles are removed from the graphical
model of the code. For this suboptimal CID algorithm, the
constrained marginalization is based on the selected con-
straints C' instead of all possible constraints C (C' c C).
In addition to the marginalization options (Sum, M a z ) , we propose two ad hoc marginalization options for min-sum algorithm:
Reliability-marginalization:

& = arg

I p h = 0,zls) - ~ ( b =k 1,zlci)l

bk = arg maxp(bk,zlei)
bk
Sequence-marginalization:
4 = arg maxp(zlb,ci)p(blci) C1

276
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:38:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

i& = arg maxp(bk,zlEi)
bk
The Reliability-marginalization method takes the constraint which gives higher reliability at time index k , while the Sequence-marginalization method takes the constraint which gives highest reliability for the whole sequence. In the followingsection, the performance of two ad-hoc methods are compared to that of the previous two methods when CID is suboptimal.
We applied the CID algorithm to a Serially Concatenated Convolutional Code (SCCC) and a regular (3,6) LDPC code, which have many cycles and nodes involved.
At first, a small number of nodes M’ out of all common nodes M are selected. For the binary case, the number of possible constraints is 2M’. Secondly, standard ID is exe-
cuted for each of the 2’‘ constraints. We should note that the constraints are explicitly applied only for the first iteration, however the soft information at subsequent iterations still evolves based on the contraints. After a fixed number of iterations (e.g, lo), the soft information from each constrained decoding is combined, and then marginalized to obtain the decoded sequence. Fig. 3 shows the SCCC system considered and the CID decoding blocks.

dG@ 3-1- (h)

Inner SISO

SOMAP

i’l8: [i!: 21’‘ const.raint.s generator 1...11

Fig. 3. Block diagrams of (a) the SCCC encoder, (b) the associated CID decoder

Similar CID algorithm was applied for (3,6) regular LDPC code. The constraints were imposed on the message from variable nodes to check nodes.

111. SIMULATION AND SNR EVOLUTION
In this section, the performance of CID is shown, when it is optimal and suboptimal. For the optimal tail-biting decoding, Fig. 4 shows the performance of CID with the constraint on the starting and ending state. The performance of iterative tail-biting decoding was also shown with two wraps (iterations) [9]. For comparison, the performance of tail-bit decoding using Viterbi Algorithm (VA) was also presented. All decoding algorithms were based on min-sum algorithm with the block size N = 10.

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

EWNo

Fig. 4. Performance of tail-biting and tail-bit convolutional codes based on the min-sum algorithm with the block size N=10

Because the starting and ending state of the tail-biting

decoder can be determined correctly with high probability

at high SNR and the tail-biting code saves the energy loss

of tail-bits, both tail-biting decoders outperformed the tail-

bit decoder at high SNR (i.e., the Eb/No reported includes

the penalty for tail-bits).

However, at low SNR, the probability of correct decision

of the starting and ending state is very low. Therefore, the

tail-bit decoder shows better performance despite tail-bit

energy loss. The optimal CID performs slightly better than

the iterative tail-biting decoding at all SNRs.

Fig. 5 shows the performance of the Ccycle tail-biting

CID algorithm. The CID shows slightly better perfor-

mance than the tail-bit code at all SNR. The 4-cycle struc-

ture increases the probability of correct decision of start-

ing and ending state because of longer observation. At

the same time, the tail-bit energy loss is decreased. This

results in smaller performance difference.

Fig. 6 represents the performance of the CID on the

SCCC system in Fig. 3 with a small interleaver size

N = 256. Table I shows four different CID options simu-

lated. The constrains are posed at the inner Soft-In-Soft-

Out (SISO) decoder. Because only some of the nodes were

constrained, CID was suboptimal and iteration improves

performance. Both standard ID and CID were simulated

up to 10 iterations. With approximate 24 time higher com-

plexity, CID shows about 0.4 dB gain at the

BER.

Among the CID options, the reliability-marginalization

showed the best performance. Although it was not shown

in this figure, a tradeoff between complexity and perfor-

mance of CID was observed. As the number of nodes con-

strained increases, the performance is better.

The complexity and performance tradeoff in CID was

shown for regular (3,6) LDPC code in Fig. 7. With the

Reliability-marginalization, the CID showed about 0.3 dB

277
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:38:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE I

THECID OPTIONS OF THE SCCC DECODER

I I SISO with constraints )I M' marginalization

I

Inner

II 4 I

Sum

1

I

Inner

II 4 I

MaX

I

Inner

1) 4 I Sequence

Inner

II 4 I Reliability

............ i...-...........;..............i..... _.....6.............. i........._.~ .

'~"~"'"'"~~""'"'~''''

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

EbMo

Fig. 5 . Performance of the 4-cycle tail-biting codes based on the min-sum algorithm with the block size N=40

10"

10s

2

2.1

2.2

2.3

2.4

2.5

2.6

EM'lo

Fig. 7. CID performance of regular (3,6)LDPC code based on

MSM algorithm with interleaver size 500. (a)CIDl: constrained

at 2 nodes, (b)CID2: constrained at 4 nodes. Both CID1

and CID2 were constrained at check nodes with the Reliability-

10-

marginalization.

1.6

1.8

2

2.2

2.4

EbiNo

Fig. 6 . Performance for SCCC based on min-sum algorithm with the interleaver size 256. M'=4 nodes were constrained.

gain compared to that of standard ID. For the convergence analysis of the CID algorithm, the
mean p was obtained from a sufficient soft information block. Based on the symmetry property [lo], the variance of soft information is 2p. With this mean and variance, the SNR evolution curves were plotted. The SNR evolution curves have a wider iteration tunnel as the noise level decreases (i.e., as Eb/No increases) A threshold of a certain decoding algorithm can be obtained when the SNR curves start to touch each other. Fig. 8 shows the SNR evolution curves of the standard ID and CID algorithms. At the threshold (Eb/No=O.53dB) of standard ID, the CID SNR curves have an open iteration tunnel, while the standard ID SNR curves are closed. In other words, the threshold of CID is lower than that of standard ID.
Fig. 9 shows that the standard ID and the CID have their thresholds at different noise level, Eb/No=0.48dB

and Eb/No=O.53dB respectively. The difference (0.5dB) between two thresholds agrees with the difference of simulation performance (0.4dB at BER
IV. CONCLUSION
A modification of the standard iterative decoding algorithm, CID, was introduced in this paper. CID is the generalization of the idea that optimal decoding of a tail-biting convolutional code can be achieved by breaking the cycle using a state variable constraint. The optimal and suboptimal CID algorithm were presented and the performance was compared that of the standard ID. The suboptimal CID was applied to the SCCC and LDPC codes, which have many cycles, and it showed about 0.3-0.5 dl3 performance gain with higher complexity compared to that of standard ID. Convergence analysis using density evolution techniques showed how the CID improved the performance compared to that of standard ID. Future work is to find a good, big codes with a few cut-points, which is optimally decoded by CID instead of standard ID (suboptimal).
REFERENCES [I] F. Kschischang and B. Frey, "Iterative decoding of compond
codes by probability propagation in graphical models," IEEE

278
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:38:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

-E- ’ s
- 0.9
-4
e
3 0.8 Ei
3
0.7

IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 297-302, February

1998.
[lo] T.J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “De-

sign of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check

..

codes,” IEEE Tmns. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619-637,

February 2001.

0.6

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

input snr (outer) I output snr (inner)

Fig. 8. SNR evolution curves of standard ID and CID on SCCC at 0.53dB.

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

input snr (outer) I output snr (inner)

Fig. 9. SNR evolution curves of standard ID and CID on SCCC at 0.53dB and 0.48dB respectively.

J . Select. Areas Commun., pp. 219-231, February 1998.
R.J. McEliece, D.J. C. MacKay, and J. F. Cheng, “Turbo de-
coding as an instance of Pearl’s ”belief propagation” algorithm,”
IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 140-152, February
1998.
S. Aji and R. McEliece, “The generalized distributive law,” IEEE Tmns. I n f o n . Theory, vol. 46, pp. 325-343, March 2000.
Y.Wang, R.Ramesh, A. Hassan, and H. Koorapaty, “On map
decoding for tail-biting convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Symposium on Information Theory, p. 225, June 1997.
S. Aji, G.Horn, and R. McEliece, “Iterative decoding on graphs with a single cycle,” in Proc. IEEE Symposium on Information Theory, (Cambrigde, MA, USA), p. 276, August 1998.
S. ten Brink, “Convergence of iterative decoding,” Electrinics Letters, vol. 35,pp. 806-808, May 1999.
H. E. Gama1 and J. A. R. Hammons, “Analyzing the turbo decoder using the gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 671-686, February 2001. D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, and F. Pollara, “Iterative turbo decoder analysis based on density evolution,” TMO Progress Reps., Jet Propulsion Lab, February 2001.
J. B. Anderson and S. M. Hladik, “Tailbiting map decoders,”

279
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:38:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

