IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

569

Efficient Erasure Correcting Codes
Michael G. Luby, Michael Mitzenmacher, M. Amin Shokrollahi, and Daniel A. Spielman

Abstract—We introduce a simple erasure recovery algorithm for codes derived from cascades of sparse bipartite graphs and analyze the algorithm by analyzing a corresponding discrete-time random process. As a result, we obtain a simple criterion involving the fractions of nodes of different degrees on both sides of the graph which is necessary and sufficient for the decoding process to finish successfully with high probability. By carefully designing these graphs we can construct for any given rate and any given real number
a family of linear codes of rate which can be encoded in time proportional to ln(1 ) times their block length . Furthermore, a codeword can be recovered with high probability from a portion of its entries of length (1 + ) or more. The recovery algorithm also runs in time proportional to ln(1 ). Our algorithms have been implemented and work well in practice; various implementation issues are discussed.
Index Terms—Erasure channel, large deviation analysis, lowdensity parity-check codes.

I. INTRODUCTION

A LINEAR error-correcting code of block length and

dimension over a finite field —an

-code for

short—is a -dimensional linear subspace of the standard vector

space . The elements of the code are called codewords. To

the code there corresponds an encoding map which is

an isomorphism of the vector spaces and . A sender, who

wishes to transmit a vector of elements in to a receiver,

uses the mapping to encode that vector into a codeword.

The rate of the code is a measure for the amount of real

information in each codeword. The minimum distance of the

Manuscript received June 7, 1999; revised September 8, 2000. The work of M. G. Luby was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Operating Grant NCR-9416101, and by the United States–Israel Binational Science Foundation under Grant 92-00226. The work of M. Mitzenmacher was supported in part by an Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellowship and by the National Science Foundation under CAREER Grant CCR-9983832. A substantial portion of this work was performed while M. Mitzenmacher was at the Computer Science Department, University of California, Berkeley, under NSF Grant CCR-9505448. The work of M. A. Shokrollahi was supported in part by a Habilitationsstipendium of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft under Grant Sh 57/1-1. This work was performed while D. A. Speilman was visiting the University of California, Berkeley, and supported by an NSF mathematical sciences Postdoctoral Fellowship.
M. G. Luby and M. A. Shokrollahi were with the International Computer Science Institute, Berkeley, CA USA. They are now with Digital Fountain, Inc, San Francisco, CA 94110 USA (e-mail: luby@digitalfountain.com; amin@digital.fountain.com).
M. Mitzenmacher was with Digital Equipment Corporation, Systems Research Center, Palo Alto, CA USA. He is now with Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138 USA (e-mail: michaelm@eecs.harvard.edu).
D. A. Spielman is with is with the Department of Mathematics, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 (e-mail: spielman@math.mit.edu).
Communicated by F. R. Kschischang, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Publisher Item Identifier S 0018-9448(01)00735-0.

code is the minimum Hamming distance between two distinct

codewords. A linear code of block length , dimension , and

minimum distance over is called an

-code.

Linear codes can be used to reliably transmit information

from a sender to a receiver: the sender first encodes the de-

sired word into a codeword and transmits the codeword over

the transmission channel. Depending on the nature of the errors

imposed on the codeword through the channel, the receiver then

applies appropriate algorithms to decode the received word. In

this paper, we assume that the receiver knows the position of

each received symbol within the stream of all codeword sym-

bols. We adopt as our model of errors the erasure channel, in-

troduced by Elias [4], in which each codeword symbol is lost

with a fixed constant probability in transit independent of all

the other symbols. Elias [4] showed that the capacity of the era-

sure channel is

and that a random linear code can be used

to transmit over the erasure channel at any rate

.

It is easy to see that a code of minimum distance is ca-

pable of recovering

or fewer erasures. Furthermore, a

closer look reveals that this task can be done in time

.

The code is optimal with respect to recovering erasures if it can

recover from any set of coordinates of the codeword, i.e., if

. Such codes are called minimum-distance sep-

arable (MDS) codes. A standard class of MDS codes is given

by Reed–Solomon (RS) codes [16]. The connection of these

codes with polynomial arithmetic allows for encoding and de-

coding in time

(see, [3, Ch. 11.7] and [16,

p. 369]). However, for small values of , quadratic time algo-

rithms are faster than the theoretically, asymptotically fast al-

gorithms for the RS-based codes, and for larger values of

the

multiplicative overhead in the running

time of the fast algorithms (along with a moderate-sized con-

stant hidden by the big-Oh notation) is large. Obviously, one

cannot hope for better information recovery than that given by

RS codes, but faster encoding and decoding times are desirable.

In this paper, we design fast linear-time algorithms for trans-

mitting just below channel capacity. For all

, we produce

rate

codes along with decoding algorithms

that recover from the random loss of a fraction of the trans-

mitted symbols in time proportional to

with high prob-

ability, where is the block length. These codes can be encoded

in time proportional to

. The fastest previously known

encoding and decoding algorithms [1] with such a performance

guarantee have run times proportional to

.

The overall structure of our codes is related to the low-density

parity-check codes introduced by Gallager [6], which have been

the subject of a great deal of recent work (see, for example, [10],

[11], and [15]). We also use some ideas related to the codes

introduced in [25] for error correction. Because we examine the

erasure setting, however, our work includes several innovations,

0018–9448/01$10.00 © 2001 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

570

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

including a simple linear time decoding algorithm and the use

of irregularity. We explain the general construction along with

the encoding and decoding algorithms fully in Section II.

Our encoding and decoding algorithms are almost symmet-

rical. Both are very simple, computing exactly one exclusive-or

operation for each edge in a randomly chosen bipartite graph.

As in many similar applications, the graph is chosen to be

sparse, which immediately implies that the encoding and

decoding algorithms are fast. Unlike many similar applications,

the graph is not regular; instead, it is quite irregular with a

carefully chosen degree sequence. We describe the decoding al-

gorithm as a process on the graph in Section II-B. Our main tool

is a model that characterizes almost exactly the performance of

the decoding algorithm as a function of the degree sequence of

the graph. In Section III, we use this tool to model the progress

of the decoding algorithm by a set of differential equations.

The solution to these equations can then be expressed as

polynomials in one variable with coefficients determined by

the degree sequence. The positivity of one of these polynomials

on the interval

with respect to a parameter guarantees

that, with high probability, the decoding algorithm can recover

almost all the message symbols from a loss of up to a fraction

of the codeword symbols (see Proposition 2). The complete

success of the decoding algorithm can then be demonstrated by

combinatorial arguments.

Our analytical tools allow us to almost exactly characterize

the performance of the decoding algorithm for any given de-

gree sequence. Furthermore, they also help us to design good

irregular degree sequences. In Section IV, we describe, given a

parameter

, a degree sequence for which the decoding is

successful with high probability for an erasure fraction that is

within of . Although these graphs are irregular, with some

nodes of degree , the average node degree is only

.

This is one of the central results of the paper, i.e., a code with

encoding and decoding times proportional to

that can

recover from an erasure fraction that is within of optimal.

In Section V, we discuss issues concerning practical imple-

mentations of our algorithms. This section includes methods for

finding good degree sequences based on linear programming,

and timings of the implementations. In the last section, we sum-

marize the main results of this paper, and discuss recent devel-

opments following the publication of a preliminary version [13].

II. GRAPH CODES

A. Erasure Codes via Bipartite Graphs

We define a code with message bits and redundant

bits, where

, by associating these bits with a bipartite

graph .1 Following standard terminology, we refer to the

redundant bits as check bits. The graph has left nodes and

right nodes, corresponding to the message bits and the check

bits, respectively. Hence, in the following, we refer to the left

nodes of a bipartite graph as its message bits and to the right

nodes as its check bits.

The encoding of

is determined by setting each check

bit to be the (XOR) of its neighboring message bits in (see

Fig. 1(a)). Thus, the encoding time is proportional to the number

of edges in , and our codes are systematic.2

Our main contribution is the design and analysis of the bi-

partite graph so that the repetition of the following simplistic

decoding operation recovers all the missing message bits.

Algorithm 1 (Erasure Decoding) Given the value of a check bit and all but
one of the message bits on which it depends, set the missing message bit to be the XOR of the check bit and its known message bits.

See Fig. 1(b) for an example of this algorithm, and Fig. 2 for

an example of full recovery.

We introduce methods for the design of sparse random graphs

where repetition of this operation recovers all the message bits

with high probability if a random subset of

of the

message bits have been lost from .

To produce codes that can correct erasures of check bits as

well as message bits, we cascade codes of the form : we

first use

to produce check bits for the original mes-

sage bits, we then use a similar code to produce check bits

for the check bits of , and so on (see Fig. 3). At the last

level, we may use a more conventional erasure correcting code

(e.g., an RS code, if the alphabet size is large enough).

Formally, we construct a family of codes

from a family of graphs

where has left

nodes and

right nodes. We select so that

is

roughly . We end the cascade with an erasure correcting

code of rate

with

message bits for which

we know how to recover from the random loss of fraction

of its bits with high probability. We then define the code

to be a code with message bits and

In this section we introduce a new class of codes. Special sub-

classes of these codes turn out to be almost MDS in the fol-

lowing sense: an

-code in this subclass is capable of re-

covering the message from a random set of

coordinate

places with high probability, where is a small real number. A

more precise statement is provided later in Section III. The ad-

vantages of these codes are that they have linear time encoding

and decoding algorithms, and that the alphabet size can be ar-

bitrary. For simplicity, in the following we assume that the sym-

bols are bits, i.e., that

.

We explain the overall construction of the codes, as well as in-

troduce simple and efficient encoding and recovery algorithms.

check bits formed by using the message bits, using
bits produced by

to produce check bits for

to form

check bits for the

, and finally using to produce

1We will use the word bit in a rather loose form, mostly to denote coordinate positions.
2Herein lies one of the differences of our codes compared to Gallager’s lowdensity parity-check codes: in the latter, the coordinate places of the codeword itself are identified with the left nodes, and the right nodes define constraints on these words. That is, Gallager allows only those words such that for any right node, the XOR of its adjacent left nodes is zero.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LUBY et al.: EFFICIENT ERASURE CORRECTING CODES

571

Fig. 1. (a) A graph defines a mapping from message bits to check bits. (b) Bits x , x , and c are used to solve for x .

an additional output by bits and

check bits for the

bits

. As

has message

check bits, it is a code of rate

.

Remark 1: Assuming that the code can be encoded and

decoded in quadratic time (an assumption which is certainly true

for RS codes), the code

can be encoded and

decoded in time proportional to the number of edges in all the

.3

We begin by using the decoding algorithm for to decode

erasures that occur within its corresponding message bits. If

corrects all the erasures, then the algorithm now knows all the

check bits produced by

, which it can then use to correct

erasures in the inputs to

. As the inputs to each

were the check bits of

, we can work our way back up

the recursion until we use the check bits produced by

to

correct erasures in the original message bits. If we show that

can correct a random

fraction of erasures with high

probability, and that each

can correct a random

fraction of erasures of its message bits with high probability,

then we have shown that

is a rate

code that can correct a random

fraction of erasures with

high probability, for some . Details can be found in the proof

of Theorem 2.

For the remainder of this section and much of the next section,

we only concern ourselves with finding graphs so that the

decoding algorithm can correct

fraction of erasures in

the message bits of , given all of its check bits.

B. The Graph Process and Degree Sequences

We now relate the decoding process of

to a process on

a subgraph of , so that hereafter we can use this simpler termi-

nology when describing the process. This subgraph consists of

p 3If the alphabet size is too small for the corresponding RS code to exist, we
can continue the cascade until the graph has roughly k nodes and use a random linear code with conventional erasure decoding.

all nodes on the left that were erased but have not been decoded

thus far, all the nodes on the right, and all the edges between

these nodes. Recall that the decoding process requires finding a

check bit on the right such that only one adjacent message bit is

missing; this adjacent bit can then be recovered. In terms of the

subgraph, this is equivalent to finding a node of degree one on

the right, and removing it, its neighbor, and all edges adjacent to

its neighbor from the subgraph. We refer to this entire sequence

of events hereafter as one step of the decoding process. We re-

peat this step until there are no nodes of degree one available on

the right. The entire process is successful if it does not halt until

all nodes on the left are removed, or equivalently, until all edges

are removed. It is simple to show that the result of this process

is independent of the order in which nodes are removed; subse-

quently, in the analysis, we may freely assume that the nodes of

degree one are chosen uniformly at random at each step.

The graphs that we use are chosen at random from a set of

sparse bipartite graphs with a carefully chosen degree sequence.

In contrast with many applications of random graphs in com-

puter science, our graphs are not regular.

We refer to edges that are adjacent to a node of degree on

the left (right) as edges of degree on the left (right). Each of our

degree sequences is specified by a pair of vectors

and

where is the initial fraction of edges on the

left of degree and is the initial fraction of edges on the right

of degree . Note that we specify graphs in terms of fractions of

edges, and not nodes, of each degree, as this form turns out to be

more convenient. The sequences and give rise to generating

polynomials

and

. The

unusual choice of rather than has to do with the analysis

of the decoding, as described below. Using these functions, one

can succinctly describe many important parameters of the graph.

For instance, it is easy to see that the average left degree of

the graph is

which is

. If is the number

of edges in the graph, then the number of left nodes of degree

is

, and hence the number of left nodes is

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

572

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Fig. 2. All stages of the recovery. (a) Original graph. (b) Graph induced by the set of lost nodes on the left. (c)–(f) Recovery process.

Hence, the average degree is divided by this quantity. By a

similar reasoning, the polynomial

has

the property that its th coefficient is the fraction of left nodes

of degree . (Analogous assertions hold of course for .)

For a given pair and of degree sequences, we will

be interested in constructing a random bipartite graph with

nodes on the left and nodes on the right which has this de-

gree distribution. We will implicitly assume that the numbers

work out, i.e., that ,

, and

are integers for all ,

and we assume that

. In this case, it

is easy to see that such graphs exist (say by induction). Later, in

Section V-C, we will carry out a procedure to uniformly sample

graphs (with multiedges) from the set of graphs with given de-

gree sequences and .

Note that, as the decoding process evolves, in the corresponding subgraph of remaining after each step the matching remaining on still corresponds to a random permutation. Hence, conditioned on the degree sequence of the remaining subgraph after each step, the subgraph that remains is uniform over all subgraphs with this degree sequence. The evolution of the degree sequence is therefore a Markov process, a fact we make use of below.
In the next two sections, we develop techniques for the analysis of the process for general degree sequences.
III. LARGE DEVIATION AND ANALYSIS OF THE DECODING
We analyze the decoding algorithm (Algorithm 1) by viewing it as a discrete random process. We model the evolution of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LUBY et al.: EFFICIENT ERASURE CORRECTING CODES

573

Fig. 3. The code levels and directions of encoding and decoding process.
main parameters of this system by a system of differential equations. These parameters include the number of edges of different right and left degrees, as well as the total number of edges and the average degrees of the bipartite graph on both sides. We need a result which makes sure that these parameters are sharply concentrated around the solutions of the system of equations, in the sense that the variation in the parameters are small compared with the total number of steps. For the sake of keeping the technical discussion at an acceptable level, we do not aim for the best possible results on the quality of the sharpness of the concentration.
In the first part of this section, we state a general large deviation result which we will prove in Appendix A. Similar results were obtained by Kurtz [8] who studied Markov jump processes, and have been used previously by many researchers, see [5], [7], [17], [18], [20], [26] and the references therein. We use a version due to Wormald [26] which has the advantage of being directly applicable to our situation.
Next we set up the appropriate system of differential equations, and solve them explicitly. This provides us with a concrete condition on the bipartite graph for successful decoding. However, we can only make limited use of the large deviation result, as this only guarantees continuation of the recovery process as long as the number of edges in the induced subgraphs is a constant fraction of the original number of edges. To prove that the process ends successfully, we need a combinatorial argument which proves that the random graph obtained at this stage of the decoding has reasonable expansion properties, with high probability. This expansion property suffices to show that once the number of edges remaining becomes sufficiently small, the decoding process is completed.

easy to compute the conditional expectation of these random

variables. This is done in the next subsection. What we need is

a tool that asserts that these random variables do not deviate too

much from their expected value over the lifetime of the process.

This is a typical example of a so-called large deviation result

which we derive in this subsection. We assume that the reader

is familiar with basic concepts such as (super- and sub-)martin-

gales [19]. For this argument, we follow [26] rather closely.

The evolution of the number of edges of different degrees on

the graphs considered is a typical example of a discrete-time

random process. Let denote a probability space and a mea-

surable space. A discrete-time random process over with state

space is a sequence

of random vari-

ables

. To every

corresponds a realization

of the process. The history of the process

up to time is the sequence

. For a

real-valued measurable function defined on

,

the random variable

is denoted by .

We say that a function

satisfies a Lipschitz con-

dition on

if there exists a constant

such that

for all

.

For a sequence of real-valued random variables

only a countable number of values, we say that

with probability , if

taking

The following theorem summarizes the large deviation result we need later. Its proof can be found in Appendix A.

Theorem 1: Let random processes

be a sequence of discrete time

over a probability space with state space and

be the th history up to time . Let be a positive integer.

For

and all positive integers let

be a measurable function such that

for

all

and for some constant (independent of , ,

). Furthermore, let

be functions from

to .

Suppose

i) there exists a constant such that for all , for all

, and for all

A. Large Deviation

For analyzing our erasure decoding algorithm we need to

where

;

keep track of nodes of degree one on the right side of the bi-

ii) for all and uniformly over all

with

we

partite graph as the algorithm proceeds. As the erasures occur

have

randomly on the left side, it is not surprising that the analysis re-

quires tools from probability theory. We may regard the number

of edges of different degrees on the left and the right sides of the

graph as random variables that evolve over time. It is relatively

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

574

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

iii) for each , the function is continuous and satisfies a Lipschitz condition on , where is some bounded connected open set containing the intersection of with some open neighborhood

Then the following holds.
a) For tions

for some
, the system of differential equa-
Fig. 4. Description of the differential equations.

has a unique solution in for

,

.

b) There is a constant such that

passing through

random node of degree one on the right is chosen, and the cor-

responding node on the left and all of its adjacent edges are

deleted. (If there is no such node, the process necessarily stops.)

The probability that the edge adjacent to the node of degree one

on the right has degree on the left is

, and in this case

we lose edges of degree , see Fig. 4(a). Hence, we have

for

and for each , where

is the so-

lution in a) with

, and

is

the supremum of those to which the solution can be ex-

tended.

for

where is the maximum degree on the

left-hand side.

Abusing the notation slightly, we set

B. The Differential Equations

We begin with the initial random graph , with left nodes

and right nodes. Suppose that the graph is given by the

degree distribution pair

and , as explained in Sec-

tion II-B, and suppose that the total number of edges in the graph

is . As was explained above, the average node degree on the

left initially satisfies

, and similarly the average

node degree on the right initially satisfies

.

In the application of Theorem 1, each time step corresponds

to recovering one node on the left-hand side. Furthermore, the

parameter corresponds to the total number of edges. Let

be the fraction of erasures in the message. Initially, just prior

to time , each node on the left is removed with probability

(because the corresponding message bit is successfully

received), and thus the initial subgraph of contains nodes

on the left. If the process terminates successfully, it runs until

time

. We denote by the scaled time . Hence,

runs from to .

Let be the graph obtained after a random deletion of

nodes on the left. We let be the th edge removed in the

graph . We define to be the graph obtained after removing

all left nodes they are connected to, and all edges

coming out of these nodes. If the process has already stopped at

time , we set

for convenience.

We denote by the number of edges of left degree at time

, and by the number of edges of right degree at time .

Let be the total number of edges in the original graph. We

let

and

represent the fraction

of edges (in terms of ) of degree on the left and right, re-

spectively, at time . We denote by the fraction of the edges

remaining at time , that is,

.

First we note that

for all and , so Con-

dition i) in Theorem 1 is satisfied. Recall that at each step, a

where

, and see that Condition ii) of Theorem 1 is

satisfied for these functions. Furthermore, fixing

, we fur-

ther see that these functions satisfy Condition iii) in the domain

defined by the inequalities

,

, for

all

, and

. Now Theorem 1 implies

that with high probability we have

uniformly for all solution to

, where

form the

(1)

for

.

These differential equations are solved by defining so that

. The value of in terms of is then

By substituting

for

, (1) becomes

, and integrating yields

. Note that

for , and

. Hence,

and

(2)

Since

goes to zero as goes to , runs over the

interval .

To discuss the evolution of the right-hand side, first note that

, where is the maximum degree on the left.

This is because a left node is connected to at most right nodes

and one of the right neighbors has been used to recover the left

node. Hence, Condition i) of the theorem is satisfied. Note that

when we remove a node of degree on the left, we remove the

one edge of degree one from the right, along with the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LUBY et al.: EFFICIENT ERASURE CORRECTING CODES

575

other edges adjacent to this node. Hence the expected number

of other edges deleted is

, where

. The

right endpoints of these other edges on the right-hand side

are randomly distributed. If one of these edges is of degree

on the right, we lose edges of degree , and gain

edges

of degree , see Fig. 4(b). The probability that an edge has

degree on the right is just

. Then, for , we have

In Appendix B we will solve the set of differential equations given by (3) and (4) with the initial condition (5). Here is the result.
Proposition 1: For the solution to the system of differential equations given by (3) and (4) with the initial condition (5) we have
(6)

(We assume that is defined for all positive , and is for

sufficiently large .) The case

plays a special role, as we

must take into account that at each step an edge of degree one

on the right is removed. This gives

where is defined via

.

This immediately gives rise to the following result.

Proposition 2: Let be a bipartite graph with message bits that is chosen at random with edge degrees specified by and . Let be fixed so that

for

Let be the maximum degree of a node on the right. Abusing the notation slightly, we set

for

where

and

. Fixing any

,

we see as in the case of the left-hand side evolution, that these

functions satisfy a Lipschitz condition, as long as

.

Application of Theorem 1 thus yields that almost surely, we

have

For all

there is some such that for all

, if

the message bits of

are erased independently with prob-

ability , then with probability at least

the recovery algorithm terminates with at most message bits

erased.

Proof: Let be the number of edges in the graph. Then

, where is the average degree of the nodes in the left

side of the graph, which is a constant for fixed and . (Note

that

.) Let

. By (6) and the preceding

discussions, with probability at least

the

number of nodes of degree one on the right is

for

, where

. By our as-

sumption, this number is positive (for large enough ), which

proves the assertion.

uniformly for all solution to
and

, where

form the

for

(3)

(4)

Our key interest is in the progression of

as a function of

. As long as

, so that we have a node of degree one

on the right, the process continues; when

the process

stops. Hence we would like

until all nodes on the left

are deleted and the process terminates successfully.

We proceed with the determination of , the expected

fraction of edges of right degree one at time : because each

node on the left is deleted randomly just prior to time with

probability

, and the graph is a random graph over those

with the given degree sequence, to the nodes on the right it is

as though each edge is deleted with probability

. Hence,

an edge whose right incident node had degree before the dele-

tion stage remains in the graph and has degree afterwards with

probability

. Thus

(5)

The foregoing proposition does not prove that the decoding process terminates successfully recovering all the missing nodes on the left-hand side. To do this, we need a combinatorial argument which says that random graphs are good expanders. This means that any small enough subset of left nodes has many right neighbors. The exact statement is given in the proof of the following result.

Lemma 1: Let be a bipartite graph with left nodes chosen

at random with edge degrees specified by and , such

that has

. Then there is some , such that,

with probability

, the recovery process restricted

to the subgraph induced by any -fraction of the left nodes ter-

minates successfully.

Proof: Let be any set of nodes on the left of size at most

, where will be chosen later. Let be the average degree of

these nodes. If the number of nodes on the right that are neigh-

bors of is greater than

, then one of these nodes has only

one neighbor in , and so the process can continue. Thus, we

only need to show that the initial graph is a good expander on

small sets.

Let denote the event that a subset of size of the nodes

on the left has at most neighbors. We first bound

,

and then sum

over all values of no larger than . Fix

any subset of the left nodes of size , and any subset of the

right nodes of size . There are ways of choosing , and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

576

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

ways of choosing . The probability that the neighbors of the vertices in is have

Note that

, hence we have

contains all . Hence, we

For large enough , Condition (7) is satisfied for instead of

(by continuity). Hence, invoking Proposition 2, for any

and any of the graphs in the cascade our decoding algorithm

stops with less than

nodes uncorrected, with probability

for some positive . Now Lemma 1 applies

and shows that, for small enough , the recovery process ends

successfully with probability

. The probability

that our algorithm fails on at least one of the graphs is thus at

most

, where runs from to

. This is

equal to

, which shows the assertion.

where is a constant (depending on and ). Since the

graph does not have nodes of degree one or two, we have that

. Choosing

yields

For designing graphs that lead to good codes, it is thus necessary to fulfill condition (7). It is sometimes desirable to use the “dual condition”
(8)

which shows that, with high probability, the original graph is an expander on small subsets.
The above proof shows that the main contribution for the error probability comes from nodes of degree three on the left. For the same reason, it is easy to see that nodes of degree two will lead to a constant error probability. We leave the details of this argument to the reader.
Altogether we obtain the main theorem of this section.
Theorem 2: Let be an integer, and suppose that

is a cascade of bipartite graphs as explained in Section II, where

has left nodes. Suppose that each is chosen at random

with edge degrees specified by and , such that

has

, and suppose that is such that

(7)

for all

. Then, if at most a -fraction of the coordinates

of an encoded word in are erased independently at random, our

erasure decoding algorithm terminates successfully with prob-

ability

, and does so in

steps.

Proof: At each level of the cascade, the number of

edges equals the average degree of the nodes on the left

times the number of the nodes. The average degree is always

, which is a constant. Hence, the total number of

edges in the cascade (up to the last layer) is , which shows

that the recovery process needs

steps (see Remark 1).

Next we bound the probability that there is some such that

the fraction of left nodes lost on the left side of the graph is

larger than

. We use a version of the Chernoff

bounds given in [19, Problem 4.7(c), p. 98]. According to that,

for any , the probability that there are more erasures than

is upper-bounded by

,

which is smaller than

. The required probability is

certainly at most equal to the sum of these probabilities (union

bound), which is

. (Note that there are

such ’s.)

for

which is obtained from (7) by substituting

. Note that has an inverse on , as it is mono-

tonically increasing.

In the following section we use this theorem to analyze de-

coding properties of codes obtained from regular graphs.

IV. CAPACITY-ACHIEVING CODES

In this section we will construct for any erasure probability

families of codes with linear time erasure decoding algorithms

that can correct any -fraction of erasures and whose rates come

arbitrarily close to the capacity

of the erasure channel.

In other words, we construct codes that are close to optimal in

terms of their erasure recovery rate, and have linear time en-

coding and decoding algorithms. We do this by finding an in-

finite family of solutions to the differential equations of Sec-

tion III in which is close to

, where is the rate.

Let be a bipartite graph with left nodes and right

nodes. We describe our choice for the left and right degree se-

quences of that satisfy condition (7). Let be a positive in-

teger that is used to trade off the average degree with how well

the decoding process works, i.e., how close we can make to

and still have the process finish successfully most

of the time.

The left degree sequence is described by the following trun-

cated heavy tail distribution. Let

be the har-

monic sum truncated at , and thus

. Then, for

all

the fraction of edges of degree on the

left is given by

The average left degree equals

. Recall that

we require the average right degree to satisfy

. The

right degree sequence is defined by the Poisson distribution with

mean : for all

the fraction of edges of degree on the

right equals

where is chosen to guarantee that the average degree on the

right is . In other words, satisfies

.

Note that we allow

for all

, and hence is

not truly a polynomial, but a power series. However, truncating

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LUBY et al.: EFFICIENT ERASURE CORRECTING CODES

577

the power series at a sufficiently high term gives a finite

distribution of the edge degrees for which the next lemma is

still valid.

We show that when

, then condition (7) is

satisfied, i.e.,

on , where

and

Note that is the expansion of

truncated at the

th term, and scaled so that

. Further,

.

Lemma 2: With the above choices for and we have

on

if

.

Proof: Since increases monotonically in , we have

Fig. 5. Erasure decoding of irregular graphs: left degree versus the overhead beyond optimal value needed to recover (rate = 1=2).
which is obviously true. By the aforementioned expansion property of the subgraph of induced by the set of unrecovered left nodes, we see that the process terminates successfully.

As

and

, we obtain

which shows that the right-hand side of the above inequality is

larger than

on .

A problem is that Lemma 1 does not apply to this system

because there are nodes of degree two on the left. Indeed, sim-

ulations demonstrate that for these choices of

and

a small number of nodes often do remain. To overcome this

problem, we make a small change in the structure of the graph

. Let

. We split the right nodes of into two

distinct sets, the first set consisting of

nodes and the

second set consisting of nodes. The graph is then formed

by taking the union of two graphs, and . is formed as

described up to this point between the left nodes and the first

set of

right nodes. is formed between the left

nodes and the second set of right nodes, where each of the

left nodes has degree three and the edges are connected

randomly to the right nodes.

Lemma 3: Let be the bipartite graph described above.

Then, with probability

, the decoding process

terminates successfully when started on a subgraph of

induced by of the left nodes and all of the right nodes,

where

.

Proof: In the analysis of the process, we may think of

as being held in reserve to handle nodes not already dealt with

using . First, using the same method as in Lemma 1 we can

prove that there is some such that a set of

left nodes

in the graph expands to a set of at least

nodes on the

right, with probability

. (Note that all nodes on

the left have degree three in this graph.) Combining Proposition

2 and Lemma 2, we see that the recovery process started on

terminates with less than nodes on the left unrecovered, with

probability

for some positive : note that the

ratio of the number of left nodes to the number of right nodes

in the graph equals

, hence the condition in

Lemma 2 translates to

Note that the degree of each left node in this modified construction of is at most three bigger than the average degree of each left node in the construction of described at the beginning of this section. We can use this observation and the lemma above to immediately prove the following.

Theorem 3: For any with

, any with

, and sufficiently large block length , there is a linear code

and a decoding algorithm that, with probability

,

is able to correct a random

-fraction of erasures

in time proportional to

.

Proof: Set

to get a one level code with

the properties described in Lemma 3. Then cascade versions

of these codes as described in Section II to get the entire

code. As was pointed out above, the average degree of

the left nodes in each of the layers is upper-bounded by

, which is proportional to

.

Hence, the total number of edges in the bipartite layers of the

graph is proportional to

, which proves the assertion

on the decoding time.

Using Lemma 3 and the same analysis as in the proof of The-

orem 2, we can show that the code constructed above can re-

cover, with probability

, all the message bits, if

a random -fraction of the codeword is missing, where

. Noting that

, we obtain the result.

Fig. 5 shows the running time of the encoding/recovery al-

gorithms (as multiples of the block length) versus the overhead

needed to recover. For instance, for sufficiently large , one can

construct in this way

-codes that have encoding/recovery

algorithms running in time , which can recover a codeword

from a random set of

of its coordinates.

V. PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS
The discussions in the preceding sections have been of a more theoretical, rather than a practical nature. However, as the graph codes designed via the above mentioned theorems can be used in practical situations, it is important to describe possible implementations. We start with modifying our construction by allowing erasures to also occur on the right-hand side. An analysis

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

578

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

of this type provides us with some insight in how to design cascaded versions of our codes with much fewer levels, and faster decoding algorithms for the end level. Next, we show how to use a linear programming approach to design bipartite graphs which give rise to very good codes. Finally, we briefly discuss some of our implementations. A preliminary report on the results of this section appeared in [9].

Furthermore, up to lower order terms, the fraction of left nodes unrecovered at time equals
We will prove this lemma later in Appendix C. We immediately obtain the condition

A. Fraction of Left Nodes Unrecovered

So far we have assumed in our analysis that in each layer of

the cascade all the check bits are received when trying to re-

cover the message bits. The reason we made this assumption is

that in the original construction the cascading sequence of bipar-

tite graphs is completed by adding a standard erasure-correcting

code at the last level.

There are some practical problems with this. One annoyance

is that it is inconvenient to combine two different types of

codes. A more serious problem is that standard erasure-cor-

recting codes take quadratic time to encode and decode (if the

alphabet size is large enough; otherwise, cubic running time

will do). Suppose the message is mapped to a codeword twice

its length. In order to have the combined code run in linear

time, this implies that the last graph in the cascading sequence

has left nodes, where is the number of nodes associated

with the original message, i.e., there are

graphs in

the sequence. In the analysis, we assume that an equal fraction

of the nodes in each level of the graph are received. However,

there is variance in this fraction at each level, with the worst

expected fractional variance at the last level of

. Thus, if

a message of length

is stretched to a codeword of length

, then just because of the variance of

,

we expect to have to receive

times the message length of

the codeword in order to recover the message.

A solution to this problem is to use many fewer levels of

graphs in the cascade, and to avoid using a standard erasure-cor-

recting code in the last level. That is, for the last layer, we con-

tinue to use a randomly chosen graph. We have tried this idea,

with the last graph chosen from an appropriate distribution, and

it works quite well. For example, using only three levels of

graphs we can reliably recover a message of length

from

a random portion of length

(i.e.,

times the optimal

of

) of a block-length of

To design the graph for this solution, we need to analyze the

decoding process when a random portion of both the message

bits and the check bits are missing. The following result gives

the expected fraction of right nodes of degree one with respect

to the number of edges in the graph, and estimates the fraction

of left nodes unrecovered at each step of the algorithm.

Lemma 4: Suppose each node on the left is missing with

probability and each node on the right is missing with prob-

ability . The fraction

of edges of right degree one at

with respect to the number of edges in the original graph

equals

(9)

for successful decoding.

It is not possible to satisfy the above inequality for all

if

, for any value of : for

the left-hand side

equals

which is strictly less than . There is an

intuitive reason for this: the subgraph on which the process

starts has edges of degree one on the left; these edges can only

correct the left nodes they are connected to, and cannot help any

other node on the left.

However, it turns out to be an interesting question to see what

fraction of the left nodes can be recovered when a fraction

of the right nodes is missing. The answer to this question can

be used to design cascading codes where the decoding process

moves from right to left bootstrapping up to recover a higher

and higher fraction of nodes at each successive decoded layer

of the graph until in practice it is able to recover all of the first

(message) layer (see Fig. 6).

Given the and vectors, condition (9) can be used to

compute the smallest value of for which the condition is still

valid. The second part of Lemma 4 then gives the fraction of

unrecovered nodes on the left at this value of .

B. Computing Degree Sequences Using Linear Programming

In this subsection, we describe a heuristic approach that

has proven effective in practice to find a good right degree

sequence given a specific left degree sequence. The method

uses linear programming and the differential equation analysis

of Section III. Recall that a necessary condition for the process

to complete is that

on . We first

describe a heuristic for determining for a given

repre-

senting the left degree sequence and a value for whether there

is an appropriate

representing the right degree sequence

satisfying this condition. We begin by choosing a set of

positive integers which we want to contain the degrees on the

right-hand side. To find appropriate ,

, we use the

condition given by Theorem 2 to generate linear constraints

that the must satisfy by considering different values of .

For example, by examining the condition at

, we obtain

the constraint

, which is linear in the

coefficients of .

We generate constraints by choosing for multiples of

for some integer . We also include the constraints

for all

. We then use linear programming to determine

if suitable exist that satisfy our derived constraints. Note

that we have a choice for the function we wish to optimize; one

choice that works well is to minimize the sum of

on the values of chosen to generate the constraints. The

best value for for given is found by binary search.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LUBY et al.: EFFICIENT ERASURE CORRECTING CODES

579

Fig. 6. Bootstrapping strategy.

Given the solution from the linear programming problem, we can check whether the computed satisfy the condition
on .

TABLE I CLOSE TO OPTIMAL CODES FOR DIFFERENT RATES AND AVERAGE
LEFT DEGREES

Due to our discretization, there are usually some conflict

subintervals in which the solution does not satisfy this in-

equality. Choosing large values for the tradeoff parameter

results in smaller conflict intervals, although it requires more

time to solve the linear program. For this reason we use small

values of during the binary search phase. Once a value for

is found, we use larger values of for that specific to

obtain small conflict intervals. In the last step, we get rid of the

conflict intervals by appropriately decreasing the value of .

This always works since

is a decreasing function

of .

the corresponding average degree is

We ran the linear programming approach on left degree

sequences of the form

for codes with

rates

and average left degrees

. These results are gathered in Table I which shows

how much of the codeword is sufficient to recover the entire

message as a fraction of the message length as the message

length goes to infinity. Since these graphs do not have nodes of

degree two on the left, Theorem 2 implies that with high proba-

bility the corresponding codes recover the entire message from

the portion of the codeword indicated in the table, provided

the message length is large enough. However, as the maximum

degrees in the examples we have found are rather large (about

), these codes are rather impractical.

One major disadvantage of the approach given above is that we need to fix the left-hand side of the graph. To overcome this difficulty, we use the dual condition (8). We can now use this condition and the linear programming approach to solve for the best given , then use the original condition to solve for the best given this , and so on. We have tried this strategy and it gives good results, although at this point we have not proved anything about its convergence to a (possibly optimal) pair of probability distributions.

For example, we found that the following pair of degree se-

quence functions yield

-codes which are able to recover

from a random set of

coordinates, with high probability;

Note that, in contrast to the examples above, the maximum node degrees in these graphs are much smaller. This makes them more practical for smaller values of than the codes giving rise to Table I.

C. Implementations and Timings

In this subsection, we report on some of the implementa-

tions of our codes. In all these examples a message consisting of

640 000 packets was encoded into a vector of 1 280 000 packets,

and each packet consisted of 256 bytes. The cascade consisted

of three layers: a first layer consisting of 640K nodes on the

left, and 320K nodes on the right, a second layer consisting of

320K nodes on the left and 160K nodes on the right, and a third

layer consisting of 160K nodes on the left and on the right. The

edge distributions of the graphs used in the first and the second

layer were the heavy tail/Poisson distribution discussed in Sec-

tion IV. The edge distribution in the third layer was different,

and used some of the analysis of Section V-A: the edge distri-

bution on the left was a “double heavy tail” distribution, given

by

, where is the edge distribution function of

the heavy tail distribution.

To chose an appropriate random bipartite graph with

edges, nodes on the left, and nodes on the right, the pro-

gram started with a bipartite graph with nodes on both the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

580

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

of using sparse bipartite graphs for constructing codes is not new [6], [25], the construction of the graphs in each of the layers is novel. We obtained the construction by analyzing a simple decoding algorithm. The analysis used results asserting the sharp concentration of parameters in a discrete random process around their means. Using this, we established a simple condition that the degree sequences of the left- and right-hand sides of the bipartite graphs had to satisfy in order for the process to finish successfully. We designed a family of capacity-achieving codes on the erasure channel with linear time encoding and decoding algorithms. We should point out that our model of computation, as it stands, is that of a random-access machine with unit cost. However, our construction can be modified using prefetching strategies to yield linear time algorithms for random-access machines with logarithmic cost. The modification is quite similar to that given in [24].

Fig. 7. Cascade for example.

VII. FURTHER DEVELOPMENTS

left- and right-hand sides, with each node of representing

an edge slot. Each node on the left-hand side of was associ-

ated with a node on the left side of , so that the distribution of

degrees is given by

and similarly for the right.

The program then chooses a random matching (i.e., a random

permutation) between the two sets of nodes on . This in-

duced a random bipartite graph on (perhaps with multiedges)

in the obvious manner with the desired degree structure. In ex-

periments, it turned out that the existence of multiedges is not a

serious problem. This can be explained by the observation that

one can analyze the process for random multigraphs instead of

random graphs and that this analysis turns out to yield essen-

tially the same results as the one carried out in Section III.

A schematic description of the code is given in Fig. 7. The av-

erage degree of the nodes in this graph was . The decoding algo-

rithm was executed 1000 times, each time with a different random

loss pattern.Fig. 8 shows length overheadstatistics: the horizontal

axis represents and the vertical axis represents the percentage of

times where

times the length of the message was needed

to completely recover the message, based on the 1000 trials. In

compliance with the results of Section III, we see that the param-

eters are sharply concentrated around their mean value.

On a DEC-alpha machine with 300 MHz and 64-Mbyte RAM

the encoding took 0.58 CPU-seconds, and the decoding took

0.94 s, on average. This corresponds to a throughput of roughly

280 Mbit/s.

On a Pentium Pro at 200 MHz and 64-Mbyte RAM, the en-

coding took 0.58 s, while the decoding took 1.73 s, on average.

This corresponds to a throughput of roughly 150 Mbit/s.

It should be noted that most of the time in our algorithm is

spent in pointer chasing. The code used was a straightforward C

implementation. Use of more sophisticated data types, and more

intelligent prefetching strategies would probably speed up the

code considerably.

VI. CONCLUSION
We have introduced in this paper a class of error-correcting codes, based on a cascade of bipartite graphs. Although the idea

The appearance of the first version of this paper as an extended abstract in [13] inspired new developments which we would like to briefly comment on in this section. First, the analysis of this paper was simplified in [9] by using proper martingale arguments. Nevertheless, since we feel that the approach outlined in this paper (in particular, Theorem 1) may have other applications, we opted for leaving the analysis in its original form. One of the main results of this paper is the fact that properly chosen irregular graphs perform a lot better than regular graphs, and that the only parameters that determine the asymptotic performance are the fractions of nodes of various degrees. This observation together with the new analysis were combined in [10] to study irregular low-density parity-check codes on the binary-symmetric channel, with simple hard-decision decoding algorithms going back to Gallager [6].4 This paper appears to have been influential. First, the idea of using irregular codes was taken up and extended by other researchers (see, e.g., [14]). Second, the main “concentration theorem” of [10] was extended to a large class of channel models in a landmark paper by Richardson and Urbanke [22], which first appeared in 1998. Based on their approach, they developed the “density evolution” algorithm, a numerical procedure to approximate the threshold of noise below which the belief propagation algorithm5 is asymptotically successful. Several months later, their method was further extended in [21] in which sequences of codes were constructed for which the belief propagation algorithm had a performance extremely close to the Shannon capacity, beating turbo codes [2] by a wide margin for modest block lengths.
Another main result of this paper was to show that there are families of degree sequences such that the corresponding graphs asymptotically meet the capacity of the erasure channel (using our simple erasure-decoding algorithm). Another family of such degree sequences was exhibited in [23]. So far, these have been the only known capacity-achieving families of degree sequences, and another example of a communication channel for which capacity-achieving sequences exist for all rates is yet to be found.
4An updated version of this paper appears in [12]. 5Our erasure decoder turns out to be the belief propagation algorithm for the erasure channel [21].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LUBY et al.: EFFICIENT ERASURE CORRECTING CODES

581

Fig. 8. Length overhead statistics.

APPENDIX A PROOF OF THEOREM 1

Recall that a sequence of random variables

is

called a martingale if

for all

The sequence is called a submartingale (supermartingale) if

For the proof of our concentration result we need the following well-known result, often called Azuma’s inequality [26, Lemma 1].

Theorem 4: Let

be a supermartingale with re-

spect to a sequence of -algebras with

, and

suppose that

and

for some constant

and for . Then for all

we have

Proof of Theorem 1: We modify the proof in [26] slightly

to obtain the error bounds asserted in the theorem. First, note

that by a standard result in the theory of first-order differential

equations, there is a unique solution in part a) of the theorem.

As in [26], we simplify the notation by considering

and referring to

, , and as , , and , and so on. The

proof for general is similar.

Let

, and assume that

. We

first demonstrate concentration of

. Notice that the

Lipschitz condition on and Condition ii) imply that for all

For fixed , define the random variable Note that

This shows that the form a supermartingale with respect to , as

Furthermore, the above equality shows that

for some constant . We can now apply the inequality of

Theorem 4. As

, we obtain

for any

. (The parameter will be chosen later.) The lower

tail can be bounded in exactly the same way, using a submartin-

gale. This gives for any constant (to be chosen later)

Now let Let

, where

(10) and

We prove by induction on that
for some constant .
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

582

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

The assertion is obvious for the induction starting at . Define

, as

equals

can be written as

, which in terms of the function . Hence, we obtain for

Note that

As is verified easily, the explicit solution is given by (11)

The inductive hypothesis gives that

with probability

at least

. Further, by (10), we have

with probability at least

. To

bound we proceed as follows. By the mean value theorem

we have that

, where

is the derivative of and is some real number with

. Note that satisfies the differential equation in

(1), hence

, and by the Lipschitz condition

on we obtain

for some constants to be determined from the initial condi-

tions for . These equations can be solved recursively, starting

with the highest nonzero , say . In this case, we have

, which gives

for

some constant . Using induction, it is then easy to prove that

(12)

Further, since

, one verifies by induction that

By the continuity of and the inductive hypothesis, we see that Plugging (5) into the last equation we see that for suitable choice of the constant we have

for large enough . Altogether we obtain

with probability at least

Now we choose

. Then

(Use from (12)

.) Hence, we obtain for (13)

To obtain the formula for , we note that . The sum of the right-hand side of (13) over all
equals

for all

Hence, we see that (2) is satisfied at

with probability at

least

. Furthermore, as

for all

(The inner sum equals if we have

we contend that ified range, with probability at least

for all in the spec.

We remark that one can have better choices for and in the above proof which make the error terms smaller, at the expense of making the error probability slightly larger.

, and is zero otherwise.) Hence,

APPENDIX B PROOF OF PROPOSITION 1

This completes the proof.

We will prove Proposition 1 in this appendix. We start with

the substitution

. This means that

, and this transforms for

(3) into

where prime stands for derivative with respect to the variable , and is the average degree of the graph at time . Note that

APPENDIX C PROOF OF LEMMA 4
Again, we begin with the initial random graph , with left nodes and right nodes, and continue to work with the generating functions and from Section III. Suppose that each node on the right is removed with probability , while nodes on the left are removed with probability . The

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LUBY et al.: EFFICIENT ERASURE CORRECTING CODES

new process can now be studied as a process with erasures

on the left only, which runs on the subgraph of the initial

consisting of the

undeleted nodes on the right. Let

be the fraction of edges of degree in with respect to

the total number of edges in . Define similarly. Obviously,

, as the number of edges of degree and the number of

total edges in are a

-factor of those of . As for ,

it is easily seen that

Further, recall that Thus

583
. Thus

This is done as follows: an edge of degree is with probability

connected to an undeleted node on the right. The proba-

bility that of the remaining edges is connected to one

of the deleted nodes on the right is exactly a

-fraction of

the above sum.

The above formula shows that

.

Invoking Theorem 1 we see that the expected number of edges

of right degree one at time (with respect to the total number

of edges in ) equals

This implies
Finally
By using Theorem 1, this shows that the fraction of nodes unrecovered at time is, up to small order terms, equal to

Since the number of edges in is

times the number of

edges in , the assertion on

follows.

To prove the second part of the proposition, we retain the no-

tation established earlier, e.g., is the fraction of the original

edges remaining at . Let be the number of edges in the orig-

inal graph, be the number of left nodes in the original graph,

and thus the average left node degree is

. We define

to be the average node degree among nodes on the left that

have at least one edge at .

We define to be the fraction of left nodes of degree in the

original graph, and thus

. We define to be

the expected fraction of original left nodes still not recovered at

. We define to be the fraction of left nodes that have all their

neighbors among the original fraction of missing right nodes.

We define

to be the expected fraction of left nodes that

have at least one neighbor not among the original fraction of

missing right nodes and that are still not recovered at .

One can verify that

, and that

. Thus, our goal is to deduce a closed-form expres-

sion for . The number of unrecovered left nodes with

at least one neighbor at is equal to the number of edges

remaining at divided by . The number of edges at is

, and thus

We now turn to . It can be verified that

From this it follows that

, and thus

Recall that

and completes the proof.

REFERENCES

[1] N. Alon and M. Luby, “A linear time erasure-resilient code with nearly

optimal recovery,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 1732–1736,

Nov. 1996.

[2] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit

error-correcting coding and decoding,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Communica-

tion (ICC’93), Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.

[3] R. E. Blahut, Theory and Practice of Error Control Codes. Reading,

MA: Addison-Wesley, 1983.

[4] P. Elias, “Coding for two noisy channels,” in Information Theory, 3rd

London Symp., 1955, pp. 61–76.

[5] A. Frieze and S. Suen, “Analysis of two simple heuristics on a random

instance of k-SAT,” J. Algorithms, vol. 20, pp. 312–355, 1996.

[6] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA:

MIT Press, 1963.

[7] R. Karp and M. Sipser, “Maximum matchings in sparse random graphs,”

in Proc. 22nd FOCS, 1981, pp. 364–375.

[8] T. G. Kurtz, “Approximation of population processes,” in CBMS-NSF

Regional Conf. Series in Applied Math., SIAM, 1981.

[9] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, and M. A. Shokrollahi, “Analysis of

random processes via and-or tree evaluation,” in Proc. 9th Annu.

ACM-SIAM Symp. Discrete Algorithms, 1998, pp. 364–373.

[10] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman,

“Analysis of low density codes and improved designs using irregular

graphs,” in Proc. 30th Annu. ACM Symp. Theory of Computing, 1998,

pp. 249–258.

[11]

, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs

and belief propagation,” in Proc. 1998 IEEE Int. Symp. Information

Theory, 1998, p. 117.

[12]

, “Analysis of low density codes and improved designs using irreg-

ular graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 671–686, Feb.

2000.

[13] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, D. Spielman, and V. Ste-

mann, “Practical loss-resilient codes,” in Proc. 29th Annu. ACM Symp.

Theory of Computing, 1997, pp. 150–159.

[14] D. MacKay, S. Wilson, and M. Davey, “Comparison of constructions of

irregular Gallager codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 10, pp.

1449–1454, Oct. 1999.

[15] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance

of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp.

1645–1646, 1996.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

584

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

[16] F. J. MacWilliams and N. J. A. Sloane, The Theory of Error-Correcting

Codes. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North-Holland, 1988.

[17] M. Mitzenmacher, “The power of two choices in randomized load bal-

ancing,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. Calif, Berkeley, 1996.

[18]

, “Tight thresholds for the pure literal rule,” DEC/SRC, Tech. Rep.

1997-011, 1997.

[19] R. Motwani and P. Raghavan, Randomized Algorithms. Cambridge,

U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1995.

[20] B. Pittel, J. Spencer, and N. Wormald, “Sudden emergence of a giant

k-core in a random graph,” J. Comb. Theory, Ser. B, vol. 67, pp. 111–151,

1996.

[21] T. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-

approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. In-

form. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2000.

[22] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2000.
[23] M. A. Shokrollahi, “New sequences of linear time erasure codes approaching the channel capacity,” in Proc. 13th Int. Symp. Applied Algebra, Algebraic Algorithms, and Error-Correcting Codes (Lecture Notes in Computer Science), M. Fossorier, H. Imai, S. Lin, and A. Poli, Eds. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag, 1999, pp. 65–76.
[24] M. Sipser and D. Spielman, “Expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 1710–1722, Nov. 1996.
[25] D. Spielman, “Linear-time encodable and decodable error-correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 1723–1731, Nov. 1996.
[26] N. C. Wormald, “Differential equations for random processes and random graphs,” Ann. Appl. Probab., vol. 5, pp. 1217–1235, 1995.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:50:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

