ISIT2001,Washington, DC, June 24-29, 2001

Iterative Reliability Based Decoding of LDPC Codes
Marc Fossorier’
Dept. of Electrical Engineering University of Hawaii
Honolulu, HI 96822, U.S.A. marc@aravis.eng.hanaii.edu

Abstract - In this work, reliability based decoding is combined with belief propagation (BP) decoding for low-density parity check (LDPC) codes. At each iteration, the soft output values delivered by the BP algorithm are used as reliability values to perform reduced complexity soft decision decoding of the code considered. This approach allows t o bridge the error performance gap between BP decoding which remains suboptimum, and maximum likelihood decoding (MLD) which is too complex to be implemented far the codes considered. A stopping criterion which reduces the average number of iterations at the expense of very little performance degradation is also proposed for this combined decoding approach. Simulations results for several Gallager LDPC codes and different set cyclic (DSC) codes of hundreds of information bits are given and elaborated.
I. SUMMARY
Recently, iterative decoding of low-density parity check (LDPC) codes has received a great deal of interest. The main motivations of these works are the excellent performances achieved by such codes for long enough lengths, and their relatively simple iterative decoding methods based on BP [l, 21. Although BP decoding of such codes does not achieve MLD [ 3 ] ,it has been showed to closely approach theoretical limits derived for iterative decoding [ 3 ] . Interestingly, these limits are themselves very close to the channel capacity for the AWGN channel. On the other hand, these limits also assume certain conditions about the loops in the Tanner graph representation of the codes which may need very long code lengths to be satisfied with a sufficiently high probability [3].
In this work, we propose to combine BP decoding with reliability based decoding for LDPC codes of short to medium code lengths (say of hundreds or few thousand bits). At each iteration, the soft-output values delivered by the BP algorithm are viewed as reliability values by a soft decision decoding algorithm. As a result, at each iteration, BP decoding is completed by a low complexity reliability based soft decision decoding algorithm. In order to keep a manageable decoding complexity, we choose order-1 reprocessing of the ordered statistic decoding (OSD) algorithm of [4]. This approach allows to bridge the gap between the error performance achieved by the B P algorithm and that of MLD, which is much too complex to be implemented for the codes considered. To further reduce the average number of iterations and consequently, the average number of OSD’s, a stopping criterion is also proposed.
Figure 1 compares BP decoding with the combined proposed scheme for a (3,6) Gallager code of length 504 and dimension 252. We observe that for the WER 10-3.5, order-1
‘This work was supported by NSF Grants CCR-97-32959 and CCR-00-98029.

reprocessing of at most 50 B P decoding iterations achieves a 0.55 dB coding gain over BP decoding of at most 200 iterations. Simulations for other LDPC and DSC codes of up to few thousand information bits have been performed. In all cases, non negligible improvements over BP decoding have been obtained with the proposed combined method.
This approach allows t o bridge the error performance gap between BP decoding and MLD. In general, compared with B P decoding, each iteration of the proposed combined approach requires a greater number of computations, but less iterations are needed to achieve either near-MLD decoding, or a predetermined error performance which outperforms that of BP decoding. Furthermore, this approach provides a way to measure the effectiveness of a given code construction. More specifically, it allows to distinguish between the suboptimality of iterative decoding and the error performance penalty due to the construction itself with respect to other codes with similar parameters. Extensions to other “turbo-like” codes or other SISO decoding methods combined with reliability based soft decision decoding worth further investigations.

B e k f Propagatlo”
0 Maximum of 50 tt x Maximum of 200 it

0 Maximum of 50 11

* Maximum of l o 11with SyndromeCheck

o Maximum of 50 It with Syndmme Check

x Maximum d 200 TwIlh Syndmme Check

1

+ Maximum of 50 it with Syndmme Check and Test T(2)

-0

05

1

15

2

2.5

SNR (in dB)

Figure 1: WER comparison between BP decoding and BP+OS decoding of a (3,6) (504, 252) LDPC code.
REFERENCES
[1] R.G. Gallager, Low-density parity-check codes. Cambridge,MA: M.I.T. Press, 1963.
[2] D.J.C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399-431, Mar. 1999.
[3] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The Capacity of Low-Density Parity Check Codes under Message-Passing Decoding,” submitted t o IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory.
[4] M.P.C. Fossorier and S . Lin, “Soft-DecisionDecodingof Linear Block Codes basedon Ordered Statistics,” IEEE Trans. Inform. T h e o r y , vol. 41, pp. 1379-1396, Sept. 1995.

233 0-7803-7123-2/01/$10.00 02001 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:30:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

