ISIT2001,Washington, DC, June 24-29,2001

FA

Bounds on the Performance of Belief Propagation Decoding
David Burshtein and Gadi Miller Department of Electrical Engineering - Systems
Tel-Aviv University Tel-Aviv 69978, Israel e-mail: burstyn,gmiller@eng. tau.ac.i.1

Abstract - We consider Gallager's soft decoding (belief propagation) algorithm for decoding low density parity check (LDPC) codes, when applied to an arbitrary binary-input symmetric-output channel. By considering the expected values of the messages, we derive both lower and upper bounds on the performance of the algorithm. We also derive various properties of the decoding algorithm, such as robustness to the initial values of the messages. Our results apply both to regular and irregular LDPC codes.

bipartite graph ensemble with parameters c and d. For any
E > 0, any integer t and N sufficiently large:
+ EXtf1 < ( 1 e)f^(EXtc, ,d , p )
where
(3)

I. INTRODUCTION
We assume a binary-input ( ( 0 , l ) ), symmetric-output, memoryless channel and consider ensembles of regular and irregular LDPC codes [2]. Let N be the block length of the code, and
let sv v = 1 , . . .,N be the channel output for the w-th input bit. qv = P ( l 1 s v ) denotes the conditional probability of
the w-th transmitted bit given s v . The algorithm is initialized by assigning rightbound message values to each edge in the bipartite graph representation of the code, such that for an edge e with left vertex w this value is 7. The algorithm then proceeds as described in [l].
Consider the subgraph of depth two spanned from an edge e , with left vertex w. We assume that this subgraph is tree like. This assumption holds with probability arbitrarily close to one for a sufficiently large block length. Denote the edges of this tree by e = ( v , w ) , ei = ( V , T I ~ )and ei,j
( i = 1 , . . . ,deg(w) - 1 ; j = 1,.. . ,deg(vi) - 1) for levels 0, 1
and 2 of the tree respectively. Denote by Xt+' the random variable (r.v.) corresponding to the rightbound value passed
+ in the decoding algorithm along e at time t 1. Similarly,
denote by Kt the leftbound message along the edge ei at time
t , and by Xt,j the rightbound message along the edge ei3j a t time t . Finally let q = qv. Then the following relations hold:

p = !j (1-)-/,

and q = !j (1 - ( 1 - 2 2 d)-T1 )

Note that the bound in Theorem 1 depends on the channel only through Ev. Hence Eq may be viewed as a quality measure of the channel. For example, for a BSC with c = 3 and
d = 6 , our bound shows that for p 5 0.0708 the algorithm
succeeds for any initial consistent message distribution. A stronger bound, that depends on the channel in a more complicated way, was also derived.
The following theorem provides a lower bound on E X t .
Theorem 2 Consider a binary-input symmetric-output channel and consider the belief propagation algorithm when applied t o decode a n L D P C code chosen f r o m the regular bipartite graph ensemble with parameters c and d. For any
E > 0, any integer t and N suficiently large:

Corollary 1 Consider a binary-input symmetric-output
channel and consider the belief propagation algorithm when applied t o decode a n L D P C code chosen f r o m the regular
bipartite graph ensemble with parameters c and d. For any
E > 0 , a n y integer t and any RO< 1 the following holds: If c and d are suficiently large and satisfy 1- c / d 2 Ro, then f o r
N sufficiently large:

Xt+' = G ( Y f ,Y,",. . .,Y,-l, q ) , where c = deg(w) (2)
11. BOUNDOSN THE PERFORMANCE
In order to analyze the algorithm we assume without loss of generality that the all-zero codeword was transmitted. We then obtain bounds on the conditional expectation of the messages given this assumption.
Theorem 1 Consider a binary-input symmetric-output channel and consider the belief propagation algorithm when applied t o decode a n L D P C code chosen f r o m the regular

For a BSC with crossover p , Corollary 1 shows that the bit error probability after t iterations approaches the uncoded bit error probability, provided that N is sufficiently large. That is belief propagation is useless here after any fixed number of iterations.
Finally we note that our results may be generalized t o the irregular case.
REFERENCES
[l] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes, M.1.T Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1963.
[2] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi and R. Urbanke, "Design of capacity approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes", IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619-637, 2001.

3 0-7803-7123-2/01/$I 0.00 02001 I EEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:42:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

