748

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 37, NO. 2, MARCH 2001

VLSI Architectures for Iterative Decoders in Magnetic Recording Channels
Engling Yeo, Student Member, IEEE, Payam Pakzad, Borivoje Nikolic´, Member, IEEE, and Venkat Anantharam, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—VLSI implementation complexities of soft-input soft-output (SISO) decoders are discussed. These decoders are used in iterative algorithms based on Turbo codes or Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes, and promise significant bit error performance advantage over conventionally used partial-response maximum likelihood (PRML) systems, at the expense of increased complexity. This paper analyzes the requirements for computational hardware and memory, and provides suggestions for reduced-complexity decoding and reduced control logic. Serial concatenation of interleaved codes, using an outer block code with a partial response channel acting as an inner encoder, is of special interest for magnetic storage applications.
Index Terms—Iterative decoders, LDPC codes, magnetic recording, turbo codes, VLSI architectures.

Fig. 1. Serially concatenated turbo encoder with a convolutional outer code.

I. INTRODUCTION

A TURBO encoder using serial concatenation of a convolutional code or Low Density Parity Check (LDPC)

code with a partial-response channel acting as the inner coder

is shown in Fig. 1 [1]. The iterative decoder (Fig. 2) uses a

combination of soft-input-soft-output (SISO) decoders sep-

arated by interleavers, , and the inverse, . We present

SISO decoder implementations that employ either the MAP

Algorithm (BCJR) [2], Soft Output Viterbi Algorithm (SOVA)

[3], or the LDPC decoding algorithm [5].

All systems considered in this paper assume an

par-

tial response channel. The particular partial response target is

not essential to the following discussion, and

is used

as an example because it presents a complexity equivalent to

contemporary read channel detectors. The outer code is either

a 16-state binary convolutional code or an LDPC code, imple-

menting a rate 8/9 coding. As is common with most magnetic

recording channels, the use of block codes and interleaver de-

sign is restricted to a sector size of 4096 user bits. The number of

bits used to represent the log-likelihood ratios or messages is a

tradeoff between the amount of hardware required and the BER

performance of the iterative decoder. Earlier systems using 4 to

6-bit representations [6], [7] have reported good performance

with respect to floating-point results.

Manuscript received June 20, 2000; revised Oct 11, 2000. The work of P. Pakzad and V. Anantharam was supported by the National Science Foundation through Awards IRI-97-12131 and SBR-9873086, and by ONR MURI through Award N00014-1-0637 on “Decision Making Under Uncertainty.”
The authors are with the Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences Department, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA (e-mail: yeo@eecs.berkeley.edu).
Publisher Item Identifier S 0018-9464(01)02388-3.

Fig. 2. Iterative decoder using SISO decoders separated by interleavers.
Fig. 3. Pipelined decoder for serially concatenated turbo codes using outer decoder D1 and inner decoder D2 separated by interleavers/deinterleavers,
= .
In order to achieve desired throughputs (above 1 Gbps) that are in line with current trends in magnetic recording systems, a fully unrolled and pipelined architecture [6] is needed (Fig. 3). This results in a linear complexity increase with the number of iterations.
In the following sections, structures for the building blocks of an iterative decoder will be analyzed. Section II discusses the implementation of an interleaver and deinterleaver. Section III discusses a MAP decoder implementing the Windowed-BCJR algorithm, using a minimal number of Add–Compare–Select units and a highly regular memory access pattern. A realization of a SOVA decoder by a simple extension of the register exchange method is presented in Section IV. Section V discusses a pipelined LDPC decoder and proposes a message arrangement in memory that lowers the complexity for address decoding. Section VI compares the results and Section VII provides some concluding remarks.

0018–9464/01$10.00 © 2001 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:53:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YEO et al.: VLSI ARCHITECTURES FOR ITERATIVE DECODERS IN MAGNETIC RECORDING CHANNELS

749

Fig. 4. Interleavers and deinterleavers implemented using alternating read/write buffers.

II. INTERLEAVER

The randomness of the interleaver output sequence makes

it difficult to realize in-place storage. A direct interleaver

implementation uses two banks of buffers alternating between

read/write for consecutive sectors of data (Fig. 4). The latency

through an interleaver is therefore equal to the block size.

The basic block interleaver design uses a minimal amount of

control logic. Using static random-access memory (SRAM) for

high-speed implementation, the interleaver inputs are written

row-wise in the memory array, while outputs are read column-

wise. For a block interleaver of size arranged as an by

matrix, such that

, this assures that bits located

within a distance of

before interleaving are separated

by a minimum distance of after interleaving. The sequential

write/read pattern along rows/columns allows the memory ac-

cess operations of this interleaver to make use of cycle counters

to activate both word (row) lines and bit (column) lines, thereby

eliminating the necessity to perform memory-address decoding.

More sophisticated interleaver designs [8], [9] yield improved

error rate performance, but result in increased implementation

complexity. Therefore, the implementation of the described

basic interleaver provides a lower limit on complexity.

9 Fig. 5. Add-compare-select unit for an iterator (either forward or backward)
using the (.) operator as indicated within the box.

3) Depending on position (inner/outer) of decoder, the

required a posteriori probability,

is either

or

respectively.

(4)
The structures for both forward and backward iterations are identical, and similar to the Add–Compare–Select units used in Viterbi decoders. Thus only the forward iterator (Fig. 5) will be described. The current branch metrics ( ) are added to the corresponding state metrics ( ) from the previous iteration:
(5)

III. MAP DECODER

A MAP decoder implements the BCJR [2] algorithm. It is

used to obtain the a posteriori information for partial response

channel decoding, as well as outer decoding when a convolu-

tional code is employed as the outer code. Given the prior prob-

abilities,

, and channel likelihood estimates,

, the

log-domain computations of the BCJR algorithm are divided

into three groups:

1) Branch metric computation for each branch between

states

to :

(1)

2) Forward/Backward iteration for each state, , assuming

a radix-2 trellis: Forward state metric; valid transitions are

(

), (

):

(2)

Backward state metric; valid transitions are (

),

(

):

(3)

The logarithm of the sum of exponentials is then evaluated with a new operator, . It uses a comparator, a lookup table, and a final adder (Fig. 5) to approximate the second term in the equation [10]:
(6) The forward/backward iteration structures are therefore termed the Add-Compare-Select-Add (ACSA) units. A number of operators are also used in the computation of the a posteriori values using a tree structure shown in Fig. 8.
To implement the original BCJR algorithm, the backward iteration can only begin after complete observation of the block of 4k bits, resulting in large memory requirements and long latencies. Variations of the BCJR algorithm avoid these effects by windowing or limiting the number of backward iteration steps.
A. Backward Propagation of Windowed BCJR
An implementation of windowed BCJR with asymptotically equivalent performance can be achieved using two overlapping windows for the -computation. Each window spans a width of
, and overlaps with the other window in both trellis position and time by steps, as shown in Fig. 6. The initial outputs are always discarded while the latter outputs, having satisfied a criterion for minimum number of steps, , through the trellis, are retained and eventually combined with the appropriate

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:53:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

750

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 37, NO. 2, MARCH 2001

Fig. 8. 3 block makes use of a binary tree of 9 (.) operators.
Fig. 6. Backward iteration using 2 overlapping windows, W and W for BCJR algorithm. The shaded outputs are always discarded.

Fig. 7. State-slice of a MAP decoder structure.

Fig. 9. Memory read and write access of branch metrics 
 .

values to obtain the soft outputs. This scheme results in lower memory requirement and less computational hardware.
Fig. 7 shows a state-slice of the MAP decoder that is able to maintain a throughput equal to the input arrival rate. The
-memory stores the branch metrics. An -ACSA performs the forward iteration and stores its outputs in the -Memory. Two
-ACSA’s perform the backward iteration in accordance with the overlapping window method.
Fig. 9 reproduces the timing diagram of a scheme that would limit the interval between the production and 3 consumption cycles to . The implementation partitions each -memory block into 3 sections of length (3 sections of columns in Fig. 9) and deliberately delays the first forward iteration by . New data is cyclically written into each of the partitions while the write/read access pattern within each partition is continuously alternated between left-to-right and right-to-left directions every periods. Each branch metric entry, , in memory is read once by each of the three ACSA’s. After the third and final read access, the memory location is immediately replaced with new data. The repetitive nature of the memory access within each partition promotes reduction in control logic, compared to

random access memory, and is implemented as a bi-directional

shift register.

Similarly, observations on the production and consumption

patterns of the values will indicate that each -Memory block

can be implemented with a bi-directional -word shift register.

Finally, evaluation of (4), the a posteriori result, is performed

by summing the and values in a tree structure (Fig. 8), and

a final adder evaluates the log-likelihood ratios.

Although the maximum latency through each MAP decoder

is (80 cycles for

), it remains insignificant compared

with that of the interleaver discussed in Section II.

IV. SOFT OUTPUT VITERBI ALGORITHM (SOVA) DECODER
The computational complexity of the BCJR algorithm can be traded for reduced BER performance by replacing the MAP decoders with SOVA decoders [3].
As in BCJR, a windowed SOVA is advantageous in terms of its memory requirement and latency, when compared to the full SOVA. Previous windowed SOVA implementations [12] made use of a two-step algorithm (Fig. 10). The first stage is a regular

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:53:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YEO et al.: VLSI ARCHITECTURES FOR ITERATIVE DECODERS IN MAGNETIC RECORDING CHANNELS

751

Fig. 10. Realization of a SOVA decoder by cascading a typical VA survival
memory unit with a SOVA section.  and  are the two most likely paths that will arrive at state m .

Fig. 12. Example 4-state SOVA-Register Exchange Survival Memory Unit with Compare-and-Mux (CAM) units to perform equivalence checking and multiplexing. The outputs EQ indicate equality of decisions taken at step
i, state j, and traceback depth k.

Fig. 11. Example 4-state system block for SOVA.

-step windowed-Viterbi algorithm (VA) that obtains the most

likely state, , with a delay of . This is followed by another

-step traceback to find the two most likely paths arriving at

. Tracebacks are performed by recursively reading interme-

diate decisions that were stored in an SRAM.

The SRAM-based traceback has a costly implementation

complexity due to address decoder and sense amplifier over-

head. An implementation of SOVA combining the efficiency

of a register exchange pipeline with the two-stage SOVA is

presented in Fig. 11.

From each of the ACS’s, the difference between the two path

metrics, , arriving at time , state is retained. Additionally,

a modified register exchange (Fig. 12) provides EQ

out-

puts indicating the equality between the competing decisions

at time

, state , from which a traceback of depth is

initiated. Using the decisions from the VA-SMU,

’s and

EQ

’s corresponding to the most likely state, , are

multiplexed into the Reliability Measure Unit (RMU), which

uses comparators (minimizing function) and multiplexers in a

pipeline to select the minimum along the most-likely path.

The pipeline is initialized with the maximum reliability mea-

sure allowed by the particular binary representation (conceptu-

ally represented as “ ” in Fig. 11). Based on the EQ input, each

pipelined section outputs one of the following:

1) Equal decision—reliability measure from the previous step.
2) Different decision—minimum of and reliability measure from the previous step.

Fig. 13. Block diagram of Compare-and-Mux (CAM) unit comprising an XOR gate for equality checking and multiplexing function.

Compared with a hard-output Viterbi decoder implemen-

tation, the total size of the SMU’s is approximately doubled

(assuming the difference between and is small). The RMU

overhead consists of copies of 1 register, 2 multiplexers and

a 2-input comparator performing the minimization function.

The latency through the SOVA decoder is

. This re-

mains insignificant compared with the overall latency in the

Turbo-SOVA system, which is dominated by the latency through

the interleavers.

V. LOW DENSITY PARITY CHECK CODE DECODERS [4]

An LDPC code with a

parity check matrix will

be used as an example outer code. This parity check matrix has

columns of weight 4 and rows of weight 36, and comprises a

total of

nonzero entries. The parity check

information is also commonly represented in a bi-partite graph

as 512 check nodes and 4608 bit nodes.

The following log-domain equations modified from [5]

exploit the large number of common terms in each group of

computations.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:53:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

752

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 37, NO. 2, MARCH 2001

Fig. 14. Recursive pipelined implementation to compute check-to-bit messages.

Fig. 15. Binary adder tree to compute bit-to-check message in a 2-stage pipeline.

1) Check to bit messaging (parity check):

MSB of all inputs. The result is fed into the output LUT to direct

an output with the appropriate sign. In addition, the final

lookup table could be precoded to account for the deterministic

term,

, in (7).

B. Bit to Check Message Computation

sgn where and

sgn (7)
are evaluated using lookup-tables:

(8)
A simple expansion of these terms will show that , implying that the implemented
lookup-tables are identical. 2) Bit to check messaging:

(9)

where

is the prior information for bit .

A. Check to Bit Message Computation

The example LDPC block code has a total of 512 parity

checks, where each parity check computes using entries

from 36 bit nodes

. The bottleneck in (7) is

the 36-input summation,

.

In order to maintain a high throughput with a small number

of read ports, the computation is performed with copies of

structures identical to Fig. 14. They are cascaded in parallel to

achieve a throughput of

messages per cycle. A natural

choice for the value of would be the column weight (4 in our

example), such that all check-to-bit messages are computed in

approximately the same time it would have taken to acquire a

new block of inputs.

Using 2’s complement representation, the most-significant

bit (MSB) of the messages is a sign bit. Therefore, the product,

sgn

, is equal to a collective XOR of the

Each of the 4608 bit nodes in the example LDPC decoder

computes

using entries from 4 different check nodes

, , and . The bottleneck is the 4-input summation:

.

Unlike the earlier 36-input summation, the small number of

inputs makes it very suitable for a pipelined tree adder structure

as shown in Fig. 15. With a steady state throughput of four

messages per cycle, the total latency to compute all the messages

is again approximately the same time it would have taken to

acquire a new block of inputs.

C. LDPC Memory Design

While the computational complexity of an LDPC decoder

is very low compared with the MAP or SOVA decoders, the

memory requirement far exceeds those of the latter two. Due

to the irregularity in the parity check matrix, the two classes

of computations over a single block of inputs, bit-to-check and

check-to-bit, cannot be overlapped. In order to achieve fully

pipelined throughputs, each memory block in the LDPC decoder

is implemented as two buffers alternating between read/write.

Thus, for a single iteration of LDPC decoding (bit-to-check and

vice-versa) the required memory is

words.

This section provides a proposal for structural indexing of the

messages to simplify the control logic.

The messages are indexed in a 2-D array with indices

that are ordered sequentially in the -direction and strictly in-

creasing indices in the -direction. Fig. 17 shows an example

matrix of messages. In general, the mes-

sages are not consumed in any particular order along the in-

dices (or -direction). With the described arrangement though,

entries along each row are consumed in a strictly left-to-right

manner. Thus each 36-entry row of the matrix is stored in a

first-in-first-out (FIFO) buffer, which also removes the require-

ment for the computation block to keep track of the column

index. Inputs are simply indexed by their row numbers, and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:53:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YEO et al.: VLSI ARCHITECTURES FOR ITERATIVE DECODERS IN MAGNETIC RECORDING CHANNELS

753

R Fig. 16. Using FIFO’s to store rows of messages.

2 Q Fig. 18. Example 4608 4 memory array for

values.

Q Fig. 19. Using 4-input stacks to store rows of

messages.

VI. COMPARISON OF SISO DECODERS

2 R Fig. 17. Example 512 36 memory array for

values.

each read port can therefore be implemented as a 512-input multiplexer.
Fig. 16 shows that each of the 4 parity check blocks outputs to a quarter of all the FIFO’s. The demultiplexer-select is incremented once every 36 cycles to switch to the next FIFO, which stores the next row in the matrix.
Similarly, is indexed as shown in Fig. 18, with i indices that are ordered sequentially in the -direction and strictly increasing indices in the -direction. Each row of the matrix is stored in a 4-entry stack. The 4 messages are produced simultaneously by the tree adder structure described previously, but consumed in a strictly left-to-right manner. The subsequent parity check ( ) computations only need to keep track of the row numbers to pop the correct values from the appropriate stack through a 4608-input multiplexer. A pipelined multiplexer is necessary in order to meet Gbps throughtputs with such a large number of inputs.

The number of computational units required for each of the iterative decoder modules is summarized in Table I. An channel decoder is concatenated with either a 16-state binary convolutional decoder or an LDPC decoder. As described in Section IV, the BCJR decoder can be replaced with a SOVA decoder. The number of ACSA units is reduced from 3 to 1 per state-slice, a 66% savings in structural computation units, while memory savings is 30%. The SOVA algorithm trades off complexity for predictable degradation in BER performance over the BCJR algorithm.
The throughputs of both the MAP and SOVA decoders are limited by the feedback loop that exists in the Add–Compare– Select units. If area and power were not constrained, a 1 Gbps iterative decoder based on MAP or SOVA decoding would be achievable with current technology; however, due to mandatory unrolling and pipelining, such a decoder will be between 10 and 15 times the area and power of any existing decoder implementation based on conventional Viterbi sequence detection.
On the other hand, the proposed LDPC decoder system is strictly feedforward; therefore, introducing additional levels of pipelining can alleviate delay issues, at the expense of register area and negligible latency. It has been widely recognized that LDPC decoders enjoy significant advantage in terms of computational complexity compared to the trellis-based decoding in MAP and SOVA decoders. This characteristic is reflected in our

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:53:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

754

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 37, NO. 2, MARCH 2001

TABLE I COMPUTATIONAL UNITS AND MEMORY REQUIREMENTS FOR ITERATIVE DECODER MODULES

proposed implementation, which uses a small number of computational units: 16 adders and 8 LUT’s.
However, the lack of any structural regularity in the parity check matrix results in memory requirements that are 2 orders of magnitude larger than those in the MAP or SOVA decoders. It was shown by example in Section V-C that a single LDPC iteration would have a memory requirement upwards of 73 000 words. To make an LDPC decoder implementation more feasible, it will be necessary to introduce regularity into the parity check matrix. Recent publications, [13], [14], suggesting the construction of LDPC-like codes based on difference-set cyclic codes may provide the necessary foundation for building a practical LDPC decoder with reduced memory requirement.
The memory problem is not restricted to LDPC decoders. Interleavers, which are necessary between concatenated convolution decoders, also require significant memory due to the randomness of the output sequences. Interleavers that allow some form of ordered permutation and compact representation will permit efficient implementations of Turbo decoders with no performance loss.
Finally, an iterative decoder implementation for magnetic storage application requires timing recovery methods that can tolerate the increased latencies through multiple decoding iterations.
VII. CONCLUSION
We have proposed datapath-intensive architectures as well as timing and data arrangement schedules for each kind of SISO decoder in order to minimize the critical path delay and simplify the control logic.
Unrolling and pipelining of iterative decoders is necessary to sustain high throughputs, but leads to a linear increase in implementation complexity; however, it provides an excellent

opportunity for reduced complexity implementations. Since decisions become increasingly confident after each stage, decoders that are later in the pipeline can trade off some BER performance for reduced complexities. A number of choices are available, ranging from replacing MAP decoders with SOVA decoders or using shorter window lengths to trellis pruning in the trellis-based decoders [15].
The immediate difficulty with LDPC decoders lies in the memory requirement, which should be addressed by designing structured LDPC codes. Without removing the memory bottleneck, further reduced-complexity LDPC decoding, such as approximating the summations in (7) and (9) with minimum and maximum functions respectively, would have little effect on the overall decoder implementation.
REFERENCES
[1] T. Souvignier, M. Oberg, P. Siegel, R. Swanson, and J. Wolf, “Turbo decoding for partial response channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 48, no. 8, Aug. 2000.
[2] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Rajiv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-20, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[3] J. Hagenauer and L. Papke, “Decoding turbo codes with the soft output viterbi algorithm (SOVA),” in Proc. IEEE ISIT 1994, Trondheim, Norway, June 1994, p. 164.
[4] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[5] J. Fan and J. Cioffi, “Constrained coding techniques for soft iterative decoders,” in Proc. GLOBECOM ’99, vol. 16, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, Dec. 1999, pp. 723–727.
[6] G. Masera, G. Piccinini, M. Roch, and M. Zamboni, “VLSI architectures for turbo codes,” IEEE Trans. VLSI Systems, vol. 7, no. 3, Sept. 1999.
[7] Y. Wu and B. Woerner, “The influence of quantization and fixed point arithmetic upon the BER performance of turbo codes,” in Proc IEEE VTC 1999, Houston, TX, USA, May 1999, pp. 1683–1687.
[8] S. Dolinar and D. Divsalar, “Weight distributions for turbo codes using random and nonrandom permutations,” JPL, TDA Progress Rep., Aug. 1995.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:53:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YEO et al.: VLSI ARCHITECTURES FOR ITERATIVE DECODERS IN MAGNETIC RECORDING CHANNELS

755

[9] K. Andrews, C. Heegard, and D. Kozen, “Interleaver design methods for turbo codes,” in Proc. IEEE ISIT 1998, Cambridge, MA, USA, Aug. 1998, p. 420.
[10] P. Robertson, E. Villebrun, and P. Hoeher, “A comparison of optimal and sub-optimal MAP decoding algorithms operating in the log domain,” in Proc. IEEE ICC 1995, Seattle, WA, USA, Jun. 1995, pp. 1009–1013.
[11] A. Viterbi, “An intuitive justification and a simplified implementation of the MAP decoder for convolutional codes,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 260–264, Feb. 1998.
[12] C. Berrou, P. Adde, E. Angui, and S. Faudeil, “A low complexity softoutput viterbi decoder architecture,” in Proc. IEEE ICC 1993, Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 737–740.

[13] D. J. C. Mackay and M. C. Davey, “Evaluation of gallager codes for short block length and high rate applications,” in Proc. IMA Workshop on Codes, Systems and Graphical Models 1999, Minneapolis, MN, USA, Aug. 1999.
[14] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low density parity check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery,” in Proc. IEEE ISIT 2000, Sorrento, Italy, Jun. 2000.
[15] B. Frey and F. Kschischang, “Early detection and trellis splicing: Reduced-complexity iterative decoding,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 153–159, Feb. 1999.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:53:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

