Joint Code and Decoder Design for Implementation-Oriented (3, &regular LDPC Codes
Tong Zhang and Keshab K. Parhi Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA

Abstract

To reduce the hardware complexity, we have to effec-

Gallager’sLow-Density Parity-Check (LDPC)codes have recently received a lot of attention because of their excellent performance. The decoder hardware implementation is obviously one of the most crucial issues determining the extent of LDPC applications in the real world. The straightforward f i l l y parallel decoder architecture usually incurs too high complexityfor many practical purposes and should be transformed to a partly parallel realization. In this papel; we propose a joint code and decoder design approach to construct a class of ( 3 , k)-regular LDPC codes which exactly fit to a partly parallel decoder implementation. The partly parallel decoder architecture is suitbale for eficient
VLSI implementation and it has been shown that the jointly
developed (3,k)-regular LDPC codes have very good performance.

tively transform the fully parallel architecture to partly parallel ones. However,due to the randomness of LDPC codes, it’s nearly impossible to find an effective transformation for an arbitrary given LDPC code. To solve this problem, Boutillon et al. [ 3 ] propose to reverse the code design sequence: Instead of trying to obtain a partly parallel decoder from a given LDPC code, we can use an available partly parallel decoder to define a constrained random LDPC code, which leads to the decoder-first code design [3]. However, the decoder obtained from this design approach contains many independent constrained random number generators which will incur much complexity for real implementations and make the entire design process very complicated.
In this work we consider the partly parallel decoder architecture design for LDPC codes with short block length (less than 10000 bits) and we believe these LDPC codes

are of great interest from practical point of view. It’s well

I: Introduction

known that the LDPC decoding algorithm works well if the corresponding Tanner graph (as explained later) does not

Gallager’sLow-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes [1J contain too many short cycles. Inspired by the criteria for

have recently received a lot of attention because of their less short cycles and the decoder-first code design method-

excellent performance and have been widely considered as ology in [3], we propose ajoint code and decoder design ap-

a promising candidate error-correcting coding scheme for proach to develop a class of implementation-oriented (3, k)-

many real applications in telecommunications and magnetic regular LDPC codes which exactly fit to a partly parallel

storage.

decoder architecture. Compared with decoder-first code de-

However, little consideration has been given to the LDPC sign, our proposed joint design approach leads to a much

decoder hardware realization which is required in many applications. As we will see later, the LDPC decoding al-

more efficient decoder by eliminating those complicated random number generators. The performance of such ( 3 ,k)-

I

gorithm is essentially a fully parallel algorithm matching a random-like graph. Thus the fully parallel architecture is the most natural solution for the LDPC decoder hardware archi-

regular LDPC code is nearly identical to the fully random LDPC codes as shown in two design examples presented in this paper.

tecture design, e.g., a 1024bit,rate-ll2 fully parallel LDPC

decoder with the maximum throughput of 1Gbit/s has been physically implemented [2].However,because of its appar-

2: Low-Density Parity-Check Codes

ent high complexity, such a fully parallel implementation is

A LDPC code is defined as the null space of a very

not suitable for many practical purposes, even short code sparse M x N parity check matrix H, and typically is repre-

length (less than 10000bits) is used, and an effectivedesign sented by a bipartite graph’, usually called Tanner graph, in

approach to reduce complexity is highly desirable.

which one set of N nodes, the variable (or message) nodes,

This research was supported by the Army Research Office by grant
number DA/DA AD19-01-1-0705.

‘A bipartite graph is one in which the nodes can be partitioned into two disjoint sets.

0-7803-7147-WO1/$10.0002001 EEE

1232

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:31:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

corresponds to the set of codeword, and another set of M nodes, the check (or constraint) nodes, corresponds to the set of parity check constraints, as illustrated in Fig. 1. The construction of LDPC codes is typically random. We say that a LDPC code is (j,k)-regular if each variable node has a degree of j and each check node has a degree of k, where the code rate will be 1- j / k provided that H is full rank.
variable nodes
Figure 1: Tanner graph representation of a LDPC code and the decoding message flow.
LDPC codes can be effectively decoded by the iterative belief-propagation (BP) algorithm. As shown in Fig. 1, the structure of BP decoding algorithm directly matches the Tanner graph: each variable node is initialized with intrinsic (or channel) information, then decoding message (check-tovariable and variable-to-checkmessage), referred as extrinsic information in the following, is iteratively computed on each node and exchanged through the edges between neighboring nodes. Since BP algorithm works well when Tanner graph doesn't contain too many short cycles, LDPC code is typically constructed under the constraint that the corresponding Tanner graph is 4-cycle free.
3: Joint Design Approach
In this section, we propose a joint code and decoder design approachto obtain a partly parallel (3, k)-regularLDPC decoder architecturewhich defines (3, k)-regular LDPC code ensemble. As shown later, we may consider that each code in this code ensemble is constructed by letting the decoder insert certain random check nodes into the deterministic highgirth (2, k)-regular LDPC code. Thus it is reasonable to expect that the Tanner graph doesn't contain too many short cycles and the corresponding code may assume good performance, which will be further illustrated by two design examples. We call such a design approach asjoint code and decoder design. Moreover,by exploiting their special structures, we propose a systematic efficient encoding scheme for the implementation-oriented(3, k)-regular LDPC codes.
Before presenting the joint design approach, we intro-
duce the definitionof girth average of a graph G [4]: Let gu
denote the length of the shortest cycle that passes through node U in graph G, then C u E G g , / N is denoted as girth average of G, where N = IGl is the total node number of
G.As proposed in [4], we can use girth average as an effec-
tive criterion for searching good LDPC code over one code

ensemble. The joint design approach is briefly described next and-the corresponding schematic diagram is shown in Fig. 2.
1. Explicitly construct the two matrices, Ho and HI,so that H = [HF,HTIT defines a (2, k)-regular LDPC
code denoted as Cz ; 2. Obtain a (3, k)-regular LDPC decoder which definesa
random (3, IC)-regular LDPC code ensemble and each
code in this ensemble is a sub-code of C2 ;
3. Use the decoder to randomly generate a certain number of (3, k)-regular LDPC codes from which we se-
lect one code with good performance by girth average comparison and computer simulations.

I

--

Figure 2: Joint design flow diagram.
3.1: Constructionof Ho and H1
In the following, we propose a novel method to con-
struct matrix H = [HF,HTITwhich definesa (2, k)-regular
LDPC code with girth of 12. Although 12 is not a very large girth value, our simulations show that it is sufficientfor generating good implementation-oriented (3, k)-regular LDPC codes for short code lengths (less than 10000bits) which are of interest. More important, such construction method will lead to a very simple decoder architecture and provide more freedom on the selection of code length: Given k,any code
- - - - length that could be factored as L .k2 is permitted, where L
can not be factored as L = a b, Vu, b E (0, ,k - 1).

.,'
N=L'k
Figure 3: Structure of submatrices HOand H1

1233

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:31:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

The structures of Hc, and HI are shown in Fig. 3. Each block matrix Iz,yin Ho is an L x L identity matrix and each block matrix Pz,vin H1 is obtained by a cyclic shift of an L x L identity matrix. Let T denote the right cyclic shift operator where Ti(U) represents right cyclic shifting matrix U by i columns, then Pz,y= T"(1) where U =
((z - 1) e y) mod L and I represents the L x L identity
[;;;j jl matrix. For example, let L = 5, z= 3 and y = 4, we have
U = (z - 1) . y mod L = 8 mod 5 = 3,then
p3+,= ~ ( 1=) 1 o o o o .

Clearly, matrix H = [HC,HTIT defines a (2,k)-regular LDPC code with L . k2 variable nodes and 2L k check nodes. Let G denote the corresponding Tanner graph, we have the following theorem pertaining to the girth of G:
- Theorem 3.1 If L can not be factored as L = a b, where
a,b E (0, - e , k - l}, then the girth of G is 12 and there is
at least one 12-cycle passing each check node.

3.2: (3, k)-regularLDPC decoder architecture
Denote the (2,k)-regular LDPC code defined by H = [H:, HT]' as C2. In the following, we present an (3,k)regular LDPC decoder architecture as shown in Fig. 4. It will be shown that this decoder defines a (3, k)-regular LDPC code ensemble in which each code has L .k2 variable nodes and 3L . k check nodes and is a sub-code of C2.

MEh4 BANK-(1.1)

MEM :-

BANj K-@_,U__....

r

C'

g-layer ShuffleNetwork

...

...

CNUl

Figure 4: (3, k)-regular LDPC decoder architecture.

This decoder contains k2 memory banks, the ith mem-

+ LYJ+ ory bank is represented as MEM BANK-(z,y), where z =

((i - 1) mod k) 1 and y =

1, and each one

stores all the intrinsic information (in RAM I ) , extrinsic
information (in two-port RAM El,E2 and E3)and estimated decoded bits (in RAM C) associated with L variable
nodes; a l-layer shuffle network (T-1 or Id); a g-layer shuffle network; k Check Node processor Units (CNU's) and k2 VariableNode processor Units (VNU's). One Address Generator (AG) is associated with each memory bank to provide the access address. The g-layer shuffle network consists of g l-layer shuffle networks, each one is configured by a single control bit ci leading to a given permutationi . if q = 1 (rt),or to the identity permutation (Id=7r!) otherwise.
. Thus, configured by the g-bit word c = (+I,. ,q,)2,
the overall permutation pattern T is the product of g per-
mutations: = .;" o ..- * 0 ;5"'. The control word c is
generated by Random Permutation Generator (RPG). Here we note that L can not be factored as L = a b, where
- a,b E (0,. - e , k 13.
In this decoder, the decoding message delivered along the same edge in Tanner graph are stored in the same memory location alternatively,and 3 extrinsic information (checkto-variable message or variable-to-check message) associated with the same variable node are stored in the 3 different RAMs, El, E 2 and E3, respectively, with the same address. As shown in Fig. 4, intrinsic and extrinsic information are represented using p and q bits, respectively. This decoder completes each decoding iteration in 3L clock cycles, and in each clock cycle it performs:
1. In each memory bank, if all the check-to-variable message associated with one variable node become available after previous clock cycle, then (a) Retrieve 1 intrinsic information and 3 check-tovariable message associated with this variable node; (b) VNU computes 3 variable-to-check message and updates the corresponding estimated decoded bit; (c) Store the 3 variable-to-check message back to
RAM El,E2 and E3 and estimated decoded bit to RAM C. 2. Retrieve k2 variable-to-check message and the corresponding estimated decoded bits from the k2 memory
banks at the addresses provided by AGi's; 3. Shufflethe k2 variable-to-check message and estimated
decoded bits according to c-1 and c provided by the comparator and RPG, respectively; 4. Each CNUi computes k check-to-variable message and performs the parity check on the corresponding IC estimated decoded bits; 5 . Unshuffle the k2 check-to-variable message and store
them back into the k2 memory banks at the initial lo-
cation.
Since El,E2,E3 are two-port RAMs, we can perform
the step 1 in the above decoding process in parallel with all other steps. Moreover, this decoder has the following

1234

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:31:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

properties: 0 Each Address Generator (AG) associated with MEM
BANK-(%,y), denoted as AG,,,, is realized by a sim-
ple modulo-L binary counter. Each counter is preset
with initial value D,,,every L clock cycles, i.e., at
r = 0, L, 2L, and

{ D,,,=

T=o
((x - l ) . y ) mod L , r = L , (1)

tOX' , W

r = 2L

where each t,,, is chosen in random with the follow-
ing constraints:
Givenx,wehavet,,,, # tr,yz,Vy1,y2 E ( l , . . . , k } ;
Giveny, wehavet,,,,-t,,,, $ ( ( q - x 2 ) y ) mod L,
VZl,Z2 E (l,-,k}. 0 Provided with the address from each AG, the RAMS
El, E 2 and E3 are accessed by the CNU array in the l S t ,2nd and 3rd L clock cycles, respectively. Thus
in one iteration, the variable-to-check message will
be computed by VNU only in the last (3"9 L clock
cycles;
0 The 1-bit output of comparator c-1 = 1if T < L,
c-1 = 0 otherwise ; 0 The I-layer shuffle network (n-1 or Id) performs the
permutation n:;'. n-1 permutes an input data se-
, . , quence (50, ' * * Zk2-11 to b 7 L l (O), * * } * &?(-k,2-1)
where

n-l(i) = (i mod IC). IC + 1i-J.
k

(2)

0 During the first 2L clock cycles, the output of RPG is a zero vector so that the g-layer shuffle network performs the identity permutation, and during the last
L clock cycles, RPG performs as a hash function f:
+ {2L,. * e , 3L - 1) (0, * ,29 - 1).
We can easily verify that the above presented decoder
architecture defines a (3, k)-regular LDPC code ensemble in which each code has a Tanner graph with L k2 variable nodes and 3 k . L check nodes and the corresponding parity check matrix can be divided into 3 submatrices: each one
is L . k by L . k 2 and corresponds to the interconnections among all the L .k2 variable and k .L check nodes realized
by this decoder in the lst, 2ndor 3'd L clock cycles in each decoding iteration.
It can be proved that the first two submatrices of each code are always identical to matrix Ho and H1 presented in last section. The third submatrix, denoted as HP,of each code is jointly specified by all t,,,'~,the hash func-
tion f and the g-layer shuffle network. Recall that we de-
note the high-girth (2, k)-regular LDPC code specified by H = [HT,HTITas C2, we know that each code in this code ensemble is actually a sub-code of CZ.Moreover, we may consider that each code is constructed by using the decoder to introduce extra L * k check nodes into C2.

We can prove that if we construct the hash function f and the g-layer shuffle network in a fully random manner and generate the value of each t,,, in random with the constraints as described above, the code ensemble defined by this decoder only contains 4-cycle free codes which is desirable in practice. Furthermore, from its special structure, it can be proved that the parity check matrix of each code at least contains 2 redundant checks, which just means that the actual code rate may be siightly higher than what the parity check matrix indicates, i.e., 1 - 3/k.
For real applications, we must select a good code from the implementation-oriented (3, k)-regular LDPC code ensemble. In this work, we propose to combine the girth average comparison and computer simulations together to find a good code: first randomly generate a certain number of implementation-oriented (3, k)-regular LDPC codes, then pick several codes with high girth averages and select the one leading to the best simulation result in extensive computer simulations.
3.3: Design Examples
To illustrate the above design methodology, we develop two implementation-oriented(3,6)-regular LDPC codes with different code length.
Let L1 = 64 and L2 = 128. Then, using the above presented decoder architecture, we may obtain two code en-
sembles with different code length: NI = L1 .k2 = 2304
and N2 = Lz . k2 = 4608. In both cases, we set g = 3 and
independently generate 500 groups of hash function f , 3layer shuffle network and all t,,, in random with the above two constraints on t,,,. Then we feed these parameters to the (3,6)-regular LDPC decoder as shown in Fig. 4 and obtain two code ensembles, each one contains 500 codes. The histograms of the girth averages of these two code ensernbles are shown in Fig. 5 (b) and (d). In each ensemble, we choose 5 codes with relatively high girth averages and select the one leading to the best performance based on the extensive computer simulations. In the computer simulation, we assume that the LDPC codes are modulated by BPSK and transmitted over AWGN channel.
We denote the selected implementation-oriented (3,6)regular LDPC codes with N I = 2304 and NZ = 4608 as C j and C:, respectively. Since the parity check matrices of both C j and CJ"contain 2 redundant checks, Cj and CJ"are (2304,1154) and (4608,2306) codes, respectively. Moreover, we randomly generate two fully random 4-cycle free (3,6)-regular LDPC code ensembles with code length NI = 2304 and N2 = 4608, respectively. Each code ensemble contains 500 codes and the histogram of the girth averages is shown in Fig. 5. In each ensemble, we also choose 5 codes with relatively high girth averages and select the one leading to the best performance. We denote the selected fully random LDPC codes with NI = 2304

1235

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:31:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

and NZ = 4608 as C i and C i , respectively. In this work, (7; and (7; are (2304,1152) and (4608,2304)code, respectively.

present a partly parallel (3, k)-regular LDPC decoder architecture which defines an implementation-oriented (3, k)regular LDPC code ensemble. Each code in this ensemble is actually constructed by inserting certain check nodes into the high-girth (2, k)-regular LDPC code, thus it’s reasonable to expect a good performance for such codes which is illustrated by the two design examples. Compared with the decoder-firstcode design approach, this joint design approach eliminates the implementations of those random number generators in the decoder so that the complexity is much lower and the entire design process is more simple. We believe such joint design approach should be a key for practical LDPC coding system implementations and future research work will be directed towards extending thisjoint design methodology to the more general(j, k)-regular LDPC codes and irregular LDPC codes.

07.0

7.7

7.8

7.9

11

7.4 7.8 7.11 a 8.2 8.4

5: References

Figure 5: Histograms of girth average for (a)(c) fully random codes, and (b)(d) implementation-oriented codes.
The finite precision simulation results of each C j and
Ck are shown in Fig. 6 . In the finite precision simula-
tions, we adopt the quantization scheme developed in [5]: received data is quantized with 4 bits and all intrinsic and extrinsic informationare represented with 6 bits. In order to guarantee the simulation accuracy, especially at high SNR, each point in the simulation results is obtained under the condition that the block error number at least exceeds 100. As shown in Fig. 6 , the performance of the (3, k)-regular LDPC codes developed by these two different approaches are almost identical, but we note that it’s nearly impossible to develop a partly parallel decoder for those fully random LDPC codes.

[I] R. G. Gallager,

Low-Density Parity-Check

Codes,

M.1.T Press, 1963. available at

http://justice.mit.edu/people/gallager.html.

[2] C. Howlandand A. Blanksby, “Parallel decoding architectures for low density parity check codes”, in Proc. of 2001 IEEE Int. Symp. on Circuits and Systems, Sydney, May 2001.

[3] E. Boutillon, J. Castura, and F. R. Kschischang, “Decoderfirst code design”, in Proceedings of the 2nd International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Related Topics, pp. 459462, Brest, France, Sept. 2000. available at http:/Aester.univubs.fr 8O8O~outillon/publications.html.

[4] Y.Mao and A. Banihashemi, “Design of good LDPC codes using girth distribution”, in IEEE InternationalSymposiumon InformationTheory, Italy, June 2000.

[5] T. Zhang, Z. Wang, and K. K. Parhi, “On finite precision

implementation of low-density parity-check codes decoder”,

in Proc. of 2001 IEEE Int. Symp. on Circuits and Systems,

Sydney, May 2001.

’“1

1

Figure 6: Finite precision simulation results where solid
lines and dash lines correspond to C i and Ci,respectively.

4: Conclusions
In this paper, based on a novel method of constructing deterministic high-girth (2, k)-regular LDPC code, we

1236

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:31:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

