ISIT2001,Washington, DC,June 24-29, 2001

An Iterative Algorithm for Calculating Posterior Probability and Model Represe:ntation

Toshiyasu MATSUSHIMA'
Waseda University, 3-4-1 Ohkubo, Shinjuku, Tokyo, 169-8555 JAPAN, toshi0matsu.mgmt.waseda.ac.jp

Tomoko K. MATSUSHIMA
Polytechnic University, 4-1-1 Hashimotodai, Sagamihara,
229-1196 JAPAN

Shigeichi HIRASAWA
Waseda University, 3-4-1 Ohkubo, Shinjuku, Tokyo, 169-8555 JAPAN

-
Iil
~

Abstract - In this paper, we introduce a representation method of probability models that can be applied to any code such as turbo, LDPC or tail-biting code. Moreover, we propose an iterative algorithm that calculates marginal posterior probabilities on the introduced probability model class. The decoding error probability for the LDPC codes of the proposed algorithm is less than that of the sum-product algorithm.

I. INTRODUCTION
If the Bayesian Network(BN) representing a code has loops, the procedure of Belief Propagation(BP)[l] can not be used directly for decoding the code For decoding the code, the BN is broken into tractable subnetworks that have no loops, and the BP algorithm is reciprocally applied to each subnetwork[2]. The results calculated by the compound BP algorithms such as the turbo decoding and the sum-product algorithm are not necessarily correct.
In this paper, we shall introduce a class of probability models called log linear model, which can be applied t o any code, and its representation method. Moreover, we propose an algorithm, which calculates marginal posterior probabilities on the introduced probability model class.
Since the class of log linear models includes all BN models, the applicable probability model class of the proposed algorithm is wider than that of the BP algorithm. The probability model class for which the proposed algorithm calculates exact marginal posterior probability is also wider than that of the BP algorithm. The justification of the proposed algorithm is proved from the viewpoint of differential geometry[3].

11. THEREPRESENTATION OF THE PROBABILITY
MODEL CLASS AND T H E PROPOSED ALGORITHM

We shall introduce log linear models whose joint probability is represented by the following function.

+ ' . . + logP(z1, ...,Z M ) = P + 4 ( Z C , )

q(z,,z,)

+ . . . + q ( z G z , z 3 , . . . ) + ' . . , (1)

EztEI Each term q ( I ) in Formula(1) satisfies

q ( I ) = 0 where

I denotes a set of some random variables
We shall propose an algorithm for calculating the marginal
posterior probabilities P ( X , I C ) ( X , E I M = { X i , . .. ,X M } )
under the condition C that restricts the marginal probabilities
P * ( X , ) ( X , E I N c I'). If the given marginal probability
is a point mass in X , = z,( x ,E I ~ as) P*(x, = 2,) =
1(X, E I N ) then P ( X , ( C ) is the ordinary posterior probability
P(X,(X,(1)= z,(I),. .. ,X % ( N =) z,JN)). Since the calculation
of the posterior marginal probabillty is the main problem in
the optimal symbol-by-symbol decoding, the algorithm can be
applied to decoding any codes.

Algorithm 1 [4] T h e algorathm repeats zteratavely the follow-
ang procedure untd the calculated marganal probabalataes converge.

1. Pick out a random variable X i from I N .
2. Propagate the information of P ( X i ) through maximal terms an a specific order. T h e propagation f r o m a maxinial term Ii to Ij is calculated as follows:
(a) Calculate P ( I i j )from P(Ii) where Iij = Ii nI j ;
('b) Calculate P ( I j ) by the e-projection[3f of P ( I j ) o n the manifold satisfying P(Iij);
We say that a collision occurs when a maximal term Ii is called twice in the subroutine 2 before completing the subroutine.
111. P R O J E C T I O N AND POSTERIOR PROBABILITY
CALCULATION
For the proof of the veracity of the proposed algorithm, we shall investigate the calculation of the posterior probability from the viewpoint of differential geometry.
Theorem 1 If the submanifold S = { P ( X ) I P ( t ( X ) )= p"} is m-Bat, the posterior probability of P ( X ) given the information of P ( t ( X ) ) = pt* is given by the e-projection of P ( X ) o n S . Especially, i f pt* is the point mass in t ( X ) = t , the ordinar:y posterior probability P(XJt(X) = t ) is given by the e-projection.
From Theorem 1, if no collision occurs in Algorithm 1, the procedure calculates the exact posterior marginal probabilities[4]. Even if collisions do occur, the result is still a very good approximation to the exact result. Since the algorithm maintains control over the order of propagation, the effect 01' the collisions is kept small. For example, the decoding error probability of the proposed algorithm is less than that of the sum-product algorithm when the algorithms are applied to the LDPC codes.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Pearl, Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems, Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[2] R.J. McElice, D.J.C. MacKay and J. Cheng, "Turbo decoding
as a.n instance of Pearl's 'Belief Propagation' ", IEEE J. Sel.
Areas Commun., Vo1.16 No.2, 1998.
[3] S. Amari, "Differential-geometry in statistical inference", Springer lecture notes in statistics, vo1.28, Springer, 1985.
[4] T. Matsushima, T.K. Matsushima and S. Hirasawa "An Iterative Calculation Algorithm for Posterior Probability", Proceedings of the 23rd Symposium on Information Theory and Its Applications, 2000.
lT1ii.s research was supported in part by the Ministry of Education under Grant-Aids (c) No.12650400 for Scientific Research.
2Let M s be a m-flat submanifold in M , and let p be a point in M . Iff the point q is given by the e-geodesic projection of p to M s , q = arg,minqEMD(pllq) where D(pJlq)is the Kullback information between p and q.

0-7803-7123-2/01/$10.0002001 IEEE

236 ~

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:33:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

