ISIT2001, Washington, DC, June 24-29,2001 
Spectral Graphs for Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes 
R. Michael Tanner 
Computer Science Department 
Baskin Engineering 
University of California 
Santa Cruz, CA 95064, U.S.A. 
e-mail: tannerQsoe .ucsc . edu 
Abstract - Quasi-cyclic codes are described in terms 
code equations on the spectral components of con- 
stituent cyclic codes. These define a constraint graph 
in the spectral domain. Here spectral graphs de- 
fine LDPC codes for which minimum distance can 
be bounded with algebraic and graph-based argu- 
ments. Examples include [42,22,8] and [155,64,20] 
reg- 
ular LPDC codes. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
It is now widely recognized that LDPC codes with sparse 
code constraint (Tanner) graphs can be decoded with graph 
message-passing algorithms to achieve decoding near the 
Shannon limit [l] [2][5], but there is as yet no algebraic theory 
of LDPC codes to guarantee code quality. A randomly gener- 
ated parity-check matrix poses implementation challenges and 
requires extensive testing to assure performance. We investi- 
gate algebraic constructions for LDPC codes that are quasi- 
cyclic, with parity-check matrices that are circulants, particu- 
larly those with graphs well suited for the use of graph-based 
iterative decoding algorithms. 
This paper examines binary quasi-cyclic (QC) codes de- 
signed using generalized transform methods [4]. In the spec- 
tral domain, QC codewords are described by giving the spec- 
tral values for each of the constituent cyclic components. The 
spectral values themselves can be viewed as forming a code 
over a extension field, which we call the ”supracode” for the 
code’s spectral values at a particular frequency. Each supra- 
code has an associated constraint graph. We demonstrate the 
algebraic and spectral graph concepts with the construction 
of binary codes related to Hamming codes and recursively de- 
fined graphs. 
11. TRANSFORMED 
QUASI-CYCLIC 
CODE EQUATIONS 
Let C be a binary QC code defined by a set of parity check 
equations of the form HcT = 0 , H an r x m block matrix 
with H = [hij] , O  5 i 5 r - 1,0 5 j 5 m - 1 in which each 
of the hi,j is an n x n circulant matrix, n an odd integer. 
Transform strategies from [4] can be used to analyze C. If T 
is any invertible matrix over some extension field of GF(2), 
C can be viewed as the binary vectors satisfying T HcT = 0; 
the invertibility of T ensures that these transformed equations 
define exactly the same code space. 
When there exists an extension field with a primitive nth 
root of unity, a Fourier transform matrix, with ith row fi, 
becomes the building block for a suitable T. The code equa- 
tions can then be written as equations over the extension field, 
which decompose into eigenspaces and take the form: 
Each A, is an r x n matrix that may have zero entries and rank 
less than r. Specifically Ai = [,X3,k], the j ,  kth element being 
the eigenvalue for the ith eigenvector of the j,kth circulant 
h3,k. Each A, is check matrix for a code S,, j = -i called the 
supracode of the jth ezgenspace. 
111. SPECTRAL 
CONSTRAINT 
GRAPHS 
Code and graph properties are evident in the supracodes. 
Codes/graphs with circulants having row weight at least three 
cannot have girth greater than six. This and other obser- 
vations imply that large girth graphs have supracodes of re- 
stricted form. We argue that for the QC code to be an LDPC 
code, the supracodes must also be relatively sparse matrix 
codes over the extension field, and therefore constraint graphs 
[4] express important structural information. The ensemble of 
supracodes and graphs can be used to understand code rate 
and to develop bounds on minimum distance. A superposi- 
tion bound exploits known cyclic code bounds on the cyclic 
component codes. Codes can be designed and recursively con- 
structed using transforms and spectral graphs. 
IV. EXAMPLES 
Examples used to illustrate algebraic analysis and spectral 
graphs include a [42,22,8] code based on Hamming codes and 
a [155,64,20] regular LPDC code of bit degree 3, parity degree 
REFERENCES 
R. G. Gallager,Low Density Parity Check Codes, M. I. T. Press, 
Cambridge, MA, 1963. 
D. J .  C. MacKay, “Good error correcting codes based on very 
sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. on Information Theory, vol. 45, 
no. 2, pp. 399-431, March 1999. 
R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes”, 
IEEE Trans. on Information Theory, vol. IT-27, Sept. 1981, pp. 
533-547. 
R. M. Tanner, “A Transform Theory for a Class of Group 
Invariant Codes,” IEEE Trans. on Information Theory, vol. 34, 
no. 4, pp. 752-775, July 1988. 
N. Wiberg, 
Codes and Decoding on General Graphs, 
Linkoeping Studies in Science and Technology, No. 440, 1996. 
226 - 
0-7803-7123-2/01/$10.00 02001 IEEE 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:30:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
