908

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, MAY 2001

Iterative Reliability-Based Decoding of Low-Density Parity Check Codes
Marc P. C. Fossorier, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper, reliability based decoding is combined with belief propagation (BP) decoding for low-density parity check (LDPC) codes. At each iteration, the soft output values delivered by the BP algorithm are used as reliability values to perform reduced complexity soft decision decoding of the code considered. This approach allows to bridge the error performance gap between belief propagation decoding which remains suboptimum, and maximum likelihood decoding which is too complex to be implemented for the codes considered. Trade-offs between decoding complexity and error performance are also investigated. In particular, a stopping criterion which reduces the average number of iterations at the expense of very little performance degradation is proposed for this combined decoding approach. Simulations results for several Gallager LDPC codes and different set cyclic codes of hundreds of information bits are given and elaborated.
Index Terms—Block code, four density parity check code, iterative decoding, reliability decoding, soft decision decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
R ECENTLY, iterative decoding of low-density parity check (LDPC) codes, first introduced in [1], [2], has received a great deal of interest. The main motivations of these works are the excellent performances achieved by such codes for long enough lengths, and their relatively simple iterative decoding methods based on belief propagation (BP) [3]–[6]. Although belief propagation iterative decoding of such codes does not achieve maximum likelihood decoding (MLD), it has been shown both theoretically and experimentally that its application to improved constructions derived from Gallager original codes [7]–[10] can closely approach channel capacity for the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. Interestingly, other families of codes such as quasicyclic based codes [11] and one-step majority logic decodable codes [12], [13] can also be decoded iteratively with BP1 . On the other hand, the derivation of these theoretical limits assumes that the influences of loops in the Tanner graph representation of the codes [14], [15] are irrelevant, which may need very long code lengths to be satisfied with a sufficiently high probability [7]. Consequently, BP decoding of codes of medium lengths (say between hundred and few thousand bits) may fall short of MLD, not only due to the suboptimum nature of iterative decoding but also due to the
Manuscript received May 1, 2000;, revised January 15, 2001. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCR-97-32959.
The author is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA.
Publisher Item Identifier S 0733-8716(01)03900-2.
1In this paper, we restrict our attention to codes constructed without an interleaver, although the proposed approach can be readily extended to “turbo-like” codes.

suboptimum graph structure of the code because of the relevant

presence of short loops.

On the other hand, MLD of such codes is generally way too

complex to be implemented. Reliability based near optimum

probabilistic decoding is another possible approach to tradeoff

error performance, and decoding complexity. In [16], a repro-

cessing strategy in successive phases has been proposed. This

decoding method is referred to as ordered statistic decoding

(OSD). However, for each reprocessing phase ,

,

codewords need to be processed, where is the dimension of

the code. As a result, for LDPC codes of dimensions larger than

hundreds of bits, only few reprocessing phases of OSD can be

implemented and the resulting error performance remains far

from that of MLD.

Phase-0 of the OSD algorithm can be viewed as performing

information set decoding in the most reliable information set

obtained from the noisy received sequence (i.e., the most re-

liable independent positions (MRIPs) in the received sequence).

Consequently, no information about the code considered is used

to construct this information set. On the other hand, the algo-

rithm of [17] can be viewed as the optimum reliability based

information set decoding since the entire code is taken into ac-

count to estimate the information bits. In [18], a generalized

strategy is proposed in which a supercode of the code consid-

ered is used to determine the most reliable information set. As

a result, phase-0 of [16] and the decoding method of [17] can

be viewed as the extreme cases in which the supercode is the

universal code and the code considered itself, respectively. Un-

fortunately, for a given code rate, near-optimum information

set decoding with the algorithm of [18] rapidly becomes too

complex due to the exponential increase of the computational

complexity with respect to . In addition, the reprocessing

approach of [16] in successive phases does not perform well

when combined with the algorithm of [18]. This can be easily

explained by the fact that if the most reliable information set de-

termined from a supercode of the code considered is erroneous,

then the corresponding number of bit errors in the MRIPs is

likely to be larger than that of the most reliable information

set determined from the universal code due to the correlations

between some information bits. Another generalization of the

algorithm of [16] based on several reliable information sets has

been presented in [19] but this generalization would achieve

near MLD only for relatively low code rates. Consequently, all

information set probabilistic decoding methods previously dis-

cussed remain too complex to achieve near-optimum decoding

of LDPC codes, despite their important computational com-

plexity reduction with respect to MLD of these codes. Note

that the main drawback of these MRP-based decoding methods

0733–8716/01$10.00 © 2001 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:48:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FOSSORIER: ITERATIVE RELIABILITY-BASED DECODING OF LDPC CODES

909

is the fact that reliabilities from the positions outside the MRIPs

are either ignored [16] or only partially considered [18], [19]

when constructing the initial state of the reduced search to de-

termine the list of candidate codewords. As a result, these al-

gorithms are in general efficient for codes with relatively small

codimension only. It follows that reliability based algorithms

which include reliability informations from all positions in a

balanced way when determining the initial state of the reduced

search are more promising for codes of medium to long lengths.

The algorithm considered in the following implicitly achieves

this goal in successive steps.

In this paper, we propose to combine BP decoding with reli-

ability based decoding. At each iteration, the soft-output values

delivered by the BP algorithm are viewed as reliability values by

the soft decision decoding algorithm. As a result, at each itera-

tion, BP decoding is completed by a low complexity reliability

based soft decision decoding algorithm. In order to keep a man-

ageable decoding complexity, we choose phase-0 and phase-1

reprocessing of the algorithm of [16], so that

com-

putations are required to determine the most reliable informa-

tion set based on the soft-output values delivered by BP2 , and

candidate codewords are processed at each iteration. This

approach allows to bridge the gap between the error perfor-

mance achieved by the BP algorithm and that of MLD, which

is much too complex to be implemented for the codes consid-

ered. Simulation results for LDPC codes and different set cyclic

(DSC) codes of hundreds of information bits are reported. In

all cases, nonnegligible improvements over BP decoding are

obtained with the proposed method for the LDPC codes con-

sidered. As expected, for a fixed code rate, the relative gains

achieved by the proposed method over BP decoding increase

as the code length decreases. Finally, a new stopping criterion

which takes into account the joint decoding method is proposed

to reduce the average number of iterations, and consequently,

the average number of OSDs. Other tradeoffs between decoding

complexity and error performance are also investigated.

The paper is organized as follows. The proposed combined al-

gorithm and a simple stopping criterion for this algorithm are in-

troduced in Section II. Simulation results of the proposed com-

bined scheme are presented and discussed in Section III, while

tradeoffs between error performance and decoding cost are in-

vestigated in Section IV. Finally, concluding remarks are given

in Section V.

II. COMBINED BELIEF PROPAGATION AND ORDERED STATISTIC DECODINGS
In the following, binary error control coding for BPSK signaling over the AWGN channel is considered.

A. Decoding Algorithm
BP decoding iteratively updates the a posteriori probabilities of each bit of the code sequence. For each bit, its associated a posteriori probability is evaluated based on a predetermined set

2Note that if quantized received values are considered, the MRB is determined in a straightforward way based on the numbers of values quantized to each level within a block.

of check sums assumed to be orthogonal3 on the position of that bit, and the a priori probabilities of the bits contributing to this set of check sums. The new information provided to the original a priori probability of the bit considered by the corresponding computed a posteriori probability is then used as additional a priori information at the next iteration. A detailed description of the algorithm can be found for example in [6]. It follows that BP decoding is suitable to decode codes for which a set of check sums orthogonal on each coded bit position can be constructed. Such is the case for LDPC codes [1], [2] and one-step majority logic decodable codes [20, Ch. 7 and 8]. Furthermore, the influence of correlations between values introduced by the iterative decoding process has to be minimized in the code construction. This can be achieved by maximizing the girth of the graph representation of the code [7], [21], although the density of short loops in this graph also influences the error performance. Note that all codes of practical interest have loops in their graph representation [22].
The OSD algorithm consists of two main parts [16]: 1) construction of the most reliable information set [also referred to as the most reliable basis (MRB)] and 2) systematic reprocessing of candidate codewords expressed in the MRB. For an binary linear block code, the MRIP’s define the MRB, which is constructed as follows.

a) Order the reliabilities associated with the hard decisions of the received values in decreasing order, which defines a first permutation .
b) Apply to the received sequence and to the columns of the generator matrix associated with the code considered. Let and denote the resulting received sequence and generator matrix, respectively.
c) Perform a Gaussian elimination on from left to right. The dependent columns found during the Gaussian elimination are then permuted after the last independent column found to obtain a matrix in systematic form, which defines a second permutation .
d) Apply to the permuted received sequence , which defines a second permuted received sequence .

The MRB consists of the positions corresponding to the (leftmost) set of independent columns found in step (c). Note that if represents a codeword in the code defined by , then
represents the corresponding codeword in the original code, where represents the inverse permutation to
. Once the MRB has been identified, the order- OSD algorithm is conducted as follows.

a) For

, make all possible changes of of the

most reliable bits in the hard decision decoding of the

permuted noisy received sequence ;

b) For each change, reencode these bits based on (in

systematic form), and compute the decoding metric asso-

ciated with each constructed codeword;

c) Select the most likely codeword among the

constructed candidate codewords.

Each value of determines the reprocessing phase- of orderreprocessing. Note finally that an equivalent dual implementa-

3Two check sums are said to be orthogonal on position-i if no other bit than that at position-i contributes to each evaluation of these check sums.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:48:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

910

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, MAY 2001

tion of OSD based on the processing of the parity check matrix

of the code considered rather than its generator matrix is also

possible [23].

In this paper, we propose to process the OSD at the end of

each iteration of the BP decoding. The a posteriori probabil-

ities delivered by the BP decoding at each iteration are con-

sidered as reliability values by the OSD and are used to con-

struct the corresponding MRB. Let represent the set of

the locations (indices) associated with the MRIP’s deter-

mined from the a posteriori probabilities delivered by BP de-

coding. Furthermore, let

define the

set of binary values corresponding to the largest a posteriori

probabilities computed by the BP decoding for each position

in at the iteration considered. Then, OSD is realized based

on the set

as original information set and the original re-

ceived sequence . More specifically, phase-0 reprocessing cor-

responds to the codeword associated with

, while phase-1

reprocessing considers the codewords obtained by inverting a

single position in

. Since phase- of order- decoding re-

quires the reprocessing of candidate codewords and codes

of hundreds of information bits are considered, we limit the

OSD to order-1 reprocessing to keep the overall decoding com-

plexity manageable. For each constructed codeword, its associ-

ated decoding metric is computed based on the original noisy re-

ceived sequence . After a predetermined maximum number of

iterations, the most likely codeword recorded by the combined

decoding algorithm is delivered as the final solution. Note that

this algorithm always delivers a codeword as its final estimate.

Consequently, as opposed to BP decoding, no decoding error

can be detected based on the decoded sequence. The flow-chart

of this combined algorithm is given in Section II-C.

Unfortunately, an error performance analysis of this com-

bined algorithm seems very difficult as for the medium length

codes considered, no theoretical framework to derive the a pos-

teriori probabilities delivered after iteration-1 is available. Fur-

thermore, these codes are too large and generally, not structured

enough to compute their weight distribution, so that a tight ap-

proximation of their MLD error performance is also not feasible.

B. Stopping Criterion
In [6], it is proposed to check whether the hard decision decoding of the a posteriori probabilities delivered at each iteration defines a codeword by checking whether the corresponding syndrome is zero. This stopping criterion can be justified by the fact that for the word error rates (WERs) considered, an undetectable error is much less likely to occur than a decoding error. Indeed, this stopping criterion can still be used in our combined decoding method.
In [6], [24], and [25], sufficient conditions on the optimality of a candidate codeword expressed in the MRB of the code have been derived. These conditions improve upon the universal conditions derived in [26]–[28] by exploiting the OSD reprocessing strategy in the MRB. Unfortunately, the conditions of [16], [24], [25] can not be used in a straightforward way in our approach since after the first iteration, the hard decisions of the MRIPs based on the a posteriori probabilities delivered at each iteration do not necessarily equal the hard decisions of the corresponding

noisy received values. On the other hand, the general sufficient

conditions of [26]–[28] remain valid but are unlikely to offer

significant computation savings for this decoding approach.

In order to further reduce the average number of iterations

and consequently, the average number of OSDs, we propose

the following test, denoted ,

: “If the most likely

codeword found by the combined algorithm at a given iteration

is also delivered by OSD at

subsequent iterations, then

this codeword is chosen as the final estimate.” This simple test

relies on the fact that if at a given iteration, near-convergence

is not achieved by the iterative decoding, the reliability values

at subsequent iterations are likely to be modified sufficiently

to define different MRBs. The test

is easily implemented

with modulo-2 arithmetic operators. For all codes simulated in

this paper, the test provides a good tradeoff as significant

computation savings are achieved with little error performance

degradation.

C. Algorithm Flow-Chart

The detailed realization of the combined algorithm proposed

in Section II-A in conjunction with the stopping criteria dis-

cussed in Section II-B are given in the following. To clearly dis-

tinguish how the reliability values computed at each iteration

by BP and the initial received values are used by the OSD algo-

rithm, the BP decoding has been reviewed in details following

[6]. Note also that the approach presented in [23] perfectly fits

this combined algorithm as OSD is expressed in the dual code

defined by , the parity check matrix of the code considered.

Define as the set of check sums containing bit , and

as the set of bits forming check sum . The iterative BP

decoding algorithm has two alternating parts, in which certain

quantities and , are iteratively updated. The quantity

is meant to be the probability that bit is taking the value

, given the information obtained via checks other than check

(i.e.,

). The quantity is meant to be the probability

that check is satisfied if bit is considered fixed at and the

other bits have a separable distribution given by the probabilities

.

Initially, for

, the bit decisions and

are initialized to the symbols corresponding to the hard deci-

sion decoding of the noisy received values , and the variables

and are initialized to the a priori probabilities and

associated with and

. The value

is

initialized to a large number, the value is initialized to a pre-

determined value to be used in the test , and the counter

is set to zero. Then each iteration is processed as follows

• BP Decoding:

Step 1: Define

and for

, compute:

and for each , ,

a)

b)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:48:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FOSSORIER: ITERATIVE RELIABILITY-BASED DECODING OF LDPC CODES

Step 2: a) For each and each , and for

, update:

911
TABLE I DECODING COMPLEXITY FOR ORDER-i REPROCESSING

where is chosen such that

.

b) For each and

, update the “pseudo-

posterior probabilities” and given by:

TABLE II DECODING COMPLEXITY FOR ONE ITERATION OF BP

where is chosen such that

.

Step 3:

a) Create

such that

if

,

and

if

.

b) do the following:

- If

then the decoding algorithm halts and is

considered as a valid decoding result.

- Else, the algorithm starts the “Order- Reprocessing.”

• Order-i Reprocessing:

Step 1: Based on the reliability values

,

determine the corresponding MRIPs. Define as

the set of locations of these MRIPs.

Step 2:

a) Take

created at Step

3-(a) of BP decoding as initial information se-

quence.

b) For

, make all possible changes of

values in

and for each change, determine

the corresponding codeword .

Step 3: Let denote the codeword with minimum dis-

crepancy

constructed so far by the iterative com-

bined decoding algorithm.

(a) For each codeword constructed at Step 2:

- If

, check whether test

is satisfied based on

the counter

(automatically satisfied for

):

* If

, then

is satisfied; the decoding

algorithm halts and is considered as a valid decoding

result.

* Else, increment

.

- Else, evaluate the discrepancy:

between and the original noisy received sequence .

* If

, set

,

and

.

c Start the next iteration with BP decoding.

The algorithm stops if some maximum number of iterations is

reached. The codeword is delivered as the final solution in

that case. The OSD can also be processed based on the initial

values and , in which case iteration-1 becomes equivalent

to the conventional order- reprocessing. Finally, note that if

the syndrome test at Step 3-(b) of the BP decoding introduces

a nonnegligible number of undetectable errors, then can be

considered as a valid result only if it satisfies

.

Furthermore, even in that case, it may be decided to pursue the

decoding process after updating

.

It is important to notice that at each iteration, both the MRB

defined by and the corresponding information sequence

are determined from the updated values

,

, while the discrepancy values are computed-based on

the original noisy received sequence . As a result, for

,

it is possible to have

.

D. Computational Analysis

Consider an

linear LDPC block code with check

sums of weight orthogonal on each bit position. For such a

code, Tables I4 and II summarize the operations required for

order- reprocessing and for one iteration of BP decoding, re-

spectively, based on the analyzes of [16] and [6], [29]. Conse-

quently, the computational cost of OSD is dominated by about

binary additions and

real

additions, while one iteration of BP decoding requires

real multiplications,

real divisions and

real additions.

Due to the different natures of the operations involved in each

decoding algorithm, any computational comparison becomes

arguable. Furthermore, several steps of the OSD can be pro-

cessed in parallel and it has even been traditionally assumed

in the literature that binary additions can be discarded from a

computational cost analysis as long as they do not highly dom-

inate the total number of operations. If these arguments seem

mostly applicable to hardware implementations, it is worthy

mentioning that many binary additions can also be performed

in one real addition in a software implementation. Similarly,

the values reported in Table II assume forward/backward recur-

sions to compute the values

and

[6]. In hard-

ware implementation, a parallel realization of these computa-

tions may become more attractive, in which case decoding speed

is traded for a larger computational cost than that of Table II.

4In Table I, a comparison is considered as a real addition since it can be obtained from the sign of a real subtraction.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:48:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

912

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, MAY 2001

Fig. 1. WER comparison between BP decoding and BP decoding in conjunction with order-1 reprocessing for a (3,6) (504 252) LDPC code.

Fig. 3. Stopping criterion effectiveness comparison between syndrome check
alone and syndrome check in conjunction with the test T (2) for BP decoding in
conjunction with order-1 reprocessing of (3,6) (504 252) and (1 008 504) LDPC
codes, and a maximum of 50 iterations.

Fig. 2. WER comparison between BP decoding and BP decoding in conjunction with order-1 reprocessing for a (3,6) (1 008 504) LDPC code.

III. SIMULATION RESULTS

In this section, simulation results for different types of LDPC

codes are given. In all cases, the maximum numbers of itera-

tions have been chosen as the minimum numbers of iterations

for which near-convergence is achieved. Also, if not stated oth-

erwise, the test

was omitted in order to reach the best

achievable error performance.

A. LDPC Gallager Codes

Figs. 1 and 2 depict the simulation results for (3,6) (i.e., each

bit is associated with three orthogonal check sums of Hamming

weight six) Gallager codes with

parameters (504 252)

and (1 008 504), respectively. In both figures, BP decoding is

compared with the combined scheme presented in Section II.

Based on Fig. 1, we notice that the combined decoding scheme

achieves near convergence for a smaller maximum number of

iterations than BP decoding, which is a desirable feature. We

also observe that for the WER

, order-1 reprocessing

of at most 50 BP decoding iterations achieves 0.55-dB coding

gain over BP decoding of at most 200 iterations. An additional

0.05-dB coding gain is achieved at this WER by increasing the

maximum number of order-1 reprocessings from 50 to 200. Fur-

thermore, both order-0 reprocessing with at most 50 BP de-

coding iterations and order-1 reprocessing with at most ten-BP

decoding iterations achieve a good tradeoff between error per-

formance and decoding complexity. For the (1 008 504) LDPC

depicted in Fig. 2, at the WER

, order-1 reprocessing

of at most 50 BP decoding iterations achieves 0.25-dB coding

gain over BP decoding of at most 200 iterations. As expected,

as the code length increases, smaller coding gains are achieved

by the combined scheme since the BP decoding becomes closer

and closer to the ideal behavior discussed in [7]. On the other

hand, these gains remain important relatively since LDPC codes

should approach channel capacity as their code length increases

[6], [7], [9].

Fig. 3 compares the effectiveness of the proposed stopping

criterion

used in conjunction with syndrome checking

with that of syndrome checking alone for the (504 252) and

(1 008 504) LDPC codes. In both cases, we observe a very

small performance degradation, as shown in Figs. 1 and 2. On

the other hand, about 25% to 30% iterations are saved by intro-

ducing the test in both cases. Note that for the (1 008 504)

LDPC code, the proposed test seems highly unreliable at the

SNR of 0.00 dB but in that case, all words are likely to be in

error anyway. Finally, it is worth mentioning that the test of

[26] used in conjunction with syndrome checking provides

negligible savings upon syndrome checking alone.

B. DSC Codes and Corresponding LDPC Codes
Fig. 4 depicts simulation results for the (73,45) DSC code. The first term of the union bound on the WER for MLD has also been represented in this figure for comparison purposes. For this code, order-3 reprocessing practically achieves MLD [16] (i.e., the error performance curve of order-3 reprocessing

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:48:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FOSSORIER: ITERATIVE RELIABILITY-BASED DECODING OF LDPC CODES

913

Fig. 4. WER comparison between BP decoding, BP decoding in conjunction with order-1 reprocessing, and order-3 reprocessing for the (73,45) DSC code.

Fig. 5. WER comparison between BP decoding and BP decoding in conjunction with order-1 reprocessing for the (273 191) DSC code and its (3,9110) and (4,13114) LDPC code counterparts.

is on top of that of MLD at all WERs considered in practical

applications). We observe that order-1 reprocessing of at most

two BP decoding iterations achieves near-MLD while order-1

reprocessing of at most three BP decoding iterations practically

achieves MLD. While order-3 reprocessing considers at most

15 226 candidate codewords, only 92 and 138 candidate code-

words are considered by order-1 reprocessing of at most two BP

decoding iterations and three BP decoding iterations, respec-

tively. For this code,

, so that based on Section II-D,

one iteration of BP requires 810 multiplications, 90 divisions,

and 252 additions. Assuming an integer addition can include up

to 128 binary additions in software, the Gaussian elimination

step of OSD is realized in

additions. The sorting of

the reliability values requires about 320 additions and order-1

reprocessing is achieved with less than

additions. Note finally that although the parameters of this code

are relatively small compared to that of the other codes consid-

ered in this paper, MLD of this code remains a complex task. For

example, the minimum trellis representation of this code has at

least states [30].

In [12], it was shown that BP decoding of the (273 191) and

(1 057 813) DSC codes significantly outperforms BP decoding

of their (3,L) and (4,L) LDPC counterparts.5 The same codes are

considered in Figs. 5 and 6. Surprisingly enough, we observe

that in both cases, a much larger coding gain is achieved for

decoding of LDPC codes than for decoding DSC codes with the

proposed combined scheme. At the WER

, coding gains

of 0.9 dB and 0.4 dB are achieved by the proposed scheme to

decode the (4,L) LDPC codes with parameters (273 191) and

(1 057 813), respectively. Good gains are also achieved for the

(3,L) LDPC codes, but these codes are subject to an error floor

at the WERs represented. As a result, the (4,L) LDPC codes

become as efficient as their DSC counterparts.

This behavior can be explained by the fact that despite the

large number of short loops in the Tanner graph of the DSC

codes, the balanced structure of this graph and the relatively

5See [12] for the parameters of these codes.

Fig. 6. WER comparison between BP decoding and BP decoding in conjunction with order-1 reprocessing for the (1 057 813) DSC code and its (3,12113) and (4,17118) LDPC code counterparts.
large number of check sums considered are quite favorable for BP decoding of these codes. On the other hand, due to the relatively high rate and short length of the randomly generated LDPC codes considered, their Tanner graph is likely to contain short loops in an unbalanced way. As a result, residual errors are left by BP decoding which is unlikely to return a codeword. On the other hand, the density of short loops in the graph representation of LDPC codes is much smaller than that of DSC codes. Consequently, the correlation values introduced by the iterative decoding have less influence for LDPC codes and the iterative decoding may diverge slower from its ideal trajectory (obtained when assuming no loops in the graph representation of the code, or equivalently, by ideally canceling the influences of correlations in the iterative decoding). As a result, a reduced search around the -tuple delivered by BP decoding at each iteration is more likely to succeed for LDPC codes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:48:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

914

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, MAY 2001

Fig. 7. WER comparison for iterative BP decoding, combined iterative BP with Fig. 8. WER comparison for iterative BP decoding, combined iterative BP with

order-1 decoding, and order-4 reprocessing for a (3,5) (155,64) LDPC code.

periodic order-1 decoding every I iterations for a (3,6) (504 252) LDPC code.

C. (155,64,20) LDPC Tanner Code

In [31], a regular (155,64) LDPC code with

and

is constructed in a very special way. This code has

both very good minimum Hamming distance

and

very good girth

(i.e., no loops of length four or six are

present in its graph representation). Fig. 7 compares the simu-

lation results for BP decoding of this code with at most 500 it-

erations, and combined BP decoding with order-1 reprocessing

with at most 50 iterations. Order-4 reprocessing, which is the

largest reprocessing order for which OSD remains feasible for

this code, BP decoding with at most 100 iterations and com-

bined BP decoding with order-1 reprocessing with at most 10

iterations are also depicted in Fig. 7. We observe that at the WER

, the combined proposed scheme outperforms BP decoding

by about 1.2 dB. Furthermore, the combined proposed scheme,

which considers at most 65 candidate codewords at each itera-

tion rapidly outperforms order-4 reprocessing which considers

at most 679 121 candidate codewords. In fact, the combined

scheme achieves about the same error performance as order-4

reprocessing after only ten iterations. These results further em-

phasize that the smaller the code length , the larger the po-

tential gain to be achieved by the combined decoding approach

over standard BP decoding.

IV. TRADEOFFS BETWEEN PERFORMANCE AND COMPLEXITY

A. Simulation Results

Based on Section II-D, we readily conclude that order-1 re-

processing requires in general more computations than one it-

eration of BP. This suggests to investigate a hybrid scheme in

which order-1 reprocessing is performed periodically after

iterations of BP decoding, so that

corresponds to the

combined scheme presented in Section II-A and set to the

maximum number of iterations considered corresponds to a se-

rial implementation of BP decoding followed by order-1 repro-

cessing. Fig. 8 depicts the simulation results of iterative BP de-

coding with a maximum of 200 iterations, and combined itera-

tive BP with periodic order-1 decoding every iterations with

a maximum of 50 iterations and values

and 50,

for a (3,6) (504 252) LDPC code. We observe that the value

provides a reasonable trade-off between error perfor-

mance and computation complexity at medium to high SNR

values. On the other hand, little improvement is achieved by re-

ducing from 10 to 5 and most importantly, a serial decoding by

BP followed by order-1 reprocessing after 50 iterations provides

negligible improvement over the standard BP decoding. Con-

sequently, postreliability based decoding is unlikely to provide

significant improvement whenever the standard BP decoding

does not deliver the MLD codeword.

The error performance of serial decoding with BP followed

by order-1 reprocessing depicted in Fig. 8 may suggest that

little improvement is achieved during the last iterations of the

proposed combined scheme. Consequently, another tradeoff

between error performance and decoding complexity can be

achieved by processing the combined scheme composed of BP

decoding and order-1 reprocessing during the first iterations

only, and then terminating the decoding by the standard BP

decoding. Fig. 9 depicts the simulation results of iterative BP

decoding with a maximum of 200 iterations, and combined

iterative BP with order-1 decoding during the first iterations

only with a maximum of 50 iterations and values

and 50, for a (3,6) (504 252) LDPC code. Again, a good

trade-off between error performance and computation com-

plexity is achieved at all SNR values but the error performance

of the combined scheme described in Section II cannot be

approached closely with a small value of .

B. Discussion
The simulation results of Sections III and Section IV-A suggest that the convergence of the standard BP decoding can be decomposed into two phases. During the first phase, the BP iterative decoding is expected to approach the MLD codeword at some iteration while during the second phase, the BP iterative decoding is unlikely to approach the MLD codeword. Consequently, the combined decoding scheme is efficient only during the first phase. The turning point between these two phases cor-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:48:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FOSSORIER: ITERATIVE RELIABILITY-BASED DECODING OF LDPC CODES

915

Fig. 9. WER comparison for iterative BP decoding, combined iterative BP
with order-1 decoding during the first F iterations only for a (3,6) (504 252)
LDPC code.

Fig. 10. WER comparison for order-i reprocessing and combined iterative BP
with order-1 decoding for the (127,64) BCH code.

responds to starting having non negligible influences introduced in the iterative process by correlation values due to the loops in the graph representation of the code considered. For BP decoding of codes of medium lengths, the existence of the second phase is further justified by the negligible improvement achieved by a serial decoding as depicted in Fig. 8. On the other hand, the simulation results of Fig. 8 also suggest that during the first phase, the MLD codeword may be approached during few iterations only, so that a periodic reprocessing of the a posteriori probabilities delivered by BP decoding results in a non negligible performance degradation with respect to the combined scheme of Section II. Furthermore, the results of Fig. 9 suggest that the turning point is more likely to occur during the first iterations of BP decoding, as expected from the small girth of the graphs associated with the codes considered. Nevertheless, neglecting the turning point occurrences after few iterations only results in a nonnegligible performance degradation, as shown in Fig. 9.
Due to the large density of loop of length 6 in the graph representation of DSC codes, the turning point associated with BP decoding of these codes is expected to occur quite fast typically. As a result, the combined approach is likely to provide little improvement over BP decoding for these codes, as observed in Section III-B. In many cases, the parity check matrix of a cyclic code can be obtained by cyclically shifting times a minimum weight codeword of the dual code. However, the graph representation associated with this construction is rich in length-4 loops. As a result, the proposed combined decoding method is expected to perform quite poorly for such codes. We verified this fact by simulating BP decoding combined with order-1 reprocessing for the (127,64) BCH code. Fig. 10 compares the results obtained after 50 iterations with order- reprocessing for
and 4. While order-4 reprocessing practically achieves MLD at all SNR values represented in this figure [16], the combined iterative decoding method is outperformed by order-2 reprocessing (which can be viewed as 32 order-1 reprocessings of the same MRB) and falls far from MLD, as expected. On the other hand, if the density of length-4 loops in the graph repre-

Fig. 11. WER comparison for iterative BP decoding and combined iterative
BP with order-1 decoding for (3,6) (504 252) LDPC codes with girth g = 4 and g = 6, and a (4,8) (504 253) LDPC code with girth g = 6.

sentation of the code is small, the proposed combined decoding

method can still work well. This is verified in Fig. 11, in which

a (3,6) (504 252) LDPC code with girth

is compared

with a (3,6) (504 252) LDPC code whose graph representation

contains 25 loops of length 4. Although this latter code is sub-

ject to a higher error floor than the former code, the combined

approach achieves about the same coding gains for both codes

with respect to BP decoding. A (4,8) (504 253) LDPC code with

girth

has also been represented in Fig. 11. As expected,

this code should have a better asymptotic error performance

than many (3,6) LDPC codes due to a larger expected minimum

Hamming distance. However, we also observe that the improve-

ment achieved by the combined algorithm over standard BP de-

coding is not as important as for the (3,6) LDPC codes. This

can be justified by the larger density of short loops in the graph

representation of (4,8) LDPC codes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:48:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

916

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, MAY 2001

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have presented a near-MLD decoding method which combines BP decoding with the OSD algorithm. This approach allows to bridge the error performance gap between BP decoding and MLD. In general, for a fixed code rate and a fixed code structure, the performance improvements increase as the code length decreases, as expected from the analytical results of [1], [2], [6], [7], [21]. In general, the proposed combined scheme converges faster than BP decoding to a better limit. Indeed, the computational cost of one iteration of the combined algorithm is higher than that of BP decoding. This approach also motivates the search for low complexity probabilistic soft decision decoding algorithms of relatively long block codes.
It can be anticipated that for some fixed code parameters, a smaller error performance gap between BP decoding and MLD is achieved if particular attention is paid to the code construction and its Tanner graph representation. To this end, the proposed approach provides a way to measure the effectiveness of the construction, assuming it achieves near-MLD. Furthermore, although for the combined proposed approach, we limited the reprocessing order to one and the maximum number of iterations to 50 for complexity issues, further secondary gains could be achieved with higher reprocessing phases and a larger maximum number of iterations if a particular target code is being investigated.
This combined approach can also be extended in several ways: 1) the BP decoding can be replaced by suboptimum iterative decoding methods as those discussed in [14]–[15], [29], and [32]–[33]; and 2) the OSD algorithm can be replaced by other reliability based decoding methods such as Chase or GMD decodings [34]–[36], especially for DSC codes for which efficient algebraic decoding methods have been devised [20]. Further refinements in the tradeoffs between error performance and decoding complexity are possible with such methods.
Finally, it is worth mentioning that the OSD algorithm can be combined in a similar way as that described in this paper to further improve the error performance of iterative decoding of “turbo-like” codes [37]–[39].
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author wishes to thank M. Tanner for numerous valuable comments, the preprints of [11], [21], [31], suggesting the use of the combined algorithm for his (155,64,20) LDPC code [31], and anticipating the large gap in error performance compared with BP decoding, as well as S. Lin for many inspiring discussions and D. MacKay for providing the parity check matrices of most LDPC codes simulated in this paper. He is also very grateful to the three reviewers and the editor, E. Eleftheriou, whose constructive comments have greatly improved this paper.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press, 1963.
[2] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1968.
[3] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.

[4] R. J. McEliece, D. J. C. MacKay, and J.-F. Cheng, “Turbo decoding as an instance of Pearl’s "belief propagation" algorithm,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 140–152, Feb. 1998.
[5] F. R. Kschischang and B. J. Frey, “Iterative decoding of compound codes by probability propagation in graphical models,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 219–230, Feb. 1998.
[6] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[7] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001, to be published.
[8] D. J. C. MacKay, S. T. Wilson, and M. C. Davey, “Comparison of constructions of irregular Gallager codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, pp. 1449–1454, Oct. 1999.
[9] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of provably good low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[10] S. Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, Jr., T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Letters, vol. 5, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001, to be published.
[11] R. M. Tanner, “Spectral graphs for quasicyclic LDPC codes,” presented at the IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Washington, DC, June 2001.
[12] R. Lucas, M. Fossorier, Y. Kou, and S. Lin, “Iterative decoding of one-step majority logic decodable codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 48, pp. 931–937, June 2000.
[13] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low density parity check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and more,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, submitted for publication.
[14] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.
[15] N. Wiberg, H. A. Loeliger, and R. Koetter, “Codes and iterative decoding on general graphs,” Eur. Trans. Telecommun., vol. 6, p. 513, Sept. 1995.
[16] M. Fossorier and S. Lin, “Soft-decision decoding of linear block codes based on ordered statistics,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 41, pp. 1379–1396, Sept. 1995.
[17] C. R. P. Hartmann and L. D. Rudolph, “An optimum symbol-by-symbol decoding rule for linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 22, pp. 514–517, Sept. 1976.
[18] H. J. Greenberger, “Approximate maximum likelihood decoding of block codes,” Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA, The DSN Progress Report 78-107, Feb. 1979.
[19] M. Fossorier and S. Lin, “Reliability-based information set decoding of binary linear codes,” IEICE Trans. Fundam., vol. E82-A, pp. 2034–2042, Oct. 1999.
[20] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Error Control Coding, Fundamentals and Applications. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1983.
[21] R. M. Tanner, “Minimum distance bounds by graph analysis,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 808–821, Feb. 2001.
[22] T. Etzion, A. Trachtenberg, and A. Vardy, “Which codes have cycle-free tanner graphs?,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 2173–2181, Sept. 1999.
[23] M. P. C. Fossorier, S. Lin, and J. Snyders, “Reliability-based syndrome decoding of linear block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 44, pp. 388–398, Jan. 1998.
[24] D. Gazelle and J. Snyders, “Reliability-based code-search algorithm for maximum likelihood decoding of block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 43, pp. 239–249, Jan. 1997.
[25] M. Fossorier, T. Koumoto, T. Takata, T. Kasami, and S. Lin, “The least stringent sufficient condition on the optimality of a suboptimally decoded code-word using the most reliable basis,” Proc. IEEE Intern. Symp. Inform. Theory, p. 430, June 1997.
[26] D. J. Taipale and M. B. Pursley, “An improvement to generalized-minimum-distance decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 37, pp. 167–172, Jan. 1991.
[27] T. Kaneko, T. Nishijima, H. Inazumi, and S. Hirasawa, “An efficient maximum likelihood decoding of linear block codes with algebraic decoder,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 40, pp. 320–327, Mar. 1994.
[28] T. Kasami, “On integer programming problems related to soft-decision decoding algorithms,” in Applied Algebra, Algebraic Algorithms and Error-Correcting Codes. New York: Springer-Verlag, Nov. 1999, vol. 1719, pp. 43–54.
[29] M. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, pp. 673–680, May 1999.
[30] A. Lafourcade and A. Vardy, “Optimum sectionalization of a trellis,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 689–702, May 1996.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:48:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FOSSORIER: ITERATIVE RELIABILITY-BASED DECODING OF LDPC CODES

917

[31] R. M. Tanner, “A (155,64,20) sparse graph (LDPC) code,” in IEEE Int. Symp. Inform. Theory, Sorrento, Italy, June 2000, presented at the Recent Results Session and private communication .
[32] K. Yamaguchi, H. Iizuka, E. Nomura, and H. Imai, “Variable threshold soft decision decoding,” IEICE Trans. Elect. Comm., vol. 72, pp. 65–74, Sept. 1989.
[33] A. J. Felstrom and K. S. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 2181–2191, Sept. 1999.
[34] G. D. Forney, Jr., “Generalized minimum distance decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 12, pp. 125–131, Apr. 1966.
[35] D. Chase, “A class of algorithms for decoding block codes with channel measurement information,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 18, pp. 170–182, Jan. 1972.
[36] M. Fossorier and S. Lin, “Chase-type and GMD coset decodings,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 48, pp. 345–350, Mar. 2000.
[37] C. Berrou and A. Glavieux, “Near optimum error correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 44, pp. 1261–1271, Oct. 1996.
[38] R. M. Pyndiah, “Near optimum decoding of product codes: Block turbo codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 46, pp. 1003–1010, Aug. 1998.
[39] D. Divsalar, H. Jin, and R. McEliece, “Coding theorems for ‘turbo-like’ codes,” in Proc. 36th Allerton Conf., Monticello, IL, Sept. 1998, pp. 201–210.

Marc P. C. Fossorier (S’90–M’95–SM’00) was born in Annemasse, France, on March 8, 1964. He received the B.E. degree from the National Institute of Applied Sciences (I.N.S.A.), Lyon, France, in 1987, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Hawaii, Manoa, Honolulu, in 1991 and 1994, all in electrical engineering.
In 1996, he joined the Faculty of the University of Hawaii, Honolulu, as an Assistant Professor of Electrical Engineering. He was promoted to Associate Professor in 1999. His research interests include decoding techniques for linear codes, communication algorithms, combining coding and equalization for ISI channels, magnetic recording and statistics. He coauthored (with S. Lin, T. Kasami, and T. Fujiwara) the book, Trellises and Trellis-Based Decoding Algorithms, (Kluwer, 1998). Dr. Fossorier is a recipient of a 1998 NSF Career Development award. He has served as Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS since 1996, as Editor for the IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS since 1999, and he is currently the Treasurer of the IEEE Information Theory Society.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:48:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

