IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

657

Analysis of Sum-Product Decoding of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes Using a Gaussian Approximation
Sae-Young Chung, Member, IEEE, Thomas J. Richardson, and Rüdiger L. Urbanke

Abstract—Density evolution is an algorithm for computing the capacity of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes under messagepassing decoding. For memoryless binary-input continuous-output additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels and sum-product decoders, we use a Gaussian approximation for message densities under density evolution to simplify the analysis of the decoding algorithm. We convert the infinite-dimensional problem of iteratively calculating message densities, which is needed to find the exact threshold, to a one-dimensional problem of updating means of Gaussian densities. This simplification not only allows us to calculate the threshold quickly and to understand the behavior of the decoder better, but also makes it easier to design good irregular LDPC codes for AWGN channels.
For various regular LDPC codes we have examined, thresholds can be estimated within 0.1 dB of the exact value. For rates between 0.5 and 0.9, codes designed using the Gaussian approximation perform within 0.02 dB of the best performing codes found so far by
using density evolution when the maximum variable degree is 10.
We show that by using the Gaussian approximation, we can visualize the sum-product decoding algorithm. We also show that the optimization of degree distributions can be understood and done graphically using the visualization.
Index Terms—Density evolution, fixed points, Gaussian approximation, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, stability, sumproduct algorithm, threshold.
I. INTRODUCTION
F OR many channels and iterative decoders of interest, lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes—first discovered by Gallager [1], [2] and rediscovered by Spielman et al. [3] and MacKay et al. [4], [5]—exhibit a threshold phenomenon: as the block length tends to infinity, an arbitrarily small bit-error probability can be achieved if the noise level is smaller than a certain threshold. For a noise level above this threshold, on the other hand, the probability of bit error is larger than a positive constant. Gallager first observed this phenomenon for binary symmetrical channels (BSCs) in his introduction of regular LDPC
Manuscript received January 7, 2000; revised July 10, 2000. This work was supported in part by Lucent Technologies. The material in this paper was presented in part at the 2000 International Symposium of Information Theory, Sorrento, Italy, June 25–30, 2000.
S.-Y. Chung was with the Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA. He is now with Airvana, Inc., Chelmsford, MA 01824 USA (e-mail: sae-young.chung@airvananet.com).
T. J. Richardson was with Bell Labs, Lucent Technologies, Murray Hill, NJ 07974 USA. He is now with Flarion Technologies, Bedminster, NJ 07921 USA (e-mail: richardson@flarion.com).
R. L. Urbanke was with Bell Labs, Lucent Technologies, Murray Hill, NJ 07974 USA. He is now with the Communications Theory Lab, EPFL, DSCLTHC, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland (e-mail: Rudiger.Urbanke@epfl.ch).
Communicated by B. J. Frey, Guest Editor. Publisher Item Identifier S 0018-9448(01)00717-9.

codes [1], [2], where he used an explicit construction of regular graphs. Luby et al. generalized this idea to randomly constructed irregular LDPC codes, showed that irregular codes perform better than regular ones, and also showed that the threshold phenomenon occurs for these codes [6].
In [7], this observation was further generalized by Richardson and Urbanke to a large range of binary-input channels, including binary erasure, binary symmetric, Laplace, and AWGN channels, and to various decoding algorithms including belief propagation (sum-product algorithm), which are collectively called message-passing algorithms. Richardson et al. proved a general concentration result showing that the decoder performance on random graphs converges to its expected value as the length of the code increases, generalizing the result of Luby et al. [7]. Since it is difficult to determine this expected performance for an ensemble of finite size, they used the expected behavior in the limit of infinitely long codes, which can be determined from the corresponding cycle-free graph. They defined the threshold as indicated above for a random ensemble of irregular codes specified by degree distributions, and developed an algorithm called density evolution for iteratively calculating message densities, enabling the determination of thresholds.
Using this result, they constructed LDPC codes that clearly beat the powerful turbo codes [8] on AWGN channels. Recently, this was improved [9], [10], where the threshold for a rateLDPC code on the AWGN channel is within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit and simulation results are within 0.04 dB of the Shannon limit at a bit error rate of using a block length of
.
Calculating thresholds and optimizing degree distributions using density evolution are computationally intensive tasks, and are often difficult for most channels other than binary-erasure channels (BECs). In BECs, density evolution becomes one-dimensional, and it is possible to do more analysis and even to construct capacity-achieving codes [11], [30]. For more interesting channels including AWGN channels, however, density evolution is too complicated to be analyzed.
In this paper, we present a simple method to estimate the threshold for irregular LDPC codes on memoryless binary-input continuous-output AWGN channels with sum-product decoding. This method is based on approximating message densities as Gaussians (for regular LDPC codes) or Gaussian mixtures (for irregular LDPC codes) [12]. We show that, without much sacrifice in accuracy, a one-dimensional quantity, namely, the mean of a Gaussian density, can act as faithful surrogate for the message density, which is an infinite-dimensional vector.

0018–9448/01$10.00 © 2001 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:47:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

658

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Since this method is easier to analyze and computationally

faster than density evolution, it can be a useful tool for under-

standing the behavior of the decoder and for optimizing irreg-

ular codes. For example, we show how to determine the rate of

convergence of the error probability, and why there is an alter-

nation between fast and slow decoding stages, as noted in [13].

We also use this method to find good irregular codes using linear

programming. This algorithm not only optimizes degree distri-

butions several orders of magnitude faster, but it is often as good

as the optimization methods based on the full density evolution.

For turbo codes, a one-dimensional Gaussian approximation

based on extrinsic information transfer chart (EXIT chart) was

first used by ten Brink [14], where he considered parallel con-

catenated codes. Using his EXIT chart methods, he recently de-

signed a rate- serial concatenated code with a repetition code

and a eight-state rate-one code that is within about 0.1 dB of the

Shannon limit [15]. A similar Gaussian-approximation method

based on signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) was later used in [16] for

turbo codes, which appeared at the same time as [12]. See also

[17] in this issue. Divsalar et al. also used a similar approxima-

tion method based on SNR [18].

Since there is no simple formula for updating message

densities for turbo decoding, Monte Carlo simulations were

used to analyze approximate trajectories for Gaussian messages

under turbo decoding in both papers [14], [16]. Similar to

the mean as used in this paper, they used one-dimensional

quantities, namely, mutual information [14] and SNR [16], to

approximate message densities. They showed that the Gaussian

approximations work reasonably well for turbo decoding, and

argued that the position of the turbo waterfall region can be

estimated by visualizing the trajectories.

In other related works, the sum-product algorithm was

analyzed for graphs with cycles when messages are jointly

Gaussian [19]–[21], [31]. Since a Gaussian density is com-

pletely characterized by its mean vector and covariance matrix,

the analysis of the sum-product algorithm becomes tractable.

The main purpose of these works is to analyze how well

decoding works on graphs with cycles. Surprisingly, the means

converge to the correct posterior means when certain conditions

are satisfied, even when there are cycles in the graph.

Let us first consider a regular binary

-LDPC code,

where denotes the number of neighbors of a variable node

and denotes the number of neighbors of a check node. Under

the sum-product algorithm, and message passing in general,

variable nodes and check nodes exchange messages iteratively.

A check node gets messages from its neighbors, processes the

messages, and sends the resulting messages back to its neigh-

bors. Similarly, a variable node receives messages from its

neighbors, processes the messages, and sends messages back to

its neighbors. Each output message of a variable or a check node

is a function of all incoming messages to the node except the in-

coming message on the edge where the output message will be

sent out. This restriction is essential for the sum-product algo-

rithm to produce correct marginal a posteriori probabilities for

cycle-free graphs.

This two-step procedure is repeated many times. After such

iterations, the variable node decodes its associated bit based on

all information obtained from its depth- subgraph of neigh-

bors. Under the “local tree assumption,” namely, that the girth of the graph is large enough so that the subgraph forms a tree (i.e., there are no repeated nodes in the subgraph), we can analyze the decoding algorithm straightforwardly because incoming messages to every node are independent. Furthermore, by the general concentration theorem of [6], which generalizes the results of [7], we are assured that, for almost all randomly constructed codes and for almost all inputs, the decoder performance will be close to the decoder performance under the local tree assumption with high probability, if the block length of the code is long enough. From now on we base our analysis on this local tree assumption.
It is convenient to use log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) as messages; i.e., we use

as the output message of a variable node, where is the bit value of the node and denotes all the information available to the node up to the present iteration obtained from edges other than the one carrying . Likewise, we define the output message of a check node as

where is the bit value of the variable node that gets the message from the check node, and denotes all the information available to the check node up to the present iteration obtained from edges other than the one carrying .
Let be a message from a variable node to a check node. Under sum-product decoding, is equal to the sum of all incoming LLRs; i.e.,

(1)

where

are the incoming LLRs from the

neighbors of the variable node except the check node that gets

the message , and is the observed LLR of the output bit

associated with the variable node. The density of the sum of

random variables

can be easily calculated

by convolution of densities of the ’s, which can be efficiently

done in the Fourier domain [6].

The message update rule for check nodes can be ob-

tained from the duality between variable and check nodes

and the resulting Fourier transform relationship between

and

, where

and

[22]. From this, we get the following “tanh

rule” [23]–[25], [6], [22]:

(2)

where

are the incoming LLRs from

neighbors of a check node, and is the message sent to the re-

maining neighbor. Figs. 1 and 2 show message flows through

a variable node and a check node, respectively, where we use

normal realizations [22] of variable and check nodes, which be-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:47:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHUNG et al.: ANALYSIS OF SUM-PRODUCT DECODING OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

659

This can be generalized to irregular codes, where a variable number of degrees is allowed. Let

and

be the generating functions of the degree distributions for the variable and check nodes, respectively, where and are the fractions of edges belonging to degree- variable and check nodes, respectively [11]. Using this expression, the nominal rate
of the code is given by

Fig. 1. Message flow through a variable node.

[11]. For detailed density evolution for irregular codes, we refer readers to [13].
This two-stage computation, called density evolution, is the key step in calculating the thresholds of message-passing decoding in [6]. First, without loss of generality, we assume that the all- codeword was sent. Then, we fix the channel parameter, namely, noise power, and we run the above algorithm iteratively until either the density of tends to the “point mass at infinity” (equivalently, the probability of error tends to zero), or it converges to a density with a finite probability of error (the probability of being negative).1 The threshold is defined as the maximum noise level such that the probability of error tends to zero as the number of iterations tends to infinity.2

II. GAUSSIAN APPROXIMATION FOR REGULAR LDPC CODES

Fig. 2. Message flow through a check node.
come a repetition and a parity check, respectively. In this representation, half-edges represent variables and full edges represent states. Under sum-product decoding, constraints become computation nodes and states become communication links between constraint nodes. Fig. 2(b) shows how the decoding for a check node can be done on a dual graph (repetition code) using Fourier transforms, which is a special case of a more general idea of dualizing the sum-product algorithm on a dual graph [22].
To apply the same Fourier transform technique to (2), we need to take logarithms on each side to convert the product into a sum, i.e.

(3)

where and are the signs of and ,

respectively. We define the sign as if

and otherwise.

Thus, the sum for the sign in (3) is performed in and the sum

for the magnitude is the ordinary sum in . As in the first case,

density evolution for this step can be done numerically in the

Fourier domain [6].

The LLR message from the channel is Gaussian with mean

and variance , where is the variance of the channel

noise. Thus, if all

[which are independent and

identically distributed (i.i.d.)] are Gaussian in (1), then the re-

sulting sum is also Gaussian because it is the sum of independent

Gaussian random variables. Even if the inputs are not Gaussian,

by the central limit theorem, the sum would look like a Gaussian

if many independent random variables are added as noted in

[26].

Indeed, if we normalize the output of (1) to a zero-mean

unit-variance variable, and if the

are i.i.d. with finite

variance, then the normalized output converges to a Gaussian

distribution as tends to infinity by the central limit theorem.

However, due to the interaction between variable and check

nodes, it does not seem easy to rigorously show how close the

distributions are to the Gaussian in actual density evolution.

Using simulations, Wiberg [26] observed that message dis-

tributions for AWGN channels resemble Gaussians using a (2,

3)-regular code. Our empirical results using density evolution

show that for a regular graph, the output in (1) as well as the

output in (2) can be well approximated by Gaussian densi-

ties, although tends to be less like Gaussian, especially when

its mean is near zero. Despite this difference, the approximation

1A point mass at 0 contributes half of its probability mass to the probability of error.
2In the limit of infinitely long codes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:47:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

660

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

method that we develop in this section works very well for reg-

ular LDPC codes. From this point on, for regular LDPC codes,

we assume that the variables

’s are Gaussian.

Since a Gaussian is completely specified by its mean and vari-

ance, we need to keep only the means and variances during it-

erations. There is an important condition, called the symmetry

condition [13], that is preserved under density evolution for all

messages, which can be expressed as

, where

is the density of an LLR message. By enforcing this con-

dition for the approximate Gaussian densities at every iteration,

we can greatly improve the accuracy of the approximation. For

a Gaussian with mean and variance , this condition reduces

to

, which means that we need to keep only the mean.

In [16], the SNR of a Gaussian was used instead of its mean,

to approximate density evolution for turbo codes. If we define

the SNR of a Gaussian with mean and variance as

,

then it becomes if we assume the symmetry condition for

the approximate messages. Therefore, the SNR becomes equiv-

alent to the mean. However, since simulations were used in [16]

due to a lack of tools for analyzing the density evolution for

turbo codes, the authors of [16] were unable to calculate thresh-

olds for turbo codes with enough precision (up to two digits).

Since we are concentrating only on regular and irregular

LDPC codes, we can find analytic expressions for the approx-

imate density evolution and we can calculate the approximate

threshold values with arbitrary precision. Our empirical results

show that it is limited to about ten digits due to the precision of

the double precision numbers. Using the mean is also intuitive

and physically motivated especially for irregular codes. It needs

more steps to show how different SNRs are mixed for irregular

codes, which can be done naturally using the mean as we will

show in the next section.

We denote the means of and by and , respectively.

Then (1) simply becomes

(4)

where is the mean of and denotes the th iteration. We

omit the index because the ’s are i.i.d. for

, and

have the same mean . Note that

since the initial

message from any check node is .

The updated mean at the th iteration can be calculated

by taking expectations on each side of (2), i.e.

Definition 1: if

if

It is easy to check that

is continuous and monotonically

decreasing on

, with

and

. Using

, we obtain the following update rule for from (4) and

(5):

(6)

where

is the initial value for .

The following lemma gives upper and lower bounds on .

Lemma 1:

(7)

Proof: By expanding

as follows:

if

if we obtain

where is the -function. Using

(5) [27], we get

where we have omitted the index and simplified the product

because the ’s are i.i.d. One complete iteration begins at

the variable nodes and then ends at the check nodes. The

variables

and

are Gaussian

, and

, respectively, where

is a Gaussian

density with mean and variance .

Note that the expectation

depends only on the where we use

[28] and

.

mean of , since is Gaussian with mean and variance Similarly, we get

; i.e.

We define the following function for will be useful and convenient for further analyses.

, which

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:47:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHUNG et al.: ANALYSIS OF SUM-PRODUCT DECODING OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

661

Fig. 3. Approximate (- -) and exact (—) thresholds for (j; k)-regular LDPC codes.

where we use

TABLE I APPROXIMATE AND EXACT THRESHOLD VALUES FOR VARIOUS (j; k)-REGULAR LDPC CODES FOR THE BINARY-INPUT AWGN CHANNEL
AND SUM-PRODUCT DECODING

These bounds, which are tight as

, will be used in

analyzing the behavior of the decoder and in optimizing degree

distributions in the following sections.

Although it is possible to calculate thresholds and to optimize

degree distributions using the exact values of , we note that

the following two approximations can be used instead to speed

up the calculations without much sacrifice in accuracy. For small

, say

, we will use the following approximation, which

is very accurate and is better than (7) for this range of :

(8)

where

,

, and

[these values

were optimized to minimize the maximum absolute error be-

tween (8) and ]. We note that there should be other curves

that fit better than (8), but (8) seems to be good enough for

our purposes. For large , say

, we use the average of the

upper and lower bounds of (7) as an approximation for .

Table I shows approximate thresholds calculated using

(6) compared to the exact thresholds

from density evolu-

tion. There is about 0.3 to 1.2% error (0.03 to 0.1 dB) compared

to the exact values.

Fig. 3 shows differences between approximate and exact thresholds for various regular LDPC codes, where SNR is defined as the distance from the Shannon limit in decibels.

Note that the accuracy for

codes becomes improved

as becomes large, which can be explained because as more inputs are added at a variable node, the output becomes more

Gaussian. Algorithms developed in [9] and [10] were used to

calculate exact thresholds in Table I.

III. GAUSSIAN APPROXIMATION FOR IRREGULAR LDPC CODES
The preceding analysis can be easily extended to irregular LDPC codes.
We again consider an ensemble of random codes with degree distributions and . A node will thus get i.i.d. messages from its neighbors, where each of these messages is a random mixture of different densities from neighbors with different degrees. We denote these mixtures from variable nodes and from check nodes by and , respectively.
We assume first that the individual output of a variable or a check node is Gaussian, as in the preceing section, based on the empirical evidence. Therefore, the mean of the output message of a degree- variable node at the th iteration is given by

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:47:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

662

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

where is the mean of and

is the mean of at the

st iteration, where is a Gaussian mixture in general

[when

is not concentrated in one degree]. The variance

of the output density is given by

, as in the last section.

Therefore, at the th iteration, an incoming message to a check

node will have the following Gaussian mixture density :

The threshold in terms of noise power is therefore equal to

. Since is monotonically decreasing on

,

we conclude that

is monotonically increasing on both

and

. By finite induction, we conclude

that for all

,

and will converge to .

Lemma 2:

will converge to iff

(9)
where is the mean of the Gaussian output from a degreevariable node.
Using (9), we get

Then, we use (5) for a check node to calculate the mean of its

output. Therefore, the mean

of the Gaussian output mes-

sage of a check node with degree at the th iteration is given by

(13)

for all

.

Proof: Let us first assume

. Since

, will converge to

. However,

cannot be finite, because if so then

.

Now we assume

for some

.

because

. Since is continuous, there exists

such that

for

. Now we choose the

smallest

such that

and

for

. Since

and

for

we conclude that

for

.

As an alternative expression to (11), for

and

, we define

and

as

Since

with probability for

, is also a

Gaussian mixture. Since the output message of a variable node

is characterized by its mean, which is the sum of the means of

the incoming densities, we need to keep only the mean of the

Gaussian mixture from check nodes to variable nodes. By lin-

early combining these means for degree-

check nodes

with weights

, we get as given in the

following:

(14)

Now, (12) becomes equivalent to

(15)

where

. The initial value is . It is easy to see that

iff

. Thus, the convergence condition

is satisfied iff

(16)

For

and

as

, we define

This will be useful in optimizing , since (14) is linear in the

(10) ’s.

Let us take an example to demonstrate how well message

and

densities are approximated by Gaussian mixtures. The following rate- code (17) was designed using density evolution and

has the threshold

[10]. The threshold calculated by the

Gaussian approximation is

.

(11)

(17)

Using this, we rewrite (10) as

(12)

where

and

that since

always start.

. The initial value is . Note

for

, the iteration (12) will

Definition 2: The threshold is the infimum of all in

such that converges to as

.

Fig. 4 shows two message densities from variable to check nodes when density evolution and the Gaussian approximation are used for the code in (17). The noise power was set to be 0.006 dB below the threshold in each case. Surprisingly, they are very close. Fig. 5 shows corresponding densities from check to variable nodes. In this case, the exact density has a spike at , which cannot be modeled well by a Gaussian approximation. Even though the two densities look very different, the fact that the two densities in the other direction are very close suggests that the approximation is working well. In fact, even though the exact density in Fig. 5 is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:47:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHUNG et al.: ANALYSIS OF SUM-PRODUCT DECODING OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

663

Fig. 4. Approximate (- -) and exact (—) densities at the check node input.

Fig. 5. Approximate (- -) and exact (—) densities at the variable node input.

very different from a Gaussian, the output of the variable node will be Gaussian-like again because many i.i.d. inputs are added at the variable node. Furthermore, when the probability of error is small enough, the exact density in Fig. 5 becomes Gaussian-like, as observed in [13]. We note that such a mismatch between the exact and approximate densities in Fig. 5 still exists in regular cases, too, because the shape of the exact density in Fig. 5 is due

to the nature of check node computations (the because is irregular.

rule), not

IV. STABILITY
In this section, we find the condition for the convergence of to in (12) as tends to infinity when is large enough, also

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:47:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

664

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

known as the stability condition [13]. We also derive the rate of convergence of the probability of error using this result.
We first prove the following lemma, which gives the behavior of (11) when is large (equivalently, small probability of error).

of [13], except that

is replaced by

Using Jensen’s inequality, we conclude that

Lemma 3: As

,

where is the first nonzero . Proof: When is large in (11),
can be simplified to

becomes

for all , with equality iff

for some

. There-

fore, the approximate stability condition is looser than the orig-

inal, which implies that stable degree distributions under the

Gaussian approximation may not be stable under density evolu(18) tion. However, stability under density evolution guarantees sta-

bility under the Gaussian approximation. In any case, these two

are the same if

for some

, and are very close if

is concentrated at two consecutive degrees, which is the

case for most good degree distributions found so far.

If

, then for large we can express as

(20)

where and respectively. If
. Using

are the first and the second nonzero

for some

, then we define

’s,

where is a constant. The probability of error ation is given by

, we get

at the th iter(21)

where we used on both sides of (19), we get

(19) where . By taking

is the fraction of degree- variable nodes. When is large, we get the following approximation for the probability of error.
Lemma 4: When is large, is approximated by

where we used Lemma 1 again, we get

and Lemma 1. By using

Finally, by taking

and by using (11), we get the result.

If

, then always converges to infinity regardless of

and as tends to infinity if is large enough. Otherwise,

becomes a constant as becomes large. For this case, using

, we get

if

if

where

are positive constants that depend on and the

degree distributions.

Proof: When is large, the first nonzero term in (21) be-

comes dominant. When

, becomes

where

where and are constants that depend on the degree distributions and , and we have used

The following theorem summarizes these two results.

Theorem 1: If

, then will converge to infinity as

tends to infinity if is large enough. If

, then cannot

converge to infinity regardless of its initial value. Note that this

condition is similar to the stability condition

and (20). If

, then becomes approximately

where is a positive constant that depends on the degree dis-

tributions and . Using this and the above approximation for the

-function, the result follows.

This implies that when

and is small, the error

probability will decrease by a factor of

at each

iteration, which matches empirical observations using density

evolution very well.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:47:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHUNG et al.: ANALYSIS OF SUM-PRODUCT DECODING OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

665

f 0 g f 0 g Fig. 6. h (s; r) r for i = 2; . . . ; 20 (top to bottom) and h(s; r) r (- -).

V. OPTIMIZATION OF DEGREE DISTRIBUTIONS

Assuming that and are given, we can optimize

by maximizing the rate of the code. The constraints are 1) nor-

malization:

; and 2) the inequality constraint (13).

Since this is a linear program, it can be solved efficiently. Alter-

natively, however, we can maximize (18) ignoring the

term. As shown in the following theorem, the optimized

in this way has the form

for some

and

.

Theorem 2: A concentrated degree distribution

To check whether the constraints of the dual problem are satis-

fied, we first observe that

, and since

if if if we conclude that induction.

,

, by finite

for some

and

, minimizes

subject to

and

, where is a constant.

Proof: The dual linear program to the given problem is

max

subject to

Suppose we choose an integer such that

Note that this solution also maximizes (18) without the term, subject to the rate constraint. Experiments show
that this concentrated form of is not much different from the optimized degree distributions using linear programming, and that there is no noticeable performance degradation for the cases we have examined so far. Thus, we will use only concentrated ’s.
The optimization of can be done similarly to the optimization of , i.e., assuming and are given, we optimize by maximizing the rate

We claim that the following are feasible solutions to the primal and dual problems of equal cost, which are optimal solutions to both primal and dual problems by the weak duality theorem [29]:

The constraints are 1) normalization:

; and 2) the in-

equality constraint (16). This can be also done using linear pro-

gramming.

Fig. 6 shows

for

using the de-

gree distribution in (17) where the noise level is equal to

the Gaussian approximation threshold of the code in (17). In this

case, where and the noise power are given, the optimiza-

tion of

may be performed by maximizing the rate of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:47:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

666

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

f 0 g Fig. 7. h(s; r) r as a function of r magnified.

code subject to the normalization constraint

inequality constraints

,

, and

and the

Figs. 6 and 7 show how each curve in

for

, is combined to produce the curve

,

where the degree distribution in (17) is used. This curve is

always below and barely touches at one point. If it hits , then

the point where the curve hits becomes a fixed point, and the

error probability cannot be decreased further. Note that, since

the slope of the curve of

near

is different

from those for

, the stability condition in Theorem 1 is

described by only .

Although we have shown that concentrated

are good

enough, we may still want to visualize how the optimization of

is done. Fig. 8 shows

for

using in (17) where the noise level is equal to the Gaussian

approximation threshold of the code in (17). In this case, where

and the noise power are given, the optimization of

may be performed by maximizing the rate of the code subject to

the normalization constraint

and the inequality con-

straints

,

, and

Figs. 8 and 9 show how two curves corresponding to and

in

are combined to produce the curve

,

where in (17) is used. This curve is always above and

barely touches at one point. If it hits , then the point where

the curve hits becomes a fixed point, and the error probability

cannot be decreased further.

Figs. 10 and 11 show thresholds in SNR for some codes

of rates to optimized using both density evolution and the

Gaussian approximation when the maximum variable degree

is or , respectively. They show that the difference between

the exact and approximate thresholds is small (less than 0.3 dB)

for codes designed using the Gaussian approximation. It also

shows that the optimization based on the Gaussian approxima-

tion is good especially when is low and when the rate is high.

For example, for rates higher than , the difference is less than

0.02 dB for

and less than 0.1 dB for

.

VI. FIXED POINTS

We have seen that the Gaussian approximation is useful in

calculating thresholds and optimizing degree distributions.

However, it is not clear how accurate the approximation is by

just looking at a single number, namely, a threshold. In this

section, we show how accurately the Gaussian approximation

can predict the locations of potential fixed points of density

evolution, which could show more aspects of the approximation

than thresholds.

First observe that in Figs. 7 and 9 there are slow and fast

phases, where the width of the gap between the curve and the

horizontal axis determines the iteration speed. This explains

why there are slow and fast phases in sum-product decoding,

as noted in [13].

Fig. 12 shows the decrease in the probability of error as a

function of the probability of error for the

code in (17)

using density evolution and the Gaussian approximation, where

the noise power is set to be 0.006 dB below the threshold of each

case. It is interesting to observe that there are three estimated

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:47:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHUNG et al.: ANALYSIS OF SUM-PRODUCT DECODING OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

667

f 0 g f 0 g Fig. 8. f (s; t) t for i = 2; . . . ; 10 (top to bottom) and f (s; t) t (- -).

f 0 g Fig. 9. f (s; t) t as a function of t magnified.

fixed points under density evolution (including zero probability

of error) but only two under the Gaussian approximation. As

we increase the noise power,

(probability of error)

becomes a fixed point under both the Gaussian approximation

and density evolution. As the noise power is increased further,

becomes another fixed point under density evolution.

(rate

) (22) using density evolution and the Gaussian ap-

proximation, where the noise power is set to be 0.006 dB below

the threshold of each case.

(22)

Fig. 13 shows the decrease in the probability of error as a In this case, the number of potential fixed points is estimated

function of the probability of error for the following

code correctly using the Gaussian approximation, and the two curves

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:47:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

668

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Fig. 10. Performance of various codes, designed/evaluated using GA/GA, GA/DE, DE/GA, or DE/DE when d = 10, where GA denotes the Gaussian approximation and DE denotes density evolution.

Fig. 11. Performance of various codes, designed/evaluated using GA/GA, GA/DE, DE/GA, or DE/DE when d = 20.

are quite close. In this case, the Gaussian approximation not only calculates thresholds accurately, but also tracks the exact probability of error reasonably well.
We note that, from empirical observations, as the maximum variable degree increases, the number of fixed points often tends to increase. Since the Gaussian approximation is not good at es-

timating the number of fixed points exactly when the maximum

variable degree is large, it becomes less useful in this case. How-

ever, when the maximum variable degree is small, the Gaussian

approximation works reasonably well. This seems to contradict

our previous observations for regular codes, where the accuracy

of the Gaussian approximation for

codes improves as

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:47:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHUNG et al.: ANALYSIS OF SUM-PRODUCT DECODING OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

669

Fig. 12. The probability of error versus decrease in the probability of error of the d = 20 code in (17) using density evolution (—) and the Gaussian approximation (- -).

Fig. 13. The probability of error versus decrease in the probability of error for the d = 7 code in (22) using density evolution (—) and the Gaussian approximation (- -).

increases. This seems to suggest that, as the maximum variable degree of the code increases, the Gaussian approximation becomes less accurate because the irregularity of the code increases, even though the fraction of high-degree variable nodes increases.

VII. CONCLUSION
For LDPC codes under sum-product decoding, the message distributions are well approximated by Gaussians or Gaussian mixtures when memoryless binary-input continuous-output

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:47:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

670

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

AWGN channels are used. Using the Gaussian approximation, we have simplified density evolution to a one-dimensional problem, and found simple and analyzable expressions for describing approximate density evolution. Because of the huge reduction in the dimension of the problem without much sacrifice in accuracy, we can find thresholds faster and optimize degree distributions faster and easier. It also enables us to analyze the behavior of density evolution especially near the zero probability of error, which makes it possible to find the approximate rate of convergence for the probability of error when it is near zero. The Gaussian approximation is also a good tool to visualize how the mean of densities are updated under density evolution, which also explains why there are fast and slow phases in density evolution. It also helps us get some hints on how to optimize degree distributions. Graphically, we have demonstrated how the optimization of degree distributions can be visualized.
Online demonstration of optimization of degree distributions using the Gaussian approximation and more results are available at http://truth.mit.edu/~sychung.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to express their appreciation to Prof. G. D. Forney, Jr. for his many helpful comments on this paper. We would also like to thank anonymous reviewers and Igal Sason for helpful comments and suggestions.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[3] M. Sipser and D. A. Spielman, “Expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 1710–1722, Nov. 1996.
[4] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.
[5] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[6] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, “Analysis of low density codes and improved designs using irregular graphs,” in Proc. 30th Annu. ACM Symp. Theory of Computing, 1998, pp. 249–258.
[7] T. J. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[8] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.

[9] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney Jr., T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On

the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the

Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., to be published.

[10] S.-Y. Chung, “On the construction of some capacity-approaching coding

schemes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Mass. Inst. Technol., Cambridge, MA,

2000. Available at http://truth.mit.edu/~sychung.

[11] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, D. Spielman, and V. Ste-

mann, “Practical loss-resilient codes,” in Proc. 29th Annu. ACM Symp.

Theory of Computing, 1997, pp. 150–159.

[12] S.-Y. Chung, R. Urbanke, and T. J. Richardson, “Gaussian approxima-

tion for sum-product decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” in

Proc. Int. Symp. Information Theory, Sorrento, Italy, June 2000, p. 318.

[13] T. J. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of ca-

pacity-approaching low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans.

Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.

[14] S. ten Brink, “Iterative decoding trajectories of parallel concatenated

codes,” in 3rd IEEE ITG Conf. Source and Channel Coding, Munich,

Germany, Jan. 2000.

[15]

, “Rate one-half code for approaching the Shannon limit by 0.1 dB,”

Electron. Lett., vol. 36, pp. 1293–1294, July 2000.

[16] H. El Gamal and A. R. Hammons Jr., “Analyzing the turbo decoder using

the Gaussian approximation,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Information Theory,

Sorrento, Italy, June 2000, p. 319.

[17]

, “Analyzing the turbo decoder using the Gaussian approximation,”

IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 000–000, Feb. 2001.

[18] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, and F. Pollara, “Low complexity turbo-like

codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, Brest, France, 2000.

[19] B. Frey, “Turbo factor analysis,” Proc. Adv. Inform. Processing Syst.,

vol. 12, Dec. 1999, submitted for publication.

[20] P. Rusmevichientong and B. Van Roy, “An analysis of turbo decoding

with Gaussian priors,” Proc. Adv. Neural Inform. Processing Syst., vol.

12, Dec. 1999.

[21] Y. Weiss and W. T. Freeman, “Correctness of belief propagation in

Gaussian graphical models of arbitrary topology,” Proc. Adv. Neural

Inform. Processing Syst., vol. 12, Dec. 1999.

[22] G. D. Forney Jr., “Codes on graphs: Normal realizations,” IEEE Trans.

Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 520–548, Feb. 2001.

[23] C. R. Hartmann and L. D. Rudolph, “An optimum symbol-by-symbol

decoding rule for linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-22,

pp. 514–517, Sept. 1976.

[24] G. Battail, M. C. Decouvelaere, and P. Godlewski, “Replication

decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-25, pp. 332–345, May

1979.

[25] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of binary

block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42,

pp. 429–445, Mar. 1996.

[26] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation,

Univ. Linköping, Linköping, Sweden, 1996.

[27] J. M. Wozencraft and I. M. Jacobs, Principles of Communication Engi-

neering. New York: Wiley, 1965.

[28] I. S. Gradshtein and I. M. Ryzhik, Table of Integrals, Series, and Prod-

ucts. New York: Academic, 1965.

[29] D. Bertsimas and J. N. Tsitsiklis, Introduction to Linear Optimiza-

tion. Belmont, MA: Athena Scientific, 1997.

[30] H. Jin, A. Khandekar, and R. J. McEliece, “Irregular repeat-accumulate

codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest,

France, Sept. 4, 2000, pp. 1–8.

[31] P. Rusmevichientong and B. Van Roy, “An analysis of belief propaga-

tion on the turbo decoding graph with Gaussian densities,” IEEE Trans.

Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 745–765, Feb. 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:47:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

