VLSI Imnlementation-Oriented (3, k)-Regular Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
Tong Zhang and Keshab K. Parhi Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,MN, USA E-mail:{ tzhang, parhi} @ece.umn.edu*
Abstract -In the past few years, Gallager’sLow-Density Parity-Check(LDPC)codes received a lot of attention and many efforts have been devoted to analyze and improve their error-correcting performance. However, little considerationhas been given to the LDPC decoder VLSI implementation. The straightforward fully parallel decoder architecture usually incurs too high complexity for many practical purposes and should be transformed to a partly parallel realization. Unfortunately, due to the randomness of LDPC codes, it’s nearly impossibleto develop an effective transformation for an arbitrary given LDPC code. In this paper, we propose a joint code and decoder design approach to construct a class of (3,Ic)-regular LDPC codes which exactlyfit to a partly parallel decoderimplementationand have a very good performance. Moreover, for such LDPC codes, we propose a systematic efficient encoding scheme by effectively exploiting the sparseness of its panty check matrix.
1 INTRODUCTION
Gallager’sLow-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes [11 have recently received a lot of attention because of their excellent performance and have been widely considered as a promising candidate error-correcting coding scheme for many real applications in telecommunications and magnetic storage.
However, little consideration has been given to the LDPC decoder hardware realization which is required in many applications. Up to the authors’ best knowledge, only two papers concerning this issue has been reported in the literatures, i.e., [2][3]. The authors of [2] implementeda 1024bit,rate-ll2 prototype fully parallel LDPC decoder with the maximum throughput of l Gbit/s. However, because of its apparent high complexity, such a fully parallel implementation is not suitable for many practical purposes, even short code length (less than 10000bits) is used, and an effective design approach to reduce complexity is highly desirable.
To reduce the hardware complexity,we have to effectivelytransform the fully parallel architecture to partly parallel ones. However, due to the randomness of LDPC
‘This research was supportedby the A r m y Research Officeby grant numberDA/DAAG55-98-1-0315.
0-7803-7145-3/01/$10.00 02001 IEEE 25
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:34:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

codes, it’s nearly impossibleto find an effective transformationfor an arbitrary given
LDPC code. To solve this problem, Boutillon et al. [ 3 ] propose to reverse the code design sequence: Instead of trying to obtain a partly parallel decoder from a given LDPC code, we can use an available partly parallel decoder to define a constrained random LDPC code, which leads to the decoder-$rst code design [3]. However, the decoder obtained from this design approach contains many independent constrained random number generators which will incur much complexity for real implementations and make the entire design process very complicated. Moreover, similar with the fully random LDPC codes scenario, it’s difficult to develop an efficient encoding scheme for those LDPC codes obtained from the decoder-firstcode design.
In this work we consider the efficient partly parallel decoder architecture design for LDPC codes with short block length (less than 10000bits) and we believe these LDPC codes are of great interest from practical point of view. It’s well known that the LDPC decoding algorithm works well if the corresponding Tannergraph (as explained later) does not contain too many short cycles. Inspired by the criteria for less short cycles and the decoder-firstcode design methodology in [3], we propose ajoint code and decoder design approach to develop a class of implementation-oriented (3,k)-regular LDPC codes which exactly fit to a partly parallel decoder architecture. Compared with decoder-firstcode design, our proposedjoint design approach leads to a much more efficient decoder by eliminating those complicated random number generators. The performance of such implementation-oriented(3, k)-regular LDPC code is nearly identical to the fully random LDPC codes as shown in two design examples presented in this paper. Moreover, we propose a systematic efficient encoding scheme for the implementation-oriented(3, ,%)-regulaLr DPC codes.

2 LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

A LDPC code is defined as the null space of a very sparse A4 x N parity check matrix H, and typically is representedby a bipartite graph, sometimes called Tanner graph, between N nodes on one side called variable (or message) nodes and M nodes on another side called check (or constraint) nodes, as illustrated in Fig. 1. We say that a LDPC code is ( j ,k)-regular if each variable node has a degree of j and each check node has a degree of k. The construction of LDPC codes is typically
random under the constraint that the corresponding Tanner graph is 4-cycle free.

check nodes

eck-lo-variable message

‘able-tosheck messag

variable nodes
Figure 1: Tanner graph representation of a LDPC code and the decoding message flow.

26

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:34:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LDPC codes can be effectively decoded by the iterative belief-propagation (BP) (also known as sum-product) algorithm [4]. The structure of BP decoding algorithm directly matches the Tanner graph: decoding message is computed on each variable node and check node and iteratively communicated through the edges between neighboring nodes. We can summarize BP algorithm as follows:
1. Initialize each variable node with the intrinsic (or channel) information obtained from the receivedbit, based on this compute the variable-to-checkmessage;
2. Deliver the variable-to-check message from variable nodes to check nodes along the edges of Tanner graph;
3. Each check node generates the check-to-variablemessage based on all incoming message from connected variable nodes;
4. Deliver the check-to-variable message from check nodes to variable nodes along the edges of Tanner graph;
5. Using the incoming message and intrinsic information, each variable node updates the estimate of the corresponding bit and generates the outgoing variableto-check message;
6 . Repeat steps 2 - 5 until: (a) current estimated decoded block f is a valid
codeword (H . i = 0), or (b) a fixed number of iterations has occurred. In the following, we denote both variable-to-checkmessage and check-to-variable message as extrinsic information. In this work we only consider the soft BP decoding in which both intrinsic information and extrinsic information are soft (represented by more than 1bit).
3 IMPLEMENTATION-ORIENTED(3, k)-REGULAR LDPC CODES
In this section, based on a novel high-girth (2, k)-regular LDPC code construction approach, we develop a partly parallel (3,k)-regular LDPC decoder architecture which defines an implementation-oriented(3,k)-regular LDPC code ensemble. As shown later, we may consider that each code in this code ensemble is constructed by letting the decoder insert certain random check nodes into the deterministic highgirth (2, k)-regular LDPC code. Thus it is reasonable to expect that the Tanner graph doesn’t contain too many short cycles and the corresponding code may assume good performance, which will be further illustrated by two design examples. We call such a design approach asjoint code and decoder design. Moreover, by exploiting their special structures, we propose a systematic efficient encoding scheme for the implementation-oriented(3, IC)-regular LDPC codes.
Before presenting the joint design approach, we introduce the definition of girth average of a graph G [ 5 ] : Let gu denote the length of the shortest cycle that passes
through node U in graph G, then C U EgG,/N is denoted as girth average of G,
where N = /GI is the total node number of G. As proposed in [ 5 ] , we can use girth average as an effective criterion for searching good LDPC code over one code ensemble. Thejoint design approach is briefly described next and the corresponding schematic diagram is shown in Fig. 2.
27
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:34:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1. Explicitly construct the two matrices, Ho and H I ,so that H = [H;,HTlT
defines a (2, k)-regular LDPC code denoted as C2;
2. Obtain an elaborated (3,k)-regular LDPC decoder architecture which defines a random (3,k)-regular LDPC code ensemble and each code in this ensemble is a sub-code of C2;
3. Use the decoder to randomly generate a certain number of (3,k)-regular LDPC codes from which we select one code with good performance by girth average comparison and computer simulations;
4. Let H denote the parity check matrix of the selected code. Introduce an explicit column permutation 7rc to generate an approximate upper triangular matrix He" = nc(H) based on which we can obtain an efficient encoding scheme.
- Selected Code

Figure 2: Joint design flow diagram.

Transformation Efficient Encoding

3.1 Constructionof Hoand HI
In the following, we propose a novel method to construct matrix H = [HT,HTIT which defines a (2, k)-regular LDPC code with girth of 12. Although 12 is not a very large girth value, our simulations show that it is sufficient for generating good implementation-oriented(3,k)-regular LDPC codes for short code lengths (less than 10000 bits) which are of interest. More important, such construction method will lead to a very simple decoder architecture and provide more freedom on the selection of code length: Given IC, any code length that could be factored as L .k2is permitted, where L can not be factored as L = a .b, Vu,b E (0,.. .,k - 1).
The structures of Ho and HI are shown in Fig. 3. Each block matrix Iz,gin Ho is an L x L identity matrix and each block matrix Pz,yin H1 is obtained by a cyclic shift of an L x L identity matrix. Let T denote the right cyclic shift operator where Ti(U)represents right cyclic shifting matrix U by i columns, then Pz,y=.T"(1) where U = ((x - 1) . y) mod L and I represents the L x L identity matnx. For example, let L = 5, x = 3and y = 4, we have U = (z-l).y mod L = 8 mod 5 = 3, then

00100
28

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:34:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 3: Structure of submatrices Ho and HI

Clearly, matrix H = [HOT,HTIT defines a (2, k)-regular LDPC code with L . k2 variable nodes and 2L . k check nodes. Let G denote the corresponding Tanner
graph, we have the following theorem pertaining to the girth of G:
Theorem 3.1 If L can not be factored as L = a . b, where a, b E ( 0 , . .. ,k - l},
then the girth of G is 12 and there is at least one 12-cycle passing each check node.

3.2 Elaborated (3, k)-regular LDPC decoder architecture

Denote the (2, k)-regular LDPC code defined by H = [HF,HTIT as CZ. In

the following,we present an elaborated (3, k)-regularLDPC decoder architectureas

shown in Fig. 4. It will be shown that this decoder defines a (3,k)-regular LDPC
code ensemble in which each code has L . k2 variable nodes and 3 L . k check nodes

and is a sub-code of CZ.

This decoder contains kz memory banks, the i t h memory bank is represented as

+ MEM BANK-(z,y), where 2 = ((i - 1) mod k ) 1 and y =

+ 1, and

each one stores all the intrinsic information (in RAM I),extrinsic information (in

two-port RAM El, E 2 and E3) and estimated decoded bits (in RAM C) associ-

ated with L variable nodes; a 1-layer shuffle network (n-1 or Id); a g-layer shuffle

network; k Check Node processor Units (CNU's) and k2 Variable Node processor

Units (VNU's). One Address Generator (AG) is associated with each memory bank

to provide the access address. The g-layer shuffle network consists of g 1-layer

shuffle networks, each one is configuredby a single control bit ci leading to a given

permutation 7ri if ci = 1 (T:), or to the identity permutation (Id=7rP) otherwise.

Thus, configured by the g-bit word c = ( + I , . . .,~ ) 2 t,he overall permutation

pattern T is the product of g permutations: 7r =

o ... o T?. The control word

c is generated by Random Permutation Generator (RPG). Here we note that L can
not be factored as L = a . b, where a, b E (0,. . .,k - 1).

In this decoder,the check-to-variablemessage and variable-to-checkmessage de-

livered along the same edge in Tanner graph are stored in the same memory location

29

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:34:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

_M..E..M....B..A...N..K...-.1..1...1...)... 1 ; (L"PD,,"I

,.M...E...M....B..A...N..K...-..1.x....y..)...

.i.M.....E...M.......B....A..NK-.1...W......

I-:--- (L",'D,.)

:

r=O ...3L-I
I

i
1
1
...
CNUi

1
Ir-, or Id
I
i
g-layer Shuffle Network

I L
...
CNUk

Figure 4:Elaborated (3, k)-regular LDPC decoder architecture.

alternatively, and 3 extrinsic information (check-to-variablemessage or variable-tocheck message) associated with the same variable node are stored in the 3 different
RAMs, E l , E2 and E3, respectively, with the same address. As shown in Fig. 4,
intrinsic and extrinsic information are represented using p and q bits, respectively. This decodercompletes each decoding iteration in 3L clock cycles, and in each clock cycle it performs:
1. In each memory bank, if all the check-to-variable message associated with one variable node become available after previous clock cycle, then (a) Retrieve 1intrinsic information and 3 check-to-variable message associated with this variable node; (b) VNU computes 3 variable-to-check message and updates the corresponding estimated decoded bit; (c) Store the 3 variable-to-checkmessage back to RAM E l , E2 and E3 and estimated decoded bit to RAM C.
2. Retrieve k2 variable-to-check message and the corresponding estimated decoded bits from the k2 memory banks at the addresses provided by AGi's;
3. Shuffle the k2 variable-to-checkmessage and estimated decoded bits accord-
ing to c-1 and c provided by the comparator and RPG, respectively;
4. Each CNUi computes k check-to-variable message and performs the parity check on the corresponding k estimated decoded bits;
5. Unshuffle the k2 check-to-variablemessage and store them back into the IC2 memory banks at the initial location.
Since El, E2,E3 are two-port RAMs, we can perform the step 1 in the above decoding process in parallel with all other steps. Moreover, this decoder has the following properties:
0 Each Address Generator (AG) associated with MEM BANK-(2, y), denoted as AGs,y, is realized by a simple modulo-l binary counter. Each counter is

30

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:34:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

preset with initial value D,,, every L clock cycles, i.e.,at r = 0, L , 2L, and

{ DZ,,=

r=O

((z - 1) .y) mod L , r = L ,

:,y7

r = 2L

(1)

where each t,,, is chosen in random with the following constraints:

1. Givenz, wehavet,,,, # t,,,,,Vyl,y2

E {l,.-.,k};

2. Given y, we have tsl,, - tzz,y $ ( ( 2 1 - I C Z ) . y) mod L, VZI, zz E

(l;..,k}.

0 Provided with the address from each AG, the RAMS E l , E2 and E3 are

accessed by the CNU array in the l S t ,2nd and 3'd L clock cycles, respec-

tively. Thus in one iteration, the variable-to-checkmessage will be computed

by VNU only in the last (3'd) L clock cycles;
0 The 1-bit output of comparator c-1 = 1 if r < L , c-1 = 0 otherwise ;

0 The 1-layershuffle network performs the permutation 7r:;'. 7r-1 permutes an

inputdatasequence { I C O , . .,. Z ~ Z - ~ }to { I C ~ ~ ~ ~ wh~ ere~ , ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~

T - (~i) = (i mod IC) . k + 1-i1.
k

(2)

0 During the first 2L clock cycles, the output of RPG is a zero vector so that the
g-layer shuffle network performs the identity permutation, and during the last
L clock cycles, RPG performs as a hash function f : { 2 L , ..., 3 L - 1) --+
(0,. ..,29 - 11.
We can easily verify that the abovepresented decoder architecturedefinesa ( 3 ,IC)-
regular LDPC code ensemble in which each code has a Tanner graph with L . k2
variable nodes and 3k . L check nodes and the corresponding parity check matrix
can be divided into 3 submatrices:each one is L .k by L .k2 and corresponds to the
interconnectionsamong all the L . kz variable and k .L check nodes realized by this decoder in the l S t ,2nd or 3rd L clock cycles in each decoding iteration.
It can be proved that the first two submatrices of each code are always identical to matrix Ho and HI presented in last section. The third submatrix,denoted as H2, of each code isjointly specified by all t,,,'s, the hash function f and the g-layer shuffle network. Recall that we denote the high-girth ( 2 ,k)-regular LDPC code specifiedby H = [HT,HTIT as C2.we know that each code in this code ensemble is actually a sub-code of CZ.Moreover,we may consider that each code is constructed by using the decoder to introduce extra L . k check nodes into C2.
We can prove that if we construct the hash function f and the g-layer shuffle
network in a fully random manner and generate the value of each tx,y in random
with the constraints as described above, the code ensemble defined by this decoder
only contains 4-cycle free codes which is desirable in practice. Furthermore, from
its special structure, it can be proved that the parity check matrix of each code at least contains 2 redundant checks, which just means that the actual code rate may be
slightly higher than what the parity check matrix indicates, i.e., 1 - 3 / k .
For real applications, we must select a good code from the implementationoriented ( 3 ,k)-regular LDPC code ensemble. In this work, we propose to combine

31

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:34:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the girth averagecomparisonand computer simulationstogether to find a good code: first randomly generate a certain number of implementation-oriented(3, k)-regular LDPC codes, then pick several codes with high girth averages and select the one leading to the best simulation result in extensive computer simulations.
3.3 Design Examples
Before presenting the efficient encoding scheme for the implementation-oriented (3, k)-regular LDPC codes, to illustrate the above design methodology, we develop two implementation-oriented(3,6)-regular LDPC codes with different code length.
Let L1 = 64 and L2 = 128. Then, using the above presented decoder architecture, we may obtain two code ensembles with different code length: N I = L 1 . k2 =
2304 and N2 = L2 . k2 = 4608. In both cases, we set g = 3 and independently generate 500 groups of hash function f,3-layer shuffle network and all tz,yin ran-
dom with the above two constraints on tz,v.Then we feed these parameters to the (3,6)-regular LDPC decoder as shown in Fig. 4 and obtain two code ensembles, each one contains 500 codes. The histograms of the girth averages of these two code ensembles are shown in Fig. 5 (b) and (d). In each ensemble, we choose 5 codes with relatively high girth averages and select the one leading to the best performance based on the extensive computer simulations. In the computer simulation, we assume that the LDPC codes are modulated by BPSK and transmitted over AWGN channel.
We denote the selected implementation-oriented(3,6)-regular LDPC codes with
N I = 2304 and N2 = 4608 as C: and Cj, respectively. Since the parity check matrices of both C: and C; contain 2 redundant checks, C: and C;are (2304,1154)
and (4608,2306) codes, respectively. Moreover, we randomly generate two fully random 4-cycle free (3,6)-regular LDPC code ensembles with code length N I = 2304 and N2 = 4608, respectively. Each code ensemble contains 500 codes and the histogram of the girth averages is shown in Fig. 5 . In each ensemble, we also choose 5 codes with relatively high girth averages and select the one leading to the best performance. We denote the selected fully random LDPC codes with N I =
2304 and N2 = 4608 as CA and Ci, respectively. In this work, CA and C i are
(2304,1152) and (4608,2304) code, respectively.
The finite precision simulation results of each Cj and Ck are shown in Fig. 6. In the finite precision simulations, we adopt the quantization scheme developed in [6]:
received data is quantized with 4 bits and all intrinsic and extrinsic information are represented with 6 bits. In order to guarantee the simulation accuracy, especially at
high S N R ,each point in the simulation results is obtained under the condition that
the block error number at least exceeds 100. As shown in Fig. 6, the performance of the (3, k)-regular LDPC codes developed by these two different approaches are almost identical, but we note that it's nearly impossible to develop a partly parallel decoder for those fully random LDPC codes.
32
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:34:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(a) Random N=2304

0.1 1

1

(b) Implementation-Oriented N=2304 1

0.04 ... . . . ;.. . . . , . .

7.1 7.2

7.3

7.4

7.5

7.6

7

7.5

8

(c) Random N=4608 0.1

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

Q

7.7

7.8

7.9

8

(d) Implementation-Oriented N 4 6 0 6 7.4 7.6 7.8 8 8.2 8.4

Figure 5: Histograms of girth average for (a)(c) fully random codes, and (b)(d) implementation-oriented codes.

- .. ...

a m

1

IS

2

3

35

E$JdB)

Figure 6: Finite precision simulation results where solid lines and dash lines corre-
spond to C'; and Ci,respectively.

33

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:34:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3.4 Efficient Encoding Scheme

The straightforward encoding scheme for LDPC codes, using the generator ma-

trix which is usually a dense matrix, has quadratic complexity in the block length.

It is suggested in [7] and [SI that using an approximate upper triangular parity

check matrix to construct LDPC code can reduce the encoding complexity signif-

icantly without performance degradation. In this section, we show that the above

idea can be easily applied to develop an efficient encoding scheme for our proposed

implementation-oriented(3, k)-regular LDPC codes.

In [8] the greedy algorithms are used to construct approximate upper triangu-

lar LDPC parity check matrix for efficient encoding. Different with that approach,

based on the specific structure of the parity check matrix of implementation-oriented

(3, k)-regular LDPC codes, we propose a systematic approach for its efficient en-

coding. The basic idea is: First we obtain an approximate upper triangular ma-

trix Hen= n,(H) by introducing an explicit column permutation rc,then obtain

j ; by performing efficient encoding based on Hen,and finally get the codeword

x = 7rc-'(jz). Constructionof Hen:We have known that the parity check matrix of implementation-

oriented (3, k)-regular LDPC code has the form: H = [HT,HT,H:IT, where Ho

and HI are shown in Fig. 3. We denote the submatrix consisting of all the columns

of H which go through the block matrix Iz,vin Ho as H(">Ye).,g., H(',2)as shown

in Fig. 7. We introduce a column permutation rCto move each H(*>"fo)rward to the position just right to H(k,')where z increases from 3 to k successively. From the
construction of Pz,gpresented in section 3.1, we know that each PI,^ is actually an

identity matrix. Therefore we know that the matrix Hen= n,(H) has the structure

as shown in Fig. 7, based on which we can write matrix Henin block matrix form

as:

i ] . E H e n = [

(3)

/

',T

I., io I,,
H = D ...#D.. ;. mo a

O 1.

P,, * * * P..

en

*

*

0

H =7C,(H)=

, ,R . ,n

Figure 7: Structure of matrix Hen. Let M = 3k . L and suppose matrix H has T redundant checks, the left M by

34

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:34:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(A4 - r ) submatrix of Henis
in which T is a (2k - 1) .L by (2k - 1). L upper triangular submatrix. Encoding Process: In the following, we describe how the efficient encoding is actually carried out based on the matrix Hen. Let 2 = (%,,&,kc) be a tentative
+ codeword decomposed according to (3), where 2, is the information bits with the
length of N - M r , redundant bits i , and i b have the length of (2k - 1) . L and
+ ( k 1) . L - r , respectively.
Procedure 3.1
1. Compute y, = D .2, and z, = E .x,, which is eficient because both D and E are
sparse;
2. Solve T . x1, = yc. Since T has the form as shown in Fig. 7, we can prove that
T-' = T. Thus we have 121, = T . yc, which can be easily computed since T is sparse;
+ 3. Evaluate i = A .k1, z,, which is also eficient since A is sparse;
+ 4. Compute 12b = G .G, where G = (A .T . B C)-'. In this step, the complexity is
+ scaled by ((k 1). L - T ) ~ ;
+ 5. Finally we can obtain 2, by solving T . 12, = B . 2, y,. Since T-' = T, + ka = T . (B .x b y,). This is eficient since both T and B are sparse.
We note that the above encoding process is similar with that in [ 8 ] . However, in
[8], 2; and 2, have to be solved using the very inefficient back-substitution method
since T-' # T in general cases. Finally, we obtain the real codeword x = T;' (x).
It's clear that x is a valid implementation-oriented(3, k)-regular LDPC codeword and the information bits on the decoder side can be easily obtained by performing the column permutation rCon the decoder output.
4 CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, based on a novel method of constructing deterministic high-girth (2, k)-regular LDPC code, we present a partly parallel (3, k)-regular LDPC decoder architecturewhich definesan implementation-oriented(3, k)-regularLDPC code ensemble. Each code in this ensembleis actually constructedby insertingcertain check nodes into the high-girth (2, k)-regular LDPC code, thus it's reasonable to expect a good performance for such codes which is illustrated by the two design examples. Compared with the decoder-first code design approach, this joint design approach eliminates the implementations of those random number generators in the decoder so that the complexity is much lower and the entire design process is more simple. Moreover, we present how to effectively exploit the sparseness of the parity check matrix to achieve an efficient encoding scheme for such LDPC codes. We believe such joint design approach should be a key for practical LDPC coding system implementations and future research work will be directed towards extending
35
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:34:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

this joint design methodology to the more general(j, k)-regular LDPC codes and irregular LDPC codes.
References
[ l ] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes, M.1.T Press, 1963. available at http://justice.mit.edu/people/gallagerh.tml.
[2] C. Howland and A. Blanksby, “Parallel decoding architectures for low density parity check codes”, in Proc. of 2001 IEEE Int. Symp. on Circuits and Systems, Sydney, May 2001.
[3] E. Boutillon, J. Castura, and F. R. Kschischang, “Decoder-first code design”, in Proceedings of the 2nd International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Related Topics, pp. 459462, Brest, France, Sept. 2000. available at http:/Aester.univubs.fr:8080/-boutillon/publications.html.
[4] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices”, IEEE Transactionson Information Theory,vol. 45, pp. 399431, Mar. 1999.
[5] Y. Mao and A. Banihashemi, “Design of good LDPC codes using girth distribution”, in IEEE InternationalSymposium on Information Theory, Italy, June 2000.
[6] T. Zhang, Z. Wang, and K. K. Parhi, “On finite precision implementation of low-density parity-check codes decoder”, in Proc. of 2001 IEEE Int. Symp. on Circuits and Systems, Sydney, May 2001 . available at http://www.ece.umn.edu/groups/ddp/turbo/.
[7] D. J. C. MacKay, S . T. Wilson, and M. C. Davey, “Comparison of constructions of irregular gallager codes”, IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 47, pp. 14491454, Oct. 1999.
[8] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of low-density parity-check codes”, IEEE Transactionson Information Theory,vol. 47, pp. 638-656, Feb. 2001.
36
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:34:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

