IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

599

The Capacity of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes Under Message-Passing Decoding
Thomas J. Richardson and Rüdiger L. Urbanke

Abstract—In this paper, we present a general method for determining the capacity of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes under message-passing decoding when used over any binary-input memoryless channel with discrete or continuous output alphabets. Transmitting at rates below this capacity, a randomly chosen element of the given ensemble will achieve an arbitrarily small target probability of error with a probability that approaches one exponentially fast in the length of the code. (By concatenating with an appropriate outer code one can achieve a probability of error that approaches zero exponentially fast in the length of the code with arbitrarily small loss in rate.) Conversely, transmitting at rates above this capacity the probability of error is bounded away from zero by a strictly positive constant which is independent of the length of the code and of the number of iterations performed. Our results are based on the observation that the concentration of the performance of the decoder around its average performance, as observed by Luby et al. [1] in the case of a binary-symmetric channel and a binary message-passing algorithm, is a general phenomenon. For the particularly important case of belief-propagation decoders, we provide an effective algorithm to determine the corresponding capacity to any desired degree of accuracy. The ideas presented in this paper are broadly applicable and extensions of the general method to low-density parity-check codes over larger alphabets, turbo codes, and other concatenated coding schemes are outlined.
Index Terms—Belief propagation, iterative decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, message-passing decoders, turbo codes, turbo decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
I N the wake of the phenomenal success of turbo codes [2], another class of codes exhibiting similar characteristics and performance was rediscovered [3], [4]. This class of codes, called low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, was first introduced by Gallager in his thesis in 1961 [5]. In the period between Gallager’s thesis and the invention of turbo codes, LDPC codes and their variants were largely neglected. Notable exceptions are the work of Zyablov and Pinsker [6], Tanner [7], and Margulis [8].
In their original (regular) incarnation, the performance of LDPC codes over the binary-input additive white Gaussian noise (BIAWGN) channel is only slightly inferior to that of parallel or serially concatenated convolutional codes (turbo
Manuscript received November 16, 1999; revised August 18, 2000. T. J. Richardson was with Bell Labs, Lucent Technologies, Murray Hill, NJ 07974 USA. He is now with Flarion Technologies, Bedminster, NJ 07921 USA (e-mail: richardson@flarion.com). R. L. Urbanke was with Bell Labs, Lucent Technologies, Murray Hill, NJ 07974 USA. He is now with the EPFL, LTHC-DSC, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland (e-mail: rudiger.urbanke@epfl.ch). Communicated by F. R. Kschischang, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Publisher Item Identifier S 0018-9448(01)00737-4.

codes). For example, a rate one-half LDPC code of block

length 10 000 requires an

of roughly 1.4 dB to achieve a

bit-error probability of , whereas an equivalent turbo code

with comparable complexity achieves the same performance

at, roughly,

0.8 dB. Shannon capacity dictates that,

in order to achieve reliable transmission at a rate of one-half bit

per channel use over the continuous-input AWGN channel, an

of at least 0 dB is required, and this increases to 0.187

dB if we restrict the input to be binary.

It is well known, that any linear code can be expressed as

the set of solutions of a parity-check equation

.

Furthermore, if the code is binary then takes elements in

GF and the arithmetic is also over this field. A

-reg-

ular LDPC code, as originally defined by Gallager, is a binary

linear code determined by the condition that every codeword bit

participates in exactly parity-check equations and that every

such check equation involves exactly codeword bits, where

and are parameters that can be chosen freely.1 In other

words, the corresponding parity-check matrix has ones in

each column and ones in each row. The modifier “low-den-

sity” conveys the fact that the fraction of nonzero entries in is

small, in particular it is linear in the block length , as compared

to “random” linear codes for which the expected fraction of ones

grows like . Following the lead of Luby et al. [1] we do not

focus on particular LDPC codes in this paper, but rather analyze

the performance of ensembles of codes. One way of constructing

an ensemble of LDPC codes would be to consider the set of all

parity-check matrices of length which fulfill the above row

and column sum constraints for some fixed parameters

,

and to equip this set with a uniform probability distribution. It

is more convenient, however, to proceed as suggested in [1] and

to define the ensemble of LDPC codes via bipartite graphs, see

Section II-A, since the resulting ensemble is easier to analyze.2

Many variations and extensions of Gallager’s original definition

are possible and these extensions are important in order to con-

struct LDPC codes that approach capacity. To mention only the

two most important ones: a) constructing irregular as opposed

to regular codes [1], [9], [10], i.e., variables may participate in

different numbers of checks, and check equations may involve

different numbers of variables and b) allowing nodes to repre-

sent groups of bits rather than single bits [11] (see also [5]).

In his thesis, Gallager discussed several decoding algorithms

that work directly on the nodes and edges of the bipartite graph

(see Section II) representing the code. Here, one set of nodes,

0 1As we will discuss in more detail in Section II-A, the design rate of such a
code is equal to 1 .
2In any case, these two ensembles are essentially identical if we consider large block lengths.

0018–9448/01$10.00 © 2001 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:49:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

600

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

the “variable” nodes, correspond to the variables, i.e., the code-

word bits or, equivalently, the columns of , the other set, the

“check” nodes, correspond to the constraints or, equivalently,

the rows of . A variable node is connected to a constraint node

in the graph if and only if the corresponding variable partici-

pates in the corresponding constraint. The decoding algorithms

of interest work iteratively. Information is exchanged between

neighboring nodes in the graph by passing messages along the

edges. Each message can be associated to the codeword bit cor-

responding to the variable node incident to the edge carrying

the message. Invariably, the messages can be interpreted as con-

veying an estimate of that bit’s value along with some reliability

information for that estimate. Associated with such a message is

a hard decision: one can consider the bit’s most likely value im-

plied by the message. We will say that a message is “correct/in-

correct” if its associated hard decision is correct/incorrect, i.e.,

does/does not agree with the true value of the codeword bit. In

the sequel, the precise meaning will be clear from context.

Gallager [5] proposed the following step-by-step program to

determine the worst binary-symmetric channel (BSC), i.e., the

BSC with the largest crossover probability, over which an appro-

priately constructed

-regular LDPC code in conjunction

with a given iterative decoding algorithm can be used to transmit

information reliably.

1) [Code Construction] For increasing length , construct

a sequence of

-regular LDPC codes that do not

contain cycles of length less or equal to

where

2) [Density Evolution and Threshold Determination] Deter-

mine the average fraction of incorrect messages passed at

the th iteration assuming that the graph does not contain

cycles of length or less. For an iterative decoder with

a finite message alphabet this fraction can be expressed

by means of a system of coupled recursive functions

which depend on the ensemble parameters

and

the channel parameter. Determine the maximum channel

parameter, called the threshold, with the property that

for all parameters strictly less than this threshold the

expected fraction of incorrect messages approaches zero

as the number of iterations increases.

3) Conclude that if one applies the chosen decoding algo-

rithm to this sequence of codes with decoding rounds

while operating over a BSC with parameter less than the

threshold found in Step 2), then the bit-error probability

decreases as

, where and are positive constants

which depend on

(one actually requires

).

(Since the block-error probability is at most times the

bit-error probability, it follows that the block-error prob-

ability can be upper-bounded in the same way.)

Although the analysis presented in this paper contains many of the same elements as the program suggested by Gallager there is one crucial difference. As remarked earlier, we do not focus on any particular (sequence of) codes but rather on (sequences of) ensembles as suggested in [1]. The main advantage gained

by this approach is the following: even in the regular case it is

not an easy task to construct codes which contain only large

cycles and this task becomes almost hopeless once we allow ir-

regular graphs. Sampling an element of an (irregular) ensemble,

on the other hand, is almost trivial. This approach was applied

with great success in [1] to the analysis (and design) of LDPC

ensembles used over the binary erasure channel (BEC) as well

as the BSC when employed in conjunction with a one-bit mes-

sage-passing decoder.

The contribution of the present paper is to extend the method

of analysis in [1] to a very broad class of channels and de-

coding algorithms and to introduce some new tools for the anal-

ysis of these decoding systems. To clarify further the nature of

the results we briefly describe an example and formulate some

claims that represent what we consider to be the apex of the

theory. Let us consider the ensemble of

-regular LDPC

codes (see Section II for its definition) of length for use over

a BIAWGNC, i.e., we transmit a codeword consisting of bits

and receive values

where the

are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) zero-mean

Gaussian random variables with variance . Choose a code at

random from this ensemble (see Section II), choose a message

with uniform probability from the set of messages, and transmit

the corresponding codeword. Decode the received word using

the belief-propagation algorithm. The following statements are

consequences of the theory:

[Concentration] Let

be the expected fraction of in-

correct messages which are passed in the th iteration,

where the expectation is over all instances of the code, the

choice of the message, and the realization of the noise.

For any

, the probability that the actual fraction

of incorrect messages which are passed in the th itera-

tion for any particular such instance lies outside the range

converges to zero exponentially

fast in .

[Convergence to Cycle-Free Case]

converges to

as tends to infinity, where

is the expected

fraction of incorrect messages passed in the th decoding

round assuming that the graph does not contain cycles of

length or less.

[Density Evolution and Threshold Determination]

is computable by a deterministic algorithm. Furthermore,

there exists a channel parameter (in this case

),3 the threshold with the following property: if

then

; if, on the other hand,

then there exists a constant

such that

for all

. For the current example, using the

methods outlined in Section III-B to efficiently implement

density evolution, we get

for

.

The first statement asserts that (almost) all codes behave alike and so the determination of the average behavior of the ensemble suffices to characterize the individual behavior of (almost)

3Gallager attempted to compute the threshold for the BSC by a combinatorial approach. The complexity of his approach precluded considering more than a few iterations though. For the threshold of the (3; 6)-regular LDPC ensemble he obtained the approximate lower bound of 0:07 whereas density evolution gives 0:084.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:49:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RICHARDSON AND URBANKE: THE CAPACITY OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

601

all codes. The second statement then claims that for long

codes this average behavior is equal to the behavior which one

can observe on cycle-free graphs and that for the cycle-free

case this average behavior is computable by a deterministic

algorithm. Finally, from the last statement we conclude that long

codes will exhibit a threshold phenomenon, clearly separating

the region where reliable transmission is possible from that

where it is not. As a consequence, if we want to transmit

over the BIAWGNC using codes from the

-regular LDPC

ensemble and a belief-propagation decoder we are confronted

with the following dichotomy. If

and if we are given

any target bit-error probability, call it , then we can choose

an appropriate number of decoding iterations

and an

appropriate block length

. We can then be assured that

all but at most an exponentially (in ) small subset from the

-regular LDPC ensemble of length

if decoded for

rounds will exhibit a bit-error probability of at most .4

On the other hand, if

and if we are willing to perform

at most decoding rounds, where is a fixed natural number,

then all but at most an exponentially (in ) small subset of

codes of the

-regular LDPC ensemble will exhibit a bit

error probability of at least 5 if decoded by means of at

most rounds of a belief-propagation decoder. With regards

to this converse, we conjecture that actually the following

much stronger statement is true—namely, that all codes in the

-regular LDPC ensemble have bit-error probability of at

least

regardless of their length and regardless of how

many iterations are performed. This will follow if one can

prove that cycles in the graph (and the resulting dependence)

can only degrade the performance of the iterative decoder on

average, 6 a statement which seems intuitive but has so far

eluded proof.

Each of the above statements generalizes to some extent to

a wide variety of codes, channels, and decoders. The concen-

tration result holds in essentially all cases and depends mainly

on the fact that decoding is “local.” Similarly, the convergence

of

to

is very general, holding for all cases of in-

terest. It is a consequence of the fact that typically the decoding

neighborhoods become “tree-like” if we fix the number of it-

erations and let the block length tend to infinity. Concerning

the density evolution, for decoders with a message alphabet of

size the quantity

can in general be expressed by means

of

coupled recursive functions (see Section III-A). For

message-passing algorithms with infinite message alphabets the

situation is quite more involved. Nevertheless, for the impor-

tant case of the sum-product or belief-propagation decoder we

will present in Section III-B an efficient algorithm to calculate

4Although this is not the main focus of this paper, one can actually achieve an exponetially decreasing probability of error. To achieve this, simply use an outer code which is capable of recovering from a small linear fraction of errors. If properly designed, the LDPC code will decrease the bit probability of error below this linear fraction with exponential probability within a fixed number of decoding rounds. The outer code then removes all remaining errors. Clearly, the incurred rate loss can be made as small as desired.
5Note that 
, the probability of sending an erroneous messages, is at least 0:068. To this corresponds a bit-error probability which is at least 0:05.
6By constructing simple examples, it is not very hard to show that for some specific bits the probability of error can actually be decreased by the presence of cycles.

. Finally, the existence of a threshold as asserted in the

last statement requires more assumptions. It depends on both

the decoding algorithm used and the class of channels consid-

ered. As we will see, such a threshold always exists if we are

dealing with a family of channels which can be ordered by phys-

ical degradation (see Section III-B1) and if the decoding algo-

rithm respects this ordering. In some other instances, like in the

case of decoders with finite message alphabets, the existence of

a threshold can often be shown by analyzing the corresponding

recursions directly.

Roughly speaking, the general statement is then of the fol-

lowing kind. We are given a particular ensemble of codes, a

family of channels, and a particular decoding algorithm. From

these quantities we will be able to calculate the critical channel

parameter which is called the threshold. Then almost any long

enough code can be used to provide sufficiently reliable trans-

mission of information if decoded by the given decoder for a

sufficiently large number of iterations provided that the actual

channel parameter is below this threshold. Conversely, reliable

transmission over channels with parameter above this threshold

is not possible with most codes chosen at random from “long”

ensembles. Therefore, one should think of the threshold as the

equivalent of a “random capacity” for a given ensemble of codes

and a particular decoder, except that in the case of random ca-

pacity the channel is usually fixed and one is interested in the

largest rate whereas for the threshold we fix the rate and ask for

the “worst” channel.

The outline of the paper is as follows. Section II introduces

the class of codes, channels, and decoding algorithms con-

sidered in this paper. We show that under suitable symmetry

conditions the error probability is independent of the trans-

mitted codeword. Section III then focuses on the determination

of

and the determination of the threshold value. We

first investigate decoders with finite message alphabets. In this

case, as pointed out above,

can be expressed by means

of multiple coupled recursive functions, and the existence of

a threshold can be shown by a closer investigation of these

recursions. We will see that by a judicious choice of the mes-

sages the resulting thresholds can be made surprisingly close

to the ultimate limit as given by the (Shannon) capacity bound.

We next investigate the important case of belief-propagation

decoders. Despite the fact that the message alphabet is infinite,

in this case we describe an efficient algorithm that can be used

to calculate

for a belief-propagation decoder for any

binary-input memoryless output-symmetric channel to any

desired accuracy. We also show that in this case the existence of

a threshold is guaranteed if the channel family can be ordered

by physical degradation, as is the case for many important

families of channels, including the BEC, BSC, BIAWGNC, and

the binary-input Laplace (BIL) channel. In Section IV, we will

show that, as the length of the code increases, the behavior of

individual instances concentrates around the expected behavior

and that this expected behavior converges to the behavior for

the cycle-free case.

The ideas presented in this paper are broadly applicable, and

extensions of the general method to irregular LDPC codes,

LDPC codes over larger alphabets, turbo codes, and other

concatenated coding schemes are outlined in Section V.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:49:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

602

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

II. BASIC NOTATION AND ASSUMPTIONS

In this section we will introduce and discuss some of the

basic notation and assumptions that we will use throughout this

paper. We start by giving a precise definition of the ensemble

of

-regular LDPC codes that we will consider. We then

discuss the notion of decoding neighborhoods. This notion will

play an important role when giving a proof of the concentration

theorem. After a brief look at the class of binary-input memo-

ryless channels we will introduce the class of message-passing

decoders, which are iterative decoders working on the graph and

which obey the extrinsic information principle well known from

turbo decoding. Finally, we will see that under a suitable set of

symmetry assumptions the conditional decoding probability will

become independent of the transmitted codeword, allowing us

in the sequel to assume that the all-one codeword was trans-

mitted.

A. Ensembles

Let be the length of the binary code given as the set of so-

lutions to the parity-check equation

. We con-

struct a bipartite graph with variable nodes and

check nodes. Each variable node corresponds to one bit of the

codeword, i.e., to one column of , and each check node cor-

responds to one parity-check equation, i.e., to one row of .

Edges in the graph connect variable nodes to check nodes and

are in one-to-one correspondence with the nonzero entries of .

Since each check equation typically decreases the number of

degrees of freedom by one, it follows that the design rate of the

code is

The actual rate of a given code may be higher since these check

equations might not all be independent, but we shall generally

ignore this possibility. There are

edges in the bipar-

tite graph, edges incident to each variable node on the left and

edges incident to each check node on the right. Fig. 1 gives

an example of a

-regular code of length .

The ensemble

of

-regular LDPC codes

of length which we consider in this paper is defined as

follows. Assign to each node or “sockets” according to

whether it is a variable node or a check node, respectively.

Label the variable and check sockets separately with the set

in some arbitrary fashion. Pick a per-

mutation on letters at random with uniform probability

from the set of all

such permutations. The corresponding

(labeled) bipartite graph is then defined by identifying edges

with pairs of sockets and letting the set of such pairs be

. This induces a uniform distribu-

tion on the set

(the set of labeled bipartite graphs).

In practice, one usually modifies the permutation in an attempt

to obtain the best possible performance for the given length.

In particular, one avoids double edges between the nodes and

excessive overlap of the neighbor sets of the nodes.

Strictly speaking, edges are unordered pairs

where

and denote the corresponding variable node socket and

check node socket, respectively. It is often more convenient to

Fig. 1. A (3; 6)-regular code of length 10. There are 10 variable nodes and five check nodes. The nd = 30 = md “sockets” of the variable and check nodes are labeled (not shown).

think of an edge as a pair of nodes

where and are the

variable and check nodes incident to the given edge. If the graph

does not contain parallel edges then both descriptions are equiv-

alent and we can freely switch between the two representations.

Although this constitutes a moderate abuse of notation, we will

maintain the notation

even if parallel edges are not

excluded. The reader is then advised to think of as some edge

which connects the variable node to the check node . This

simplifies the notation significantly and should not cause any

confusion. By a directed edge we mean an ordered pair

or

corresponding to the edge

. When we say

that a message traverses a directed edge we mean that it tra-

verses it in the indicated direction. When we say that a message

traverses an undirected edge we mean that it traverses it in

some direction.

B. Decoding Neighborhoods

A path in the graph is a directed sequence of directed edges

such that, if

then the

for

. The length of the path is the number of

directed edges in it and we say that the path starts from , ends

at , and connects to . Given two nodes in the graph, we

say that they have distance

if they are connected by a

path of length but not by a path of length less than . (If the

nodes are not connected then we say

.) For a given node

, we define its neighborhood of depth , denoted by , as

the induced subgraph consisting of all nodes reached and edges

traversed by paths of length at most starting from (including

). Note that for any two nodes and we have, by symmetry

of the distance function

(1)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:49:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RICHARDSON AND URBANKE: THE CAPACITY OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

603

Fig. 2. The directed neighborhood of depth 2 of the directed edge ~ = ( ; ).

Let be a particular edge between variable node and check

node , i.e.,

according to our convention. The undi-

rected neighborhood of depth of , denoted by , is de-

fined as

. We claim that for any pair of edges

and

(2)

By symmetry, it is clearly enough to prove the implication in

one direction. Hence, assume that

. A directed version

of , denoted , lies on a path of length starting from either

or . It follows that there exists a path starting from either or

and ending at either or of length at most . Reversing

the orientation of the directed edges in the path we obtain a path

of length at most from either or to either or . Thus,

there exists a path of length at most starting from either or

containing a directed version of the edge

. We conclude

that

.

The directed neighborhood of depth of

, de-

noted by , is defined as the induced subgraph containing all

edges and nodes on paths

starting from such that

. Fig. 2 gives an example of such a directed neighbor-

hood of depth . A directed neighborhood of a directed edge

is defined analogously. If the induced subgraph (cor-

responding to a directed or undirected neighborhood) is a tree

then we say that the neighborhood is tree-like, otherwise, we say

that it is not tree-like. Note that the neighborhood is tree-like if

and only if all involved nodes are distinct. For

,

one can prove that the number of (distinct) nodes as well as the

number of (distinct) edges in a neighborhood of a node or of an

edge (undirected or directed) of depth is upper-bounded by

(see [5, p. 92]).

Fig. 3. The BSC with parameter .

The channel is depicted in Fig. 3. It is well known (see [12, p. 186]), that the (Shannon) capacity of this channel is

(3)

where entropy function [12, p. 13].

is the binary

Example 2 [Continuous Additive Channels: Gaussian and

Laplace]: Consider a memoryless binary-input channel with

continuous output alphabet and additive noise. More precisely,

let the channel be modeled by

, where

and where is a sequence of i.i.d. random variables with prob-

ability density . The best known example is the BIAWGN

channel for which

The capacity of the BIAWGN channel is given by
(4) where

C. Binary-Input Memoryless Channels
The class of channels we consider in this paper is the class of memoryless channels with binary input alphabet and discrete or continuous output alphabet . We will, however, indicate some extensions in Section V.

As a second example, we consider the BIL channel for which The capacity of the BIL channel is given by

Example 1 [BSC]: Let ,

, be the channel

input at time , . Let ,

, be the output at

time . The BSC with parameter is characterized by the rela-

(5)

tion

, where is a sequence of i.i.d. Bernoulli

random variables with

and

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:49:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

604

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

D. Message-Passing Decoders

Without loss of generality, we can assume that the channel

output alphabet is equal to the decoder input alphabet. Given a

code and a channel model there are, in general, many reasonable

decoding algorithms based on message passing—the class of al-

gorithms we consider in this paper. These algorithms behave as

follows. At time zero, every variable node ,

, has an as-

sociated received message , a random variable taking values in

. Messages are exchanged between nodes in the graph along

the edges in the graph in discrete time steps. First, each variable

node sends back to each neighboring check node a mes-

sage taking values in some message alphabet . Typically, at

time zero, a variable node sends as its first message (this

requires

). Each check node processes the mes-

sages it receives and sends back to each neighboring variable

node a message taking values in . Each variable node

now processes the messages it receives together with its associ-

ated received value to produce new messages which it then

sends to its neighboring check nodes. For every time ,

,a

cycle or iteration of message passing proceeds with check nodes

processing and transmitting messages followed by the variable

nodes processing and transmitting messages.

An important condition on the processing is that a message

sent from a node along an adjacent edge may not depend

on the message previously received along edge . There is a

good reason for excluding the incoming message along edge in

determining the outgoing message along edge . In turbo coding

terminology, this guarantees that only extrinsic information is

passed along. This is known to be an important property of good

message-passing decoders. Even more importantly, it is exactly

this restriction that makes it possible to analyze the behavior of

the decoder.

Let

, , denote the variable node

message map and let

,

, denote the

check node message map as a function of

. These func-

tions represent the processing performed at the variable nodes

and constraint nodes, respectively.

Note that, because of the imposed restriction on the depen-

dence of messages, the outgoing message only depends on

incoming messages at a variable node and

incoming messages at a check node. Note also that we allow

these maps to depend on the iteration number. We assume that

each node of the same degree invokes the same message map

for each edge and that all edges connected to such a node are

treated equally. For completeness, let

denote

the initial message map, i.e., node initially transmits the

message

to all of its neighbors.

For any given set , let denote the space of probability

distribution defined over . In our analysis the messages will be

random variables, and we are interested in tracking the evolution

of their distributions during the execution of the algorithm. To

this end, we define the map

as follows. If

is a random variable distributed ac-

cording to

, and

, are

random variables distributed according to

, and

all indicated random variables are independent, then the

distribution of

is, by definition,

.

We define the map

in an analogous way.
E. Symmetry Assumptions: Restriction to All-One Codeword
It is helpful to think of the messages (and the received values) in the following way. Each message represents an estimate of a particular codeword bit. More precisely, it contains an estimate of its sign and, possibly, some estimate of its reliability. To be concrete, consider a discrete case and assume that the output alphabet is

and that the message alphabet is

The sign of the message indicates whether the transmitted bit is

estimated to be or , and the absolute value of the message

is a measure of the reliability of this estimate. The sign of the

particular value , which represents an erasure, is equally likely

to be a or a . In the continuous case we may assume

that

, or even

. Again,

the sign of the message indicates whether the transmitted bit is

estimated to be or , and the absolute value of the message

is a measure of the reliability of this estimate.

Our subsequent analysis and notation will be greatly sim-

plified by assuming the following symmetry conditions on the

channel and the decoding algorithm.

Definition 1 [Symmetry Conditions]: • Channel symmetry: The channel is output-symmetric,
i.e.,

• Check node symmetry: Signs factor out of check node message maps

for any sequence

.

• Variable node symmetry: Sign inversion invariance of variable node message maps holds

and

.

Lemma 1 [Conditional Independence of Error Probability

Under Symmetry]: Let be the bipartite graph representing a

given binary linear code (not necessarily an LDPC code) and for

a given message-passing algorithm let

denote the con-

ditional (bit or block) probability of error after the th decoding

iteration, assuming that codeword was sent. If the channel and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:49:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RICHARDSON AND URBANKE: THE CAPACITY OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

605

the decoder fulfill the symmetry conditions stated in Definition

1 then

is independent of .

Proof: To prove the claim, let

denote the channel

transition probability

. Now note that any bi-

nary-input memoryless output-symmetric channel can be mod-

eled multiplicatively as

where is the input bit, is the channel output, and are i.i.d.

random variables with distribution defined by

. Let denote an arbitrary codeword and let

be an

observation from the channel after transmitting , where de-

notes the channel realization (multiplication is componentwise

and all three quantities are vectors of length ).

Let denote an arbitrary variable node and let denote one

of its neighboring check nodes. For any received word , let

denote the message sent from to in iteration as-

suming was received and let

denote the message sent

from to in iteration assuming was received. From the

variable node symmetry at

we have

.

Assume now that in iteration we have

Since is a codeword, we have

.7 From

the check node symmetry condition we conclude that

Furthermore, from the variable node symmetry condition it follows that in iteration the message sent from variable node
to check node is

Thus, by induction, all messages to and from variable node when is received are equal to the product of and the corresponding message when is received. Hence, both decoders commit exactly the same number of errors (if any), which proves the claim. Moreover, we observe that the entire behavior of the decoder can be predicted from its behavior assuming transmission of the all-one codeword.
In the sequel we will assume that the symmetry conditions are fulfilled and that the all-one codeword was transmitted.
III. DENSITY EVOLUTION AND THRESHOLD DETERMINATION
Recall from the introduction that there are three components to our proposed analysis of message-passing decoders: 1) concentration: show that almost all instances behave nearly the same; 2) convergence to cycle-free case: show that the average behavior converges (in the block length ) to that of the cycle-free case; 3) density evolution and threshold determination: analyze the cycle-free case via what we termed density evolution as well as determine the threshold for the cycle-free case.
In this section we will concentrate on the third step, i.e., we will assume that the decoding neighborhood of depth is tree-like and we will analyze the evolution of the densities as a function of the iteration number.

We say that a message passed along an edge is correct if the sign of the message agrees with the transmitted bit, and we say that a message is incorrect otherwise. Recall from Section II-E that we may assume that the all-one codeword was transmitted, and, hence, the number of incorrect messages is equal to the number of messages with nonpositive sign. (By convention, we will count an erasure as being incorrect with probability .)
We start in Section III-A by focusing on the case of message-passing decoders with discrete message alphabets. As remarked already, in this case the expected fraction of erroneous messages passed in the th iteration can be expressed through a system of linked recursive functions which depend on and the channel parameter. By investigating this system of recursive functions one can usually prove the existence of a threshold and this threshold can then be determined numerically to any desired degree of accuracy.8 Furthermore, we show that by a judicious choice of the message maps one can construct iterative coding systems with a threshold which is surprisingly close to the ultimate (Shannon) limit at very low complexities. For example, in many cases, decoder E (see Example 5), which uses a message alphabet of size three, performs surprisingly close to belief propagation, which uses an infinite message alphabet, and significantly better than Gallager’s decoder B (see Example 4), which uses a message alphabet of size two.
In Section III-B, we investigate the most important case of a message-passing decoder with an infinite message alphabet, namely, the sum-product or belief-propagation decoder. In this case, one has to keep track of the evolution of message densities. We will present an efficient algorithm to accomplish this task. We will also show that, in the case of the belief-propagation decoders, thresholds always exist if we consider a family of channels which can be ordered by physical degradation.

A. Discrete Alphabets

We start with message-passing algorithms that use discrete

message alphabets. Let ,

,

be the probability that the message sent at time zero is equal to

. Let denote the corresponding probabilities at iteration

(assuming that edge has a tree-like directed neighborhood up

to at least depth ). Similarly, let denote the probability

of messages sent from check nodes to variable nodes in the th

iteration. Assume we are given a particular message-passing al-

gorithm, i.e., particular message maps and . As was

shown by Gallager, it is then, in principle, possible to write down

a recursion, expressing as a function of ,

the code

parameters

, and the channel parameter.

Example 3 [Gallager’s Decoding Algorithm A]: Consider

the ensembles of

-regular graphs. Let the channel be

the BSC of Example 1 with input and output alphabet

and crossover probability . Then, clearly,

and

. The message alphabet is given by

.

The message maps are time-invariant, i.e., they do not depend

on the iteration number, and are given by

,

if

7In the case of parallel edges, x has to be counted according to the multi-

8In some instance, it is even possible to determine the threshold analytically

plicity of the edge.

(see , e.g., [13]).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:49:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

606

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

and and

otherwise,

TABLE I MAXIMAL PARAMETER  FOR THE BSC AND GALLAGER’S DECODING ALGORITHMS A AND B, ALGORITHM E (ERASURES IN THE DECODER), AND BELIEF PROPAGATION (BP). NOTE THAT ALGORITHMS A AND B ONLY DIFFER FOR d > 3. ALSO, LISTED IS THE MAXIMUM ALLOWED VALUE
 ACCORDING TO (3)

In words, check nodes send a message indicating the modulo two sum of the other neighboring variables. The variable nodes send their received value unless the incoming messages are unanimous, in which case the sign indicated by these messages is sent.
It follows that

have the following: the message maps are the same as in the pre-

vious example, except that

if

and

otherwise.

and

The evolution of is now given by (see [5, p. 50])

Eliminating we obtain, as in Gallager [5, p. 48]

(6)

From (6) it is easy to see that, for a fixed value of

,

is an increasing function of . Likewise, for a fixed value of

, is an increasing function of

. Hence, by induc-

tion we conclude that is an increasing function of . Let

denote the supremum of all values of

such that

. By the above argument it follows that, for

all values

,

. These threshold values

are listed for various pairs of

in Table I, where most

of the entries were already given by Gallager.9 We note that

this decoding algorithm is universal in that it does not require

knowledge of the channel parameter.

Example 4 [Gallager’s Decoding Algorithm B]: For

the following algorithm, also due to Gallager [5, p. 50], is more

efficient. The message along edge

equals the re-

ceived value unless at least incoming check messages (ex-

cluding the message along edge ) disagree with the received

value, in which case the opposite of is sent. The value of

is in general a function of , , and . Formally, we

9Exact threshold values for this case can be found in [13].

The optimal choice of was also determined in [5] and is given by the smallest integer for which

Again, let denote the supremum of all values of such

that

. By an argument similar to that in the

previous example, it follows that, for all values

,

. The threshold values are listed for var-

ious combinations of

in Table I.

Example 5 [BSC with Erasures in the Decoder:10 Algorithm E]: Assume now that we extend the previous example by

10This decoder was independently conceived and analyzed by M. Mitzenmacher [14].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:49:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RICHARDSON AND URBANKE: THE CAPACITY OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

607

allowing erasures in the decoder, i.e., the alphabet is now

. The decoding rule is the following. At step

, the message node takes the real sum of all incoming

messages, except the message along edge

, plus

times the received message , where is an appropriately

chosen weight. The message along edge

is now

chosen as the sign of this sum. At check node , the message

along edge

is equal to the product of all incoming

messages except the incoming message along edge

.

Thus, in this example, the message maps are specified by

and We easily obtain

These equations explicitly represent the equation where and
The quantities , , and can now be expressed as

It remains to specify the sequence of weights ,

(at

there are no incoming messages at the variable nodes

and, hence, no weight is used). Note that, at any given step ,

different choices of the weight will result in different den-

sities

and that there is no clear (linear) ordering

among those alternatives. To find a good sequence of weights we

could proceed in the following way. Assume that we would like

to minimize

at the th decoding iteration, where is

some positive number, e.g.,

. We can then find the op-

timum weights

by means of dynamic program-

ming. For the -regular code, the optimum weight sequence

found by dynamic programming is

, and

,

. The advantage of such an approach is that it is widely

applicable regardless of how many alternative maps there are

at any step and regardless of how many levels of quantization

we have. The major drawback is that this scheme is computa-

tionally intensive and that it quickly becomes infeasible if the

size of the message alphabet becomes large. It is often almost

equally effective, and much less labor-intensive, to find sensible

heuristics. In the sequel, we will assume that the weight ,

, maximizes

(7)

which is the capacity of a memoryless symmetric channel with

binary input and ternary output with a crossover probability of

and an erasure probability of . For the

-regular

code this leads to the same sequence of weights, but no claim is

made regarding the optimality of this decision scheme in gen-

eral. Table I summarizes the largest achievable parameters for

the various code parameters. We see that all entries are signifi-

cantly larger than their corresponding entries for Gallager A and

B. Particularly impressive is the performance for the

-reg-

ular code. We will later see that with belief propagation, the code

has a threshold for the BSC of roughly 8.4%. Hence, the simple

decoder with erasures performs almost as well as a belief-prop-

agation decoder.

Example 6 [Quantized Continuous Channels with Erasures

in the Decoder]: Encouraged by the large increase in the

threshold for the BSC when allowing erasures in the decoder,

we apply the same kind of decoder to continuous output

channels.

Assume first that we pick a symmetric threshold around

zero, and quantize the continuous output of the channel into

negative values, erasures, and positive values, depending on

whether the continuous output fulfills

,

,

or

, respectively.

We can now apply exactly the same algorithm as in the pre-

vious example. Clearly, the resulting threshold will depend

on the choice of the threshold value , and we can try to find

the optimum such threshold value. We can make even better use

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:49:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

608

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

of the received values if we adapt the quantization at every step

of the decoding algorithm. More precisely, rather than picking

the threshold value once and for all, we can pick a suitable

threshold value at every step of the decoding algorithm. At

every step we pick that threshold and that weight which

maximize (7). For the BIAWGN channel and the

-regular

code, the threshold is

, which corresponds to a raw

bit-error probability of roughly 8.9%. Hence, by providing soft

information at the input to the decoder, even when the messages

are only ternary, the threshold raw bit-error probability can be

raised by almost 2% compared to a decoder which is fed hard

decisions.

be defined by and let be defined by
The variable message map

is determined by and by the threshold set

Example 7 [Quantized Gaussian Channel, 3-Bit Messages,

-Regular Codes]: From the previous example it is evident

that a very coarse quantization of the input and a very small mes-

sage alphabet can already result in very good performance. We

now present a very simple time-invariant decoder whose perfor-

mance on the

-regular code over the Gaussian channel is

close to the performance of belief propagation.

Let the message alphabet and the received alphabet be equal

to

In this example, we look at practical situation: a quantized ver-

sion of the Gaussian channel. If the output of the channel at time

is

then the corresponding log-likelihood ratio

is given by

. Let the threshold set be given by

For example, if

,

, and

then

so that the outgoing message is (since

).

It is evident that the computational requirements to imple-

ment this decoder are very small. This decoder on the -reg-

ular code has a threshold11 value of

, corresponding

to a raw error rate of about 11.9%. Later we will see that with be-

lief propagation the code has a threshold of roughly

,

equivalent to a raw error rate of about 13.0%. Hence, the per-

formance of this simple decoder is very close to that of belief

propagation.

Actually, as specified, this decoder has an error floor of about

0.06%. The error floor is easily removed by replacing

with the corresponding

and quantize the log-likelihood value according to these thresh-

olds, e.g., if

, then the associated

received value is .

The check message map

is specified as

where the sign is given by

and where is the reliability specified by the following deci-

sion tree. Let be the number of received messages out of all

messages under consideration with reliability (absolute

value) ,

. For simplicity, we represent the de-

cision as a sequence of tests. Thus, in the list below, we perform

the tests in order, stopping as soon as is determined.

1) If

or

then

.

2) If

then

.

3) If

and

then

.

4) If

or

then

.

5)

.

We define the variable message map by first mapping the received messages and the incoming messages into suitable integers so that the decision rule can be based on the sum of all these values. Let

after sufficiently many iterations.
From the previous examples the general method should now be clear. For a given discrete memoryless channel and a decoder with discrete message alphabet it is always possible, although cumbersome, to write down the recursion describing the evolution of the fraction of incorrect messages which are passed. If the channel is parameterized by a single real value, then we can find the supremum of all such values for which the fraction of incorrect messages passed at the th decoding iteration converges to zero as tends to infinity. This threshold value is, of course, a function of the code parameters. We will see in Section IV that this quantity, which we derived under the assumption that the graph did not contain small cycles describes the average behavior over all inputs. Quite surprisingly, it also describes the behavior for almost all randomly chosen graphs and almost all inputs up to an arbitrarily small deviation, once the code length is sufficiently large.
It should also be clear from the previous examples that there is an enormously rich family of message-passing algorithms, whose surface we have only scratched, and that by choosing different elements of this family we can trade off complexity with performance. From a practical point of view, it is interesting to note that very simple decoders (like the ones used in Examples 5 and 6) can already yield extremely good performance.
11We have not demonstrated monotonicity of this decoder, but monotonicity is apparent.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:49:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RICHARDSON AND URBANKE: THE CAPACITY OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

609

B. Continuous Message Alphabets: Belief Propagation

Assume now that the message alphabet is continuous and that

the channel output is discrete or continuous. From our previous

experience with binary or ternary message-passing algorithms,

it seems a formidable task to determine the threshold in the con-

tinuous case. But for the most important case, namely, the case

of a belief-propagation decoder, there is an efficient way of de-

scribing and evaluating density evolution, which we will now

present.

To begin, we will assume that our alphabets are the reals

and that probability density functions of interest are absolutely

continuous with respect to Lebesgue measure. This assumption

is not required, and we will consider discrete (input) proba-

bility densities later, but it simplifies the mathematical state-

ments. Throughout, we shall refer to probability density func-

tions simply as densities.

Roughly speaking, in belief propagation the messages sent

on an edge represent posterior densities on the bit associated

with the incident variable node. A (conditional) probability den-

sity on a bit is a pair of nonnegative reals

satisfying

. Such a pair can be represented by the corre-

sponding log-likelihood ratio

and, to be specific, we

shall assume that the messages use this representation. Each

node acts under the assumption that each density communicated

to it in a given round is a conditional distribution on the bit, and

that each message is conditionally independent of all others, i.e.,

the random variables on which the different messages are based

are independent. After receiving its messages, a node transmits

to each neighboring node the conditional distribution of the bit

conditioned on all information not coming from that particular

neighboring node. More precisely, consider the message emitted

by a variable node along the edge

in the th de-

coding round. Assuming that there are no cycles of length

or less, this message is

, where is the a posteriori

probability that the value of the associated variable node is

given the observed values of all nodes in the directed neighbor-

hood . An equivalent statement is true for the messages sent

out from check nodes.

If

are likelihood ratios of conditional distribu-

tions of a given bit value conditioned on independent random

variables, then the likelihood ratio of the bit value conditioned

on all of the random variables is

. Therefore, since we

are using log likelihoods for messages, we have

tain

using the fast Fourier transform

(FFT).

Let us now consider a check node . We are interested in the

outgoing message along edge

, where is some

variable node incident to . Label all other edges (excluding )

incident to with the set

, and let the incoming message

along edge

be given by

. We can think of

each such message as representing a random variable on

that takes on the value with probability . Furthermore,

all of these

random variables are assumed independent.

The outgoing message along edge is then

, where

is the probability that the product of these random variables has

value .

To calculate it is more convenient to switch to the fol-

lowing alternative representation: assume that the random vari-

ables take values in

, instead of , with the correspon-

dence

,

,

, and

. The value

is now the probability that the

sum of the

inde-

pendent

-valued random variables is equal to zero.

Note that the probability vector

is given by the cyclic

convolution of the

probability vectors

. An ef-

ficient way of performing these convolutions is by means of a

Fourier transform. In general, if represents a function over

GF

, then its Fourier transform is defined over

and is given by

and

When is a probability mass function, we have, of course, . Thus, we have

(and also If is a log-likelihood

). , then it follows that

Conversely, if

, then

. Thus, the

appropriate definition for the check message map is

Given densities on the real quantities

, it

follows that the density of

is simply the

convolution (over the reals) of those densities. In other words,

we have

where denotes convolution. Letting denote the Fourier transform (over the reals in this case) we have

Let us consider the evolution of the densities of the messages

at the check nodes according to the above scheme. It turns out

that, for this purpose, the check node update is more conve-

niently expressed using yet another representation of the mes-

sages. A probability density

can be represented as a

log-likelihood

, as used above, and it can also be repre-

sented using the following ordered pair:

GF

where we define

In our computations, we shall have

and

all densities will be quantized; we can therefore efficiently ob-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:49:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

610

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

(Ideally,

is defined probabilistically, taking either value

or with equal probability.) Note that the above essentially

decomposes

into its sign and its (log) magnitude. The

advantage of this representation arises from the fact that, under

this representation, the check node message map in the given

space GF

is simply addition.

Given a density of log-likelihoods we can find the

equivalent density over GF

by making the

appropriate change of measure. Let denote a log-likeli-

hood with density , then we wish to derive the density of

, where we have used the fact that

If

, then, letting

prising symmetrical relation

then letting

, we find the sur. Similarly, if

and

Thus, may be obtained by performing the inverse Fourier

transform. The density

can now be

obtained from by a change of variables.

Let us summarize how we perform density evolution for be-

lief propagation for

-regular graphs. Let denote the

common density associated with the messages from variable

nodes to check nodes in the th round, and let denote the

density of the received values. First we find the density

corresponding to . This is done using the change of measure

described above. We then determine the density according

to

we have defined by defined by
)
and

. Let

, be

and let

, be

. By differentiating we obtain (for

(8)

where

denotes the Laplace transform of

. Finally,

we obtain by performing the appropriate change of mea-

sure.

Thus, completing the iteration, we have

(9)

Similarly, given we have

for

and, for

Note that the space GF

is the direct product of two

fields and that we are interested in computing the densities of

the sum of putatively independent random variables over this

space given their individual densities. It follows, and this is the

point of the representation, that the density of this sum is the

convolution of the densities of the summands. This convolution

can be efficiently computed using (generalized) Fourier trans-

forms. Here, the Fourier transform is the Laplace transform in

the second coordinate (in practice, we use the Fourier transform

over the reals) and the discrete Fourier transform over GF in

the first coordinate.

More specifically, let

denote the Laplace transforms

of

, respectively. The Fourier transform of the density

is given by

and

Let denote the density of

where

corresponds to a log-likelihood message

according to . We then have

GF distributed

The above described algorithm enables one to effectively com-

pute

from via judicious use of the FFT.

Although we have assumed that the density

is abso-

lutely continuous with respect to Lebesgue measure, the anal-

ysis above easily extends to more general densities. In partic-

ular, we may consider discrete densities. In some cases, we may

have

for some , in which case special con-

sideration must be taken for this probability mass. This can be

done in a straightforward manner, as we indicated earlier, and

will not be described further.

The above algorithm can also be used to study quantization

effects. If the messages are quantized versions of the messages

that would be obtained using belief propagation, then the perfor-

mance can be evaluated as above by simply, for given messages,

computing the density of return messages assuming belief prop-

agation, and then quantizing the densities in accordance with the

quantization of the messages.

Essentially, all our finite-alphabet examples can be in-

terpreted as quantized versions of belief propagation. The

eight-level message passing algorithm of Example 7, in partic-

ular, was designed by hand to approximate belief propagation

near the threshold value for that decoder. The quantization

levels were chosen visually from plots of the message den-

sities arising from belief propagation and partially quantized

belief propagation (we introduce quantization in stages). The

rules given to describe the algorithm are consistent with the

effect of the quantization but are written in a form which

emphasizes their simplicity. We have not attempted to properly

optimize the quantization levels, and we restricted ourselves

to time-invariant quantization. Clearly, the algorithm is not

the optimal eight-level algorithm but it is surely close and its

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:49:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RICHARDSON AND URBANKE: THE CAPACITY OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

611

construction indicates general principles that can guide the

design of low-complexity decoders.

1) Monotonicity—Threshold Effects: Assume we are given

a class of channels fulfilling the required symmetry condition

and that this class is parameterized by . This parameter may

be real-valued, as is the case for all our examples (the crossover

probability for the BSC, the standard deviation for the BI-

AWGNC, the parameter for the BILC), or may take values

in a larger domain. For a fixed parameter we can use the

above algorithm to determine if, for a given

, the ex-

pected fraction of incorrect messages tends to zero with an in-

creasing number of iterations under density evolution.

For all our examples, the parameter reflects a natural or-

dering of the channels—the capacity decreases with increasing

parameter . It is, therefore, natural to ask whether in such cases

the convergence for a parameter automatically implies the

convergence for every parameter such that

. More

generally, we might want to define a partial ordering of channels

with respect to a given code and a belief-propagation decoder.

Let a channel be represented by its transition probability

. We say that a channel is physically degraded with

respect to if

for some auxil-

iary channel , see [12].

coder operating on the output of the channel has a smaller

probability of error than a belief-propagation decoder operating

on the output of the channel , i.e.,

.

If a class of channels is parameterized by a real-valued parameter , we will say that the class of channels is monotone with respect to a particular decoder if the convergence for a parameter implies the converge for every parameter such that
.

Example 8 [BSC: Monotonicity by Self-Concatenation]: Assume we are given two BSCs with parameters and , respectively. It is then easy to see that their concatenation (in any order) is again a BSC and that the parameter of the concatenated channel is

(10)

Moreover, for any

and any

there exists a posi-

tive such that (10) is fulfilled. By Theorem 1, this proves the

monotonicity of the class of BSCs with respect to a belief-prop-

agation decoder.

Equivalent statements are true for the class of BECs, the class

of BIAWGNCs channels, and the class of Cauchy channels with

Theorem 1 [Monotonicity for Physically Degraded Chan-

nels]: Let and be two given memoryless channels that

fulfill the required channel symmetry conditions. Assume that

is physically degraded with respect to . For a given

code and a belief-propagation decoder, let be the expected

fraction of incorrect messages passed at the th decoding

iteration assuming tree-like neighborhoods and transmission

over channel , and let denote the equivalent quantity for

transmission over channel . Then

.

Proof: Let

be a given edge and assume that

is tree-like. Let be the result of passing a randomly

chosen codeword through channel , and let be the result

of passing through an additional auxiliary channel which

is chosen so that the concatenation of and results in the

channel . Consider the following three maximum-likelihood

(ML) estimators of the bit value associated to given all ob-

servations in . The first estimator has input , the second

one has input

, and the third one has input . Since

the transmitted bit associated with variable node has uniform

a priori probability, an ML estimator is equal to a maximum

a posteriori estimator, which is known to yield the minimum

probability of error of all estimators based on the same observa-

tion. The first two of the above three estimators clearly yield the

same probability of error since the additional input is con-

ditionally independent of the transmitted bit given . Further-

more, we can think of the third estimator as an estimator which

has input

but ignores in his decision. Clearly, such

an estimator cannot have smaller probability of error than the

optimal (ML) estimator given input

.

The claim now follows by observing that, for a belief-propagation decoder, the sign of the message sent along edge in the th decoding iteration is equal to the estimate of an ML estimator based on the observations in [15]. Our above statements then translate into the fact that a belief-propagation de-

Example 9 [Monotonicity of the BILC]: As discussed in Section II, for the class of BILCs we have
Although the concatenation of a BILC with a Laplace channel (LC) is not a BILC, one can check that the concatenation of a BILC with parameter with an additive memoryless channel with
where denotes the Dirac delta function, results in a BILC with parameter . Hence, by Theorem 1, the class of BILC is monotone with respect to a belief-propagation decoder.
2) Thresholds for Belief Propagation—Examples: For each of the examples below we computed the corresponding threshold value. Note that, in order to carry out the computations, the involved quantities have to be discretized. In order to avoid some of the resulting numerical precision problems, we made sure that the discretization was symmetric with respect to the input parity. As a consequence, the computations correspond to actual implementable message-passing algorithms (quantized, possibly probabilistic, approximations of belief propagation). Since the values reported are those for which the probability of error converged to zero (within machine precision,) it follows that the reported thresholds are guaranteed to be lower bounds. In all cases, the values presented are believed (after extensive numerical checking) to be accurate (rounded down) up to the number of digits given.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:49:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

612

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

TABLE II
THRESHOLD VALUE  FOR THE BIAWGNC UNDER BELIEF PROPAGATION
FOR VARIOUS CODE PARAMETERS. ALSO LISTED IS THE MAXIMUM
ALLOWED VALUE  ACCORDING TO (4)
TABLE III
THRESHOLD VALUE  FOR THE BILC UNDER BELIEF PROPAGATION FOR
VARIOUS CODE PARAMETERS. ALSO LISTED IS THE MAXIMUM ALLOWED
VALUE  ACCORDING TO EQUATION (5)

corresponds to the output of an actual channel or not. One situation where such a criterion would be of great value is the situation of a channel mismatch. Assume, for example, that it is known that the channel belongs to a certain class parameterized by but the exact value of is unknown. Assume further that the class is monotone and that the threshold is . In such a situation, it is natural to inquire if a belief-propagation decoder is “universal” in the sense that it may assume a parameter and that it will decode correctly with high probability as long as the actual parameter is strictly less than . Unfortunately, this question cannot be answered by means of the monotonicity theorem since the input to the decoder will, in general, not correspond to the output of an actual channel.
IV. CONCENTRATION AND CONVERGENCE TO THE CYCLE-FREE CASE

Example 10 [BSC Under Belief Propagation]: We start by applying the above algorithm to the BSC with crossover probability . The initial density is given by
The resulting threshold values are given in Table I. Example 11 [BIAWGN Channel Under Belief Propaga-
tion]: We next apply the above algorithm to the BIAWGN channel with standard deviation . In this case we have
The resulting threshold values are given in Table II. Example 12 [BILC Under Belief Propagation]: As a final
example, we apply the above algorithm to the BILC with parameter . In this case we have
where
The resulting threshold values are given in Table III. As we have seen in the previous example, the monotonicity
theorem is a powerful tool. Nevertheless, in some situations it would be desirable to have alternative sufficient conditions for convergence of the density evolution according to a belief-propagation decoder. These conditions should depend only on the shape of the input density, regardless of whether this density

In this section, we will show that the average behavior of

individual instances (of the code and the noise) concentrates

around its expected behavior when the length of the code grows

and we will show that this average behavior converges to the

behavior of the cycle-free case.

The concentration result which we derive applies regardless

of whether the average fraction of incorrect messages passed at

the th iteration converges to zero as

or not. Hence, as-

suming that the codeword length is large enough, for almost

all codes in the ensemble

transmission will be reli-

able if and only if the parameter of the channel is below the cal-

culated threshold value. More precisely, if the parameter of the

channel is below the calculated threshold value, then, given any

arbitrarily small target error probability, it can be achieved using

iterations of the decoder (for some fixed depending on the

target error probability) with probability approaching one expo-

nentially in by choosing a code at random from

. If

the parameter of the channel is above the calculated threshold

value, then there is an

such that, for any fixed number

of iterations , the decoder will yield an error rate larger than

with probability approaching one exponentially in when using

a code chosen at random from

. (Note that if we could

prove that loops in the graph degrade average performance, and

we conjecture that this is actually the case, then we could allow

the number of iterations to be arbitrary.)

In order to simplify some of the subsequent notation, we will

assume that the number of iterations that the decoder performs

is fixed and we will denote this number by . All subsequent

quantities are then the quantities at iteration and, hence, we

often omit the index .

Assume that we are in the th iteration and recall that the mes-

sage passed from variable node to check node is a function

of the chosen graph and the input to the decoder. Let be the

number of incorrect messages among all variable-to-check

messages sent out in the th iteration and let

be the ex-

pected value of where the expectation is over all graphs and

all decoder inputs. For a given edge whose directed neighbor-

hood of depth is tree-like, let be the expected number of in-

correct messages (including half the number of erasures) passed

along this edge at the th iteration, averaged over all inputs. We

have seen in the previous section how can be determined in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:49:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RICHARDSON AND URBANKE: THE CAPACITY OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

613

most cases of interest. Note that in the case of continuous mes- average is over all graphs and all decoder inputs. Then, by lin-

sage alphabets, is given as

earity of expectation and by symmetry

where

describes the density of the messages at the th it-

eration. Although we will not make use of this fact in the se-

quel, we note that the same concentration result applies to the

more general case of a random variable that corresponds to

messages in the range of

for any

. The pre-

vious case is then just the special case

. More impor-

tantly, since and

are increasing functions with range

, uniform convergence to within follows from conver-

gence at finitely many points determined by

. For ex-

ample, if

is continuous in , then we may take the points

where

for

. If

is within of

at these points, then is within

of

for all . If

is discontinuous, then, in gen-

eral, we must consider left and right limits at each and we

obtain uniform convergence of these limits. These uniform con-

vergence results show that the cumulative message distributions

computed for tree-like neighborhoods uniformly approximates

the actual message distributions to within with a probability

that decays exponentially in .

The equivalent of the following main theorem for the binary

erasure channel and binary messages was proved in [1].

Theorem 2: Over the probability space of all graphs

and channel realizations let be the number of

incorrect messages among all

variable-to-check node

messages passed at iteration . Let be the expected number

of incorrect messages passed along an edge with a tree-like

directed neighborhood of depth at least at the th iteration.

Then, there exist positive constants

and

such that

[Concentration Around Expected Value] For any

we

have

(11)

[Convergence to Cycle-Free Case] For any we have

and (12)

[Concentration Around Cycle-Free Case] For any

and

we have

(13)

Furthermore

is tree-like is not tree-like

is tree-like is not tree-like

where denotes the directed neighborhood of depth of edge . It is shown in Appendix A that

is not tree-like

for some positive constant . Furthermore, we have

by definition and

is tree-like is not tree-like

trivially, hence

and

. It follows that if

then

It remains to prove (11). Recall that denotes the number of

incorrect variable-to-check node messages among all vari-

able-to-check node messages passed in the th iteration for a

particular

, where is a graph in the ensemble

, is a particular input to the decoder, and is the

probability space. Let ,

, be a

sequence of equivalence relations on ordered by refinement,

i.e.,

implies

.

These equivalence classes are defined by partial equalities. In

particular, suppose we expose the edges of the graph one at

a time, i.e., at step

we expose the particular check node

socket which is connected to the th variable node socket,

and, similarly, in the following steps we expose the received

values one at a time. Then we have

if

and only if the information revealed in the first steps for both

pairs is the same.

Now, define

by

By construction

is a Doob’s Martingale

Process [16, p. 90], where

and

. As noted

in Appendix B, one can give bounds on

if we can prove that (14)

Proof: As noted before, Theorem 2 is an extension of [1,

Theorem 1] to nonbinary channel output alphabets and nonbi-

nary messages. As we will see, we can use essentially the same

arguments as were given in [1]. Since the proof in [1] is rather

brief, we give an explicit account of the necessary steps.

First note that (13) follows immediately from (11) and (12).

We start by proving (12). Let ,

, be the expected

number of incorrect messages passed along edge , where the

for some suitable constants which may depend on , , and

, but preferably not on .

We first prove (14) for

, i.e., for the steps where

we expose the edges. Recall that

means that the th

variable node socket is connected to the th check node socket.

Let

be the set of graphs in the ensemble

such

that the first edges are equal to the edges in , i.e.,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:49:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

614

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Fig. 4. Left: a graph G in the ensemble C (3; 6). Middle: a graph H from the ensemble G (G; 7) (note that the labels of the sockets are not shown—these labels should be inferred from the order of the connections in the middle figure); the first seven edges that H has in common with G are drawn in bold. Right: the associated graph  (H). The two dashed lines correspond to the two edges whose end points are switched.

Let

be the subset of

for which

. Thus,

We have

consisting of those graphs .

Pr

(15)

We claim that if and are such that

an exchange of the endpoints of two edges if one (or both) of

the two edges is (are) in the directed neighborhood . As

stated in the beginning of this section, a neighborhood contains

at most

distinct edges and, by the symmetry property

expressed in (2), an edge can be in at most

neighbor-

hoods. It follows that at most

neighborhoods can be

affected by the exchange of the endpoints of two edges, which

proves claim (17).

Since is a bijection and preserves probability, it follows

that

and

then

(16)

To prove this claim define a map

as

follows. Let be the permutation defining the edge assignment

for a given graph

and let

. Define a

permutation by

except that

and

. Let denote the resulting graph, then

. By

definition,

. The construction is shown in Fig. 4.

Clearly, is a bijection and, since every (edge-labeled) graph

in the ensemble has uniform probability, such a bijection pre-

serves probabilities. We claim that

By (17), any pair

and

has difference

bounded by

and, since for any random variable

, claim (16) follows. Finally, note that, by def-

inition,

is equal to

for some

where

denotes the set of unoccu-

pied sockets on the check node side after revealing edges of

, i.e.,

. Hence

(17)
for all decoder inputs . To see this, note that for any edge the message along this edge is only a function of the directed neighborhood . Therefore, a message is only affected by

where we have used the representation of

given in

(15). This proves (14) for

with

.

It remains to show that the inequality is also fulfilled for the

last steps. The idea of the proof is very similar and we will be

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:49:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RICHARDSON AND URBANKE: THE CAPACITY OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

615

brief. When we reveal a received value at a particular message

node then messages whose directed neighborhood include the

node can be affected. By the node symmetry property (1) this

is equal to the number of nodes in the neighborhood and by

our above estimate this number is upper-bounded by

.

This proves (14) for

with

.

Theorem 2 now follows by applying Azuma’s inequality

to the given martingale. The parameter can be chosen

as

. We remark that this is by no means the best

possible constant.

As discussed before, it follows from this concentration the-

orem that (for sufficiently large ) almost all codes can transmit

reliably up to the threshold value, but that they have an error

probability bounded away from zero above the threshold value.

The required size of , according to the proofs, could be ab-

surdly large. The proofs, however, are very pessimistic. We as-

sume, for example, that any loop effectively introduces an error

into every message it affects. With similar pessimism we assume

that replacing one received value with another independent one

can produce an error in every message the replacement affects.

In summary, the analysis rests on the idea that loops and local

changes are perturbations that are irrelevant asymptotically. In

practice, however, large loops may have only a small effect and

local changes tend to disappear under correct decoding. The ef-

fects are therefore much milder than predicted and the re-

quired to observe near threshold performance is significantly

smaller than any bound that can be obtained from the results.

Fig. 5 depicts some simulation results for the BSC. Fig. 6

depicts corresponding simulation results for the BIAWGN

channel. The curves indicate bit-error probabilities observed

as a function of the channel parameter. Results are indicated

for

and for several different decoding algo-

rithms. Also shown is the predicted threshold value for each

algorithm. We observe the convergence to a sharp threshold

effect at the predicted value as increases.

We remark that the bit-error probabilities are the result of run-

ning the decoder for 100 iterations. (For shorter lengths this is

far more than necessary.) In some cases, in particular for Gal-

lager’s decoding algorithm A, it is possible to slightly lower the

measured bit-error rate by exploiting the observation that when

the decoding fails the number of errors is typically larger than

the uncoded error rate (this is not true for belief propagation).

Since decoding failure is virtually always detected, one can de-

code to the received values and reap a small gain in this case.

V. EXTENSIONS
In this section, we outline some extensions that are slated to be subjects of further work.12
First, consider irregular graphs. As proposed in [1], better LDPC codes can be constructed if we allow varying degrees, i.e., if we allow variable nodes to participate in different numbers of checks and check equations to involve different numbers of variables. One can check that, as long as the degrees in

Fig. 5. Bit-error probability versus parameter  for the (3; 6)-regular ensemble transmitting over the BSC channel for three decoding algorithms. The leftmost curves correspond to Gallager’s decoding algorithm A, the middle curves correspond to decoding with erasures and the rightmost curves correspond to a belief-propagation decoder. The solid curves correspond to a codeword length of 1000, whereas the dashed and the dotted-dashed curves correspond to codeword lengths of 10 000 and 100 000, respectively. The arrows indicate the threshold values  = 0:04, 0:07, and 0:084, respectively. Observe how the lines move closer to these threshold values for increasing codeword lengths.
Fig. 6. Bit-error probability versus parameter  for the (3; 6)-regular code used over the BIAWGN channel. The left curves correspond to the message passing algorithm with eight messages described in Example 7, whereas the right curves correspond to belief propagation. The solid curves correspond to a codeword length of 1000, whereas the dashed and the dotted–dashed curves correspond to codeword lengths of 10 000 and 100 000, respectively. The arrows indicate the corresponding threshold values  = 0:847 and  = 0:88. Observe how the lines move closer to this threshold value for increasing codeword lengths.
the graph are bounded, the concentration theorem applies essentially unchanged to such an ensemble of codes, requiring only adjustments of the constants. Let and be polynomials representing the variable node and check node degree distributions, respectively. More precisely
and

12Some of the proposed work has been carried out subsequent to the prepa- where and denote the fraction of edges incident to variable

ration of this paper, see, e.g., [10].

and check nodes with degree , respectively. The calculation of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:49:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

616

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

the message densities under the tree-like assumption requires only minor modifications to accommodate irregular degree sequences. In fact, the only changes required are the following: (8) becomes

and important open question to find a larger class of decoding algorithms for turbo codes that allow one to trade off performance with complexity in a larger range.
We conclude this section by presenting our view of the overall structure of LDPC codes and belief-propagation decoders. Let us first consider the structure of the code and the meaning of the graph. In general,

and (9) becomes
Hence, for given degree sequences and a given memoryless channel, we can calculate the resulting threshold of a belief-propagation decoder in an efficient manner. In [1], the authors propose a particular degree sequence for a rate one-half code. The degree distributions are given by the following:13

• the variables take values in some ring and • check nodes represent weighted sum constraints. More
precisely, each check node represents a constraint of the form
where the weights are elements of the ring. Under belief propagation we have the following general description of the meaning of the messages.

where

Although this particular degree distribution was optimized for

erasure channels, we can use our extended algorithm to calcu-

late the resulting threshold for other channels. For example, we

get

for the BSC and

(

corre-

sponds to

) for the BIAWGNC. Some very good

degree distributions for various channels and message-passing

algorithms are described in [10].

Next, let us consider LDPC codes over larger fields, or rings,

under belief-propagation decoding. Again it is easy to check that

the concentration results apply to both regular and, with proper

conditions as mentioned above, irregular graphs.

Another area into which the methods used in this paper ex-

tend is that of turbo codes. Although this is not immediately

apparent, the notion of a neighborhood of a variable and the no-

tion of a tree-like such neighborhood, which played important

roles in proving concentration results for LDPC codes, can be

suitably extended to the setting of turbo codes. This is the key

observation in proving equivalent concentration results for turbo

codes. The determination of the average performance (under

tree-like assumptions) may not be directly computationally fea-

sible, but simulations should nevertheless be sufficient to deter-

mine the densities of the messages passed between constituent

decoders. This opens the possibility of calculating threshold

values for turbo codes under turbo decoding. For a more de-

tailed account of this extension, see [17] and [18]. As we saw

in this paper, LDPC codes admit a large family of decoding al-

gorithms, allowing a tradeoff between performance and com-

plexity. To date there are only a few decoding algorithms known

for turbo codes, such as the standard turbo decoding using the

Bahl–Cocker–Jelinek–Raviv (BCJR) algorithm, or the simpler

version employing the SOVA algorithm [19]. It is an interesting

2 + 1 13Note that the left degrees are of the form

(the exponents of the

polynomials are one less than the corresponding degrees).

• A message is a (representation of a) conditional distribution of the variable associated with the variable node.
• All messages arriving at a node at a particular stage (including the received value in the case of a variable node) are assumed to be conditional distributions of the associated variable, each independent of the others, i.e., each conditioned on independent random variables.
• At the variable nodes the outgoing messages are pointwise products of the densities from incoming messages.
• The outgoing messages from the check nodes represent the distribution of the (additive group) inverse of some weighted sum of variables. The variables participating in the sum are assumed to have the distributions indicated by the associated incoming message, and each is assumed independent of the others. Thus, the outgoing message represents the convolution of the participating incoming messages (suitably adjusted for any multiplicative factor). Typically, the additive group possesses a Fourier transform so that efficient computation of the convolution can be done in the Fourier domain.
Thus, at the message nodes, the distributions should be interpreted in the Fourier domain, and then the outgoing messages are just pointwise products. For example, in the case of GF , the additive group operative at the check nodes is GF . Thus, the appropriate Fourier transform is just the multidimensional version of the one used for binary parity-check codes. This observation leads to a new efficient implementation of the decoder for this case.
We now address the problem of computing average asymptotic performance. Here, we interpret the messages themselves as random variables for which we desire the density.
• In each case, i.e., at both sets of nodes, we move to a log domain so that pointwise products become pointwise sums.
• Once in the log domain, the density of an outgoing message is the convolution of the density of incoming messages. Typically, the log domain can be suitably repre-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:49:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RICHARDSON AND URBANKE: THE CAPACITY OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

617

sented so that a Fourier transform exists over the space on which the densities are defined. The update of the density can then be computed efficiently in this Fourier domain. This applies both at the variable nodes and at the check nodes, but the spaces may be different in both cases.

not create a loop is large, we now have

. Assuming that is sufficiently

In the case of GF , for example, the Fourier transform

of the densities can be viewed as a real function over

,

taking values in the interval

. Thus, the appropriate log

domain is a multidimensional version of the one appearing in

the binary case. Unfortunately, the dimensionality of the space

renders computation of the densities infeasible except for quite

small (e.g.,

).

Other examples of interest are codes over

or codes

over

. The latter example introduces the possibility

of designing LDPC codes directly for QAM-type signaling

schemes. Again, it is the existence of the Fourier transform

over these spaces that renders the necessary computation at the

check nodes efficient.

Thus, the probability that

is tree-like given

is

tree-like is lower-bounded by

.

It now follows that the probability that

is tree-like is

lower-bounded by

Hence, for sufficiently large is not tree-like

APPENDIX A PROBABILITY OF TREE-LIKE NEIGHBORHOOD
In this section we will give a short proof that

is not tree-like

for some constant , where randomly chosen element of
Note that there are, in total,

is a given edge in a and is a fixed depth.

APPENDIX B AZUMA’S INEQUALITY

Let

be a sum of independent random variables. We

can then use the Chernoff bound to give an exponential bound

on the probability that will deviate from its mean by more

than a fraction .

Sometimes it is possible to give strong bounds even when the

random variables are not independent. In one particularly useful

case the random variables form a martingale.

Theorem 3 [Azuma’s Inequality]: Let tingale sequence such that for each

be a mar-

variable nodes and

where the constant may depend on . Then, for all

and

any

check nodes in

assuming it is tree-like. Recall that de-

notes the number of check nodes in the full graph. Fix and

let

. Assuming that is tree-like, we ask this: what is

the probability that

is tree-like? We obtain a bound by

revealing the outgoing edges of the variable node leaves of the

tree given by one at a time and bounding the probability that

this revelation creates a loop. Assume that additional edges

have been revealed at this stage without creating a loop; then the

probability that the next revealed edge does not create a loop is

. Assuming that is sufficiently large we have

For proofs and applications of Azuma’s inequality see, for example, [16], [20].
ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors would like to thank Richard Blahut, Amin Shokrollahi, Emre Telatar, and Igal Sason for their comments on an earlier draft of this paper. They would also like to thank the reviewers for their many helpful suggestions.

REFERENCES

Thus, the probability that

is tree-like, given is tree-

like, is lower-bounded by

.

Assume now that

is tree-like. As above, we reveal the

outgoing edges of the check node leaves of

one at a time.

Assuming that variable nodes have been revealed without cre-

ating a loop, then the probability that the next revealed edge does

[1] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman. Analysis of low density codes and improved designs using irregular graphs. [Online]. Available: http://www.icsi.berkeley.edu/~luby/
[2] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding,” in Proc. Int. Communications Cconf. (ICC’93) Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[4] M. Sipser and D. Spielman, “Expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 1710–1722, Nov. 1996.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:49:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

618

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

[5] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[6] V. Zyablov and M. Pinsker, “Estimation of the error-correction complexity of Gallager low-density codes,” Probl. Pered. Inform., vol. 11, pp. 23–26, Jan. 1975.
[7] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.
[8] G. A. Margulis, “Explicit construction of graphs without short cycles and low density codes,” Combinatorica, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 71–78, 1982.
[9] D. MacKay, S. Wilson, and M. Davey, “Comparison of constructions of irregular Gallager codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, pp. 1449–1454, Oct. 1999.
[10] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[11] M. C. Davey and D. J. C. MacKay, “Low density parity check codes over GF (q),” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 2, pp. 165–167, June 1998.
[12] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory. New York: Wiley, 1991.

[13] L. Bazzi, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Exact thresholds for the binary symmetric channel and Gallager’s decoding algorithm A,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, to be published.
[14] M. Mitzenmacher, “A note on low density parity check codes for erasures and errors,”, SRC Technical Note 1998-017, December 1998.
[15] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[16] R. Motwani and P. Raghavan, Randomized Algorithms. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1995.
[17] E. Gelblum, R. Calderbank, and J. Boutros, “Understanding serially concatenated codes from a support tree approach,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sept. 1997, pp. 271–274.
[18] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Thresholds of turbo codes,” paper, to be published.
[19] J. Hagenauer and P. Hoeher, “A Viterbi algorithm with soft-decision outputs and its applications,” in Proc. GLOBECOM ’95, Dallas, TX, Nov. 1995, pp. 1680–1686.
[20] N. Alon, J. Spencer, and P. Erdös, The Probabilistic Method. New York: Wiley, 1992.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:49:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

