520

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Codes on Graphs: Normal Realizations
G. David Forney, Jr., Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—A generalized state realization of the Wiberg type is
called normal if symbol variables have degree 1 and state variables have degree 2. A natural graphical model of such a realization
has leaf edges representing symbols, ordinary edges representing states, and vertices representing local constraints. Such a graph can be decoded by any version of the sum-product algorithm. Any state realization of a code can be put into normal form without essential change in the corresponding graph or in its decoding complexity.
Group or linear codes are generated by group or linear state realizations. On a cycle-free graph, there exists a well-defined minimal canonical realization, and the sum-product algorithm is exact. However, the Cut-Set Bound shows that graphs with cycles may have a superior performance–complexity tradeoff, although the sum-product algorithm is then inexact and iterative, and minimal realizations are not well-defined. Efficient cyclic and cycle-free realizations of Reed–Muller (RM) codes are given as examples.
The dual of a normal group realization, appropriately defined, generates the dual group code. The dual realization has the same graph topology as the primal realization, replaces symbol and state variables by their character groups, and replaces primal local constraints by their duals. This fundamental result has many applications, including to dual state spaces, dual minimal trellises, duals to Tanner graphs, dual input/output (I/O) systems, and dual kernel and image representations. Finally, a group code may be decoded using the dual graph, with appropriate Fourier transforms of the inputs and outputs; this can simplify decoding of high-rate codes.
Index Terms—Codes, dual codes, graphical models, group codes, state realizations, sum-product algorithm.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE subject of codes defined on graphs is one of intense current interest.
Briefly, this subject developed as follows. The low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes of Gallager [19] were the first such codes. Gallager also invented what today is called the sumproduct algorithm for a posteriori probability (APP) decoding.
Some years later, Tanner [42] founded the general study of codes defined on graphs, introduced generalized constraints, and proved the optimality of the sum-product and min-sum algorithms for decoding codes defined on cycle-free graphs.
Modern interest in this subject reawakened with the work of Wiberg, Loeliger, and Koetter [46], [47], who rediscovered Tanner’s results and introduced states into Tanner graphs, thus allowing connections to trellises and to turbo codes, and with the rediscovery of LDPC codes by Spielman et al. [41] and
Manuscript received December 10, 1998; revised August 15, 2000. The material in this paper was presented in part at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Sorrento, Italy, June 2000.
The author is with the Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA (e-mail: forney@lids.mit.edu).
Communicated by F. R. Kschischang, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Publisher Item Identifier S 0018-9448(01)00726-X.

MacKay et al. [31]. Connections to Bayesian networks and Markov random processes were then recognized [32], [26]. Recently, the subject has been abstracted and refined to a high degree under the rubrics of “factor graphs” [27] or “the generalized distributive law” [1], and further connections have been made, e.g., to fast Fourier transforms and to Kalman filtering.
Unlike some of this prior work, this paper makes a clear distinction between a realization of a code or system, namely, a mathematical characterization of the code/system as in system theory, and a graphical model of a realization.
We begin with realizations of the Wiberg type, which we call generalized state realizations. Generalized state realizations are constructed from three kinds of elements: symbols, states, and constraints. Each constraint is local, in the sense that it involves only a certain subset of the symbol and state variables. The full behavior of a generalized state realization is the set of all symbol/state configurations that satisfy all of the local constraints. The code generated by the realization is the set of all symbol configurations (codewords) that appear as part of some symbol/state configuration in the full behavior.
A generalized state realization has a natural graphical model, as shown in Wiberg et al. [46], [47] (now called a factor graph [27]). Symbols, states, and constraints are represented by three different kinds of vertices. A state or symbol vertex is connected to a constraint vertex if the corresponding state or symbol variable is involved in the corresponding constraint. Consequently, the graph is bipartite.
We restrict attention to normal realizations, defined as generalized state realizations in which the degree of a state variable (the number of constraints in which it is involved) is restricted to two, and the degree of a symbol variable is restricted to one. We note that these restrictions are already satisfied by conventional state realizations (trellises) and tail-biting realizations. We show how to “normalize” any generalized state realization.
Normal realizations have a natural graphical model, which we call a normal graph, in which constraints are represented by vertices, state variables are represented by ordinary edges, and symbol variables are represented by leaf edges (“half-edges”). We show that the normal graph of a normalized generalized state realization has the same topology as the factor graph of the original realization.
Like a factor graph, a normal graph has a natural associated “decoding algorithm,” namely, the sum-product algorithm. If the graph is finite and cycle-free, then the algorithm is finite and exact. If the graph has cycles, then the algorithm becomes iterative and approximate, but empirically often performs well—e.g., for turbo codes or LDPC codes.
We show that normalization of a generalized state realization does not affect its decoding complexity. Moreover, in de-

0018–9448/01$10.00 © 2001 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FORNEY: CODES ON GRAPHS: NORMAL REALIZATIONS

521

coding normal graphs, there is a nice separation of the functions of each graph component: symbol edges are purely for input/output (I/O), state edges are purely for communications (message passing), and constraint nodes are purely for computation.
Linear codes are generated by linear realizations, and group codes are generated by group realizations. We will see that a linear or group code defined on a cycle-free graph has a canonical minimal realization, as in the conventional trellis case. However, the question of how to minimize realizations on graphs with cycles remains largely open.
As examples, we present efficient realizations of Reed– Muller (RM) codes on graphs with cycles. Moreover, we show how these realizations may be made cycle-free by clustering, which yields realizations as in [13] that are slightly more efficient than minimal trellis realizations.
We give a fundamental duality theorem for normal realizations of linear or group codes/systems. We define the dual of a normal linear or group normal realization as follows: the dual realization has the dual (character group) state and symbol alphabets, which are the same as the primal alphabets in the linear or finite-group case, and dual (orthogonal) constraints. The graph of the dual realization therefore has the same topology as that of the primal realization. We then show that the dual realization generates the dual (orthogonal) linear or group code, regardless of whether the graph of the realization is cycle-free.
This fundamental duality theorem depends essentially on precisely the degree restrictions that we have imposed on normal realizations, and thus strongly supports restricting attention to such realizations. It also supports our growing belief that the fundamental results of linear system theory are most transparent in a group-theoretic setting, and do not depend on time invariance.
This theorem has myriad applications, of which we mention a few, including dual state spaces, dual minimal trellises (tailbiting too), duals to Tanner graphs, dual I/O systems, and dual kernel and image representations.
Finally, we show how a primal code may be decoded using the dual graph, after appropriate Fourier transform operations on the inputs and outputs.

of a collection

of symbol alphabets, where is

any discrete index set. The elements of are denoted by

, and will be called symbol configurations.

If all alphabets are vector spaces over a field , then is a

direct-product vector space. If all alphabets are groups, then

is a direct-product group.

A code is any subset

of a symbol configuration

space. The elements of will be called valid symbol configura-

tions, or codewords.

Whereas in system theory the index set is usually ordered

and regarded as a time axis, here will not necessarily be or-

dered. In coding, two codes that differ only by a permutation of

the index set are usually regarded as equivalent; they have the

same minimum distance and the same performance on a memo-

ryless channel. Consequently, we may represent the “time axis”

by an unordered discrete set (or by a graph) rather than by a

subinterval of the integers.

For simplicity, we will usually assume that the index set

is finite—i.e., that is a block code. (See the note at the end of

Section VII-B.)

A linear code

is a vector subspace of a direct-product

symbol configuration space

, where each symbol

alphabet is a vector space over a given field .

A group code

is a subgroup of a direct-product symbol

configuration space

, where each symbol al-

phabet is a group.

A linear code is evidently a group code. As our principal re-

sults are essentially group-theoretic, we will generally state and

prove them for the group case. However, recognizing that most

readers will be more familiar with linear codes, we will con-

sistently translate our results into linear terms, and most of our

examples will be linear.

We will use the

extended Hamming code as a run-

ning example, to exhibit various styles of realizations. This code

is a binary linear block code consisting of a subset of 16 ele-

ments of the space

of binary -tuples. In one coor-

dinate ordering, the codewords are the set of binary linear com-

binations of the four generators

II. CODES, REALIZATIONS, AND GRAPHICAL MODELS

In this section we will establish notation and terminology for codes, and review Tanner-type and Wiberg-type realizations and their corresponding graphical models.

A. Codes

We denote variables by upper case letters, values of variables

by corresponding lower case letters, and the alphabets of vari-

ables by corresponding upper case script letters.

For example, a symbol variable takes values

in a

symbol alphabet . In coding, is often a vector space over

a finite field (e.g., the set

of all binary -tuples) or a finite

Abelian group.

A symbol configuration space is a Cartesian product

B. Behavioral Realizations and Tanner Graphs

A code

may be characterized as the set of configura-

tions

that satisfy a certain set of constraints. For example,

a linear code may be characterized as the set of

that

satisfy a certain set of parity checks.

Gallager’s LDPC codes are based on such a representation

[19], [20]. Tanner formalized and generalized this notion [42].

Nowadays such a representation might be called “behavioral,”

since it is specified by local constraints as in the behavioral

system theory of Willems [48], [49].

Formally, a behavioral realization of a code

is de-

scribed by a set

, of local constraints (“local codes,”

“local behaviors”), where is a second discrete index set that

need have no relation to the symbol index set Each local

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

522

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Fig. 1. Tanner graph.

constraint involves some subset of the symbol variables, in-

dexed by a certain subset

of the symbol index set , and

defines a subset

Fig. 2. Tanner graph for (8, 4, 4) code.

of the corresponding local Cartesian product set . The local

constraint thus defines a set of valid local configurations (“local

codewords”)

where the nota-

tion

denotes the projection of a configuration onto the

symbol variables indexed by . The code is then the

set of all configurations that satisfy all local constraints

for all

In a linear behavioral realization, each symbol alphabet is

a vector space over a field , and each local code is a subspace

of the direct-product vector space . The code is then a linear

code—i.e., a subspace of .

In a group behavioral realization, each symbol alphabet

is a group, and each local code is a subgroup of the di-

rect-product group ; the code is then a group code—i.e.,

a subgroup of .

For example, a linear code

may be characterized as the

set of

that satisfy the parity-check equations

for a certain set of check configurations

. The

symbol variables that are involved in the th check are those

for which

. Each local code is then a linear

single-parity-check (SPC) code, whose length , called

the degree of , is equal to the number of symbols involved in

.

A behavioral realization has a natural graphical model, which

in coding is called a Tanner graph. A Tanner graph is a bipar-

tite graph in which a first set of vertices represents the symbol

variables

, a second set of vertices represents the

local constraints

, and a symbol vertex is connected

to a constraint vertex by an edge if the corresponding symbol

variable is involved in the corresponding local constraint. Fig. 1

illustrates a generic Tanner graph.

For example, the binary linear

code is self-dual, and

therefore may be characterized as the set of binary -stuples that

satisfy the four parity-check equations

by square vertices labeled by “ ” signs. Clearly, there is no simpler Tanner graph for this code.

C. Generalized State Realizations and Factor Graphs
Wiberg et al. [46], [47] rediscovered Tanner’s work and extended it to include state variables, a step whose importance can hardly be overstated. Connections were thereby made to the theory of trellis realizations, which correspond to conventional system-theoretic state realizations of codes. Moreover, new kinds of generalized state realizations were thereby defined, differing from those traditionally considered in system theory.
Formally, a generalized state realization of a code is defined by three sets of elements:

• a set of symbol variables ;
• a set of state variables spaces) ;
• a set of local constraints

with alphabets with alphabets (state .

The three index sets

and are discrete, unordered, and

in general unrelated to each other. The symbol configuration

space is the Cartesian product

, and the state

configuration space is the Cartesian product

.

Each local constraint involves a subset of the symbol and

state variables indexed by a certain subset

of the symbol

index set and a certain subset

of the state index set ,

respectively, and defines a subset

of the corresponding local Cartesian product configuration

space

. The local constraint thus defines a set of valid

local configurations (“local codewords”)

The full behavior

is the set of all global sym-

bol/state configurations that satisfy all local constraints

Finally, the code generated by the generalized state realiza-

The Tanner graph of this behavioral realization is shown tion is the projection

of the full behavior

in Fig. 2. The four parity-check constraints are represented onto the symbol configuration space . In other words, the code

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FORNEY: CODES ON GRAPHS: NORMAL REALIZATIONS

523

Fig. 4. Factor graph of a conventional state realization.

Fig. 3. Factor graph of a generalized state realization.

is the set all

that occur as part of some valid configu-

ration

.

In still other words, if the full behavior is regarded as a

symbol/state code, then is the code obtained from by “punc-

turing” all state variables.

In a linear generalized state realization, each symbol al-

phabet and state alphabet is a vector space over a field

, and each local code is a subspace of the direct-product

vector space

. The full behavior and the code

generated by a linear realization are linear codes.

In a group generalized state realization, each symbol alphabet

and state alphabet is a group, and each local code is a

subgroup of the direct-product group

. The full behavior

and the code generated by a group realization are group

codes.

The degree of a local constraint is defined as the number

of symbol and state variables that are involved

in . Conversely, the degree of a symbol or state variable is

defined as the number of local constraints in which it is involved.

A generalized state realization has a natural graphical model,

now called a factor graph [27]. A factor graph is a bipartite

graph in which three types of vertices represent, respectively,

symbol variables , state variables , and local constraints

. A symbol or state vertex is connected to a constraint vertex

by an edge if the corresponding symbol or state variable is in-

volved in the corresponding local constraint. Thus, the degree

of a vertex is the degree of the corresponding variable or con-

straint as defined above. Edges are in principle unlabeled and

undirected, although an edge may sometimes be labeled by the

state or symbol variable to which it is connected [27]. Fig. 3 il-

lustrates a generic factor graph of a generalized state realization.

Another possible graphical model for a generalized state real-

ization is a hypergraph—i.e., a graph in which edges may have

arbitrary degrees. Variables may be associated with hypergraph

edges and local constraints with vertices, or vice versa. A hy-

pergraph edge of degree greater than two may be drawn as a

star (as in block diagrams) or as a clique (as in Markov random

fields). However, a hypergraph edge of degree one needs to be

represented by a special symbol (e.g., the “dongle” symbol in-

troduced later in Fig. 10).

D. Symbol Versus State Variables
It may at first appear that there is little difference between a behavioral realization of a code as described earlier and a generalized state realization as just described, except that the variables have been partitioned into two types. What is the difference between symbol and state variables?

The basic difference is that state variables do not appear in codewords. A generalized state realization of a code is obtained by first realizing a full behavior , and then puncturing the state variables.
Symbol variables are given a priori as part of the description of . State variables are auxiliary variables that are introduced by the designer to improve the realization in some sense.
Symbol variables are visible (manifest, observable), whereas state variables are hidden (latent, unobservable). In coding, symbol variables are transmitted over a channel and are observed at the receiver in the presence of noise, whereas state variables are part of the internal realization of the code and are neither transmitted nor observed.

E. Conventional State Realizations

A conventional state realization is a good first example of a

generalized state realization.

In a conventional state realization, the symbol index set is

regarded as an ordered time axis and is identified with a subin-

terval of the integers; e.g.,

. In coding, the ordering

of is a design choice.

The state and constraint index sets are taken to be essentially

the same time axis, e.g.,

and

. The

initial and final state variables are unary (single-valued):

. The local constraints specify the configurations

that can actually occur; i.e.,

which state transitions

can occur, and

which symbols

may be associated with each possible

transition.

Thus, each symbol variable is involved in one local con-

straint , and each state variable (except and ) is involved

in two local constraints, namely, and .

Fig. 4 shows a factor graph of a conventional state realization.

The graph consists of a chain of “trellis sections” corresponding

to the constraints , and is evidently cycle-free.

A trellis diagram is a more detailed graphical model of a con-

ventional state realization which can be drawn when all state

spaces are finite, as is usually the case in coding. A trellis

diagram is a directed graph with a set of vertices at each

time corresponding to the states in . A local constraint

is represented by a trellis section, consisting of a set of edges

(“branches”) from to labeled by for each valid local

configuration

. Each path in the trellis from

the unique root vertex

to the unique goal vertex

then corresponds to a valid configuration

in the full be-

havior . The code generated by the trellis diagram is the set

of all path label sequences, namely, the projection

.

For example, for the

code, it is known that the

minimal state complexity profile of any trellis diagram is

obtained with the coordinate ordering given earlier, and is equal

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

524

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Fig. 5. Trellis diagram for (8; 4; 4) code. Fig. 6. Factor graph for (8; 4; 4) code.

Fig. 7. Four-section realizations for (8; 4; 4) code. (a) Trellis diagram. (b) Factor graph.

to

. This trellis

diagram is shown in Fig. 5.

The corresponding factor graph is shown in Fig. 6. Each state

variable is labeled by the dimension of its alphabet. (All symbol

variables have dimension .) Each local constraint (trellis sec-

tion) is a binary linear block code, labeled by its length and di-

mension

.

It is well known that a nicer trellis diagram is obtained by

taking symbols two at a time to obtain a four-section trellis di-

agram in which each branch is labeled by a pair of symbols, as

shown in Fig. 7(a). This reduces the state space dimension pro-

file to

. The corresponding sectionalized factor

graph is shown in Fig. 7(b). Because the local constraint codes

(trellis sections) do not increase in size, this sectionalized real-

ization is no more difficult to decode, which is not the case in

general.

F. Tail-Biting State Realizations

A tail-biting state realization is a good first example of an

unconventional generalized state realization (cf. [8]).

In a tail-biting state realization, the symbol index set is

regarded as a circular time axis and is identified with , the

integers modulo

. All index arithmetic is performed in

; i.e., modulo . Again, the correspondence between and

is a design choice.

The state and constraint index sets are taken as the same cir-

cular time axis; i.e.,

. Again, the local constraints

specify the valid configurations

Fig. 8. Factor graph of a tail-biting state realization.
In particular, specifies the valid configurations

Thus, each symbol variable is involved in one local con-

straint , and each state variable is involved in precisely two

local constraints, namely, and . A symbol configuration

is a valid codeword if and only if there exists a symbol/state

configuration

that satisfies all local constraints.

Fig. 8 shows a factor graph of a tail-biting state realization.

The graph consists of a circular chain of “trellis sections”

corresponding to the constraints

, and has a single

cycle.

For example, Fig. 9 shows a minimal four-section tail-biting

realization for the

code [8], both as a trellis diagram

and as a factor graph. Note that a different coordinate ordering

is used. The state complexity profile is

which in

this case, hardly improves over that of a conventional state real-

ization.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FORNEY: CODES ON GRAPHS: NORMAL REALIZATIONS

525

Fig. 9. Four-section tail-biting realizations for (8; 4; 4) code. (a) Trellis. (b) Factor graph.

Fig. 10. Factor graph and normal graph of a conventional state realization.

III. NORMAL REALIZATIONS AND NORMAL GRAPHS

• Each local constraint is represented by a vertex.

We define a normal realization simply as a generalized state realization in which all symbol variables have degree and all state variables have degree . In other words, each symbol variable is involved in precisely one local constraint, and each state variable is involved in precisely two local constraints. No restriction is imposed on constraint degrees.
Because of these degree restrictions, a normal realization has a natural graphical model that is different from a factor graph, which we call a normal graph. In a normal graph, variables are represented by edges and constraints by vertices.
We note immediately that the variables in a conventional state realization satisfy these degree restrictions, except for the initial and final state variables and . But these state variables are unary and therefore may be neglected, since a function of a unary variable is actually independent of that variable. Excluding and , therefore, we have the following.
Theorem 3.1: A conventional state realization is a normal realization.
Similarly, by inspection of Fig. 4, we have the following.
Theorem 3.2: A tail-biting state realization is a normal realization.

• Each state variable , which by definition is involved in two local constraints, is represented by an ordinary edge between the two corresponding vertices.
• Each symbol variable , which by definition is involved in one local constraint, is represented by a “leaf edge” (or “half-edge”) connected to the corresponding constraint vertex.
The resulting normal graph is a graph with leaves, comprising a set of vertices representing local constraints, a set of ordinary edges representing state variables, each incident on two vertices, and a set of leaf edges representing symbol variables, each incident on only one vertex. It differs from a factor graph in the following respects.
• Whereas a factor graph represents state and symbol variables by vertices, a normal graph represents them by edges. This choice is unconventional for graphical models of state realizations, although conventional for, e.g., block diagrams.
• Whereas a factor graph is bipartite, a normal graph has only one kind of vertex, and there are no restrictions on graph topology.

More generally, however, these degree restrictions may at first appear to impose significant constraints. However, we will show that
• restriction to normal realizations incurs no loss of generality, because every state realization can be “normalized” by a certain replication procedure;
• restriction to normal realizations incurs no essential cost in complexity, because the normal graph of the “normalized” realization is essentially the same as the factor graph of the original generalized state realization.
A. Normal Graphs
A normal realization has a natural graphical model, which we call a normal graph (or, after a while, simply a “graph”). It is defined as follows.

• Whereas the edges of a factor graph need not be labeled, an edge of a normal graph is labeled by the state or symbol variable that it represents.
• Whereas a factor graph is an ordinary graph, a normal graph is a graph with leaves. This is the most elementary type of hypergraph, namely, a hypergraph in which edge degrees must be or .
The factor graph of a normal realization is by definition a factor graph in which all symbol vertices have degree and all state vertices have degree . A factor graph satisfying these constraints will be called a normal factor graph.
For example, Fig. 10 illustrates the factor graph of a conventional state realization, which is already normal, and the corresponding normal graph. Leaf edges in the normal graph are represented by a special symbol, called a “dongle.” The normal

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

526

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Fig. 11. Conversion of symbol and state variables: factor graph to normal graph.

variables by open vertices. In the normal graph, repetition constraints are represented by vertices labeled by the symbol “ ,” and leaf edges are represented by the special “dongle” symbol.
The result of this procedure will be called a normalized state realization. Notice the following.

graph is evidently simpler; however, we will see that both graphs have the same decoding complexity.
We like the term “half-edge” for the degree- edges that represent symbol variables. Note that any portion of a normal graph may be regarded as a subsystem. We may isolate the subsystem by cutting a set of boundary edges, so that each such edge (state) becomes a pair of “half-edges” (symbols), one in the disconnected subsystem and one in the remaining system. (See, e.g., Fig. 38.) Conversely, given a system, each half-edge may potentially be coupled to some half-edge in the external environment. Thus, half-edges (symbols) represent the coupling between a system and its environment, whereas ordinary edges (states) represent internal connections.
The special “dongle” symbol for such a half-edge that is introduced in Fig. 10 is intended to be reminiscent of a railroad-car coupler, symbolizing the coupling function described in the previous paragraph. However, any special symbol will do, including a filled circle as in factor graphs.
Note that a graph with leaves may be converted into an ordinary graph by merging leaf edges into their associated vertices (yielding “vertices with hair”). Thus any normal graph may be converted into an ordinary graph, with an implicit symbol variable possibly associated with each constraint node. The topological properties of a graph with leaves and this associated ordinary graph are clearly essentially the same. In particular, the two graphs will have the same properties of connectedness and/or cycle-freedom.

B. Normalization by Replication

We now show that any generalized state realization of may

be “normalized” to become a normal realization that generates

the same code, via the following replication procedure.

Normalization by Replication: Given a generalized state re-

alization of a code with symbol variables

, state

variables

and local codes

, where the

symbol and state variables are indexed by

and , re-

spectively.

1) (Symbol Replication): For each

, for each

create a replica of with alphabet and

replace by in the local constraint . Then for

each

, add a local constraint that constrains

all replicas to be equal to each other and to .

2) (State Replication): For each

, for each

create a replica of with alphabet and replace

by in the local constraint . Then for each

,

add a local constraint that constrains all replicas to

be equal to each other, and delete .

The corresponding conversions from the factor graph of the original state realization to the normal graph of the normalized realization are illustrated in Fig. 11. In the original factor graph, symbol variables are represented by filled vertices and state

• The set

of symbol variables is preserved.

• The set of state variables is replaced by

• The set of local constraints is augmented by a new set
The new local constraints are repetition constraints that force all variables involved to be equal.
The following is clear by construction.
• The normalized state realization generates the same code , since each new state variable may be replaced by
the symbol variable to which it is equal, and each new state variable may be replaced by the common value
of all the .
• Each symbol variable is now involved in only one local constraint, namely, the new constraint .
• Each state variable or is now involved in precisely two local constraints, namely, the original constraint and a new constraint or , respectively.
Fig. 12 shows how the bipartite factor graph of a generic generalized state realization is converted to the normal graph of the corresponding normalized state realization. The new normal graph looks exactly like the original factor graph, except for the addition of leaf edges to represent symbol variables. All state or symbol vertices are converted into repetition constraint vertices.
We will see when we discuss decoding that the similarity of these graphs implies that their decoding complexity is essentially the same.
We see also from Fig. 12 that graph topology and global graph-theoretic properties are not essentially affected by this conversion; e.g., graphs that are connected remain connected, and graphs that are cycle-free remain cycle-free.
To summarize, we have the followiwng theorem.
Theorem 3.3: Given a generalized state realization of a code , normalization yields a normal realization of . The normal graph of the normalized realization has essentially the same topology as the factor graph of the original realization, and may be decoded with essentially the same decoding complexity.
In other words, perhaps somewhat surprisingly, there is no loss of generality or efficiency in restricting attention to normal realizations.
C. Further Remarks on Normalization
We remark first that normal realizations that are derived by normalization are not the most general normal realizations, because they must satisfy certain restrictions. Namely, in a normal graph of a normalized realization, certain vertices must be repetition vertices, and the graph must be bipartite. Conventional

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FORNEY: CODES ON GRAPHS: NORMAL REALIZATIONS

527

Fig. 12. Conversion of the factor graph of a generic generalized state realization to the normal graph of a normalized realization.

Fig. 13. Conversions for normalized symbol and state variables.
and tail-biting state realizations are examples of normal realizations that are not subject to such restrictions.
Second, note that a state variable that has degree or a symbol variable that has degree does not need to be replicated in the normalization process. Therefore, in these cases the conversion process from a factor graph to a normal graph may be simplified as follows.
1) (Normalized Symbol Variables): For each original symbol vertex of degree , replace the symbol vertex and its attached edge by a leaf edge representing .
2) (Normalized State Variables): For each original state vertex of degree , replace the state vertex and its two attached edges by a single ordinary edge representing .

map is then invertible, and the inverse map may be composed with the projection onto the remaining variables (called a check set in coding theory) to give an I/O map from the variables in the information set (the “inputs”) to the variables in the check set (the “outputs”). Conversely, if no projection of onto any subset of its variables is bijective, then no such I/O map exists.
If the local code is a group code, then the projection of onto an information set must be an isomorphism, and the resulting I\O map a homomorphism.
If a local code has an information set, then we may optionally regard the corresponding vertex in a normal graph as an I\O system. This may be indicated by labeling all incident edges by appropriately directed arrows. If all edges in the graph can be so labeled consistently, then the resulting graph may be regarded as a block diagram. (For an example, see Fig. 29 below.) From a behavioral perspective, such a labeling is purely for illustrative purposes, and does not affect the associated normal realization nor the code that it generates.

These conversions are illustrated in Fig. 13. The symbol “ ” is used because these conversions are evidently invertible.
The conversions of Fig. 13 may be used to convert back and forth between a normal factor graph and a normal graph. Which graphical model is preferable? As we saw earlier in Fig. 10, a normal factor graph looks much like the corresponding normal graph, except for redundant state vertices in the middle of ordinary edges. While these redundant state vertices complicate the graphical model unnecessarily, we will see that in decoding no computation occurs at a state vertex of degree ; messages simply pass through it. From a complexity viewpoint, therefore, normal graphs and normal factor graphs are essentially equivalent. Aesthetically, we believe that normal graphs are a bit nicer.
D. Block Diagrams
Another familiar type of graphical model is a block diagram. In a block diagram, the edges represent variables, and the vertices (“blocks”) typically represent I/O systems, in which some of the incident edges represent inputs to the block and the remaining edges represent outputs. These distinctions are typically indicated by placing arrows on the edges, making a block diagram into a directed graph.
An I/O system defines a local code, but the converse does not hold. Given a local code , a subset of the variables involved in
is called an information set if the projection of onto that subset is a bijective (one-to-one and onto) map. The projection

E. Pairwise Markov Random Fields (MRFs)
In this section we briefly sketch some intriguing parallels between normal graphs and pairwise Markov random fields (MRFs). An MRF is a undirected graphical model in which vertices correspond to random variables, and the joint probability distribution of the random variables factors into the product of potential functions defined on the maximal cliques of the graph (see, e.g., [27] or [45], this issue). Thus, an MRF is essentially a factor graph, with functions (constraints) represented by cliques rather than by vertices [27]. Alternatively, an MRF could be regarded as a hypergraph in which cliques represent hypergraph edges.
A pairwise MRF is an MRF in which the degrees of all functions are restricted to or . Any MRF may be “normalized” to a pairwise MRF via a replication procedure [45].
The pairwise restriction allows a number of remarkable results to be proved [50]. One can define a “Bethe free energy” function on the MRF graph such that the sum-product algorithm (“belief propagation”) minimizes this free energy approximately (exactly, if the MRF graph is cycle-free). It follows that the fixed points of the sum-product algorithm are the zero-gradient points of the free energy, and, since the free energy is bounded below, that the sum-product algorithm always has a fixed point, regardless of graph topology.
These results follow from restricting function (constraint) degrees to or less, just as the results of this paper result from

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

528

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

restricting variable degrees to or less. Either restriction may be made without loss of generality or essential change to graph topology. These two restrictions are clearly mirror images of one another, and both seem very useful. However, it is clearly not possible to restrict both function (constraint) and variable degrees to or less, because the resulting graph could only consist of disconnected simple cycles and chains.

Fig. 14. Aggregated view of a realization with a cut set .

IV. GRAPH-THEORETIC PROPERTIES OF REALIZATIONS
A normal realization is completely characterized by its normal graph, and vice versa. Therefore, we will henceforth identify a normal realization with its normal graph. We may also omit the word “normal.” We may therefore say that a code is realized or generated by a certain graph. Moreover, we may say that a realization has certain graph-theoretic properties, such as connectedness or cycle-freedom.
In this section, we will discuss important graph-theoretic properties of realizations and the corresponding properties of codes.
We first show that a code has a disconnected realization if and only if it is the Cartesian product of shorter codes. In this case, we may consider the shorter codes independently.
Secondly, we consider cut sets. A connected graph is cycle-free if and only if every edge is by itself a cut set. Every cut set of a realization induces a certain decomposition of the code into a union of Cartesian product codes.
From this cut-set decomposition follows a lower bound (the Cut-Set Bound) on the product of the sizes of the state spaces in any cut set in terms of the minimal state-space size in a certain conventional trellis realization. In the linear or group case, this lower bound may be evaluated via the State Space Theorem. If the graph is also cycle-free, then there exists a canonical realization in which all of these lower bounds are met with equality—i.e., a minimal realization.
The Cut-Set Bound shows that state-space sizes cannot be reduced substantially unless the realization has cycles, which motivates the consideration of realizations with cycles.
In the following section, we will develop a general exact decoding algorithm for cycle-free realizations, called the sumproduct algorithm. This development will also be based on cut sets.
A. Connectedness and Independence

B. Cut Sets and Conditional Independence

In this subsection, we introduce the important topic of cut

sets, and prove a Cut-Set Decomposition Lemma, which can be

interpreted as a statement of conditional independence.

A cut set of a connected graph is a minimal set of edges such

that removal of that set partitions the graph into two discon-

nected subgraphs. A connected graph is cycle-free if and only

if every ordinary edge is by itself a cut set.

In a normal graph, a cut set consists of a set of ordinary (state)

edges, and may be specified by the corresponding subset

of state indices. The cut-set alphabet is then the Cartesian

product

, with values

and

size

. Of course, if the cut set is a single edge,

then the cut-set alphabet is simply the associated state space

with values and size .

Since removal of a cut set partitions a graph into two dis-

connected subggraphs, the index sets ,

, and are

correspondingly partitioned into disjoint index sets, say

,

, and

.

Fig. 14 gives a high-level view of a realization with a cut set .

On one side of , the local codes

and state variables

are aggregated into an “upstream” code that

constrains the upstream symbol variables

and the cut-set

alphabet . Similarly, an aggregated “downstream” code

constrains the downstream symbol variables

and .

As noted in [27], fixing a variable (or conditioning on that

variable) effectively removes the corresponding edge in the

corresponding graph. The reason is that a function of a unary

(single-valued) variable does not actually depend on that

variable.

If is a cut set of a normal graph, therefore, fixing

partitions the graph of Fig. 14 into two disconnected subgraphs.

Every cut set of the graph thus corresponds to an instance of

conditional independence.

In detail, for each , the code

generated by the dis-

connected graph (i.e., the set of all codewords consistent with

) is a Cartesian product

Suppose that a realization is disconnected. Then the code generated by the realization is the Cartesian product of the codes generated by the components of the realization. Conversely, if a code can be represented as a Cartesian product of shorter codes, then the disjoint union of any set of realizations of the shorter codes is a realization of the original code.
Thus, a realization of a code can be disconnected if and only if the code can be decomposed into the Cartesian product of shorter codes. The component codes are then independent of each other, and may be considered separately. Therefore, we will henceforth consider only codes that cannot be so decomposed, whose realizations are necessarily connected.

where the codes

and

are

generated independently by the two graph components. The

code generated by the original connected graph is then the

union of these Cartesian product codes:

Lemma 4.1 (Cut-Set Decomposition Lemma): If a code has a realization with a cut set as in Fig. 14, then has the following decomposition:

(4.1)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FORNEY: CODES ON GRAPHS: NORMAL REALIZATIONS

529

C. The Cut-Set Bound

Observe that Fig. 14 may be interpreted as a conventional

two-section state realization (trellis) of on the two-section

time axis

, with central state space . The two trellis

sections are determined by the two local constraints

and

Any minimal state space corresponding to any cut such that

is the past and is the future must be isomorphic to .

More precisely, define the

-induced, -induced, and

-induced state maps as the natural maps

,

, and

, respectively. Then there

exist isomorphisms

and

such

that the following diagram commutes, where and are the

projections onto and , respectively:

with the initial and final state spaces being implicit. Such a twosection trellis realization implies the decomposition of Lemma 4.1.
In other words, the alphabet of a cut set is a sufficient state space for a partition of the “time axis” of into a “past”
and “future” . From this observation follows the important Cut-Set Bound [47], [8].

Theorem 4.2 (Cut-Set Bound): Let be the symbol index

set of a code , let be a cut set in the graph of a normal re-

alization of , and let and be the two disjoint subsets

of symbol indices in the graph partition induced by removal of

the edges in . Then

is lower-bounded by

the minimum central state space size in any two-section con-

ventional state realization of on the two-section time axis

.

Proof: Under these hypotheses, (4.1) holds, so there ex-

ists a two-section realization of on the two-section time axis

with central state space .

D. The State Space Theorem

When is a linear or group code, the minimum state-space

size of the Cut-Set Bound is easily determined via the State

Space Theorem [16], [48].

In discrete-time system theory, a state space arises from a

cut of an ordered index set (time axis)

at time , which

partitions into two disjoint subsets, the “past”

and the “future”

. Here we consider

more general two-way partitions of an unordered index set into

disjoint subsets

, where

.

Given a linear or group code defined on an index set and

a subset

, we define its projection

and

cross section

, where

and

denotes the all-zero (identity) configuration. It is immediate

that and are vector spaces or groups, and that is a

subspace or normal subgroup of .

The following easy but extremely important result was shown

in [16]. (For linear systems, this result was essentially given in

[48].)

Theorem 4.3 (State Space Theorem): Given a linear or group

code defined on an index set , let

be any two-way

partition of . Then the following three quotient groups are iso-

morphic:

1) the

-induced state space

;

2) the -induced state space

;

3) the -induced state space

.

This implies that there exists a state realization of with the following full behavior:
or, equivalently, that may be decomposed as follows: (4.2)
where
and
are the cosets of and that map to , respectively, and is the corresponding coset of
in . If is a linear code, then this development may be summa-
rized as follows. has a generator matrix of the following form:

where and are generator matrices for the cross sec-

tions and , and

and

are

generator matrices for the projections and . The dimen-

sion of the minimal state space is the dimension of

or of

.

From (4.2) we see that may be used as the central state

space in a two-section state realization of . Moreover, because

the cosets

are disjoint, it is clear that no

smaller state space is possible.

E. The Cut-Set Bound for Linear or Group Codes

For linear or group codes, the State Space Theorem implies the following.

Corollary 4.4 (Cut-Set Bound for Linear or Group

Codes): Let be the symbol index set of a linear or group

code , let be a cut set in the graph of a normal realization

of , and let and be the two disjoint subsets of symbol

indexes in the graph partition induced by removal of the edges

in . Then

is lower-bounded by the size of

the

-induced state space

of :

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

530

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

F. Canonical Realizations on Cycle-Free Graphs

If a normal graph representing a code is cycle-free, then

every ordinary edge is a cut set; i.e., every state variable

partitions the symbol index set into two disjoint subsets,

and . For linear or group codes, the State Space Theorem

defines the

-induced state space

as the canonical state space associated with this partition.

We, therefore, define a canonical normal realization as fol-

lows. Define

, define as the natural state map

, and define

as the composition of these

state maps. Define the full behavior as the set of all configu-

rations

Then

, so the realization generates . Moreover, the

lower bound on of Corollary 4.4 is met everywhere with

equality.

Such a realization is minimal in the sense of meeting the

Cut-Set Bound for all state spaces . Moreover, it is a linear

or group realization, since the state spaces are all vector spaces

or groups and the local codes are all homomorphic images of

:

For example, the graph of a conventional state realization is cycle-free. For this case, our canonical state realization reduces to the canonical conventional state realization of [16].

G. Realizations on Graphs with Cycles

On cycle-free graphs, each edge is a cut set, and the size of

the state space associated with that edge is lower-bounded by

the Cut-Set Bound to be at least as great as that of a state space

in some conventional state realization (trellis). Therefore, no

dramatic reduction in complexity over conventional realizations

can be expected by using more general cycle-free realizations.

On the other hand, on graphs with cycles, cut sets generally

comprise multiple state variables, and the minimum complexity

implied by the Cut-Set Bound may be spread across these vari-

ables; therefore, dramatic reductions in state complexity may be

obtained.

For example, consider a tail-biting realization, with a cir-

cular graph as shown in Fig. 15. Here, every cut set comprises

two edges. Consequently, the minimum size of both such state

spaces can be as small as the square root of the value given by

the Cut-Set Bound [46].

It has been shown, for example, that whereas in any conven-

tional state realization of the

Golay code the size

of the state space at the trellis midpoint must have at least 256

states, there exists a tail-biting realization in which the size of

each state space is only [8]. Simulations using this tail-biting

realization have shown a performance degradation of only about

0.1 dB relative to maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding [36].

On the other hand, the question of finding “minimal” tail-

biting realizations is in general quite difficult (see, e.g., [25]),

even for this simplest case of a graph with cycles.

Fig. 15. Normal graph of a tail-biting realization.
H. Normal Realizations of Capacity-Approaching Codes
Spectacular progress has recently been made on capacity-approaching coding schemes, using codes that are naturally defined on graphs.
For example, the original turbo codes of Berrou et al. [6] are realized as shown in Fig. 16. A data bit sequence is duplicated and used as the information bits in two low-complexity rateconvolutional codes, in one case after being permuted in a long, pseudo-random permuter . The code symbols are the data sequence and the two parity sequences, so the code rate is .
Given received symbol APPs, each convolutional code may be decoded by the sum-product decoding algorithm of the next section to give updated APPs, which may be relayed via the data-bit repetition constraints to the other convolutional decoder. Decoding continues in this way for 10–20 iterations. On an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, performance within 0.35 dB of the Shannon limit has been achieved.
A turbo code is thus a long, powerful, pseudo-random code with cycles comprised of simpler cycle-free codes. Its length and pseudo-randomness are induced by the permuter, which does not require any computations in decoding. The decoding operations are performed iteratively on the component low-complexity, cycle-free graphs. Note that the overall code graph must have cycles, since, as we have seen from the Cut-Set Bound, the state spaces could not be small otherwise.
As another example, Gallager’s LDPC codes [19] are realized by a Tanner normal graph, as shown in Fig. 17. Connections between data bits and checks are realized by a long, pseudorandom permuter .
Decoding alternates between the repetition and parity-check constraints. The overall graph has cycles, but they can be made very long. With highly irregular repetition-constraint degrees on an AWGN channel, performance within 0.005 dB of the Shannon limit has now been achieved [10].
Finally, remarkably good results have been achieved even with the simple “repeat–accumulate” (RA) code of Fig. 18 [12]. Here the data bits are simply repeated times, permuted in a long, pseudo-random permuter , and then used as the information bits in a trivial rate- -state “accumulate” code, whose states are the code symbols. On an AWGN channel, with turbo-like decoding, performance within 1.0 dB of the Shannon limit has been achieved.
These remarkable results show that there are many possible routes to channel capacity. The common element is a long, pseudo-random permuter, which makes the codes long and pseudo-random without itself incurring any computational

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FORNEY: CODES ON GRAPHS: NORMAL REALIZATIONS

531

Fig. 16. Normal graph of a classical turbo code.

Fig. 17. Normal graph of a LDPC code.

V. THE SUM-PRODUCT ALGORITHM
One of the most important properties of a graphical model of a realization of a code is that it specifies an associated “decoding” algorithm (actually, a class of decoding algorithms): namely, the sum-product algorithm.
By now, there are many expositions of the sum-product algorithm; e.g., in the context of factor graphs, see [27]. The reader who is already familiar with the factor-graph algorithm may adapt it to normal graphs simply by applying the factor-graph algorithm to the equivalent normal factor graph. We give a brief development of the sum-product algorithm for normal graphs here not only to make our presentation self-contained, but also because we believe that the development is somewhat simpler in the normal graph context, mainly because it focuses on edges and cuts.
The sum-product algorithm is exact only on cycle-free graphs. However, the sum-product update rule may be used for approximate iterative decoding on graphs with cycles. We observe that deterministic and/or erased variables can sometimes have the effect of “breaking” cycles.
We observe that with normal graphs there is a clean functional separation between the elements of the graph and the elements of the sum-product algorithm: leaf edges (symbols) are purely for I\O, ordinary edges (states) are purely for communications, and all computation takes place at vertices (local codes).
Finally, we observe that graph fragments, including individual vertices (local codes), may be decoded as lower level “modules” or “subroutines.”

A. The Sum-Product Algorithm on Cycle-Free Graphs

Fig. 18. Normal graph of an RA code.
complexity. Outside of the permuter, two (or more) low-complexity cycle-free codes are used—it does not seem to matter much which, or which bits are tapped to be code symbols. The overall code must have cycles, but with a long permuter the cycles can be made very long, so that the graph structure within some radius of any vertex can be made locally cycle-free. The sum-product decoding algorithm then operates almost as though on a cycle-free graph.

The decoding problem solved by the sum-product algorithm is as follows.
Assume that a code defined on a finite index set has a normal realization whose graph is finite, connected and cyclefree. In other words, every (ordinary) edge is a cut set.
Assume further that observations are made on all symbols , resulting in a set of input weight vectors

e.g., likelihood vectors with th observation. The weight of a codeword
as the componentwise product

, where is the is then defined

e.g., with likelihood vectors,

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

532

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

The sum-product algorithm computes for every value of every symbol variable the sum

where

is the set of codewords that are consistent with ;

i.e., whose th symbol has value . Similarly, for every value

of every state variable , it computes

Fig. 19. Local configuration for sum-product update rule.

where

is the set of codewords that are consistent with .

If weight vectors are likelihood vectors and codewords are

equiprobable, then the weight vector

is pro-

portional up to a scale factor to the APP vector

. We write this using the notation “ ” (“equivalent up

to scaling”) as

The sum-product algorithm is therefore sometimes called the

APP decoding algorithm [19]. In the context of Bayesian net-

works, it is called belief propagation [34]. In general, we will as-

sume that two weight vectors that are proportional up to scaling

are equivalent.

For the purposes of this development, it is convenient to re-

gard every leaf edge as being terminated by a leaf vertex, as

in the factor graph picture. Leaf edges then become ordinary

edges. For uniformity, we may regard these new ordinary edges

as representing a set of additional state spaces corresponding

to the symbol alphabets . The state (edge) index set thus be-

comes

.

The algorithm is based on two fundamental principles that we

will now develop.

1) (Upstream/Downstream Decomposition): For each , the th edge weight vector is the componentwise
product of “upstream” and “downstream” weight vectors and (see (5.3)), which may be computed inde-
pendently on the two disconnected components of the graph that results from deleting the th edge.

Lemma 5.1 (Cartesian-Product Distributive Law): If and are disjoint discrete sets and and are any two functions defined on and , then

This Cartesian-product distributive law holds whenever

and take values in any commutative semiring and arith-

metic is performed in this semiring (cf. end of this subsection),

and is the fundamental reason why the sum-product algorithm

is “fast,” as pointed out in [1].

Taking

and

in Lemma 5.1, we

conclude that

(5.3)

i.e., the th-edge weight vector is the componentwise product of upstream and downstream weight vectors and
, where, e.g.

To compute weights, the algorithm proceeds iteratively ac-

cording to the following sum-product update rule. Let be the

local code corresponding to the vertex upstream of the th edge.

Let

denote the set of indexes of all other

edges incident on the th vertex; then the set

of code-

words upstream of the th edge that are consistent with is

2) (Sum-Product Update Rule): The components of an upstream weight vector are given by a sum of products of components of the next-further upstream weight vectors, consistent with the upstream local code (see (5.4)).

For the first principle, we use the Cut-Set Decomposition

Lemma (Lemma 4.1). For each

, the th edge is a cut set

whose removal partitions the graph into two disconnected com-

ponents, which we label arbitrarily as “upstream” and “down-

stream.” Every codeword may be correspondingly decom-

posed into upstream and downstream components:

.

By Lemma 4.1, may be decomposed as a union of Cartesian

products

where

and

are the sets of upstream and down-

stream components consistent with , respectively.

We may now apply an elementary Cartesian product lemma:

where

is the set of codewords consistent with

, and

is the set of codewords upstream of the th

edge that are consistent with . This situation is illustrated in

Fig. 19.

Now suppose that we know all upstream weight vectors

. Then, again using Lemma 5.1, it follows

that the components of the weight vector are given by the

following sum-product update rule:

(5.4)

The computational complexity of the sum-product update

rule is evidently proportional to , since for every codeword

in a product of

upstream weight vectors must be

computed and added to a running sum, where is the degree

of the th vertex. This involves

multiplications,

and must be done once for the outgoing edges from .

Therefore, the total number of multiplications associated with

the th node is

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FORNEY: CODES ON GRAPHS: NORMAL REALIZATIONS

533

Note that for a conventional state realization, is the “branch complexity” of the th trellis section, which measures decoding complexity more precisely than the “state complexity” [44].
If the local code is a repetition code, then the sum-product update rule (5.4) reduces to the product update rule

Fig. 20. Sum-product algorithm realized by an I/O layer and a computation layer.

(5.5)

i.e., is just the componentwise product of the upstream weight vectors , all of which have the same alphabet . In many descriptions of the sum-product algorithm for factor graphs, the product update rule is stated as a separate rule for symbol and state vertex updates.

Note further that if a repetition vertex has degree , then there

is only one upstream edge with index , and we have simply

a “pass-through”

with no computation. This ex-

plains why we can suppress degree- repetition vertices (e.g.,

redundant state vertices).

There are many possible schedules for this iteration [27]. In

the sequential schedule, the sum-product update rule is com-

puted at the th edge as soon as all upstream weight vectors are

known. In a finite cycle-free graph, the upstream graph from the

th edge is a tree with finite depth , and the trees from the up-

stream edges have maximum depth

. Therefore, starting

with leaf edges, whose upstream depth is

and whose

upstream weight vector is the input weight vector , all

weight vectors at depth may be computed at the th cycle of

the algorithm. The algorithm completes with the correct answer

in cycles, where the graph diameter is the maximum

depth of any edge in either direction. The sum-product update

rule is computed once for each value of each edge in each di-

rection.

Alternatively, in the parallel schedule, the two weight vectors of every edge are updated on every cycle, using whatever upstream weight vectors are available. Weight vectors at depth
again become correct on the th cycle. The parallel schedule is particularly suitable for asynchronous and even analog implementations [30].

The sum-product algorithm generalizes to any commutative

semiring in which a “sum” and “product” that satisfy the asso-

ciative, distributive, and commutative rules of ordinary arith-

metic can be defined [1], [27]. An important example is the

min-sum semiring

, with “addition” defined as taking

the minimum, and “multiplication” defined as the usual sum;

the additive and multiplicative identities are then and , re-

spectively. In the min-sum semiring, the sum-product algorithm

becomes the min-sum algorithm, which computes for every

where

weights

.

is a componentwise sum of input

If the weights are negative log likelihoods,

, then

, and the min-sum

algorithm becomes a per-symbol maximum-likelihood (ML)

decoding algorithm.

In summary, we have the following theorem.

Theorem 5.2: Given a finite, cycle-free normal graph of di-

ameter

and weight vectors for each symbol variable

, the sum-product algorithm computes the sum of the weights

of all codewords that are consistent with all values of all state

and symbol variables in clock cycles. The weights and the

computations may be in any commutative semiring. One vector

(message) of size is computed and sent each way along the

th edge for each

. The number of computations at the

th vertex is of the order of

, where is the vertex

degree.

From Theorem 5.2, we see that the state complexity is

a measure of the communications complexity, or “bandwidth,”

of the th edge. The computational complexity at the th node is

proportional to the constraint complexity , or more precisely

to

.

B. The Sum-Product Algorithm on Graphs with Cycles

On a graph with cycles, because the sum-product update rule

is local, it may still be used in an iterative decoding algorithm.

One must then specify an initialization rule, a schedule, and a

stopping rule. Optimality is not in general guaranteed, nor even

convergence. However, such approximate iterative sum-product

algorithms often work very well, and indeed are commonly used

to decode capacity-approaching codes such as turbo codes and

LDPC codes.

Alternatively, one may develop a more elaborate exact algo-

rithm by generalizing the sum-product algorithm and its update

rule to more general cut sets.

For example, for any graph with cycles, one can find a con-

figuration of cut sets starting with the empty set “downstream”

and ending with the empty set “upstream,” such that each suc-

cessive cut set moves one vertex from the “downstream” to

the “upstream” side of the cut—i.e., one can sweep a cut-set

boundary through the graph, crossing one vertex at a time. The

sum-product update rule may then be generalized to a rule for

computing weight vectors in terms of previously computed

“upstream” weight vectors

; the resulting algorithm will

be exact. (This idea is closely related to the “junction tree”

method for factor graphs [1].)

However, such a sweep establishes a cycle-free graph struc-

ture on the symbol index set . The sizes of the state spaces

will be at least equal to the sizes of the state spaces in some

conventional state realization (trellis), according to the Cut-Set

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

534

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Fig. 21. Realizations of eight-symbol repetition constraint. (a) Chain (trellis). (b) Tree.

Bound, so the complexity advantage of a realization on a graph with cycles will be lost.
We conjecture that any exact decoding algorithm for a code must be at least as complex as the sum-product algorithm applied to some cycle-free normal graph for (or its dual; see Section IX). Therefore, in general it will be more attractive to use lower complexity graph representations with cycles and approximate iterative decoding, provided that performance is not too poor.

C. Deterministic and Erased Variables

A variable for which only one of the upstream weights

is nonzero will be called (upstream) deterministic, since

is equivalent up to scaling to the probability vector of a

deterministic random variable. If has this property, then so

does , independent of (provided that

for the

for which

), so the downstream weight vector

does not need to be computed.

If all variables in an information set of a local code are up-

stream deterministic, then only one codeword has nonzero up-

stream weight, and the remaining variables in the complemen-

tary check set must also be upstream deterministic.

A variable for which all of the upstream weights

are equal will be called an (upstream) erasure, since is

equivalent up to scaling to the probability vector of an equiprob-

able random variable. If has this property, then is propor-

tional up to scaling to ,

, so up to scale equiva-

lence depends only on the downstream weight vector .

If all variables in a check set of a local code are upstream

erasures, then all codewords have equal upstream weight, and

the remaining variables in the complementary information set

must also be upstream erasures.

Deterministic variables and erasures can thus make compu-

tations of the upstream or downstream components of certain

weight vectors unnecessary. In this sense, they can effectively

convert a undirected graph into a partially directed graph. This

may have the effect of eliminating some or all cycles in the orig-

inal graph, and thus may allow exact decoding of a graph which

is not cycle-free. For example, these properties may allow us to

use a graph with cycles to realize an encoder I/O system, as we

will see in Section VI.

For decoding of graphs with cycles, it may therefore be useful

to let an intelligent supervisor make tentative “hard decisions”

or “erasures” on certain variables, perhaps in various configura-

tions, to speed convergence. Making tentative hard decisions is

called “pinning” in [27].

D. Functional Separation

Normal graphs yield a clean separation of functions in sum-

product decoding.

All computations take place at vertices (local codes). The

function of ordinary edges (states) is purely communications

(message passing). The function of leaf edges (symbols) is

purely input of weight vectors

(“intrinsic informa-

tion”) from observation of symbols , and ultimately output

of weight vectors

(“extrinsic information”) computed

from the rest of the graph. In integrated circuit terminology,

the local codes, state spaces, and symbols represent logic,

interconnect, and I/O, respectively.

Conceptually, one can think of the vertices and ordinary edges

as a “computation layer,” connected by the leaf edges to an “I/O

layer.” Given a set of input weight vectors at the I/O layer,

the computation layer returns a set of weight vectors for each

symbol that have been computed by the sum-product algorithm.

This viewpoint is illustrated in Fig. 20.

E. Decoding Graph Fragments

Another nice feature of the sum-product algorithm is that it

can be executed on any fragment of a graph. Decoding a graph

fragment can then be viewed as a lower level “subroutine” that

may be called during the decoding of the original graph. This

leads to recursive implementations.

In particular, each local code may be realized by a

cycle-free state realization, which may then be decoded exactly

by the sum-product algorithm.

For example, if is an -symbol repetition constraint (i.e.,

in the linear case, an

repetition code), then may be

represented by the conventional state realization of a repetition

code, which is essentially a chain of

three-symbol repeti-

tion codes, as shown in Fig. 21(a). This will be simpler to decode

than one -symbol code [1]. Even better, may be represented

by a binary tree of three-symbol repetition codes, as shown

in Fig. 21(b). Compared to the chain, the tree realization has

the same space complexity, but less time complexity. Similarly

efficient realizations may be used for decoding -symbol SPC

codes.

In Section IV-C, we will show how to decode graph fragments

using dual graphs.

VI. NORMAL REALIZATIONS OF REED–MULLER CODES
At this point we pause to present a family of normal realizations for Reed–Muller (RM) codes. RM codes are known to have rather simple conventional state realizations (trellises), and their minimal state complexity profiles are known [13], [44].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FORNEY: CODES ON GRAPHS: NORMAL REALIZATIONS

535

These realizations are quite efficient: they have space com-

plexity of the order of

and time complexity of the order

of

. They use the simplest possible components: binary

state variables, and

and

local codes. How-

ever, they do have cycles, which degrade decoding performance.

They are nonetheless useful for encoding.

If cycles are removed by clustering, then we obtain somewhat

more complicated cycle-free realizations that meet the Cut-Set

Bound everywhere, and are slightly simpler than the standard

trellis realizations of RM codes. They turn out to specify the

ML decoding algorithms of [13].

Fig. 22. Realization of (A ; A ) = (a ; a + a ).

A. Definition of RM Codes Via Hadamard Transforms

The basic building block of RM codes is the Hadamard

transform over the binary field , defined by the

matrix

Given a binary -tuple

, its Hadamard transform

is the binary -tuple

. In detail,

. Note that

, so the Hadamard transform

of

is

.

The

Hadamard transform is defined by the -fold

tensor product

. For example

Fig. 23. Realization of A + aH .

The weights of the rows of

are powers of , and the

number of rows of weight is the combinatorial coefficient

. Again, is self-inverse.

The RM code RM

of length and minimum distance

is defined as the code generated by the rows of

of weight or greater. In other words, the codewords are the

words

, where the components of the information

vector corresponding to rows of weight less than are zero,

and the remaining components are free.

B. Normal Realizations of RM Encoders

A normal realization of an I/O realization of RM

(an encoder for RM

) may therefore be obtained from

a normal realization of the Hadamard transform relation

, which in turn may be based on realizations of the

elementary

transform

.

Such an elementary realization is shown in Fig. 22. Here there

is one binary state variable , and two constraints

There are three nontrivial RM codes of length , which are obtained by fixing certain of the transform components to zero and letting the others range freely. With these assignments, Fig. 23 becomes an encoder for any of these codes.

i) RM ii) RM
all others free. iii) RM

: free; all others set to zero. :

:

; all others free.

C. Normal Realizations of RM Codes

In the realizations above, both and represent visible sym-

bols. In other words, Fig. 23 is a realization of the full I/O be-

havior

. Particularly for decoding,

we desire a realization of the code

in which only the

code symbols are visible, while the “input symbols” be-

come latent (driving) state variables.

The components of should then be regarded as state edges

connected to degree- local constraints, which restrict them ei-

ther to be zero or to be a free element of . In Fig. 24, degree-

constraint vertices labeled by “0” and “F” indicate zero and free

constraints, respectively. We may then use the following “reduc-

tion rules,” illustrated in Fig. 24.

Note that there are no arrows in this “behavioral” realization.

Both and are information sets; either may be taken as the

“input,” and then its Hadamard transform ( or , respectively)

is the “output.” (Interestingly, this is the controlled-NOT gate,

the standard two-qubit gate of quantum computation [3].)

A realization of the relation

may now be obtained

by connecting

such elementary realizations in tensor

product fashion, as illustrated for

in Fig. 23. Again,

this yields a “fast” realization of either the

Hadamard

transform or its inverse.

a) If b) If c) If d) If e) If

, then

.

, then

.

is free and

, then

.

is free, then

.

and are free, then and are free.

Using these reduction rules, we obtain the reduced realiza-

tions shown in Figs. 25–27.

We note that the realizations of the

and

codes are the minimal binary-tree realizations of repetition and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

536

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Fig. 24. Reduction rules to minimize elementary realizations.

Fig. 25. Reduced realization of (8; 1; 8) code. Fig. 26. Reduced realization of (8; 4; 4) code.

Similar reduced realizations may be developed for all RM

codes. These representations are quite efficient: for a code of

length

, the number of elementary realizations needed

(“space complexity”) is upper-bounded by

, and the

diameter (“time complexity”) is upper-bounded by

.

However, except for SPC and repetition codes, these real-

izations have cycles, whose girth is lower-bounded by . We

therefore do not have good bounds on the number of iterations

needed or on performance with the sum-product decoding algo-

rithm. Performance deteriorates as the codes become more com-

plicated; e.g., decoding simulations of the reduced graph of the

code have shown performance about 1.0 dB worse

than ML decoding [9].

Although they have cycles, these realizations may nonethe-

less be used for encoding. Fig. 29 shows, for example,

how the

realization can implement an encoder

with information set

and check set

by edge directing, as explained in

Section V-C. This technique works for any RM realization of

this type and any information set.

D. Cycle-Free Realizations Via Clustering

Fig. 27. Reduced realization of (8; 7; 2) code.

SPC codes that were illustrated in Fig. 21. They each involve

only six

degree-three, binary-valued constraints of

parity-check or repetition type, respectively. These graphs are

cycle-free, and their diameter is only

.

The realization of the

code is novel, as far as

we know. It involves only 12 degree-three, binary-valued

constraints of parity-check or repetition type, which is likely

to be the most efficient possible for this code. The diameter

is only . However, the graph is not cycle-free. The minimum

cycle girth is . Simulations of iterative sum-product decoding

on this graph have shown performance about 0.2 dB worse than

exact ML decoding [9].

Fig. 28 shows a reduced realization for the

RM

code. It involves 34 degree-three, binary-valued constraints; its

diameter is ; and the minimum girth of any cycle is . Decoding

simulations on this graph have shown performance about 0.4 dB

worse than ML decoding [9].

We now show how these realizations may be made cycle-free

by clustering (“sectionalization”).

Consider the realization of the

code in Fig. 26. We

may obtain an alternative quaternary realization for the

code by clustering as shown in Fig. 30.

If we cluster pairs of bits, then the top-row clusters are in-

consequential, because one incident quaternary variable is just

a permutation of the other. No computation occurs at this level,

just a pass-through of weights with relabeling according to this

permutation.

At the next level, the two clusters may each be regarded as

a realization of a certain simple self-dual

binary linear

block code.

The result is the realization of Fig. 31. The four symbols and

the single state are all -valued. The two constraints are identical

and are defined by a certain

binary code. The realization is

cycle-free, and has maximum constraint (branch) complexity .

Indeed, this is the minimal conventional sectionalized four-state

realization (trellis) for this code (see Fig. 7).

Similarly, we obtain the cycle-free realization for the

code shown in Fig. 32. Here the 4-bit sections

represent

codes, which in turn are represented in “divide-

by- ” fashion. (We omit the inconsequential

codes at the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FORNEY: CODES ON GRAPHS: NORMAL REALIZATIONS

537

Fig. 28. Reduced realization of (16; 5; 8) code.

Fig. 29. Encoder for (8; 4; 4) code.

Fig. 31. Minimal sectionalized realization (trellis) for (8; 4; 4) code.

Fig. 32. Minimal sectionalized realization for (16; 5; 8) code.

Fig. 30. Clustering of (8; 4; 4) realization.

2-bit section level.) Each of the two halves (8-bit sections) is

constrained to lie in the

code. The 3-bit state variable

represents a coset of

in

[13]. The parameters

of each constraint code are as shown.

The Cut-Set Bound is met for all possible cut sets in this re-

alization. Decoding is slightly faster than for the standard min-

imal four-section, eight-state trellis for this code because of the

tree-like “divide-by- ” structure. The dominant constraint codes

have complexity , equal to the maximum branch complexity

in the minimal trellis for this code.

Similarly, by grouping -tuples of bits, we obtain a cycle-free

“four-section, 64-state” realization for the

code that

is shown in Fig. 33. A closely related “three-section, 64-state”

realization for the

Golay code is shown in Fig. 34.

In each case, the dominant constraint complexity is , as in

the minimal trellis for these codes. Again, the Cut-Set Bound is

met everywhere. Note how the

realization cleverly

avoids any cuts that would partition the symbols into two equal

parts, which would require a state complexity of .

It is interesting to notice these realizations specify precisely

the “divide-by- ” ML decoding algorithms that were proposed

in [13] to decode RM codes. These algorithms are slightly more

efficient than Viterbi algorithm decoding of the minimal trellis.

Future work might explore whether there exists some inter-

mediate clustering technique that reduces but does not eliminate

cycles, and that obtains near-ML decoding performance.

Fig. 33. Minimal sectionalized realization for (32; 16; 8) code.
Fig. 34. Minimal sectionalized realization for (24; 12; 8) Golay code.
VII. DUAL CODES AND REALIZATIONS In this section we develop our most fundamental result: dual normal group realizations (suitably defined) generate dual group codes. This result depends on precisely the degree restrictions that characterize normal realizations, and has as corollaries some of the most basic dynamical duality results for linear or group codes and realizations. Our notion of duality is Pontrayagin (character group) duality. Pontryagin duality theory applies to locally compact Abelian (LCA) groups such as finite Abelian groups and real Euclidean -space , and underlies all Fourier analysis [35], [40], [23],

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

538

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

[14]. For linear codes, it reduces to the usual notions of duality in terms of orthogonality.
We will briefly recapitulate some definitions and results from the duality theory of group codes, which extends that of linear codes [17], [18], [15]. Under Pontryagin duality, a group code has a well-defined dual code , which is the usual orthogonal code when is actually linear over a finite field or over .
Our objective is to define a dual to a normal group realization of such that the dual realization necessarily generates the dual code .

A. Pontryagin Duality

We discuss a number of basic dualities of Pontryagin duality

theory: character group duality, orthogonal subgroup duality, di-

rect product duality of two kinds, quotient group duality, and

sum/intersection duality.

The character group of an LCA group is the group

under composition of all continuous homomorphisms

from into the complex unit circle . The fundamental Pon-

tryagin duality theorem is that is LCA and that the character

group of may be taken as :

. Indeed, if one defines

a “pairing”

by

, then the char-

acters

of are precisely the characters defined by

.

If is isomorphic to a finite cyclic group , then its char-

acter group is isomorphic to , and the pairing

may

be written explicitly as

, where

is a

complex th root of unity, both and are identified with

, and the product is taken in . Similarly, if

,

then its character group is isomorphic to , and the pairing

may be written explicitly as the Fourier kernel

.

In these two cases, and are isomorphic; however, this is

not true in general. For example, by quotient group duality (see

below), the character group of the integers is the torus . In

general, the character group of a discrete group is compact and

vice versa, so the character group of a discrete group is discrete

if and only if it is also compact, i.e., finite.

If

is the direct product of a finite collection

of LCA groups

, then its character group is

the direct product

of the corresponding

character groups

. Each group element may

be written as

, each character may be written

as

, and the pairing

may be written

componentwise as

Since every finite Abelian group is a finite direct product

of finite cyclic groups , it follows that its

character group

is isomorphic to itself.

Similarly, the character group of is isomorphic to .

If and are dual character groups, then

and

are said to be orthogonal if

(the identity of ). If is

a subgroup of , then the orthogonal subgroup (annihilator) of

is the set of all

that are orthogonal to all . The

second basic Pontryagin duality theorem is that is a closed

subgroup of , and that is the closure of in .

We will therefore consider only closed subgroups in this

paper. In particular, we will refine our definition of a group

code

to require to be a closed subgroup of the direct

product group in its natural topology. In the case of finite

Abelian block codes, the topology of is discrete, and all

subgroups are closed.

With this condition, the orthogonal subgroup of is :

. Thus, a closed subgroup

is completely char-

acterized by its orthogonal subgroup

.

If

is the direct product of a finite collection

of subgroups

, then its orthogonal sub-

group is the direct product

of the

corresponding orthogonal groups

.

Another elementary duality result is that if

and

are orthogonal subgroups, then may be identified with

the character group of the quotient group , so is isomor-

phic to . In the finite Abelian case, this implies

.

More generally, if

, then

, and

is isomorphic to . We call this quotient group du-

ality. In the finite Abelian case, this implies

.

Finally, if and are subgroups of and and are the

orthogonal subgroups in , then the sum

(the smallest

closed subgroup containing both and ) and the intersection

are orthogonal subgroups, as are

and

.

If all groups are -ary groups (i.e., isomorphic to

for

some prime ), then all groups may be regarded as vector spaces

over the -ary field , and all subgroups as linear subspaces.

The group definitions of orthogonality and duality then reduce

to the standard definitions for linear vector spaces over .

B. Dual Configuration Spaces and Dual Codes

If

is a group symbol configuration space

defined on a finite index set with LCA symbol alphabets

, then the dual symbol configuration space is

defined as its character group

, where is the

character group of .

If

is a (closed) subgroup of , then the dual group

code is defined as the orthogonal subgroup

. In the

finite Abelian case, we have

by quotient group

duality. We will say that is high-rate if

and low-rate

if

.

Note that duality of configuration spaces is defined in a char-

acter group sense, whereas duality of group codes is defined in

an orthogonal subgroup sense.

Two simple but useful examples of dual group codes are the

following.

1) If

(the universe code), then

(the trivial

code containing only the all-zero codeword

). This

follows since there is only one character orthogonal to

all elements of a group , which is called the principal

character and denoted by

.

2) If

and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FORNEY: CODES ON GRAPHS: NORMAL REALIZATIONS

539

(the repetition code of length over ), then and

Fig. 35. Normal graphs of (CjD) and (C jD ) .

(the zero-sum code of length over ). This follows

since for

, by the bihomomorphic properties of

characters

Now let

be a group code defined on , and let

be a group code defined on . Define the con-

ditioned code

to be the projection onto of the set of

all codewords in whose projection onto is in

which equals for all

if and only if

principal character

.

It is clear that a conditioned code is a group code.

Note that we may write

as either a projection or a

is the cross section

(Note: The technical difficulty with an infinite index set

is that the character group of an infinite direct product

,

with an appropriate product topology, is the infinite direct sum

, namely the set of all elements in the direct product

that have only a finite number of nonzero components,

with an appropriate sum topology [24]. Our duality theorems

remain true in the infinite case if we impose a global finiteness

restriction in either the primal or dual domain; however, such a

global restriction cannot be depicted in graphical models.)

C. Conditioned Code Duality

We now state a new fundamental lemma from which will

follow all of our duality results.

We first prove a special case of this lemma, called projec-

tion/cross-section duality. In this subsection, the symbol index

set will be denoted simply by , and will be partitioned into two

disjoint subsets . We write

, with

un-

derstood implicitly. We recall that

denotes

the projection of onto , and

denotes the cross section of in .

Theorem 7.1 (Projection/Cross-Section Duality): If and

are dual group codes defined on a partitioned index set

, then the cross section and the projection

are

dual group codes.

Proof: Because pairings are defined componentwise, we

have

We therefore have the following logical chain:
where we have used the definition of the cross section , orthogonal subgroup duality, and the fact that respectively.

since, by definition,

if and only if there is some

such that

.

For example, the projection is equal to the conditioned

code

, and the cross section is equal to the condi-

tioned code

.

Our fundamental lemma is then as follows.

Theorem 7.2 (Conditioned Code Duality): If and are

dual group codes defined on a partitioned index set

and and are dual group codes defined on , then the con-

ditioned codes

and

are dual group codes.

Proof: We have the following duality chain:

where we have used one definition for

, projec-

tion/cross-section duality, sum/intersection duality, direct

product duality (with

), and, finally, a

second definition for

.

Fig. 35 illustrates the dual conditioned codes

and

by normal graphs. These graphs are examples of the

dual graphs that will be defined in the next subsection.

D. Dual Realizations and Dual Graphs

Let a normal realization for be given with symbol variables

, state variables

, and local codes

, where the index subsets of the symbol and state

variables that are involved in the th local code are

and

, respectively. We now aim to define a dual realization in

such a way that the dual realization necessarily generates the

dual code .

It is natural to attempt to define such a dual realization as

follows.

1) The dual symbol alphabets are the duals (character

groups)

of the primal symbol alpha-

bets.

2) The dual state alphabets are the duals (character groups) of the primal state alphabets.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

540

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Fig. 36. Modifying a state edge by inserting a repetition vertex.

3) The dual local codes are the duals (orthogonal subgroups)

of the primal local codes, where the

index subsets of the symbols and state spaces that are

involved in the th local code

are again

and

, respectively.

This realization is evidently normal. Its graph has the same

topology as the graph of the primal realization. The alphabets

of the variables are replaced by their character groups, and the

local codes labeling the vertices are replaced by their dual (or-

thogonal) codes. We recall that the character group of a finite

Abelian group or of a vector space over a finite field is isomor-

phic to the original alphabet.

Unfortunately, this realization does not always generate the

dual code (except when all groups are binary). We also need

a trick that was used by Mittelholzer [33] to construct dual con-

ventional state realizations (trellises): invert the sign of each

dual state space

in precisely one of its two appearances

in the dual local codes . The mathematical necessity for this

sign inversion will become apparent below.

To describe this trick precisely, let us replace each state vari-

able by two replicas and with the same alphabet

in the two local codes in which it is involved, where the choice

between and may be made arbitrarily, and then require

that the two replicas be equal. The original realization is thus

modified as follows.

1) The symbol variables are still

.

2) The state variables are now

and

.

3) The local codes now include both the original local codes

and also length-2 repetition codes

, which impose the constraints

.

Each state variable or is now involved in one local

code and one repetition code .

Graphically, this amounts to replacing each state edge by

the concatenation of a new state edge , a degree- repetition

constraint

, and a new state edge , as shown in

Fig. 36. The resulting realization is still normal and still gener-

ates the same code, although it now has a redundant repetition

vertex in the middle of each edge.

The dual realization is now defined as follows.

1) The dual symbol alphabets are the duals of the primal symbol alphabets.
2) The dual state variables are the duals

Fig. 37. Dualizing a state edge; a sign inverter appears in the middle of the dual edge.

tively. Since the dual of a repetition code is a zero-sum

code, the dual codes

impose the constraints

, where

.

In the graph of the dual realization, a state edge in the original

realization is thus replaced by the concatenation of a state edge

, a degree- zero-sum constraint

, and

a state edge . We call such a constraint a sign inverter, and

depict it as shown in Fig. 37.

The code generated by the modified original realization may

be characterized as follows:

Observe that has the form of a conditioned code , where

•

denotes the set of

all local code constraints ;

that satisfy

•

is the length- repetition code over that

enforces the equality

.

Moreover, because the codes have no variables in common, all constraints are independent; i.e., is simply the direct product

In other words, the code is generated by the graph obtained

by cutting every ordinary edge in the original graph for into

two half-edges, thus creating a completely disconnected graph

in which every local code and its associated half-edges lies

in a distinct disconnected component. The relation then glues

the two half-edges of a cut edge back together via a repetition

vertex, thus reconstructing a graph for

that is

equivalent to the original graph. This sequence of transforma-

tions is depicted in Fig. 38.

Similarly, the code generated by the dual realization has

the form of a conditioned code

, where

•

denotes the set of

that

satisfy all constraints

;

•

is the length- zero-sum code over that

enforces the equality

.

and

of the primal state alphabets.

3) The dual local codes are the duals

and

of the primal local codes, respec-

Again, in the codes

have no variables in common, so

is simply the direct product

. But by direct

product duality, this is the dual of :

. Similarly, is

the dual of :

. Thus,

, which, by

conditioned code duality, implies that

.

Therefore, we have proved our main result.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FORNEY: CODES ON GRAPHS: NORMAL REALIZATIONS

541

Fig. 38. Transformations. (a) A graph for C. (b) A graph for P. (c) A graph for (PjR) .

Fig. 39. Reduction rules for sign inverters.

Theorem 7.3 (Dual Realizations Generate Dual Codes): If

and are codes generated by dual normal realizations as

defined above, then and are dual codes:

.

Note that the restrictions that symbol variables have degree

and state variables have degree are essential to Theorem 7.3;

i.e., it can hold only for normal realizations.

Theorem 7.3 is remarkable for its generality. In particular, it

is one of the few general theorems known for codes generated

by graphs with cycles.

If all groups are binary, so that

, then Theorem 7.3

holds for our original attempt at a dual realization, since it differs

from our ultimate dual realization only by sign inversions.

The graph of the dual realization is called the dual graph. It

is the same as the graph of the original realization, except that

alphabets of variables are replaced by their character groups (if

necessary), codes are replaced by their dual codes, and sign in-

verters are inserted into edges as shown in Fig. 37 (if necessary).

In the linear or finite Abelian cases, alphabets are unchanged,

and in the binary case, inverters are unnecessary. Thus, given a

normal graph realizing a code , a dual graph that realizes

may be obtained by trivial graphical manipulations.

The following rules may be used to minimize proliferation of

sign inverters (see Fig. 39).

• Sign inverters may be inserted into every edge incident

on any vertex; this has no effect since

for any

Abelian group code .

• Two consecutive sign inverters are equivalent to a repetition vertex and may be suppressed.

VIII. APPLICATIONS
Theorem 7.3 has innumerable applications. In this section we give some examples.

A. Dual Trellises, State Spaces, Tail-Biting Trellises, and RM Codes
Theorem 8.1 (Dual Minimal Cycle-Free Realizations): Let and be dual group codes. Let have a minimal realization on a cycle-free graph. Then has a minimal realization on the

same graph, in which the state spaces are the character groups of the primal state spaces.
Proof: The existence of such a dual realization for follows directly from Theorem 7.3. Moreover, each state space in the dual realization is necessarily as small as possible, else the dual of the dual realization would be a realization for with smaller state spaces than a minimal realization on that graph, which is impossible.

Again, we remind the reader that in the linear or finite Abelian cases, the character group of is isomorphic to , so that the same state spaces may be used in the dual realization.

Corollary 8.2 (Dual Trellises): (Mittelholzer [33]) Let and be dual group codes over finite Abelian groups. A minimal
trellis for is obtained by dualizing a minimal trellis for . Both minimal trellises have the same state complexity profile. The constraints (trellis sections) for are the duals of the constraints for .
Proof: Specialize the previous theorem to trellises and finite Abelian groups.

Corollary 8.3 (Dual State Spaces): Let and be dual

group codes defined on . Let

be any two-way par-

tition of the index set , and let the corresponding

-in-

duced state space of be . Then the

-induced state

space of is isomorphic to the character group of .

Proof: Specialize the previous theorem to any cycle-free

graph in which there exists an edge whose removal induces the

given two-way partition.

Theorem 8.3 is not difficult to prove directly using quotient group duality and projection/cross-section duality [18], [17], [15], but it is interesting that it falls out of this general development.

Theorem 8.4 (Dual Tail-Biting Realizations): Let and be dual group codes. Suppose that has a tail-biting realization with state spaces . Then has a tail-biting realization with state spaces .
Proof: Follows directly from Theorem 7.3.

Theorem 8.5 (Dual RM Codes):

RM

RM

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

542

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Fig. 40. (a) Tanner graph. (b) Normal Tanner graph. (c) Dual Tanner graph.

Fig. 41. Realizations of (a) encoder for C and (b) syndrome-former for C.

Proof: Consider the realizations for RM

and

RM

given in Section VI. It can be seen by

inspection that dualizing one (by interchanging repetition and

zero-sum (parity-check) constraints, as well as free and zero

inputs) gives the left–right mirror image of the other. Therefore,

the two realizations are dual and must generate dual codes.

B. Duals to Tanner Graphs, Encoders, and Syndrome Formers

Two related realizations are illustrated in Fig. 41. If we make the input symbols of Fig. 40(c) visible, then we obtain a realization of an input/output system (“encoder”) for :
The dual of this realization realizes an I/O system called a “syndrome-former” for :

A Tanner graph is a factor graph without state variables. An

parity-check matrix for an

binary linear

block code is a binary matrix such that

These dual realizations are a special case of the more general dual I/O systems to be discussed in the next subsection.
C. Adjoints and Dual I/O Systems

The parity-check matrix realization for leads to a Tanner graph

with binary symbol variables, SPC local codes representing

the rows (parity checks) of , and edges corresponding to

the nonzero entries of , as illustrated in Fig. 40(a).

The corresponding normal graph is illustrated in Fig. 40(b).

SPC codes are designated by a “ ” symbol, while repetition

codes are as usual designated by “ .”

Since the dual of an SPC code is a repetition code and vice

versa, the dual to this normal Tanner graph is the normal graph

shown in Fig. 40(c), which we will call a dual Tanner graph. By

regarding the binary state variables associated with each of the

repetition constraints as “inputs,” we see that the dual Tanner

graph generates the dual

binary linear block code

, whose generator matrix is . The SPC

vertices serve to sum the contributions to each of the code

symbols from each of the inputs.

Note that this dual “generator-matrix” realization cannot be

represented by a Tanner graph.

In behavioral system theory, realizations such as those in

Fig. 40(b) and (c) are called “kernel” and “image” representa-

tions, respectively. The next subsection will discuss the duality

between kernels and images in a more general setting.

In this subsection we show that the dual of a homomorphic

I/O system is the adjoint I/O system, with inputs and outputs

trading places. For linear systems, these results are classical.

The adjoint of a homomorphism

is the unique ho-

momorphism

such that

for all

. The adjoint character

is simply the

unique character in whose values are given by

. Evidently the adjoint of is :

.

Now let us consider a group code

for which the

first symbol is an information set. Then is isomorphic to ,

and may be written in the form of an I/O system

where the I/O map The dual code

is a homomorphism. is then evidently

since and only if

is orthogonal to all codewords in if

for all

but this implies

by the definition of the adjoint .

Fig. 42 shows block diagrams of the I/O system representing

and the dual I/O system representing . Note that in the dual

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FORNEY: CODES ON GRAPHS: NORMAL REALIZATIONS

543

Fig. 42. Block-diagram realizations of (a) homomorphic I/O system and (b) dual I/O system.

Fig. 43. Dual graphs for image and kernel representations, showing Im ' =
0! 0! ! 00!! ! (Ker ' )

Fig. 44. Block-diagram realizations of homomorphism G

V U; and adjoint U^ V^ = U^=V

(G=K)^ = K

G=K G^.

system the I/O map is replaced by its negative adjoint , the input and output are interchanged, and the directions of all edges are reversed. An arrow has been placed on each block to indicate the direction of the homomorphism.
In a group block diagram, all edges are directed, and every block may be written as a homomorphic I/O system as above by letting be the direct product of all input alphabets and be the direct product of all output alphabets. We thus arrive at the following general prescription for dualizing a group block diagram.

1) Replace all homomorphisms by their negative adjoints, and reverse their direction.
2) Replace all edge alphabets by their character groups, and reverse each edge direction.
3) Put sign inverters in the middle of all internal edges.

By Theorem 7.3, the dual block diagram then generates the dual

code (system).

As we shall see in an example below, if the primal system is

causal, then I/O reversal makes the dual system anticausal. In

order to represent the dual system as a causal system, we must

reverse the direction of time (negate time indexes

).

Thus, the well-known principle of time reversal in dual systems

fundamentally follows from I/O reversal.

A fundamental duality result for adjoints is that the kernel

of a homomorphism is the dual (orthogonal subgroup) of the

image of its adjoint , and vice versa. This result follows di-

rectly from Theorem 7.3 applied to the dual graphs shown in

Fig. 43. In system theory, these are called image and kernel rep-

resentations of Im and Ker , respectively. Fig. 41(c) and (b)

are examples of standard image (generator-matrix) and kernel

(parity-check-matrix) representations in a coding context.

We next consider three elementary types of homomorphisms

and their adjoints, and show how every homomorphism and its

adjoint can be built up from such elementary homomorphisms.

Consider first an isomorphism ; then its adjoint is

evidently also an isomorphism. Consider next a natural map

; then its adjoint is the injection

,

where is identified with the character group

of

. (This follows from the fact that the characters in are

constant on the cosets of in ,

for all

, which is essentially why may be taken

as the character group of

.) Similarly, the adjoint of an

injection

is the natural map

, where

acts as the character group of .

By the fundamental theorem of homomorphisms, any homo-

morphism

with kernel and image may be

Fig. 45. Block diagram of (A; B; C; D) input/state/output realization.

written as the composition of a natural map

,

an isomorphism from

to , and an injection

.

A block diagram is shown in Fig. 44. By block-diagram duality,

the adjoint

may correspondingly be written as the

composition of a natural map

, an iso-

morphism from

to

, and an injection

, as shown also in Fig. 44. (Sign inverters have

been minimized.)

Notice again that the kernel of is the dual of the image

of , and the image of is the dual of the kernel of

.

For another example, consider the standard

-

matrix linear input/state/output realization over a field given

by the equations

where

and are state -tuples, is an input -tuple,

is an output -tuple, and

are matrices of ap-

propriate dimension.

A block diagram of this realization is shown in Fig. 45. Note

that explicit three-symbol repetition vertices are used in place of

“degree- hyperedges.” We also convert each ordinary block-

diagram adder representing, e.g.,

to a

zero-sum constraint followed by a sign-inverter, representing,

e.g.,

.

To dualize this block diagram, we use the fact that the adjoint

of a matrix homomorphism, for example,

is the

transpose matrix homomorphism, for example,

We also use the duality between repetition and zero-sum

constraints, and the sign inverter reduction rules given in Sec-

tion VII-D. We then obtain the dual block diagram of Fig. 46.

Fig. 46 has the same functional form as Fig. 45. If we reverse

the direction of time in the dual diagram (negate time indexes)

to make the system causal, then Fig. 46 represents the linear

input/state/output realization given by the equations

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

544

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

Fig. 47. Realization of general two-symbol group code C.

Fig. 46. Block diagram of dual input/state/output realization.

Fig. 48. Alternative realization of general two-symbol group code C.

where

and

are state -tuples,

is an input

-tuple,

is an output -tuple, and

are the dual

matrices.

Note that even if the

matrices vary with time,

this procedure still realizes the dual system. This observation

generalizes the usual result for linear time-invariant systems.

The same development clearly holds when inputs, states, and

outputs are LCA groups, and

are group homo-

morphisms, if

denote negative ad-

joints. (Such systems were studied under the rubric “finite group

homomorphic sequential systems in [7].) However, homomor-

phic block diagrams are not the most general realization of a

group code; see next subsection. Indeed, canonical state real-

izations need not be homomorphic [16].

the dual state space theorem [18], [17], [15], but the situation becomes completely transparent in this pictorial proof based on Theorem 7.3.
(Parenthetically, the appearance of the sign inverter in Fig. 49 hints at the difficulties that are encountered in generalizing these results to the non-Abelian case.)

E. A Behavioral Control Theorem and Its Dual

As a final application, we rederive, sharpen, and dualize a

pretty behavioral control theorem of Trentelman and Willems

[43]. Recall the definition of a conditioned code

, illus-

trated in Fig. 35(a)

D. General Two-Symbol Group Codes

Now let

be a general two-symbol group code.

cannot be represented as an I/O system unless the projection

onto the first or the second coordinate is an isomorphism. (This

is an example of how behavioral realizations are more general

than block-diagram realizations.)

The general situation is completely described by the State

Space Theorem. Let be the projection of onto the first co-

ordinate, and the cross section. Similarly, let be the projec-

tion of onto the second coordinate, and the cross section.

Then

is a codeword in if and only if

,

, and the coset

of in corresponds to the coset

of in under the natural isomorphism of the State

Space Theorem.

A graph of a realization of according to this description

is shown in Fig. 47. All of the blocks (vertices) in the graph

are elementary homomorphic I/O systems, but the graph cannot

be made into a block diagram in general because there is no

consistent way of directing the edges unless

and

, or alternatively

and

.

Fig. 48 shows an alternative, equivalent realization, in which

the injective and natural map blocks have been interchanged

on each side. This makes no difference; we may generate, e.g.,

by first restricting to and then reducing modulo , or,

equivalently, by first reducing modulo and then restricting

to .

By dualizing Fig. 48, we obtain a realization for as shown

in Fig. 49. All but one sign inverter in the dual realization has

been eliminated.

The dual realization again has the form of Fig. 47. We see that

the projections onto the first and second coordinates are and

, the cross sections are and , and the state space is

isomorphic to

or

; i.e., to the character group

of the primal state space. All of this was already known from

In a control context, we make the following interpretation.

• is the behavior of a linear or group I/O system, called a plant;

• are a set of observable variables, called the to-becontrolled variables;

•

are a set of connectable variables, called the control

variables;

• is the behavior of a controller with variables ;

•

is the controlled behavior after the controller is

connected to the plant.

The question is, given the full behavior , what controlled

behaviors

are possible? In view of the coset decompo-

sition (4.2) of the State Space Theorem, the answer is clear.

Theorem 8.6: Let be a linear or group plant behavior gov-

erning a set of variables partitioned into to-be-controlled vari-

ables and control variables , and let

be

the -induced state space of , where and are, respec-

tively, the projection and cross section of onto . Then a con-

trolled behavior

is achievable by choice of a controller

behavior if and only if

is a union of cosets of in

.

Proof: In view of (4.2), any collection of cosets of in

may be determined by selecting the corresponding collec-

tion of cosets of in as control variables. Conversely, no

finer partition of nor addition to the to-be-controlled variables

is possible.

Evidently, the maximal controlled behavior

is the

projection , which is obtained if the controller behavior is

free, i.e.,

if

, and the minimal con-

trolled behavior

is a single coset of the cross section

, which is obtained if the controller behavior is unary (deter-

ministic); e.g.,

if

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FORNEY: CODES ON GRAPHS: NORMAL REALIZATIONS

545

Fig. 49. Dual realization of dual two-symbol group code C .

If we require that the controller behavior be a linear or group behavior, then we obtain the theorem of Trentelman and Willems [43], extended to the group case.

Theorem 8.7 [43]: Let be a linear or group plant behavior

governing a set of variables partitioned into to-be-controlled

variables and control variables , and let

be the -induced state space of , where and are, re-

spectively, the projection and cross section of onto . Then, a

controlled behavior

is achievable by choice of a linear

or group controller behavior if and only if

is a group

and

Proof: If is a group, then the conditioned code

is a group. Since

, (4.2) implies that

. Conversely, if

is a group and

, then the collection of cosets of

corresponding to

is a subgroup of .

As noted in [43], this theorem implies that control problems may be reduced to finding an acceptable controlled behavior
that lies between given minimal and maximal controlled behaviors and ; an explicit controller need not be found.
Finally, by projection/cross-section duality, we have the following duality between minimal and maximal controlled behaviors.

Theorem 8.8: Let be a linear or group plant behavior gov-

erning a set of variables partitioned into to-be-controlled vari-

ables and control variables , and let and be the

maximal and minimal controlled behaviors, respectively. Then

the minimal and maximal controlled behaviors of the dual plant

behavior are

and

, respectively. Thus, a con-

trolled behavior

is achievable by choice of a linear

or group controller behavior if and only if

is a

group and

.

is primarily to simplify exposition; analogous results hold for general LCA groups.
A. Fourier Transforms and the Poisson Summation Formula The Fourier transform of a real- or complex-valued function of a group is the function
of its character group defined by

where

is the Fourier kernel defined previously

[15].

The key to the use of the dual graph to compute APPs is the

powerful and general Poisson Summation Formula (also the key

to the MacWilliams identities), which says that the sum of a

function over a subgroup

is proportional to the sum of

its Fourier transform over the orthogonal subgroup

[15].

Theorem 9.1 (Poisson Summation Formula): Let

be a real- or complex-valued function defined on a

finite Abelian group , let

be its Fourier trans-

form, and let

and

be orthogonal subgroups.

Then

B. The Sum-Product Algorithm on the Dual Realization

As previously noted, if all code configurations

are

equiprobable, then the th APP vector

given an observed vector is proportional to (written )

(9.1)

IX. DUALIZING THE SUM-PRODUCT ALGORITHM
On a conventional state realization (trellis), the sum-product algorithm is called the “BCJR” or “forward–backward” algorithm. Several authors [22], [2], [21], [39] have observed that APPs can be computed for binary linear codes by transforming the likelihood weights and running the BCJR algorithm on the dual-code trellis, which can be simpler when the dual code is low-rate. Berkmann has extended this result to linear codes over nonbinary fields [4] and over rings [5].
Here we generalize this result to any cycle-free normal group realization of any finite Abelian group code . The cycle-free condition is required in order that the sum-product algorithm be an exact APP decoding algorithm. The finite Abelian condition

where the indicator function

restricts the sum to

. We assume as before that the

channel is memoryless so that

, where

is the th intrinsic information vector.

Since the input weight

appears in every term in (9.1),

we may extract it and write

, where

are the components of the th extrinsic information vector [21].
Viewed as a black box, the sum-product algorithm operating on a finite cycle-free graph takes the intrinsic information vector

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

546

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

nents. While such a change in range may not cause problems in a digital implementation, it could pose problems in analog implementations of the sum-product algorithm as in [30].
If the symbol alphabets are two-valued, then since

a two-valued likelihood vector can be represented simply by

the likelihood ratio

. Since the Fourier transform

of

is

Fig. 50. Computing APPs using the sum-product algorithm on the dual graph.
as its input at the th I/O terminal, and in a finite time returns the extrinsic information vector , as illustrated in Fig. 20.
Applying the Poisson Summation Formula, we have

where

and

are, respectively, the Fourier

transforms of

and

, and we have noted that

the Fourier transform of a product function

is the corresponding product function, namely

this leads to the “tanh rule” for transforming likelihood ratios [22], [2], [21]

which is its own inverse (i.e.,

). Note,

however, that the range of is

, whereas the range of its

transform is

.

Note also that a deterministic likelihood vector transforms to

an erasure, and vice versa. This general property holds also for

nonbinary variables.

C. Dualizing the Sum-Product Update Rule
The sum-product algorithm may be used to decode any cycle-free graph fragment. Therefore, the Fourier transform method of the previous section may be used to compute the sum-product update rule, as previously observed in [37].
In words, the dual sum-product update rule can be expressed as follows.

Explicitly, we can evaluate the transform of

as

Breaking up the sum over

into terms for which

for each

, we obtain

1) Transform the upstream weight vectors

Fourier transforms

.

to their

2) Execute the sum-product update rule (5.4), using the

transforms

and the dual local code .

3) Transform the resulting vector to obtain a vector proportional to the weight vector .

This yields the following equation, which we call the dual sum-product update rule: (9.2)

where we define

Now observe that is the th extrinsic information vector

for the dual code if the likelihood weight vectors are .

Thus, (9.2) expresses the primal extrinsic information vector

as the Fourier transform of the dual extrinsic information vector

.

It follows that we can compute APPs using the sum-product

algorithm on the dual graph if we simply Fourier-transform the

intrinsic (likelihood) vector inputs and the extrinsic information

vector outputs as shown in Fig. 50.

It should be noted that the transformed likelihood vectors may

take values in a different range than the original likelihood vec-

tors, which are nonnegative real. Unless the alphabet groups are

all binary (isomorphic to

for some ), the transformed

likelihoods will, in general, be complex; even if they are bi-

nary, their transforms will, in general, have negative compo-

(9.3)

The dual sum-product update rule may be less complex than

the sum-product update rule if is a high-rate code and Fourier

transforms are easy to compute. For example, if is a binary

SPC code, then the input weight may be trans-

formed by the “tanh rule,” and the dual sum-product update rule

may be executed by a simple componentwise multiplication, be-

cause the dual code is a simple binary

repetition

code.

When the sum-product algorithm is used for APP decoding, it

suffices to compute weight vectors up to a scale factor. If exact

weight vectors are desired, then the exact scale factor may be

obtained from the Poisson Summation Formula.

X. CONCLUSION
Normal realizations lead to graphical representations of codes that are nicer than factor graphs in some respects. There

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FORNEY: CODES ON GRAPHS: NORMAL REALIZATIONS

547

is only one vertex type, and there are no topological restrictions. A clean functional separation is obtained between operations in the sum-product decoding algorithm. Computational complexity is associated entirely with vertices, and is appropriately measured by the sizes of local codes. Edges are sites for cuts and for communication between graph components; these properties accord with the essence of the system-theoretic notion of “state.”
Most strikingly, we have shown that duals of normal realizations generate dual codes. We have seen that this fundamental result underlies a great many other duality results.
It would be interesting to explore new classes of code constructions using normal realizations. Any such code may be decoded with iterative versions of the sum-product algorithm. Careful deployment of state spaces may yield simpler realizations and better decoding performance.
For example, with classical LDPC codes, there are no explicit state spaces, and all implicit state spaces are binary. We believe that the performance improvements observed from using nonbinary symbol alphabets [11] may be attributable to the implicit use of larger state spaces. (However, we note that near-capacity results have now been obtained [38], [10] with binary LDPC codes.) Similarly, turbo codes might benefit by using nonbinary state spaces to connect component codes.
Finally, one would like to define classes of canonical realizations on graphs with cycles that are in some sense “minimal.” The work of [25] on minimal tail-biting realizations shows that this will not be a straightforward problem.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author is grateful to R. Koetter, F. R. Kschischang, H.-A. Loeliger, T. Mittelholzer, D. Spielman, N. Wiberg, and A. Vardy for various comments and suggestions, particularly to H.-A. Loeliger and T. Mittelholzer for pointers to [33], to F. R. Kschischang and D. Spielman for proofs of the results of Section IX in the binary case, to A. Vardy for a proof of the nonexistence of a conjectured tetrahedral realization of the binary Golay code, and to S.-Y. Chung for the RM decoding simulations reported in Section VI. He would also like to thank the authors of [1] for preprints of their papers, and the reviewers for their helpful comments.

REFERENCES

[1] S. M. Aji and R. J. McEliece, “The generalized distributive law,” IEEE

Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 46, pp. 325–343, Mar. 2000.

[2] G. Battail, M. C. Decouvalære, and P. Godlewski, “Replication de-

coding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-25, pp. 332–345, May

1979.

[3] C. H. Bennett and P. W. Shor, “Quantum information theory,” IEEE

Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 44, pp. 2724–2742, Oct. 1998.

[4] J. Berkmann, “On turbo decoding of nonbinary codes,” IEEE Commun.

Lett., vol. 2, pp. 94–96, Apr. 1998.

[5]

, “A symbol-by-symbol MAP decoding rule for linear codes over

rings using the dual code,” in Proc. 1998 IEEE Intl. Symp. Information

Theory, Cambridge, MA, Aug. 1998, p. 90.

[6] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit

error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo codes (I),” in Proc. ICC

’93, Geneva, Switzerland, June 1993, pp. 1064–1070.

[7] R. W. Brockett and A. S. Willsky, “Finite group homomorphic sequential

systems,” IEEE Trans. Automat. Contr., vol. AC-17, pp. 483–490, 1972.

[8] A. R. Calderbank, G. D. Forney Jr., and A. Vardy, “Minimal tail-biting

trellises: The Golay code and more,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol.

45, pp. 1435–1455, July 1999.

[9] S.-Y. Chung, private communication, 1999.

[10] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney Jr., T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On

the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB from the

Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., submitted for publication.

[11] M. C. Davey and D. J. C. MacKay, “‘Low-density parity-check codes
over GF (q),” IEEE Commun. Letters, vol. 2, pp. 165–167, June 1998.

[12] D. Divsalar, H. Jin, and R. J. McEliece, “Coding theorems for ‘turbo-

like’ codes,” in Proc. 1998 Allerton Conf. Communication, Control and

Computers, Allerton, IL, Sept. 1998, pp. 201–210.

[13] G. D. Forney Jr., “Coset codes—II: Binary lattices and related codes,”

IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 34, pp. 1152–1187, Sept. 1988.

[14]

, “Transforms and groups,” in Codes, Curves and Signals: Common

Threads in Communications, A. Vardy, Ed. Norwood, MA: Kluwer,

1998, ch. 7.

[15]

, “Group codes and behaviors,” in Dynamical Systems, Control,

Coding, Computer Vision, G. Picci and D. S. Gilliam, Eds. Zürich,

Switzerland: Birkhauser, 1999, pp. 301–320.

[16] G. D. Forney Jr. and M. D. Trott, “The dynamics of group codes: State

spaces, trellis diagrams and canonical encoders,” IEEE Trans. Inform.

Theory, vol. 39, pp. 1491–1513, Sept. 1993.

[17]

, “Controllability, observability and duality in behavioral group sys-

tems,” in Proc. 34th Conf. Decision and Control, vol. 3, New Orleans,

LA, Dec. 1995, pp. 3259–3264.

[18]

, “The dynamics of group codes: Dual abelian group codes and

systems,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, submitted for publication.

[19] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform.

Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.

[20]

, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,

1963.

[21] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of binary

block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42,

pp. 429–445, Mar. 1996.

[22] C. R. Hartmann and L. D. Rudolph, “An optimum symbol-by-symbol

decoding rule for linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-22,

pp. 514–517, Sept. 1976.

[23] E. Hewitt and K. A. Ross, Abstract Harmonic Analysis I, 2nd ed. New

York: Springer, 1979.

[24] S. Kaplan, “Extension of the Pontrjagin duality—I: Infinite products,”

Duke Math. J., vol. 15, pp. 649–658, 1948.

[25] R. Kötter and A. Vardy, “Factor graphs: Construction, classification

and bounds,” in Proc. 1998 IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory,

Cambridge, MA, Aug. 1998, p. 14.

[26] F. R. Kschischang and B. J. Frey, “Iterative decoding of compound codes

by probability propagation in graphical models,” IEEE J. Select. Areas

Commun., vol. 16, pp. 219–230, Feb. 1998.

[27] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and

the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp.

498–519, Feb. 2001.

[28] H.-A. Loeliger, G. D. Forney Jr., T. Mittelholzer, and M. D. Trott,

“Minimality and observability in group systems,” Linear Alg. Appl.,

vol. 205–206, pp. 937–963, July 1994.

[29] H.-A. Loeliger and T. Mittelholzer, “Convolutional codes over groups,”

IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 1660–1686, Nov. 1996.

[30] H.-A. Loeliger, F. Lustenberger, M. Helfenstein, and F. Tarköy, “Proba-

bility propagation and decoding in analog VLSI,” IEEE Trans. Inform.

Theory, vol. 47, pp. 837–843, Feb. 2001.

[31] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of

low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 1645–1646,

Aug. 1996. Reprinted in Electron. Lett., vol. 33, pp. 457–458, Mar. 1997.

[32] R. J. McEliece, D. J. C. MacKay, and J.-F. Cheng, “Turbo decoding as

an instance of Pearl’s ‘belief propagation’ algorithm,” IEEE J. Select.

Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 140–152, Feb. 1998.

[33] T. Mittelholzer, “Convolutional codes over groups: A pragmatic

approach,” in Proc. 33d Allerton Conf. Communiccation, Control and

Computers, Allerton, IL, Sept. 1995, pp. 380–381.

[34] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems. San Mateo,

CA: Kaufmann, 1988.

[35] L. Pontryagin, Topological Groups. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ.

Press, 1946.

[36] A. Reznik, “Iterative decoding of codes defined on graphs,” M.Sc. thesis,

MIT, Cambridge, MA, May 1998.

[37] T. J. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-

check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform.

Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

548

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 47, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2001

[38] T. J. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of provably

good low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol.

47, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.

[39] S. Riedel, “New symbol-by-symbol MAP decoding algorithm for

high-rate convolutional codes that uses reciprocal dual codes,” IEEE J.

Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 175–185, Feb. 1998.

[40] W. Rudin, Fourier Analysis on Groups. New York: Wiley, 1990.

[41] M. Sipser and D. A. Spielman, “Expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform.

Theory, vol. 42, pp. 1660–1686, Nov. 1996.

[42] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE

H Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.

[43] H. Trentelman, “A truly behavioral approach to the

control

problem,” in The Mathematics of Systems and Control: From Intelligent

Control to Behavioral Systems, J. W. Polderman and H. Trentelman,

Eds. Groningen, Germany: U. Groningen, 1999, pp. 177–190.

[44] A. Vardy, “Trellis structure of codes,” in Handbook of Coding Theory, V.

Pless and W. C. Huffman, Eds. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier,

1998.

[45] Y. Weiss and W. T. Freeman, “On the optimality of solutions of the max-

product belief propagation algorithm in arbitrary graphs,” IEEE Trans.

Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 736–744, Feb. 2001.

[46] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation,

Univ. Linköping, Linköping, Sweden, 1996.

[47] N. Wiberg, H.-A. Loeliger, and R. Kötter, “Codes and iterative

decoding on general graphs,” Euro. Trans. Telecomm., vol. 6, pp.

513–525, Sept./Oct. 1995.

[48] J. C. Willems, “Models for dynamics,” in Dynamics Reported, U. Kirch-

graber and H. O. Walther, Eds. New York: Wiley, 1989, vol. 2, pp.

171–269.

[49]

, “Paradigms and puzzles in the theory of dynamical systems,”

IEEE Trans. Automat. Contr., vol. 42, pp. 259–294, Mar. 1991.

[50] J. S. Yedidia, W. T. Freeman, and Y. Weiss, “Bethe free energy, Kikuchi

approximations and belief propagation algorithms,” Mitsubishi Elec.

Rsch. Lab., Cambridge, MA, preprint, June 2000.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:51:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

