2011 Eighth International Conference on Information Technology: New Generations
Bit Error Rate Locked Loops Using Log-likelihood Decoders

Eric Rives Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering University of Alabama in Huntsville
Huntsville, Alabama 35899 Email: rivese@eng.uah.edu

Laurie Joiner Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering University of Alabama in Huntsville
Huntsville, Alabama 35899 Email: ljoiner@eng.uah.edu

Abstract—An automatic feedback control system that maintains an average bit error rate (BER) on decoded codewords is proposed for log-likelihood ratio (LLR) error correction code (ECC) decoders. The input to the controller is the LLR output of the decoder, while the controller output is the decoder iteration parameter. The loop error signal is constructed by computing the difference between the scaled decoder LLR of codeword estimates and an ideal LLR value derived from a target BER. The discrete time transfer function of a proposed proportional-integral (PI) loop filter with integrator feedback using ideal linear analysis is presented, followed by loop simulation results using the decoder.
Keywords-Error correction, iterative decoding, digital signal processing, automatic control, digital control.
I. INTRODUCTION
Recent strides in the field of error correction coding have brought communication link BER performance quite close to levels predicted by Claude Shannon’s theoretical coding limit for certain channel types [1], [2]. The decoders used to achieve these performance levels are typically iterative, multiple cycle per codeword algorithms. Under high signal-to-noise (SNR) channel conditions, fewer decoder iterations are needed to meet a given BER objective, compared to low SNR conditions. Subsequently, various techniques have been developed to monitor decoder internal variables and halt decoding once some criteria is met. Many of the prominent techniques have been derived from the cross entropy (CE) measure of Hagenauer [3].
When implemented with a fixed precision digital machine, the CE and derivative algorithms can be categorized as either operating on cycle-to-cycle observations of sign bits of LLR binary words, or the magnitudes thereof. Examples are the hard-decision-aided (HDA) and sign-change ratio (SCR) algorithms [4]. Common to these techniques is a simple, uncontrolled directconnect feedback structure, which can be visualized as passing the decoder LLR output through a variable gain block and back into the loop iteration control port on the decoder. Disadvantages to this approach include the susceptibility of decoder operation to noise present on LLR values and unpredictable decoder response to

transient SNR conditions due to sudden signal fades or gains.
This report proposes and analyzes a simple, but effective ECC decoder feedback control structure that performs error signal filtering and tracking, typically used with other communications components, for example phase locked loops (PLLs). The error signal is derived from a target BER via real time monitoring of decoder LLR variables. Discrete simulation of a WiMAX [5] iterative low-density parity-check (LDPC) decoder is used to demonstrate loop behavior. The resulting structure is referred to as a BER locked loop, or BERLL.
The paper is organized as follows: Section II presents the basic loop structure and provides a discussion of the operational theory. Section III contains the closed loop linear analysis for the feedback structure assuming linearity between the decoder output LLR and decoder iteration value. Section IV presents simulation results for the BERLL using a WiMAX LDPC code, and numerically compares the method with the CE and HDA techniques. Conclusions are given in Section V.
II. LOOP STRUCTURE
In a conventional ECC application, the sole input to the ECC decoder is a noisy received codeword, while the output after a considerable amount of processing is a hard-decision symbol estimate. For decoders that process log-likelihood ratios of codeword symbols, the hard-decision estimates are the sign bits (for binary codes) of the soft LLR values; the LLR magnitudes are typically discarded once processing for the decoded codeword has terminated. For the present report, the discarded LLR magnitudes are recycled and drive a feedback control loop that will infer a reliability level on decoded codewords. The loop will in turn produce an output that will drive a configuration port on the ECC decoder, for example the number of decoder iterations used per codeword. In this regard, the ECC decoder is a 4-port device; Figure 1 illustrates this idea. In the figure, a noisy channel having energy-to-noise ratio Eb/N0 corrupts transmitted codewords, received as r. From a data path perspective, the ECC decodes the bits in r and

978-0-7695-4367-3/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE

481

DOI 10.1109/ITNG.2011.90

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:03:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

sign{L(û )}

Noisy Channel

r

ECC |L(û)| Decoder

BERLL

Eb /N0

s

Figure 1. ECC decoder viewed as a 4-port device, shown with bit error rate locked loop feedback controller attachment.

produces estimates uˆ of the original codeword u (not

shown) to a data sink. The hard decision estimates are taken as the sign of L(uˆ). From the loop viewpoint, the magnitudes of L(uˆ) are processed to generate a decoder configuration parameter s. As Eb/N0 conditions change over time, so too will |L(uˆ)|, which will cause the loop to increase or decrease s to maintain a minimum reliability level on decoded message bits.
Figure 2 shows the basic feedback loop structure used to automatically adjust the ECC decoder, highlighting the internal details of the BERLL block in Figure 1. The ordinary data path through the decoder ends with hard decision estimates, sign{L(uˆ)}, delivered to a data sink, where uˆ is the decoded message vector estimate and L(uˆ) is the LLR of uˆ. The loop takes the magnitude of L(uˆ), applies scaling kL, and compares the result |Ls| with an LLR magnitude |L0| derived from a target BER P0 using the LLR definition

|L0|

log 1 − P0 P0

(1)

where the natural logarithm is used. The resulting error signal ε is thus

ε |L0| − |Ls| = |L0| − kL |L(uˆ)| ,

(2)

where kL is selected so that ε ≈ 0 across Eb/N0 ranges over which the decoder operates. The error signal ε is
subsequently filtered by the loop filter block, the output εF of which is accumulated via integration, scaled by kT , and finally fed back to adjust the decoder iteration parameter, s.

sign{L(û )}

|L0|

Noisy r ECC

Channel

Decoder

Eb /N0

s

|Ls|

+ e

Loop

εF

kL –

Filter

∫ dt kT

Figure 2. BERLL block diagram.

III. CLOSED LOOP LINEAR ANALYSIS
Decoder simulations verify a highly-linear LLR versus s relationship for moderate Eb/N0 levels, as shown

70
3 dB 60

Average Soft LLR Decoder Output

50 2 dB
40

30

20

10

1 dB

0 dB

0

0

3

6

9

12

15

Number of Decoder Iterations, s

Figure 3. Decoder log-likelihood ratio versus number of decoder iterations, s.

in Figure 3. This approximation allows for traditional linear analysis of the loop, and is valuable for estimating loop performance for specific loop coefficients. A detailed signal processing schematic of the BERLL is provided in Figure 4, where a digital one-pole infinite impulse response (IIR) structure is used as the loop filter, while a marginally-stable digital accumulator is used as an integrator. The z-domain transfer functions of the loop filter and accumulator are

b HL(z) = 1 − a z−1 ,

1 HA(z) = 1 − z−1 . (3)

The loop filter and accumulator chosen are typical for digital PLL designs [6]. In the schematic, the channel Eb/N0 (abbreviated as E) is shown as an additional decoder input, and serves as a reminder that the decoder s-to-LLR gain kD is in the strict sense a function of both s and Eb/N0; however as previously discussed, for a static Eb/N0 level a predominantly linear relationship is observed. Also, sign{|L(uˆ)|} is replaced simply with uˆ since the two are equivalent.

û

{r, E }

ECC Decoder

kD = f (E, s)

s

|L0|

|Ls|

+ e

kL –

b

kT

z –1

HL(z ) z –1
a
eF HA(z )

Figure 4. BERLL schematic used for analysis and simulation.

The system transfer function for the BERLL is

H(z) Ls(z) , L0(z)

(BERLL transfer function) (4)

where Ls(z) and L0(z) are the z-transforms of Ls(n)

482 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:03:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

and L0(n), respectively, and the absolute value operations have been suppressed. Using (3), straightforward linear analysis is used to determine the BERLL transfer function (4) in terms of the loop coefficients and gains:

H (z )

=

b kT

kD

kL

b kT kD kL + (1 − z−1)(1 −

a z−1) .

(5)

Having two poles, the BERLL as embodied in Figure 4 is a second order system. The loop gain terms can be selected to produce overdamped, critically-damped and underdamped transient responses, the last of which is demonstrated via simulation in the next section. Specific frequency attenuation can also be achieved with proper tuning of the IIR coefficients a and b.

IV. CLOSED LOOP SIMULATION
Monte Carlo simulations were performed to evaluate the transient response and convergence properties of the bit error rate locked loop using the topology of Figure 4. The BERLL was released for operation at time index 0, and given a target BER of P0 = 10−6 with a channel energy-to-noise ratio of Eb/N0 = 3 dB. ECC codeword bits were subjected to zero-mean additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) with noise variance σ2 = N0/(2Eb). Releasing the system at time index 0 with a fixed P0 level is equivalent to injecting a step input on the |L0| signal. After a suitable number of loop iterations, the signal |Ls| will converge to |L0| for a properly designed circuit. Equivalently, the error signal ε and filtered error signal εF will converge to an average value of zero.
The loop filter was configured with a coefficient set of (a, b) = (0.9, 0.1) to produce an underdamped transient response. The decoder output LLR gain factor was set at kL = 0.25, while the decoder input parameter translation factor was set at kT = −0.75. The decoder gain factor kD, modeled as a constant for the linear analysis in Section III, is not a modifiable parameter for simulation since decoder intrinsic behavior determines this effective, nonlinear value as a function of parameter type and Eb/N0. A total of N = 200 decoder codewords were processed per BERLL update, which along with 288 message bits per codeword resulted in a total of 57,600 LLR magnitudes being averaged to produce an LLR magnitude estimate for the BER error detector. This averaging procedure acts as an over-sampled, firstorder filter of sorts to the aggregate loop and gives a noise suppression benefit. Table I summarizes the loop simulation parameters.
Fig. 5 shows plots of the unfiltered and filtered LLR error signals ε and εF , which gradually converge to zero. The beneficial effects of the low-pass loop filter are easily seen when comparing the unfiltered and filtered error signals; notably signal attenuation and smoothing.
Fig. 6 compares the integer number of decoder iterations executed using the BERLL concept in this

Table I CLOSED LOOP SIMULATION PARAMETERS.

Parameter
P0 Eb/N0
|L0| (a, b)
kT kL

Value
1×10−6 3 dB 13.82 (derived) (0.9, 0.1) −0.75 0.25

report, s, with the average number of iterations determined separately by the CE method described in [3] (µCE) and the HDA method in [4], (µHDA). The BERLL s value settles in a controlled fashion between 10 and 11 decoder iterations after about 50 samples to achieve the target BER of 10−6 at an Eb/N0 of 3 dB. The cumulative BER for the BERLL over the last 50 samples is at 5.0×10−6, and decreasing.
10

ε
F
5

0

−5 ε

−10 0

20

40

60

80

100

Figure 5. BERLL simulation waveforms for loop error signals ε and εF versus time index n.

The controlled response of the BERLL s value is in contrast with the equivalent CE and HDA iteration values, the latter resembling discrete noise distributed about µCE and µHDA. Concurrent BER measurements showed the HDA method achieving a BER of 1.2×10−5, short of the 10−6 target. This was due to HDA running too few decoder iterations on average. The CE method BER was on par with the 10−6 target, achieved running an average number of iterations in between that of HDA and BERLL. The iteration performance advantage of CE over BERLL comes with a complexity drawback, due to CE requiring a summation of the expression L(ei)(uˆk) − Le(i−1)(uˆk) 2 / exp{L(i)(uˆk) + Le(i−1)(uˆk)}
across each codeword bit uˆk each iteration, where Le(i)(uˆk) and L(i)(uˆk) are the extrinsic and total LLRs for bit estimate uˆk at iteration i, respectively. This in contrast with a simple summation of LLR magnitudes at the last decoder iteration for BERLL, and the

483 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:03:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

20

BERLL

16

µ
HDA

µ
CE

12

8

4

0

0

20

40

60

80

100

Figure 6. Comparison of decoder iteration number versus time index n for BERLL, CE and HDA methods.

arithmetic machinery to run the other loop components once per loop update.
V. CONCLUSION
In this report, the feasibility of dynamically adjusting the BER level on decoded bits output from an ECC decoder using a standard digital feedback control system was explored. The non-decoder portion of the loop used familiar signal processing blocks, specifically fixed gains, an IIR loop filter and an IIR accumulator. For analysis purposes, the decoder was modeled as a fixed gain device, as far as input parameter to output LLR characteristics were concerned. The transfer function of a specific embodiment of the loop filter and accumulator produced a second order digital system.

Monte Carlo simulations were performed on the closed loop to verify loop convergence. Loop coefficients were selected that exhibited an underdamped transient response. Comparisons were made between the BERLL, CE and HDA methods. The computationally small HDA LLR sign bit processing was observed to suffer from a higher BER than CE and BERLL. The CE and BERLL methods both achieved the desired BER, with the CE method requiring fewer average decoder iterations than BERLL, however at the expense of significant additional computational resources.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: TurboCodes(1),” IEEE Int. Conf. on Communications (Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993), pp. 1064–1070.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay, R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, Aug. 1996.
[3] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of binary block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 44, pp. 1261–1271, Oct. 1996.
[4] R. Y. Shao, S. Lin, M. P. C. Fossorier, “Two simple stopping criteria for turbo decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 8, pp. 1117–1120, Aug. 1999.
[5] IEEE Std 802.16e-2005, IEEE Standard for Local and metropolitan area networks, Part 16: Air Interface for Fixed and Mobile Broadband Wireless Access Systems, IEEE Computer Society, Dec. 2005.
[6] F. M. Gardner, Phaselock Techniques, 3rd ed. WileyInterscience, Hoboken, N.J., 2005.

484 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:03:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

