98

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 58, NO. 1, JANUARY 2011

Memory System Optimization for FPGABased Implementation of Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes Decoders
Xiaoheng Chen, Jingyu Kang, Shu Lin, Life Fellow, IEEE, and Venkatesh Akella

Abstract—Designers are increasingly relying on field-programmable gate array (FPGA)-based emulation to evaluate the performance of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes empiri-
cally down to bit-error rates of 10 12 and below. This requires
decoding architectures that can take advantage of the unique characteristics of a modern FPGA to maximize the decoding throughput. This paper presents two specific optimizations called vectorization and folding to take advantage of the configurable data-width and depth of embedded memory in an FPGA to improve the throughput of a decoder for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes. With folding it is shown that quasi-cyclic LDPC codes with a very large number of circulants can be implemented on FPGAs with a small number of embedded memory blocks. A synthesis tool called
QCSyn is described, which takes the H matrix of a quasi-cyclic
LDPC code and the resource characteristics of an FPGA and automatically synthesizes a vector or folded architecture that maximizes the decoding throughput for the code on the given FPGA by selecting the appropriate degree of folding and/or vectorization. This helps not only in reducing the design time to create a decoder but also in quickly retargeting the implementation to a different (perhaps new) FPGA or a different emulation board.
Index Terms—Alignment, field programmable logic array (FPGA), folding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) decoder, memory system optimization, normalized min-sum algorithm, quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check (QC-LDPC) codes, very large scale integration (VLSI) implementation.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes, discovered by Gallager in 1962 [1], were rediscovered and shown to approach Shannon capacity in the late 1990s. Today LDPC codes are being considered for a wide variety of emerging applications such as high-density flash memory, satellite broadcasting, WiFi and mobile WiMAX. Rapid performance evaluation of LDPC codes is very desirable to design better codes for these applications. LDPC codes are decoded iteratively using the sum-product algorithm [1], [2] and its variations such as the normalized min-sum algorithm (NMSA) [3]. Memory bandwidth is the key performance limiting factor
Manuscript received September 14, 2009; revised February 17, 2010; accepted June 11, 2010. Date of publication August 03, 2010; date of current version December 30, 2010. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCF-0727478, in part by NASA under Grants NNX07AK50G and NNX09AI21G, and in part by gift grants from Intel and Northrop Grumman Space Technology. This paper was recommended by Associate Editor L. He.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Davis, CA 95616 USA (e-mail: xhchen@ucdavis.edu; jykang@ucdavis.edu; shulin@ucdavis.edu; akella@ucdavis.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2010.2055250

in the hardware realization of a LDPC decoder. For example, consider the implementation of the (8176,7156) LDPC code [4], [5] used in NASA LANDSAT and cruise exploration shuttle missions. The underlying Tanner graph of this code has 32 704 edges, which means approximately messages have to be read and written per iteration to decode a codeword (the factor 4 is needed because each iteration consists of two phases called check node and variable node processing, and each phase requires reading and writing messages corresponding to each edge). Clearly, the decoding throughput of a LDPC decoder is limited by this memory bandwidth requirement. Modern field-programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) from Xilinx and Altera have a large number of embedded memory blocks, typically in the range of a few hundreds. In a Xilinx FPGA, these embedded memory blocks are known as block RAMs and in Altera FPGA they are called embedded array blocks. We will focus on a Xilinx FPGA in the rest of the paper, though the ideas described in this paper can easily be migrated to an Altera FPGA. Block RAMs are dual-ported and can be accessed independently in a single cycle (typically 400 to 500 MHz in a Xilinx Virtex FPGA), that results in an enormous internal memory bandwidth, which if exploited properly can result in very high decoding throughput. Consequently, in the past several years, there has been a great deal of interest in developing FPGA-based architectures for decoding LDPC codes [6]–[11].
However, most of the FPGA-oriented implementations reported in literature fail to take full advantage of the fact that the aspect ratio of the block RAMs is configurable—i.e., both the word size and the number of locations in the memory or depth of the memory can be selected by the designer. For example, each 18 Kb block RAM in a Virtex-4 FPGA can be configured to operate as a 512x36, 1Kx18, 2Kx9, 4Kx4, 8Kx2, or 16Kx1 memory block (in a 512x36 configuration, 36 bits can be read or written simultaneously, whereas in a 1Kx18 configuration 18 bits can be read or written simultaneously). In fixed-point implementation of LDPC codes, the messages are typically 6 to 8 bits [11]. Most FPGA implementations store one message per block RAM word. So, typically they utilize 8/36 or roughly 22% of the available memory bandwidth, or in other words, roughly 78% of the available memory bandwidth is not being used.
We propose two architectural techniques to increase the throughput of an FPGA-based implementation of a LDPC decoder. The first technique, called vectorization, exploits the configurable width of the block RAM; and the second, called folding, takes advantage of the configurable depth of the block RAM. Vectorization allows the packing of multiple messages

1549-8328/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: MEMORY SYSTEM OPTIMIZATION FOR FPGA-BASED IMPLEMENTATION

99

into the same physical word by exploiting the wider word configuration of a block RAM. However, it introduces some key challenges. Given that each memory access delivers multiple messages, duplication of the functional units to process the messages concurrently, and data alignment hardware to route the messages to the appropriate functional unit is required. In an FPGA the total number of resources (flip-flops, lookup tables, and interconnect) are fixed. So vectorization could result in an implementation that either might not fit on a given FPGA or could result in a lower clock frequency due to the alignment logic and interconnect complexity. As a result, careless vectorization might result in performance that is worse than a scalar implementation. The resource utilization and the resultant clock frequency depend on the structure of the code being implemented. To address this challenge, we developed a semiautomated tool called QCSyn that automatically synthesizes a vector architecture for a given quasi-cyclic code. This allows the designer to pick the correct degree of vectorization and pipeline depth for functional units, for a target FPGA and throughput requirements.
Though the idea of packing multiple messages in a single memory word has been reported in literature [12], [13], the key contribution of this paper is a configurable vector decoder architecture for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes that can be customized to a given code and a given FPGA (which represents a set of resource constraints) by choosing the appropriate degree of pipelining of the functional units and automating the generation of the data-alignment logic. As a result, the proposed approach reduces the time to design a custom vector architecture for a given code and given FPGA platform. We also extend the overlapped message passing algorithm [8] to a vector architecture to further improve the performance of an FPGA-based vector decoder, which has not been addressed by prior research.
Folding is an optimization that allows implementing large (complex) LDPC codes on FPGAs with limited number of block RAMs. Even the largest FPGA that is commercially available (a Virtex-5) has only around hundreds of block RAMs, so approaches such as the partially parallel implementation described in [9]–[11] that maps each circulant to a separate block RAM will not work for codes with a very large number of circulants. In other words, existing approaches such as [9]–[11] implicitly assume that the number of block RAMs is always greater than the number of submatrices (circulants) in the LDPC code, which is not always possible, especially with new applications such as DVB-S2 etc which require codes with a very large number of circulants. Folding is essentially a memory virtualization technique that maps messages corresponding to multiple submatrices in the same physical block RAM. This allows us to implement codes with a very large number of edges in their underlyingTanner graph on an FPGA using the partially parallel architectural template.
In summary, the specific contributions of this paper are threefold.
1) We propose an extension to the partially parallel decoder architecture to incorporate vector processing to take advantage of the configurable width of the block RAMs. The words in the block RAM are treated as short vectors and suitable functional units and data alignment structures are created to implement a customized vector

processor for a given quasi-cyclic code. The overlapped message passing algorithm [8], [9] is extended to handle vector processing. 2) A memory virtualization technique called folding is developed that allows messages from different submatrices of quasi-cyclic code to share the physical block RAM. This allows us to implement very large codes, i.e., codes with a very large number of submatrices (and hence edges) efficiently on a given FPGA. 3) A semiautomated tool called QCSyn is developed to explore the design space of vectorization and folding to meet the resource and throughput targets for a given code and application on a given FPGA. An emulation platform has been realized using the DN8000K10PSX board from Dini Group and implementation results from the actual hardware are reported. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II provides the necessary background on LDPC codes and the message passing algorithm to decode LDPC codes. Section III describes the vector decoder architecture and the vector overlapped message passing algorithm. Section IV presents the folding technique and examples. The results and discussion for each method are presented in the corresponding section. Section V describes the QCSyn tool and the FPGAemulation platform that was developed and Section VI presents the comparison of the proposed methods with related approaches in literature.

II. LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES
In this section we provide the background to understand the techniques proposed in this paper. We start with an overview of LDPC codes and the definition of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes. Next, we describe an iterative message passing algorithm called normalized min-sum algorithm (NMSA) [3], which is the algorithm realized by the various architectures proposed in this paper. We will end the section with a brief overview of the partially parallel decoder architecture that serves as the baseline for the implementations reported in this paper.

A. Classification of LDPC Codes

A binary LDPC code of length is given by the null space

of an

sparse parity-check matrix

over GF(2).

If each column has constant weight (the number of 1-entries

in a column) and each row has constant weight (the number

of 1-entries in a row), then the LDPC code C is referred to

as a

-regular LDPC code. If the columns and/or rows of

the parity-check matrix have multiple weights, then the null

space of gives an irregular LDPC code. If is an array of

sparse circulants of the same size over GF(2), then the null space

of gives a quasi-cyclic (QC)-LDPC codes. If consists of a

single sparse circulant or a column of sparse circulants, then the

null space of gives a cyclic LDPC code.

A binary -tuple

is a code-

word in if and only if

. For

, let

be the th row of . Then the

condition

gives the following set of constraints on

the code bits of a codeword in :

(1)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

100

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 58, NO. 1, JANUARY 2011

Fig. 1. Parity check Matrix for a (3,6)-regular QC-LDPC code. There are 18 circulant permutation matrices (or CPMs) marked 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 3, 6, 12 . . . 80, 160. The number denotes the offset for the CPM. For example, the circulant marked labeled 3 is shown in more detail in (b). Each circulant is a
2 256 256 matrix. The offset is the position of the nonzero entry in the first
m row of the circulant. (a) A (3,6)-regular QC-LDPC code ( = 256). (b) A m CPM with = 256, offset 1 = 3.

for

, where the operations in the sum are modulo-2

operations. Each sum is called a check-sum (check constraint).

Often an LDPC code is represented graphically by a bipar-

tite graph which consists of two disjoint sets of nodes. Nodes

in one set represent the code bits and are called variable nodes

(VNs), and the nodes in the other set represent the check-sums

that the code bits must satisfy and are called check nodes (CNs).

Label the VNs from 0 to and the CNs from 0 to . The

th CN is connected to the th VN by an edge if and only if

. The VNs connected to the th CN simply correspond

to the code bits that are contained in the th check-sum. The CNs

connected to the th VN simply correspond to the check sums

that contain the th VN.

In terms of encoding and decoding implementation, the most

advantageous structure of an LDPC code is the QC structure.

Commonly, in most of the proposed constructions of QC-LDPC

codes, the parity-check matrix of a QC-LDPC code is given as

a

array (or block) of circulants or circulant permutation

matrices (CPMs) and/or zero matrices of the same size, say

, as follows:

...

...

...

...

(2)

Then is a

matrix over GF(2). The QC-LDPC

code given by the null space of the matrix has length and

rate at least

. Many standard codes for communication

systems are QC-LDPC codes.

Fig. 1(a) shows the code structure of a (3,6) regular

QC-LDPC codes. We denote this code as . The ma-

trix has 3 block rows and 6 block columns for a total of 18

circulant permutation matrices. Each circulant permutation

matrix (CPM) is 256 256 with a certain offset, which denotes

the position of the nonzero entry in the first row of the matrix.

Details of a CPM with offset equal to 3 is shown in Fig. 1(b).

Fig. 2. Partially parallel decoder architecture for (3,6)-regular QC-LDPC codes

m  j < j with = 256, adapted from [9], I (0

6) denotes the th IMEM,

 i < ;  j < i j E (0

30

6) denotes the EMEM on the th row and on the th

column.

. Assume transmission using BPSK signaling with unit en-

ergy per signal. Then the codeword is mapped into a sequence

of BPSK signals

for transmis-

sion. Suppose is transmitted. Let

be

the received soft-decision sequence, where

is the intrinsic channel reliability value of the th code bit, is

a Gaussian random variable with zero-mean and variance .

For

and

, we define

, and

. Let

be the maximum number of iterations to be performed.

For

, let

be the

hard decision vector generated in the th decoding iteration,

be extrinsic message passed from the th CN to the th

VN,

be the extrinsic message passed from the th VN to

the th CN, and be the reliability value of the th code bit.

The NMSA can be formulated as follows:

1) Initialization: Set

,

and the maximum

number of iterations to

. For all , set

, set

when

.

Step 1): Parity check: Compute the syndrome

of

. If

, stop decoding and output

as the decoded codeword; otherwise go to Step 2).

Step 2): If

, stop decoding and declare a decoding

failure; otherwise, go to Step 3).

Step 3): CNs update: Compute the message

(3)

where

is the normalization factor. Pass

messages from CNs to VNs.

Step 4): VNs update:

. Compute the message

(4)

B. Normalized Min-Sum Algorithm

The NMSA [3] is a reduced-complexity approximation of the SPA. With carefully chosen normalization factor, the NMSA

and update the reliability of each received bit by

performs as good as SPA. Let be transmitted over the binary-

(5)

input AWGN channel with two-sided power spectral density

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: MEMORY SYSTEM OPTIMIZATION FOR FPGA-BASED IMPLEMENTATION

101

K j < j i < ; j < i = 2 (0 Fig. 3. A vector decoder for code C when

,I 

j on the th column.

6) denotes the th IMEM, E (0 

3 0

6) denotes the EMEM on the th row and

For

, make the following hard-decision: 1)

III. VECTOR DECODER ARCHITECTURE FOR QC-LDPC CODES

, if

; 2)

, if

. Form a new received

vector

. Go to Step 1).

The partially parallel architecture proposed by Chen and

Parhi in [9] is an elegant method to realize quasi-cyclic LDPC

codes. For

-regular QC-LDPC code, this approach uses

-input CNUs (check node units), -input VNUs (variable

node units), intrinsic message memories (IMEM) with each

storing intrinsic messages, and extrinsic message mem-

ories (EMEM) with each storing extrinsic messages and

hard decision bits. The partially parallel decoder for is

shown in Fig. 2.

Functional unit

,

performs the CN update

and tentative decoding [Step 1)–3) in NMSA] for the th block

row, while functional unit

,

performs the

VN update [Step 4) in NMSA].

denotes the

IMEM of the th block column, which stores the received in-

trinsic message.

denotes the

EMEM which stores the messages passed between the th CNs

and the th VNs and the hard decision bits corresponded to the

th VNs. The hard decision bit is computed by VNUs and ap-

pended at the head of the variable-to-check messages. There are

IMEMs for a -regular QC-LDPC codes. Every message

is stored in one memory word of the block RAM. Thus we de-

note the conventional partially parallel decoder architecture as

a scalar decoder to contrast it with the vector decoder proposed

in Section III. In [9], the authors propose a simple method to

take advantage the quasi-cyclic nature of the codes to improve

the decoding throughput by overlapping Step 1)–3) and Step 4)

in the NMSA (called overlapped message passing) as shown in

Fig. 6(c). This requires the computation of a critical parameter

called the waiting time (see [8] for a detailed explanation and

algorithm), which determines the exact time when the overlap-

ping message passing can begin. In the limit, overlapped mes-

sage passing can increase the throughput of the decoder over the

baseline approach by a factor of 2.

Vector decoder architecture overcomes the limitation of the

scalar decoder (described in the previous section) by packing

multiple messages in the same memory word. As noted before,

this is possible because, block RAMs can be configured into

different aspect rations. For the NMSA, the intrinsic and the

extrinsic messages are usually 6–8 bit wide, thus up to six 6-bit

messages can be packed in one memory word in the 512x36

block RAM configuration. We define the number of messages

packed into one memory word as . The vector decoder for a

-regular code requires CNUs, VNUs, and

block RAMs for intrinsic and extrinsic memories. Fig. 3

shows a vector decoder for the code when

.

Potentially, the throughput of a vector decoder can be times

that of a scalar decoder, given that there are times more func-

tional units operating simultaneously. However, without proper

data packing scheme, memory access conflicts will be caused

since multiple messages are accesses per cycle. Besides, effi-

cient message alignment units are required so that the additional

logic incurred would be reduced. The techniques to overcome

these challenges is described next.

A. Message Packing and Alignment

In a scalar decoder, one full block RAM memory word is

used to store a message. Messages are packed in column major

order, i.e., the message in the th CPM column is packed in ,

where

is a one-dimensional array that represents

the storage of the CPM in the block RAM. stores CN up-

date message during Step 3) of the execution and VN update

message during Step 4), i.e., the extrinsic messages are updated

in place. For example, in the scalar implementation of the par-

tially parallel decoder proposed in [9] (and shown in Fig. 2),

the CNU starts from the th CPM row, i.e., in the order of

,

,

. The VNU starts from the th CPM

column, i.e., in the order of ,

,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

102

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 58, NO. 1, JANUARY 2011

m = 15 1 = 6 K = 4 Fig. 4. Illustration of message packing for a CPM with

and

when vector size

. (a) Example CPM (b) Packing scheme proposed in this

paper (c) Wang’s [12] Packing Scheme.

. In overlapped message passing, and CPM are stored in the block RAM. Note, that each message ap-

could be non zero, as the processing could start at any arbi- pears in two different locations, because of the double buffering

trary message.

described above. Each block RAM is partitioned logically into

In a vector decoder, each block RAM location holds multiple a VNU memory and CNU memory and the messages are stored

messages. Memory conflicts could arise if the CNU and VNU in different order to facilitate conflict free access by CN and

try to access the same location simultaneously. The key chal- VN processing units. We compare our method with the scheme

lenges with vector decoding is to reduce the potential for such presented in Wang [12], which is shown in Fig. 4(c). There

conflicts and to ensure that the overhead of resolving these con- are two advantages of our scheme over the scheme proposed

flicts through alignment units does not increase the complexity in [12]. First, our scheme does not require any read alignment

of the decoder and limit scalability and clock frequency. We ad- units (due to double buffering), where as the packing shown

dress this challenge with a combination of three techniques that in Fig. 4(c) requires two read alignment units in addition to

are described next. First, we use double buffering, i.e., the mes- two write alignment units (which we also require). Second, our

sages are replicated for CNU and VNU access, so that they are method works for any value of and which is essential to

stored in different ways to match the access pattern of the CNU support overlapped message passing, whereas the method in

and VNU processing. Though it doubles the amount of memory [12] works well for nonoverlapped message passing, i.e., and

needed for the storage, it does not increase the number of block are implicity assumed to be 0. When and are nonzero as in

RAMs necessary, because we use the same block RAM to store this example, the packing scheme in [12] becomes inefficient.

both CNU and VNU memory. This works because typically the For example, consider the updating of the messages in the

CPM sizes are much smaller than the depth of the block RAMs third word in the VNU memory, , , , . In

in an FPGA. Second, we develop a new packing strategy that not Fig. 4(c), one can see that these messages are spread across

only uses the block RAMs efficiently but also reduces the poten- three different memory words, which would entail three reads

tial for conflicts. Third we propose a sequential alignment unit and a very complex alignment circuitry with the concomitant

and its implementation to demonstrate that the alignment task increase in latency.

can be achieved with relatively low complexity, which makes 2) Sequential Write Alignment Unit: Given that a given

the scheme scalable.

message is mapped to different locations in the CNU and

1) Proposed Packing Scheme: The CNU and VNU VNU memory, except when

, the messages need to be

memory can be modeled as two dimensional arrays, de- aligned before they are written to the memory. Given the double

noted by and . The variable-to-check messages are buffered efficient packing scheme described above, the align-

stored in the CNU memory by the CNU access order, i.e., ment task is greatly simplified. We need just the current word

the message

is packed as

. The and the previous word to reconstruct the input order for the

check-to-variable messages are packed in the VNU memory CN and VN processing units. Table I shows the state transition

by the VNU access order, i.e., the message is packed as table for the example shown in Fig. 4(b), which represents the

. In general, message is packed to the location case when vector length

. The alignment unit takes four

inputs , , , and produces four outputs , , ,

in the CNU memory and to

every cycle using the hardware circuitry shown in Fig. 5.

in the VNU memory. We will illustrate The messages are assumed to be quantized to bits.

this with an example. Fig. 4(a) shows a circulant permutation The hardware requirements are relatively modest. Let

matrix with size

and offset

. The starting row

for VNU alignment and

for CNU processing,

and the starting column for VNU

for CNU alignment. For vector length and CPM

processing is

. Fig. 4(b) shows how the messages , size , 1) when , or when

,

,

corresponding to the nonzero entries in the no alignment unit circuitry is needed; 2) when

,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: MEMORY SYSTEM OPTIMIZATION FOR FPGA-BASED IMPLEMENTATION

103

TABLE I TRANSITION TABLE FOR THE ALIGNMENT UNIT IN FIG. 5

Fig. 5. Hardware implementation of the sequential alignment unit for the example in Fig. 4(b).

of the partially parallel decoder. Fig. 6(a) shows the timing di-

agram of the baseline message passing algorithm and Fig. 6(c)

shows the benefits of overlapped message passing. Fig. 6(b)

shows how vector processing (described in the previous section)

helps in improving the performance by reducing the CNU and

VNU processing time. Vector processing can be combined with

overlapped message passing to further improve the throughput

as shown by the timing diagram in Fig. 6(d). We call this VOMP

or vector overlapped message passing which is described next.

Let denote the number of waiting clock cycles between

CNU update and VNU update of the same iteration. The optimal

value of is computed as follows.

Step 1): Let

denote the starting CPM

rows for CNUs. Let

de-

note the starting CPM columns for VNUs. Let

denote the waiting time between intraiteration CNU

and VNU computations. Apply the OMP method de-

scribed in [8] to get , , and .

Step 2): Compute the starting read and write word address

at the 1st iteration. The starting CNU or VNU

read address is 0. The starting write message for

CNU is

, which is packed in

in the VNU memory, where

Likewise, the starting write message for VNU is

, which is packed in

in the

CNU memory, where

Step 3): Compute the minimum waiting time for VOMP by

Fig. 6. Timing diagrams of different scheduling algorithms. (a) Original message passing. (b) Vector message passing. (c) Overlapped message passing. (d) Vector overlapped message passing.

Step 4): Compute the number of clock cycles for subiteration

,

-bit registers are required; 3) when

time by

(the worst case), our implementation requires

-bit registers and two to

if

,

one multiplexors and two comparators. The latency is one cycle for any value of and .

otherwise.

B. Vector Overlapped Message Passing

The starting read and write address for CNUs and VNUs increases cyclically with the increment of for every new iter-

As described in Section II, overlapped message passing ation for data dependency. In VOMP scheduling scheme, CNUs

(OMP) method was proposed by [9] to improve the throughput and VNUs may read and write the extrinsic memory at the same

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

104

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 58, NO. 1, JANUARY 2011

TABLE II
IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS FOR C

time, thus memory modules with four ports are needed. We emu- Next we evaluate the performance of our implementation

late quad-ported memory by clocking the block RAMs at twice on two large QC-LDPC codes. The first code is a (8176,7156)

the clock frequency and time-multiplexing the read and write (4,32)-regular QC-LDPC code [4], [5] which has been adopted

ports. This is possible because the critical path in the vector de- for NASA’s LANDSAT (near-earth high-speed satellite com-

coder architecture, is in the check-node functional units, and is munications) and other missions including TDRSS high-rate

more than twice the access time for the block RAMs.

1.0 and 1.5 Gbps return link service. The other code is a

Using the method described in [8], we derive a general for- (3969,3213) irregular code [15].

mula for computing the throughput of the vector decoder as fol- The (8176,7156) QC-LDPC code is constructed based on the

lows:

3-dimensional Euclidean geometry

over the finite

field

. Based on the lines of

not passing

if

,

through the origin, nine circulants of size 511 511 over GF(2)

if

can be constructed, each circulant having both column and row

weights 8. To construct the (8176,7156) code, 8 circulants are

where

is the clock frequency,

is the average iter-

ation number, is the number of clock cycles for intraiter-

ation wait, and is the number of clock cycles for loading

or updating messages. The denominator denotes the number of

clock cycles to decode a codeword, and contains two parts: over-

lapped load/store time , and iteration time. Note that this for-

mula can predict the throughput for all the four cases shown in

Fig. 6. For example, for the baseline scalar decoder [Fig. 6(a)]

, while for scalar decoder with OMP sched-

uling [Fig. 6(c)],

,

. For a basic vector decoder

[Fig. 6(b)]

and for vector decoder with OMP

scheduling [Fig. 6(d)],

,

.

taken and arranged in a row

. Then,

each circulant ,

, is decomposed into a 2 2

array of 511 511 constituent circulants by column and

row decompositions. The decomposition of each circulant of

results in a 2 16 array of constituent circulants of size

511 511. This array is a 2044 8176 matrix over GF(2)

with column and row weights 4 and 32, respectively. The null

space of gives the (8176,7156) QC-LDPC code with rate

0.8752. The bit-error performance down to

simulated by

computer is shown in Fig. 7.

A VLSI decoder for this code has been built by NASA. Using

this decoder, bit-error rate (BER) down to

has been com-

puted, which is shown by the curve labeled “NASA” in Fig. 7.

C. Performance, Results and Discussion

Above BER of , the performance computed with the VLSI decoder agrees with the one simulated by computer [16]. From

First, we compare our implementation with the best known Fig. 7, we also see that there is no error floor down to the BER of

partially parallel decoder architecture implementation [8]. We

. An FPGA decoder for this code is also reported in [12],

use the same experimental conditions as in [8]—the same code which packs two messages per memory word. The performance

[shown in Fig. 1(a)], the same Xilinx Virtex 2 XC2V6000-5 of the code simulated by the FPGA decoder in [12] is 0.1 dB

FPGA with 8-bit quantization scheme and min-sum algorithm. worse than the performance shown in Fig. 7 and furthermore, it

For CNU and VNU implementation, we use the method intro- has an error-floor at the BER of

.

duced in [14]. Table II shows the results of the comparison with FPGA implementation of (8176, 7156) code on a Xilinx

various values of . The proposed vector architecture with

Virtex 4 XC4VLX-160 FPGA is shown in Table III. We use

results in 8.4X improvement in throughput (99.1 Mbps versus NMSA

and 6-bit uniform quantization scheme to

830.6 Mbps). Furthermore, our implementation uses only 24 design the decoder for different values of the vectorization, i.e.,

block RAMs instead of 36. This is because of our optimization

. For comparison we also report the results from

of embedding hard decision bit in the extrinsic messages. Note [12] on the same code, though it uses fixed-point SPA algorithm

that, when

which is same as scalar decoder, our imple- as opposed to the min-sum algorithm. Our implementation uses

mentation still outperforms the implementation in [8] because fewer resources and produces a higher decoding throughput.

of the double buffering and effective emulation of quad-ported Also, we can see that the throughput does not decrease dra-

memory, which the implementation in [8] method does not em- matically, so that the alignment and vector factor up to 4 does

ploy.

not reduce routing efficiency. The logical power increase in a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: MEMORY SYSTEM OPTIMIZATION FOR FPGA-BASED IMPLEMENTATION

105

Fig. 7. Performance of the (8176,7156) Code. The curve labeled FPGA denotes the performance measured from our FPGA implementation. The curve labeled NASA is the performance reported from the VLSI chip designed by NASA and the curve labeled Wang is from [12].
TABLE III FPGA IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS FOR (8176,7156) CODE

linearly way. The BRAM width influence the power a little bit, and looks similar.

TABLE IV COLUMN AND WEIGHT DISTRIBUTIONS OF THE (3969,3213) CODE

The (3969,3213) irregular QC-LDPC code was constructed

using method 1 in [15] as follows. First, a 63 63 array of

CPMs of size 63 63 is constructed based on the finite field

. Take a 12 63 subarray

of CPMs from .

Then replace some of the CPMs in

with zero ma-

trices of size 63 63. This replacement is called masking. The

masking is designed based on the degree distributions of VNs

and CNs derived using density evolution. After masking, an

array of CPMs and zero matrices is obtained. The distribu-

tions of CPMs in columns and rows of are given in Table IV. The null space of gives the (3969,3213) irregular QC-LDPC

is a 756 3969 matrix with varying column and row weights. code with rate 0.81.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

106

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 58, NO. 1, JANUARY 2011

TABLE V VECTOR DECODER IMPLEMENTATION FOR IRREGULAR (3969,3213) CODE

We use the NMSA

and 6-bit uniform quanti- word, the power consumption due to block RAM access is

zation scheme to implement the decoder when

. about the same, so vectorization can increase the throughput

The implementation results of the (3369,3213) code on a Xilinx without increasing the power consumption.

Virtex 4 XC4VLX-200 FPGA is listed in Table V. The results indicate that the decoding performance increases almost linearly with vector length . The logic resources increase propor-

IV. FOLDING: A TECHNIQUE TO VIRTUALIZE BLOCK RAMS FOR QC-LDPC DECODER IMPLEMENTATION

tionally to support the additional functional units and alignment logic. However, with each successive generation of FPGAs, the number of resources in terms of slices, flip-flops, and LUTs is increased significantly, so the proposed technique can be used to scale the decoding performance as bigger FPGAs become available.
D. Scalability and Power Analysis of Vector Decoders

A. Motivation
Many practical codes are large. For example, the matrix of the (64800,32400) LDPC code for the DVB-S2 standard can be expressed as quasi-cyclic code with 630 circulants, where each circulant is 360 360 matrix. Even the largest FPGA commercially available (a Virtex-5) has only around hundreds of block RAMs, so a partially parallel implementation show in Fig. 2 that

Table III and Table V show the impact of increasing the vector maps each circulant to a separate block RAM will not work.

length on the power, performance, and resource requirements. We need to map messages corresponding to multiple circulants

It is clear that the proposed implementation is scalable to

to the same physical block RAM. Irregular codes make this

—the clock frequency drops slightly but the overall throughput problem a little bit more challenging, as instead of circulant per-

increase almost linearly. As expected the number of resources in mutation matrices we have zero matrices in some places.

terms of flip-flops and LUTs increases because of the alignment We propose a simple (greedy) heuristic to fold multiple cir-

units but the overall utilization of the slices, flip-flops and LUTs culant permutation matrices to the same block RAM. The goal

is less than 70%, which is very reasonable. For the (8176,7156) of our heuristic is to reduce the hardware complexity, which in-

code the resource utilization is under 26%. We believe that scal- cludes resources required to route the data from the memory

ability beyond vector length of 4 is not necessary for this par- to the CNUs and VNUs and the complexity of the VNUs and

ticular application because of the following reasons. First, the CNUs themselves, especially in the case of an irregular code.

typical word length of the messages is around 8 bits, so it is For a irregular code all the VNUs and CNU will not have the

not possible to pack more than 4 messages in each block RAM same number of input ports, so mapping CPMs with the same

word which is around 36 bits. Second, for complex codes, the number of inputs to the same block RAM will be advantageous.

limitation is the number of block RAMs available in a given For simplicity, we make the following additional assumptions.

FPGA—as high-end FPGAs typically have a very large number Each message will occupy a single memory word, i.e., we will

of flip-flops and LUTs. So, one is likely to run out block RAMs not attempt to vectorize the decoder in the current exposition;

before flip-flops or LUTs, as results from the (3969,3213) seem vectorization is orthogonal to folding, so a folded architecture

to indicate.

can always be vectorized by using the techniques proposed in

The power analysis of the vector decoder shows that the Section III. We also assume that CNU and VNU processing is

vector decoders improve the energy efficiency of LDPC de- not overlapped. Given that multiple CPMs will be mapped to

coding due to enhanced parallelism and pipelining. For the the same block RAM, and the number of ports to the memory

(8176,7156) code the energy efficiency increases from 10.26 are fixed, VNU and CNU processing will require multiple clock

nJ/bit to 4.25 nJ/bit as we increasing the vector length from 1 cycles.

to 4 and for the more complex code, the energy efficiency increases from 9.42 nJ/bit to 5.18 nJ/bit. The reason being vector B. Folding Transformation for Decoding of QC-LDPC Codes

decoding makes better use of the FPGA interconnect and block Let be an integer that denotes the folding factor, i.e., the

RAM resources through enhanced parallelism and pipelining. number of CPMs mapped to a single block RAM. For example,

Whether you store one message per word or 4 messages per

, means two CPMs will be mapped to the same block

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: MEMORY SYSTEM OPTIMIZATION FOR FPGA-BASED IMPLEMENTATION

107

Fig. 8. Variable node reorder unit (VRU) for the (6, 6)-irregular QC-LDPC code decoder: routes messages from/to the EMEMs to/from the VNUs.

RAM. Let be the number of block RAMs available in the code on an FPGA with only 7 block RAMs using the folding

targeted FPGA. For example, in a Virtex-4 LX160 that is used transformation described above

in this paper, is 288. Let be the depth of the block RAM

such that the word size is sufficient to fit one message.

Consider a

-matrix which has block rows and

block columns, for total of

CPMs where each CPM is a

circulant permutation matrix. Let be the number of

nonzero CPMs in . For a regular code will be , while

in a irregular code will be less than because some CPMs

are replaced by all-zero matrices.

Step 1): Find the smallest and such that

and

. For the scalar de-

coder, and block RAMs are needed for IMEMs

and EMEMs respectively. Thus, the memory usage

are reduced to almost .

Step 2): The partially parallel architecture shown Fig. 2 is

modified as follows. Use

CNUs and

VNUs instead of CNUs and VNUs.

Step 3): Partition the block columns into

groups

such that number of total number of inputs ports of

the VNUs is minimized. We use a simple heuristic

to do this. Sort the block columns of matrix in

descending order of the block column weight. Group

each successive block columns together starting

with the smallest.

Step 4): Partition the block rows into

sets in the same

way as Step 3).

Using Step 1), the optimum folding factor is found to 3.

Following Step 3), the block columns are sorted in descending

order,

and partitioned into two sets:

and

. We need a 4-input VNU to

process the first set and a 2-input VNU to process the second

set, thus a total number of six ports are required for incoming

extrinsic messages. On the other hand, if we had not sorted the

columns but just grouped the columns in the order in which they

appear in the matrix, i.e., choose

as one set

and

as another, we would need a VNU with 4

inputs for the first set and a VNU with 3 inputs for the second

set, and thus a total number of seven ports are used. Similarly,

the block rows are also partitioned into two sets

and

along the lines of Step 4). Without folding,

extrinsic messages of block columns ,

are updated in one clock cycle; with folding, extrinsic messages

are updated in

clock cycles as follows—messages of

C. Example: Folding on a Irregular QC-LDPC Code

and are updated in the first cycle, messages of and are updated in the next cycle and messages of and are

Consider the

matrix of an arbitrary irregular updated in the last cycle.

QC-LDPC code shown below. The matrix of the Fig. 8 shows the routing of the memory modules to/from the

(6,6)-irregular QC-LDPC code has six block columns VNUs of the folded partially parallel decoder architecture for

, whose weights are 4, 2, 2, 3, 2, the example irregular QC-LDPC code. The majority of the in-

and 2, respectively. We illustrate the implementation of the puts of the VNUs are directly connected to the outputs of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

108

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 58, NO. 1, JANUARY 2011

TABLE VI IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS FOR FOLDED DECODER FOR (8176,7156) CODE,
NON-OMP SCHEDULING IS USED

TABLE VII
K = 1 IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS FOR FOLDED DECODER FOR (3969,3213) CODE CASE IS ON A XILINX XC4VLX-200 FPGA

Fig. 9. Check node reorder unit (CRU) for the (6,6)-irregular QC-LDPC code decoder: routes messages from the EMEMs to the CNUs.

D. Results and Discussion

block RAMs, while others are generated via a simple reordering In this section we will present the results for the folded

network. The logical memory and are packed in nonover- FPGA implementation for the same two codes discussed in

lapped segments of physical memory based on the partition re- Section III. We use NMSA with

and 6-bit uniform

sults in Step 3) of the folding transformation. In this way, the quantization scheme and Xilinx Virtex 4 XC4VLX-160 FPGA.

probability that two logical memory of the same columns will Table VI shows the results for the (8176,7156) code while

reside in the same physical memory will be lowered. For ex- Table VII shows the results for the (3969,3213) code. To

ample, the messages of

are mapped to three phys- show the impact of folding we present the results for different

ical block RAMs. Also, we make sure that the messages of the folding factors, i.e.,

. We also show results for

same rows do not map to the same block RAMs. In this way, we

which is our baseline partially parallel decoder with

can reduce the latency of the processing VNU reorder units and degree of vectorization equal to 1 (a scalar decoder). To make

CNU reorder units. As the memory is packed for the preference a fair comparison, nonoverlapped message passing is used for

of VNU update, we need a reorder unit for CNU to read (labeled

. The key point to note is that even complex codes

CRU-R in Fig. 9) that routes the messages from the EMEMs to such as the (8176,7156) code can be realized with as few as

the CNUs, and also routes the messages from the CNUs back 20 block RAMs (with

), of course, with a significantly

(labeled CRU-W) to the EMEMs, as shown in Fig. 9. Also, there lower performance because the memory is effectively shared

is a reorder unit (labeled VRU in Fig. 8) that routes the residue by different functional units. It should be noted that the OMP

messages between EMEMs and VNUs.

scheduling is not applied to the folded decoder.

It should be noted that due to the differences in the block row Fig. 10 shows how folding can be combined with vectoriza-

weight or block column weight, in certain clock cycles, some tion described in the previous section. Both folding and vector-

inputs might not be useful. For example, for VNU update,

ization exploit the unused depth of the block RAMs—given that

and share the same 4-input VNU. has a weight of 2. most CPMs are much smaller than the number of locations in a

Thus, we should set the corresponding input to 0 since it does block RAM. Vectorization uses the block RAM depth for double

not influence the result. Similarly, for CNU update, and

buffering as explained in the previous section, while folding

share the same 4-input CNU, so with min-sum algorithm the uses the block RAM depth to map multiple CPMs into the same

unused inputs are set to the maximum allowable positive value block RAM. So, the folding factor will be constrained by the

and when sum-product algorithm is used the unused inputs are available depth of the block RAM. For example, when vector

set to 0. This ensures that the computation does not change when decoding and folded decoding are applied to the (8176,7156)

a VNU or CNU with a larger number of inputs are used.

code, can only be 2, since 2 511 2 messages will be used.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: MEMORY SYSTEM OPTIMIZATION FOR FPGA-BASED IMPLEMENTATION

109

Fig. 10. Vectorized folded decoder.

Fig. 11. FPGA-based simulation platform for QC-LDPC codes decoder.

V. QCSYN AND EMULATION PLATFORM

generation of all the logic required for alignment, message re-

The goal of this project is to create an FPGA-based emulation platform to accelerate the design space exploration of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes. The design environment consists of the DN8000K10PSX board from the Dini Group and an architectural synthesis tool called QCSyn. The implementation results reported in this paper were generated using the design environment described here.
QCSyn is a tool written in Python that takes the description of the QC-LDPC code and the target FPGA and generates the Verilog code a folded or vector architecture. The Verilog code can be simulated with Modelsim and synthesized using Xilinx synthesis tools. The goal of QCSyn is to reduce the time required to generate a customized folded or vectorized architecture for a given LDPC code from months to days. The first step involves reading the FPGA block RAM resource specification file (which describes the number of block RAMs (block RAM budget) and the aspect ratios) and the QC-LDPC code structure along with the design parameters listed such as data quantization format for message representation, number of pipeline stages for CNU, number of pipeline stages for VNU, CPM offsets, CPM size , distribution of CN degree and distribution of VN degree. One of

ordering, and interconnection. The last steps involves instantiating the CNU and VNU components from the prebuilt library and integration with the testbench. The generated Verilog can be automatically verified with the bit-accurate C model and synthesized by the Xilinx tools. The tasks that have to be performed manually include generating the CNU or VNU of a specific number of inputs (if it is not already in the library) and some logic to interface to the FIFO and noise generator on the FPGA board.
Our FPGA-based simulation platform shown in Fig. 11 is based on the DN8000K10PSX board from Dini Group, which has two Xilinx Virtex-4 LX160-10’s and is hosted in a 64-bit PCI slot (66MHz). The Main Bus, PCI/Main Bus Bridge, PCI Interface are provided by the vendor, the rest of the modules were developed by us. The main components include the AWGN generator, based on the Wallace method [17] that generates the erroneous all-zero codeword for the decoder, a FIFO to synchronize data across different clock boundaries, the data sink which gathers the decoder statistics such as iteration count, status of the codeword, etc., and the PC software that initializes the AWGN generator and interfaces with the user.

the major parameters for choosing architectures is the number of block RAMs. When it is smaller than the requirement of scalar

VI. RELATED WORK

decoder, fold decoder is used.

Fully parallel decoder architectures such as [18] that employ

Next, depending on whether the designer wants a vector de- a separate processing unit for each node of the Tanner graph

coder or a folded decoder, the architecture specific parameters can exhibit the highest performance but are impractical for an

are determined. This includes resource allocation (number and FPGA-based implementation because FPGAs have limited re-

types of CNUs and VNUs) and scheduling. This is followed by sources. Thus, partially parallel decoders are more preferable

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

110

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 58, NO. 1, JANUARY 2011

[19]–[23]. The details of a partially parallel decoder and its op- the throughput of a decoder for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes. We

timization using overlapped message passing were described in demonstrate a decoding throughput of 1.162 gigabits per second

Section II illustrated in Figs. 2 and 6. In [12], Wang and Cui for the (3969,3213) code on a Xilinx Virtex4 XC4VLX-200

propose an enhanced partially parallel decoder architecture for FPGA and 713.8 Mbps for the (8176,7156) code on a Xilinx

QC-LDPC codes, which is somewhat similar to the vector de- Virtex4 XC4VLX-160 FPGA using the vectorization tech-

coding architecture described in Section III. However, there are niques, which is significantly better than the best known FPGA

some key differences. First, the memory packing method de- implementation for the same code in research literature [12].

scribed in [12] is not amenable to overlapped message passing With folding we showed that quasi-cyclic LDPC codes with

and the data alignment scheme is inefficient. As a result, the de- a very large number of circulants can be implemented on

coding throughput is significantly lower than what is achieved FPGAs with a small number of embedded memory blocks.

by our approach, as shown in Fig. 3. With

we outperform This is useful for developing decoders for the codes used in

them by a factor of 3.6. Furthermore, the bit error performance DVB-S2 for example. We also described a synthesis tool called

on the (8176,7156) code reported in the paper has some dis- QCSyn that takes the matrix of a quasi-cyclic LDPC code

crepancy from NASA and our implementation, as shown by the and the resource characteristics of an FPGA and automatically

error-floor in Fig. 7. Preliminary results from the vector pro- synthesizes a folded or vector architecture that maximizes

cessing aspects of this work were reported in [24]. However, the decoding throughput for the code on the given FPGA by

[24] does not present bit-error performance curves and does selecting the appropriate degree folding and/or vectorization.

not show how the proposed vector implementation compares We plan to extend the methods described in this paper and

in terms of resource utilization and decoding throughput with the QCSyn tool to develop an universal decoder architecture

other architectures that use message packing. Furthermore, [24] for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes, basically, a single decoder that

does not address the folding transformation to take advantage of works for a family of quasi-cyclic codes.

configurable depth of the block RAMs and the QCSyn tool that

facilitates design space exploration of FPGA implementation of

decoders for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes.

In [25], Liu proposes a register-based decoder for structured

LDPC codes which is composed of circulants (not necessarily

circulant permutation matrices). For an LDPC code whose

parity check matrix is

, the variable-to-check messages

are grouped by equal size of . For the

-regular code,

the decoder has

-input CNUs and

-input VNUs.

The decoder breaks the sequential tie between CNU update

and VNU update. The two half-iteration can be overlapped

with the waiting clock cycle of 1. The decoder is a tradeoff

between memory-shared partially parallel decoder and fully

parallel decoder. The proposed ASIC implementation of a

(2048,1723) (6,32)-regular structured LDPC code (10GBaseT

ethernet standard) achieved a maximum decoding throughput

of 5.3 Gb/s at 16 iterations.

The idea of mapping messages from multiple CPMs to the the

same physical memory has been explored by some researchers

including [6], [13], [26]–[28]. The common theme underlying

these approaches is to pack messages of the same CPM into

one long word (realized by a concatenation of several block

RAMs) or several consecutive (say 4) memory words and use

a long barrel shifter to reorder the message so that they can be

aligned to be processed. Typically, one-input one-output pro-

cessing units are used to process the messages serially. The

barrel shifter [29] is quite expensive and researchers [29], [30]

have explored efficient implementations of the barrel shifter

using Benes network structure. By mapping messages in this

way, it is very efficient to implement highly flexible decoder for

multiple standards [31], [32].

VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
We described two specific optimizations called vectorization and folding to take advantage of the configurable data-width and depth of embedded memory in an FPGA to improve

REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[3] M. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May 1999.
[4] L. Chen, J. Xu, I. Djurdjevic, and S. Lin, “Near-Shannon-limit quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 1038–1042, Jul. 2004.
[5] Z. Li, L. Chen, L. Zeng, S. Lin, and W. Fong, “Efficient encoding of quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 11, p. 1973, Nov. 2005.
[6] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam, and M. Wainwright, “Investigation of error floors of structured low-density parity-check codes by hardware emulation,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., Dec. 2006, pp. 1–6.
[7] E. Yeo, P. Pakzad, B. Nikolic, and V. Anantharam, “High throughput low-density parity-check decoder architectures,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., 2001, vol. 5, pp. 3019–3024.
[8] Y. Dai, Z. Yan, and N. Chen, “Optimal overlapped message passing decoding of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 565–578, May 2008.
[9] Y. Chen and K. Parhi, “Overlapped message passing for quasi-cyclic low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 1106–1113, Jun. 2004.
[10] T. Zhang and K. Parhi, “A 54 Mbps (3,6)-regular FPGA LDPC decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst., Oct. 2002, pp. 127–132.
[11] T. Zhang, “Efficient VLSI Architectures for Error-Correcting Coding,” Ph.D., Univ. Minnesota, Minneapolis, 2002.
[12] Z. Wang and Z. Cui, “Low-complexity high-speed decoder design for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 104–114, Jan. 2007.
[13] M. Gomes, G. Falcao, V. Silva, V. Ferreira, A. Sengo, and M. Falcao, “Flexible parallel architecture for DVB-S2 LDPC decoders,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., Nov. 2007, pp. 3265–3269.
[14] C. Wey, M. Shieh, and S. Lin, “Algorithms of finding the first two minimum values and their hardware implementation,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 3430–3437, Dec. 2008.
[15] L. Lan, L. Zeng, Y. Tai, L. Chen, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Construction of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for AWGN and binary erasure channels: A finite field approach,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 2429–2458, Jul. 2007.
[16] W. Ryan and S. Lin, Channel Codes: Classical and Modern. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2009.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: MEMORY SYSTEM OPTIMIZATION FOR FPGA-BASED IMPLEMENTATION

111

[17] D.-U. Lee, W. Luk, J. Villasenor, G. Zhang, and P. Leong, “A hardware Gaussian noise generator using the Wallace method,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 13, no. 8, pp. 911–920, Aug. 2005.
[18] A. Blanksby and C. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.
[19] S.-H. Kang and I.-C. Park, “Loosely coupled memory-based decoding architecture for low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 1045–1056, May 2006.
[20] L. Yang, H. Liu, and C.-J. Shi, “Code construction and FPGA implementation of a low-error-floor multi-rate low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 892–904, Apr. 2006.
[21] G. Masera, F. Quaglio, and F. Vacca, “Implementation of a flexible LDPC decoder,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 542–546, Jun. 2007.
[22] T. Zhang and K. Parhi, “Joint (3,k)-Regular LDPC code and decoder/encoder design,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 1065–1079, Apr. 2004.
[23] H. Zhong and T. Zhang, “Block-LDPC: A practical LDPC coding system design approach,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 766–775, Apr. 2005.
[24] X. Chen, J. Kang, S. Lin, and V. Akella, “Accelerating FPGA-based emulation of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes with vector processing,” presented at the Des., Autom. Test Eur., Nice, France, Apr. 2009.
[25] L. Liu and C.-J. Shi, “Sliced message passing: High throughput overlapped decoding of high-rate low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 3697–3710, Dec. 2008.
[26] F. Kienle, T. Brack, and N. Wehn, “A synthesizable IP core for DVB-S2 LDPC code decoding,” in Design, Automation and Test in Europe, Mar. 2005, vol. 3, pp. 100–105.
[27] J. Dielissen, A. Hekstra, and V. Berg, “Low cost LDPC decoder for DVB-S2,” in Proc. Des., Autom. Test Eur., Mar. 2006, vol. 2, pp. 1–6.
[28] T. Brack, M. Alles, T. Lehnigk-Emden, F. Kienle, N. Wehn, N. L’Insalata, F. Rossi, M. Rovini, and L. Fanucci, “Low complexity LDPC code decoders for next generation standards,” in Proc. Des., Autom. Test Eur., Apr. 2007, pp. 1–6.
[29] J. Lin, Z. Wang, L. Li, J. Sha, and M. Gao, “Efficient shuffle network architecture and application for WiMAX LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 215–219, Mar. 2009.
[30] Z. Wang and Z. Cui, “A memory efficient partially parallel decoder architecture for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 483–488, Apr. 2007.
[31] D. Bao, B. Xiang, R. Shen, A. Pan, Y. Chen, and X. Zeng, “Programmable architecture for flexi-mode QC-LDPC decoder supporting wireless LAN/MAN applications and beyond,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, to be published.
[32] C. Zhang, Z. Wang, J. Sha, L. Li, and J. Lin, “Flexible LDPC decoder design for multi-Gb/s applications,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, to be published.
Xiaoheng Chen received the B.S. and M.S. degrees from the Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China, in 2005 and 2007, respectively. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Davis. He has done a lot of work on field-programmable gate arrays and digital application-specific integrated circuit designs. His general interests include channel coding theory, very large scale integration (VLSI) design, communication theory, multimedia coding theory, VLSI system design, and VLSI design methodology. Main current interests include VLSI design for low-power and high-performance communication system, VLSI design for ultrahigh-throughput channel coding system, and VLSI design for video and audio technology.

Jingyu Kang received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electronic engineering from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 2002 and 2005, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering from the University of California, Davis in 2009.
He is currently with Augusta Technology USA, Inc., Santa Clara, CA, as a System Engineer. His research interests include error control coding and signal processing for data storage and communication systems.
Shu Lin (S’62-M’65-SM’78-F’80-LF’00) received the B.S.E.E. degree from the National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, in 1959, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Rice University, Houston, TX, in 1964 and 1965, respectively.
In 1965, he joined the Faculty of the University of Hawaii, Honolulu, as an Assistant Professor of Electrical Engineering. He became an Associate Professor in 1969 and a Professor in 1973. In 1986, he joined Texas A&M University, College Station, as the Irma Runyon Chair Professor of Electrical Engineering. In 1987, he returned to the University of Hawaii. From 1978 to 1979, he was a Visiting Scientist at the IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, where he worked on error control protocols for data communication systems. He spent the academic year of 1996–1997 as a Visiting Professor at the Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany. He retired from University of Hawaii in 1999 and he is currently an Adjunct Professor at University of California, Davis. He has published numerous technical papers in IEEE Transactions and other refereed journals. He is the author of the book An Introduction to Error-Correcting Codes (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1970). He also coauthored (with D. J. Costello) the book Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1st ed., 1982, 2nd ed., 2004), and (with T. Kasami, T. Fujiwara, and M. Fossorier) the book Trellises and Trellis-Based Decoding Algorithms, (Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic, 1998). He has served as the Principal Investigator on 36 research grants. His current research areas include algebraic coding theory, coded modulation, error control systems, and satellite communications. Dr. Lin is a Member of the IEEE Information Theory Society and the Communication Society. He served as the Associate Editor for Algebraic Coding Theory for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY from 1976 to 1978, the Program Cochair of the IEEE International Symposium of Information Theory held in Kobe, Japan, in June 1988, and a Cochair of the IEEE Information Theory Workshop held in Chengdu, China, October 2006. He was the President of the IEEE Information Theory Society in 1991. In 1996, he was a recipient of the Alexander von Humboldt Research Prize for U.S. Senior Scientists, a recipient of the IEEE Third-Millennium Medal, 2000, and a recipient of the IEEE Communications Society 2007 Stephen O. Rice Prize in the Field of Communication Theory.
Venkatesh Akella received the Ph.D. degree in computer science from the University of Utah, Salt Lake City.
He is a Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering at University of California, Davis. His current research encompasses computer architecture and embedded systems.
Prof. Akella is a Member of ACM.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

