758
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 59, NO. 3, MARCH 2011
Efficient Linear Programming Decoding of
HDPC Codes
Alex Yufit, Asi Lifshitz, and Yair Be’ery, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—We propose several improvements for Linear Pro-
gramming (LP) decoding algorithms for High Density Parity
Check (HDPC) codes. First, we use the automorphism groups
of a code to create parity check matrix diversity and to generate
valid cuts from redundant parity checks. Second, we propose an
efficient mixed integer decoder utilizing the branch and bound
method. We further enhance the proposed decoders by removing
inactive constraints and by adapting the parity check matrix
prior to decoding according to the channel observations. Based
on simulation results the proposed decoders achieve near-ML
performance with reasonable complexity.
Index Terms—Adaptive LP decoding, automorphism groups,
BCH codes, belief propagation, branch and bound, linear pro-
gramming, LP relaxation, pseudocodewords.
I. INTRODUCTION
L
INEAR Programming (LP) decoding was proposed by
Feldman in [1] for decoding binary linear codes. Feldman
showed that ML decoding can be equivalently formulated
as an LP optimization problem running on the codewords
polytope. The codewords polytope is a convex hull of all the
valid codewords, described by a set of constraints. The number
of constraints depends exponentially on the code length; thus
Feldman proposed a sub-optimal algorithm running on a
relaxed codewords polytope. The relaxation of the codewords
polytope is done as follows: each row of the parity check
matrix is represented by a set of linear constraints. These
constraints construct a local codeword polytope. The intersec-
tion of all the local codeword polytopes is a relaxed polytope,
also called the fundamental polytope [2]. The vertices of the
fundamental polytope contain every codeword, but also some
non-codeword pseudocodewords. The LP decoding process
finds a vertex of the fundamental polytope maximizing the
channel likelihood ratios function. One of the advantages of
LP decoding is that the decoder has the desirable Maximum
Likelihood (ML) certificate property; whenever it outputs an
integral solution, it is guaranteed to be the ML codeword [1].
Another advantage is that the relaxed polytope can be tight-
ened by including additional constraints, such as constraints
based on Redundant Parity Checks (RPC) [3].
The work of [1] was focused on Low Density Parity Check
(LDPC) codes. In the formulation of [1] the number of
constraints per check node is exponential in the check node
degree. LDPC codes are characterized by a sparse parity check
Paper approved by S.-Y. Chung, the Editor for LDPC Coding and Infor-
mation Theory of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received
November 26, 2009; revised June 14, 2010 and September 14, 2010.
The authors are with Tel Aviv University, School of Electrical Engineering,
Ramat, Aviv 69978, Israel (e-mail: ybeery@eng.tau.ac.il).
The material in this paper was presented in part at the Workshop on Lin-
ear Programming and Message-Passing Approaches to High-Density Parity-
Check Codes and High-Density Graphical Models, Tel Aviv, Israel, Mar. 2010.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2011.122110.090729
matrix, which in turn leads to a relatively small set of LP
constraints. High Density Parity Check (HDPC) codes are
characterized by a dense parity check matrix, which leads to
poor performance over the AWGN channel when using the
decoder of [1] due to several reasons. First, the number of
constraints depends exponentially on each parity check degree,
which results in a very large linear problem. Second, each
vertex of the fundamental polytope is the intersection of sev-
eral hyper-planes, defined by the parity check constraints; thus
increasing the number of constraints leads to increasing the
number of pseudocodewords, deteriorating the performance of
the decoder.
In the works of Vontobel and Koetter [2], [4], [5] several
LP relaxations approximating the codewords-polytope were
described, low complexity LP decoding algorithms for LDPC
codes were proposed and the performance of these decoding
algorithms was analyzed. In [6] Burshtein showed that under
an appropriate scheduling scheme the algorithm of [4] can
have a computational complexity which scales linearly with
the block length.
Dimakis et al. [7] investigated the geometrical structure
of the fundamental polytope and its pseudocodewords. They
proposed an improved LP decoding algorithm that eliminates
fractional pseudocodewords by guessing facets of the funda-
mental polytope. Their algorithm has the same complexity or-
der as the LP decoder of [1], but with significant performance
improvement.
Chertkov and Stepanov [8], [9] provided a pseudocodeword-
search method for finding the pseudocodewords with low
effective distance. In [9] a new algorithm was suggested
to reduce the complexity of [1]. Equipped with this new
algorithm they were able to find the spectrum of the low
effective distance pseudocodewords for codes which would
otherwise be impractical to decode by LP.
In [10], Yang et al. presented a compact LP relaxation
which required less constraints compared to [1] to describe
the relaxed polytope. Yang et al. proved in [10] that the
new relaxation is equivalent to [1] by means of having the
same projection on the codewords polytope; thus having the
same performance. In the new formulation, the number of
constraints is polynomial in the check node degree result-
ing in a considerable decrease of computational complexity.
However, despite the complexity reduction, [10] cannot be
applied to medium and long HDPC codes, since the number
of constraints is still prohibitively large.
In [3] an Adaptive LP (ALP) decoder was presented, which
can be applied to medium and long HDPC codes. The decoder
of [3] achieves the same performance as the decoders of [1]
and [10] by solving a set of compact LP problems instead of
one problem with a huge number of constraints. ALP decoder
0090-6778/11$25.00 c⃝2011 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
YUFIT et al.: EFFICIENT LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING OF HDPC CODES
759
iteratively converges to the same solution as [1] by adding
constraints and dropping some old constraints. A randomized
algorithm for finding row RPC cuts to tighten the relaxation
is also presented in [3] as a way to improve the performance.
Nevertheless, finding efficient methods of constructing RPC
cuts was left open.
In [11] Draper et al. have suggested a mixed integer decod-
ing for improving the performance of LP decoding over LDPC
codes. By adding integer constraints to the ALP decoder of [3],
the proposed mixed integer decoder can obtain ML decoding
performance. However, the authors of [11] have claimed that
their method cannot be applied to HDPC codes since the
complexity becomes prohibitively large.
An LP decoding algorithm for HDPC codes with acceptable
performance and complexity was proposed by Tanatmis et
al. [12]. This new decoder, denoted as a New Separation
Algorithm (NSA) performs significantly better then the LP
decoder of [1], [3], [10] and [11] mainly due to a generation
of new RPC cuts. The algorithm generating RPC cuts is
based on Gaussian elimination of the parity check matrix.
Recently, Tanatmis et al. have improved their decoder by
finding additional algorithms for generating RPC cuts [13].
The contribution of this paper is in providing better adap-
tive LP decoding techniques for decoding HDPC codes. We
present several methods for eliminating fractional pseudocode-
words, while adding tolerable complexity. First, we propose to
improve the performance of the LP decoder by running several
decoders in parallel, while each one using a different represen-
tation of the parity check matrix. As an alternative, we propose
using several representations of the parity check matrix to
derive RPC cuts in order to tighten the relaxed polytope. The
variety of parity check matrix representations are produced by
columns’ permutations taken from the automorphism groups
of the code. Second, a new variant of mixed integer decoding
utilizing the branch and bound method is proposed. We further
enhanced the proposed decoders by utilizing ordered statistics
for adapting the parity check matrix according to the channel
observations prior to decoding. We also propose removing
all inactive constraints after each decoding iteration, which
avoids the growth of the number of constraints and reduces the
number of fractional pseudocodewords in the relaxed polytope.
Our decoding algorithms adaptively seek for constraints which
exclude fractional pseudocodewords from the feasible set. We
achieve a near-ML performance by solving several compact
LP problems, rather than solving a single growing problem.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: We provide
some preliminaries in Section II. In Section III we introduce an
improved adaptive LP decoder which makes use of the auto-
morphism groups. In Section IV we present an adaptive branch
and bound decoding algorithm. In Section V we propose
two further enhancements for the adaptive LP decoder: parity
check matrix adaptation and removing inactive constraints.
Simulation results are presented in section VI. Section VII
concludes the paper.
II. PRELIMINARIES
A binary Linear code 𝒞of dimensions (n, k) is the space
of all the binary words of length n which can be described
by its parity check matrix H. A binary vector x of length
n is a codeword iff x satisfies: 𝐻x = 0 in GF(2). In this
paper we consider transmitting over Additive White Gaussian
Noise (AWGN) channel using BPSK modulation. Let y be
the receiver input, then we can formulate the ML decoding
problem in the following way:
x𝑀𝐿= 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑖𝑛{
𝑛
∑
𝑖=1
𝑐𝑖𝑥𝑖𝑠.𝑡. x ∈𝒞}
(1)
where 𝑐𝑖= 𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑃𝑟(𝑦𝑖∣𝑥𝑖= 0)/𝑃𝑟(𝑦𝑖∣𝑥𝑖= 1)) is the log
likelihood ratio of the 𝑖𝑡ℎbit and x𝑀𝐿is maximum likelihood
codeword. The vector c = [𝑐1, . . . , 𝑐𝑛] is also called a cost
vector.
Each check node j in the Tanner graph [14] of a code
generates a local codeword polytope [1]. The local codeword
polytope is defined by the following set of constraints:
∑
𝑖∈𝑁(𝑗)∖𝑆
𝑥𝑖+
∑
𝑖∈𝑆
(1 −𝑥𝑖) ≥1, ∣𝑆∣is odd
(2)
where 𝑁(𝑗) is a set of all the bit nodes connected to check
node j and S is an odd subset of 𝑁(𝑗). The constraints
(2) are also known as Forbidden Set (FS) inequalities or FS
constraints.
The decoder of [1] performs LP optimization over the
fundamental polytope. When the LP solver returns an integer
codeword it has the ML certificate property [1], which guar-
antees that the decoded word is the ML-codeword. However,
when the solution contains fractional coefficients, the decoder
returns an error. In [1] Feldman proposed adding RPC cuts
in order to tighten the relaxed polytope and thus improve the
performance. However, no efficient way of finding such RPCs
was given.
The number of FS constraints required to describe the
fundamental polytope in
Feldman’s LP decoder [1] is
∑𝑚
𝑗=1 2𝑑𝑐(𝑗)−1 where 𝑑𝑐(𝑗) is the order of the 𝑗𝑡ℎrow of
H, and m is the number of rows in H. The complexity of the
decoder of [1] grows exponentially with the density of the
parity check matrix; thus such a decoder is only applicable to
LDPC codes.
The ALP decoder of [3] adaptively adds FS inequalities (2)
and solves a set of compact LP problems rather than one large
problem. In [3] it was shown that such an adaptive decoder
converges to the same solution as the original LP decoder
of [1], but with much less complexity. For each check node
only a single constraint from the set S of (2) can generate a
cut. Furthermore, the maximal number of iterations required
is bounded by the code length. These bounds make adaptive
LP decoding efficient even for HDPC codes. However, the
performance of [3] is poor when applied to HDPC codes.
The NSA decoder proposed by Tanatmis et al. in [12] is also
an adaptive LP decoder. In [12], additional auxiliary variables
are used as indicators to detect the violated parity checks.
Each indicator variable corresponds to a row of the parity
check matrix and satisfies the following equality constraints:
𝐻x −2z = 0
(3)
x and z are the codeword bit variables and auxiliary vari-
ables respectively and 0 is the all-zeros vector. The initial
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
760
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 59, NO. 3, MARCH 2011
LP problem of [12] contains only the constraints of (3). If
the decoder output is integral, the ML certificate property
guarantees that the output is the ML codeword. Otherwise,
valid cuts are generated and added to the LP formulation
to eliminate the fractional pseudocodeword. A modified LP
problem is solved again repetitively until an integral solution
is found or no more valid cuts could be generated. Valid cuts
are generated by either FS inequalities of (2) or by generating
RPC cuts. RPC cuts are generated based on the observation
that every fractional pseudocodeword is cut by an RPC whose
support contains only one fractional index. Such RPCs are
generated by Gaussian elimination of the parity check matrix
as described in [12].
III. LP DECODERS UTILIZING AUTOMORPHISM GROUPS
Automorphism group of a linear block code 𝒞, 𝐴𝑢𝑡(𝒞),
is a group of all the coordinates’ permutations which send
𝒞into itself [15]. For example, the automorphism group
of any cyclic code includes a cyclic shift permutation, as
well as other permutations which depend on the internal
structure of the code. For many widely used block codes the
automorphism groups are well known. Automorphism groups
of some primitive binary BCH codes are provided in [16].
Several BP decoders [17], [18], [19] exploit the knowledge
of the automorphism group of the code to generate alterna-
tive representations of the parity check matrix by permuting
its columns with a permutation taken from 𝐴𝑢𝑡(𝒞). In BP
decoders, the choice of a parity check matrix has a crucial
influence on the Tanner Graph [14] of the code and thus
on the performance of the decoder. It is shown in [17],
[18], [19] that a BP decoder running on several H matrices
in parallel achieves significant performance improvement for
HDPC codes, though increases the computational complexity.
We use the same approach with LP decoders based on
the following: First, an LP decoder is also susceptible to
the choice of the parity check matrix [1] i.e. different parity
check matrices will have different relaxations of the codewords
polytope and thus different pseudocodewords. A systematic
way for a-priori choosing a representation of the parity check
matrix that will yield the best decoding result for a given
received word is still unknown; thus we propose to run several
LP decoders in parallel, each one using a different parity
check matrix representation. We denote this concept: parity
check matrix diversity. Second, alternative representations of
a parity check matrix can be exploited to derive new RPC cuts
when using adaptive LP decoders [3], [12]. When an adaptive
decoder is unable to generate any more valid cuts, alternative
representations of the parity check matrix can provide addi-
tional RPCs to generate valid cuts in order to obtain a tighter
relaxation. Each of the two approaches presented above can
be used with any LP decoder ([1], [3], [10] and [12]). In the
following we propose using the first approach with the NSA
decoder of [12] and the second with the ALP decoder of [3].
A. LP Decoder Utilizing Parity Check Matrix Diversity
The behavior of an adaptive LP decoder [3], [12] is difficult
to analyze: At each stage, the relaxed polytope is modified
due to the addition of new constraints and possibly disposal
of old constraints [3]. These modifications lead to the emer-
gence of some new pseudocodewords and the disappearance
of some existing pseudocodewords. For each chosen parity
check matrix, the adaptive LP decoder may converge to a
fractional pseudocodeword minimizing the objective function
in a vicinity of the received word and causing a decoding
failure. Such a pseudocodeword may not exist in the relaxed
polytope derived from a different parity check matrix.
The parity check matrix diversity is a powerful tool to re-
duce the likelihood of decoding failures caused by converging
to pseudocodewords. Algorithm 1 is an improved version of
the NSA decoder provided in [12], and its performance gain
will be demonstrated in section VI. For each received word,
the decoder tries to decode the word several times, each time
with a different representation of the parity check matrix. Each
new representation is generated by permuting the columns of
H with a random permutation taken from 𝐴𝑢𝑡(𝒞). The ML
certificate property of the LP decoder is used as a stopping
criterion when an integral solution is found. If none of the
decoders returned a valid codeword, the algorithm returns a
fractional solution with minimal Euclidian distance from the
received word.
In the description of Algorithm 1 we used the following
notation: x = 𝑎𝑟𝑔
𝑚𝑖𝑛{c𝑡x 𝑠.𝑡. 𝐻} means run the
NSA decoder which finds x that minimize c𝑡x, subject to
using H as a parity check matrix representation. The worst
case complexity of Algorithm 1 is higher than the worst
case complexity of the NSA decoder by a linear factor N,
while resulting in a major performance enhancement. One can
trade performance for complexity by controlling the maximal
number of NSA decoding attempts, N.
B. LP Decoder Utilizing RPC Cuts Based On Alternative
Parity Check Matrix Representations
As was stated earlier, alternative parity check matrix repre-
sentations can contribute to the search of new RPC valid cuts.
Valid RPC cuts are generated from the rows of the permuted H.
Such an approach achieves tighter relaxation of the codeword
polytope and results in a superior performance. This approach
is demonstrated in Algorithm based on the ALP decoder of
[3].
The first stage of the proposed algorithm is to decode the
received word using the ALP decoder of [3]. If the result is
integral, the ML certificate property holds and the optimal
solution is returned. Otherwise, a new representation of the
parity check matrix is generated. Such a new representation
is achieved by permuting the columns of H by a random
permutation taken from 𝐴𝑢𝑡(𝒞). The ALP decoder is used
repetitively, each time with a different representation of H.
The decoder continuous until an integral solution is found or
a maximal number of decoding attempts is reached. The major
difference between the current approach and the approach
presented in sub-section III-A is that the current approach
preserves constraints generated in pervious decoding attempts.
The worst case complexity of Algorithm 2 is higher by
factor N than the worst case complexity of the ALP decoder
of [3]. The parameter N is chosen as a trade-off between the
desirable performance and complexity.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
YUFIT et al.: EFFICIENT LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING OF HDPC CODES
761
Algorithm 1 NSA decoder of [12] with parity check matrix
diversity
Input:
r - Received vector
c - Cost vector
𝐻- Parity check matrix
𝐴𝑢𝑡(𝒞) - Automorphism group of code 𝒞
𝑁- Maximal number of decoding attempts
Output:
x𝑜𝑝𝑡- Returned optimal solution
Init x𝑜𝑝𝑡= 0, c = −r
for i in range 1 to N do
Run
the
NSA
decoder
of
[12]
:
x𝑖
=
𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑖𝑛{c𝑡x 𝑠.𝑡. 𝐻}
if x𝑖is integral then
x𝑜𝑝𝑡= x𝑖
Permute the result: x𝑜𝑝𝑡= 𝜋𝑖⋅. . . ⋅𝜋𝑖−1(x𝑖)
Return x𝑜𝑝𝑡
Terminate
end if
Choose randomly a permutation : 𝜋𝑖∈𝐴𝑢𝑡(𝒞)
Apply inverse permutation to the cost vector : c =
𝜋−1
𝑖
(c)
end for
Permute the vectors: x𝑘= 𝜋1 ⋅. . . ⋅𝜋𝑘(x𝑘), 𝑘∈1, . . . , 𝑁
Find a solution x𝑜𝑝𝑡= 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑖𝑛∥x𝑘−r∥, 𝑘∈1, . . . , 𝑁
Return x𝑜𝑝𝑡
Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2 rely on the NSA decoder and
the ALP decoder, respectively. Despite the performance issue,
the main advantage of using an ALP decoder is that unlike
an NSA decoder, the ALP decoder doesn’t employ Gaussian
elimination for the search of valid cuts. The use of Gaussian
elimination may have a severe implication on the complexity
especially for large codes. In Algorithm 2 we employ H matrix
permutations for the search of new valid cuts which has a
complexity of only 𝑂(𝑛) since only the columns’ indices have
to be permuted.
IV. A BRANCH AND BOUND LP-BASED ADAPTIVE
DECODER
The branch-and-bound method, in the context of linear
programming decoding, was first proposed in [20], as a
multistage LP decoding of LDPC codes. The proposed decoder
is a suboptimal LP decoder, for which deeper depths lead to
a better performance at the cost of an increased complexity. It
can be applied to both LDPC and HDPC codes, does not use
mixed integer programming, and requires less computations
compared to [11]. It is able to refine the results of [12]
by systematically eliminating the most unreliable fractional
elements towards finding the ML-codeword.
The proposed decoder initially tries to find the ML-
codeword by calling the NSA decoder. If a fractional pseu-
docodeword was returned and no new valid cuts could be
found, our decoder recursively constructs two new LP prob-
Algorithm 2 Improved ALP decoder of [3] using alternative
H representations
Input:
r - Received vector
c - Cost vector
𝐻- Parity check matrix
𝐴𝑢𝑡(𝒞) - Automorphism group of code 𝒞
𝑁- Maximal number of decoding attempts
𝐶𝑆- Set of initial constraints
Output:
x𝑜𝑝𝑡- Returned optimal solution
Init c = −r, 𝐶𝑆= {}
for i in range 1 to N do
Run the ALP decoder of [3] : x = 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑖𝑛{c𝑡x 𝑠.𝑡. 𝐻}
with constraints set CS
Add all new generated constraints to the set CS
if x is integral then
break
end if
Choose a random permutation : 𝜋𝑖∈𝐴𝑢𝑡(𝒞)
Permute the columns of the parity check matrix H: 𝐻=
𝜋𝑖(𝐻)
end for
Return x𝑜𝑝𝑡= x
lems and solves them using [12]. Each new problem is
equipped with a new equality constraint, forcing the most
unreliable fractional element to have a binary value. The most
unreliable fractional element is chosen using the following
novel technique. The proposed decoder obtains a set of coun-
ters - one for each element. At each iteration of the NSA,
the counters of all the fractional elements are incremented.
When the NSA outputs an error, the fractional element with
the highest value is chosen as the most unreliable fractional
element. The decoder adopts a depth-first tree searching ap-
proach of limited depth. At each node a different LP problem
is solved. The root of the tree (depth equals zero) is the
fractional solution (pseudocodeword) obtained by solving the
original problem using [12]. A node at depth i has i new
equality constraints, and has two children at depth 𝑖+ 1. The
proposed algorithm is described below as Algorithm 3 and
makes use of procedure 𝐵𝐵𝑑𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑑𝑒presented just after it.
The decoders of [1], [3] and [12] make use of the ML-
certificate property as a stopping criterion. The new equality
constraints may lead to infeasible solutions or integral solu-
tions which are not the ML-codewords. In order to maintain
the ML-certificate property, our decoder has three pruning
possibilities:
1) Pruning by infeasibility: If equality constraints vio-
late the parity check matrix constraints, adding more
constraints (deeper search) will not make the solution
feasible.
2) Pruning by bound: The smallest integral solution found
so far is stored as an incumbent. The optimal cost value
of the incumbent is stored as 𝐵𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟−𝑏𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑. If the cost
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
762
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 59, NO. 3, MARCH 2011
Algorithm 3 Branch and Bound separation decoder
Input:
c - Cost vector
𝐻- Parity check matrix
𝐵𝐵𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ- Maximal depth
𝐵𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟−𝑏𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑- Objective value upper bound
Output:
x𝑜𝑝𝑡- Returned optimal solution
Run the NSA decoder of [12] : x = 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑖𝑛{c𝑡x 𝑠.𝑡. 𝐻}
if the output of [12] is integral then
return x𝑜𝑝𝑡= x
Terminate
end if
Find the most unreliable fractional element 𝑥𝑖and construct
two LP problems:
1) ORG_BB_zero: Original problem with a constraint
𝑥𝑖= 0
2) ORG_BB_one: Original problem with a constraint
𝑥𝑖= 1
Set 𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡_𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ= 1
Set 𝐵𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟−𝑏𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑= 𝑀𝐴𝑋𝐼𝑁𝑇
Set x𝑜𝑝𝑡= 0
Call Procedure 1 with (x𝑜𝑝𝑡, 𝐵𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟−𝑏𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑, 𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡_𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ) =
𝐵𝐵_𝑑𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑑𝑒(𝑂𝑅𝐺_𝐵𝐵_𝑧𝑒𝑟𝑜, 𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡_𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ, 𝐵𝐵𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ,
𝐵𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟−𝑏𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑, x𝑜𝑝𝑡)
Set 𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡_𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ= 1
(x𝑜𝑝𝑡, 𝐵𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟−𝑏𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑, 𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡_𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ) =
𝐵𝐵_𝑑𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑑𝑒(𝑂𝑅𝐺_𝐵𝐵_𝑜𝑛𝑒, 𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡_𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ, 𝐵𝐵𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ,
𝐵𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟−𝑏𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑, x𝑜𝑝𝑡)
TABLE I
COMPARING THE AVERAGE NUMBER OF LP PROBLEMS AND LP
CONSTRAINTS IN THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE NSA AND THE BRANCH
AND BOUND SEPERATION DECODER OF DEPTH=6 FOR THE BCH[63,36,11]
CODE
NSA Decoder
Branch
and
Bound
Separation
Decoder
depth = 6
SNR
Average
num-
ber
of LP
prob-
lems
Average
num-
ber of
con-
straints
FER
Average
num-
ber
of LP
prob-
lems
Average
num-
ber of
con-
straints
FER
3.0
8.667
12.951
4.785e-2
39.601
44.587
5.976e-3
3.5
7.049
13.177
1.608e-2
17.757
24.301
1.379e-3
4.0
5.643
13.470
4.037e-3
8.251
16.167
2.299e-4
4.5
4.400
13.495
9.849e-4
4.954
14.099
4.499e-5
5.0
3.422
13.202
2.249e-4
3.559
13.325
4.999e-6
value of a node is bigger than 𝐵𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟−𝑏𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑, this node
will not be fathomed; this is because each of its two
children has an additional constraint, which in turn may
only increase the cost.
3) Pruning by integrality: An integral solution at node i is
a stopping criteria, since fathoming the node may only
increase the cost.
The complexity of our algorithm is upper bounded by
Procedure 1 BB_decode
(x𝑜𝑝𝑡, 𝐵𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟−𝑏𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑, 𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡_𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ) =
BB_decode(𝐿𝑃_𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑙𝑒𝑚, 𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡_𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ, 𝐵𝐵𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ,
𝐵𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟−𝑏𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑, x𝑜𝑝𝑡) :
Input:
𝐿𝑃_𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑙𝑒𝑚- LP problem
𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡_𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ- Current tree depth
𝐵𝐵𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ- Maximal depth
𝐵𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟−𝑏𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑- Objective value upper bound
Output:
x𝑜𝑝𝑡- Returned optimal solution
𝐵𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟−𝑏𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑- Objective value upper bound
𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡_𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ- Current tree depth
if 𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡_𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ> 𝐵𝐵𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎthen
return (x𝑜𝑝𝑡, 𝐵𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟−𝑏𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑, 𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡_𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ)
end if
Run the NSA decoder of [12] : x = 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑖𝑛{c𝑡x 𝑠.𝑡. 𝐻}
Denote the objective value as c*
if no feasible solution is found then
return (x𝑜𝑝𝑡, 𝐵𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟−𝑏𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑, 𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡_𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ)
end if
if the solution is integral then
if 𝑐∗< 𝐵𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟−𝑏𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑then
𝐵𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟−𝑏𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑= 𝑐∗
x𝑜𝑝𝑡= x
end if
return (x𝑜𝑝𝑡, 𝐵𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟−𝑏𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑, 𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡_𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ)
else
if 𝑐∗< 𝐵𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟−𝑏𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑then
𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡_𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ= 𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡_𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ+ 1
Find the most unreliable fractional element 𝑥𝑖and
construct two problems:
∙BB_zero: Current problem with a constraint 𝑥𝑖= 0
∙BB_one: Current problem with a constraint 𝑥𝑖= 1
Solve BB_zero and BB_one by calling Procedure 1
end if
end if
the complexity of solving 2𝐷𝑝LP problems using the NSA
decoder, where 𝐷𝑝is the maximal allowed depth. It should be
noted that each such problem does not use the RPC constraints
of its predecessor; thus a compact problem is being solved
at each node. Table I shows the collected statistics for the
BCH[63,36,11] code when using the NSA decoder of [12]
and the proposed Branch and Bound Separation decoder with
𝐷𝑝= 6.
Example 1. Let H be the parity check matrix of the [8,4,4]
extended Hamming code
𝐻=
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠
Let r be an arbitrary received vector (LLR): r
=
[0.798, 1.422, −1.240, −0.771, −1.745, 0.554, 0.984, −0.405]
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
YUFIT et al.: EFFICIENT LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING OF HDPC CODES
763
Fig. 1.
Example of the Branch and Bound separation algorithm.
Fig. 1 represents the algorithm steps for maximal depth
equals 3. Edges enumeration represents the decoder steps. Ver-
tices enumeration represents the additional binary constraints
at a given depth. One can observe that the tree is pruned twice:
After step 5 and after step 6 due to pruning by bound. The
final solution is found after 6 iterations of the NSA decoder. A
different search algorithm could converge to the ML solution
after two steps if the first search was for 𝑥8 = 1. Different
search techniques may improve the complexity, but have no
affect on the decoder performance.
V. FURTHER ENHANCEMENTS
A. Adapting the Parity Check Matrix According to the Chan-
nel Observations
The method of adapting the parity check matrix was pro-
posed for the sum product algorithm by Jiang and Narayanan
[21]. We utilize this technique in LP decoding. In [21] matrix
adaptation is performed before each decoding iteration. Due
to the nature of LP decoders, for which no LLR refinement is
obtained, the matrix adaption is performed only once prior to
decoding. We perform Gaussian elimination, such that a sparse
submatrix that corresponds to the less reliable bits is created
prior to decoding. We show in the next section that adapting
the parity check matrix prior to decoding can significantly
improve both the performance and the complexity. The latter
is achieved due to a faster convergence of the decoding
algorithm. In [3], Taghavi et al. have proven that a fractional
solution of the LP decoder requires the existence of a cycle
in the Tanner graph over all fractional-valued nodes. Less
reliable bits are more prone to become fractional due to their
low weight in the objective function. By employing matrix
adaptation, these cycles are pruned, and better performance is
obtained.
B. Removing Inactive Constraints
The performance and complexity of any adaptive LP de-
coder are strongly related to the number of constraints in the
LP problem. An LP decoder based on the Simplex algorithm
searches for an optimal solution over the vertices of the relaxed
polytope. The number of codewords vertices of any relaxed
polytope is constant, while adding new constraints increases
the total number of vertices. Obviously, all the new added
vertices are non-codewords fractional pseudocodewords. On
one hand adding new constraints to the problem makes the
relaxed polytope tighter, but on the other hand increases
the number of non-codewords pseudocodewords, leading to
more decoding failures. Furthermore, having a large number
of constraints increases the decoding complexity, especially
for long codes. In [3], Taghavi et al. proposed a way of
detecting and disposing unused constraints without loss of
performance. In their decoder each row of the parity check
matrix can contribute at most one constraint, while the rest of
the constraints are disposed. However, such a technique cannot
be applied to the constraints generated from RPCs. The NSA
decoder does not provide a way of removing old constraints,
thus making the LP problem grow at each iteration.
The following propositions 1 and 2 show that the con-
vergence of the adaptive LP decoder is influenced by a
small number of active constraints. Active constraints are the
constraints for which strict equality holds. In contrast, the
nature of the adaptive LP decoder is to accumulate inactive
constraints from previous iterations which do not contribute
to the convergence but only increase the number of pseu-
docodewords. We propose disposing all inactive constraints
at each iteration. The number of remaining constraints is
bounded by the LP problem dimensions. Practically, inactive
constraints can be easily detected by examining the slack
variables returned by the LP solver.
Proposition 1. Removing all the inactive constraints from the
LP problem does not affect the optimal solution.
Proof: It is enough to prove that removing a single
inactive constraint does not affect the LP solution. Denote
c = (𝑐1, . . . 𝑐𝑛) as the cost vector, x = (𝑥1, ⋅⋅⋅𝑥𝑛) as the
variables vector of the LP problem and A as an m by n
constraints matrix which rows are {a𝑖∣𝑖= 1 to m}, for which
each row represents an inequality constraint. Using the above
notations, the LP problem is formulated as follows:
𝑚𝑖𝑛(c𝑡x) 𝑠.𝑡𝐴x ≤b
(4)
Without loss of generality, suppose P is the optimal solution
of problem 4, and the row a1 corresponds to an inactive
constraint i.e.
a1x < b
(5)
Hyper-plane (5) divides the space into two sub-spaces as
shown in Fig. 2. The sub-space on the right side of the hyper-
plane is infeasible. After removing inactive constraint (5) from
the LP problem and solving the new problem, new optimal
solution is found. Let Q be the optimal solution after removing
(5). We have to prove that P = Q. First Note that:
c𝑡Q < c𝑡P
(6)
Also note that Q must lie on the right side of the hyper-plane
(4) i.e. in the infeasible part because otherwise Q would have
been the optimal solution of (4). Let l be the line connecting P
and Q and let R be the crossing point of l and the hyper-plane
(5) such that
R = 𝑡P + (1 −𝑡)Q, 𝑡∈(0, 1)
(7)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
764
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 59, NO. 3, MARCH 2011
l
a1
a2
a3
an
P
Q
R
Fig. 2.
Geometrical example of removing an inactive constraint.
Note that R is a feasible point of (4). From (6) and (7) we
get
c𝑡R = c𝑡[𝑡P + (1 −𝑡)Q] < c𝑡P
(8)
This is a contradiction of the assumption that P is the optimal
solution of (4) and of the hyper-plane (5) being an inactive
constraint of (4). Thus P = Q, i.e removing any inactive
constraint does not affect the optimal solution.
Proposition 2. Adaptive LP decoder will never return the
same solution twice when all the inactive constraints are
removed at each iteration.
Proof: We will prove that the objective function of the
adaptive decoder increases monotonically. At each decoding
iteration there are two possibilities: I. No valid cuts were
found and II. Valid cuts were found and added as constraints
to the LP problem. Case I represents a stopping criterion; thus
we will concentrate on case II. In case II we add some new
constraints given by valid cuts and remove some old inactive
constraints. Based on Proposition 1 hadn’t we added new
constraints but only removed inactive constraints would not
affect the LP solution. But because we added new constraints
which cut the current LP solution, the objective function must
increase in the next iteration. Repeating this at each iteration
proves the statement.
It should be emphasized that the enhanced decoder doesn’t
converge to the same solution since it runs on a different re-
laxed polytopes. The enhanced decoder has fewer constraints;
thus naturally its polytope will have less pseudocodewords.
The difference between the presented approach and the one
proposed in [3] is in the following: In the current approach all
the inactive constraints are removed (including those generated
from RPCs by cut generating Algorithm 2 of [12]). In contrast,
in [3] only the constraints generated by the same row of parity
check matrix are disposed, while the constraints generated
from alternative parity check matrix representations and RPCs
cannot be disposed. The equality constraints (3) cannot be
disposed since they are always active by definition.
VI. SIMULATIONS RESULTS
The performance of the proposed decoders was tested by
computer simulation. In the following, we present results for
(a) Frame Error Rate for BCH[63,36,11].
(b) Complexity for BCH[63,36,11].
Fig. 3.
Simulation results for BCH[63,36,11].
BCH[63,39,9], BCH[63,36,11] and BCH[127,99,9] codes. We
propose three decoders, each one comprising of a specific
combination of the presented techniques and enhancements.
1) Decoder A: Algorithm 1 with parity check matrix adap-
tation and removing inactive constraints.
2) Decoder B: Algorithm 3 with parity check matrix adap-
tation.
3) Decoder C: NSA decoder with parity check matrix
adaptation and removing inactive constraints.
The proposed decoders provide sufficient information as
for the improvement that can be obtained by using the pre-
sented algorithms and enhancements. Decoder C combines the
original NSA decoder and employs both enhancements. One
can observe that the two enhancements improve the frame
error rate by up to 0.5dB, with minor affect on the decoding
time. Decoder A and Decoder B employ Algorithm 1 and
Algorithm 3, respectively and outperform the performance
of the original NSA decoder by up to 1dB in the tested
codes. Clearly, our algorithms can improve the performance,
as long as more permutations are performed for Decoder A
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
YUFIT et al.: EFFICIENT LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING OF HDPC CODES
765
(a) Frame Error Rate for BCH[63,39,9].
(b) Complexity for BCH[63,39,9].
Fig. 4.
Simulation results for BCH[63,39,9].
and higher maximal depths are used for Decoder B, at the
cost of increasing the decoding time. Obviously this is not the
case for our enhancements which have a fixed improvement.
Combining our algorithms and our enhancements is natural,
since we can gain better performance with almost no affect
on the decoding time.
In Decoder A we use diversity of order 5 as a tradeoff
between performance and complexity. Regardless of the choice
of the code, higher diversity order achieves only a minor
performance improvement at a cost of linear increase of
complexity. For Decoder B, the maximal depth, Dp, required
to achieve near-ML performance varies for each code. In order
to have approximately a 0.1dB gap from the ML curve, Dp=4,
Dp=6 and Dp=8 are chosen for BCH[63,39,9], BCH[63,36,11]
and BCH[127,99,9], respectively. Decoder C is an improved
NSA decoder with both superior performance and reduced
complexity. Simulation results for the mentioned decoders
appear in Figs. 3, 4 and 5. As a benchmark, the curves of the
NSA decoder and the ML decoder are plotted. Complexity is
estimated as an average run-time of a decoded word, while all
(a) Frame Error Rate for BCH[127,99,9].
(b) Complexity for BCH[127,99,9].
Fig. 5.
Simulation results for BCH[127,99,9].
simulations were taken on the same Linux machine (CentOS
release 4.5, 8G RAM), using the same LP solver (CPLEX
10.2).
Decoder A achieves 0.3 to 0.4dB performance gain in frame
error rate compared to the NSA decoder with almost the same
complexity, for the tested BCH codes. Decoder B achieves
0.9 to 1dB gain, for BCH[63,36,11], 0.5 to 0.6dB gain for
BCH[63,39,9] and 0.6 to 0.7dB gain for BCH[127,99,9].
Decoder C achieves 0.2 to 0.3dB gain with half the complexity
of the NSA decoder. Due to the ML certificate property,
the complexity of Decoders A and B decreases sharply with
the growth of SNR. At high SNR the complexity of all the
presented algorithms is slightly inferior compares to the NSA
decoder, since parity check matrix adaptation requires at least
one Gaussian elimination of the parity check matrix.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
Several improved adaptive LP decoders efficiently operating
on HDPC codes were presented. A new LP decoder based
on parity check matrix diversity was presented. This decoder
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
766
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 59, NO. 3, MARCH 2011
outperforms the NSA decoder by more than 0.4dB. A new
branch and bound decoder was proposed, achieving perfor-
mance within 0.1dB of the optimal ML decoder. Two further
enhancements were proposed: adaptation of the parity check
matrix prior to decoding and disposing inactive constraints.
Both enhancements were shown to achieve both performance
gain and complexity reduction. The benefit of each algorithm
was examined, as well as its performance versus its complex-
ity. Based on the presented simulation results, a decoder that
satisfies a given performance and latency requirements can be
chosen among the presented techniques.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. R. Karger, “Using linear program-
ming to decode binary linear codes," IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51,
no. 1, pp. 954-972, Jan. 2005.
[2] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Graph-cover decoding and finite length
analysis of message-passing iterative decoding of LDPC codes," 2005.
[Online]. Available: http://www.arxiv.org/abs/cs.IT/0512078
[3] M. H. Taghavi, A. Shokrollahi, and P. H. Siegel, “Efficient im-
plementation of linear programming decoding," IEEE Trans. Inf.
Theory, Dec. 2008, submitted for publication. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/0902.0657
[4] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Towards low-complexity linear-
programming decoding," in Proc. 4th Intern. Conf. Turbo Codes
Related Topics, Munic, Germany, Apr. 2006. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/cs.IT/0602088
[5] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Bounds on the threshold of lin-
ear programming decoding," in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop
(ITW 2006), Punta del Este, Uruguay, Mar. 2006. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/cs/0602087v1
[6] D. Burshtein, “Iterative approximate linear programming decoding of
LDPC codes with linear complexity," IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55,
no. 11, pp. 4835-4859, Nov. 2009.
[7] A. G. Dimakis, A. A. Gohari, and M. J. Wainwright, “Guessing facets:
polytope structure and improved LP decoding," IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory,
vol. 55, no. 8, pp. 3479-3487, Aug. 2009.
[8] M. Chertkov and M. Stepnov, “An efficient pseudo-codeword-search
algorithm for linear programming decoding of LDPC codes," IEEE
Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 1514-1520, Apr. 2008.
[9] M. Chertkov and M. Stepnov, “Pseudo-codeword landscape," in Proc.
IEEE Intern. Symp. Inf., Nice, France, June 2007.
[10] K. Yang, X. Wang, and J. Feldman, “A new linear programming
approach to decoding linear block codes," IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory,
vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 1061-1072, Mar. 2008.
[11] C. S. Draper, J. S. Yedidia, and Y. Wang, “ML decoding via mixed-
integer adaptive linear programming," in Proc. IEEE International Symp.
Inf. Theory (ISIT), Nice, France, June 2007.
[12] A. Tanatmis, S. Ruzika, H. W. Hamacher, M. Punekar, F. Kienle, and
N. When, “A separation algorithm for improved LP decoding of linear
block codes," 2008. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/0812.2559
[13] A. Tanatmis, S. Ruzika, H. W. Hamacher, M. Punekar, F. Kienle,
and N. When, “Valid inequlities for binary linear codes," in IEEE
International Symp. Inf. Theory, Seoul, Korea, July 2009.
[14] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs," Ph.D. dissertation,
Linkoping University, Linkoping, Sweden, 1996.
[15] F. J. MacWilliams and N. J. A. Sloane, The Theory of Error-Correcting
Codes. Amsterdam, Holland: North-Holland, 1977.
[16] C. C. Lu and L. R. Welch, “On automorphism groups of binary primitive
bch codes," in Proc. IEEE International Symp. Inf. Theory, Trondheim,
Norway, June 1994, p. 51.
[17] T. R. Halford and K. M. Chugg, “Random redundant iterative soft-in
soft-out decoding," IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 513-517,
Apr. 2008.
[18] T. Hehn, J. B. Huber, S. Leander, and O. Milenkovich, “Multiple-bases
belief-propagation for decoding of short block codes," in Proc. IEEE
International Symp. Inf. Theory, Nice, France, 2007.
[19] I. Dimnik and Y. Be’ery, “Improved random redundant iterative HDPC
decoding," IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 1982-1985, July
2009.
[20] K. Yang, X. Wang, and J. Feldman, “Non-linear programming ap-
proaches to decoding low-density parity check codes," IEEE J. Sel.
Areas Commun., vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 1603-1613, Aug. 2006.
[21] J. Jiang and K. R. Narayanan, “Iterative soft decision decoding of Reed-
Solomon codes based on adaptive parity check matrices," IEEE Trans.
Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 3746-3756, Jan. 2006.
Alex Yufit was born in the former Soviet Union in
1981 and immigrated to Israel in 1991. He received
his B.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from the
Technion, the Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa,
in 2004. He is currently a system architect in Cer-
agon networks, Tel Aviv, Israel and at the same
time he is working on his M.Sc. degree in electrical
engineering at the Tel Aviv University. His fields
of interest include digital communications, error
correcting codes and iterative decoding.
Asi Lifshitz was born in Israel in 1975. He received
the B.Sc. degree in electrical engineering, from Tel
Aviv University, Israel, in 2005. He is currently
pursuing his M.Sc. degree in Electrical Engineering
at Tel Aviv University. He is an Asic engineer at
CopperGate Communications, Tel Aviv, Israel. His
fields of interests include System-on-Chip (SoC)
simulations, digital communications, error correct-
ing codes and iterative decoding algorithms.
Yair Be’ery was born in Israel in 1956. He received
the B.Sc. (Summa Cum Laude), M.Sc. (Summa
Cum Laude), and Ph.D. degrees, all in electrical
engineering, from Tel Aviv University, Israel, in
1979, 1979, and 1985, respectively.
He is currently a Professor in the Department of
Electrical Engineering - Systems, Tel Aviv Univer-
sity, where he has been since 1985. He served as the
Chair of the Department during the years 1999-2003.
He is the recipient of the 1984 Eliyahu Golomb
Award from the Israeli Ministry of Defense, the
1986 Rothschild Fellowship for postdoctoral studies at Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute, Troy, NY, and of the 1992 Electronic Industry Award in Israel.
His research interests include digital communications, error control coding,
turbo codes and iterative decoding, combined coding and modulation, VLSI
architectures and algorithms for systolic and multi-cores arrays.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:05:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
