IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2011
3301
Transactions Papers
On Complexity, Energy- and
Implementation-Efficiency of Channel Decoders
Frank Kienle, Member, IEEE, Norbert Wehn, Senior Member, IEEE, and Heinrich Meyr, Life Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Future wireless communication systems require ef-
ficient and flexible baseband receivers. Meaningful efficiency
metrics are key for design space exploration to quantify the
algorithmic and the implementation complexity of a receiver.
Most of the current established efficiency metrics are based on
counting operations, thus neglecting important issues like data
and storage complexity.
In this paper we introduce suitable energy and area efficiency
metrics which resolve the afore-mentioned disadvantages. These
are decoded information bit per energy and throughput per area
unit. Efficiency metrics are assessed by various implementations
of turbo decoders, LDPC decoders and convolutional decoders.
An exploration approach is presented, which permit an appropri-
ate benchmarking of implementation efficiency, communications
performance, and flexibility trade-offs. Two case studies demon-
strate this approach and show that design space exploration
should result in various efficiency evaluations rather than a single
snapshot metric as done often in state-of-the-art approaches.
Index Terms—Channel coding, algorithmic complexity, energy
efficiency, design space exploration.
I. MOTIVATION
T
ODAY, high-end smart phones have to support multiple
radio standards, advanced graphic- and media applica-
tions and many other applications resulting in a workload of
about 100 giga operations per second in a power budget of 1
Watt [1]. The baseband processing in the radio part (mainly
front-end processing, demodulation and decoding) requires
more than 50% of the overall workload in a state-of-the-
art 3.5G smart phone. To achieve higher spectral efficiency
new transmission techniques like MIMO will be established.
However, this will increase the workload even further. Thus,
there is a strong need for efficient wireless baseband receivers.
The overall efficiency of a baseband receiver depends on
∙communications efficiency: expressed by the spectral effi-
ciency and signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). The requirements
on the communications efficiency have the largest impact
on the selected baseband processing algorithms.
Paper approved by G. M. Vitetta, the Editor for Equalization and Fading
Channels of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received March
19, 2010; revised October 18, 2010 and July 12, 2011.
This work has been partly supported by the UMIC Research Center, RWTH
Aachen University.
F. Kienle and N. Wehn are with the Microelectronic Systems Design
Research Group, University of Kaiserslautern, Kaiserslautern, Germany (e-
mail: {kienle, wehn} @eit.uni-kl.de).
H. Meyr is with RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany (e-mail:
heinrich.meyr@iss.rwth-aachen.de).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2011.092011.100157
∙implementation efficiency: related to silicon area, power
and energy. Here, the energy efficiency is the biggest
challenge due to the limited available battery power in
many devices.
∙flexibility: in software defined radio, receivers should
be flexible/configurable at run-time since they have to
support multiple standards. There are various silicon im-
plementation styles ranging from general purpose archi-
tectures, over DSPs and ASIPs down to fully physically
optimized IP blocks which strongly differ in their im-
plementation efficiency but also in their flexibility. Thus,
for each building block of the receiver a detailed analysis
of algorithmic flexibility and service parameter flexibility
requirements has to be carried out. Service parameter
flexibility for a specific channel code is for example
varying code rates, block sizes with respect to a given
throughput. The goal is to find an optimal implementation
style with respect to a flexibility/cost trade-off. Thus,
advanced baseband receivers are heterogeneous multi-
core architectures implemented in different design styles.
System requirements are very often specified by commu-
nication standards such as UMTS, LTE and WiMAX, which
define different services in terms of required communications
performance and system data throughput, i.e. information bits
per second. To obtain an efficient baseband implementation,
a careful and elaborate design space exploration has to be
performed. This is a very challenging task due to the size
and the multi-dimensionality of the design space. Therefore it
is mandatory to prune the design space in an early stage of
the design process. In this process the algorithms have to be
selected, optimized, and quantitatively compared to each other
with respect to their system performance and implementation
efficiency.
Appropriate metrics are key for efficient design space
exploration to measure the algorithmic and the implementation
complexity, respectively.
A. Algorithmic Complexity
There exists no universal measure for complexity. The huge
field of complexity theory and the resulting ’O’ notation is
mainly focused towards software implementation and can-
not be adapted in a straight forward fashion to hardware
implementation. The algorithmic complexity, with respect to
0090-6778/11$25.00 c⃝2011 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:02:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
3302
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2011
hardware implementation, has to be tailored to its application
space, in this case the communication system.
Thus, it is important to understand the application under
consideration. From a communication system point of view
we can separate digital processing in the baseband into two
parts: the so called ’inner modem’ and ’outer modem’ [2],
respectively. The task of the inner modem is the extrac-
tion of symbols from the received signal waveform, i.e.,
equalization, channel estimation, interference cancellation and
synchronization. The outer modem performs demodulation,
de-interleaving and channel decoding on the received symbols.
A large diversity exists in the various baseband processing al-
gorithms with respect to operation types, operation complexity,
and data types especially between the inner and out modem.
Thus, algorithmic complexity in baseband processing should
be separately analyzed for the inner and the outer modem,
respectively.
Van Berkel determined the complexity of various algorithms
in baseband processing. In his remarkable and comprehensive
article [1] he focused on the number of ’algorithmic’ oper-
ations which have to be performed per received bit by the
algorithms of a baseband receiver for different communication
standards. As a consequence the algorithmic complexity for
the inner and outer modem is measured in giga operations
per second (GOPs). Using this metric it can be seen that
sophisticated decoding schemes like turbo and LDPC codes
have a much larger complexity - measured in GOPs - than
the algorithms of the inner modem. Eberli from ETH Zürich
uses a similar metric [3] for measuring complexity in baseband
processing. The importance of appropriate metrics to compare
forward error correcting codes is recently shown in [4]. Two
improved metrics are suggested, one metric is based on
operations the other metric is based on the required storage
demands per decoded bit. The major weakness of these metrics
is the missing link between both metrics which prevents an
application to the resulting implementation complexity.
B. Implementation Complexity
Often implementation complexity is derived from algorith-
mic complexity in a straight forward manner. E.g. Eberli
[3] uses a cost factor for each algorithmic operation which
reflects its implementation cost. In this way we can derive area
efficiency and energy efficiency which is even more important
for baseband receivers.
Graph representations for energy and area efficiency are
commonly used for design space exploration:
∙A two dimensional energy efficiency graph: one axis
corresponds to the algorithmic complexity, e.g. measured
in 𝐺𝑂𝑃𝑠, and the other axis to the power, e.g. measured
in 𝑚𝑊, consumed when providing the corresponding
operations/second. Each point in this graph describes
the energy efficiency metric of a given implementation,
i.e. operations/second/power unit, usually measured in
𝐺𝑂𝑃𝑠/𝑚𝑊. Since energy corresponds to power mul-
tiplied with execution time, each point gives the opera-
tions/energy measured in 𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠/𝐽𝑜𝑢𝑙𝑒.
∙In a similar way we can set up an area efficiency graph
in which one axis represents the needed area. Each
point in this graph yields the area efficiency metric,
i.e. operations/second/area unit, usually measured in
𝐺𝑂𝑃𝑠/𝑚𝑚2.
Note that the energy and area efficiency for the same algo-
rithmic complexity can vary by several orders of magnitude,
depending on the selected implementation style. By far the
highest energy efficiency is achieved by physically optimized
circuits, however, at the expense of limited algorithmic and
service parameter flexibility. The highest flexibility, at the ex-
pense of low energy efficiency, is achieved by programmable
digital signal processors. As said the designer has to find
a compromise between the two conflicting goals by trading
off flexibility vs. energy efficiency. However, in contrast to
area and energy efficiency, flexibility is hard to quantify. The
optimum design point has thus to be understood qualitatively.
It depends on the application and a large number of economic
and technical considerations. We can combine energy and area
efficiency in a two dimensional design space in which the
two axes correspond to area efficiency and energy efficiency,
respectively. This is a well known representation of the design
space.
C. Assessment of Metrics
Area, throughput and especially energy in many system-
on-chip implementations are dominated by data-transfers and
storage schemes [5] and not by the computations themselves.
However, common metrics as described above focus solely
on operations, and do not consider data-transfer and storage
issues at all. Thus, these metrics are only valid if the operations
dominate the implementation complexity. This is the case
in data-flow dominated algorithms like an FFT calculation,
correlation or filtering which are dominating the algorithms
in the inner modem.
However, the channel decoding algorithms in the outer
modem largely differ from the algorithms used in the inner
modem. Here, the operations to be performed are non-standard
operations (e.g. tanh) using non-standard data types (e.g. 7 bit
fix-point). But more importantly, the overall implementation
complexity, especially energy, is dominated by data-transfers
and storage schemes.
The transitions from 3G to LTE advanced require an im-
provement of two orders of magnitude in energy efficiency.
This improvement will come from technology scaling to a
small extent only [6]. A general trend towards co-design of
algorithm and architecture can be seen in new standards. Since
the traditional separation of algorithm and architecture design
leads to suboptimal results.
In channel decoding the co-design focuses on data-transfer
and storage schemes [7][8][9]. Examples with respect to
communication standards are special interleavers for turbo
codes (e.g. LTE standard [10]) and special structures of the
parity check matrix for LDPC codes (e.g. DVB-S2 standard
[11]). These special structures allow an efficient parallel
implementation of the decoding algorithm with small overhead
in data-transfer and storage. GOPs based metrics do not at all
reflect such specific structures.
Another important issue is flexibility. Flexibility on the
service parameter side, e.g., code rates and block sizes in the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:02:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
KIENLE et al.: ON COMPLEXITY, ENERGY- AND IMPLEMENTATION-EFFICIENCY OF CHANNEL DECODERS
3303
TABLE I: Reference decoders: service parameters and implementation results in 65nm technology.
Channel
Decoder
Flexibility
Max.
Blocksize
Throughput
[Mbit/s]
Frequency
[MHz]
Area
[mm2]
Dynamic
Power
[mW]
ASIP [12]
CC
Binary TC
Duo-binary TC
N=16k
40 (64-state)
14 (6 iter)
28 (6 iter)
385
(P&R)
0.7
(P&R)
∼100
LTE TC [13]
R=1/3 to R=9/10
(by puncturing)
N=18k
150 (6.5 iter)
300
(P&R)
2.1
(P&R)
∼300
LDPC flexible
R=1/4 to R=9/10
N=16k
30 (R=1/3 40 iter)
100 (R=1/2 20 iter)
300 (R=5/6 10 iter)
385
(P&R)
1.172
(P&R)
∼389
LDPC
WiMedia 1.5 [14]
R=1/2 to R=4/5
N=1.3k
640 (R=1/2 5 iter)
960 (R=3/4 5 iter)
265
0.51
∼193
CC Decoder
64-state NSC
500
500
0.1
∼37
case of channel decoding, have a large impact on the imple-
mentation complexity. The cost of the overhead introduced by
flexibility is normally not considered by looking only at the
operations of the algorithm.
In summary, efficiency metrics based on GOPs only are
questionable. Particularly, for non-data flow dominated al-
gorithms, as they entirely neglect important issues like data
and storage complexity, algorithm/architecture co-design and
flexibility.
In this paper we focus on channel decoding as application.
The contributions of this paper are:
∙We show that metrics based on GOPs can lead to wrong
conclusions.
∙We introduce meaningful and suitable metrics for energy
and area efficiency.
∙We present an approach for design space exploration
based on these metrics.
II. REFERENCE DESIGNS
Reference designs are key to assess various metrics. Many
publications on VLSI implementations exist for turbo de-
coders, e.g. [15][16] [17][18][19][20] and LDPC decoders,
e.g. [21][22][23][24][25]. However, performing an objective
assessment of metrics requires detailed and complete infor-
mation about the implementation cost and the communication
performance. The difficulty of comparing different publica-
tions is shown in Section V after deriving suitable metrics for
comparison.
For the sake of demonstration, we selected 5 different
channel decoder implementations which were designed by
our research group in the last couple of years. All test
benches, fixed point models, and technology related data are
completely available. Every decoder is designed with the same
design methodology: hand optimized VHDL code and synthe-
sized using Synopsis Design Compiler. The decoders differ
in services (throughput, block sizes, code rates), decoding
algorithms, and implementation styles. Selected channel codes
are convolutional codes, turbo codes and LDPC codes which
covers a large spectrum of channel codes used in todays
standards. The 5 different decoders are:
∙An application specific instruction set processor (ASIP)
[12] capable of processing binary turbo codes, duo-binary
turbo codes and various convolutional codes (CC) with
varying throughputs dependent on code rate and decoding
scheme.
∙A turbo decoder, which is LTE [10] compliant. The max-
imum throughput is 150Mbit/s at 6.5 decoding iterations.
∙An LDPC decoder optimized for flexibility, support-
ing two different decoding algorithms, code rates from
R=1/4-9/10 and a maximum block length of 16384.
∙An LDPC decoder which is WiMedia 1.5 compliant and
optimized for throughput, supporting code rates from
R=1/2-4/5 with two block lengths N=1200 and N=1320
bits [14].
∙A convolutional decoder with 64-states which is WiFi
[26] compliant.
All decoders are synthesized on a 65nm CMOS technology
under worst case conditions with 𝑉𝑑𝑑= 1.0𝑉, 120∘𝐶. Power
estimations are based on nominal case 𝑉𝑑𝑑= 1.1𝑉. Table I
gives an overview of the key parameters of the different
decoders. P&R indicates that the corresponding data are
post-layout data. The payload (information bits) throughput
depends on the number of decoding iterations for turbo and
LDPC codes which also impacts the communications perfor-
mance. Thus, the throughput is specified depending on the
number of iterations. We chose our own designs as reference
designs, as these were the only designs for which we had
complete access to all information, which is necessary for a
fair assessment of metrics. This does not limit the validity of
the statements and conclusions made in this paper.
In Table II we show the number of algorithmic operations
required to process the different types of convolutional codes,
turbo codes and LDPC codes. Bit-true C-reference models are
used for operation counting. In all algorithms of Table II the
operations are fixed point additions with varying bit width. We
normalized all operations to an 8 bit addition. The number
of operations is related to information bits which have to
be decoded. The total number of operations, which have
to be performed per second, depends on the code rate R
and throughput, which in turn depends on the number of
iterations for LDPC and turbo code decoding. Two different
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:02:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
3304
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2011
TABLE II: Number of normalized algorithmic operations
per decoded information bit for different channel decoders
dependent on throughput and code rate R.
Channel
# iter-
GOPs (w.r.t. throughput)
Code
ations
100 Mbit/s
300 Mbit/s
1 Gbit/s
CC (64-state)
20
60
200
LDPC
10
15/R
45/R
150/R
Min-Sum
40
60/R
180/R
600/R
LDPC
10
50/R
150/R
500/R
𝜆-3-Min
40
200/R
600/R
2000/R
3GPP Turbo
2
28
84
280
(Max-Log)
6
84
252
840
1
10
ergy Efficiency:  
ion/energy (op/pJ)
ASIP TC (14Mbit/s)
LTE TC (150Mbit/s)
LDPC flexible (100 Mbit/s)
LDPC WiMedia (1Gbit/s)
CC (500Mbit/s) 
Min-Sum
0.1
1
10
10
100
1000
Energy Efficiency:  
operation/energy (op/pJ)
Area Efficiency: GOPs/mm2
ASIP TC (14Mbit/s)
LTE TC (150Mbit/s)
LDPC flexible (100 Mbit/s)
LDPC WiMedia (1Gbit/s)
CC (500Mbit/s) 
Min-Sum
O-3-Min
Min-Sum
Fig. 1: Energy efficiency versus area efficiency based on
operations
algorithms for LDPC codes are utilized in our LDPC decoders.
Both algorithms are suboptimal algorithm approximating the
belief propagation algorithm: the Min-Sum algorithm with
a scaling factor and the 𝜆-3-Min algorithm [27] which is a
more accurate approximation. However, the latter needs about
3.3 times more operations. This more accurate approximation
is required when lower code rates 𝑅< 0.5 have to be
supported, as for example in DVB-S2 decoders [23]. The
flexible LDPC decoder supports both decoding algorithms, the
WiMedia LDPC decoder is based on the Min-Sum algorithm
only.
III. SUITABLE METRICS
Figure 1 shows the two dimensional design space for our
decoders, covering area and energy efficiency based on opera-
tions. One axis represents the area efficiency (𝐺𝑂𝑃𝑠/𝑚𝑚2),
and the other axis the energy efficiency (𝑜𝑝/𝑝𝐽). In this graph,
efficient architectures w.r.t. area and energy are located in the
upper right corner. Less efficient architectures are placed in
the lower left corner.
The convolutional decoder seems to be the most efficient
decoder while the ASIP shows to be the decoder with the
lowest efficiency. An interesting observation is the efficiency
of the flexible LDPC decoder. The efficiency largely increases
in both directions (area, energy) when replacing the Min-
Sum by the 𝜆-3-Min algorithms which is the more complex
1
10
100
Energy Efficiency:  
ded bit/energy (bit/nJ)
ASIP TC (14Mbit/s)
LTE TC (150Mbit/s)
LDPC flexible (100 Mbit/s)
LDPC WiMedia (1Gbit/s)
CC (500Mbit/s) 
Min-Sum
0.1
1
10
100
10
100
1000
10000
Energy Efficiency:  
decoded bit/energy (bit/nJ)
Area Efficiency: (Mbit/s)/mm2
ASIP TC (14Mbit/s)
LTE TC (150Mbit/s)
LDPC flexible (100 Mbit/s)
LDPC WiMedia (1Gbit/s)
CC (500Mbit/s) 
Min-Sum
O-3-Min
Min-Sum
Fig. 2: Design space based on suitable metrics. Decoded
information bit per energy over information bit throughput
per area unit.
algorithm in terms of operations. As described in the previous
section the GOPs for this algorithm increases by a factor 3.3.
Furthermore, we see that the 𝜆-3-Min based flexible LDPC
decoder has nearly the same efficiency as the less flexible
WiMedia decoder which is optimized for high throughputs.
This observation seems to be contradictory, we would expect
that a less flexible decoder, optimized for throughput, has a
much higher efficiency compared to a highly flexible decoder
architecture. This aspect shows already the problem with
GOPs based metrics.
The problem with GOPs based metrics will become more
obvious after introducing appropriate metrics which resolve
the aforementioned anomaly. Instead of referring to operations
per task we refer to the number of decoded information bits.
Metrics normalized to the number of information bits allow
to compare competing architectures for a given algorithm
since the efficiency metrics are independent of the specific
operations and data types used to execute the algorithm.
All implementation issues like data-transfer and storage are
taken into account since the metrics are oblivious of how the
task has been executed. Such a metric considers the result
only and not how the result is calculated. Furthermore, a
metric normalized to the number of information bits allows
to compare different coding schemes as a function of the
communication parameters (modulation, signal to noise ratio,
bandwidth). In particular, iterative decoding algorithms can be
compared in a meaningful way to non-iterative algorithms.
We define two metrics for implementation efficiency as
follows
∙energy efficiency metric: decoded information bit per
energy measured in 𝑏𝑖𝑡/𝑛𝐽
∙area efficiency metric: information bit throughput per
area unit measured in 𝑀𝑏𝑖𝑡/𝑠/𝑚𝑚2
We mapped our decoders to the design space which is based
on these metrics. The result is shown in Figure 2. Again
efficient architectures are in the upper right corners, inefficient
architectures are in the lower left corner.
A large change in the relative and absolute positions can
be observed for some decoders, when comparing the graph to
Figure 1 which was based on GOPs metrics.
∙The difference in the efficiency between the two instances
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:02:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
KIENLE et al.: ON COMPLEXITY, ENERGY- AND IMPLEMENTATION-EFFICIENCY OF CHANNEL DECODERS
3305
of the flexible LDPC decoder (Min-Sum and the 𝜆-3-Min
decoder, respectively) is now much smaller. Moreover the
Min-Sum decoder is more efficient than the other ones
which was not the case in the conventional design space.
This matches our expectations since the data-transfer and
storage scheme in both decoders is nearly identical. The
increase in computation results in only a small energy
and area increase by about 10%. Both flexible LDPC
decoders are targeting the same throughput.
∙The efficiency of the WiMedia decoder which is opti-
mized rather for throughput than for flexibility, is now
much larger than the efficiency of the flexible LDPC
decoder which again matches our expectations.
To summarize, in applications which are dominated by data-
transfers and storage schemes, like here in channel coding, the
change in the number of operations in the algorithm has only
a small impact on area and energy. Comparing Figure 1 and
Figure 2 demonstrates clearly the problem with GOPs based
metrics.
So far we have focused on the implementation complexity
but have not discussed the important aspect of flexibility and
communication performance. In the following we will inves-
tigate the relationship between communication performance,
algorithmic/service parameter flexibility and implementation
efficiency.
IV. APPROACH FOR DESIGN SPACE EXPLORATION
In the previous section we investigated the absolute and
the relative positions of the different decoders to each other.
However, equally important in this space is the shift of an
efficiency point when specific communication parameters are
changed.
The following relevant parameters will be considered: the
frame error rates (FER), i.e. communications performance,
coding techniques, code rates, number of iterations and
throughput.
We present two case studies to demonstrate an appropriate
approach for design space exploration. The resulting different
values for area and energy efficiencies illustrate the strong
dependency between communications performance and imple-
mentation efficiency.
The two case studies will show that a single quantitative
measure to select the best channel code does not exist. The first
case study is concerned with implementation efficiency and
compares non-iterative decoding techniques (convolutional
codes) to iterative decoding techniques (LDPC codes). The
second case study compares two different iterative decoding
techniques (LDPC and Turbo codes) with code rate flexibility.
A. Implementation driven design space exploration
The first design study reflects the discussion performed dur-
ing the WiMedia 1.5 standardization process. WiMedia [28]
features low complexity devices for UWB communication.
The older WiMedia 1.2 standard uses convolutional codes as
channel coding technique which served as a reference design.
LDPC codes were considered as a promising candidate which
had to be compliant to the given service parameters like
the throughput of 960 Mbit/s and the code rate 𝑅= 0.75.
Thus, new LDPC codes were developed according to the
code/architecture co-design approach [14] resulting in an
LDPC decoder which has a much higher efficiency than e.g.
a highly flexible LDPC decoder.
As already shown in Figure 2 the area and energy efficiency
of the resulting WiMedia 1.5 LDPC decoder is lower com-
pared to a convolutional decoder. However, this comparison
does not at all consider the communications performance.
At most five decoding iterations can be performed by the
LDPC decoder to comply with the throughput requirements
of the standard. As already pointed out, the number of
iterations strongly impacts the communications performance
of the LDPC decoder. The frame error rates as a function of
the number of iterations are contrasted with implementation
efficiency in Figure 3. Point 3 in the design space figure
corresponds to the WiMedia 1.5 decoder when performing
5 iterations (this was the decoder assumption in the previous
figures when we referred to the WiMedia LDPC decoder).
The communication figure shows that this decoder has a
4dB better communication performance than the convolutional
decoder. The communication performance is comparable to
that of the convolutional decoder if the LDPC performs only
two iterations instead of five (case 2 in Figure 3). Finally,
executing only one iteration in the LDPC decoder results in a
communication performance which is about 4dB worse than
the convolutional decoder (case 1 in Figure 3).
Note the resulting set of points in the design space for the
different cases. The different efficiency points in Figure 3 are
obtained by distinguishing two cases:
∙The system throughput is not changed w.r.t. WiMedia 1.5.
constraint (scenario 𝑎in Figure 3). In this scenario only
the energy efficiency is improved (points 3 →2𝑎→1𝑎).
Obviously the decoding time decreases when the decoder
executes a smaller number of iterations resulting in a
negative time lag. This time lag can be exploited for
energy efficiency improvement. For example clock and
power supply could be completely switched off when
decoding is finished. This reduces energy and leakage
current. Another possibility is to slow down the fre-
quency (frequency scaling). This reduces the energy by
the same amount as in the previous case but the peak
power consumption during decoding instead of leakage
is minimized. The most efficient technique is voltage
scaling in which the voltage is reduced which results in
the highest energy efficiency.
∙The system throughput is changed (scenario 𝑏in Fig-
ure 3). In this scenario the area efficiency increases by the
same amount as the throughput increases due to smaller
number of iterations (points 3 →2𝑏→1𝑏).
We see that in terms of efficiency the LDPC decoder is
increasing with decreasing communication requirements, i.e.
number of iterations. Thus, the decoder efficiency is repre-
sented by various efficiency evaluations instead of a single
point in the design space. This varying set of points results
from varying communication performance requirements. We
also see that the efficiency of the LDPC decoder outperforms
the convolutional decoder at the same communication perfor-
mance.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:02:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
3306
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2011
1
10
100
100
1000
10000
100000
Area Efficiency: (Mbit/s)/mm2
Energy Efficiency:
decoded bit/energy (bit/nJ)
LDPC WiMedia1.5 
CC WiMedia1.5
1a
2a
 3
2b
1b
 R
(a) Implementation Efficiency
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
EB/N0 [dB]
FER
LDPC, R=3/4, 5 iterations
LDPC, R=3/4, 2 iterations
CC, R=3/4
LDPC, R=3/4, 1 iterations
2
R
1
3
(b) Communications performance
R :
Reference convolutional decoder with code rate
(𝑅= 0.75) and fixed throughput of 1 Gbit/s
1 :
LDPC code performing 1 iteration
a)
identical throughput (1 Gbit/s)
∼4dB worse communications performance
b)
5 times higher throughput (5 Gbit/s)
∼4dB worse communications performance
2 :
LDPC code performing 2 iteration
a)
identical throughput (1 Gbit/s)
∼1dB better communications performance
b)
2.5 times higher throughput (2.5 Gbit/s)
∼1dB better communications performance
3 :
LDPC code performing 5 iteration
identical throughput (1 Gbit/s)
∼4dB better communications performance
Fig. 3: Implementation efficiency and communications performance for WiMedia 1.5 standard (16-QAM, CM1 channel
according to IEEE 802.15.3a [14])
B. Communications performance driven exploration
In the second design study we compare two iterative decod-
ing techniques and put emphasis on the resulting communica-
tions performance. An LTE turbo decoder is compared with
a flexible LDPC decoder which supports code rate flexibility.
The right graph in Figure 4 shows the communication perfor-
mance for the two decoding schemes for different code rates
(𝑅= 0.5 and 𝑅= 0.83) and iteration numbers. The number
of information bits is 𝐾= 6140 in all cases. Frame error rates
are based on fixed point simulations matching the hardware
implementation. We use the communications performance of
the turbo decoder with 6.5 iterations as reference point for
both code rates. The 6.5 iterations result from the throughput
constraint of 150Mbit/s which is specified in the LTE standard.
The 6.5 iterations fulfill the LTE communications performance
requirements for all code rates.
It is well known that the communication performance in
LDPC decoding depends on the number of iterations and the
code rate. The LDPC decoder under investigations provide
large code rate flexibility, i.e., the hardware can support
various code rates. The LDPC decoder requires 10 iterations
for 𝑅= 0.83 and 20 iterations for 𝑅= 0.5 to match
the performance of the turbo decoder. For a code rate of
𝑅= 1/3 even 40 iterations are mandatory (this is not shown
in Figure 4b).
The corresponding results in the implementation space are
noteworthy. The turbo decoder efficiency is identical for all
code rates (see left graph in Figure 4). Thus, we have only
one fixed efficiency point. This is due to the fact that the
code rate flexibility is implemented by puncturing which has
negligible impact on throughput, area and energy.
However, the situations is completely different for the flex-
ible LDPC decoder. For a given communications performance
the code rate has strong impact on the number of required
iterations. This iteration number influences the implementa-
tions efficiency as we have seen in the previous case study.
But beside this impact of the iteration number, there is also a
direct impact of the code rate on the implementation efficiency
since lower code rates require also a more accurate decoding
algorithm (𝜆-3-Min algorithm instead of the less complex
Min-Sum algorithm). The resulting efficiency points are shown
in the left graph of Figure 4. We see that the efficiency
increases in both directions with increasing code rate (points
1 →2 →3).
The important observation in this exploration is the varying
implementation efficiency of the flexible LDPC decoder. The
different efficiency evaluations result from the required code
rate flexibility in the LDPC decoder which is necessary to
match the communications performance with respect to a
competitive turbo code decoder. We see that analyzing only
one code rate, and thus one snap shot, could result in a wrong
efficiency conclusions.
The two explorations have shown that implementation ef-
ficiency for iterative decoders often results in many points
instead of a single point in the design space. The differ-
ent evaluations result from the strong interrelation between
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:02:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
KIENLE et al.: ON COMPLEXITY, ENERGY- AND IMPLEMENTATION-EFFICIENCY OF CHANNEL DECODERS
3307
0.01
0.1
1
10
10
100
1000
Area Efficiency: (Mbit/s)/mm2
Energy Efficiency:
decoded bit/energy (bit/nJ)
TC LTE 
flexible LDPC
 3
 R
 2
 1
(a) Implementation Efficiency
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
FER
R=0.5
TC
6.5 iter
TC
3 iter
Eb/N0 [dB]
LDPC
10 iter
LDPC
20 iter
LDPC
10 iter
LDPC
5 iter
TC
6.5 iter
R=0.83
TC
3 iter
(b) Communications performance
R :
Reference of LTE turbo decoder
150 Mbit/s throughput for all code rates
reference TC performance at 6.5 iterations
1 :
LDPC code at code rate 𝑅= 1/3
∼max throughput 30Mbit/s
∼40 iterations to match TC performance
2 :
LDPC code at code rate 𝑅= 1/2
∼max throughput 90Mbit/s
∼20 iterations to match TC performance
3 :
LDPC code at code rate 𝑅= 0.83
∼max throughput 300Mbit/s
∼10 iterations to match TC performance
Fig. 4: Implementation efficiency and communications performance of LTE turbo code/decoder and a flexible LDPC decoder
(BPSK, AWGN channel).
communication performance, flexibility and implementation
efficiency.
V. COMPARISON OF PUBLISHED DECODER
ARCHITECTURES
Comparing different decoder architectures objectively, even
given proper metrics, is a very challenging task. This is due
to the fact that published decoders
∙are based on different technology nodes (e.g. 180nm,
130nm,
65nm)
and
characterization
assumptions
(e.g. worst case, nominal case or best case operating
conditions) and
∙differ in their communications performance with respect
to the chosen architectural parameters.
To highlight the problem of a fair comparison, we list se-
lected state-of-the-art turbo decoder architectures in Table III.
This table shows the implementation parameters of the various
decoders, i.e. frequency, area, throughput, technology node,
but also parameters which have a strong impact on the com-
munications performance. First, we will discuss technology
parameters that influence the achievable throughput followed
by architectural parameters affecting the communications per-
formance.
A. Technology Parameters
Different technologies have different area, timing (fre-
quency) and energy characteristics. In principle, it is possible
to normalize the area from one technology node (e.g. 130nm)
analytically to a reference technology node (e.g, 65nm) [29],
but scaling timing and energy is very difficult for advanced
technology nodes. Due to space limitations, we focus here on
only some aspects of technology scaling.
In larger technologies, e.g. a 130nm process, the critical
path is normally found in the logic. In turbo decoders, for
example, it is typically determined by the add-compare-select
unit in the maximum a posteriori (MAP) processing kernel.
In advanced technologies of 65nm and less, memories are
becoming more and more the limiting factor in terms of
timing and energy [29]. Today, we can see large variations
in timing and energy efficiency of memories even in the
same technology node, depending on the technology provider
and the final memory instantiation [30]. Consequently, the
assumption that memories scale as good as the logic, when
scaling published timing and energy to reference node, is not
true [31][29].
The assumptions under which published frequency and
energy data were obtained are another important issue. Timing
and energy characterization can be performed under nominal,
worst and best case operating conditions. These conditions
are related to voltage supply, temperature and technology
variations. The achievable frequency can vary up to a factor of
two between worst case and best case conditions. E.g., under
worst case conditions the decoder presented in [13] has a
maximum frequency of 𝑓𝑐𝑦𝑐= 300MHz, but achieves 𝑓𝑐𝑦𝑐=
450MHz under nominal case conditions. In Table III we list
the operating conditions, when specified in the publication.
Measurements of fabricated chips are often performed under
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:02:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
3308
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2011
nominal or even best case conditions, whereas some of the
listed decoders assume worst case conditions. Depending on
the assumed operating conditions, we see large differences in
achievable frequencies, which in turn results in large variations
in the final throughput, see Section VII.
B. Communications Performance
The communication performance is mainly affected by three
parameters, which also have a strong impact on throughput,
area, and energy: input quantization (Q), window length (WL),
and acquisition length (AL). Efficient decoder architectures
split the input block into several so-called windows, to reduce
the memory requirements and to permit parallel processing. To
counteract the consequent degradation of the communications
performance, an acquisition step is introduced at the window
borders. Of course, the input quantization has a large and
direct effect on the communications performance. The quanti-
zation of data internal to the turbo decoder can be derived from
the input quantization. Typically, a 5 bit input quantization
shows a 0.2dB performance degradation compared to a 6 bit
input quantization, assuming the same number of iterations
and a code rate of 𝑅= 1/3. Most of the published turbo
decoder architectures are instantiated with 5 or 6 bits for input
quantization.
To highlight the impact of window and acquisition length on
the communications performance, we compare the two turbo
decoders [32] and [13]. They share the same quantization,
technology, and basic decoder architecture, but strongly differ
in the window length and acquisition length (𝑊𝐿=8, 𝐴𝐿=20
compared to 𝑊𝐿=32, 𝐴𝐿=96). For a code rate 𝑅= 1/3
and a given number of iterations, the two decoders show a
nearly identical communications performance. However, for
𝑅= 0.95, the highest code rate specified in the LTE standard,
the difference in the communications performance after 6
iterations is about 2dB. The decoder from [32] achieves the
desired communications performance only after 9 iterations,
at a much lower throughput, which is first order inverse
proportional to the number of iterations, see Section VII.
It is possible to derive some first order analytical equations
showing the impact of the parameters (𝑊𝐿, 𝐴𝐿) on throughput
and area (Section VII), but there is no analytical equation
for the dependency of the communications performance on
these parameters. Instead Monte Carlo simulations have to
be performed, making it nearly impossible to compare the
decoders in Table III from a communications performance
point of view, unless the publications give detailed commu-
nications performance graphs for the relevant parameters of
the given standards. Although sometimes such graphs are
published, they typically cover only a subset of a standard’s
parameters and do not cover their corner cases. E.g., the
turbo decoder from [19] is LTE compliant with respect to the
supported interleavers and code rates, but it is not clear how
many iterations are required to fulfill the LTE communications
performance requirements at the code rate of 𝑅= 0.95.
These examples show that comparing only architectural
results of different published decoders may lead to entirely
wrong conclusions. The communications performance results
have to be published as well, not for one point but for various
service parameters, to allow a comparison of implementation
efficiencies.
VI. CONCLUSION
Understanding the trade-offs between implementation effi-
ciency, communications performance and flexibility will be
key for designing efficient baseband receivers. Meaningful
efficiency metrics are mandatory to explore and evaluate the
resulting huge design space. We introduced and discussed
suitable energy and area efficiency metrics which are based
on decoded information bit per energy and throughput per
area unit. Various channel decoder implementations were
utilized to examine these efficiency metrics with respect to the
achieved communications performance and with respect to the
decoder flexibility. The presented approaches allow to system-
atically compare different realizations by jointly considering:
implementation efficiency, communications performance and
flexibility.
VII. APPENDIX
In this section we show the dependencies of various ar-
chitectural parameters on throughput and area of state-of-the
art turbo decoders. We use the following nomenclature and
parameters:
𝑡𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑
technology node and operating conditions
w.r.t. feature size variation, 𝑉𝑑𝑑, temperature
𝑓𝑐𝑦𝑐
frequency of the design
𝑄
quantization of the input data, the quantization
of all other variables are derived from this
𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑟
iteration number
𝐾
number of information bits
𝑊𝐿
window length, in hardware the codeword is
processed window by window
𝐴𝐿
acquisition length, the number of training steps
for the forward or backward recursion.
𝑟𝑑𝑥
radix-2 or radix-4 realization of the recursion units
𝑃
architectural parallelism
𝐶𝑁
latency due to network to realize the interleaving,
strongly depends on 𝑃and interleaver structure
The throughput (𝑇) for state-of-the-art turbo decoder archi-
tectures can be calculated by the frequency times the number
of cycle needed to process an information word of length 𝐾.
An increased throughput requires a higher parallelism of the
architecture, which increases the number of overhead cycles
for interleaving 𝐶𝑁(𝑃).The throughput is given as follows:
𝑇
=
𝑓𝑐𝑦𝑐⋅
𝐾
2 ⋅𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑟⋅
(
𝑊𝐿+𝐴𝐿
𝑙𝑜𝑔2(𝑟𝑑𝑥) +
𝐾
𝑃⋅𝑙𝑜𝑔2(𝑟𝑑𝑥) + 𝐶𝑁(𝑃)
) (1)
The frequency itself mainly depends on technology 𝑡𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑, the
quantization of the input data, and the critical path in the
combinatorial logic.
The area 𝐴𝑎𝑙𝑙of a turbo decoder is composed of three parts:
𝐴𝑎𝑙𝑙
=
𝑃⋅𝐴𝑀𝐴𝑃(𝑡𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑, 𝑄, 𝑊𝐿, 𝐴𝐿, 𝑟𝑑𝑥)
+𝐴𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑙(𝑡𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑)
+𝐴𝑀(𝑡𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑, 𝑄, 𝑊𝐿, 𝐴𝐿, 𝑟𝑑𝑥, 𝑃)
(2)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:02:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
KIENLE et al.: ON COMPLEXITY, ENERGY- AND IMPLEMENTATION-EFFICIENCY OF CHANNEL DECODERS
3309
TABLE III: Published 3GPP TC decoder architectures with corresponding architectural and technology parameters. The
communications performance depends mainly on: input quantization (𝑄), window length (𝑊𝐿), and acquisition length (𝐴𝐿).
Work
Standard(s) Results
Throughput @ iter.
@ 𝑓𝑐𝑦𝑐
Tech-
Area
Parameters strongly affecting
from
[Mbit/s]
[MHz]
nology
[mm2]
communications performance
[15]
HSPA
fabricated
chip
24
6
145
180 nm
14.5
𝑄=5, 𝑊𝐿=40, 𝐴𝐿=40
[16]
HSPA
fabricated
chip
20.2
5.5
246
130 nm
1.2
𝑄=5, 𝑊𝐿=40, 𝐴𝐿=40
[17]
HSPA
worst case
synthesis
758
6
256
130 nm
13.1
𝑄=5, 𝑊𝐿=32, 𝐴𝐿=32
[18]
LTE,
WiMAX
fabricated
chip
186
8
250
130 nm
10.7
𝑄=?, 𝑊𝐿=128, 𝐴𝐿=128
[19]
LTE
fabricated
chip
390
5.5
302
130 nm
3.57
𝑄=5, 𝑊𝐿=30, 𝐴𝐿=30
[20]
LTE
place &
route
1280
6
400
65 nm
8.3
𝑄=6 , 𝑊𝐿=64, 𝐴𝐿=64
[32]
HSPA
worst case
synthesis
184
6
300
130 nm
3.8
𝑄=6, 𝑊𝐿=8, 𝐴𝐿=20
[13]
LTE
fabricated
chip
150
6.5
300
65 nm
2.1
𝑄=6, 𝑊𝐿=32, 𝐴𝐿=96
𝐴𝑀𝐴𝑃is the logic area for a single MAP processing kernel
which has to be instantiated 𝑃times depending on the par-
allelism. 𝐴𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑙is the area of the controller which is typically
small compared to the other two parts. 𝐴𝑀is the required
area for instantiated memories. The area to store the input
data (A𝐼/𝑂
𝑀), the area of extrinsic data (A𝑒𝑥𝑡𝑟
𝑀
) which are
exchanged between component decoders, and the area to store
state metric values used within the processing units (A𝑀𝐴𝑃
𝑀
).
Thus the area of the memory which is a large portion of the
overall area is given by
𝐴𝑀
=
𝑃⋅A𝑀𝐴𝑃
𝑀
(𝑡𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑, 𝑊𝐿, 𝑄, 𝑟𝑑𝑥)
+A𝐼/𝑂
𝑀(𝑡𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑, 𝑃, 𝐾, 𝑄)
+A𝑒𝑥𝑡𝑟
𝑀
(𝑡𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑, 𝑃, 𝐾, 𝑄)
(3)
In a similar way we can derive equations for the energy
consumption. However, these results are omitted due to space
limitations.
REFERENCES
[1] C. H. van Berkel, “Multi-core for mobile phones,” in Proc. Design,
Automation. Test Europe Conf. Exhibition, Apr. 2009, pp. 1260–1265.
[2] H. Meyr, M. Moeneclaey, and S. A. Fechtel, Digital Communication
Receivers. John Wiley & Sons Inc., 1998.
[3] S. C. Eberli, Ph.D. dissertation, ETH Zurich, Integrated Systems Labo-
ratory, 2009.
[4] S. Galli, “On the fair comparison of FEC schemes,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Commun., 2010, pp. 1–6.
[5] M. Miranda, C. Ghez, E. Brockmeyer, P. Op De Beeck, and F. Catthoor,
“Data transfer and storage exploration for real-time implementation of a
digital audio broadcast receiver on a Trimedia processor,” in Proc. 15th
Symp. Integrated Circuits Syst. Design, Sep. 2002, pp. 373–378.
[6] C. Rowen, “Energy-efficient LTE baseband with extensible dataplane
processor units,” in 9th International Forum Embedded MPSoC Multi-
core, Aug. 2009.
[7] E. Boutillon, J. Castura, and F. Kschischang, “Decoder-first code de-
sign,” in Proc. 2nd International Symp. Turbo Codes Related Topics,
Sep. 2000, pp. 459–462.
[8] M. Mansour and N. Shanbhag, “Architecture-aware low-density parity-
check codes,” in Proc. IEEE International Symp. Circuits Syst., May
2003.
[9] J. Kwak and K. Lee, “Design of dividable interleaver for parallel
decoding in turbo codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 38, no. 22, pp. 1362–
1364, Oct. 2002.
[10] “3GPP LTE (Long Term Evolution) Homepage.” Available: http://www.
3gpp.org/Highlights/LTE/LTE.htm
[11] European Telecommunications Standards Institude (ETSI), “Digital
Video Broadcasting (DVB) Second generation framing structure,channel
coding and modulation systems for Broadcasting, Interactive Services,
News Gathering and other broadband satellite applications; TM 2860r1
DVBS2-74r8.” Available: www.dvb.org.
[12] T. Vogt and N. Wehn, “A reconfigurable ASIP for convolutional and
turbo decoding in a SDR environment,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale
Integration (VLSI) Syst., vol. 16, pp. 1309–1320, Oct. 2008.
[13] M. May, T. Ilnseher, N. Wehn, and W. Raab, “A 150Mbit/s 3GPP LTE
turbo code decoder,” in Proc. Design, Automation Test Europe, Mar.
2010, pp. 1420–1425.
[14] M. Alles, F. Berens, and N. Wehn, “A synthesizable IP core for WiMedia
1.5 UWB LDPC code decoding,” in Proc. IEEE International Conf.
Ultra-Wideband, Sep. 2009, pp. 597–601.
[15] M. Bickerstaff, L. Davis, C. Thomas, D. Garrett, and C. Nicol, “A
24Mb/s Radix-4 LogMAP turbo decoder for 3GPP-HSDPA mobile
wireless,” in Proc. IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conf., Feb.
2003, pp. 150–151.
[16] C. Benkeser, A. Burg, T. Cupaiuolo, and Q. Huang, “Design and
optimization of an HSDPA turbo decoder ASIC,” IEEE J. Solid-State
Circuits, vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 98–106, Jan. 2009.
[17] G. Prescher, T. Gemmeke, and T. Noll, “A parameterizable low-
power high-throughput turbo-decode,” in Proc. IEEE International Conf.
Acoustics, Speech, Signal Process., Mar. 2005, pp. V-25-28.
[18] J.-H. Kim and I.-C. Park, “A unified parallel radix-4 turbo decoder
for mobile WiMAX and 3GPP-LTE,” in Proc. IEEE Custom Integrated
Circuits Conf., Sep. 2009, pp. 487–490.
[19] C. Studer, C. Benkeser, S. Belfanti, and Q. Huang, “A 390Mb/s
3.57mm2 3GPP-LTE turbo decoder ASIC in 0.13𝜇m CMOS,” in Proc.
IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conf. - Digest Tech. Papers,
vol. 53, Feb. 2010, pp. 274–275.
[20] Y. Sun and J. Cavallaro, “Efficient hardware implementation of a highly-
parallel 3GPP LTE/LTE-advance turbo decoder,” Integration VLSI J.,
2010.
[21] P. Urard, L. Paumier, V. Heinrich, N. Raina, and N. Chawla, “A 360mW
105Mb/s DVB-S2 compliant codec based on 64800b LDPC and BCH
codes enabling satellite-transmission portable devices,” in Proc. IEEE
International Solid-State Circuits Conf., Feb. 2008, pp. 310–311.
[22] X.-Y. Shih, C.-Z. Zhan, C.-H. Lin, and A.-Y. Wu, “An 8.29 mm 52
mW multi-mode LDPC decoder design for mobile WiMAX system in
0.13 & CMOS process," IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, no. 3, pp.
672–683, Mar. 2008.
[23] S. Muller, M. Schreger, M. Kabutz, M. Alles, F. Kienle, and N. Wehn,
“A novel LDPC decoder for DVB-S2 IP,” in Proc. Design, Automation.
Test Europe Conf. Exhibition, Apr. 2009, pp. 1308–1313.
[24] M. Mansour and N. Shanbhag, “Low-power VLSI decoder architectures
for LDPC codes,” in Proc. International Symp. Low Power Electron.
Design, Aug. 2002.
[25] J. Dielissen, A. Hekstra, and V. Berg, “Low cost LDPC decoder for
DVB-S2,” in Proc. Design, Automation Test Europe, Mar. 2006.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:02:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
3310
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 59, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2011
[26] IEEE 802.11, “Wireless fidelity (Wireless LAN).” Available: http://
grouper.ieee.org/groups/802/11/.
[27] F. Guilloud, E. Boutillon, and J. Danger, “𝜆-Min decoding algorithm
of regular and irregular LDPC codes,” in Proc. 3rd International Symp.
Turbo Codes Related Topics, Sep. 2003, pp. 451–454.
[28] “WiMedia alliance." Available: www.wimedia.org.
[29] International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors, “ITRS home
page.” Available: http://public.itrs.net.
[30] CMP, “Circuits Multi-Projets.” Available: http://cmp.imag.fr/products/ic/
[31] J. M. Rabaey, Low Power Design Essentials, 1st edition. Springer, 2009.
[32] M. May, C. Neeb, and N. Wehn, “Evaluation of high throughput turbo-
decoder architectures,” in Proc. IEEE International Symp. Circuits Syst.,
May 2007, pp. 2770–2773.
Dr. Frank Kienle received the M.Sc in Commu-
nications from the Technical University of Kaiser-
slautern in 2001. He joint to the Microelectronic
Systems Design Research Group and received his
Ph.D. in 2006.
From 2006-2008 he had a Post-Doc position
at the Microelectronic Systems Design Research
Group responsible for industry cooperation’s. Since
2009, he holds the position ’Akademischer Rat’ and
is heading the communications research group in
the institute. He has more than 40 publications in
various fields.
Dr. Norbert Wehn holds the chair for Microlec-
tronic System Design in the department of Elec-
trical Engineering and Information Technology at
the University of Kaiserslautern. He has more than
200 publications in various fields of microelectronic
system design and holds several patents. He is
chairman of the European Design Automation Asso-
ciation, Chairman of the Research Center “Ambient
Systems” at TU Kaiserslautern, associate editor of
various journals and member of several scientific
advisory boards. In 2003 he served as program chair
for DATE 2003 and as general chair for DATE 2005 respectively. His
special research interests are VLSI-architectures for mobile communication,
forward error correction techniques, low-power, advanced SoC architectures
and reliability issues in SoC. Norbert Wehn is IEEE Senior and IEEE Golden
Core member.
Dr. Heinrich Meyr received his M.Sc. and Ph.D.
from ETH Zurich, Switzerland. He spent over 12
years in various research and management posi-
tions in industry before accepting a professorship
in Electrical Engineering at Aachen University of
Technology (RWTH Aachen). He has retired as
Professor Emeritus in 2007 but remains active as
a researcher. Presently he is a visiting Professor at
EPFL, Switzerland.
During the last thirty years, Dr. Meyr has worked
extensively in the areas of communication theory,
digital signal processing and CAD tools for system-level design. His academic
work is highly cited, he received three IEEE best paper awards, and in 2000 he
received the prestigious Vodafon innovation prize. Dr. Meyr is a Life Fellow
of the IEEE
At RWTH Aachen he implemented an innovative cooperation model
between university and industry with a highly successful fundraising program,
without compromising academic excellence. Major industry funding included
grants from leading US and European companies.
Dr .Meyr has a dual career as entrepreneur. He has founded several
successful companies. The last company he cofounded in 2001 was LisaTek.
LisaTek has developed revolutionary technology to design MPSoC. Since
2010 Lisatek is part of Synopsys, the market leader in EDA.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:02:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
