2011 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory Proceedings
Trapping Sets of Structured LDPC Codes
Qin Huang1, Qiuju Diao2, Shu Lin1 and Khaled Abdel-Ghaffar1
1 Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of California, Davis, 95616, USA 2 State Key Laboratory of Integrated Service Networks, Xidian University, Xi’an, 710071, CHINA
Email: {qinhuang, qdiao, shulin, ghaffar}@ucdavis.edu

Abstract—THIS PAPER IS ELIGIBLE FOR THE STUDENT PAPER AWARD. This paper analyzes trapping set structure of binary regular LDPC codes whose parity-check matrices satisfy the constraint that no two rows (or two columns) have more than one place where they both have non-zero components, which is called row-column (RC) constraint. For a (γ,ρ)-regular LDPC code whose parity-check matrix satisfies the RC-constraint, its Tanner graph contains no (κ, τ ) trapping set with size κ ≤ γ and number τ of odd degree check nodes less than γ. For several classes of RC-constrained regular LDPC codes constructed algebraically, we show that their Tanner graphs contain no trapping sets of sizes smaller than their minimum weights.
I. INTRODUCTION
LDPC codes [1] perform amazingly well with iterative decoding based on belief propagation. However, with iterative decoding, most LDPC codes have a common severe weakness, known as error-floor. The error-floor of an LDPC code is characterized by the phenomenon of an abrupt decrease in the slope of the code’s error performance curve from the moderate SNR water-fall region to the high SNR floor region, i.e., the error probability of a code in the high SNR region suddenly drops at a rate much slower than that in the region of low to moderate SNR (or even stops to drop). Ever since this phenomenon became known [2], a great deal of research effort has been expended in finding its causes and methods to resolve or mitigate it. For the AWGN channel, the errorfloor of an LDPC code is mostly caused by an undesirable structure, known as trapping-set [3], in the Tanner graph of the code based on which the decoding is carried out.
Definition 1. Let G be the Tanner graph of a binary LDPC code C given by the null space of an m × n matrix H over GF(2). For 1 ≤ κ ≤ n and 0 ≤ τ ≤ m, a (κ,τ ) trapping set, denoted by T (κ, τ ), is defined as a set of κ variable-nodes (VNs) in G which induce a sub-graph of G with exactly τ odd-degree check-nodes (CNs) and an arbitrary number of even-degree CNs [3]. An elementary (κ, τ ) trapping set [4] is a trapping set for which all CNs have degree one or two, and there are exactly τ degree-one CNs.
Suppose, in transmission of a codeword in C, an error pattern e with κ errors at the locations of the κ VNs of a (κ, τ ) trapping set occurs. This error pattern will cause τ paritycheck failures (nonzero check-sums). In this case, for iterative decoding, another decoding iteration must be carried out to
This research was supported by NSF under the Grants CCF-0727478 and CCF-1015548, NASA under the Grant NNX09AI21G and gift grants from Northrop Grumman Space Technology, Intel and Denali Software Inc..

correct the failed check-sums. Iterative decoding algorithms, such as the SPA and the MSA, are very susceptible to trapping sets of a code. In each decoding iteration, we call a CN a satisfied CN if it satisfies its corresponding check-sum constraint (i.e., zero check-sum), otherwise, call it an unsatisfied CN. During the decoding process, the decoder undergoes state transitions from one state to another until all the CNs satisfy their corresponding check-sum constraints or a predetermined maximum number of iterations is reached. The ith state of an iterative decoder is represented by the hard-decision decoded sequence obtained at the end of the ith iteration. In the process of a decoding iteration, the messages from the satisfied CNs try to reinforce the current decoder state, while the messages from the unsatisfied CNs try to change some of the bit decisions to satisfy their check-sum constraints. The decoder will succeed in correcting the errors in T (κ, τ ) if the messages coming from the unsatisfied CNs connected to the VNs in T (κ, τ ) are strong enough to overcome the messages coming from the satisfied CNs. However, this may not be the case if τ is small compared to κ. As a result, the decoder may not converge to a valid codeword even if more decoding iterations are performed and this non-convergence of decoding results in an error-floor.
Extensive study and simulation results show that the trapping sets which result in high decoding failure rates and contribute significantly to high error-floors are those with small values κ and small ratios τ /κ [2] - [14] (see [14] for more references). These trapping sets are commonly called small trapping sets. Furthermore, from extensive computer simulations reported in the literature, it has been observed that most trapping sets that exert a strong influence on the errorfloor are of the elementary trapping sets with τ /κ < 1. Besides small trapping sets and their distributions, undetected errors caused by a small minimum weight of a code also contribute considerably to the error-floor of the code. If there are no trapping sets with size κ smaller than the minimum weight of an LDPC code, then the error-floor of the code is dominated by the minimum weight of the code.
The notion of a small trapping set given above is loosely defined. A more quantitative definition of small trapping sets was given by La¨ndner and Milenkovic [4].
Definition 2. A (κ, τ ) trapping set in the Tanner grap√h of an LDPC code of length n is said to be small if κ ≤ n and τ ≤ 4κ, i.e., the ratio τ /κ ≤ 4.
A regular binary LDPC code [1] is given by the null space of a sparse parity-check matrix H over GF(2) that has constant column weight γ and constant row weight ρ. Such an LDPC

978-1-4577-0595-3/11/$26.00 ©2011 IEEE

1086

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

code is said to be (γ, ρ)-regular. In almost all of the proposed constructions of LDPC codes, the following constraint on the rows and columns of H is imposed: no two rows (or two columns) can have more than one place where they both have non-zero components. This constraint on the rows and columns of H is referred to as the row-column (RC)-constraint. This RC-constraint ensures that the Tanner graph of the LDPC code given by the null space of H has a girth of at least 6 and that the minimum weight of the code is at least γ + 1 [15], [16]. This bound on minimum weight is tight for regular LDPC codes whose parity-check matrices have large column weights, such as finite geometry (FG) LDPC codes [15] and finite field QC-LDPC codes constructed in [14], [17]-[19].
In this paper, we present an analysis of trapping set structure of regular LDPC codes whose parity-check matrices satisfy the RC-constraint. We show that the Tanner graph of an RC-constrained (γ, ρ)-regular LDPC code contains no (κ, τ ) trapping set with κ ≤ γ and τ < γ. More precisely, any trapping set (κ, τ ) with κ VNs, if κ ≤ γ, then the number of odd-degree CNs is at least γ + 1, i.e., τ > γ. This is to say that for an RC-constrained (γ, ρ)-regular LDPC codes, there is no harmful trapping set with size smaller than γ. Finite geometry codes given in [15] and finite field QC-LDPC codes given in [14], [17] - [19] are all RC-constrained LDPC codes and whose parity-check matrices have large column weights γ (also high row redundancies). Hence they don’t have harmful tapping sets with size smaller than γ.
II. ORTHOGONAL CHECK-SUMS
Let C be a binary (γ, ρ)-regular LDPC code of length n given by the null space of an RC-constrained m × n matrix H = [hi,j] 0 ≤ i < m, 0 ≤ j < n over GF(2) with column and row weights γ and ρ, respectively. For 0 ≤ i < m, let hi = (hi,0, hi,1, ..., hi,n−1) be the ith row of H. An n-tuple v = (v0, v1, ..., vn−1) over GF(2) is a codeword in C if and only if v · HT = 0. The condition v · HT = 0 gives m constraints on the bits of the codeword v, ci = v · hi = v0hi,0 + v1hi,1 + ... + vn−1hi,n−1 = 0 for 0 ≤ i < m, where v · hi is the inner product of v and hi. The m sums of code bits, ci with 0 ≤ i < m, are called check-sums. The m check-sums equal to 0 are the constraints that the code bits of any codeword must satisfy. For 0 ≤ j < n, if hi,j = 1, then the jth code bit vj is contained in the ith check-sum ci. In this case, we say that the ith check-sum ci checks on the jth code bit vj of v. Since H has constant column weight γ, there are γ check-sums checking on vj. Since H satisfies the RC-constraint, no two different code bits, vj1 and vj2 , are simultaneously checked by two different check-sums, ci1 and ci2 .
Suppose a codeword v = (v0, v1, ..., vn−1) in C is transmitted. Let z = (z0, z1, ..., zn−1) be the hard-decision received sequence. Let e = (e0, e1, ..., en−1) = (z0, z1, ..., zn−1) + (v0, v1, ..., vn−1) = (z0 + v0, z1 + v1, ..., zn−1 + vn−1) where, for 0 ≤ j < n, ej = zj + vj and “+” is modulo-2 addition. If zj = vj, then ej = 1 otherwise ej = 0. Therefore, the positions in e where the components equal to “1” are the erroneous positions. The n-tuple e is called the error pattern contained in z [16].

For any decoding algorithm (soft or hard), the first step is to compute the syndrome of z [16], s = (s0, s1, ..., sm−1) = z · HT, where si = z · hi = z0hi,0 + z1hi,1 + ... + zn−1hi,n−1 with 0 ≤ i < m, which is called a syndrome-sum of z. If s = 0, then the received bits in z satisfy all the m check-sum constraints and z is a codeword. In this case, the receiver assumes that z is the transmitted codeword and accepts it as the decoded codeword. If s = 0, the received bits in z do not satisfy all the m check-sum constraints and z is not a codeword. In this case, we say that errors in z are being detected. Since z = v + e and v · hi = 0, each syndrome-sum is a sum of a set of error bits, si = e · hi = e0hi,0 +e1hi,1 +...+en−1hi,n−1. If z is error-free, si = ci = 0 for 0 ≤ i < m. If z is not error-free but the error pattern e happens to be identical to a nonzero codeword in C, all the m syndrome-sums will be equal to 0. In this case, the received sequence z contains an undetected error pattern and
decoding results in an incorrect decoding. Decoding process
is initiated (or continues in iterative decoding) only if not all
the syndrome-sums are equal to zero. A syndrome-sum si is equal to “1” if and only if the number
of nonzero error digits checked by si is odd. Let e be an error pattern with κ nonzero error bits which cause τ nonzero (failed) syndrome-sums. Construct a sub-graph G(κ, τ ) of the Tanner graph G of the code with a set T (κ, τ ) of κ VNs. These κ VNs correspond to the κ nonzero error bits in e and are connected to τ CNs which correspond to the τ
failed syndrome-sums and/or connected to some CNs which
correspond to zero syndrome-sums but are adjacent to the VNs in T (κ, τ ). In this sub-graph, the CNs corresponding
to the failed syndrome-sums have odd degrees and the other CNs have even-degrees. This sub-graph G(κ, τ ) is said to be induced by the detectable error pattern e and the set T (κ, τ )
is a trapping set. A syndrome-sum si that contains an error bit ej is said to
check on ej. Since each column of the parity-check matrix H has weight γ, there are γ syndrome-sums checking on every error bit ej, i.e., every error bit is checked by γ syndromesums. Since H satisfies the RC-constraint, no two error bits can be checked simultaneously by two syndrome-sums.
For 0 ≤ i < m and 0 ≤ j < n, define the following two index sets: Ni = {j : 0 ≤ j < n, hi,j = 1} and Mj = {i : 0 ≤ i < m, hi,j = 1}. Since H satisfies the RC-constraint, it is clear that: 1) for 0 ≤ i1, i2 < m and i1 = i2, Ni1 and Ni2 have at most one index in common; and 2) for 0 ≤ j1, j2 < n and j1 = j2, Mj1 and Mj2 have at most one index in common. Since H has constant column weight γ and constant row weight ρ, |Mj| = γ for 0 ≤ j < n and |Ni| = ρ for 0 ≤ i < m. For 0 ≤ j < n, define the following set of rows of H : A(j) = {hi : i ∈ Mj}. Then it follows from the RCconstraint on H that A(j) has the following properties: 1) every row hi in A(j) has 1-component at the jth position; 2) any 1component at a position other than the jth position can appear in at most one row in A(j); and (3) for 0 ≤ j1, j2 < n, and j1 = j2, A(j1) and A(j2) can have at most one row in common. The rows in A(j) are said to be orthogonal on the jth code bit vj. For 0 ≤ j < n, define the following set of syndromesums: S(j) = {si = e · hi : hi ∈ A(j)}. Then, the jth error

1087
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

bit ej of the error pattern e is checked by every syndromesum in S(j) and any error bit other than ej is checked by at most one syndrome-sum in S(j). The γ syndrome-sums in S(j) are said to be orthogonal on the error bit ej and are called orthogonal syndrome-sums on ej. The RC-constraint on the parity-check matrix H (or property-3 of A(j)) ensures that any two different orthogonal sets S(j1) and S(j2) can have at most one syndrome-sum in common.
III. ANALYSIS OF TRAPPING SETS
In this section, we analyze the trapping set structure of RCconstrained regular LDPC codes based on the structure of their orthogonal parity-check sums. We first use error patterns with one, two and three errors to illustrate how they induce trapping sets of sizes one, two and three. Then, we analyze the structure of trapping sets of an (γ, ρ)-regular LDPC code induced by error patterns with t or fewer errors with t ≤ γ.
Consider an error pattern e = (e0, e1, ..., en−1) with a single error at jth position with 0 ≤ j < n, i.e., ej = 1. For this single error pattern, all the syndrome-sums in S(j) orthogonal on ej are equal to “1”. Since ej is checked only by the syndrome-sums in S(j), all the syndrome-sums in any other orthogonal syndrome set are error free and equal to zero. Consequently, the trapping set corresponding to this single error pattern is a (1, γ) trapping set T (1, γ) with one VN and γ CNs of degree 1. It is an elementary trapping set.
Next, we consider an error pattern e with two errors at positions, j1 and j2, i.e., ej1 = ej2 = 1. Then all the syndrome-sums in the orthogonal set S(j1) check on ej1 and all the syndrome-sums in the orthogonal set S(j2) check on ej2 . If S(j1) and S(j2) are disjoint, then all the syndromesums in S(j1) and all the syndrome-sums in S(j2) are equal to “1”. In this case, the trapping set corresponding to the error pattern e with double errors is a (2, 2γ) elementary trapping set T (2, 2γ) with 2 VNs and 2γ CNs of degree 1. If S(j1) and S(j2) are not disjoint, then they have exactly one common syndrome-sum which checks on both ej1 and ej2 and hence this common syndrome-sum is zero. In this case, the trapping set corresponding to the error-pattern e with double errors is a (2, 2(γ − 1)) elementary trapping set with 2 VNs, 2(γ − 1) CNs of degree 1 and one CN of degree 2. The above analysis shows that the trapping set corresponding to an error pattern with two errors has at least 2(γ − 1) CNs of odd degrees.
Consider an error pattern e with three errors at the positions, j1, j2 and j3. The trapping set corresponding to this error pattern has several possible configurations depending on the locations of the three errors. The first possible configuration is such that the three errors are checked separately by three mutually disjoint orthogonal sets, S(j1), S(j2) and S(j3). In this case, the trapping set corresponding to the error pattern e is a (3, 3γ) elementary trapping set with 3 VNs and 3γ CNs of degree 1, no CN with even degree. The second possible configuration is such that two orthogonal sets, say S(j1) and S(j2), have a common syndrome-sum and the third orthogonal set S(j3) is mutually disjoint with S(j1) and S(j2). In this case, error bits, ej1 and ej2 , are jointly checked by a common syndrome-sum in S(j1) and S(j2) and the error bit

ej3 is checked only by the syndrome-sums in S(j3). Then, the trapping set corresponding to this triple-error pattern e is a (3, 3γ − 2) elementary trapping set with three VNs, 3γ − 2 CNs of degree 1 and one CN of degree 2. The
third possible configuration is such that all three errors are
checked by a syndrome-sum which is contained in all three orthogonal sets, S(j1), S(j2) and S(j3). In this case, all the syndrome-sums in each of the orthogonal sets, S(j1), S(j2), and S(j3), are nonzero. The common syndrome-sum in these three orthogonal sets contains the three errors, ej1 , ej2 , ej3 , and all the other syndrome sums contain only one of these
three errors. Consequently, the trapping set corresponding to e is a (3, 3γ − 2) tapping set with 3γ − 3 CNs of degree
1 and one CN of degree 3 (no CN with even degree). The fourth possible configuration is that S(j1) and S(j2) have a common syndrome sum checking on ej1 and ej2 , S(j1) and S(j3) have a common syndrome sum checking on ej1 and ej3 , and S(j2) and S(j3) are disjoint. For this configuration, the trapping set is a (3, 3γ − 4) elementary trapping set, with 3γ − 4 CNs of degree-1 and two CN of degree-2. The fifth possible configuration is such that the pair of errors, (ej1 , ej2 ), is checked by the common syndrome-sum in S(j1) and S(j2), the pair (ej1 , ej3 ) is checked by the common syndrome-sum in S(j1) and S(j3), and the pair (ej2 , ej3 ) is checked by S(j2) and S(j3). Corresponding to this configuration, the trapping set is a (3, 3(γ − 2)) elementary trapping set with 3(γ − 2) CNs of
degree 1 and 3 CNs of degree 2. In all possible configurations of three errors, any trapping set has at least 3(γ − 2) odddegree CNs. If γ > 3, the number of odd-degree CNs in a
trapping set corresponding to a triple-error pattern is greater than γ. If γ > 6, then the trapping sets corresponding to all
possible configurations of three errors are not small trapping
sets of the type defined by Definition 2. Among all possible
configurations of errors, the last one has the smallest number
of CNs of odd degree. For this configuration, the 3 errors are uniformly distributed in pairs among the three sets of
orthogonal syndrome-sums. This distribution maximizes the
number of CNs of degree-2 and hence minimizes the number
of degree-1. For 1 ≤ t ≤ γ and 0 ≤ j1, j2, ..., jt ≤ γ, consider an error
pattern of t errors at positions j1, j2, ..., jt. For large t and γ, to analyze all the possible configurations of trapping sets with t VNs is very hard if not impossible. However, a lower
bound on the minimum number of odd-degree CNs can be
derived. A configuration that results in a minimum number of odd-degree CNs is such for 0 ≤ r, s ≤ t, every pair {ejr , ejs } of errors is checked by a common syndrome-sum in S(jr) and S(js). That is, the t errors are uniformly distributed in pairs among the t orthogonal syndrome-sums, S(j1), S(j2), ..., S(jt).
This configuration maximizes the number of CNs with even degrees (all degree 2) and results in a (t, t(γ−(t−1))) trapping set T (t, t(γ −(t−1))) with t(γ −(t−1)) CNs of degree 1 and t(t − 1)/2 CNs of degree 2. It is an elementary trapping set. Any other configurations (or distributions) of t errors would
result in a trapping set with larger number of odd-degree CNs with possibly multiple odd-degrees. For t ≤ γ, a trapping set with t VNs in the Tanner graph of an RC-constrained (γ, ρ)regular LDPC code has at least t(γ − (t − 1)) CNs of odd-

1088
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

degrees. For 1 < t < γ, the number of odd-degree CNs is greater than γ. For t = γ, the number of odd-degree CNs is at least γ.
Based on the above analysis and definitions of small trapping sets, we have the following two theorems on the trapping set structure of RC-constrained LDPC codes.
Theorem 1. For an RC-constrained (γ, ρ)-regular LDPC code with γ > 1, its Tanner graph contains no trapping set of size smaller than γ + 1 for which the number of odd-degree CNs is smaller than γ.
Theorem 2. Let γ be a positive integer such that γ > 3. For an R√C-constrained (γ, ρ)-regular LDPC code of length n, if γ ≤ n, then its Tanner graph contains no small trapping set (based on Definition 2) of size smaller than γ − 3.
If we follow the commonly used definition for small trapping sets, i.e., small κ and ratio τ /κ < 1, Theorem 1 simply says that for an RC-constrained (γ, ρ)-regular LDPC code with γ > 1, its Tanner graph contains no small trapping set with size smaller than γ + 1. If Definition 2 of a small trapping set is used, then the Tanner graph of an RC-co√nstrained (γ, ρ)regular LDPC code of length n and γ ≤ n contains no small trapping set with size smaller than γ − 3.
It is important to note that a trapping set induced by an error pattern does not necessarily prevent decoding to converge unless the error pattern is uncorrectable by the decoder. Only trapping sets induced by error patterns that are uncorrectable by the decoder may prevent decoding to converge (or fail) and cause an error-floor. Hence, the term, trapping set is actually misnamed. Extensive simulations in literature did observe that in general, trapping sets of small size (relative to the minimum weight wmin of the code) with small number of odd-degree CNs are the most harmful ones. If the minimum weight wmin of an LDPC code is small, trapping sets induced by uncorrectable error patterns that correspond to the minimum weight codewords also contribute significantly to the errorfloor. In general, a code has a lower error-floor if it does not have small trapping sets (relative to the minimum weight) with small numbers of odd-degree CNs and its minimum weight is reasonable large.
IV. TRAPPING SETS OF SEVERAL KNOWN CLASSES OF RC-CONSTRAINED LDPC CODES
Over last ten years, several large classes of RC-constrained LDPC codes have been constructed. These classes of codes are constructed based on either finite geometries [15], [20] or finite fields [15], [17] - [19], [14]. Since the check-sums of codes in these classes have the orthogonal structure, they have the trapping set structure as described in Section III. Codes in these classes are either cyclic or quasi-cyclic (QC) and their encoding can be implemented with simple shift registers [16]. Every class of these codes contains a special subclass of codes which have large minimum weights. In this following, we present 4 special subclasses of RC-constrained LDPC codes and describe their trapping set structures.
The first class of RC-constrained LDPC codes constructed algebraically is the class of codes constructed based on finite

geometries [15]. It consists of two subclasses, Euclidean

geometry (EG) and projective geometry (PG) LDPC codes.

Since the parity-check matrices of both EG- and PC-LDPC

codes satisfy the RC-constrained, their Tanner graphs have

the trapping set structure as described in Section III. For illus-

tration, we consider two special cases. First, we consider the

EG-LDPC code CEG constructed based the two-dimensional (2-D) Euclidean geometry EG(2, 2s) over the field GF(2s).

The parity-check matrix HEG of this EG-LDPC code CEG is a (4s − 1) × (4s − 1) circulant over GF(2) whose rows
are the incidence vectors of all the lines in EG(2, 2s) not

passing through the origin. The column and the row weights of HEG are both equal to 2s. The rank of HEG is 3s − 1 [15], [16]. Note the parity-check matrix HEG has 4s − 3s
redundant rows. For s ≥ 3, HEG has a large row redundancy.

Large row redundancy of the parity-check matrix of an LDPC

code makes iterative decoding to converge faster. CEG is a
cyclic LDPC code with the following parameters: 1) length n = 4s − 1; 2) dimension k = 4s − 3s, and 3) minimum distance dmin = 2s + 1 (exact). Since HEG satisfies the RC-
constraint, the Tanner graph of this code has a girth at least 6.

It follows from the trapping set analysis given in Section III that any trapping set corresponding to an error pattern with 2s

or fewer errors will induce a subgraph of the code’s Tanner graph which contains at least 2s CNs of odd degrees. This

is to say that the code has no (κ, τ ) trapping set of size κ smaller than 2s + 1 with the number τ of odd-degree CNs smaller than 2s. This implies that for κ ≤ 2s, there is no

(κ, τ ) trapping set with the ratio τ /κ < 1. If the (commonly

used) requirements of small value of κ and τ /κ < 1 are used

to define a small trapping set, then the 2-D cyclic EG-LDPC code CEG has no trapping set of size smaller than 2s + 1 (the

minimum is n = 4s

weight√of − 1, n

the code). ≈ 2s. For

Since the length of the code 1 < κ < 2s − 3, it follows

from the trapping set analysis given in the last section that for

a (κ, τ ) trapping set, the number τ of CNs of odd-degree is at least κ(2s − (κ − 1)) > 4κ which implies that τ /κ > 4.

Then, the code has no small trapping set of the type defined by Definition 2 with size smaller than 2s − 3. As an example,

consider the cyclic (4095,3367) EG-LDPC code constructed based on EG(2,26) [15]. This code has minimum weight 65

whose Tanner graph contains no small trapping set of size

smaller 65 with number of odd degree CNs smaller than 64.

Next, we consider the trapping set structure of a cyclic

PG-LDPC code CP G constructed based on the 2-D projective geometry PG(2,2s) over GF(2s) [15]. The parity-check matrix HP G of this code is a (22s + 2s + 1) × (22s + 2s + 1) circulant over GF(2) with both column and row weights equal to 2s + 1 and rank equal to 3s+1. HEG also has a large row redundancy
for s ≥ 3. The null space of HP G gives a cyclic PG-LDPC code CP G of length n = 4s + 2s + 1 and minimum weight at least 2s +2, whose Tanner graph has a girth of at least 6. Since

the HP G satisfies the RC-constraint and its column weight is

2s + 1, then the Tanner graph of CEG contains no trapping set

of size κ smaller than the minimum distance 2s + 2 with the

number root of

τ of odd degree the length of the

CcNodesmisal√lernth≈an2s2.s

+ 1. The square For κ < 2s − 2,

CP G has no trapping set of the type defined by Definition 2

1089
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

with size smaller than 2s − 2. The results on trapping sets of the 2-D cyclic PG-LDPC code are exactly the same as that obtained in [4] derived with a different approach.
Major classes of binary RC-constrained LDPC codes constructed based on finite fields are given in [17]-[19], [14]. Codes in most of these classes are QC-LDPC codes whose parity-check matrices are arrays of circulant permutation matrices (CPMs). Since the parity-check matrices of these codes satisfy the RC-constraint and their syndrome-sums have orthogonal structure, their Tanner graphs have trapping set structure as described in Section III. In the following, we single out two special classes of these QC-LDPC codes for illustration.
First special class considered is a subclass of of QC-LDPC codes constructed by the first method given in Section V of [17]. Consider the parity-check matrix H(1) given by Eq. (5) in [17, p. 2432]. Let q = 2s. Then H(1) is a (2s − 1) × (2s − 1) array of CPMs of size (2s − 1) × (2s − 1), which is constructed based on the field GF(2s). It is an RC-constrained (2s − 1)2 × (2s − 1)2 matrix over GF(2) with both column and row weights equal to 2s −2. Using the technique given in [19], we can show that the rank of H(1) is 3s − 3. H(1) also has large row redundancy. The null space of this matrix gives a QC-LDPC code with the following parameters and structures: 1) length n = (2s − 1)2; 2) dimension k = (2s − 1)2 − 3s + 3; 3) minimum weight at least 2s − 1; 4) girth at least 6; 5) any trapping set T (κ, τ ) with κ ≤ 2s − 2 must have more than 2s −3 CNs of odd-degrees; and 6) no small trapping set (based on Definition 2) of size less than 2s − 5.
The second special class of QC-LDPC codes considered is a subclass of QC-LDPC codes constructed based on the Latin squares over finite fields given in [19]. For every finite field GF(q), there is a Latin square of order q. Based on this Latin square, an RC-constrained q × q array H of CPMs of size (q − 1) × (q − 1) can be constructed (see [19], Eq. (13), p. 3129). For q = 2s, H is a 2s(2s − 1) × 2s(2s − 1) matrix over GF(2) with both column and row weights equal to 2s − 1. The rank of H is also 3s − 1. The null space of H gives a QC-LDPC code C with following parameters: 1) length n = 2s(2s − 1); 2) dimension k = 2s(2s − 1) − 3s + 1; 3) minimum weight at least 2s; and 4) girth at least 6. It follows from the trapping set analysis given in Section III that any trapping set corresponding to an error pattern with 2s − 1 or fewer random errors will induce a sub-graph of the Tanner graph of the code which contains at least 2s − 1 CNs of odd degrees. If τ /κ < 1 is the required ratio used to define a small trapping set, then the QC-LDPC code C has no small trapping set of size smaller than 2s − 1. From Theorem 2, the code has no small trapping set (based on Definition 2) of size less than 2s − 4. Consider the code constructed based on the Latin square of order 32 over GF(25) which is an RC-constrained (992,750) QC-LDPC code with minimum distance at least 32. Extensive computer search found no trapping sets of sizes smaller than 36 that trap the decoder.
V. CONCLUSION AND REMARKS
In this paper, we have analyzed the trapping set structure of regular LDPC codes whose parity-check matrices satisfy the

RC-constraint. We have shown that several classes of finite
geometry and finite field LDPC codes do not have harmful
trapping sets of sizes smaller than the minimum weights of
the codes. The codes in these classes have large minimum
weights. Consequently, codes in these classes have very low
error-floors (see references [14], [17] - [19]).
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low Density Parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. MacKay and M. S. Postol, “Weaknesses of Margulis and RamanujanMargulis low-density parity-check codes,” Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 74, pp. 97–104, 2003.
[3] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” Proc. 41st Annual Allerton Conf. Commun., Control and Comp., Monticello, IL, Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[4] S. La¨ndner and O. Milenkovic, “Algorithmic and combinatorial analysis of trapping sets in structured LDPC codes,” Proc. Int. Conf. Wireless Networks, Communications and Mobile Computing, Maui, HI, Jun. 2005, pp. 630–635.
[5] M. Stepano, and M. Chertkov, “Instanton analysis of low-density paritycheck codes in error-floor regime,” Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inform. Theory, Seattle, WA, USA, Jul. 9–14, 2006, pp. 552–556.
[6] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek. B. Nikolic´, V. Anantharam, and M. Wainwright, “Investigation of error floors of structured low-density parity-check codes by hardware emulation,” Proc. IEEE Globecom, San Francisco, CA, USA, Nov. 27–Dec. 1, 2006.
[7] S. La¨ndner and O. Milenkovic, “LDPC codes based on Latin squares: Cycle structure, stopping set, and trapping set analysis,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 303–307, Feb. 2007.
[8] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic´, “Analysis of absorbing sets for array-based LDPC codes,” Int. Conf. Commun., Glasgow, Scotland, Jun. 24–28, 2007, pp. 6261–6268.
[9] M. Ivkovic´, S. K. Chilappagari and B. Vasic´, “Eliminating trapping sets in low-density parity check codes by using Tanner graph covers”, IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 3763–3768, Aug. 2008.
[10] Y. Han and W. E. Ryan, “Low-floor decoder for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1663-1673, Jun. 2009.
[11] E. Cavus, C. L. Haymes, and B. Daneshrad, “Low BER performance estimation of LDPC codes via application of importance sampling to trapping sets,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57 , no. 7. pp. 1886-1888, Jul. 2009.
[12] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. J. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic´, “Analysis of absorbing sets and fully absorbing sets of array-based LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 181– 201, Jan. 2010.
[13] S. K. Chilappagari, D. V. Nguyen, B. Vasic, and M. W. Marcellin, “On trapping sets and guaranteed error correction capability of LDPC codes and GLDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform Theory, vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 1600–1611, Apr. 2010.
[14] Q. Huang, Q. Diao, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Cyclic and quasi-cyclic LDPC codes on constrained parity-check matrices and their trapping sets,” submitted to IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, arXiv:cs/1012.3201v1, 2010.
[15] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[16] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Jr., Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications, 2nd edition. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2004.
[17] L. Lan, L. Zeng, Y. Y. Tai, L. Chen, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Construction of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for AWGN and binary erasure channels: A finite field approach,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 2429–2458, Jul. 2007.
[18] J. Kang, Q. Huang, L. Zhang, B. Zhou, and S. Lin, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes: An algebraic construction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 1383–1396 , May 2010.
[19] L. Zhang, Q. Huang, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes: An algebraic construction, rank analysis, and codes on Latin squares,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 3126-3139, Nov. 2010.
[20] N. Kamiya, “High-rate quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes derived from finite affine planes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 1444–1459, Apr. 2007.

1090
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

