428
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 59, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011
Efficient Iterative Techniques for
Soft Decision Decoding of Reed-Solomon Codes
Farnaz Shayegh, Student Member, IEEE, M. Reza Soleymani, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Two new iterative soft decision decoding methods for
Reed-Solomon (RS) codes are proposed. These methods are based
on bit level belief propagation (BP) decoding. In order to make
BP decoding effective for RS codes, we use an extended binary
parity check matrix with a lower density and reduced number of
4-cycles compared to the original binary parity check matrix of
the code. In the first proposed method, we take advantage of the
cyclic structure of RS codes. Based on this property, we can apply
the belief propagation algorithm on any cyclically shifted version
of the received symbols with the same binary parity check matrix.
For each shifted version of received symbols, the distribution
of reliability values will change and deterministic errors can
be avoided. This method results in considerable performance
improvement of RS codes compared to hard decision decoding.
The performance is also superior to some popular soft decision
decoding methods. The second method is based on information
correction in BP decoding. It means that we determine least
reliable bits and by changing their channel information, the
convergence of the decoder is improved. Compared to the first
method, this method needs less BP iterations (less complexity)
but its performance is not as good.
Index Terms—Reed-Solomon codes, belief propagation, ex-
tended binary parity check matrix, cyclic codes, information
correction.
I. INTRODUCTION
R
EED-SOLOMON (RS) codes are non-binary linear block
codes with a wide range of applications in wireless
communications and storage systems. RS codes concatenated
with convolutional codes are the standard channel codes for
satellite transmission and deep-space communications. They
are also outer codes in the third generation (3G) wireless
standard and expected to be used as outer codes in concate-
nated coding schemes for fourth generation wireless standard.
RS codes are maximum distance separable which is a very
attractive property for error-correcting codes. Hard decision
decoders with low complexity exists for RS codes [1], but
they don’t use the channel reliability information which causes
considerable performance loss that may not be acceptable in
many applications. Guruswami and Vardy [2] have shown that
the maximum likelihood decoding of RS codes is NP-hard.
Based on this fact, many different soft decision decoding
Paper approved by O. Milenkovic, the Editor for Coding Theory and
Applications of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received
October 8, 2009; revised January 7, 2010 and August 17, 2010.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineer-
ing, Concordia University, 1515 Saint-Catherine Street, Montreal, QC, H3G
1M8, Canada (e-mail: {f_shayeg, msoleyma}@ece.concordia.ca).
This work has been supported by NSERC CRD grant CRDPJ-340658 as
well as contribution from InterDigital Canada Ltd., PROMPT Quebec and
FQRNT. Parts of this work have been presented at the IEEE International
Conference on Communications (ICC2009), Dresden, Germany, June 2009.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2011.121410.090612
methods have been introduced for RS codes in an effort to
have moderate complexity and a performance close to the
optimal maximum likelihood (ML) decoding. Algebraic list
decoding algorithm (the Koetter-Vardy (KV) algorithm [3])
provides significant coding gain over hard decision decoding
for low rate RS codes. However, in order to have large coding
gain, its complexity might increase prohibitively.
ML decoding of RS codes using their binary image expan-
sion was first proposed in [4] by decomposing RS codes into
BCH subfield subcodes. The complexity of this method grows
exponentially with the code length.
Using the binary image of RS codes, reliability based
ordered statistics decoding (OSD) [5] and its variations [6]
[7] can also be used for RS codes.
Belief Propagation (BP) iterative decoding was first pro-
posed for decoding low-density parity check (LDPC) codes
[8]. It has been shown that iterative decoders for very long
codes can achieve performances close to Shannon capacity.
Therefore, it would be ideal if Reed-Solomon codes are
suitable for this class of decoders.
Standard BP iterative decoding is not suitable for high
density parity check codes like RS codes, because for these
codes, there are a large number of short cycles in the factor
graph [9] which cause correlation between the messages and
error propagation. In [10], the cyclic structure of RS codes
is used and BP decoding is applied to a random shift of the
received vector at each iteration to avoid error propagation. For
short RS codes, the coding gain is significant but it diminishes
for long codes. Another bit-level decoding method based on
belief propagation was proposed in [11], but it was only
efficient for very low rate RS code. In [12], an algorithm for
removing all the 4-cycles in the factor graph of linear block
codes is introduced. This method improves the suitability
of iterative decoders for short low rate RS codes. The first
successful bit-level iterative decoding method for RS codes
was adaptive parity-check (ADP) algorithm [13]. In ADP, in
order to make BP decoding effective for dense RS parity check
matrix, Gaussian Elimination is performed on the binary parity
check matrix before each iteration such that the variables of
lowest reliability connect into the graph only once. It has
been shown that this algorithm has very good performance
compared to other soft-decision decoding algorithms for RS
codes. The problem with ADP algorithm is that the required
adaptation of the parity check matrix at each iteration is
very complex. Recently more decoding methods based on
BP algorithm have been proposed for general linear block
codes [14]–[18]. In [19] multiple-bases belief-propagation for
linear block codes with dense parity check matrices has been
0090-6778/11$25.00 c⃝2011 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:04:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
SHAYEGH and SOLEYMANI: EFFICIENT ITERATIVE TECHNIQUES FOR SOFT DECISION DECODING OF REED-SOLOMON CODES
429
proposed. It makes use of the fact that a code has many
structurally diverse parity-check matrices, capable of detecting
different error patterns.
In this paper, for effective iterative decoding of RS codes,
we use a fixed binary parity check matrix. This matrix is the
extended version of the original parity check matrix with lower
density and less number of 4-cycles. This parity check matrix
representation is better suited for iterative decoders. We should
mention that, parity check matrix extension is only applied in
the receiver for the decoding without affecting the RS code
itself (i. e. the transmitter). Even using the extended parity
check matrix, the performance of normal BP decoding is not
very good. In this paper, in order to improve the performance
of normal BP decoding, we propose two new bit level iterative
soft decision decoding methods for RS codes using the fixed
extended binary parity check matrix.
The first algorithm uses the cyclic structure of RS codes.
Based on this property, we can apply the BP algorithm on
any cyclically shifted version of the received symbols with the
same binary parity check matrix. For an (𝑁, 𝐾) RS codeword,
each of 𝑁shifted versions of received symbols leads to a
different distribution of reliability values and deterministic
errors can be avoided. Simulation results demonstrate that the
performance of this method is superior or comparable to some
popular methods including ADP method.
The second algorithm uses the information correction in
BP decoding. It means that based on the updated reliabilities
at the end of each iteration, we can determine the bits with
lowest reliabilities such that changing their channel informa-
tion improves the convergence of the decoder to a codeword
[20]. In this method, a few steps of information correction
are performed which help improving the performance of the
normal BP decoding. The performance of this method is not
as good as the first algorithm, but it is less complex because
it needs less number of BP iterations.
The organization of this paper is as follows. In section II the
system model for RS encoding and transmission is introduced.
In section III, we first briefly review the BP decoding. Then
we explain low density extended binary parity check matrix
for RS codes. After that we investigate the performance of
BP decoding with different binary parity check matrices over
binary erasure channel. In section IV, using the extended parity
check matrix, two algorithms for soft decision decoding of
RS codes based on BP decoding is presented. First, iterative
decoding based on cyclic properties of RS codes is introduced.
We also give a geometric interpretation of the proposed algo-
rithm. Then, iterative decoding using information correction
is presented. We also present complexity analysis for the
proposed algorithms. Simulation results and discussions are
in section V where the performance of different RS codes
over AWGN channels is considered. We explore the amount
of soft-decision gain that our algorithms provide for different
RS codes. Finally, conclusions are presented in section VI.
II. SYSTEM MODEL
We use a Reed-Solomon (𝑁, 𝐾) code over Galois Field
𝐺𝐹(2𝑚) where 𝑁= 2𝑚−1. The parity check matrix of the
code can be represented by:
H =
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
1
𝛼
𝛼2
...
𝛼(𝑁−1)
1
𝛼2
𝛼4
...
𝛼2(𝑁−1)
...
1
𝛼(𝑁−𝐾)
𝛼2(𝑁−𝐾)
...
𝛼(𝑁−𝐾)(𝑁−1)
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠.
(1)
For any codeword 𝑐of the RS code, 𝐻𝑐𝑇= 0 . Since any
element 𝛽∈𝐺𝐹(2𝑚) has an 𝑚tuple representation, we can
show any codeword of length 𝑁in binary form:
𝑐𝑏= (𝑐1,1, 𝑐1,2, ..., 𝑐1,𝑚, 𝑐2,1, ..., 𝑐2,𝑚, ..., 𝑐𝑁,1, ..., 𝑐𝑁,𝑚).
(2)
We assume BPSK modulation 𝑥= −2𝑐𝑏+ 1 over AWGN
channel. So, the received signal is:
𝑦= 𝑥+ 𝑛
(3)
where 𝑛is the AWGN vector with variance 𝜎2. The reliability
of the received vector can be expressed in terms of the log
likelihood ratios (LLR’s) that are given by 𝜌𝑐ℎ= 2𝑦/𝜎2.
Here for the decoding, we consider RS codes over an
extension field of 𝐺𝐹(2). We denote a primitive polynomial of
𝐺𝐹(2𝑚) over 𝐺𝐹(2) by 𝑝(𝑥) = 𝑎0+𝑎1𝑥+...+𝑎𝑚−1𝑥𝑚−1+
𝑥𝑚. We also suppose that 𝛼is a root of 𝑝(𝑥) and therefore a
primitive element in 𝐺𝐹(2𝑚). For 𝑝(𝑥), there is an 𝑚× 𝑚
companion matrix which is given as follows:
cp =
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
0
...
0
𝑎0
𝑎1
𝐼𝑚−1
:
𝑎𝑚−1
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠
(4)
where 𝐼𝑚−1 is an (𝑚−1) × (𝑚−1) identity matrix [21].
A field isomorphism can be defined by the mapping 𝛼𝑖→
𝑐𝑖
𝑝, 𝑖= {0, 1, ...}. Based on this mapping, each element of the
parity check matrix of the code is replaced with an 𝑚× 𝑚
binary matrix resulting a binary parity check matrix 𝐻𝑏of size
(𝑁−𝐾)𝑚×𝑁𝑚. Such a mapping results in 𝐻𝑏𝑐𝑇
𝑏= 0. This
equation specifies the set of linear constraints satisfied by the
codeword bits. Every linear code can also be represented by a
bipartite graph [9] where the set of variable nodes represents
the codeword bits and the set of check nodes represents the
set of parity-check constraints satisfied by the codeword bits.
There is also a set of edges that connect every check node
with all the variables nodes involved in its check equation.
We denote the number of the check equations that a variable
node 𝑖, 𝑖= 1, 2, ..., 𝑁∗𝑚is involved with by 𝑑𝑣𝑖and refer
to it as the degree of that variable node. Also, We denote
the number of the variable nodes that are involved in a check
equation 𝑖, 𝑖= 1, 2, ..., (𝑁−𝐾) ∗𝑚by 𝑑𝑐𝑖and refer to it as
the degree of that check node. The (edge) degree distributions
of the code are defined as:
𝜆(𝑥) =
𝑑𝑣𝑚𝑎𝑥
∑
𝑖=1
𝜆𝑖𝑥𝑖−1,
(5)
𝜌(𝑥) =
𝑑𝑐𝑚𝑎𝑥
∑
𝑖=1
𝜌𝑖𝑥𝑖−1.
(6)
Here 𝜆𝑖(𝜌𝑖) is equal to the fraction of edges that connect to
variable (check) nodes of degree 𝑖.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:04:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
430
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 59, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011
III. ITERATIVE DECODING OF RS CODES USING BELIEF
PROPAGATION
A. Standard Belief Propagation decoding of RS Codes
In the bipartite graph of the binary image of an (𝑁, 𝐾)
RS code, there are (𝑁−𝑘)𝑚check nodes and 𝑁𝑚variable
nodes. Given the vector 𝜌𝑐ℎof initial channel LLR’s and the
bipartite graph defined by 𝐻𝑏, the BP algorithm updates the
reliability information of the bits for an specific number of
iterations [22]. The stopping criterion could be when all the
checks are satisfied or when we reach the maximum number
of iterations. Standard BP iterative decoding is not suitable for
RS codes, because for these codes, the large number of short
cycles in the factor graph will cause correlation between the
messages and consequently error propagation.
B. Extended Low Density Binary Parity Check Matrix for RS
Codes
The total number of short cycles in the factor graph of RS
codes increases exponentially with the parity check matrix
density. The density of the binary image of the parity check
matrix given in equation (1) is around 50% for different RS
codes which leads to a large number of short cycles. So,
one step is to find a low density binary parity check mtrix
for an (𝑁, 𝐾) RS code which is equivalent to finding the
(𝑁−𝐾)𝑚codewords of low hamming weight that span
the binary image of the dual code of the RS code which is
also an RS code. These codewords may be obtained from
the appropriate linear combinations of the rows of 𝐻𝑏[23].
The density of the new parity check matrix for different RS
codes is around 30% which leads to less short cycles compared
to the original 𝐻𝑏. However, the number of short cycles is
still high which prevents the BP algorithm to be effective.
In order to reduce the number of 4-cycles even more, we
can extend the low density parity check matrix by rows and
columns using the method in [23]. The extended parity check
matrix has 𝑟𝑒= (𝑁−𝐾)𝑚+ (𝑁−𝐾)𝑚/2 rows and
𝑛𝑒= 𝑁𝑚+ (𝑁−𝐾)𝑚/2 columns. The density of the new
extended parity check matrix is around 15% for different RS
codes which means considerably less short cycles. Since we
never actually transmit these new variables, we consider them
as erasures (zero LLR’s) during the decoding. Iterative BP
decoding using this extended binary parity check matrix is
called phantom decoding [23].
C. Performance Analysis over Binary Erasure Channel
Because of its simplicity, we investigate the performance of
belief propagation decoding of RS codes over binary erasure
channel (BEC) with erasure probability equal to 𝜖.
Similar to Low density parity check (LDPC) codes, for a
given degree distribution pair (𝜆, 𝜌) and 𝜖∈[0, 1], we define
𝑓(𝜖, 𝑥) = 𝜖𝜆(1 −𝜌(1 −𝑥)). Then the threshold is defined as
[24]:
𝜖∗(𝜆, 𝜌) = sup{𝜖∈[0, 1] : 𝑥= 𝑓(𝜖, 𝑥) has no solution x in
(0, 1]}
A critical point is a point at which 𝑓(𝜖∗, 𝑥) −𝑥tangentially
touches the horizontal axis. It has been proved that for
unconditionally stable graphs (for which 𝜆
′(0)𝜌
′(1) < 1)
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
Erasure Probability (ε)
Frame Error Rate
 
 
Original binary parity check matrix
Low density binary parity check matrix
Extended binary parity check matrix
Fig. 1.
Performance of belief propagation decoding of RS(31,25) code using
three different binary parity check matrices.
with only one critical point (𝑥∗), the block error probability
curves of a code of fixed length 𝑛can be approximated in the
waterfall region (around the asymptotic threshold) by [24]:
𝑃𝐵= 𝑄(
√𝑛(𝜖∗−𝛽𝑛−2/3 −𝜖)
𝛼
)(1 + 𝑂(𝑛−1/3))
(7)
where knowing the degree distributions 𝜆(𝑥) and 𝜌(𝑥), we
can compute the covariance term 𝛼and the shift parameter 𝛽
[24].
In defining the threshold, it is supposed that the messages
coming from the check nodes are independent as well as the
messages coming from the variable nodes. However, when
there are cycles in the factor graph, this assumption is not
always true. So, the results in this section are not exact but
they give us a good estimate to investigate the performance
of BP decoding of RS codes over BEC channels.
It should be mentioned that the performance of BP decoding
of a specific code depends largely on the parity check matrix
that is used for decoding. Here, we consider three different
parity check matrices: 1- the original binary parity check
matrix with density around 50% and 𝜖∗= 0.065, 2- low
density parity check matrix with density around 30% and
𝜖∗= 0.0911, 3- extended parity check matrix with density
around 15% and 𝜖∗= 0.155. Performance of BP decoding of
RS(31,25) code over BEC channel using these three different
binary parity check matrices has been shown in Fig. 1. It
should be mentioned that for the case of extended parity check
matrix, newly added variable nodes are considered as erasure
and therefore the erasure probability used in the formula was
more than the real erasure probability. Even doing so, the
performence of BP decoding using the extended parity check
matrix was still much better than the others. As it can be
seen from this figure, by reducing the density of the parity
check matrix and therefore the number of cycles, the erasure
probability threshold increases and the performance of BP
decoding improves largely. So, in the next section that we
propose new methods for iterative decoding of RS codes, we
use the extended binary parity check matrix for BP decoding.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:04:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
SHAYEGH and SOLEYMANI: EFFICIENT ITERATIVE TECHNIQUES FOR SOFT DECISION DECODING OF REED-SOLOMON CODES
431
IV. EFFICIENT ITERATIVE DECODING OF RS CODES
Using the extended parity check matrix discussed previ-
ously, we can perform phantom decoding of RS codes using
normal BP iterations. However, the performance will be far
away from the performance of the ML decoder because there
are still large number of cycles in the factor graph of the code.
Therefore, In this section we present two methods to improve
the performance of phantom decoding.
A. Method A: Iterative Decoding of RS Codes Based on Their
Cyclic Properties
Since RS codes are cyclic, any cyclically shifted version
of a codeword 𝑐is also a valid codeword. Therefore, we can
consider a cyclically shifted version of the received signal 𝑦
by 𝜑symbols (𝜑∈[0, 𝑁−1]) as the received signal when
a shifted version of 𝑐by 𝜑symbols which is also a valid
codeword was transmitted. Based on this fact, we can apply the
BP algorithm on any cyclically shifted version of the received
reliabilities with the same binary parity check matrix [10]. At
the end of each iteration, the updated reliabilities are shifted
back to their original positions.
Since for each cyclically shifted version of the reliabilities,
their values are differently distributed, some deterministic
errors can be avoided. So, the idea is to have outer rounds
during the decoding. During each outer round, a different
cyclically shifted version of the received reliabilities is
generated and then used as the input to the BP decoding
algorithm.
Denoting the low density extended parity check matrix by
𝐻, the proposed algorithm is described as follows:
Step 1) Inputs: 𝐻, 𝜌𝑐ℎ= 2𝑦/𝜎2 and 𝜃.
Step 2) Initialization step: , 𝑐𝑖𝑡= 0, 𝐵𝑃𝑖𝑡= 0.
Step 3) 𝜑= 𝑐𝑖𝑡.
Step 4) Cyclically shifting the channel LLR’s by 𝜑symbols:
𝜌𝑐ℎ−𝑠ℎ𝑖𝑓𝑡= 𝜌𝑐ℎ
𝜑.
Step
5)
𝜌𝐵𝑃𝑖𝑡
=
[00...0]1×(𝑁𝑚+(𝑁−𝐾)𝑚/2)
and
𝜌𝐵𝑃𝑖𝑡(1 : 𝑁𝑚) = 𝜌𝑐ℎ−𝑠ℎ𝑖𝑓𝑡.
Step 6) Belief Propagation: feed 𝜌𝐵𝑃𝑖𝑡and the parity check
matrix 𝐻into the BP decoder and generate extrinsic LLR’s
for each bit: 𝜌𝑥.
Step 7) Update the LLR of each bit:
𝜌𝐵𝑃𝑖𝑡+1(𝑐𝑖) = 𝜌𝐵𝑃𝑖𝑡(𝑐𝑖) + 𝜃𝜌𝑥(𝑐𝑖)
where 0 < 𝜃≤1 is the damping coefficient.
Step 8) Hard Decisions, for 𝑖= 1, 2, ..., 𝑁𝑚:
˜𝑐𝑖=
{
0
𝜌𝐵𝑃𝑖𝑡+1(𝑐𝑖) > 0
1
𝜌𝐵𝑃𝑖𝑡+1(𝑐𝑖) < 0 .
}
(8)
Step 9) If ˜𝑐satisfies all the check equations, shift the decoded
bits back to their original position: ˜𝑐= ˜𝑐(−𝜑), save ˜𝑐,
terminate the algorithm and go to step 12.
else: Berlekamp-Massey (BM) decoding [1],
˜
𝑐𝐵𝑀= 𝐵𝑀(˜𝑐)
and if a decoding success was signaled,
˜
𝑐𝐵𝑀=
˜
𝑐𝐵𝑀(−𝜑)
and save
˜
𝑐𝐵𝑀.
Step 10) Inner round (BP iterations):
if 𝐵𝑃𝑖𝑡= 𝐵𝑃𝑖𝑡−𝑚𝑎𝑥, go to step 11.
else 𝐵𝑃𝑖𝑡= 𝐵𝑃𝑖𝑡+ 1 and go to step 6.
Step 11) Outer round: if 𝑐𝑖𝑡
=
𝑐𝑖𝑡−𝑚𝑎𝑥, terminate the
algorithm and go to step 12.
else 𝑐𝑖𝑡= 𝑐𝑖𝑡+ 1, 𝐵𝑃𝑖𝑡= 0 and go to step 3.
Step 12) Among all the codewords that were saved during the
algorithm, choose the one with minimum Euclidean distance
from the received vector.
The maximum number of outer rounds, 𝑐𝑖𝑡−𝑚𝑎𝑥, can be
chosen to be equal 𝑁−1 such that all the possible cyclically
shifted versions of the received reliabilities are considered as
the input of BP decoding. It should be mentioned that most of
the time, our algorithm finds the response very soon (during
the first or the second outer round) and is terminated. So, there
is no need to complete all of the outer rounds.
In the proposed algorithm we use both BP decoding and
hard decision BM decoding. At the end of each BP iteration,
the hard decision version of updated reliabilities is used
as the input to the BM decoding algorithm. Even in the
situations that BM algorithm can recover a codeword, we do
not stop the algorithm just save that codeword. In the end,
if the BP decoding was not successful, we choose one of
the saved codewords with minimum Euclidean distance from
the received vector as the response of the proposed iterative
decoding method. Therefore, the block error rate of the method
can be written as:
𝑃𝐵= 𝑃𝐵−𝐵𝑀× 𝑃𝐵−𝐵𝑃
(9)
where 𝑃𝐵−𝐵𝑀is the block error rate of BM decoding method
and 𝑃𝐵−𝐵𝑃is the block error rate of BP decoding with cyclic
shifting of reliabilities.
In order to reduce the number of required BP iterations
before finding the response of the algorithm, we define a
radius 𝑟=
√
𝑁𝑚𝜎2. Each time there is a decoding success
at the output of BM algorithm at the end of step (9), we
check the distance of that codeword from the received vector
𝑑= ∥˜
𝑥𝐵𝑀−𝑦∥where
˜
𝑥𝐵𝑀= −2 ˜
𝑐𝐵𝑀+ 1. If 𝑑<= 𝑟, we
terminate the algorithm and go to step (12). We refer to this
process as extra stopping criterion (𝑑≤𝑟). Of course by doing
so, the performance of our proposed algorithm will be slightly
worse than before. Therefore, we have a trade-off between the
performance and the complexity.
As we will see in simulation results, the performance
of iterative decoding using cyclic property of RS codes is
very good and even for short RS codes close to the ML
performance. However, the disadvantage is that for low signal
to noise ratios we still need to perform so many iterations
of belief propagation. In the next section, we will present
another method for efficient decoding of RS codes. Although
the performance of this method will not be as good but it will
require much less BP iterations.
B. Analysis of Cyclic Shifting of RS Codes: Geometric Inter-
pretation of the Proposed Algorithm
The belief propagation based algorithms were shown to be
special cases of the gradient descent algorithm [25]. We define
the potential function 𝐽as [13]:
𝐽(𝐻𝑏, 𝑇) = −
𝑛−𝑘
∑
𝑗=1
𝛾𝑗= −
𝑛−𝑘
∑
𝑗=1
𝑛
∏
𝑝=1,𝐻𝑗𝑝=1
𝑇𝑝
(10)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:04:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
432
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 59, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
−24
−22
−20
−18
−16
−14
−12
−10
−8
−6
−4
Number of iterations
Potential function (J)
First outer
round
Second outer
round
Third outer
round
Fig. 2.
Potential function versus the number of iterations for three outer
rounds during the iterative decoding of RS(15,11) code over AWGN channel
with 𝐸𝑏/𝑁0 = 4𝑑𝐵.
where 𝐽is a function of both the (𝑛−𝑘) × 𝑛parity check
matrix 𝐻𝑏and the received soft information T:
𝑇= [𝑇1, 𝑇2, ..., 𝑇𝑛] = [𝑣(𝜌(𝑐1)), ..., 𝑣(𝜌(𝑐𝑛))] .
(11)
Here, the operator 𝑣: [−∞, ∞] →[−1, 1] is a mapping from
the LLR domain to tanh domain:
𝑣(𝜌) = 𝑡𝑎𝑛ℎ(𝜌
2) = 1 + 𝑒𝜌/2
1 −𝑒𝜌/2 .
(12)
When all the checks are satisfied, we have reached a valid
codeword and the potential function 𝐽is minimized. In this
case, ∣𝑇𝑗∣= 1 for 𝑗= 1, ..., 𝑛and 𝐽𝑚𝑖𝑛= −(𝑛−𝑘). In
the case of RS codes, even using the extended parity check
matrix, the density is still high and applying the iterative
decoding might lead to some local minimum points called
pseudo-equilibrium points. These point are not corresponded
to valid codewords and the iterative algorithm gets stuck at
them. Actually, there are a few unreliable bits which do not
let 𝐽to be minimum.
Because 𝐽is a function of both 𝐻𝑏and T (bit reliabilities),
different arrangements of the reliabilities with the same 𝐻𝑏, re-
sult in different potential functions 𝐽. The proposed algorithm
uses this fact and when a pseudo-equilibrium point is reached,
we change the arrangement of bit reliabilities using cyclic
shifting by 𝜑symbols (𝜑= 0, ..., 𝑁−1), such that it allows
the update to proceed rather than getting stuck at the pseudo-
equilibrium point. In Fig. 2, we have shown the potential
function 𝐽versus the number of iterations for three outer
rounds during the iterative decoding of RS(15,11) code over
AWGN channel with Eb/N0=4 dB. As it can be seen in this
figure, during the first outer round, BP decoding gets stuck in a
pseudo-equilibrium point and can not converge to a codeword.
However, by cyclically shifting the reliabilities by one symbol
during the second round, BP decoding converges to the correct
codeword. Here, for RS(15,11) code, the extended parity check
matrix is an 𝑟𝑒× 𝑛𝑒matrix with 𝑟𝑒= (𝑁−𝐾)𝑚+ (𝑁−
𝐾)𝑚/2 and therefore 𝐽𝑚𝑖𝑛= −𝑟𝑒= −24 that has been
reached during the second round.
C. Method B: Iterative Decoding of RS Codes Based on
Modified Belief Propagation
In this section, we introduce another iterative method based
on improving the normal belief propagation technique. As
we mentioned before, even using the extended binary parity
check matrix, there will be a big gap between normal belief
propagation decoding of RS codes and ML decoding. This is
because of the large number of 4-cycles in the factor graph of
the code.
The new method is based on information correction in the
BP decoding algorithm [20]. In this method, first normal BP
decoding is performed for 𝐵𝑃𝑖𝑡−𝑚𝑎𝑥iterations. During these
iterations, the average decoded LLRs are recorded:
𝜌𝐵𝑃𝑖𝑡−𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝑠𝑢𝑚
(𝑐𝑗) =
1
𝐵𝑃𝑖𝑡−𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝐵𝑃𝑖𝑡−𝑚𝑎𝑥
∑
𝑖=1
𝜌𝑖(𝑐𝑗),
𝑗= 1, ..., 𝑁𝑚+ (𝑁−𝐾)𝑚
2
(13)
where 𝜌𝑖(𝑐𝑗) is the reliability of the 𝑗𝑡ℎbit after 𝑖iterations.
If a codeword is reached during these iterations, we terminate
the algorithm. However, if decoding was not successful at
the end of 𝐵𝑃𝑖𝑡−𝑚𝑎𝑥iterations, 𝐼𝐶𝑚𝑎𝑥steps of information
correction are performed:
Step 1) Based on the average LLRs, we select the least
reliable bit:
𝑐𝑝= 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑗
𝜌𝐵𝑃𝑖𝑡−𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝑠𝑢𝑚
(𝑐𝑗)
 .
(14)
Changing the channel information of the selected bit very
likely improves the convergence of the decoder to a codeword.
Therefore, we perform two tests by setting 𝜌𝑐ℎ(𝑐𝑝) = ±𝑖𝑛𝑓
and for each case we continue BP iterations with the new
channel reliabilities for additional 𝐵𝑃𝑎𝑑𝑑iterations. During
these iterations, we also record the average LLRs:
𝜌𝐵𝑃𝑎𝑑𝑑
𝑠𝑢𝑚
(𝑐𝑗) =
1
𝐵𝑃𝑎𝑑𝑑
𝐵𝑃𝑖𝑡−𝑚𝑎𝑥+𝐵𝑃𝑎𝑑𝑑
∑
𝑖=𝐵𝑃𝑖𝑡−𝑚𝑎𝑥+1
𝜌𝑖(𝑐𝑗),
𝑗= 1, ..., 𝑁𝑚+ (𝑁−𝐾)𝑚
2
.
(15)
At the end of each test, we select one least reliable bit based
on the average LLRs. We assume these bits are at positions
ℎand 𝑘for the case 𝜌𝑐ℎ(𝑐𝑝) = +𝑖𝑛𝑓and 𝜌𝑐ℎ(𝑐𝑝) = −𝑖𝑛𝑓
respectively.
Step 2) At the second step, we perform four tests by
setting 𝜌𝑐ℎ(𝑐𝑝) = +𝑖𝑛𝑓, 𝜌𝑐ℎ(𝑐ℎ) = ±𝑖𝑛𝑓and 𝜌𝑐ℎ(𝑐𝑝) =
−𝑖𝑛𝑓, 𝜌𝑐ℎ(𝑐𝑘) = ±𝑖𝑛𝑓. For each of the new channel reliabili-
ties, we continue BP iterations from 𝐵𝑃𝑖𝑡−𝑚𝑎𝑥for additional
𝐵𝑃𝑎𝑑𝑑iterations and record the average LLRs based on
equation (15). Finally, four least reliable bits are selected for
each case.
In general, step 𝑗of the algorithm for 2 < 𝑗≤𝐼𝐶𝑚𝑎𝑥will
be as follow:
Step 𝑗) For each of 2𝑗−1 bits selected at step 𝑗−1, two
tests are performed. For each of 2𝑗tests, BP iterations are
continued with the new channel reliabilities for additional
𝐵𝑃𝑎𝑑𝑑iterations and 2𝑗bits are selected.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:04:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
SHAYEGH and SOLEYMANI: EFFICIENT ITERATIVE TECHNIQUES FOR SOFT DECISION DECODING OF REED-SOLOMON CODES
433
If a valid codeword is reached at any step, the decoding
is terminated. Here, like the previous algorithm, at the end of
each BP iteration, we perform BM decoding using the updated
reliabilities. However, if the BM decoding is successful, we do
not stop the algorithm just save that codeword. In the end, we
choose one of the saved codewords with minimum Euclidean
distance from the received vector as the decoding response.
Using this strategy we can enforce the correct values on the
selected bits and eliminate pseudo-codewords. Therefore, the
chance of BP iterations to converge to a codeword is improved
significantly. It should be noted that by increasing the signal
to noise ratio, the information correction technique is more
effective, because at higher 𝐸𝑏/𝑁0, there are less bit errors
at the channel output.
As we mentioned before, there are considerable short cycles
even in the factor graph of the extended parity check matrix.
Therefore, there will be correlation between the messages and
the values of high reliable bits may be affected significantly
by the values of low reliable bits. To avoid this, we can select
the highest reliable bits using a threshold value 𝜏:
𝐶ℎ=
{
𝑐𝑗,
𝜌𝑐ℎ(𝑐𝑗)
 > 𝜏
}
.
(16)
We then fix the values of these selected bits using hard
decision and do not update them during the BP iterations:
𝜌𝑐ℎ(𝑐𝑗) = 𝑠𝑖𝑔𝑛(𝜌𝑐ℎ(𝑐𝑗)) × 𝑖𝑛𝑓,
∀𝑐𝑗∈𝐶ℎ.
(17)
If the threshold is selected appropriately, the selected bits will
have correct channel information with high probability. This
way, high reliable correct bits are safe and their values are not
affected in any ways.
In method B, we also add the extra stopping criterion used
in the first method in order to reduce the number of required
BP iterations.
D. Complexity Analysis of the Proposed Algorithms
For both algorithms, the extended parity check matrix is
used. The complexity of belief propagation in each iteration
is proportional to the number of nonzero elements in the parity
check matrix of the code. Because the density of the extended
binary parity check matrix is around 15%, the time complexity
of each BP iteration is:
𝑂(0.15 × 𝑟𝑒× 𝑛𝑒)
(18)
where 𝑟𝑒= (𝑁−𝐾)𝑚+ (𝑁−𝐾)𝑚/2 and 𝑛𝑒= 𝑁𝑚+
(𝑁−𝐾)𝑚/2.
In the ADP method, each iteration involves 𝑂(𝑁2𝑚2)
floating point operations for sorting and BP, and 𝑂(𝑁𝑚×
𝑚𝑖𝑛(𝐾2𝑚2, (𝑁−𝐾)2𝑚2)) binary operations for Gaussian
Elimination. So, the complexity of each iteration of our
methods is less than ADP method.
The maximum number of BP iterations in the first method
based on cyclic shifting of RS codes is:
𝑐𝑖𝑡−𝑚𝑎𝑥× 𝐵𝑃𝑖𝑡−𝑚𝑎𝑥.
(19)
However, most of the times, we find the response very soon
(during the first or the second outer round) and we terminate
the algorithm. So, the actual complexity will be much less than
the maximum complexity. In the next section that we provide
simulation results for different RS codes, we will also give
a table of the average number of required BP iterations for
different signal to noise ratios.
The maximum number of BP iterations in the second
algorithm based on information correction is:
𝐵𝑃𝑖𝑡−𝑚𝑎𝑥+ 𝐵𝑃𝑎𝑑𝑑×
⎛
⎝
𝐼𝐶𝑚𝑎𝑥
∑
𝑗=1
2𝑗
⎞
⎠.
(20)
Here also most of the times, we find the response very soon
and the actual complexity is much less than the maximum
complexity. During the simulation results for different RS
codes, the average number of required BP iterations for
different signal to noise ratios is provided.
V. SIMULATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
In this section, simulation results for decoding of RS codes
based on the proposed algorithms are presented. For all the
simulations, we suppose BPSK transmission over AWGN
channel. We set the maximum number of BP iterations during
the inner round of the first algorithm to be equal 60. So, the
maximum number of iterations will be 60𝑁. For the second
algorithm based on information correction, the maximum
number of initial BP iterations is set to 𝐵𝑃𝑖𝑡−𝑚𝑎𝑥= 60. We
will have 4 steps of information correction and 𝐵𝑃𝑎𝑑𝑑= 10.
So, the maximum number of iterations using equation (20)
will be 360. It is clear that the maximum number of iterations
in the second algorithm is much less than the first one.
We compare our algorithms with Berlekamp-Massey (BM)
hard decision decoding method [1] and also the algebraic soft
decision decoding proposed by Koetter and Vardy [3] [22] that
will be mentioned by KV algorithm. We will also compare
our results with phantom decoding [23] and ADP method
[13]. It is also important to compare our algorithms with the
best performance possible, which is that of the ML decoder.
The weight enumerator of an RS code under a specific binary
image expansion is not known. The averaged ensemble of the
RS code can be found by averaging over all possible binary
expansions [26]. The averaged binary weight enumerator can
then be used by the Divsalar simple bound [27] to bound the
ML error probability [13].
A. RS(15,11) code
In Fig. 3, we have shown the performances of our proposed
methods. From this figure, at codeword error rate of 10−3,
decoding using method A will provide more than 1.5 dB
coding gain compared to the asymptotic performance of KV
algorithm, 2.7 dB compared to the BM algorithm and 1.7 dB
compared to phantom decoding. This method has also about
0.5 dB coding gain compared to the performance of ADP-
BM (5,1) [13]. The performance of method B is also shown
in this figure which is almost the same as method A with
extra stopping criterion ((𝑑≤𝑟)). It has also 1.4 dB coding
gain compared to phantom decoding. In order to consider the
complexity, Table I shows the average number of required BP
iterations during the decoding for both methods. By comparing
the complexity and the performance of method A with and
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:04:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
434
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 59, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011
0
2
4
6
8
10
10
−6
10
−5
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
Signal to Noise Ratio (dB)
Codeword Error Rate
RS (15,11,5), BPSK Modulation, AWGN Channel
 
 
Hard Decision−BM Algorithm
KV Algorithm, cost=1000
KV Algorithm, cost=inf
Phantom Decoding
ADP−BM (5,1)
Proposed Method (B) with extra
stopping criterion
Proposed method (A) with extra
 stopping criterion (d<r)
Proposed Method (A)
ML simulation
Fig. 3.
Performance of the proposed algorithms for RS(15,11).
TABLE I
THE AVERAGE NUMBER OF REQUIRED BP ITERATIONS FOR RS(15,11)
Eb/N0 (dB)
2
3
4
5
Method A
422
174
52
6
Method A
253
97
24
5
with extra stopping criterion (𝑑≤𝑟)
Method B
99
47
13
2
with extra stopping criterion (𝑑≤𝑟)
without extra stopping criterion, we see that adding the extra
stopping criterion ((𝑑≤𝑟)) causes about 0.2 dB performance
loss and at the same time reduces the average number of
required BP iterations considerably. Therefore, for longer RS
codes, we always add this extra stopping criterion. From Table
I, we can also see that the complexity of method B is much
less than method A. Finally from Fig. 3, the performance of
method A is very close to the performance of ML simulation.
B. RS(31,25) code
From Fig. 4, decoding using algorithm A with the extra
stopping criterion (𝑑≤𝑟) will provide more than 1.5 dB
coding gain compared to asymptotic performance of KV
algorithm, about 2.5 dB compared to the BM algorithm and 1
dB compared to phantom decoding at codeword error rate of
10−4. Also, method A has about 0.5 dB coding gain compared
to ADP-BM (5,1) and 0.2 dB compared to ADP-BM (20,1).
From this figure, at codeword error rate of 10−4, method B
has 0.5 dB coding gain compared to phantom decoding. The
performance of method B is not as good as method A and it
is close to the performance of ADP-BM (5,1). However, as
we can see in Table II, the complexity of method B is much
less than method A especially at low signal to noise ratios.
C. RS(63,55) code
From Fig. 5, at codeword error rate of 10−3, method
A provides better performance (about 0.2 dB coding gain)
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
10
−6
10
−5
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
Signal to Noise Ratio (dB)
Codeword Error Rate
RS (31,25,7), BPSK Modulation, AWGN Channel
 
 
Hard−Decision−BM Algorithm
KV Algorithm, cost=inf
Phantom Decoding with
Extra Stopping Criterion (d<=r)
Proposed Method (B) with
Extra Stopping Criterion (d<=r)
ADP−BM (5,1)
ADP−BM (20,1)
Proposed Method (A) with
Extra Stopping Criterion (d<=r)
ML lower Bound
Fig. 4.
Performance of the proposed algorithms for RS(31,25).
TABLE II
THE AVERAGE NUMBER OF REQUIRED BP ITERATIONS FOR RS(31,25)
Eb/N0 (dB)
3
4
5
5.5
Method A
1139
331
41
11
with extra stopping criterion (𝑑≤𝑟)
Method B
164
102
22
7
with extra stopping criterion (𝑑≤𝑟)
compared to ADP-BM (5,1) algorithm. Also it provides a
coding gain of about 1.75 dB compared to the BM algorithm
and 0.75 dB compared to phantom decoding. The performance
of method A is about 0.25 dB away from the performance of
ADP-BM (20,3). Method B has about 1.35 dB coding gain
over BM algorithm and 0.3 dB over phantom decoding.
D. RS(255,239) code
From Fig. 6, at codeword error rate of 10−4, method A
provides better performance (about 0.15 dB coding gain)
compared to ADP-BM (5,1) algorithm. Also it provides a
coding gain of about 1.05 dB compared to the BM algorithm,
0.5 dB compared to KV algorithm and 0.7 dB compared to
phantom decoding. Method B has about 0.65 dB coding gain
over BM algorithm, 0.2 dB over phantom decoding and its
performance is very close to the performance of KV algorithm.
The performance of method A is about 0.25 dB away from
the performance of ADP-BM (20,3) at codeword error rate
of 10−3. However, as discussed in the complexity analysis
section, the complexity of our methods is much less than
ADP method mainly because we do not perform Gaussian
eliminations at every iteration.
From Tables I, II, III and IV, we can see that by increasing
the signal to noise ratio, the number of required BP iterations
and therefore the complexity of the iterative algorithms are
reduced. Also, the average number of required BP iterations is
much less than the maximum number of BP iterations for both
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:04:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
SHAYEGH and SOLEYMANI: EFFICIENT ITERATIVE TECHNIQUES FOR SOFT DECISION DECODING OF REED-SOLOMON CODES
435
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
10
−5
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
Signal to Noise Ratio (dB)
Codeword Error Rate
RS(63,55,9), BPSK Modulaton, AWGN Channel
 
 
Hard−Decision−BM Algorithm
Phantom Decoding with Extra
Stopping Criterion (d<=r)
Proposed Method (B) with Extra
Stopping Criterion (d<=r)
ADP−BM (5,1)
Proposed Method (A) with Extra
Stopping Criterion (d<=r)
ADP−BM (20,3)
ML lower Bound
Fig. 5.
Performance of the proposed algorithms for RS(63,55).
TABLE III
THE AVERAGE NUMBER OF REQUIRED BP ITERATIONS FOR RS(63,55)
Eb/N0 (dB)
4
4.5
5
5.5
Method A
2012
1089
373
29
with extra stopping criterion (𝑑≤𝑟)
Method B
205
147
90
42
with extra stopping criterion (𝑑≤𝑟)
methods. The other result is that, keeping the same number of
information correction steps in method B, the larger the code
length, the higher the difference between the performances
and also complexities of method A and method B.
VI. CONCLUSION
We proposed two soft decision decoding algorithms based
on bit level belief propagation decoding for RS codes.
The advantage of our methods over ADP method [13] is
that they work with the fixed parity check matrix. In both
methods, we used an extended binary parity check matrix
with lower density and reduced number of 4-cycles compared
to the original binary parity check matrix of the code. We
investigated the performance of normal BP decoding with
different binary parity check matrices over binary erasure
channel and we realized that the extended binary parity
check matrix provides better performance. The first method
was based on cyclic property of RS codes and we also
presented geometric interpretation for that. Simulation results
showed that our method has significant gain over hard
decision decoding. The performance was also superior to
some other popular soft decision decoding methods including
KV method and ADP method. The second method was based
on information correction in BP decoding. Compared to the
first method, method B needed less BP iterations but its
performance was not as good. We also presented complexity
analysis for both methods.
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
7.5
10
−6
10
−5
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
Signal to Noise Ratio (dB)
Codeword Error Rate
RS(255,239), BPSK Modulation, AWGN Channel
 
 
Hard Decision−BM Algorithm
Phantom Decoding with Extra
Stopping Criterion (d<=r)
KV Algorithm, cost=inf
Proposed Method (B) with Extra
Stopping Criterion (d<=r)
ADP−BM (5,1)
Proposed Method (A) with Extra
Stopping Criterion (d<=r)
ADP−BM (20,3)
ML Lower Bound
Fig. 6.
Performance of the proposed algorithms for RS(255,239).
TABLE IV
THE AVERAGE NUMBER OF REQUIRED BP ITERATIONS FOR RS(255,239)
Eb/N0 (dB)
5
5.5
6
6.5
Method A
8894
1986
58
3
with extra stopping criterion (𝑑≤𝑟)
Method B
264
158
17
2
with extra stopping criterion (𝑑≤𝑟)
REFERENCES
[1] S. Lin and D. Costello, Error Control Coding. Prentice-Hall, 1983.
[2] V. Guruswami and A. Vardy, “Maximum-likelihood decoding of Reed-
Solomon codes is NP-hard," in Proc. Sixteenth Annual ACM-SIAM
Symposium Discrete Algorithms, pp. 470-478, 2005.
[3] R. Koetter and A. Vardy, “Algebraic soft-decision decoding of Reed-
Solomon codes," IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 11, pp. 2809-
2825, 2003.
[4] A. Vardy and Y. Beery, “Bit-level soft-decision decoding of Reed-
Solomon codes," IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 39, no. 3, 1991.
[5] M. Fossorier and S. Lin, “Soft-decision decoding of linear block codes
based on ordered statistics," IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 41, no. 5, pp.
1379-1396, 1995.
[6] Y. Wu, R. Koetter, and C. Hadjicostis, “Soft-decision decoding of linear
block codes using preprocessing," in Proc. International Symp. Inf.
Theory (ISIT), p. 259, 2004.
[7] M. Fossorier and A. Valembois, “Reliability-based decoding of Reed-
Solomon codes using their binary image," IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8,
no. 7, pp. 452-454, 2004.
[8] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes," IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory,
vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21-28, 1962.
[9] F. Kschischang, B. Frey, and H. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-
product algorithm," IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498-519,
2001.
[10] J. Jiang and K. Narayanan, “Iterative soft decoding of Reed-Solomon
codes," IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 244-246, 2004.
[11] B. Kamali and A. Aghvami, “Belief propagation decoding of Reed-
Solomon codes; a bit-level soft decision decoding algorithm," IEEE
Trans. Broadcast., vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 106-113, 2005.
[12] S. Sankaranarayanan and B. Vasic, “Iterative decoding of linear block
codes: a parity-check orthogonalization approach," IEEE Trans. Inf.
Theory, vol. 51, no. 9, pp. 3347-3353, 2005.
[13] J. Jiang and K. Narayanan, “Iterative soft-input soft-output decoding of
Reed-Solomon codes by adapting the parity-check matrix," IEEE Trans.
Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 3746-3756, 2006.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:04:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
436
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 59, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2011
[14] T. Halford and K. Chugg, “Random redundant iterative soft-in soft-out
decoding," IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 4, p. 513, 2008.
[15] I. Dimnik and Y. Beery, “Improved random redundant iterative HDPC
decoding," IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 1982-1985, 2009.
[16] J. Knudsen, C. Riera, L. Danielsen, M. Parker, and E. Rosnes, “Iterative
decoding on multiple Tanner graphs using random edge local comple-
mentation," in Proc. International Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), 2009.
[17] A. Kothiyal, O. Takeshita, W. Jin, and M. Fossorier, “Iterative reliability-
based decoding of linear block codes with adaptive belief propagation,"
IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 1067-1069, 2005.
[18] C. Wang, Y. Hsieh, and H. Kuo, “Bilateral exchange of soft-information
for iterative reliability-based decoding with adaptive belief propagation,"
IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 13, no. 9, pp. 682-684, 2009.
[19] T. Hehn, J. Huber, O. Milenkovic, and S. Laendner, “Multiple-
bases belief-propagation decoding of high-density cyclic codes," Arxiv
preprint arXiv:0905.0079, 2009.
[20] N. Varnica and M. Fossorier, “Belief-propagation with information
correction: improved near maximum-likelihood decoding of low-density
parity-check codes," in Proc. International Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT),
2004.
[21] R. Horn and C. Johnson, Matrix Analysis. Cambridge University Press,
1985.
[22] M. El-Khamy and R. McEliece, “Iterative algebraic soft-decision list
decoding of Reed-Solomon codes," IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun.,
vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 481-490, 2006.
[23] J. Bellorado, “Low-complexity soft decoding algorithms for Reed-
Solomon codes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard University, 2006.
[24] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge
University Press, 2008.
[25] R. Lucas, M. Bossert, and M. Breitbach, “On iterative soft-decision
decoding of linear binary block codes and product codes," IEEE J. Sel.
Areas Commun., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 276-296, 1998.
[26] C. Retter, “An average weight-distance enumerator for binary expansions
of Reed-Solomon codes," IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 5, pp.
1195-1200, 2002.
[27] D. Divsalar, “A simple tight bound on error probability of block codes
with application to turbo codes," TMO Progress Report, vol. 19, pp.
42-139, 1999.
Farnaz Shayegh received the B.Sc. degree from
Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan, Iran, the
M.Sc. degree from Amirkabir University of Tech-
nology (Polytechnique), Tehran, Iran, and the Ph.D.
degree from Concordia University, Montreal, QC,
Canada, all in Electrical and Computer Engineer-
ing in 2002, 2005, and 2010, respectively. She is
currently a Postdoctoral Fellow in the Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Concordia
University. Her research interests lie in the area of
wireless communications and include information
theory, channel coding, Cognitive radios, rateless codes and cooperative
communications. Dr. Shayegh is the recipient of several academic awards
including the Hydro Quebec Graduate Award, and the Concordia University
Graduate Fellowship.
Mohammad Reza Soleymani received the B.S.
degree from the University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran,
in 1976, the M.S. degree from San Jose State
University, San Jose, CA, in 1977, and the Ph.D.
degree from Concordia University, Montreal, QC,
Canada, in 1987, all in electrical engineering. From
1987 to 1990, he was an Assistant Professor with the
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
McGill University, Montreal. From October 1990
to January 1998, he was with Spar Aerospace Ltd.
(currently MDA), Montreal, QC, Canada, where
he had a leading role in the design and development of several satellite
communication systems. In January 1998, he joined the Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Concordia University, as a Professor.
His current research interests include wireless and satellite communications,
information theory and coding.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:04:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
