12th International Conference on Electrical, Electronics and Computer Engineering (IcETRAN), Čačak, 9-12 June 2025 
979-8-3315-8557-0/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE
Gradient Descent Decoding of MDPC Codes 
Optimized with Genetic Algorithm 
Dimitrije Jovanović 
School of Electrical Engineering 
University of Belgrade 
Belgrade, Serbia 
jd235018p@student.etf.bg.ac.rs 
0009-0001-5842-9139 
Jovan Milojković 
School of Electrical Engineering 
University of Belgrade 
Belgrade, Serbia 
mj205018p@student.etf.bg.ac.rs  
0009-0008-7555-3896 
Predrag Ivaniš 
School of Electrical Engineering 
University of Belgrade 
 Belgrade, Serbia 
predrag.ivanis@etf.rs 
0000-0003-4565-1141 
Zoran Čiča 
School of Electrical Engineering 
University of Belgrade 
Belgrade, Serbia 
cicasyl@etf.rs 
0000-0003-4456-5858 
Abstract—Bit-flipping (BF) is a very simple algorithm for 
decoding linear block codes. For the BF to achieve high 
performances of belief-propagation (BP) algorithms, which are far 
more complex, we apply several optimizations using the genetic 
algorithm (GA), to optimize the parameters of our decoder. 
Adaptive diversity gradient descent bit-flipping with momentum 
(AD-GDBFwM) algorithm is designed as a cascade of multiple 
decoders with different parameters, which are optimized with GA. 
In this paper we consider AD-GDBFwM decoding of medium-
density parity-check (MDPC) codes. We measure the decoding 
performance and compare it with the results of various types of 
decoders, including BP and neural BP. 
Keywords—genetic algorithm, gradient descent, bit-flipping, 
iterative decoding, MDPC codes 
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are popular error-
correcting codes applied in a wide range of modern 
communication applications, e.g. DVB-S2X [1], 5G NR [2], and 
can be used for SSD storage [3]. One reason is their high 
performance, capable of approaching the Shannon limit [4] for a 
given code rate. The other reason is potentially linear decoding 
complexity, in terms of the codeword length. However, these two 
aspects are very hard to fulfil simultaneously, and there has to be 
a compromise between performance and complexity. An 
important example is a 5G component called Ultra-Reliable 
Low-Latency Communication (URLLC) [5], where the 
requirements include very robust decoding in a minimal number 
of iterations. 
Historically, the first linear block codes applied in practice 
are classical algebraic codes, with a high-density parity-check 
matrix. A popular example is Bose-Chaudhuri-Hocquenghem 
(BCH) codes [6], [7]. BCH codes are constructed for a given 
minimal Hamming distance, where the guaranteed number of 
correctable errors is predefined. It is known that BCH codes can 
achieve good performance in high-rate, short-length scenarios, 
when decoding is using the maximum likelihood (ML) 
estimation [8]. 
ML decoding [9] aims to find the most probable codeword 
that corresponds to the received word. In theory, ML decoding 
will always output the correct codeword, but in general it is an 
NP-hard problem [10], and in specific cases it is impractically 
complex at least. In that sense, important research directions 
focus to design LDPC decoders that are both as simple as 
possible and have great performance, with ML being the ideal. 
Two large classes of iterative decoding algorithms are bit-
flipping (BF) and message passing (MP), both introduced by 
Gallagher [11]. BF decoding is based on the syndrome 
calculation from checksums, which is used as a measure of the 
successful codeword transmission. The bits of the received word 
are selectively flipped according to the current syndrome value, 
which is updated within each iteration. Instead of directly 
changing the bits of the codeword, MP algorithms are based on 
messages passing between nodes of the Tanner graph [12]. The 
representative of MP algorithms is BP [13], which uses 
probabilities, or likelihood ratios, as messages. 
In the specific case, when the Tanner graph is a tree (i.e., has 
no cycles), BP decoding can achieve ML performance, which 
means perfect decoding. However, cycle-less codes are not used 
in practice which can lead to suboptimal performance [14]. Short 
codes usually have more cycles which results to BP performance 
far from ML limits. On the other hand, Gallagher’s basic bit-
flipping (BF) algorithm is very simple and fast when 
implemented on hardware, but has very low performance. 
Recently there have been efforts to maximize the 
performance of bit-flipping approach while still having great 
simplicity. In the ordinary BF algorithm, a local energy function 
corresponding to one bit of the received word is equal to the 
number of unsatisfied checksums containing that bit. Each bit 
with the local energy function higher than some threshold is 
flipped. Gradient descent bit-flipping (GDBF) algorithm was 
first presented in [15], where a correlation factor was added to 
the energy function. This decoder is several times simpler to 
implement on hardware than BP, which means it can meet much 
higher throughput than BP with the same resources. However, 
the plain GDBF does not achieve satisfactory performance in 
most cases. The energy function of the GDBF algorithm was 
extended [16] into GDBF with momentum (GDBFwM), where 
an additional momentum term is used to unstimulate recently 
flipped bits to improve the decoding performance. Next 
important improvement is the adaptive diversity gradient descent 
2025 12th International Conference on Electrical, Electronic and Computing Engineering (IcETRAN) | 979-8-3315-8557-0/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICETRAN66854.2025.11114132
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:31:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
bit-flipping with momentum (AD-GDBFwM) [17]. The AD-
GDBFwM decoder is a concatenation of multiple GDBFwM 
decoders, where the parameters are optimized using the genetic 
algorithm [18]. The AD-GDBFwM decoder also supports the 
additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, as well as 
irregular block codes. 
In the mentioned literature, the quality of the introduced 
GDBF decoders was shown by comparing the achieved 
performance with BP decoder. In most cases in the literature, 
short and dense BCH codes [19], [20], [21] were used for the 
experiments. This paper focuses on applying AD-GDBFwM 
algorithm to medium-density parity-check (MDPC) codes, 
which have a moderate density of the parity-check matrix. More 
specifically, we consider short irregular MDPC codes and the 
transmission over the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) 
channel. 
II. LINEAR BLOCK CODES 
A. Parity-Check Matrix 
A binary linear block code (𝑛, 𝑘) can be fully described by 
its parity-check matrix 𝐇, with 𝑚= 𝑛−𝑘 rows and 𝑛 columns. 
Each bit of the codeword 𝑣𝑗 (variable bit) corresponds to the 
column 𝑗 of 𝐇, which represents the set of indices 𝑃(𝑣𝑗) =
{𝑖|ℎ𝑖𝑗=1} of parity checks in which the bit 𝑣𝑗 participates. The 
weight of 𝑣𝑗 is equal to |𝑃(𝑣𝑗)|, which is the number of ones in 
the column 𝑗 of 𝐇. Each parity check 𝑐𝑖 corresponds to the row 𝑖 
of 𝐇, corresponding to the set of indices 𝑄(𝑐𝑖) = {𝑗|ℎ𝑖𝑗=1} of all 
variable bits that participate in the parity check 𝑐𝑖. The weight of 
𝑐𝑖 is equal to |𝑄(𝑐𝑖)|, and it represents the number of ones in the 
row 𝑖 of 𝐇. The code is regular if all columns have the same 
weight, and if all rows have the same weight. Otherwise, the code 
is irregular. 
Let 𝐱= [𝑥1, … , 𝑥𝑛] ∈{−1,1}𝑛 be a codeword vector, 
modulated with Binary Phase Shift Keying (BPSK). The 
modulated codeword 𝐱 is transmitted over the additive white 
Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. The Gaussian noise is added 
to 𝐱 and the channel outputs the vector 𝐲= [𝑦1, … , 𝑦𝑛] ∈ℝ𝑛. 
For each parity check 𝑐𝑖 it holds that ∏
𝑥𝑗
𝑗∈𝑄(𝑐𝑖)
= 1. 
B. MDPC Codes 
Linear block codes can be classified based on the number of 
non-zero elements in the parity-check matrix. MDPC codes [22] 
have a moderately higher density than LDPC codes. The row 
weights of MDPC codes scale in 𝑂(√𝑛log 𝑛) [23]. Practical 
examples include quasi-cyclic (QC) MDPC codes, often used in 
modern McEliece-based cryptosystems [24], [25]. 
A method for constructing MDPC codes [22], given the code 
rate and minimal Hamming distance, uses idempotents and 
cyclotomic cosets [26], for a desired rate and minimal Hamming 
distance. The result is an idempotent polynomial with the degree 
𝑛−1 . The parity-check matrix of a cyclic MDPC code is 
obtained by filling the rows with 𝑛−𝑘 sequential cyclic shifts 
of the idempotent polynomial. 
III. DECODING PROCESS 
A. GDBF Algorithms 
GDBF decoder [15] is a decoder where gradient descent 
optimization method [27] is applied to Gallagher’s BF decoding 
algorithm [11]. The aim of the GDBF algorithm is to maximize 
the objective function, in this case 
 
𝑓(𝐱) = ∑
𝑥𝑗𝑦𝑗
𝑛
𝑗=1
+ ∑
∏
𝑥𝑗
𝑗∈𝑄(𝑐𝑖)
𝑚
𝑖=1
 . 
() 
The first term is the correlation between the transmitted 
codeword 𝐲 and the received word 𝐱, and it should be 
maximized. The second term is the number of unsatisfied parity 
checks for the received word. It is used as a penalty, in order to 
force the received word to be the valid codeword.  
The GDBF algorithm may be seen as a maximization process 
of (1), where in each iteration of the algorithm, the energy 
(inversion) function is calculated for each variable bit. The bit is 
flipped if the value of its energy function is below a given 
threshold. The maximal number of iterations 𝐿max  is also 
predefined. Usually, there are many local maxima of the 
objective function, which can cause the algorithm to oscillate 
between them. This results in suboptimal solutions, and the 
performance is frequently worse than in case of message passing 
algorithms. 
For the AD-GDBFwM decoder, the local energy function of 
the 𝑗-th variable bit during the ℓ-th decoding iteration is defined 
as [19] 
 
𝐸𝑗
(ℓ) = 𝑎𝑗
(ℓ)𝑦𝑗𝑥̂𝑗
(ℓ−1) + 𝑏𝑗
(ℓ) ∑
𝑠𝑖
(ℓ) + 𝑚𝑙𝑗
𝑖∈𝑃(𝑣𝑗)
 , 
() 
where 𝑎𝑗
(ℓ), 𝑏𝑗
(ℓ), and 𝑚𝑙𝑗 are adaptable decoder parameters, and 
𝑙𝑗≥1 is the number of iterations since the last flip of the 𝑗-th 
variable bit. The term 𝑠𝑖
(ℓ) = ∏
𝑥̂𝑗
(ℓ−1)
𝑗∈𝑄(𝑐𝑖)
 is the syndrome of 
the bit 𝑣𝑗. Initially we have 𝑥̂𝑗
(0) = sign(𝑦𝑗). 
 
The original GDBF decoder [15] has parameter values 
𝑎𝑗
(ℓ) = 𝑏𝑗
(ℓ) = 1  and 𝑚𝑙𝑗= 0  for each 𝑗= 1, … , 𝑛.  The 
introduced parameters are applied for different purposes: 𝑎𝑗
(ℓ) 
and 𝑏𝑗
(ℓ)  are multiplicative weights, used to control the flip 
frequency, and 𝑚𝑙𝑗 is an additive term, used to avoid flipping 
the same bit in consecutive iterations. 
 
If the code is regular, the vector of all the weights 𝑎𝑗
(ℓ) 
reduces to a scalar 𝑎(ℓ), and the vector of weights 𝑏𝑗
(ℓ) reduces to 
a scalar 𝑏(ℓ). But in case of an irregular code, equal weight values 
across variable nodes can make the correction of errors much 
more difficult for low-weight variable bits [19]. For that reason, 
for irregular codes all variable nodes have their own independent 
values of 𝑎𝑗
(ℓ) and 𝑏𝑗
(ℓ) attached to them. 
The parameter 𝑚𝑙𝑗 is called the momentum, introduced in 
[16]. It is used to unstimulate recently flipped bits to be flipped 
again during the current decoding iteration. For this reason, bits 
that are flipped more recently are assigned higher momentum 
values. The momentum 𝑚𝑙𝑗 is chosen from a momentum vector 
𝐦= [𝑚1, 𝑚2, … , 𝑚𝐿, 0], while 𝑚𝐿+1 = 0. Since lower indices 
of 𝐦 correspond to more recent decoding iterations, 𝐦 is a 
vector of non-increasing, non-negative integers: 𝑚1 ≥𝑚2 ≥
⋯≥𝑚𝐿≥0. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:31:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
The assumption is that the effect of momentum is limited to 
the last 𝐿 iterations, so 𝑚𝑙𝑗= 0 for 𝑙𝑗> 𝐿. At the beginning of 
the decoding algorithm there is no momentum, so we set 𝑙𝑗=
𝐿+ 1 for each 𝑗-th variable bit. During each decoding iteration, 
𝑙𝑗 is updated as 𝑙𝑗= min{𝑙𝑗, 𝐿} + 1. On top of that, 𝑙𝑗 is set to 0 
when the 𝑗-th variable bit is flipped [16]. 
Variable bit 𝑥𝑗 is flipped according to the following rule: 
 
𝑥𝑗
(ℓ+1) = {
1 −𝑥𝑗
(ℓ), 𝐸𝑗
(ℓ) ≤𝐸th
(ℓ)
𝑥𝑗
(ℓ), otherwise,
 
() 
where 𝐸th
(ℓ) = min
𝑗=1,…,𝑛𝐸𝑗
(ℓ) + 𝛿 is an inversion threshold and 𝛿 is 
a predetermined margin. The purpose of the parameter 𝛿 is to 
allow flipping more than one bit during the same decoding 
iteration.  
The decoding algorithm stops if all parity checks are satisfied 
(𝐱(ℓ+1) ∙𝐇T = 𝟎), or if the maximal number of iterations 𝐿max 
is reached. 
B. Cascade of Decoders 
The AD-GDBFwM decoder [17] contains 𝑀𝐷 decoders in a 
cascade, illustrated in Fig. 1. The input to each decoder is decided 
based on its binary restart flag [28], [29]. The 𝑡-th decoder in the 
sequence, 𝐷𝑒𝑐𝑡, takes the vector 𝐳𝑡= (1 −𝑟𝑡)𝐱𝑡−1 + 𝑟𝑡𝐲 as an 
input, and outputs the vector 𝐱𝑡, where 𝐲 is the received word, 
and 𝑟𝑡 is a restart flag. For the first decoder we have 𝐱(0) = 𝐲. 
Instead of being fixed, the parameters of the whole AD-
GDBFwM decoder can be optimized for each decoder in the 
cascade. This can be very useful to lower the negative impact of 
the trapping sets on the decoding convergence [19]. Each 
decoder 𝐷𝑒𝑐𝑡 has the maximal number of iterations 𝐿𝑡, which is 
empirically chosen.  
IV. GENETIC ALGORITHM 
Inspired by biological evolution, the genetic algorithm (GA) 
[18], [30], [31] is based on a population composed of a set of 
chromosomes 
– 
solutions 
to 
the 
decoding 
problem. 
Chromosomes consist of genes – the values of parameters for 
optimization, and they are processed at the same time by the 
algorithm [31]. The population evolves through phases called 
generations, until some halting rule is satisfied. Each generation 
will apply operators onto individuals called parents. Parent 
individuals produce the child individuals which constitute the 
population of the next generation [31]. 
The following subsections give an overview of the main steps 
inside one generation of the genetic algorithm. 
A. Initialization 
At the beginning of the algorithm, the population is chosen 
randomly, e.g. according to the uniform distribution.  
At initialization, the intention is to get the solutions spread 
uniformly in order to increase population diversity. Parameters 
that are optimized are represented by bit strings, so they first need 
to be quantized. 
 
Fig. 1. Diagram of the AD-GDBFwM cascade decoder 
 
Fig. 2. Single-point crossover (left) and double-point crossover (right) 
B. Fitness and Selecton 
Each individual in the population is assigned a fitness value 
that corresponds to the quality of the chromosome solution. 
Better solutions are more probable to remain in the next 
generation, which is called elitism. The fitness values are 
calculated based on some defined criterion. Selection is a process 
by which chromosomes, within the current generation, are 
picked based on their fitness value to become parents. 
C. Crossover 
After the selection phase, GA combines two parent solutions 
and creates new child solutions. Bits of two parents are swapped 
between randomly chosen crossover points. Depending on a 
predefined number of crossover points, crossover can be single-
point or multiple-point. In the case of GDBF optimization, e.g. 
single-point crossover can be used, which means the 
chromosomes of two parent solutions are swapped before and 
after one point. The single-point and double-point crossover are 
illustrated in Fig. 2. 
D. Mutation 
Once the child chromosomes have been created, their genes 
are randomly modified with some small probability 𝑝𝑚. 
Mutation creates random solutions which preserves population 
diversity. This lowers the chance of getting the algorithm stuck 
on the local, suboptimal solutions. Low mutation rate is used in 
GA to prevent the algorithm to reduce to a random search [18]. 
Regarding one chromosome, mutation will loop over its genes, 
generate a random uniform variable for each gene in interval 
(0,1), and if that variable is less than 𝑝𝑚, the gene will be 
flipped. 
E. Elitism 
The best solutions, called the elites, can get their fitness 
reduced if they get mutated, or crossed over with worse 
solutions. To preserve the best solutions, they are transferred to 
the next generation. 
     
GDBF M
     
GDBF M
      
GDBF M
 
param   
   
   
  
param   
   
 
param     
      (     )              
     
GDBF
   
   
  
  
Crossover point
Parent  
Parent  
Child  
Child  
Crossover points
Parent  
Parent  
Child  
Child  
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:31:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
V. OPTIMIZATION OF GDBFWM PARAMETERS 
A. Learning from Error Logs 
Parameter optimization for one GDBFwM decoder is 
performed by error logs from some value of 𝐸𝑏/𝑁0. This is done 
in order to collect enough uncorrectable errors used for learning. 
Also, the decoder is designed for the parity-check matrix of the 
given code. For each decoder in the cascade, the parameters that 
are optimized are 𝑎𝑗, 𝑏𝑗, and vector 𝐦, while the parameters 𝐿𝑘 
and 𝛿 are predetermined. We perform the optimization for each 
decoder separately. 
The initial step of the optimization is to collect the set of 
uncorrectable error patterns (error log), by using the ordinary 
GDBF decoder 𝐷𝑒𝑐0  [15]. Monte Carlo simulations are 
performed for a relatively high 𝐸𝑏/𝑁0  value and number of 
decoding iterations 𝐿0, in order to obtain error patterns mostly 
caused by trapping sets. A number of codewords is transmitted 
such that several thousand error patterns can be collected. 
Next step is to learn the parameters 𝑎𝑗, 𝑏𝑗, and 𝐦 of the first 
decoder 𝐷𝑒𝑐1  in the cascade, using the initial set of error 
patterns. All possible parameter values have to be predefined, in 
order to select the optimal values using an optimization 
algorithm. 
Then, we collect uncorrectable error patterns using the 
optimized decoder 𝐷𝑒𝑐1.  Monte Carlo simulations for 
𝐿1iterations are used to collect new error patterns and update the 
error log. Error patterns from initial set that are still uncorrectable 
by 𝐷𝑒𝑐1  are remebered. The additional error patterns 𝐷𝑒𝑐1 
failed to decode are also remembered. These two sets are 
combined into the resulting error log of the decoder 𝐷𝑒𝑐1. 
The error log from the decoder 𝐷𝑒𝑐1 is used to learn the 
parameters of the second decoder 𝐷𝑒𝑐2 in the cascade, with 𝐿2 
iterations. In our research, we create two candidates for the 𝐷𝑒𝑐2 
decoder, one with 𝑟2 = 1 and the other with 𝑟2 = 0. We chose 
the better candidate for 𝐷𝑒𝑐2 in the cascade out of those two 
candidates. This process is repeated in a similar way for all 
decoders in the cascade, until the predefined number of decoders, 
or the total number of iterations is reached. 
B. Application of the Genetic Algorithm 
Given the number of iterations and parameter 𝛿 of a 
GDBFwM decoder, the genetic algorithm can be used to learn 
the optimal values of parameters 𝑎𝑗
(ℓ), 𝑏𝑗
(ℓ) and 𝐦. In the case of 
GDBF decoders, the fitness values are calculated based on the 
percentage of corrected codewords. 
Weights 𝑎𝑗 and 𝑏𝑗 are initially set to 1. The value of the 
weight is calculated by adding 1 to the integer value from the bits 
and then normalizing it with some factor [20]. 
Momentum optimization is performed by choosing one of the 
possible momentum vectors. Before the optimization, the 
momentum matrix 𝐌 is created from all possible momentum 
vectors [20]. We specify the maximal momentum length 𝐿 and 
maximal momentum value 𝑚max. Momentum vectors shorter 
than 𝐿 are padded with zeros. The beginning rows of the matrix 
are filled by all unique momentum vectors, and the remaining 
rows are copied starting from the beginning. The number of 
possible momentums, 𝑁𝑚, is equal to the number of 𝐿-element 
combinations of 𝑚max + 1 elements with repetition 
 
𝑁𝑚= 𝐶𝑚max+1
𝐿
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ = ((𝑚max+1)+𝐿−1
𝐿
) =
(𝑚max+𝐿)!
𝐿!𝑚max!  . 
() 
Since the optimized parameters are represented by bits, each 
row of the matrix will be selected with 𝑢 bits. Therefore, 
momentum matrix has 2𝑢 rows, where 𝑢= ⌈log2 𝑁𝑚⌉. The 
number of columns is equal to 𝐿. 
For example, if 𝐿= 2 and 𝑚max = 2 we have 𝑁𝑚= 6 and 
𝑢= 3. The matrix 𝐌 in the transpose form is 
 
𝐌= [0
1
1
2
2
2
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
2
0
0]
T
 
() 
VI.  EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
For our research, three GDBF-like decoders are designed: 
• GDBF, with parameters 𝑎𝑗= 𝑏𝑗= 1, 𝐦= 0. 
• GDBFwM, with parameters 𝑎𝑗= 𝑎 for each 𝑗, 𝑏𝑗= 1, 
and some momentum vector chosen from the momentum 
matrix 𝐌 with parameters 𝑁max = 4 and 𝐿= 6. These 
parameters were learned with GA. GDBFwM decoder 
has 𝐿max = 60. 
• AD-GDBFwM, which has 𝐿𝑡=15 for each 𝑡 and 𝑀𝐷= 4. 
This decoder is a hybrid of [20], where the first decoder 
in cascade has the previously mentioned GDBFwM 
decoder with 𝐿1=15. 
We consider the ordinary BP algorithm, as well as the neural 
BP algorithm (NBP) [21]. The messages which are used in the 
message passing process of NBP are multiplied by their 
individual weights, which are the subject of deep learning. The 
neural network [21] directly corresponds to the decoder structure 
and the specified number of decoding iterations. 
All 
experiments 
were 
performed 
for 
the 
code 
MDPC(127,106). It is a short, cyclic, irregular MDPC code 
constructed by rotating the idempotent polynomial given in [22]. 
Its minimal Hamming distance is equal to 6, so this code 
guarantees to correct up to 2 errors. 
The parity-check matrix of the MDPC(127,106) code, the 
decoders obtained by GA, and the weights learned by NBP 
decoder are available at [32]. 
The obtained results are based on Monte Carlo simulations. 
Without the loss of generality, the transmitted codeword is the 
all zero codeword, modulated with BPSK, corrupted by passing 
through the AWGN channel. In each simulation, the transmitted 
codeword is compared with the output codeword of the decoder. 
The simulations continue until at least 100 failed decoded 
codewords are detected. 
Fig. 3. shows the fitness of the best elite for different 
decoders of the AD-GDBFwM decoder in the learning process. 
The number of chromosomes in GA is fixed to 50, for each 
execution of the algorithm. Single-point crossover is used as 
strategy for crossover in GA. Mutation probability 𝑝𝑚 is equal to 
0.05. The selection process is based on roulette wheel selection, 
which is described in [18]. It can be seen in Fig. 3. how the fitness 
of the best elite in the GA converges to some value for different 
decoders. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:31:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
The learning curve for 𝐷𝑒𝑐1 is flat, which means that in the 
first iteration of the GA the best solution for the problem was 
found, and the GA did not find better solutions in the next 
generations. Furthermore, it can be seen that 𝐷𝑒𝑐1 is able to 
correct almost all errors from the error log since its fitness of the 
best elite is almost 2, which is the highest fitness value in our 
simulations. The 𝐷𝑒𝑐1 has 𝑎𝑗= 𝑎 for each 𝑗 and 𝑏𝑗= 1, like in 
[19], where the search space is smaller than the general case. 
Other decoders use energy function defined as in (2). 
For other decoders, it can be seen that the fitness value of the 
best elite increases from some initial value and starts to saturate 
after 40 iterations. The fitness value still increases, because the 
space is much larger than for 𝐷𝑒𝑐1, but in smaller manner than 
earlier. This may be because the GA is struggling to overcome 
the local maxima of the problem. 
Furthermore, the difference of the percentage of errors from 
error logs which decoders are able to correct as new decoders are 
added to cascade starts to decline. This can also be seen in Fig. 
4, where the curve of the AD-GDBFwM decoder starts to flatten 
and converge to some value. For example, this is visible by 
comparing the FER results after every 𝐿𝑡= 15 iterations. 
In Fig. 4. the FER dependency of FER to the iteration number 
can be seen for different algorithms, for a given 𝐸𝑏/𝑁0 =
7.5 dB. GDBF algorithm achieves FER saturation rather early, 
at around 5 iterations. 
The GDBFwM algorithm saturates at 20 iterations, and has 
much lower FER at that point than GDBF algorithm. It is 
interesting to observe that GDBFwM algorithm initially is better 
than the BP algorithm for the first 40 iterations, but after that BP 
continues to gradually decrease its FER, while GDBFwM 
saturates. The AD-GDBFwM algorithm does not saturate for 60 
iterations, but its curve starts to reduce the slope significantly 
after 45 iterations, and compared to BP has significantly better 
results for number of iterations greater than five. 
Regarding the neural BP decoder, we consider two 
algorithms, one which has its weights trained for 10 iterations 
(NBP10) and one for 20 iterations (NBP20). Both algorithms do 
not saturate for the given number of iterations, but it is interesting 
that NBP10 has almost the same FER after 10 iterations as the 
NBP20 algorithm. Furthermore, NBP20 is worse than BP in the 
first 10 iterations, but its performance is compensated later. 
NBP algorithm is very time consuming during the training 
phase of offline learning. But in terms of execution time of one 
iteration, NBP is very similar to the ordinary BP algorithm. BP 
and NBP are much more computationally complex than the 
considered GDBF variants, with NBP performing more 
multiplications than BP.  
The NBP10 algorithm has better performance than both BP 
and AD-GDBFwM within the first 10 iterations. When 
complexity is considered, the AD-GDBFwM algorithm can 
achieve faster transmission rates for a comparable number of 
iterations than NBP10 algorithm. Furthermore, it can be 
observed that the NBP20 algorithm is worse than AD-GDBFwM 
for iteration number greater than three. 
 
Fig. 3. Fitness of the genetic algorithm throughout generations 
 
Fig. 4. Convergence speed of various decoding algorithms 
Fig. 5. shows FER as a function of 𝐸𝑏/𝑁0. For decoders 
GDBF, GDBFwM, and AD-GDBFwM the maximal number of 
iterations is 60. In the case of BP and NBP decoders the maximal 
number of iterations is 10. The GDBF decoder in Fig. 5. has the 
worst performance of all. It can be observed that the AD-
GDBFwM has far superior performance than other algorithms. 
The AD-GDBFwM surpasses the BP algorithm by 1.5 dB and is 
better than the GDBFwM decoder by more than 0.5 dB. Also, it 
is interesting to note, that the GDBFwM decoder is better than 
BP decoder by almost 1 dB, because for regular LDPC codes this 
is not the case [16], [17]. In comparison to the NBP decoder, 
GDBFwM has the similar performance, even though GDBFwM 
is far less complex for implementation. Analogous conclusions 
can be drawn from Fig. 6., which shows BER as a function of 
𝐸𝑏/𝑁0, for the same simulation runs as for the FER results in Fig. 
5. 
For AD-GDBFwM and GDBFwM decoders we observed 
some miscorrections during Monte Carlo simulations. This 
means that a false positive decoding can happen when all the 
parity check equations are satisfied, but the decoded codeword is 
not the same as the transmitted codeword. For the AD-
GDBFwM, Monte Carlo simulation was run for 5 ∙108 
codewords 
for 𝐸𝑏/𝑁0 = 7.5 dB  and 
we 
observed 
36 
miscorrected codewords, most of them caused by 𝐷𝑒𝑐1. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:31:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
 
Fig. 5. FER performance of various decoding algorithms 
 
Fig. 6. BER performance of various decoding algorithms 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we have shown that by using the AD-
GDBFwM algorithm, the decoding performance for a desired 
number of iterations achieves better performance than BP 
algorithm. This allows us to use a larger number of iterations for 
decoding, compared to BP, while still maintaining low 
computational complexity. We have shown that the AD-
GDBFwM algorithm achieves better performance rates than the 
BP algorithm and NBP algorithm for the code MDPC (127,106). 
Future work will consider MDPC codes with other code rates. 
REFERENCES 
[1] ETSI, “Standard ETSI EN 302 307-2 V1.4.1,” European Broadcasting 
Union, 2024. 
[2] ETSI, “Standard ETSI TS 138 101-1 V18.5.0 (2020-11) 5G,” European 
Broadcasting Union 2020. 
[3] K. Zhao, W. Zhao, H. Sun, T. Zhang, and X. Zhang, “LDPC-in-SSD: 
Making advanced error correction codes work effectively in solid state 
drives,” Proc. of the USENIX Conf. on FAST, 2013; pp. 243–256. 
[4] C E  Shannon, “A mathematical theory of communication,” Bell Syst. 
Tech. J., vol. 27, 1948, pp 379–423. 
[5] Z. Li, M.A. Uusitalo, H. Shariatmadari, and B. Singh, “5G URLLC: design 
challenges and system concepts,” ISWCS, 2018.  
[6] A  Hocquenghem, “Codes correcteurs d'erreurs,” Chiffres, vol   ,  959, 
pp. 147–156. 
[7] R. C. Bose and D. K. Ray-Chaudhuri, “On a class of error correcting 
binary group codes,” Inform  Control, vol ,  96 , pp 68–79. 
[8] R.J. Rossi, “Mathematical statistics: an introduction to likelihood based 
inference,” John Wiley & Sons, 2018. 
[9] I. Sason and S  Shamai, ”Performance analysis of linear codes under 
maximum-likelihood decoding: a tutorial,” no  Publishers, 2006. 
[10] E R  Berlekamp, R J McEliece, and H C A  Van Tilborg, “On the inherent 
intractability of certain coding problems,” IEEE Trans. on Inform. Theory, 
vol. 24 (5), 1978, pp. 384–386. 
[11] R  Gallagher, “Lo -density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans  Inform  
Theory, vol. 8, 1962, pp. 21–28. 
[12] L  M  Tanner, “A recursive approach to lo  complexity codes,” IEEE 
Trans. Inform.Theory, vol. 27, 1981, pp. 533–547. 
[13] X.-Y  Hu, E  Eleftheriou, D M  Arnold, and A  Dholakia, “Efficient 
implementations of the sum-product algorithm for decoding LDPC 
codes,” Proc  IEEE Global Telecomms  Conf, vol   ,       
[14] T  Etzion, A  Trachtenberg, and A  Vardy, “Which codes have cycle-free 
Tanner graphs?,” IEEE Trans  Inform  Theory, vol  45,  999, pp    73–
2181. 
[15] T. Wadayama, K. Nakamura, M. Yagita, Y. Funahashi, S. Usami, and I. 
Takumi, “Gradient descent bit flipping algorithms for decoding LDPC 
codes,” IEEE Trans  Commun , vol  58, no  6, 2010, pp. 1610–1614. 
[16] V  Savin, “Gradient descent bit-flipping decoding  ith momentum,” Proc. 
ISTC, 2021. 
[17] S. Brkić, P. Ivaniš, and B. Vasić, “Adaptive gradient descent bit flipping 
diversity decoding,” IEEE Commun  Letters, vol   6, no    , 2022, pp. 
2257–2261. 
[18] S. Mirjalili, “Evolutionary algorithms and neural networks, theory and 
applications,” Springer, 2019. 
[19] J  Milojković, S  Brkić, P  Ivaniš, and B  Vasić, "Learning to decode linear 
block codes using adaptive gradient-descent bit-flipping," Proc. ISTC, 
Brest, France, 2023, pp. 1-5. 
[20] J. Milojković, S  Brkić, P  Ivaniš, and B  Vasić, “Optimization of the 
iterative decoding algorithms for irregular block codes,” 3 nd Telfor 
Conf., 2024. 
[21] E  Nachmani, Y  Be’ery, and D  Burshtein, “Learning to decode linear 
codes using deep learning,” th Annual Allerton Conf ,    6  
[22] S  Ouzan and Y  Be’ery, “Moderate-density parity-check codes,” 
arXiv:0911.3262, 2009. 
[23] R. Misoczki, J.-P  Tillich, N  Sendrier, and P  Barreto, “MDPC-McEliece: 
New McEliece variants from moderate density parity-check codes,” IEEE 
Internat. Symp. Inform. Theory, 2013, pp. 2069–2073. 
[24] R J  McEliece, “A public-key cryptosystem based on algebraic coding 
theory,” DSN Progress Report,  978, pp   4–116. 
[25] M  Baldi, P  Santini, and F  Chiaraluce, “Soft McEliece: MDPC code- 
based McEliece cryptosystems with very compact keys through real- 
valued intentional errors,” IEEE Internat  Symp  Inform  Theory,    6, pp  
795–799. 
[26] B  Brame, “Idempotents in cyclic codes,” East Carolina University,       
[27] S  Ruder, “An overvie  of gradient descent optimization algorithms,” 
arXiv:1609.04747, 2016.  
[28] T  Tithi, C  Winstead, and G  Sundararajan, “Decoding LDPC codes via 
noisy gradient descent bit-flipping  ith redecoding,” arXiv:1503.08913, 
2015. 
[29] B. Vasić, P. Ivaniš, D  Declercq, and K  LeTrung, “Approaching maxi-
mum likelihood performance of LDPC codes by stochastic resonance in 
noisy iterative decoders,” in Proc  ITA Workshop,    6  
[30] M. Melanie, “An introduction to genetic algorithms,” MIT Press, 1996. 
[31] A. Petrowski and S. Ben-Hamida, “Evolutionary algorithms”, Wiley, 
2017.  
[32] Parity-check matrix, decoders, and weights for the given numerical results, 
available at https://github.com/dickica/IcEtran2025 
 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:31:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
