IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 33, NO. 6, JUNE 2025

1679

Revisiting Multiple ECC on High-Density NAND Flash memory

Yunpeng Song , Member, IEEE, Yina Lv , Wentong Li , Jialin Liu, and Liang Shi , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Three-dimensional NAND flash memory using the advanced multibit-per-cell technique is widely adopted due to its high density. However, it faces the problem of deteriorating read performance and energy consumption due to decreased reliability. Low-density parity-check code (LDPC) is typically adopted as an error correction code (ECC) to encode data and provide fault tolerance. To reduce the cost, LDPC with a high code rate is always adopted. However, LDPC will lead to read retry operations when the accessed data are not successfully decoded, and such retry-induced performance degradation is serious, especially for modern high-density flash memory. In this work, a reliability-aware differential ECC (READECC) approach is proposed to reduce redundancy protection and storage cost of LDPC with a low code rate and optimize the read performance. The basic idea is to adopt LDPC with a suitable code rate considering both data access characteristics and flash reliability characteristics. First, hot reads are identified based on the frequency of being accessed. Second, based on the reliability variation characteristics, the life of flash memory is divided into three reliability periods. As the reliability period shifts, the code rate of the LDPC adjusts adaptively to minimize redundancy protection. Third, an adaptive-sized logical page approach is further proposed to support LDPC with strong error correction capability (a low code rate) with a low storage cost. Through careful design and evaluation on 3-D triple-level-cell NAND flash memory, READECC achieves encouraging optimizations with a negligible cost.
Index Terms—3-D NAND flash, energy consumption, error correction code (ECC), low-density parity-check code (LDPC), read performance.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE NAND flash memory is a popular technology used in modern computing systems to build storage devices to meet large-capacity storage and I/O performance requirements. The capacity growth of NAND flash memory is due to two advanced technologies. First, the capacity of 3-D NAND flash memory is expanded by stacking storage cells. The number of stacked layers has grown from 24 to the recent 300+ layers [1]. Second, the capacity of 3-D NAND flash memory is expanded by increasing the storage density of
Received 5 December 2024; revised 10 February 2025; accepted 8 March 2025. Date of publication 1 April 2025; date of current version 23 May 2025. This work was supported by Shanghai Science and Technology Project under Grant 22QA1403300. (Corresponding author: Liang Shi.)
Yunpeng Song, Wentong Li, Jialin Liu, and Liang Shi are with the MoE Engineering Research Center of Software/Hardware Co-Design Technology and Application and the School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200050, China (e-mail: shi.liang.hk@gmail.com).
Yina Lv is with the School of Informatics, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian 361005, China.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVLSI.2025.3551400

the memory cells. This technology is called multibit-per-cell technology [1]. With the above two technologies, 3-D NAND flash memory can continue to increase storage density, but the reliability of flash chips is negatively impacted. As the density of flash memory increases, reliability-induced performance degradation issues will hinder its further development [2]. To ensure data reliability, two approaches are typically used in high-density flash-based solid-state drives (SSDs). First, the error correction code (ECC) is used in SSDs that can detect and correct dozens of raw bit errors (e.g., 72 bits per 1-kB code word [2]). With its powerful error correction capability, low-density parity-check code (LDPC) has been widely adopted [3]. Second, when the ECC cannot correct all bit errors, the SSD controller performs a read retry operation, reading the incorrect page again using a slightly adjusted reference voltage [2]. However, retry-induced performance degradation is significant, especially in high-density flash memory.
Previous studies have proposed multi-ECC schemes for flash memory to reduce redundancy protection (i.e., energy consumption) [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10]. The basic idea of this work is to determine the code rate of ECC based on the reliability of data. For example, Nie et al. [7] used ECC with a high code rate for data with a low raw bit error rate (RBER). As the reliability of flash memory decreases, the code rate of ECC will converge to the normal ECC. Wu et al. [4] proposed to optimize flash read performance through a combination of fine-grained programming and weak ECC. However, these works ignore the reliability requirements of different kinds of data and the frequent read retries due to the low reliability of high-density flash memory. Compared with the decoding overhead of ECC, read retries will cause more energy consumption. Existing studies on multi-ECC have not noticed that retry operations increase with decreasing reliability of high-density NAND flash memory, leading to read performance degradation. Different from the above works, this work proposes a multi-ECC scheme for high-density flash memory to optimize read performance while reducing redundancy protection and storage cost of strong ECC.
High-density 3-D NAND flash memory faces significant challenges when making difficult design tradeoff between read performance and ECC overhead (i.e., redundancy protection and storage cost). This article proposes a reliability-aware differential ECC (READECC) scheme for high-density 3-D NAND flash memory to reduce the read retry operations while reducing the redundancy protection and storage cost. In this article, storage costs are defined as the physical page size

1063-8210 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:27:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1680

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 33, NO. 6, JUNE 2025

Fig. 1. Typical architecture of SSD and flash internal components. (a) Typical

architecture of SSD. (b) Architecture of FCA. (c) Architecture of block.

Fig. 2. VTH distribution of a 3-D TLC flash cell [9].

(i.e., the number of storage cells in a WL) required to store the parity codes and data. The basic idea is to reduce redundancy protection and storage costs by considering both data access characteristics and flash reliability during the ECC selection. To summarize, we make the following contributions.
1) The lifetime of flash memory is classified into different reliability periods. Based on this, the redundancy protection-aware differential ECC is proposed to provide ECCs with code rates corresponding to the characteristics of the reliability period and data access characteristics.
2) We explored the relationship between the code rate and error correction capability of ECCs. The ECC code rate of the hot read data is varied to adapt to the characteristics of the reliability period and to reduce redundancy protection.
3) An access characteristic-aware differential ECC is further proposed to adopt different strengths of ECC. This scheme is designed to minimize the redundancy protection and improve the read performance.
4) A storage cost optimization scheme is proposed to provide enough storage space for low code rate ECC and to reduce the storage cost without increasing the production cost.
5) Through careful design and evaluation, experimental results show that READECC can achieve significant optimizations with negligible impact on lifetime.
II. BACKGROUND
A. High-Density NAND Flash-Based Solid State Drives
Fig. 1 shows the architecture of high-density NAND flashbased SSDs. Flash-based SSDs typically consist of the flash translation layer (FTL) and the flash chip array (FCA). FTL has been proposed to overcome some of the limitations inherent in flash memory. First, flash memory has an out-of-place update feature. After a page has been used, it needs to wait for the page to be erased before it can be used again [11]. Second, flash blocks have a program/erase (P/E) cycle limit [12]. When the P/E cycles of a flash block exceed the upper limit of P/E cycles, it is considered to be a bad block and will not be used in the future. To maximize the lifetime of the flash memory, FTL controls the P/E cycles of all blocks to a similar level to fully utilize the P/E cycles of all blocks. This process is called wear leveling [13]. Third, the FTL maintains a mapping table of logical addresses to physical addresses to resolve address mismatches caused by out-of-place updates. Finally, the SSD controller contains the hardware decoding module of the ECC to guarantee data reliability.

The FCA is hierarchically organized and connected by channels. Inside the chip, there are several dies, each containing multiple planes (e.g., 2–8). Thousands of blocks form a plane, and each block is organized by arrangements of storage cells, which are interconnected by wordlines (WLs) and bitlines (BLs). With the multibit-per-cell technique, there are various densities of flash memory, such as triple-level-cell (TLC) and quad-level-cell (QLC) flash, in the order of flash density increases. In this article, we take TLC as the default storage medium. For TLC flash, each WL contains three pages. Each storage cell contains three bits, which are called least significant bit (LSB), central significant bit (CSB), and most significant bit (MSB). The space of a page is logically divided into two parts: user space and spare space. The user space is used to store user data, while the spare space is used to store additional information, such as ECC. Three basic operations are supported for flash memory, including read, write, and erase. The basic operation unit of erase is a block, and that of read/write is a page [14].
B. Read on High-Density Flash Memory
The NAND flash memory cell uses a floating gate (FG) or charge trap (CT) to store charges. Fig. 2 shows the VTH distribution of a 3-D TLC flash cell. The voltage window is divided into eight states (ER and P1–P7) in the TLC flash with 3 bits per cell. Here, S is used to represent the number of voltage states and n is used to represent the number of bits in a storage cell. The relationship between S and n is S = 2n. Seven reference voltages (i.e., VREF0–VREF6) are needed to distinguish between the total eight states. Initially, all flash cells without stored charges are in the erase state i.e., E. During the programming of the charge injection into the flash cell, eight voltage states are matched from low to high, i.e., E to P7. When the flash memory cell reaches the specified state, charge injection is stopped. When a WL is read, it is necessary to apply VPass voltage on the other WLs to reduce read disturbance.
Gray code [15] is used in flash memory to encode the bit information corresponding to the state of the flash cell. Various Gray codes are supported in high-density flash memory (e.g., 2-3-2 and 1-2-4 for TLC flash) [15]. When a page is read, 1 bit is fetched from each flash cell. As shown in Fig. 2, take the LSB as an example. Since one read reference voltage can be applied at a time, the reference voltage is increased from VREF0 to VREF6 to complete a read operation. First, determine whether the state is at P3 or P4 by applying the reference voltage VREF3. If the state is P3, the LSB is 1. Otherwise, the LSB of the bit is 0. All bits of the LSB can be read as

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:27:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SONG et al.: REVISITING MULTIPLE ECC ON HIGH-DENSITY NAND FLASH MEMORY

TABLE I COMPARISON OF MULTI-ECC WORKS

1681

Fig. 3. VREF adjustment in the read retry operation [9]. (a) Retention loss. (b) Read retry: adjusting VREF.
described above. CSB and MSB are read in the same way by their corresponding reference voltages. With all the reference voltages of a page, we can get the data of this page.
C. Reliability Issue During Read Operation
The reliability of high-density flash memory has been a critical issue [2]. Voltage distribution will be distorted due to the retention loss (i.e., charge leakage) or disturbance (i.e., read disturbance and program interference). For example, the voltage distribution will shift to the left during retention loss and shift to the right due to the disturbance [16] (the red dotted line in Fig. 2). To this end, the adjacent voltage states will be overlapped, making bit errors. The reading process on high-density NAND flash memory relies on an ECC module in the SSD controller. Specifically, the read request process includes several steps. First, the read request is issued. Second, the corresponding page is sensed by the method described in Section II-B. Third, the data are transferred to the controller and corrected by ECC. If the data are not corrected successfully, the retry operation is activated to read the data again until the data can be corrected. With the interference of various flash errors, the reliability of the data stored in flash cells gradually decreases and the RBER of the data gradually increases.
LDPC is always adopted by high-density NAND flash memory as the default ECC module [17]. When the RBER of the data is within the error correction capability of the LDPC, the data are decoded only once. When the data are not correctly decoded, read retry operations are issued to read again. Fig. 3(a) shows the phenomenon of retention loss leading to an overlapping area. As the retention time grows, the overlapping area will further increase, resulting in data failure decoding. In this case, the read retry operation reads the data again with a different VREF value [e.g., VRRi in the ith read retry step in Fig. 3(b)]. By adjusting VREF, VOPT is gradually approached so that the correct data can be read [2]. When the RBER of the data is high, we need to read retry several times. In this case, the read operation needs to acquire the state information multiple times until LDPC can correct the errors. For high-density flash memory, degraded reliability will result in severe performance degradation [2].
III. PROBLEM STATEMENT AND MOTIVATION
LDPC with a unified code rate is often adopted in highdensity flash as ECC to ensure data reliability. However, LDPC with a unified code rate cannot adapt to the increase in

data error rate after the reliability of flash memory decreases, resulting in read performance degradation. Another solution is the existing multi-ECC methods. Table I shows the comparison of multi-ECC work [5], [10], [12], [18]. Existing multi-ECC schemes are designed to reduce read retries or redundancy protection and ECC decoding latency. However, these works cannot adequately address the impact of the read retry problem on low-reliability high-density flash memory because they ignore the reliability requirements of data with different access characteristics. Existing multi-ECC schemes adopt a low code rate-based LDPC to provide strong error correction capability. One important problem is that this kind of LDPC increases parity cost, redundancy protection, and energy consumption. If it is adopted for all data, the cost will be unacceptably high. DECC is the first work to consider the above issues but ignores strong ECC overhead. This work proposes an READECC scheme for high-density flash to optimize read performance while reducing the strong ECC overhead.
A. Redundancy Protection
To understand the performance characteristics of different LDPC for high-density NAND flash memory, we have done experiments as follows. First, we evaluated the performance of flash memory under different reliability periods, i.e., high-, middle-, and low-reliability periods. The definition of reliability periods will be given in Section IV-B1. Second, several LDPCs with different code rates were simulated. Third, based on their error correction capability and the reliability period they are in, the percentages of data enrolled in read retry are varied. For example, we assume that the percentage of data enrolled in read retry is low for LDPC with a low code rate and vice versa. The data with one LDPC code rate will have more read retries in the low-reliability period than in the high-reliability period. Then, the percentages of data enrolled in read retry are varied from 0% to 100% to represent LDPC with different code rates. The different number of read retries is used to represent the impact of different reliability periods on read performance. The number of read retries under each reliability period is set according to [2]. For the high-, middle-, and old-reliability period, one, two, and three read retries are triggered, respectively. The variations in read performance under a higher number of read retries will be carefully evaluated in Section VI.
FIO is used to evaluate the device and IOPS is used as the metric. Experimental configurations are listed in Section VI. Fig. 4 shows the results with random read workloads. First, compared to LDPC with a high code rate, LDPC with a low code rate achieves better read performance. For LDPC with

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:27:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1682

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 33, NO. 6, JUNE 2025

Fig. 4. Motivational results with random read workloads. The x-axis repre- Fig. 5. Overview of SSD with READECC. sents the percentage of data that suffered different numbers of read retries.

a low code rate, it provides up to 2.2× IOPS in the highreliability period and up to 4.0× IOPS in the low-reliability period. Second, as the reliability decreases, the performance gap between LDPCs with different code rates will grow. For the high-reliability period, the performance difference between LDPCs with different code rates is small. For the middleor low-reliability period, the performance difference among LDPCs with different code rates starts to increase. The above results motivate us to propose a new design, where data with different reliability or performance requirements should be protected by LDPC with different code rates under different reliability periods to reduce redundancy protection.
B. Storage Cost
The parity code must be stored persistently. As the code rate decreases, the length of the parity code increases, inevitably increasing the storage cost. The parity code is usually stored in the sparse space. The existing sparse space can only support LDPC for some code rates. For example, referring to [9], the maximum code rate that the spare space can support is 0.8. Some manufacturers have further reduced the spare space to further minimize production costs. Referring to [8], the maximum code rate that the spare space can support is 0.89. This limits the use of ECC with low code rates. A simple approach is to provide enough sparse space to support low code rate LDPC. However, this approach inevitably increases the production cost. The above results motivate us to propose a method to optimize the storage cost of low code rate ECC without increasing the production cost.
IV. RELIABILITY-AWARE DIFFERENTIAL ECC
A. Overview
An READECC scheme is proposed to reduce strong ECC overhead (e.g., extra space to store parity codes) and improve the read performance of high-density 3-D NAND flash memory. The basic idea is to apply ECC with an appropriate code rate to fit data access characteristics and flash reliability periods. To realize the above basic idea, several challenges should be considered. First, ECC with a low code rate to encode data improves read performance, but it also increases redundancy protection. Second, since the device side does not know the data access frequency, novel data identification is needed. Third, since the data characteristics may change, the data

need to be recoded with a new ECC, which will introduce background read and write operations. Finally, ECC with different code rates requires different storage overhead for storing parity codes, which will lead to increased storage costs.
Fig. 5 shows the architecture of READECC. To tame the above challenges, READECC includes three novel methods, called a redundancy protection-aware differential ECC method, an access characteristic-aware differential ECC method, and a storage cost optimization method. First, the redundancy protection-aware differential ECC selects the code rate of ECCs based on the reliability period and the access characteristics of the data. We divide the flash into three reliability periods based on P/E cycles, as presented in Section IV-B2. Then, within each reliability period, a pair of ECCs with different code rates is selected to provide reliability guarantees based on the reliability demands of the data. Second, a simple yet smart access characteristic-aware differential ECC method is used to record the data access frequency and guide the data recoding. Also, to adapt to the reliability requirements of data with different access characteristics, a read retry-aware recoding method is proposed to select the suitable ECC for data by referring to the READECC table. With the above methods, the redundancy protection of low code rate ECCs is minimized. Third, to reduce the storage cost and provide storage space for parity codes for strong ECCs, a storage cost optimization method is proposed to provide a specific storage space size for logical pages according to the selected ECCs.
B. Redundancy Protection-Aware Differential ECC
1) READECC Table Construction: An READECC table is constructed to ensure data reliability using a suitable ECC based on flash reliability and data characteristics. In this article, two ECCs (strong ECC and normal ECC) are provided under each reliability period. ECCLS, ECCMS, and ECCHS represent the strength of ECC in different reliability periods of flash memory. One strong ECC (i.e., one of the ECCLS, ECCMS, and ECCHS in Table II) is used to encode hot read data and one normal ECC (i.e., ECCN) is used to encode other read data. In addition, data access characteristics are classified into two types: hot reads and other reads. Hot reads represent data that are read frequently, and other reads represent all reads that are not hot read data. Since hot read data are encoded with strong ECC to ensure their reliability, read

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:27:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SONG et al.: REVISITING MULTIPLE ECC ON HIGH-DENSITY NAND FLASH MEMORY

1683

TABLE II READECC TABLE
retries can be significantly reduced. The adoption of strong ECC is designed based on the access characteristic-aware differential ECC method (see Section IV-C). Once the recoding conditions are matched, strong ECC is applied to optimize the performance. If the RBER is below the error correction capability of strong ECC, we can obtain optimization of read performance. Even if the RBER exceeds the error correction capability of strong ECC, we need fewer read retries to bring the RBER down below the error correction capability of strong ECC compared to ECCN.
2) Definition of Reliability Periods: Referring to [5], [10], and [18], the lifetime of flash memory is divided into three reliability periods (i.e., Young, Middle, and Old periods) based on the P/E cycles. This is because the P/E cycles of flash blocks are linearly related to flash reliability [16]. The larger the value of P/E cycles is, the lower the reliability of the flash will be. For each reliability period, we can select a suitable ECC to ensure data reliability to minimize the retryinduced performance degradation. Specifically, Young period refers to the flash duration that the P/E cycles of all blocks are at a low value, which exhibits high data reliability. Middle period refers to the flash duration that the flash reliability is degraded due to increased P/E cycles. Then, there exist more read retry operations when reading data than the Young period. Old period refers to the flash duration that all blocks are approaching the nominated P/E cycles decided by flash manufacturers [16]. In this period, the flash reliability is poor with a large number of read retry operations, resulting in severe performance degradation.
3) Selection of ECC: Based on the above definition, the ECC with a specific code rate is selected for each reliability period to encode the hot read data. Three ECCs with different code rates are adopted, named ECCLS, ECCMS, and ECCHS. For example, at the Young period, an ECC with a low error correction capability (ECCLS) is used to encode the hot read data. At the Middle period, an ECC with a middle error correction capability (ECCMS) is used to encode the hot read data. At the Old period, an ECC with a high error correction capability (ECCHS) is used to encode hot read data. For other data, we use a normal ECC (ECCN) with a unified code rate, which is not changed among all reliability periods. The refresh scheme provides reliability assurance by limiting the number of read retries. For example, when eight read retries occur on data, the refresh scheme rewrites the data to reset the data’s error rate. The code rates of the above four ECCs are listed in Section VI-A.
Furthermore, the selection must consider both performance optimization and ECC overhead. For strong ECC, it will

increase ECC overhead (e.g., parity space cost and energy consumption). First, since the error correction capability of strong ECC is larger than that of ECCN, then, there exists parity space cost, which is determined by the code rate of ECC. Based on the design of LDPC, their error correction capability can be significantly increased with a slight reduction of code rates. Then, the storage cost of parity space can be controlled based on the requirement of error correction capability. Second, the energy consumption comes from the decoding of the hot read data, which includes the energy cost from the data read and read retries. Compared with ECCN, strong ECC reduces the number of retry operations, which can reduce the energy cost from retry operations. Then, the energy cost from strong ECC used for hot read data should be comparable to that of ECCN. In addition, ECCN is designed to guarantee data integrity. Considering that the ECC has been taken in existing SSDs, the existing ECC is used as ECCN to meet the data reliability requirements. With the above approach, the reliability of hot read data can be guaranteed in all reliability periods with low redundancy protection.
C. Access Characteristic-Aware Differential ECC
1) Hot Read Data Identification for READECC: To optimize read performance by considering data characteristics for ECC selection, a critical step is to identify hot reads. Multiple works have proposed the hot read data identification methods [9], [19], such as blooming filter, machine learning method, and read counter. By analyzing the existing hot read identification methods, we found that the higher the accuracy is, the higher the algorithm overhead will be. For example, maintaining a least recently used (LRU) link list to identify hot reads can improve the identification accuracy. However, the corresponding memory and lookup overheads will be high. Based on the requirements of READECC for identification accuracy, we choose to use a simple threshold (TR) for the number of reads to identify hot reads. The larger the TR is, the less data are identified as hot reads, and vice versa. Two design principles of this threshold selection are as follows. First, READECC considers improving read performance as the highest priority. Second, READECC requires a “sluggish” hot reads identification process. An overly aggressive hot reads identification scheme will cause overprotection problems, which will introduce more energy and space costs. In addition, cold read data have a small impact on read performance, and even if strong ECC is used, the performance gain is low and even brings negative gain and increases the energy consumption overhead. In the experiment, TR is evaluated to make a tradeoff between read performance and recoding cost.
As shown in Fig. 6, the identification process exists in the host read process and SSD internal management. The read counter is used to count the number of reads to the accessed data. When the page is read, its read count is added by 1 [see Fig. 6(a)]. When the page is updated, its read count is reset to 0. Considering the hotness of the data changes, read counters will be set to 0 after every certain number of requests received by the SSD. The number of requests works as one cycle and TR is used to identify hot reads during the cycle. By evaluating the workload offline, we conservatively set the number of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:27:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1684

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 33, NO. 6, JUNE 2025

Fig. 7. Data and parity code distribution in two existing solutions. (a) Together. (b) Separate.

Fig. 6. Read retry-aware recoding. C refers to cold read data page, H refers to hot read data page, I refers to invalid data page, and HR refers to hot read data page with retry operations. (a) Recoding triggered by host read requests. (b) Recoding triggered by SSD internal management.

Fig. 8. Data distribution of strong and normal logical pages.

requests per cycle to 10000 to fully accumulate the hotness of the data. We use the number of requests per cycle and TR to feedback access frequency for filtering out cold read-only data and from hot to cold reads. The hot read identifier is used to detect the read count of the accessed data and compare it with the threshold TR. Three types of data pages are classified, namely, hot read data page (H), cold read data page (C), and hot read data page with retries (HR). Specifically, during the host read process, the read count of the accessed data page will be compared with TR. If the read count is smaller than TR, the data page is identified as a cold read data page (C). If the read count is larger than TR and data are read with retry operations, the data page is identified as a hot read data page with retries (HR). If the read count is larger than TR, the data page is identified as a hot read data page (H). The H type contains the HR type. During the SSD internal management (i.e., GC and wear leveling), the identification condition is the same as that in the host read process. This counter-assisted identification method follows the abovementioned design principles, such as simple implementation and low computational overhead.
2) Read Retry-Aware Recoding: The read retry-aware recoding scheme is designed to optimize read performance by recoding hot read data with strong ECC at a low cost. After identifying the hot read data, the hot read data need to be recoded with a strong ECC. As presented above, strong ECC is used when the data are hot read data with ECCN. In this case, the data should be recoded with a strong ECC. This design means that data are initially encoded with ECCN. Once the above requirements are satisfied, the accessed data should be recoded for read performance optimization. The basic recoding processes are as follows. First, data are read and decoded by ECCN. Second, if the data are hot read, data are encoded with strong ECC at the storage controller. Finally, the coded data are written back to flash memory.
The above process is costly, especially when many data need to be recoded. It is worth noting that data will only cause read performance degradation after read retries are triggered. To minimize the cost, the recoding process is designed as follows. First, ECCN is used to code when data are first written or updated. This is because, at this point, the hotness of the data is unknowable or cleared. Second, only hot data with ECCN that has retry operations during reads need to be recoded. Third, the recoding process can be activated at two timing points, host reading and background processing, as shown in Fig. 6.

Fig. 6(a) refers to the retry operations are triggered when host reads execute. If the hot read data are accessed and retried, it can be recoded by encoding the data in the controller ( ). If many read requests waiting in the I/O queue, this process should be delayed to the following case. Fig. 6(b) refers to the background processes, such as GC or wear leveling. During runtime, hot read data are identified and recorded. Once the block is enrolled in GC or wear leveling, the hot read data will be recoded with the strong ECC ( ). Meanwhile, cold read data with the strong ECC (i.e., from hot to cold) will be recoded with normal ECC ( ) to further reduce redundancy protection.
D. Storage Cost Optimization for Overlong Parity Codes
The parity code always needs to be persisted to flash. As mentioned in Section III, without affecting the user space, the spare space is only capable of storing a limited number of parity codes. When the parity code of strong ECC is too large (e.g., ECCHS), it will lead to insufficient storage space. This will result in only ECCs with limited code rates can be used.
1) Existing Solutions for Overlong Parity Codes: Two approaches were proposed. First, Jung et al. [20] proposed to include a logical data page and its ECC unit in one flash page by storing fewer codewords (i.e., a data block and its ECC). However, unaligned data blocks (e.g., 1 or 2 kB) may generate cross-page accesses and increase mapping overhead [as shown in Fig. 7(a)]. Second, Chang et al. [21] proposed to store ECC and data separately. However, accessing the ECC page adds some reads, which results in a degradation of READECC’s read performance [as shown in Fig. 7(b)]. The above solutions are designed for strong ECC for all data. This inevitably increases ECC overhead. For READECC, strong ECC is only required for hot read data, which requires dynamic parity code storage support to reduce storage costs. Neither of the above solutions applies to READECC.
2) Adaptive-Sized Logical Page: Inspired by existing solutions, the adaptive-sized logical page scheme for READECC is proposed to provide storage space for the parity codes of strong ECC while minimizing the mapping overhead, storage costs (i.e., the size of the WL), and complexity. Specifically, two sizes of logical pages are provided, one (strong logical page) for strong ECC and the other (normal logical page) for normal ECC. Due to the limitations of the manufacturing

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:27:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SONG et al.: REVISITING MULTIPLE ECC ON HIGH-DENSITY NAND FLASH MEMORY

1685

process, the size of the WL is fixed. For strong ECC, we use some user space to store parity codes. Two design principles must be considered. First, the complexity of managing logical pages of different sizes must be minimized. Mapping tables are typically mapped at a granularity of 4 kB [22]. Therefore, both strong logic pages and normal logic pages should be multiples of 4 kB. Also, both logical page sizes should be 4 kB aligned. Second, the strong logic page should be used to support an ECC with high error correction capability. By doing this, the read performance can be further optimized when the reliability of flash memory is low. Fig. 8 shows the distribution of data in logical pages with different sizes. The size of the strong logical page is 12 kB and the size of the normal logical page is 16 kB. As we know, both 12 and 16 kB are multiples of 4 kB. Thus, there is no metadata overhead added to the mapping table, and the FTL is not affected. The user data on the page are divided into multiple blocks of 4-kB size. Each data block is stored together with its parity code. The data layout of the normal logical page represents the traditional data layout. The read amplification of the adaptive-sized logical page scheme is carefully evaluated in Section VI.
3) Reliability Period-Aware Recoding: During recoding, the execution flow of adaptive-sized logical page scheme is as follows. First, when data are first written or updated, the normal logical page (16 kB) with ECCN is used to store the data. Second, when data are identified as hot read and read retries have occurred, the recoding is triggered. The method to distinguish between the two types of pages will be described in Section V. The allocation of logical pages during the recoding process can be divided into the following cases. If the hot read data are stored on a normal logical page with ECCN or reliability period shift, a strong logical page (12 kB) with strong ECC is used to store the data. The extra 4 kB (i.e., 16–12 kB) of data are cached and waited for other hot reads with read retries to be written to flash together to reduce the write amplification factor. Note that hot read data are only merged with hot read data. This ensures that all data on a logical page uses the same code rate of ECC. If the hot read data are stored on a strong logical page and the reliability period has not changed, they do not need to be recoded. This is because the hot read data have already been recoded and there is no need to recode the data again. Third, the cold read data with strong ECC (i.e., from hot to cold) are recoded with ECCN in the data migration of SSD internal management (described in Section IV-C2). The data are read and cached during the migration process. Then, the cold read data with strong ECC are recoded with ECCN in 16-kB size and written back to flash memory. With the above approach, the performance of the hot read data can be guaranteed using strong ECC with reduced storage costs (i.e., the size of the WL).
The read amplification problem caused by the adaptive-sized logical page scheme can be categorized into the following two aspects. First, the read granularity of flash memory is usually pages. For 16 kB, the logical page can store 16-kB data. Therefore, reading 16-kB data requires reading a page. Also, 16-kB data exceed the size of a 12-kB logical page. Therefore, two 12-kB logical pages, i.e., 24-kB data, need to

be read. In addition, if the flash memory supports partial read operations (i.e., the read granularity is smaller than the page), the amount of data read will be reduced. The exact amount of data read depends on the supported read granularity. This will cause read amplification. Since the adaptive-sized logical page scheme accumulates hot read data into the same page, the additional 8 kB of hot read data will be cached. In this case, the adaptive-sized logical page scheme can achieve the effect of prefetching, thus reducing the performance impact of read amplification. Second, if 4 kB of hot read data are read, the adaptive-sized logical page scheme does not cause additional read amplification. The above analysis can be applied to other I/O sizes. We will evaluate the effect of read amplification in Section VI-B.
V. IMPLEMENTATION AND OVERHEAD ANALYSIS
To implement READECC, the FTL of the SSD is updated as follows. First, for READECC, each page should be identified to distinguish the strength of its adopted ECC. In the mapping table, the highest 2 bits of the logical address are used to indicate ECC decoding and data recoding. Second, for hot read data identification, each page needs a counter to record the number of times it has been read. The highest 3 bits of the physical address are used. For HR, it is detected during the read. A global variable is used to keep track of the number of requests. Third, for the adaptive-sized logic page scheme, we can use the marks of ECC strength to distinguish between logical pages of different sizes. A more compact mapping table is employed to reduce the memory requirements compared to using separate records. Finally, for ECCHS codes, we need extra space to store parity information. Take the ECCHS presented in Table II as an example. The required extra space as a percentage of the total space is (0.8 − 0.66) ×100% =14%. Although some storage space is sacrificed, READECC can greatly improve read performance and guarantee data reliability. Also, with the adaptive-sized logical page scheme, the storage cost is further reduced. The storage cost is described in detail in Section VI-B.
More importantly, READECC minimizes the energy and storage cost (ECC overhead) of LDPC with a low code rate while improving data reliability (e.g., only the hot read data use strong ECC). In addition, the hardware decoding latency of strong ECC is negligible compared to the latency caused by read retry operations [23]. The recoding scheme needs additional program operations to encode the hot read data. The program operations have an impact on lifetime and performance. In this work, only hot read data with retry operations are recoded. To minimize the recoding cost, we can increase TR. In the experiment, TR is carefully studied to reduce the cost. Furthermore, we propose recoding data during internal operations, which can further minimize the impact on the performance.
The adaptive-sized logical page scheme will inevitably lead to some loss of lifetime. This is because some user space is used to store parity codes for strong ECC. Fortunately, two factors can reduce the lost lifetime to negligible. First, the larger the spare space size is, the shorter the time the adaptive-sized logical page scheme is activated during the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:27:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1686

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 33, NO. 6, JUNE 2025

TABLE III EVALUATED 3-D TLC NAND FLASH MEMORY CONFIGURATION [9]

Fig. 9. Tolerable RBER at each code rate. The data size is 16 kB [9].

flash memory’s lifetime. For example, if the maximum code rate that the spare space can support is 0.8, the adaptivesized logical page scheme is only activated in the old period when storing parity codes for ECCHS. Thus, the impact of the adaptive-sized logical page scheme on lifetime is reduced. Conversely, if the maximum code rate that the spare space can support is 0.89, the adaptive-sized logical page scheme is activated in all periods to provide sufficient storage space. Second, there is a logarithmic relationship between the code rate and the error correction capability of ECC. The specific relationship between the code rate and the error correction capability of the ECC will be presented in Section VI-A. This means that we have the opportunity to explore the optimal cost-benefit point to reduce the impact of ECC with a low code rate on lifetime. In Section VI-B, the impact of an adaptivesized logical page scheme on lifetime and storage costs will be evaluated in detail.
The recoding overhead can be reduced by synergetic architectures. Under some architectures (e.g., multistream, ZNS, and FDP), hot and cold labels can be provided on the host side [24], [25]. In these architectures, READECC can utilize the hot and cold labels to match the code rate of the ECC on the first write. This reduces the recoding overhead. In future work, we will explore reducing the recoding overhead in this way.
VI. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
A. Experiment Setup
FEMU [26] is used to evaluate the benefit of READECC. The storage is emulated using 3-D TLC NAND flash memory. The details are as follows: SSD is 16 GB, eight channels. There are 16 chips, each channel has two chips, and each chip is equipped with two planes. Table III shows the configuration and synthetic workload characteristics. The latency configurations in Table III are consistent with the work in [2]. Refer to [2] for more detailed latency settings. FIO [27] is used to generate workloads and conduct tests. It has been shown that real-world workloads typically exhibit skewed access patterns [28]. Therefore, Zipfian distributions [29] are used to generate workloads with skewed access characteristics. They have been widely used to study device characteristics [30]. READECC was also evaluated under real workloads with various access modes. As shown in Table III, these workloads are denoted as Zipf x/y and the skew factors of the Zipfian distribution are adjusted such that x% of the generated operations access y%

of the LBA space for a given device size. Based on [5], [10], and [18], the lifetime of flash memory is divided into three reliability periods. Each reliability period is one-third of the total P/E period by default [16]. We also evaluated the effect of different ratios of period lengths (i.e., Younger and Older).
Quasi-cyclic low-density parity checking (QC-LDPC) is used to implement different code rates of ECC in a single circuit without using a dedicated circuit for each code rate [31]. The achievable code rates are determined by the structure of the seed matrix and the expansion method. Different seed matrix structures and expansion methods can have an impact on the fault tolerance of QC-LDPC, but the trends in the fault tolerance of QC-LDPC are all similar. Fig. 9 shows the code rate sequence synthesized from the state-of-the-art AR4JA code [32]. For data reliability and overhead consideration, we need to encode data with an appropriate code rate using LDPC under different reliability periods. Table II shows the adopted ECCs of READECC. We select ECCs with code rates appropriate for the average P/E cycles in each period to provide high reliability and reduced redundancy protection. In addition, in future work, we will try another approach to determine if there is enough redundant space by trying ECC with various code rates in a real flash device to observe the performance characteristics. First, the reliability is high in the young period. EECLS with a 0.86 code rate can obtain high performance and low overhead. Second, the reliability decreases in the middle period. ECCMS with a 0.8 code rate is adopted. Third, the reliability is further reduced in the old period. With the adaptive-sized logical page approach, ECCHS with a 0.66 code rate can be adopted. As shown in Fig. 9, continuing to reduce the code rate of the ECCHS can further improve performance, but at a significant cost. Finally, ECCN with a 0.9 code rate is adopted [2].
A probability-based read retry model is proposed to simulate the read retry in real scenarios, which is used to evaluate the performance improvement by READECC. The occurrence of read retry is related to data reliability [2]. The model includes the number of read retries and probability distributions. Specifically, in this article, the model is constructed by using a random function. Multiple random number intervals are divided, and each random number interval corresponds to a different number of read retries. A random number is generated for each request, and the number of read retries is determined based on the interval in which the random number is located. We denote the model as retry p0/p1/p2/p3

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:27:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SONG et al.: REVISITING MULTIPLE ECC ON HIGH-DENSITY NAND FLASH MEMORY

1687

Fig. 10. Normalized average IOPS in the young period under different read retry probability models. Older in (b) and (c) is in the middle period. (a) Retry model 100/0/0/0. (b) Retry model 80/20/0/0. (c) Retry model 50/50/0/0.

and generate various probability distributions by adjusting the values of p0, p1, p2, and p3. In this article, p0, p1, p2, and p3 represent the probability of zero, one, two, and three read retries, respectively.
B. Experimental Results for Synthetic Workloads
To evaluate the benefit of the READECC scheme, four stateof-the-art works are compared in the following experiments.
1) Uniform Code Rate LDPC: UECC represents the approach of adopting a uniform code rate LDPC (UECC) for the data. UECC uses 0.9 code rate LDPC as the ECC [2].
2) Refresh [33]: Refresh represents hot read data encoded using ECCN after refresh when retry happens through periodic patrol check all data for read retries. If read retries are triggered, the data are read for error correction and then rewritten to flash memory.
3) Multi-ECC [5], [10], [18]: Multi-ECC (MECC) represents the adoption of multicode rate LDPC, which adopts different code rate LDPCs according to the P/E cycles. Reduced redundancy protection by using high code rate LDPC in the young period. In this article, MECC uses a 0.94 code rate LDPC for performance evaluation in the young and middle periods. For the old period, MECC uses 0.9 code rate LDPC for all data.
4) Differential ECC [9], [12]: Differential ECC (DECC) represents hot read data with read retries using strong ECC and other data using normal ECC. With DECC, overprotection in the young period will increase the energy overhead, while weak protection in the old period will result in suboptimal read performance optimization. Consistent with [9], the code rate is set to 0.8 for strong ECC and 0.9 for normal ECC.
5) READECC: It automatically matches strategies based on data type and reliability period. First, when the first time a hot read data with read retry needs to be recoded, the exact code rate is determined by the reliability of the block at the current write point (target block). Second, when a read retry is triggered again for hot read data that have been recoded, the recoding is triggered only if the current block is more reliable than the target block. Third, for the SSD internal management (e.g., garbage collection), the ECC code rate of the data is determined by the target block and data type.

6) Younger and Older: Younger {young (code rate = 0.83): middle (code rate = 0.75): old (code rate = 0.5) = 5:3:1}, and Older {young (code rate = 0.88): middle (code rate = 0.8): old (code rate = 0.75) = 1:3:5} represent different ratios of period length, respectively. The ratio of period length is set according to the number of retry models (nine retry models are set in this article), thus facilitating the experimental evaluation.
1) Performance: Fig. 10 shows the normalized average IOPS in the young period under different read retry probability models. First, under the retry model 100/0/0/0, all five schemes have the same performance. This is because all blocks are reliable and no read retry operation occurs. Second, compared with UECC, the IOPS of MECC decreases by 10% and 5% on average under the remaining two read retry models. Since MECC uses ECC with low error correction capability, more read retries will occur compared to UECC. Third, refresh improves IOPS by an average of 14% and 15%. This is because refresh resets the RBER of data by periodically migrating data, reducing the number of read retries that occur. Fourth, DECC improves IOPS by an average of 20% and 42%. With strong ECC, the number of read retries is reduced. Finally, the performance of READECC and DECC is the same due to the high reliability of the young period. The difference is that READECC not only improves read performance but also obtains lower energy consumption than DECC. This is because the code rate of ECCLS used in READECC in the young period is higher than that of DECC. In addition, READECC achieves more benefits when the workloads are more skewed.
Fig. 11 shows the normalized average IOPS in the middle period. First, MECC still has no benefit on IOPS due to that it adopts a high code rate-based LDPC, which is harmful to performance. Compared to UECC, the IOPS of MECC decreased by an average of 5% under the three retry models. Second, the refresh scheme can improve the IOPS by an average of 18%, 14%, and 11% for the three models. Third, DECC further improves the IOPS by an average of 41%, 15%, and 16% for the three models. Finally, the performance of READECC and DECC is the same. In the middle period, READECC and DECC obtain the same performance by using ECCs with the same code rate.
Fig. 12 shows the normalized average IOPS in the old period under three retry models. For the old period, MECC

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:27:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1688

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 33, NO. 6, JUNE 2025

Fig. 11. Normalized average IOPS in the middle period under different read retry probability models. Younger in (a) and (b) is in the young period. Older in (b) and (c) is in the old period. (a) Retry model 20/80/0/0. (b) Retry model 10/40/50/0. (c) Retry model 0/20/80/0.

Fig. 12. Normalized average IOPS in the old period under different read retry probability models. Younger in (a) and (b) is in the middle period. (a) Retry model 0/20/60/20. (b) Retry model 0/10/40/50. (c) Retry model 0/0/20/80.

did not cause performance degradation compared to UECC. The refresh scheme only can improve the IOPS by an average of 3%, 1%, and 1% for the three models. Due to the low reliability in the old period, read retries occur again after data are migrated by refresh. The DECC can improve the IOPS by an average of 33%, 26%, and 20% for the three models. Due to physical space constraints (i.e., the physical size of the WL), DECC achieves suboptimal read performance optimization in the old period. The READECC can improve the IOPS by an average of 46%, 40%, and 35% for the three models. With the adaptive-sized logical page approach, ECCHS can be employed to further improve the read performance.
2) Ratios of Period Lengths: The results are presented in Figs. 10–12. The shortened periods (e.g., old period for Younger) show better optimization results compared to the equalization method (READECC). For example, Younger’s read performance improves by 5.3% on average under the retry model 0/0/20/80 compared to the equalization method. On the contrary, the lengthened periods (young period for Younger and old period for Older) show poorer optimization results compared to the equalization method. This is because lengthening the period leads to an increase in the reliability variation, which leads to an increase in redundancy protection and a decrease in read performance optimization. For example, Older’s read performance is reduced by an average of 5.6% under the retry model 0/10/40/50 compared to the equalization method. Based on the above results, we default to an equalization method.
3) Energy Consumption: To understand the difference in energy consumption between UECC, DECC, and READECC, we collected their energy consumption. The energy

consumption configuration is consistent with the work in [6]. Specifically, we collected the number of times each code rate page is read for each scheme. Based on the read energy consumption of the pages for each code rate provided in [6], we calculate the total energy consumption. We selected one retry model at each reliability period to compare the energy consumption difference between different schemes. The energy consumption under other retry models for each reliability period has similar trends. Fig. 13 shows the normalized energy consumption. First, compared to UECC, DECC reduces energy consumption by 21%, 32%, and 14% on average for each reliability period. This is because DECC can reduce the number of read retries. Second, compared to DECC, READECC further reduces energy consumption by an average of 2% and 6% in the young and old periods, respectively. For the young period, the code rate of READECC is higher than that of DECC, which further reduces energy consumption. For the old period, READECC can reduce more read retries compared to DECC. This not only further improves read performance but also further reduces energy consumption. For the middle period, both READECC and DECC use the same code rate ECC, so the reduced energy consumption is the same. Third, as the skew of the workload increases, READECC and DECC achieve better energy consumption optimization. This is because the higher the skew of the workload is, the more read retries are reduced.
4) Recoding Cost: Recoding cost refers to the ratio of background operations generated during the recoding process to the total number of host requests. In our scheme, background operations during recoding are as large as the footprint of hot read data. To this end, the recoding cost is determined by the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:27:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SONG et al.: REVISITING MULTIPLE ECC ON HIGH-DENSITY NAND FLASH MEMORY

1689

Fig. 13. Normalized energy consumption in different reliability periods under different read retry probability models. (a) Young period: retry model 50/50/0/0. (b) Middle period: retry model 0/20/80/0. (c) Old period: retry model 0/0/20/80.
TABLE IV CHARACTERISTICS OF REAL WORKLOADS

Fig. 14. (a) Recoding cost with different TR’s and (b) IOPS improvement by the different number of read retries in the middle period.
footprint of hot read data and the number of host requests. Our proposed recoding scheme reduces the recoding cost by considering only hot read data. Take Zipf 80/20 as an example. The ratio between the footprint of the hot read data and the amount of data is about 20%. As shown in Fig. 14(a), the highest recoding cost is 2.2%. Moreover, as the degree of workload skew increases, the recoding cost decreases further. Based on the above analysis, the overall recoding cost is negligible.
5) Sensitive Study: To understand the relationship between recoding cost and TR, we have done experiments by varying TR from 2 to 16 in the middle period. The recoding cost under other retry models for each reliability period has similar trends. Fig. 14(a) shows the recoding cost when varying TR from 2 to 16. From the experimental results, we have the following observations. The results show that as TR increases, the amount of identified hot read data decreases. Therefore, the recoding overhead decreases as the amount of recoded data decreases. In this work, TR was set to 4 to avoid the high recoding cost and achieve read performance optimization. Fig. 14(b) shows the read performance optimization effect of READECC in the middle period when the number of read retries varies from 1 to 16. The results show that as the number of read retries increases, the optimization of read performance decreases. In the Zipf 80/20 workload, the read performance optimization decreases from 50% for one read retry to 4% for 16 read retries. Importantly, READECC optimizes read performance over the lifetime of the data.
6) Storage Costs and Lifetime Overhead: To understand the loss of lifetime and reduced storage costs due to the adaptive-sized logical page scheme, a modeling analysis was performed. For READECC, the minimum code rate is 0.66.

The data length is 12 kB with the adaptive-sized logical page scheme and 16 kB without the adaptive-sized logical page scheme. Therefore, READECC requires a minimum physical page size of 18.18 kB (12 kB/0.66), and READECC without the adaptive-sized logical page scheme requires a minimum physical page size of 24.24 kB (16 kB/0.66). The adaptive-sized logical page scheme reduces storage costs by 33.3% [(24.24–18.18 kB)/18.18 kB ×100%] compared to the READECC without the adaptive-sized logical page scheme. For DECC, the minimum code rate is 0.8. DECC requires a minimum physical page size of 20 kB (16 kB/0.8). Compared to DECC, the adaptive-sized logical page scheme can reduce flash storage costs by up to 10% [(20–18.18) kB/18.18 kB ×100%]. For lifetime overhead, assume that the hot read data occupy 20% of the storage space. As described in Section IV-D, the hot read data require 25% [(12–16 kB)/16 kB ×100%] of storage space. Therefore, the additional storage space required for hot read data is 5% (25% ×20%). Assume that the adaptive-sized logical page scheme is only activated in the old period, the loss of lifetime due to the adaptive-sized logical page scheme is 1.7% (5%/3).
C. Experimental Results for Real Workloads
To understand the performance of READECC under real workloads, four workloads from [34] and two workloads from [35] are chosen to evaluate the performance of READECC. Table IV shows the characteristics of the six real workloads, including access patterns, access granularity (I/O size), read/write (R/W) ratios, and degree of access skew. The access patterns contain two types, namely, sequential and random accesses. The granularity of sequential access ranges from 16 kB to 1 MB, and the granularity of random access ranges from 2 to 256 kB. The read/write ratio varies depending on

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:27:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1690

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 33, NO. 6, JUNE 2025

Fig. 15. Normalized average IOPS in the old period under different read retry probability models. (a) Retry model 0/20/60/20. (b) Retry model 0/10/40/50. (c) Retry model 0/0/20/80.

the characteristics of the workload. The degree of access skew, m/n, means that m% of the requests are focused on n% of the data or files. The degree of access skew varies depending on the access pattern of the workload. For sequential access patterns, accesses are sequential within files and skewed between files. For random access patterns, accesses are skewed both within and between files.
1) Performance: Fig. 15 shows the normalized average IOPS in the old period under three retry models. READECC focuses on optimizing read performance for high-density NAND flash memory, so Fig. 15 shows only the normalized average IOPS for read performance. Since the performance difference between DECC and READECC exists only in the old period, we only show the read performance in the old period. From the experimental results, we have the following conclusions. First, the performance of UECC and MECC is the same for all workloads. Second, due to the low reliability in the old period, the refresh scheme can only improve the IOPS by an average of 4.0%, 3.4%, and 2.8% for the three models. Third, the DECC scheme can improve the IOPS by an average of 33.6%, 33.0%, and 27.2% for the three models. Third, READECC achieves optimal read performance optimization under skewed workloads. Compared to DECC, the READECC can further improve the IOPS by an average of 21.7%, 11.5%, and 10.3% for the three models. For sequential access patterns, a file is read sequentially within a file and there is no skewed access. However, there are skewed accesses among files. This provides an opportunity for READECC to optimize read performance. The READECC optimizes the read performance of sequential accesses by improving the read performance of hot read files. Finally, under workloads without skewed access features (e.g., Ssdtrace0), DECC and READECC degrade to UECC. This is because no hot read data are available to optimize read performance. In summary, READECC not only improves the read performance of high-density NAND flash memory but also reduces energy consumption.
2) Read Amplification: To demonstrate the impact of READECC read amplification, we evaluated an optimal scheme without read amplification (sufficient physical page size for 16-kB logical page). Fig. 15 shows the results. Compared to DECC, the READECC can further improve the IOPS by an average of 21.7%, 11.5%, and 10.3% for the three models. This is because, with the adaptive-sized logical page scheme, READECC can employ ECCHS, which further

reduces the number of read retries. The read amplification cost is ultimately reflected in the performance difference between READECC and optimal. On average, the read performance of READECC degrades by 3.5% compared to optimal. This is because only some of the requests (e.g., 16 kB) in some of the data trigger read amplification. In addition, the high parallelism of flash memory hides the impact of read amplification on READECC. For READECC, the benefits of the adaptivesized logical page scheme far outweigh the read amplification cost.
VII. RELATED WORK
A. Read Retry Optimization
First, some works focused on optimizing the reading process of flash memory. For example, Park et al. [2] proposed to divide a read retry into multiple phases, and all phases can be executed in parallel. Second, multiple works focused on reducing the RBER of data [33], [36], [37], [38], [39]. A common approach is to reset the RBER of the data by migrating the data, also called refresh [33]. Frequent refreshes lead to WAF spikes, which impact the lifetime of flash memory. A periodic refresh based on the number of read retries can limit the maximum response latency (i.e., device timeout). How to utilize low code rate LDPC to reduce the probability of timeout response is a direction worth exploring.
B. Data Placement
There are other solutions to reduce RBER, such as finegrained programs [40] and data placement [41], [42], [43], [44]. For example, Song et al. [45] proposed to reserve a portion of highly reliable flash blocks to serve hot read data and reduce read disturbance. READECC is friendly to various data migration and placement schemes. These works are orthogonal to READECC. Different from them, this work is aimed at optimizing the read retry-induced performance degradation in high-density flash memory.
C. LDPC Optimization
LDPC is widely adopted by SSDs for its excellent error correction capability. Many works propose to combine the reliability characteristics of flash memory with the LDPC decoding process to optimize the performance [3], [4], [33], [36], [46], [47], [48], [49]. For example, Wu et al. [4] proposed

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:27:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SONG et al.: REVISITING MULTIPLE ECC ON HIGH-DENSITY NAND FLASH MEMORY

1691

to optimize flash read performance by a combination of finegrained programming and weak ECC. Zhao et al. [3] proposed to optimize the selection position of the sense voltage to reduce the LDPC decoding times. Du et al. [36] proposed to smartly place the reference voltage of the LDPC to reduce decoding overhead. These works are also called threshold voltage tuning. In addition, Zhou et al. [8] proposed caching the overlong ECC to reduce the decoding latency. All of these works reduced the decoding latency by optimizing the decoding process of LDPC, which is orthogonal to READECC. READECC is focused on read retries due to the reliability degradation of high-density flash memory and does not modify the decoding process of LDPC.
D. Multi-ECC
Prior works focused on using ECC with multiple error correction capabilities to reduce energy overhead and redundancy protection [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [12]. For example, Nie et al. [7] used ECC with a high code rate for data with low RBER, and Zambelli et al. [10] used ECC with a high code rate based on the reliability of flash memory. However, read retry-induced energy consumption is emerging as a more critical bottleneck due to the flash reliability degradation, which is higher than that of ECC decoding energy overhead [6]. Our proposal leverages multiple ECCs to reduce the read retries by considering the flash reliability characteristics and data access characteristics.
VIII. CONCLUSION
This work proposes READECC that applies an ECC with awareness of flash reliability and data access characteristics, to reduce redundancy protection and storage costs of strong ECCs and improve the read performance of high-density NAND flash memory. We first divide the flash lifetime into three reliability periods to apply the specific strength of ECCs, and then, the redundancy protection and read performance is optimized by encoding the hot read data with strong ECCs through an access characteristic-aware differential ECC scheme. To minimize the storage costs of strong ECCs, we design a storage cost optimization scheme that reorganizes the logical page to adapt to the requirements of the parity codes. Furthermore, to approximate the real scenarios, a retry model is constructed to emulate the reliability periods. Evaluations on synthetic and real workloads show that READECC not only reduces strong ECC overhead but also achieves read performance optimization compared to state-of-the-art methods.
REFERENCES
[1] B. Kim et al., “28.2 A high-performance 1Tb 3b/cell 3D-NAND flash with a 194MB/s write throughput on over 300 layers,” in IEEE Int. SolidState Circuits Conf. (ISSCC) Dig. Tech. Papers, Feb. 2023, pp. 27–29.
[2] J. Park, M. Kim, M. Chun, L. Orosa, J. Kim, and O. Mutlu, “Reducing solid-state drive read latency by optimizing read-retry,” in Proc. 26th ACM Int. Conf. Archit. Support Program. Lang. Operating Syst., 2021, pp. 702–716.
[3] K. Zhao, W. Zhao, H. Sun, X. Zhang, N. Zheng, and T. Zhang, “LDPCin-SSD: Making advanced error correction codes work effectively in solid state drives,” in Proc. FAST, 2013, pp. 243–256.

[4] G. Wu, X. He, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “Exploiting workload dynamics to improve SSD read latency via differentiated error correction codes,” ACM Trans. Des. Automat. Electron. Syst., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 55–77, 2013.
[5] Y. Cai, Y. Wu, and E. F. Haratsch, “Error correction code (ECC) selection using probability density functions of error correction capability in storage controllers with multiple error correction codes,” U.S. Patent 10 153 782, Dec. 11, 2018.
[6] S. Qi, D. Feng, N. Su, W. Liu, and J. Liu, “A new solution based on multi-rate LDPC for flash memory to reduce ECC redundancy,” in Proc. IEEE Trustcom/BigDataSE/ISPA, vol. 1, Aug. 2015, pp. 918–923.
[7] S. Nie, Y. Zhang, W. Wu, and J. Yang, “Layer RBER variation aware read performance optimization for 3D flash memories,” in Proc. 57th ACM/IEEE Design Autom. Conf., Jul. 2020, pp. 1–6.
[8] Y. Zhou, F. Wu, Z. Lu, X. He, P. Huang, and C. Xie, “SCORE: A novel scheme to efficiently cache overlong ECCs in NAND flash memory,” ACM Trans. Archit. Code Optim., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 1–25, Dec. 2018.
[9] Y. Song, Y. Lv, and L. Shi, “DECC: Differential ECC for read performance optimization on high-density NAND flash memory,” in Proc. 28th Asia South Pacific Design Autom. Conf. (ASP-DAC), Jan. 2023, pp. 1–6.
[10] C. Zambelli et al., “Characterization of TLC 3D-NAND flash endurance through machine learning for LDPC code rate optimization,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Memory Workshop (IMW), May 2017, pp. 1–4.
[11] M.-C. Yang, Y.-M. Chang, C.-W. Tsao, P.-C. Huang, Y.-H. Chang, and T.-W. Kuo, “Garbage collection and wear leveling for flash memory: Past and future,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Smart Comput., 2014, pp. 66–73.
[12] S. Wang et al., “Lifetime adaptive ECC in NAND flash page management,” in Proc. Design, Autom. Test Eur. Conf. Exhib. (DATE), Mar. 2017, pp. 1253–1556.
[13] M.-C. Yang, Y.-H. Chang, T.-W. Kuo, and F.-H. Chen, “Reducing data migration overheads of flash wear leveling in a progressive way,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 1808–1820, May 2016.
[14] C.-Y. Liu, Y. Lee, W. Choi, M. Jung, M. T. Kandemir, and C. Das, “GSSA: A resource allocation scheme customized for 3D NAND SSDs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. High-Perform. Comput. Architecture, Feb./Mar. 2021, pp. 426–439.
[15] Y. Lv et al., “MGC: Multiple-gray-code for 3D NAND flash based highdensity SSDs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. High-Performance Comput. Archit. (HPCA), Feb. 2023, pp. 122–136.
[16] N. Papandreou et al., “Characterization and analysis of bit errors in 3D TLC NAND flash memory,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Rel. Phys. Symp. (IRPS), Mar. 2019, pp. 1–6.
[17] J. Wang et al., “Enhanced precision through multiple reads for LDPC decoding in flash memories,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 880–891, May 2014.
[18] S. Bates, “Using rate-adaptive LDPC codes to maximize the capacity of SSDs,” in Proc. Flash Memory Summit, 2013, pp. 1–12.
[19] R. Pletka et al., “Improving NAND flash performance with read heat separation,” in Proc. 28th Int. Symp. Modeling, Anal., Simulation Comput. Telecommun. Syst. (MASCOTS), Nov. 2020, pp. 1–8.
[20] S. Jung, S. Lee, H. Jung, and Y. H. Song, “In-page management of error correction code for MLC flash storages,” in Proc. IEEE 54th Int. Midwest Symp. Circuits Syst. (MWSCAS), Aug. 2011, pp. 1–4.
[21] Y.-H. Chang, M.-C. Yang, T.-W. Kuo, and R.-H. Hwang, “A reliability enhancement design under the flash translation layer for MLC-based flash-memory storage systems,” ACM Trans. Embedded Comput. Syst., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 1–28, 2013.
[22] H. Lv et al., “Exploiting minipage-level mapping to improve write efficiency of NAND flash,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Netw., Architecture Storage (NAS), Oct. 2018, pp. 1–10.
[23] Q. Xia and W. Xiao, “Improving MLC flash performance with workloadaware differentiated ECC,” in Proc. IEEE 22nd Int. Conf. Parallel Distrib. Syst. (ICPADS), Dec. 2016, pp. 545–552.
[24] M. Bjørling et al., “ZNS: Avoiding the block interface tax for flashbased SSDs,” in Proc. USENIX Annu. Tech. Conf. (USENIX ATC), 2021, pp. 689–703.
[25] K. Han, H. Gwak, D. Shin, and J. Hwang, “ZNS+: Advanced zoned namespace interface for supporting in-storage zone compaction,” in Proc. OSDI, 2021, pp. 147–162.
[26] H. Li, M. Hao, M. H. Tong, S. Sundararaman, M. Bjørling, and H. S. Gunawi, “The CASE of FEMU: Cheap, accurate, scalable and extensible flash emulator,” in Proc. 16th USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol. (FAST), 2018, pp. 83–90.
[27] JensAxboe.FIO: Flexible I/O Tester. Accessed: Jan. 15, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/axboe/fio

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:27:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1692

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 33, NO. 6, JUNE 2025

[28] L. Cherkasova and M. Gupta, “Analysis of enterprise media server workloads: Access patterns, locality, content evolution, and rates of change,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 781–794, Oct. 2004.
[29] B. C. Arnold, “Pareto distribution,” in Wiley StatsRef: Statistics Reference Online.Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2014, pp. 1–10.
[30] R. Pletka et al., “Management of next-generation NAND flash to achieve enterprise-level endurance and latency targets,” ACM Trans. Storage, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 1–25, Nov. 2018.
[31] Y.-M. Lin, H.-T. Li, M.-H. Chung, and A.-Y. Wu, “Byte-reconfigurable LDPC codec design with application to high-performance ECC of NAND flash memory systems,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 62, no. 7, pp. 1794–1804, Jul. 2015.
[32] A. Cassagne et al., “AFF3CT: A fast forward error correction toolbox!,” SoftwareX, vol. 10, Jul. 2019, Art. no. 100345.
[33] Y. Du, Q. Li, L. Shi, D. Zou, H. Jin, and C. J. Xue, “Reducing LDPC soft sensing latency by lightweight data refresh for flash read performance improvement,” in Proc. 54th ACM/EDAC/IEEE Design Autom. Conf. (DAC), Jun. 2017, pp. 23–29.
[34] T. Vasily. Filebench: A Flexible Framework for File System Benchmarking. Accessed: Mar. 20, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/ filebench/filebench
[35] G. Yadgar, M. Gabel, S. Jaffer, and B. Schroeder, “SSD-based workload characteristics and their performance implications,” ACM Trans. Storage, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 8–34, 2021.
[36] Y. Du, D. Zou, L. Qiao, S. Liang, and C. J. Xue, “LaLDPC: Latencyaware LDPC for read performance improvement of solid state drives,” in Proc. 33rd Int. Conf. Massive Storage Syst. Technol. (MSST), 2017, pp. 1–11.
[37] Y. Di, L. Shi, C. Gao, Q. Li, C. J. Xue, and K. Wu, “Minimizing retention induced refresh through exploiting process variation of flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 83–98, Jan. 2019.
[38] Q. Li et al., “Shaving retries with sentinels for fast read over high-density 3D flash,” in Proc. 53rd Annu. IEEE/ACM Int. Symp. Microarchitecture (MICRO), Oct. 2020, pp. 483–495.
[39] Q. Li, M. Ye, T.-W. Kuo, and C. J. Xue, “How the common retention acceleration method of 3D NAND flash memory goes wrong?,” in Proc. HotStorage, 2021, pp. 1–7.
[40] Y. Lv, L. Shi, Q. Li, C. J. Xue, and E. H.-M. Sha, “Access characteristic guided partition for read performance improvement on solid state drives,” in Proc. 57th ACM/IEEE Design Autom. Conf. (DAC), Jul. 2020, pp. 1–6.
[41] Y. Lv, L. Shi, C. J. Xue, Q. Zhuge, and E. H.-M. Sha, “Latency variation aware read performance optimization on 3D high density NAND flash memory,” in Proc. GLSVLSI, 2020, pp. 411–414.
[42] Y. Song, Y. Lv, and L. Shi, “Adaptive differential wearing for read performance optimization on high-density NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 380–393, Jan. 2024.
[43] J. Li et al., “Mitigating negative impacts of read disturb in SSDs,” ACM Trans. Design Autom. Electron. Syst., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 1–24, 2020.
[44] Q. Li et al., “Access characteristic guided read and write cost regulation for performance improvement on flash memory,” in Proc. 14th USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol. (FAST), 2016, pp. 125–132.
[45] Y. Song, Q. Li, Y. Lv, C. Li, and L. Shi, “DWR: Differential wearing for read performance optimization on high-density NAND flash memory,” in Proc. Design, Autom. Test Eur. Conf. Exhib. (DATE), Mar. 2022, pp. 897–902.
[46] F. Wu et al., “Using error modes aware LDPC to improve decoding performance of 3-D TLC NAND flash,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 909–921, Apr. 2020.
[47] M. Sandell and A. Ismail, “Machine learning for LLR estimation in flash memory with LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 792–796, Feb. 2021.
[48] A. Hareedy, C. Lanka, and L. Dolecek, “A general non-binary LDPC code optimization framework suitable for dense flash memory and magnetic storage,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 2402–2415, Sep. 2016.
[49] J. Guo, W. Wen, J. Hu, D. Wang, H. Li, and Y. Chen, “FlexLevel: A novel NAND flash storage system design for LDPC latency reduction,” in Proc. 52nd ACM/EDAC/IEEE Design Autom. Conf. (DAC), Jun. 2015, pp. 194–200.

Yunpeng Song (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree in computer science from Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua, China, in 2020. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in computer science and technology at East China Normal University, Shanghai, China.
His research interests include NAND flash memory and software/hardware codesign.
Yina Lv received the B.S. degree in computer science from Ningbo University, Zhejiang, China, in 2018, and the Ph.D. degree in computer software and theory from East China Normal University, Shanghai, China, in 2023.
She is currently an Assistant Professor with the School of Informatics, Xiamen University, Fujian, China. Her research interests include NAND flash memory and computer architecture.
Wentong Li received the B.S. degree in computer science from Anhui University of Technology, Ma’anshan, Anhui, China, in 2020. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in computer science and technology at East China Normal University, Shanghai, China.
His research interests include memory management, mobile computing, and computer architecture.
Jialin Liu received the B.S. degree in communication engineering from East China Normal University, Shanghai, China, in 2020, where he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in computer science and technology.
His research interests include hybrid storage, disaggregated storage, caching, and graph processing.
Liang Shi received the B.S. degree in computer science from Xi’an University of Post and Telecommunication, Xi’an, Shanxi, China, in 2008, and the Ph.D. degree from the University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China, in 2013.
Since 2013, he has been an Associate Professor with the College of Computer Science, Chongqing University, Chongqing, China. Since 2018, he has been a Full Professor with the School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China. His research interests include flash memory, embedded systems, and emerging nonvolatile memory technology.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:27:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

