2025 IEEE 101st Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC2025-Spring) | 979-8-3315-3147-8/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/VTC2025-SPRING65109.2025.11174663

Performance Analysis of an Advanced HARQ Scheme Based on LDPC Coupled Codes

Yiyun Jian IHP – Leibniz Institute for High Performance Microelectronics 15236 Frankfurt (Oder), Germany jian@ihp-microelectronics.com

Lukasz Lopacinski IHP – Leibniz Institute for High Performance Microelectronics 15236 Frankfurt (Oder), Germany lopacinski@ihp-microelectronics.com

Eckhard Grass IHP – Leibniz Institute for High Performance Microelectronics 15236 Frankfurt (Oder), Germany Humboldt-University of Berlin Unter den Linden 6, Berlin, Germany grass@ihp-microelectronics.com

Abstract—In this paper, we investigate the effectiveness of a newly proposed frame superposition Hybrid Automatic Repeat reQuest (HARQ) scheme, which adopts different variants of spatially coupled low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. The construction of the method with the use of 5G new radio (NR) LDPC codes is explained in detail. Bit error rate (BER), frame error rate (FER), and the projected data goodput in additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) and Rayleigh block fading channels are investigated. The HARQ scheme is based on frame combination by using spatially coupled LDPC codes. It outperforms all classical variants of HARQ and can, hence, be seen as a potential successor of the classical methods. The main cost is the need for more complicated LDPC decoding, whereby the decoder needs to support the decoding of two or even more blocks at the same time.
Index Terms—HARQ, LDPC, Rayleigh block fading.
I. INTRODUCTION
In communications networks, transmissions usually take place over time-varying channels [1]. Hybrid automatic repeat request (HARQ) techniques are commonly used in wireless networks to combat the loss of data frames due to fading channel [2]. Hybrid ARQ transmission schemes combine conventional ARQ with forward error correction (FEC), such as low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. Traditionally, HARQ systems with fixed FEC are denoted as type I HARQ. In the case of an extension with chase combining (CC) [3], the whole frame with static FEC information is retransmitted several times. The received signal of those repeated frames is added together by maximum ratio combining, and therefore, the decoding probability is increased. With type II HARQ, the transmitter sends data and redundancy in separate frames. Moreover, with the increase of the retransmission counter and enabled incremental redundancy (IR), the rate of used FEC algorithm is reduced. Thus, more redundancy is transmitted in every additional retransmission of the same frame [4].
LDPC decoders have become popular because of their strong correction performance and their suitability for parallel hardware implementation [5]. Together with polar codes, convolutional LDPC, and spatially coupled LDPC (SC-LDPC) codes, they are recognized to be capable of achieving the capacity of binary-input memoryless symmetric channels [6].

In [4], bit error rate (BER), throughput, and delay profiles of IR- and CC-HARQ are analyzed under AWGN and Rayleigh block fading, using finite state Markov channel model. An adaptive cross-packet HARQ scheme is proposed in [7], where the transmitter jointly encodes a variable number of bits and adapts the coding rates for each round of HARQ, based on the negative acknowledgment provided by the receiver. Spatially coupled LDPC codes with a superimposed convolutional structure have been introduced in [8]. Their application to HARQ are investigated in [9], [10], and [11], where the superposition of the LDPC codewords is integrated with HARQ to improve the throughput over the fading channels.
Inspired by the application of spatially coupled LDPC codes in HARQ, this paper continues our work on coupled FEC coders and HARQ, where we initially started coupling hard decision Reed-Solomon codewords [12]. The main novelty aspect introduced in this paper is that our design approach focuses on redesigning the parity-check matrix and the connections between variable nodes and check nodes, rather than the combination patterns and the generator matrix construction. We define an enhanced HARQ strategy utilizing coupled LDPC codes for multiple retransmissions. The frame error rate (FER) and goodput of the scheme in additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) and Rayleigh block fading channels are analyzed. Additionally, three different variants of crossframe oriented SC-LDPC codes based on the standard 5G new radio (NR) generator and parity matrices are proposed, simulated, and compared.
II. FRAME SUPERPOSITION HARQ SCHEME
For a rate R = k/n binary linear block code, where k represents the length of the data bits and n represents the length of codewords bits. Let G and H denote the generator matrix and the parity-check matrix of the basic LDPC code, respectively. For the sake of simplicity, in this manuscript, the code rate is set to R=1/2. The transmitted frame length at the physical layer is equal to one LDPC codeword. In the later subsections, we describe three variants of the coupled LDPC codes. The coupling is used to construct decoding dependencies between the data in consecutive transmitted

979-8-3315-31A4ut7h-o8ri/z2e5d/$lic3e1n.s0e0d ©us2e0l2im5iteIEd EtoE: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:25:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

frames. Those dependencies are used to increase the successful decoding probability of transferred frames.

A. Variant A - Fully Coupled LDPC Codes

We introduce dependencies between the L neighboring blocks so that they can improve their decoding similarly as in spatially coupled LDPC codes:

H



D H



HL = D D H

 

,

(1)

 

...

 

D D ... D H

where D = I Z is the coupling matrix, I is the identity matrix of size (n-k) by (n-k), and Z is the zero-matrix of size (n-k) by k. By introducing the D with a diagonal matrix, we insert additional edges to connect the check nodes between the LDPC blocks. Those connections improve the error correction of the neighboring blocks. The size of HL is L(n-k) by Lk. We reorganize HL to a form where the redundancy connections defined in the parity matrix are moved to the right side. Thus, the matrix in a form as below is obtained:

HL = A B ,

(2)

where size of A is L(n-k) by Lk and B is L(n-k) by L(n-k). Then, the generator matrix would be:

GL = I AT ⊙ inv(BT ) ,

(3)

where I is the identity matrix, ⊙ is the symbol of GF(2) multiplication, and inv(BT ) computes the inverse of the transposed square matrix BT . After performing operation in
(3), the generator matrix GL is reorganized into the matrix
structure with separate blocks in a form as follows:

G C C ... C

 G C ... C

GL

=

 

...

 

,

(4)

 

G C

G

where C is the coupling part reflected in the generator matrix. Sub-matrix C satisfies the following equations:

G ⊙ DT + C ⊙ HT = 0,

(5)

C ⊙ DT = 0,

(6)

so that GL ⊙ HTL = 0. Given a sequence of data u = (u1, u2, ..., uL), the coupled LDPC encoder generates a series of codewords v = (v1, v12, ..., v1L,...L−1). Codeword v1L,...L−1 does not only depend on a message uL , but also on the previous messages u1, u2, . . . , uL−1 as follows:

v1 v21 ... v1L,..L−1 = u1 u2 ... uL ⊙ GL, (7)

v1 = u1 ⊙ G,

(8)

v21 = u1 u2 ⊙ C G T ,

(9)

v1L,...L−1 = u1 u2 ... uL ⊙ C C ... G T . (10)

Fig. 1. Sparsity pattern of G4 and H4 matrix for Variant A.

In the above notation, the lower subscript defines the sequence number of the transmitted codeword. The upper superscript defines the set of indexes of the coupled codewords, for which the C sub-matrices have constructed the check node dependencies. The rate of the block code scheme in (10) is Lk/Ln = R, which is identical to the original LDPC code defined by G and H. Therefore, there is no redundancy or any rate loss in the LDPC codes. HL introduces dependencies between the neighboring blocks H, so that they are coupled during decoding, and the overall error correction performance is increased. Fig. 1 depicts the sparsity patterns of G4 and H4.

B. Variant B - Adjacently Coupled LDPC Codes

Similar to fully coupled LDPC Codes described as variant A, we investigate adjacently coupled LDPC Codes, which are denoted as variant B in this manuscript. According to (1), we couple all the previous frames to the next frame. As L increases, the number of additional edges connected to the check nodes also increases. In the low-SNR region, this leads to error accumulation, causing a decline in error correction performance. Thus, we redefine the coupling connections and add exactly one edge for check nodes represented in the rows of the superposition matrix. The parity-check matrix and the generator matrix of L neighboring adjacently coupled LDPC codes are in form as shown below:

H



HL

=

D  

H

...

, 

DH

G C



GL

=

 

... G

 C

.

(11)

G

C. Variant C - Selectively Coupled LDPC Codes
Additionally, we define a third strategy, named selectively coupled LDPC codes, referred to as variant C. In this scheme, exactly one edge of check nodes is coupled, and only the first unrecoverable frame is included in the next retransmissions.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:25:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

The idea behind this method is to add coupling edges only between the first faulty codeword and future codeword transmissions. Thus, the faulty codeword is supported by the check node edges going to the next transmitted codewords. Example HL and GL matrices for this scheme are shown below:

H



G C



HL

=

D 

H

...

, 

GL

=

 

G

... ...

C . (12) 

D

H

G

According to (12), dynamic GL and HL matrices can be

derived, whereby only the codewords with bit errors are cou-

pled. This allows for selective influence where the correction

effort of the coupled check nodes occurs. In the example

matrices in (12), codeword v1 was initially coupled with codeword v2 due to decoding errors in codeword v1. After that, codeword v1 was successfully decoded, but codeword v2 failed. Thus, codeword v2 was coupled with all the next

codewords, including the last one.

D. Proposed HARQ Scheme
The basic principle of the proposed HARQ scheme is executed when a frame is decoded incorrectly, and the retransmission frames are superimposed into the next frame(s). The original coded frame can be expressed as v1 = u1 ⊙ G. If a NACK is received, the standard matrix G at the encoder is replaced with GL. This modified generator matrix is used for generating retransmission data which is superimposed into the vL transmission. At the receiver, the HL is used to decode all unrecovered frames v1, v12, ... together. If an ACK is received, we set the encoder back to the original G and decoder to H. The generated Lth frame, always has the same length which is equal to the length of uL ⊙ G, and includes vL and lost frames information. Therefore, no extra redundancy bits and no overhead are generated, as compared with the original LDPC codes. Each coupled codeword for subsequent transmissions is superimposed with the previous data, and this superposition improves the decoding probability by creating additional edges in the decoding graph due to the dependencies generated by HL. By employing HL and GL matrices defined in LDPC coding variants A, B, or C, different HARQ performances are achieved.
As shown in Fig. 1, and matrices in (1), (11) and (12), the coupling matrix D = I Z adds decoding edges between the data bits of the first codeword and redundancy bits of the later codewords. Such constructed dependencies lead to an important benefit of our HARQ scheme, which is that the superposition does not change any data bits in the frames. It only influences the parity bits. This means that, based on the proposed HARQ scheme, all the frames can be successfully decoded individually using the coupled HL matrix.
Fig. 2 depicts the message flow chart with encoder and decoder structures for type I HARQ + CC, type II HARQ + IR, and the proposed HARQ scheme. The type I HARQ retransmits the same frame using a fixed LDPC encoder and decoder. Additionally, type I HARQ + CC accumulates the Log-Likelihood Ratios (LLR) of each retransmitted frame and

Fig. 2. Message flow charts with encoder and decoder structures for: (a) type I HARQ + CC, (b) type II HARQ + IR, and (c) the proposed HARQ with coupled LDPC codes.
combines them through chase combining. Type II HARQ + IR retransmits only the incremental redundancy bits of the LDPC codes. Our proposed HARQ schemes maintain a fixed code rate and superimpose the lost frame’s data bits into subsequent frames so that no additional bits are retransmitted.
III. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, we evaluate the BER and FER performance of the proposed HARQ scheme for AWGN and Rayleigh block fading channels. We use an outdoor to indoor ITU scenario [13] with BPSK single carrier modulation. We choose a LDPC code with R = 1/2, where the H and G matrices have sizes of (352,704), and are defined by the 5G NR standard TS 38.212 [14]. The belief propagation algorithm with normalized minsum approximation with 10 iterations is used for decoding. The zero-forcing algorithm is employed for Rayleigh block fading channel equalization. The equalizer works in the time domain and consists of a finite impulse response (FIR) filter with 15 pre-cursor and 15 post-cursor taps. All computations are based on floating-point arithmetic. The simulated SNR range, based on the typical post-decoding BER and FER range, is set to -2 dB to 1 dB for the AWGN channel and 2 dB to 20 dB for the Rayleigh block fading channel.
A. Evaluation of the Retransmission Limit for Variant A Fully Coupled LDPC Codes in a Rayleigh block fading Channel
In all Monte-Carlo simulations included in this manuscript, the BER and FER statistics for the coupled LDPC frames are calculated for the information bits after the LDPC decoding. Cyclic redundancy check (CRC) is used to validate whether all data bits are correctly decoded. Only errors in information

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:25:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 3. HARQ BER performance of variant A with GL and HL over Rayleigh Fig. 5. HARQ FER performance of different variant coupled LDPC codes

block fading Channel (BPSK).

with L=4 over an AWGN channel (BPSK).

Fig. 4. HARQ FER performance of variant A with GL and HL over Rayleigh Fig. 6. HARQ FER performance of different variant coupled LDPC codes

block fading Channel (BPSK).

with L=4 over a Rayleigh block fading channel (BPSK).

bits are included in BER and FER statistics. Bit errors in the redundancy part of the codewords remaining after the decoding are ignored. First, the original LDPC codes are used at the transmitter and receiver. If the receiver cannot decode frame v1, a NACK is sent to the transmitter. Then, at the transmitter, the next frame according to (9) is transmitted. At the receiver, the two received frames are concatenated and decoded by an LDPC decoder with H2 parity matrix. The procedure continues until all frames are correctly decoded or the maximum retransmission limit L is reached. Every retransmission frame vL contains dependencies to all previous u1, u2, ..., uL−1 frames.
In Fig. 3 and Fig. 4, the simulation curve with L=1 represents the BER and FER performance of the basic 5G NR LDPC. The performance of the HARQ scheme using the proposed coupled LDPC codes improves with an increase of factor L. Therefore, coupling more frames improves the probability of successful decoding. However, the introduction of additional edges at the check nodes in the coupled frames results in an increase in bit errors in incorrectly decoded frames, so the BER does not improve for L greater than 8.
The performance in the Rayleigh block fading channel

achieves up to 6 dB gain at post-decoding BER of 10−6, and up to 5 dB gain at post-decoding FER of 10−5 when L=16. At the SNR< 4dB, where standard LDPC post-decoding BER > 10−2, the BER and FER statistics are not improved as expected, and the coupled LDPC frames do not show any benefits. FER and BER statistics are worse due to extensive error propagation in check nodes during the decoding. Thus, the frame combination should not be used. However, BER > 10−2 is out of the typical mode of operation of radio transceivers. It would lead to very frequent retransmissions and to very short PHY frames, so this problem is not limiting the use of the method. It is possible to add a logic that detects such a situation and switches the data link layer processor to use the standard parity matrices without frame combination.
B. Error Correction Performance of All Variant Coupled Parity-Check Matrices in AWGN and Rayleigh block fading Channel
The FER performance of the HARQ scheme with coupled LDPC codes of variants A, B, and C defined in Section II are simulated in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6, with AWGN and Rayleigh block fading channel respectively. The retransmission limit factor L is set to 4. The method based on variant C - selectively

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:25:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 7. HARQ goodput performance of different HARQ schemes with L=4 over an AWGN channel (BPSK).
Fig. 8. HARQ goodput performance of different HARQ schemes with L=4 over a Rayleigh block fading channel (BPSK).
coupled LDPC codes demonstrates improved error correction performance, achieving gains of 1.5 dB in AWGN at postdecoding FER of 10−6, and 4 dB in Rayleigh block fading channel at post-decoding FER of 10−5, compared with the type I HARQ. Furthermore, the complexity of the selectively coupled method is lower than that of fully coupled LDPC, as only one frame is coupled to the subsequent data transmission. Thus, there are fewer edges in the decoding graph, and check nodes have a lower order. C. Goodput Performance of Variant C - Selectively Coupled LDPC Codes in AWGN and Rayleigh block fading Channel
Additionally, we investigate the goodput benefits of our scheme compared to the traditional HARQ systems. The goodput of HARQ systems is expressed as the ratio of the total number of successfully decoded data bits to the total number of transmitted bits at the PHY, including all the FEC redundancy and retransmissions.
Fig. 7 and Fig. 8 compare the classical type I HARQ, type I HARQ with CC, type II HARQ with IR, SR-HARQ [11], and our new scheme. We simulate the SR-HARQ using the same parameter L and same (704,352)LDPC codes as used in all other methods. The type I methods are based on 5G NR LDPC(704,352) with a static code rate. The type

II HARQ with IR uses two parity matrices: (704,352) and (1088, 352). Initially, the data is encoded with (704,352), and if retransmission is needed, then additional redundancy using (1088, 352) code is transmitted. In this case, the initial transmission will use 352 data bits and 352 bits of redundancy. In the retransmission, additional 384 redundancy bits are sent, without any data bits. Thus, after the initial transmission, the LDPC decoder with the (704,352) parity matrix is used, and after retransmitting the additional parity bits, the larger decoder with the (1088, 352) matrix is employed.
Our selective HARQ method can also use elements of incremental redundancy. Thus, it can be seen as an extension of the type II HARQ scheme. Initially, a frame encoded with LDPC(704,352) is transmitted. If decoding fails, two frames are combined using two coupled parity matrices of LDPC(704,352), with the H2 matrix employed for decoding the two coupled frames. If the frame still has CRC errors and remains erroneous until retransmission limit factor L is reached, a parity extension of 384 additional bits, generated by LDPC(1088,352), is transmitted for each such lost frame.
The solution we proposed shows the best results from all tested methods as indicated in Fig. 7 and Fig. 8. The goodput improvement is up to 22% compared to type I HARQ at -2 dB, 8% to type I HARQ + CC at -1.6 dB , and 4% to type II HARQ + IR at -1.4 dB for the AWGN channel. For the Rayleigh block fading channel, it is 9% improvement compared to type I HARQ at 2 dB, 5% to type I HARQ + CC at 3 dB, and 2% to type II HARQ + IR at 4 dB. Our method also achieves better goodput than another advanced HARQ solution shown in [11], in both, AWGN and Rayleigh block fading channels.
However, decoding complexity will increase due to the large block size by combining additional variable nodes, resulting in higher resource and power consumption. Furthermore, decoding latency is primarily caused by ARQ and occurs only in the presence of frame loss. Future research will explore the use of higher modulation orders and additional design optimizations, including Tanner Graph decoding analysis.
IV. CONCLUSION
In this work, we propose a new advanced HARQ approach based on inter-frame superposition using coupled LDPC codes. The proposed HARQ schemes can be easily implemented from the basic components of existing 5G LDPC matrices. The coupled method is applicable to linear block codes, while the HARQ strategy offers potential applications in 6G and future wireless communication systems. The BER, FER, and goodput of the proposed HARQ are investigated in detail. When retransmission limit L=4, the FER performance achieves up to 1.5 dB gain for an AWGN channel and up to 4 dB gain for the Rayleigh block fading channel using coupled 5G NR LDPC codes. For the AWGN channel, the expected goodput increases up to 22% compared with type I HARQ.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:25:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors acknowledge the financial support by the BMBF in the project Open6GHub (16KISK009) and DFG project PSSS-FEC (442607813).
REFERENCES
[1] I. Andriyanova and E. Soljanin, “Optimized IR-HARQ schemes based on punctured LDPC codes over the BEC,” IEEE transactions on information theory, vol. 58, no. 10, pp. 6433–6445, 2012.
[2] B. Makki, T. Svensson, and M. Zorzi, “Finite block-length analysis of the incremental redundancy HARQ,” IEEE Wireless Communications Letters, vol. 3, no. 5, pp. 529–532, 2014.
[3] A. Ahmed, A. Al-Dweik, Y. Iraqi, H. Mukhtar, M. Naeem, and E. Hossain, “Hybrid automatic repeat request (HARQ) in wireless communications systems and standards: A contemporary survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 2711–2752, 2021.
[4] F. Nadeem, Y. Li, B. Vucetic, and M. Shirvanimoghaddam, “Analysis and optimization of HARQ for URLLC,” in 2021 IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps). IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–6.
[5] P. Hailes, L. Xu, R. G. Maunder, B. M. Al-Hashimi, and L. Hanzo, “A survey of FPGA-based LDPC decoders,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1098–1122, 2015.
[6] S. Miao, C. Kestel, L. Johannsen, M. Geiselhart, L. Schmalen, A. Balatsoukas-Stimming, G. Liva, N. Wehn, and S. ten Brink, “Trends in channel coding for 6G,” Proc. IEEE, 2024.
[7] M. Jabi, A. Benyouss, M. Le Treust, E. Pierre-Doray, and L. Szczecinski, “Adaptive cross-packet HARQ,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 65, no. 5, pp. 2022–2035, 2017.
[8] X. Ma, C. Liang, K. Huang, and Q. Zhuang, “Block Markov superposition transmission: Construction of big convolutional codes from short codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 6, pp. 3150–3163, 2015.
[9] Q. Wang, S. Cai, L. Chen, and X. Ma, “A throughput-enhanced HARQ scheme for 5G system via partial superposition,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 24, no. 10, pp. 2162–2166, 2020.
[10] Q. Wang, S. Cai, W. Lin, S. Zhao, L. Chen, and X. Ma, “Spatially coupled LDPC codes via partial superposition and their application to HARQ,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 70, no. 4, pp. 3493–3504, 2021.
[11] Q. Wang, L. Chen, and X. Ma, “A new HARQ scheme for 5G systems via interleaved superposition retransmission,” China Commun., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 1–11, 2023.
[12] L. Lopacinski, M. Brzozowski, R. Kraemer, S. Buechner, and J. Nolte, “100 gb/s data link layer - from a simulation to fpga implementation,” Journal of Telecommunications and Information Technology (JTIT), vol. 1, 90 (2016), 2016.
[13] R. Jain, “Channel models: A tutorial,” Proc. WiMAX AATG, 2007. [14] 5G;NR;Multiplexing and channel coding, 3GPP Std. TS 38.212 version
18.3.0 Release 18, 2024-08.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:25:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

