1466

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 3, JUNE 2025

U-Shaped Error Correction Code Transformers
Dang-Trac Nguyen and Sunghwan Kim , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this work, we introduce two variants of the U-shaped error correction code transformer (U-ECCT) in combination with weight-sharing to improve the decoding performance of the error correction code transformer (ECCT) for moderatelength linear codes. The proposed models are inspired by the well-known U-Net architecture to leverage residual information for faster error estimation based on the syndrome-based reliability decoding principle. As an effort to further improve the general decoding performance of the U-ECCT, we propose the variational U-ECCT (VU-ECCT), in which the process of learning the shortcut connections is treated as a generative problem, forming a variational autoencoder (VAE) that exists intertwined with the existing U-ECCT model. This design allows the extraction of mutual information between the different levels of the U-shaped architecture, thus enhancing the performance of large syndrome sequences for low-rate codes. Additionally, to further reduce the model size, a new weight-sharing strategy, called mirror-sharing, is proposed to compress the model size as well as complement the mechanism of the proposed U-shaped architecture. In experiments, it has been demonstrated that our proposed models achieve significantly better performance than baseline conventional algorithms and other learning-based models.
Index Terms—Transformer, error correction code transformer (ECCT), mirror-sharing, variational autoencoder (VAE), U-Net.
I. INTRODUCTION
R ELIABILITY of data transmission is one of the most important aspects of wireless communications. Among the leading technologies of modern communication systems, error correction codes (ECCs) have long been recognized as one of the most important factors contributing to the enhancement of reliable transmission due to their noise resistance and error correction capability. To achieve this, ECCs utilize likelihood decoding algorithms such as belief propagation (BP) decoding, min-sum (MS) decoding, and maximum likelihood (ML) decoding for low-error probability estimation of original messages. While these decoding algorithms have been proven to be powerful and optimal in certain code settings, further optimizing them has been considered highly challenging, posing difficulties for the advancement of ECCs. Other efforts to improve conventional ECCs have focused on
Received 31 December 2023; revised 14 August 2024; accepted 6 October 2024. Date of publication 17 October 2024; date of current version 12 June 2025. This work was supported by the Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea under Grant NRF2022M3C1A3081366 and NRF-2023R1A2C1003546. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was L.-C. Wang. (Corresponding author: Sunghwan Kim.)
Dang-Trac Nguyen is with the Department of Electrical, Electronic and Computer Engineering, University of Ulsan, Ulsan 44610, Republic of Korea (e-mail: tracng417@gmail.com).
Sunghwan Kim is with the School of Electronic Engineering, Kyonggi University, Suwon 16227, Republic of Korea (e-mail: skim@kyonggi.ac.kr).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCCN.2024.3482349

situational code designs, which are mostly effective for their specific applications.
With the rise of deep learning applications across major aspects of society, learning-based approaches for ECC adaptation have gained favor due to achieving better performance compared to traditional methods. Model-based designs adopted the BP algorithm [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6] or its variants, and the min-sum algorithm [7] for neural decoding designs. Although these works were able to achieve significant improvements over BP, their models have still been restricted by the complex decoding rules involving Tanner-graph. On the other hand, model-free approaches [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [48], which were pioneered by the authors of [8], were not subject to the complexity of the Tanner-graph but instead hindered by the curse of dimensionality, especially with significantly large code length. Recently, the authors of [15] proposed the transformerbased architecture for effective model-free decoding of ECCs. In [15], different components from the originally proposed transformer in [16] were modified to achieve a code-aware transformer that operates on the basis of the syndrome-based reliability decoding principle [17]. The transformer-based model in [15] was able to achieve a significant reduction in error probability compared to the state-of-the-art learningbased approaches. However, similar to previous model-free research, the error correction code transformer (ECCT) in [15] suffered from scalability problems, where the model performed sub-optimally on moderately large code lengths with a shallow architecture (few stacked layers) and required a deeper architecture (moderate number of stacked layers) to maintain the same level of performance gain. This resulted in a significant increase in the model size for ECCT, which greatly affected the time complexity of the decoding process. Therefore, a structural change that reduces the dependency of performance on model size is needed to effectively address the problem.
The research on neural network architectural design has been highly successful, yielding renowned models such as ResNet [19], [20], DenseNet [21], [22], and MobileNet [23]. Among the popular architectural designs, U-Net [24] is known as the state-of-the-art image segmentation convolutional model. While it is well-known for its application in the field of computer vision, many researchers have successfully adapted this design to time-series data and other fields of research, as well as combining it with models other than convolutional neural networks.
Driven by the need for an architectural change to resolve the limitation of the ECCT in [15] when decoding larger codelength, in this work, we propose U-shaped ECCT (U-ECCT) models. The contributions of this work are as follows:

2332-7731 c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:32:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NGUYEN AND KIM: U-ECCTs

1467

• A design that combines a U-shaped architecture with ECCT is proposed to provide flexibility in scaling the size of the transformer-based decoder architecture and to improve performance for decoding moderate-length linear block codes. This design offers an efficient learning-based decoder, contributing to the advancement of intelligent communication systems. The proposed U-shaped architecture consists of two major network flows: the main flow and the shortcut connections. While the decoding process of the main network flow is similar to the baseline ECCT, the shortcut connections interact with the main flow through a multiplicative operator. With this mechanism, the proposed model learns to generate and combine two different segments of the embedding dimension, retaining common information between the two flows, which significantly enhances the decoding process, particularly targeting large code-length cases. Furthermore, the U-ECCT is designed with multi-level scaling with four different levels of hidden dimension, providing flexibility and reducing model size compared to the baseline ECCT [15].
• In order to improve the general performance of the U-ECCT at all code rates, the U-shaped architecture is combined with the variational autoencoder (VAE) model to form a variational U-ECCT (VU-ECCT). In our improved model, the interaction between the main network flow and the shortcut connections is modified to resemble the VAE. This modified U-ECCT model provides a way to estimate the common distribution of the shortcut connections. Through this effect, the large syndrome length is fully utilized, enabling significant improvements in low-rate codes.
• Finally, in an effort to enable an efficient U-ECCT design, a new weight-sharing strategy is proposed, called mirrorsharing. Our weight-sharing strategy is applied so that the second half of the U-shaped model reuses the parameters of its first half in a reflective manner. This method effectively compresses our proposed U-ECCT models, enabling a deep, light-weight model that performs better than the baseline ECCT.
• In experimentation, all U-ECCT models achieve significantly better performance than the baseline ECCT for moderate code-length cases (from 256 to 1024), and still provide noticeable improvement for short codelength cases (less than 256). In terms of decoding performance, the basic U-ECCT variant with optimal size provides improvements that vary between 0.3dB and 0.5dB for moderate code-length cases, depending on the code structure and code rates. The VU-ECCT model supports moderate improvement, especially for low code rate cases, achieving improvements between 0.5dB and 0.65dB. Regarding efficiency, through mirror-sharing strategy, our models provide effective compression, achieving up to 73% reduction in model size compared to the baseline ECCT [15].
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II introduces the related knowledge adopted for this work. Section III consists of detailed explanations for the system

model and our proposed methods. The experimental results and discussions are described in Section IV. Finally, conclusion to this work is provided in Section V.

II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORKS
In this section, necessary background knowledge is provided for transformers [16], [25], [26], [27], [28], [29], [30], [31], [32], [33], [34] and key features of the ECCT [15], UNet architecture [24], [35], [36], [37], [38], and variational autoencoder (VAE) [39], [40], [41], [42], [43].

A. Transformer

The transformer was first introduced in [16] as a successor to the recurrent neural networks in sequence-to-sequence learning tasks, consisting of two major components: the positional encoding and multi-head attention mechanism. Since then, the transformer not only dominates the performance scale in the field of natural language processing but also becomes one of the leading models in multiple mainstream topics, including time series data [25], [26], [27] and image classification [28]. Several researchers have also adopted the design of the transformer to enhance the communication systems, such as 6G intelligent network designs [29], attention-inspired feedback codes [30], [31], signal modulation detection [32], [33], and BP-inspired semantic communications for text [34].
The heart of the transformer is a multi-head attention mechanism. By employing a learnable scaled dot-product mapping of a query-key vector pair, the model generates attention weights capturing the relation between each element to every other element within the same sequence (self-attention) or between a reference query sequence and another sequence projected into key and value vectors (cross-attention). The scaled dot-product attention can be formulated as

A(Q, K , V ) = Softmax Q√K T V ,

(1)

dh

where dh is the dimension of the learned linear projections of query and key vectors, which is originally calculated by

dmodel/h in which dmodel denotes the embedding dimension after performing positional encoding on the input sequence;

h denotes the number of parallel heads during the linear

projection of query, key, and value vectors.

From the basis of the scaled-dot product attention, the

multi-head self-attention mechanism is then formulated as

MultiHead (Q, K , V ) = Concat(head1, . . . , headh )W O , where headi = A(QWiQ , KWiK , VWiV ). The linear projec-

tions of Q, K, V, and the attention output are parameterized

by matrices Rdmodel×dh ,

WiQ and

∈ Rdmodel×dh WiO ∈ Rhdh

×, WdmioKdel∈.

Rdmodel×dh , In [16], the

WiV ∈ masked

self-attention module takes the summation of causal masks and

the dot product of the query-key vector pair. This mechanism

was proposed to prevent the language decoder from attending

to subsequent positions in the sequence, thereby preventing

the network from learning only to copy the input. However,

many researchers later modified this mask operation either to

enhance general performance or to address domain-specific

problems.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:32:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1468

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 3, JUNE 2025

B. Error Correction Code Transformer
The authors of [15] introduced two key features, namely positional reliability encoding and code-aware self-attention, which will be discussed in this subsection.
1) Positional Reliability Encoding: In [15], the authors proposed a unique positional encoding method that pays more attention to the magnitude of the input sequence (i.e., the pair of channel corrupted codewords and their respective syndromes). Each dimension of {y˜i }i2=n−1 k in the positional encoding is regarded as the pre-processed version of the channel output y. The encoding process projects the vector y˜ to a dmodel dimensional embedding {φi }2i=n−1 k which is defined by

φi =

|yi |Wi ,

if i ≤ n,

(1 − 2(s(y))i−n+1)Wi , otherwise,

(2)

where {Wi ∈ Rd }i2=n−1 k denotes the one-hot encoding vector corresponding to each bit position of y˜. As was shown in [15], this embedding method yields a desirable effect during the self-attention dot product operation such that the unreliable information (i.e., low magnitude positions) would collapse to the origin, whereas the syndrome bits yield negative scaling. The proposed encoding can be viewed as a positional encoding that corresponds to the input reliability, hence the name positional reliability encoding.
2) Code-Aware Self-Attention: Similar to the conventional decoding process, which requires the parity-check matrix, the transformer counterpart, introduced in [15], is designed to incorporate unique sparse masks capturing the patterns of the parity-check matrix for each respective code type. Since each bit of the input vector is not necessarily related to all other bits, traditional causal masking as well as non-masking would yield sub-optimal performance.
Thus, for a given algebraic code corresponding to a parity-check matrix H, the attention mask is denoted by g(H) : {0, 1}(n−k)×n −→ {−∞, 0}(2n−k)×(2n−k). First, the mask is initialized with an identity matrix. Taking reference to each row of the parity-check matrix H at a time, for every bit one in H, a pair of positions (simultaneously considering row and column) in g(H) is unmasked, i.e., assigned with one. Consequentially, this process provides a symmetric mask containing information about every pairwise bit relation. The construction of the mask g(H) is explained by Algorithm 1.

C. U-Net
In the field of computer vision, a popular convolutional network architecture called U-Net was proposed in [24] for semantic segmentation in images. This architecture is designed with one side for down-sampling and the other side for up-sampling operations. The features extracted by the down-sampling side are also forwarded and learned by the up-sampling side through skip connections, concatenation, and re-scaling modules. As a result of its success in the initial proposed problem set, U-Net was later combined with other neural network families to provide efficient solutions for a variety of tasks, including U-shape swin transformers (SUNet [35]) and U-Net VAE [36] for image denoising, U-Net

Algorithm 1 Pseudo-Code of the Binary Mask Generating Algorithm Input: Parity-check matrix H Output: Mask based on H M ← I (2n − k ) for i = 1, 2, . . . , n − k do
idx ← where(H[i ] == 1) for j ∈ idx do
M[n + i , j ] ← 1 M[j , n + i ] ← 1 for h ∈ idx do
M[j , h] ← 1 M[h, j ] ← 1 end end end M ← (−∞(¬M))
transformer (Ds-transunet [37]) for enhanced medical image segmentation, and one-dimension convolutional U-Net [38] for times series learning. In the majority of its applications, U-Net was proposed due to its highly effective capability for segmenting different parts of the superimposed input data and extracting hidden patterns that enable restoration of distorted information. In this context, we note that U-Net architecture has great potential in noise segmentation problems such as channel decoding.
D. Variational Autoencoder
Initially introduced in [39], VAE is one of the successful deep generative models. As suggested by its naming convention, this variant of the autoencoder belongs to the family of methods called variational Bayes methods. In general, this family of methods is used to solve the variational inference problem, where a posterior distribution of unobserved latent variables given some input data is approximated by a variational distribution. VAE operates as a parameterized model to optimize the process of discovering the variational distribution across all input data points.
This process is achieved by using an encoder neural network to map the input data to a latent space. Then, a separate parameterized model learns the mean and variance of the encoded latent space to generate new samples from the prior distribution. Finally, an decoder network approximates the distribution of the input data (the variational distribution) by extracting the features from the newly generated samples. A combination of VAE and transformers had also been proposed for generative tasks [40]. In the communication point of view, VAE has also been proposed for channel coding [41], [42] and joint source-channel coding [43].
III. SYSTEM MODEL
Under the assumption of a standard wireless communication system, the transmission process uses a linear code C to encode an input message m ∈ {0, 1}k into a codeword x ∈ {0, 1}n by taking the Galois field matrix product

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:32:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NGUYEN AND KIM: U-ECCTs

1469

with a generator matrix G, in which a summation operation

is replaced by the modulo-2 operation. The linear code is

defined by a binary generator matrix G of size k × n and

a binary parity-check matrix H of size (n − k) × n, such that GHT = 0, where T denotes the matrix transposition.

A codeword x, satisfying Hx = 0, is then transmitted via a

binary-input-symmetric-output, additive white Gaussian noise

(AWGN) channel. The effect of the channel can be modeled as

y = xs + z, where xs is the modulated codeword (commonly

considered binary phase shift keying (BPSK)), and z, defined by z ∼ N (0, σ 2), represents the AWGN which is independent

of the modulated codeword xs. Without loss of generality, the modulated codeword xs can be obtained by xs = bipolar (x), where bipolar(·) denotes the conversion by 0 → 1, 1 → −1,

and is also obtainable as bipolar (a) = 1 − 2a with input

a ∈ {0, 1}.

At the decoder, the main objective is to provide a soft

estimation xˆ of the original codeword. Thus, the decoding

function can be viewed as a function of y, which is xˆ =

f (y). Similar to [15], the pre-processing and post-processing

methods proposed by [17] are considered in this work. These

methods are regarded as an extended version of symdrome-

based decoding that includes channel reliabilities, aiming to

overcome overfitting by eliminating the need to simulate

codewords during training.

The pre-processing step modifies channel output y with

a vector of length 2n − k, defined as y˜ = |y| s(y),

where denotes the vector concatenation, |y| represents the element-wise magnitude of y, and s(y) = Hyb ∈ {0, 1}n−k
denotes the syndrome vector as a result of the Galois field

matrix product between the hard-decision mapping yb of y and the parity-check matrix H. The binary hard-decision

transformation of y can be obtained by yb = bin(sign(y)) =

1 2

(1

−

sign (y)),

where

bin(·)

denotes

the

inverse

of

the

bipolar (·) operation, and sign(·) denotes a sign function. An

inverse BPSK operation, denoted as bin(·) is defined by bin(b)

= (1 − b)/2, where input b ∈ {±1} is the result of the BPSK

bipolar conversion. The sign function, denoted as sign(·), is

defined by

⎧ ⎨ 1, c > 0,

sign (c )

=

⎩

0, −1,

c c

= <

0, 0.

The post-processing step multiplies the bipolar mapping of the channel output y with the decoder output to create the estimation xˆ of the original codeword x. To be more specific, the prediction takes the form of xˆ = y ⊗ fθ(y˜), where fθ(·) represents the neural decoder parameterized by θ and ⊗ is the component-wise multiplication. The decoding process is visualized in Fig. 1.
The objective of the neural decoder is to generate a form of estimation that will reduce the effect of channel noise and recover the original codeword when multiplied with the channel output y. With such an approach, the syndrome-based decoding proposed method in [17] focused on prediction of the multiplicative noise ˜z. Let ˜zs denotes the soft multiplicative noise such that y = xs ⊗ ˜zs (proof of [18, Lemma 1]), thereby obtaining the following expression: ˜zs = ˜zs ⊗ xs2 = y ⊗

Fig. 1. System model for syndrome-based decoding framework.
xs. Hence, the target data is the binary multiplicative noise, defined by ˜zb = bin(sign(y ⊗ xs)). Given the decoder output and its target data, the loss function is chosen as the binary cross-entropy (BCE) loss between the decoder output fθ(y) and the binary multiplicative noise ˜zb, which is formalized as
n
LBCE(z˜b, fθ(y˜)) = − (z˜i log(fθ(y˜))
i =1
+(1 − z˜i log(1 − fθ(y˜))). (3)
Thus, the estimation of the original codeword x is obtained by xˆ = bin(sign(fθ(y˜) ⊗ sign(y))).
IV. PROPOSED ARCHITECTURE
In this section, the proposed U-ECCT designs are explained in detail. To elaborate on our proposal, the subsections include the description of U-ECCT for decoding high-rate, moderatelength codes, VU-ECCT for decoding moderate-length codes at lower code rates, and the mirror-sharing strategy for model size compression.
A. U-ECCT
Inspired by the U-Net from [24], we propose a U-shaped architecture for the ECCT model with specific modifications to enable both performance improvement and parameter quantity reduction. In Fig. 2, the architecture of U-ECCT is presented by a specific network with four scaling levels. This architecture is designed as a counterpart to the standard six-layer ECCT model in [15]. The proposed model consists of the main network flow of information and the shortcut connections. The main flow is a network of sequentially connected components, including the bottleneck layer and pairs of scaling linear layer and transformer layer. The bottleneck layer is positioned at the center of the network, dividing it into two halves. Prior to the bottleneck layer, the first half of the network (left side of architecture Fig. 2) takes as input the post-embedding vector with the hidden dimension of dmodel. Each pair of the scaling and transformer layers is designed with a hidden dimension that increases as the information flows toward the bottleneck layer. The second half of network (right side of architecture after the bottleneck layer in Fig. 2) then performs a reverse scaling in terms of hidden dimension.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:32:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1470

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 3, JUNE 2025

Fig. 2. Overview of the four-level U-ECCT architecture. (a) Overall architecture of the U-ECCT. (b) Sub-layer architecture of the transformer layers.

As presented in Fig. 2, the scaling of the hidden dimension is divided into four levels: L1, L2, L3, and L4, with their hidden dimensions denoted by d1, d2, d3, and d4, respectively. The hidden dimension follows the order d1 < d2 < dmodel < d3 < d4, three of which are shared between the first half and the second half of the architecture. Similar to the UNet of [24], the shared levels in our design also comprise the interaction between the main flow and the shortcut connections. At each level, a copy of the output on the first half is used as a shortcut connection to provide supportive information to the second half of the network. In the U-Net architecture of [24], the shortcut connections are combined with the main network flow through concatenation. However, through experimentation, it is found that the concatenation is inefficient for our design in terms of dimensionality. Instead, element-wise multiplication is utilized to combine the shortcut connections with the second half of the network. Furthermore, through multiplication, the information from the first half acts as positional weights that help U-ECCT effectively narrow down the regions in the embedding space corresponding to the erroneous bits in the channel output.
The original U-Net was designed for convolutional networks, in which the data is processed in terms of height, width, and number of channels. Hence, the scaling of dimensionality is different from our design. As an example, in [24], the first half of the U-Net downscaled the height-width dimensions by half their size after each level but doubles the number of channels accordingly. Since the dimensionality of our problem is similar to that of a sequence-based problem, the scaling of U-ECCT only involves a change to the last

dimension (the embedding dimension) of the data array. In

the baseline ECCT [15], the hidden dimension for each

sub-layer was scaled according to the embedding dimension

dmodel. Similarly, our proposed scaling design also has the hidden dimension of each level derived from the embedding

dimension dmodel. In ascending order, the hidden dimensions

of d3

U-ECCT are defined

=

5 4

dmodel,

and

d4

=

as d1 =

3 2

dmodel

.

1 2

dmodel

,

d2

=

3 4

dmodel,

This design supports better

parameter utilization efficiency and decoding performance

compared to the baseline ECCT.

The parameter utilization is determined by the total number

of parameters in the entire model. This refers to the sum of the

number of weights and biases from different types of layers

trained for the given task. In the sub-layer architecture of both

our proposed design and the baseline ECCT in [15], three

main sub-layer types are used, namely layer normalization

(LN), multi-head attention (MHA), and feed-forward network

(FFN). For ECCT [15], the number of parameters used by

each type of sub-layer can be calculated as a function of the

embedding dimension dmodel. The building block of all sublayers is referred to as the dense layer or fully connected layer,

with din and dout denoting its input and output dimensions, respectively. Its number of parameters, Pdense, is calculated by

Pdense(din, dout) = din × dout + dout.

(4)

The number of parameters for layer normalization, PLN, is defined as

PLN = 2dmodel.

(5)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:32:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NGUYEN AND KIM: U-ECCTs

TABLE I AN EXAMPLE OF PARAMETERS QUANTIFICATION FOR U-ECCT

1471

From (4) and (5), the number of parameters for MHA and transformer layer by M number of layers used in the model

FFN sublayers can be defined as

architecture, which results in the following form as

PMHA = 4Pdense(dmodel, dmodel)

= 4 × dm2 odel + dmodel

= 4dm2 odel + 4dmodel,

(6)

PFFN = Pdense(dmodel, dFFN) + Pdense(dFFN, dmodel)

= 4dm2 odel + 4dmodel + 4dm2 odel + dmodel + 2dmodel

= 8dm2 odel + 5dmodel.

(7)

where dFFN is the dimensionality of the FFN module innerlayer, which was equal to four times the embedding dimension dmodel in [15] and [16]. The FFN component, was originally proposed in [16] along with the MHA module, is composed of
a neural layer with GELU activation [44] followed by a linear
layer. In this pair of layers, the output dimension of the first
layer and the input dimension of the second layer are equal to dFFN.
By accumulating the sub-components parameters, the total
number of parameters for a transformer layer is calculated by

PTransformer = PMHA + PFFN + 2PLN

= 4dm2 odel + 4dmodel + 8dm2 odel + 5dmodel

+ 4dmodel

= 12dm2 odel + 13dmodel.

(8)

Let M denote the number of transformer layers in the model. The size of an M-layers ECCT model is determined by multiplying PTransformer number of parameters of each

PECCT = M × PTransformer = 12Mdm2 odel + 13Mdmodel. (9)

Based on ECCT parameter calculation, the size of the U-

ECCT architecture can be determined by substituting dmodel with the hidden dimension of each respective scaling level.

However, due to the difference between levels, additional

layers (rescale blocks in Fig. 2) are assigned between the

levels to facilitate inter-level transitions. For example, a rescale

layer positioned between levels d1 and d2 will have an input dimension of d1 and an output dimension of d2. Therefore, by (4), the size of the rescale layer between levels L1 and L2

is PR12 = d1 × d2 + d2 = d2 × (d1 + 1). The functions to determine size for the U-ECCT and its sub-components are

summarized in Table I.

With the proposed scaling scheme, the dimension of

each level is adjustable, enabling flexibility in parameter

assignment. This multi-level scaling aspect of the U-shaped

architecture is crucial for learning to separate combined distri-

butions. Another crucial aspect of the proposed scaling scheme

is the utilization of fewer parameters while achieving better

performance than the baseline ECCT at high code rates with

moderate length. In particular, for models with M = 6 layers,

our model utilizes a which is fewer than

tthoeta7l 2odfm26o4ddem2l +od7e8l +dm7o1ddeml opdaeral mpaertaemrseutesresd,

by the baseline ECCT. The model setting presented in Table I

is empirically chosen for its superior performance compared

to the referenced six-layer ECCT model.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:32:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1472

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 3, JUNE 2025

Fig. 3. Diagrams for the VU-ECCT architecture. (a) Overall architecture of the VU-ECCT. (b) Sub-layer architecture for individual transformer layer type.

B. Variational U-ECCT
The VU-ECCT architecture is proposed to improve the performance of the initially proposed model at lower code rates. In the new architecture, three modifications are applied to the U-shaped architecture regarding the shortcut connection, the dimensionality scaling, and the transformer layers on the second half of the network. Fig. 3 presents the overall and sub-layer architecture for the VU-ECCT architecture.
Firstly, the shortcut connection in the VU-ECCT architecture is not a direct forward pass as in the basic design. Instead, the variational Bayes inference method is adopted to provide a combined approximation for the learned features from the first half of the network. As shown in Fig. 3(a), the outputs of transformer layers in the first half are combined through summation and normalized before feeding to the approximation module, forming an encoder-like structure that encodes the outputs of the first half into a common latent space. The approximation mechanism adopts the re-parameterization trick proposed in [39], where the distribution of the latent space is approximated by a deterministic function, defined by

˜s = μ + σ ⊗ ,

∼ N (0, 1),

(10)

where ˜s is the latent vector, μ is the learned mean vector of the latent distribution, σ is the learned variance vector of the latent distribution, and is the random vector drawn from the standard normal distribution. In this case, the reparameterization trick formula is designed to generate random vectors from

the location-scale distribution family. The latent vector ˜s is

fed to the second half of the network. In Fig. 3(a), the second

half is structured with two types of transformer layers, denoted

by T-SA (transformer with self-attention sub-layer) and T-CA

(transformer with cross-attention sub-layer). First introduced

by the authors of [16], the two types of attention modules

were shown to be effective in learning inter-positional relations

within a sequence in a teach-forcing manner. The input to the

T-SA is either the previous T-SA output (from the first half

of the network) or the sum of the bottleneck layer output and

latent information (at the bottom level of the second half). For

the T-CA, as shown in Fig. 3(b), the query vector Q is directly

taken from the preceding transformer layer, whereas the key

and value vectors, K and V, are obtained by taking in the

summation between the main flow information and the latent

approximation. By this mechanism, the second half of the

U-shaped architecture operates as a VAE decoder, extracting

reliable information from the combined distribution between

the main flow and the latent approximation. In particular, the

latent approximation captures the common patterns across the

T-SA layers on the encoder side, mitigating the adverse effect

upon combining the shortcuts with the second half of the

network for low rate codes when the syndrome length is n −

k

≥

n 2

.

However,

this

mechanism

is

less

effective

when

the

syndrome length is small, rendering the performance of the

VU-ECCT closer to the basic U-ECCT design.

Secondly, in the VU-ECCT architecture, the dimensionality

is uniform across all layers. In the case of the basic U-ECCT,

the multi-level scaling provides flexibility to adjust the model

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:32:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NGUYEN AND KIM: U-ECCTs

1473

size as well as effectively distribute the parameters to important parts of the network. On the contrary, the VU-ECCT architecture becomes highly complex when applying multilevel scaling due to the requirement for additional rescale layers before and after the latent space approximation step. As a result, the model size increases significantly compared to the basic U-ECCT while performance slightly degrades compared to the VU-ECCT with a uniform hidden dimension, losing both the benefits of model reduction and performance improvement.
Finally, as part of the VAE, the objective function of the model is modified to include the KL-divergence term in addition to the cross-entropy loss. This combination can be deduced from the evidence lower bound, which was detailed in [39]. The new loss function is defined as
Lθ = LBCE(˜zb , fθ(y˜)) + DKL(N (μ, σ2I ) N (0, σy2I ), (11)

where LBCE is the binary cross-entropy (BCE) term which is obtained by (3), DKL is the KL-divergence term, and σy is the standard deviation of the channel output y. In our design, the target standard normal distribution in the
KL-divergence is modified to the normal distribution with a zero mean and the standard deviation σy calculated from the observed channel output y. The KL-divergence term between
two normal distribution is defined by

DKL(N (μ1, Σ1) N (μ2, Σ2))

=

1 2

tr

Σ2−1Σ1

+ (μ2 − μ1)TΣ2−1(μ2 − μ1)

+

r

+

log

|Σ2| |Σ1|

,

(12)

where r is the size of the random vector, which, in this case, is

the hidden dimension dmodel of the latent vector. Leveraging the formula derived by the authors of [41, Appendix B] and

the considered distributions in our case, the KL-divergence

loss term can be calculated as

DKL N μ, σ2I

N 0, σy2I

=

1 2σy2

r
μ2j
j =1

−

r 2

1−

σy2 σ2

+ log

σy2 σ2

.

(13)

In this formulation, the latent distribution is designed to have a similar power factor to the channel output, further enhancing the estimation of the multiplicative noise. Furthermore, during training, the derived form in (13) is tractable during backpropagation.
The mechanism of the VU-ECCT provides significant resistance to the unwanted noise provided by the extensively large syndrome length in low code rate cases. Furthermore, it is able to take advantage of the additional syndrome information to enhance the multiplicative noise estimation process. Therefore, the VU-ECCT exhibits considerably better performance in low code rate cases compared to the basic U-ECCT design. However, as a trade-off, the multi-level scaling of the basic design is not applicable for the variational model, losing much of the scaling flexibility of the U-ECCT model.

C. Mirror-Sharing for Model Compression

In this sub-section, a new model compression strategy,

named mirror-sharing, is introduced. This strategy is based

on the weight-sharing method, which increases learning effi-

ciency. While there were numerous effective weight-sharing

strategies proposed in previous works, we came to the conclu-

sion that, in order to effectively apply weight-sharing to the

setting of U-ECCT, a new weight-sharing scheme is required.

In our weight-sharing strategy, each transformer layer in

the first half of the U-shaped architecture is assigned an

independent set of parameters. For the second half of the

architecture, we reuse the parameter sets from the first half.

In this structure, the proposed weight-sharing method is called

mirror-sharing since one side of the network mimics the

parameters of the other side in an U-shaped architecture that

has reflective characteristics regarding dimensionality. During

training, the first half and the second half of the U-shaped

model share the same set of parameters, or, in other words,

this set of parameters is trained twice during the forward

and backward propagation. This means that when considering

an M-layers model, only

M 2

sets of parameters are used,

which results in a new model with only half the number

of parameters. Nevertheless, depending on the computational

power required for specific cases, the sharing rate needs to

be adjusted. Furthermore, the weight-sharing technique cannot

be applied to rescale layers since they are not reflective in

dimensionality. Each rescale layer has a unique dimensionality,

which is highly complex when applying the weight-sharing

technique.

Fig. 4 shows the mirror-sharing strategy for U-ECCT archi-

tecture with M = 10. A fully mirror-sharing strategy is shown

in Fig. 4, where both sides of the U-shaped model share the

same five sets of parameters for transformer layer, denoted

by W1, W2, W3, W4, and W5. The parameters set W6 of the bottleneck layer in Fig. 4 is not subject to sharing since

this layer is used only once in the entire model. Five sets of

parameters are specifically chosen for sharing to reduce model

size and obtain optimal performance.

Table II presents the model size comparison models with

and without mirror-sharing for basic and VU-ECCT. Here,

three different scaling settings are presented for basic

U-ECCT, which are Type I, Type II and Type III, and a mirror-

sharing setting for VU-ECCT. Among the three settings for

U-ECCT, Type I is the same setting presented in Table I,

whereas Type II and Type III are settings with reduced size

and increased size, respectively. Without mirror-sharing, only

Type II provides a significant reduction to the overall model

size. However, when mirror-sharing is applied, the model size

is significantly reduced. Especially for the Type III model, the

model size is significantly improved with mirror-sharing, as it

now uses fewer parameters than the baseline ECCT as opposed

to the model before applying the proposed sharing scheme.

Similarly, the mirror-sharing strategy is also applicable for the

VU-ECCT, as shown in Fig. 4(b) and the last row of Table II.

However, since the hidden dimension is uniform across all

transformer layers of the VU-ECCT architecture, the mirror-

sharing strategy provides less reduction compared to sharing

model for the U-ECCT.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:32:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1474

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 3, JUNE 2025

Fig. 4. The proposed mirror-sharing strategy for the U-ECCT variants. (a) Mirror-sharing is applied to the basic U-ECCT design. (b) Mirror-sharing applied to VU-ECCT.

TABLE II

MODEL SIZE COMPARISON BETWEEN MODELS WITH AND WITHOUT MIRROR-SHARING. MODELS WITHOUT MIRROR-SHARING ARE CONFIGURED

WITH M = 6 LAYERS. THE MODELS WITH MIRROR-SHARING ARE CONFIGURED WITH M = 10 LAYERS WITH

M 2

UNIQUE PARAMETER SETS SHARED

BETWEEN THE TWO HALVES OF THE U-SHAPED ARCHITECTURE AS SHOWN IN FIG. 4

V. EXPERIMENTATION
A. Setup and Training
The experimentation involves comparing the performance of the proposed models with the baseline ECCT [15] and BP [45]. Similar to [15], our design is evaluated with three classes of codes, namely low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, Bose-Chaudhuri-Hocquenghem (BCH) codes and polar codes. The parity-check matrices for all codes are taken from [49]. For polar codes exclusively, successive cancellation list (SCL) [47] and CRISP [48] are included for comparison.

For LDPC exclusively, min-sum (MS) algorithm [46] and
the state-of-the-art model-driven normalized min-sum neural decoder (NNMS) [7] are included for comparison. The model from [7] used for comparison is the shared NNMS with Leaky ReLU and a 12-bit quantizer (SNNMS-LR-Q). The baseline ECCT [15] model is trained and tested using the transformer architecture with M = 6 layers, h = 8 attention heads, and embedding dimension dmodel = 128. Our designs and the baseline ECCT have the same number of attention heads and embedding dimension. For the models without mirror-sharing, our models are trained with configurations

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:32:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NGUYEN AND KIM: U-ECCTs

1475

TABLE III HYPERPARAMETERS SETTING FOR ALL METHODS. (L: THE LIST SIZE OF
THE SCL DECODING, b: NUMBER OF CYCLIC REDUNDANCY CHECK (CRC) BITS ADDED TO THE POLAR CODEWORD IN THE CRC-AIDED
SCL DECODING SCHEME, I: THE NUMBER OF ITERATIONS FOR BP-BASED METHODS, M: THE NUMBER OF LAYERS IN NEURAL NETWORK MODELS, d: THE HIDDEN DIMENSION OF THE RNN MODEL
UTILIZED IN CRISP [48])

similar to those of the baseline. For mirror-sharing cases, our

models are configured with either M = 6 layers or M = 10

layers, with

M 2

sets of parameters shared between the two

halves of the U-shaped model. Details of the hyperparameters

settings for all comparing methods are shown in Tab. III. All

simulation tasks are performed on a workstation equipped

with an AMD Ryzen Threadripper Pro 5995WX processor,

512GB of RAM, and two NVIDIA RTX 4090-24GB GPUs.

However, training and testing are executed on individual GPU

independently. All simulations are programmed using the

PyTorch framework [50].

For training ECCT-based models, data samples are gener-

ated with v samples per batch for 1000 batches, which makes

up v × 1000 samples. Due to limitations in dedicated GPU

memory, the number of samples is adjusted based on code

length and code rates. Codes with n ≥ 256 and R ≤ 0.5

force the input dimension of the neural network to exceed

the computational limit of our current available hardware.

Therefore, the number of samples and embedding dimension

are adjusted for specifically memory-consuming cases. For

codes with n ≥ 256 and R ≤ 0.5, v = 96 samples are generated

per batch. For all cases with n ≥ 512 (n = 512, 576, 1024,

1056), the number of samples per batch is v = 32 and v = 16,

respectively, with the exception of Polar (1024, 342) using

v = 8 samples per batch and an embedding dimension of

dmodel = 64. Baseline ECCT and our proposed models are trained with all-zero codewords as it is shown to be sufficient

in [15], [17]. For CRISP [48] and SNNMS-LR-Q [7], training are conducted follows the reported settings in their respective articles. As suggested in [7], [48], instead all-zero codewords, random binary messages encoded using the generator matrix of each code type are utilized. For CRISP, v × 1000 batches with batch size of v = 4096 samples are used for training over 120000 epochs to obtained the reported results with n ≤ 64. However, such number of samples are infeasible for simulation on our current hardware when n ≥ 128. Therefore, for large code lengths, CRISP model is trained with v = 512 samples per batch with 300 batches over 1000 epochs to keep the total number of samples close to that of ECCT-based models while keeping the batch size large as suggested in [48]. All neural network models are trained on noise-corrupted codewords with the energy per bit to noise power spectral density ratio Eb/N0 generated within the range of 2dB to 7dB. The Adam optimizer [35] is used with initial learning rate of 10−4. If not stated otherwise, training is conducted over 1000 epochs using the cosine annealing weight decay method [38] without a warm restart until the learning rate reaches 5 × 10−7.
For inference, the generator matrix G is obtained from the respective standard form parity-check matrix and used to generate the codewords through the Galois field matrix product, defined by x = mG. With this operation, v samples are generated for each test batch until the number of error frames reaches 100 frames to obtain accurate bit error rate (BER) results. Similarly, for BP and MS with 50 iterations, Monte-Carlo simulations are conducted with a total of 107 samples to ensure accurate results across all Eb /N0 regions. All methods are tested over the Eb /N0 range between 1dB and 7dB.
B. Significance of Mirror-Sharing in U-ECCT Models
The proposed mirror-sharing strategy described in Section III provides a solution to configure deeper U-ECCT networks without increasing the number of parameters. In Figs. 5(a) and 5(c), the BER performance is shown for the three scaling types in Table II. Compared to the baseline ECCT and the non-sharing U-ECCT model, all of our mirrorsharing variants are superior in either decoding performance or model size. For Type II model, the number of parameters equates to 27% that of the ECCT [15] (a reduction of 73% total parameters), yet its performance is still superior to the baseline model. For the other two variants, not only do they provide model reduction (36% for Type I and 22% for Type III), but they also outperform the baseline ECCT design by a considerable difference. This demonstrates that the mirror-sharing U-ECCT enables significant improvements compared to the baseline ECCT. Furthermore, the superior results highlight the significance of neural networks depth (number of layers) to performance as opposed to their width (total number of parameters). With all variants having an advantage in both performance and model size, the strong improvement of our design in model efficiency is proven.
The effectiveness of mirror-sharing combined with U-ECCT is further proven by the result of VU-ECCT models in Figs. 5(b) and 5(d), where the mirror-sharing U-ECCT

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:32:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1476

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 3, JUNE 2025

TABLE IV CALCULATED MODEL SIZE OF ECCT [15] AND U-ECCT VARIANTS WITH CHOSEN dmodel = 128. ECCT MODELS AND PROPOSED MODELS WITHOUT MIRROR-SHARING USE M = 6 LAYERS, WHILE MIRROR-SHARING MODELS USE M = 10 LAYERS. THE SIZE DIFFERENCE COLUMNS
CONSISTS OF MODEL SIZE DIFFERENCE IN PERCENTAGE BETWEEN ECCT AND THE MODELS IN THE PRECEDING COLUMN TO THE RIGHT

Fig. 5. BER performance for U-ECCT with different mirror-sharing strategies. (a) Mirror-sharing vs. no mirror-sharing for U-ECCT with Polar (256, 128). (b) Mirror-sharing vs. no mirror-sharing for VU-ECCT with Polar (512, 171). (c) Mirror-sharing vs. no mirror-sharing for U-ECCT with LDPC (576, 432). (d) Mirror-sharing vs. no mirror-sharing for VU-ECCT with LDPC (155, 64).

significantly outperforms both its non-sharing variant and the baseline ECCT. Nevertheless, the VU-ECCT without mirrorsharing demonstrates its improvement over baseline ECCT with a noticeable gain in performance.
Table IV presents the calculated size of all tested neural network models based on the chosen embedding dimension of dmodel = 128. Among the non-sharing models, only Type I and Type II models allow the use of fewer parameters. In the case of mirror-sharing, model size reduction is enabled on all proposed models. Coupled with the advantage in performance, the U-ECCT variants are much more efficient in utilizing the parameters for multiplicative noise estimation. The results further prove the efficiency as well as superiority of the U-ECCT design compared to the baseline ECCT.
C. BER Performance of U-ECCT Variants
By testing the proposed designs on a variety of coding cases, it has been verified that all mirror-sharing U-shaped variants provide considerable improvements over the baseline ECCT. In Fig. 6, the BER performance results tested on different code rates for Polar codes with a code length of 256 are plotted for all considered methods. Except for SCL and CA-SCL, it can be observed that both U-ECCT and VU-ECCT outperform other methods, specifically within the Eb /N0 range of 4dB to 7dB. However, for Polar (256,192) in Fig. 6(a), the proposed models begin to match at Eb/N0 = 6dB and outperform nonCRC SCL decoding at Eb /N0 = 7dB. It is worth noting

that with SCL decoding, a list size of L = 32 is sufficient in achieving near-MAP performance. Nevertheless, compared to CRC-aided SCL, there still is a significant difference. However, compared to a SCL-inspired model like CRISP, which achieved near-SCL performance at short code lengths, our model shows a significant gain in decoding performance. Furthermore, the VU-ECCT model demonstrates its advantage for low code rates, offering significant performance gains compared to both the U-ECCT and the baseline ECCT [15]. The advantage of our model over the state-of-theart learning-based model is further confirmed by comparing the execution time and complexity with baseline models in Section V-D.
In Fig. 7, BER results are shown for ECCT and variants of U-ECCT on larger code-length. The proposed models also exhibit better performance than BP, MS, and other learningbased models at larger code lengths. For polar codes with n = 512 and n = 1024, the average performance gains of the U-ECCT models to the baseline ECCT are 0.6dB in Eb /N0 between BER = 10−5 and BER = 10−8 in Fig. 7(a), which is 0.2dB higher compared to the average performance gains at the smaller code length of n = 256 in Fig. 6(a). For the three cases of LDPC codes in Figs. 7(d), 7(e), and 7(f), the average performance gains of our models over ECCT are 0.6dB for LDPC (512, 256) and 0.5dB for LDPC (256, 128). Even at lower Eb /N0 values of 3dB, where the noise level is higher, the U-ECCT models still achieve a 0.4dB gain for LDPC (512, 256) and a 0.3dB gain for LDPC

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:32:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NGUYEN AND KIM: U-ECCTs

1477

Fig. 6. BER performance results for the baseline methods and U-ECCT models on polar codes with a code-length of 256 at different code rates. (a) BER

for

Polar

(256,

192)

with

code

rate

R

=

3 4

.

(b)

BER

for

Polar

(256,

128)

with

code

rate

R

=

1 2

.

(c)

BER

for

Polar

(256,

86)

with

code

rate

R

=

1 3

.

(256, 128). Furthermore, our model outperforms MS and

SNNMS-LR-Q, both of which already surpass the baseline

ECCT.

It

can

also

be

observed

that

for

cases

with

R

≥

1 2

in

Figs. 6(a), 6(b), 7(a), 7(d), 7(e), and 7(f), the VU-ECCT model

does not enable any significant improvements to the existing

U-ECCT design. However, for low rate codes of Polar (256,

86) in Fig. 6(c), Polar (1024, 342) in Fig. 7(b), and Polar (512,

171) in Fig. 7(c), VU-ECCT model demonstrates considerably

better performance than the non-variational model, showcasing

the combined advantage of the U-shaped model and the VAE-

like structure. While the performance differences between

SCL-based methods and the other methods become more

pronounce with large code lengths, it is important to note that

ECCT-based models are forced to be trained on very limited

number of samples due to current hardware constraints and

are possible to achieve better performance given larger batch

size for training.

Table V presents the performance results of baseline ECCT

and our proposed mirror-sharing U-ECCT variants for a

variety of code structures at various code-length and coding

rates. As shown in Table V, improvements compared to BP,

MS, and learning-based models can be observed over all code-

length cases. However, larger gains are observed with lengths

from 256 to 1024). Evidently, based on the obtained results,

the mirror-sharing U-ECCT variants outperform the baseline

ECCT in almost all cases, some less than others. For short-

length polar codes, the proposed models outperform non-CA

SCL decoding and closely performs at the level of CA-SCL,

showing the potential of our models to compete with state-of-

the-art polar decoding when trained with an adequate number

of samples.

D. Complexity Analysis
In addition to performance comparison, the quality of the methods is evaluated in terms of complexity. Since the considered methods are diverse, to ensure a fair analysis across all methods, multiply-accumulative (MAC) operation,

also known as multiply-add (MAD) operation, is chosen as our complexity metric. The MAC metric account for the number of multiplication and addition operations required by a given computational model. For neural network models, the basic unit of computation is a dense layer with its MAC operation defined as

MACdense = l × dinput × doutput.

(14)

In this work, The quantification of MACs for all considered learning-based models is based solely on the weight matrices, omitting the biases for simplicity of calculation. Given the length of the input sequence y˜ as 2n − k and the embedding dimension as dmodel, considering all operating steps, such as the parallel linear projections of the self-attention input to Q, K, and V vectors, the softmax dot-product attention, and the inverse projection at the output, the MAC of the MHSA is defined by

MACMHSA = (2n − k )2dmodel + 4(2n − k )dm2 odel = (2n − k )2dmodel + 4(2n − k )dm2 odel.
(15)

Subsequently, the MAC of FFN module can be quantified as

MACFFN = (2n − k ) × dmodel × 4dmodel

= 4(2n − k )dm2 odel.

(16)

From (11) and (16), the MAC for ECCT and our proposed models can be derived as

MACTransformers = (2n − k )2dmodel + 8(2n − k )dm2 odel. (17)

The baseline ECCT used in simulation is configured with an

architecture of stacked M = 6 layers. Therefore, the MAC of

ECCT is defined by M × MACTransformers. For VU-ECCT,

the factor M is replaced with

M 2

and the MAC of the latent

approximating networks is included. For the U-ECCT Type-III

model, the MAC is calculated considering the rescale factor at

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:32:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1478

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 3, JUNE 2025

Fig. 7. BER performance results for baseline methods and U-ECCT variants on large code length. (a) Polar (1024,768). (b) Polar (512,384). (c) Polar (512,171). (d) LDPC (1056,528). (e) LDPC (512,256). (f) LDPC (256,128).

each level alongside the additional MAC for the rescale layers. Apart from the baseline ECCT and our proposed models, the MAC of other methods is referenced from the complexity analysis reported in the original article for each respective model. All MAC quantification, exact calculation at various code lengths, inference time per sample, and training time per epoch are reported in Table VI.
Table VI shows complexity quantification for all models considered in this work. Among the learning-based models, CRISP utilizes the highest number of MAC units, making it significantly less efficient than other models. At code length n = 1024, despite CRISP using fewer MAC than baseline ECCT, its actual training time is significantly due to its use of various sequential-based computations including the use of RNN cells and curriculum-guided mechanism. Furthermore, to achieve the reported results for CRISP at short code length, the original paper used a large batch size (4096 samples per batch), 1000 batches per epoch, and up to 120000 epochs. Compared to the ECCT-based models, including our proposed models, which use 128 batches under same number of batches and only 1000 epochs, CRISP is highly inefficient as it achieves only near-SCL performances at short-length polar codes. For SNNMS-LR-Q, despite its low MAC units, this model trades

spatial complexity for time complexity as it employs various looping mechanisms for summation over sparse connections between variable nodes and check nodes, as well as unfolding iterations into stacking sequential neural layers. Therefore, its training time is also sub-optimal. While ECCT-based models use significantly more MAC units than classical decoders, the actual inference times of ECCT-based models are much better, which enhances the appeal toward these models, particularly for our proposed designs. For a fair comparison with the classical decoding algorithms, training and testing time for learning-based models are also obtained under CPU-only conditions. It is observed that decoding time per codeword for learning-based models are comparable to SCL decoding, surpassing BP-based approaches. Among the learning-based approaches, SNNMS-LR-Q benefits from CPU-only conditions due to avoiding the overhead of excessive data transfer between CPU and GPU. Nevertheless, ECCT-based methods still demonstrate fast decoding times and lowest training times under CPU-only conditions.
VI. CONCLUSION
As model-free neural-based ECC decoding schemes are on the rise, we propose U-ECCT models to enhance the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:32:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NGUYEN AND KIM: U-ECCTs

1479

TABLE V ADDITIONAL PERFORMANCE RESULTS OF ECCT [15] AND OUR PROPOSED U-ECCT VARIANTS WITH MIRROR-SHARING. THE RESULTS FOR U-ECCT ARE TESTED ON THE TYPE III MODEL. BOTH U-ECCT VARIANTS ARE CONFIGURED WITH MIRROR-SHARING. TESTED CODE STRUCTURES INCLUDE
BCH CODES, LDPC CODES, AND POLAR CODES. THE RESULTS ARE PRESENTED IN NEGATIVE NATURAL LOGARITHM OF BER FOR Eb /N0 CASES FROM 4 DB TO 6 DB (LARGER VALUES ARE BETTER)

TABLE VI

MAC COMPARISONS BETWEEN THE CONSIDERED MODELS. NOTATIONS ARE REUSED FROM THE DEFINITION IN TABLE III. ADDITIONAL NOTATION

INCLUDES: ei : CODE LENGTHS

THE NUMBER OF “ONES” (EDGES) IN THE i−th COLUMN OF THE PCM. EXACT QUANTIFICATION OF MAC ARE CALCULATED

n

=

64,

256,

1024 WITH CODING RATE R

=

1 2

.

TRAINING

AND

INFERENCE

TIMES

ARE

LENGTH n = 1024 (POLAR CODES), n = 1056 (LDPC CODES) AND CODE

OBTAINED RATE R =

FROM 3 4

SIMULATION

WITH

FOR
CODE

performance of ECCT on moderate code-length decoding. The basic U-ECCT design forms a unique interaction between the shortcut connections and the main network flow, supporting an enhanced extraction of reliable information beyond just relying on the self-attention mechanism. This enables the model to achieve both performance enhancement and model size reduction. With the proposed mirror-sharing strategy,

parameter utilization efficiency has significantly increased. This method also enables a deeper yet lighter model, thus achieving better performance and size reduction compared to the baseline ECCT. With the modification in the form of VU-ECCT, the decoding performance at low code rates is significantly enhanced, providing up to 0.7dB in average performance gains on the scale of Eb /N0.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:32:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1480

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 3, JUNE 2025

REFERENCES
[1] A. Buchberger, C. Häger, H. D. Pfister, L. Schmalen, and A. Graell i Amat, “Pruning and quantizing neural belief propagation decoders,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 39, no. 7, pp. 1957–1966, Jul 2021.
[2] G. Larue, L.-A. Dufrene, Q. Lampin, H. Ghauch, and G. R.-B. Othman, “Neural belief propagation auto-encoder for linear block code design,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 70, no. 11, pp. 7250–7264, Nov. 2022.
[3] E. Nachmani and L. Wolf, “Autoregressive belief propagation for decoding block codes,” 2021, arXiv:2103.11780.
[4] D. Liu, M. Bober, and J. Kittler, “Neural belief propagation for scene graph generation,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intel., vol. 45, no. 8, pp. 10161–10172, Aug. 2023.
[5] I. Be’Ery, N. Raviv, T. Raviv, and Y. Be’Ery, “Active deep decoding of linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 728–736, Feb. 2020.
[6] F. Liang, C. Shen, and F. Wu, “An iterative BP-CNN architecture for channel decoding,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 144–159, Feb. 2018.
[7] Q. Wang et al., “Normalized min-sum neural network for LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 70–81, Feb. 2023.
[8] T. O’Shea and J. Hoydis, “An introduction to deep learning for the physical layer,” IEEE Trans. Cog. Commun. Netw., vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 563–575, Dec. 2017.
[9] Y. Jiang et al., “Turbo autoencoder: Deep learning based channel codes for point-to-point communication channels,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019, pp. 2758–2768.
[10] Y. Jiang et al., “Feedback turbo autoencoder,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), 2020, pp. 8559–8563.
[11] J. Clausius et al., “Serial vs. parallel turbo-autoencoders and accelerated training for learned channel codes,” in Proc. 11th Int. Symp. Topics Coding (ISTC), 2021, pp. 1–5.
[12] F. A. Aoudia and J. Hoydis, “Model-free training of end-to-end communication systems,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 37, no. 11, pp. 2503–2516, Nov. 2019.
[13] D. García, J. O. Lacruz, D. Badini, D. De Donno, and J. Widmer, “Model-free machine learning of wireless SISO/MIMO communications,” Comput. Commun., vol. 181, pp. 192–202, Jan 2022.
[14] T. Gruber, S. Cammerer, J. Hoydis, and S. t. Brink, “On deep learningbased channel decoding,” in Proc. 51st Annu. Conf. Inf. Sci. Syst. (CISS), 2017, pp. 1–6.
[15] Y. Choukroun and L. Wolf, “Error correction code transformer,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 35, 2022, pp.38695-38705.
[16] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. 31st Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
[17] A. Bennatan, Y. Choukroun, and P. Kisilev, “Deep learning for decoding of linear codes—A syndrome-based approach,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Vail, CO, USA, 2018, pp. 1595–1599.
[18] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[19] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2016, pp. 770–778.
[20] F. He, T. Liu, and D. Tao, “Why ResNet works? Residuals generalize,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 31, no. 12, pp. 5349–5362, Dec. 2020.
[21] W. Tong, W.Chen, W. Han, X. Li, and L. Wang, “Channel-attentionbased DenseNet network for remote sensing image scene classification,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens, vol. 13, pp. 4121–4132, 2020.
[22] G. Huang, Z. Liu, L. Van Der Maaten, and K. Q. Weinberger, “Densely connected convolutional networks,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2017, pp. 4700–4708.
[23] S. Qian, C. Ning, and Y. Hu, “MobileNetV3 for image classification,” in Proc. IEEE 2nd Int. Conf. Big Data, Artif Intell. Internet Things Eng. (ICBAIE)., 2021, pp. 490–497.
[24] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-Net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation,” in Proc. 18th Int. Conf Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assist. Interv., 2015, pp. 234–241.
[25] J. Devlin et al., “BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” 2018, arXiv:1810.04805.
[26] X. Liu, H. Lu, J. Yuan, and X. Li, “CAT: Causal audio transformer for audio classification,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), 2023, pp. 1–5.

[27] B. Tang and D. S. Matteson, “Probabilistic transformer for time series analysis,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 34, 2021, pp. 23592–23608.
[28] K. Han et al., “A survey on vision transformer,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 87–110, Jan. 2023.
[29] Y. Wang, Z. Gao, D. Zheng, S. Chen, D. Gunduz, and H. V. Poor, “Transformer-empowered 6G intelligent networks: From massive MIMO processing to semantic communication,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 30, no. 12, pp. 127–135, Dec. 2023.
[30] E. Ozfatura, Y. Shao, A. G. Perotti, B. M. Popovic´, and D. Gündüz, “All you need is feedback: Communication with block attention feedback codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Inf. Theory, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 587–602, Sep. 2022.
[31] Y. Shao, E. Ozfatura, A. G. Perotti, B. M. Popovic´, and D. Gündüz, “AttentionCode: Ultra-reliable feedback codes for short-packet communications,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 71, no. 8, pp. 4437–4452, Aug. 2023.
[32] W. Kong, X. Jiao, Y. Xu, B. Zhang, and Q. Yang, “A transformerbased contrastive semi-supervised learning framework for automatic modulation recognition,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 950–962, Aug. 2023.
[33] J. Cai, F. Gan, X. Cao, and W. Liu, “Signal modulation classification based on the transformer network,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 1348–1357, Sep. 2022.
[34] S. Yao, K. Niu, S. Wang, and J. Dai, “Semantic coding for text transmission: An iterative design,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 1594–1603, Dec. 2022.
[35] C.-M. Fan, T.-J. Liu, and K.-H. Liu, “SUNet: Swin transformer UNet for image denoising,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), 2022, pp. 2333–2337.
[36] D. H. Thai, X. Fei, M. T. Le, A. Züfle, and K. Wessels, “Riesz-Quincunx-UNet variational autoencoder for unsupervised satellite image denoising,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, Jul. 2023, Art. no. 5404519.
[37] A. Lin et al., “DS-TransUNet: Dual swin transformer U-Net for medical image segmentation,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–15, May 2022.
[38] M. Perslev et al., “U-Time: A fully convolutional network for time series segmentation applied to sleep staging,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst, 2019, pp. 4415–4426.
[39] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational Bayes,” 2013, arXiv:1312.6114.
[40] D. Liu and G. Liu, “A transformer-based variational autoencoder for sentence generation,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw. (IJCNN), 2019, pp. 1–7.
[41] V. Raj and S. Kalyani, “Design of communication systems using deep learning: A variational inference perspective,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw., vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 1320–1334, Dec. 2020.
[42] M. A. Alawad, M. Q. Hamdan, and K. A. Hamdi, “Innovative variational autoencoder for an end-to-end communication system,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 86834–86847, 2023.
[43] Y. M. Saidutta, A. Abdi, and F. Fekri, “Joint source-channel coding over additive noise analog channels using mixture of variational autoencoders,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 39, no. 7, pp. 2000–2013, Jul. 2021.
[44] D. Hendrycks and K. Gimpel, “Gaussian error linear units (GELUs),” 2016, arXiv:1606.08415.
[45] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. Burlington, MA, USA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[46] M.P.C. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic´, H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol.47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May 1999.
[47] I. Tal and A. Vardy, “List decoding of polar codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 2213–2226, May 2015.
[48] S. A. Hebbar et al, “CRISP: Curriculum based sequential neural decoders for polar code family,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2023, pp. 12823–12845.
[49] M. Helmling et al., “Database of channel codes and ML simulation results,” 2019. [Online]. Available: www.uni-kl.de/channel-codes
[50] A. Paszke et al., “PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019, pp. 8024–8035.
[51] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” 2014, arXiv:1412.6980.
[52] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, “SGDR: Stochastic gradient descent with warm restarts,” 2016, arXiv:1608.03983.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:32:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NGUYEN AND KIM: U-ECCTs

1481

Dang-Trac Nguyen received the B.S. degree in electronics and telecommunication engineering from Ton Duc Thang University, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam, in 2022, and the M.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Ulsan, Republic of Korea, in 2024, where he is a former student researcher for the Coding and Information Theory Laboratory. His current research interests are in the areas of deep learning applications for error correction coding, semantic communications, and transformer-based neural network applications.

Sunghwan Kim (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees from Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea, in 1999, 2001, and 2005, respectively. From 2005 to 2007, he was a Postdoctoral Visitor with the Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA. From 2007 to 2011, he was a Senior Engineer with Samsung Electronics, Suwon, South Korea. From 2011 to 2024, he was a Professor with the Department of Electrical, Electronic and Computer Engineering, University of Ulsan, Ulsan, South Korea. He is currently a Professor with the School of Electronic Engineering, Kyonggi University, Suwon, South Korea. His research interests include 5G/6G communications, IoT communications, multiple access, deep learning, transformer, error correction codes, and DNA-based storage.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:32:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

