New 5G-NR-Like LDPC Code Design
for HRLLC Scenarios
Zhitong He1,2, Kewu Peng1,2, Jian Song1,2,3
1Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist)
2Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3Research Institute of Tsinghua University in Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China
hezt20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {pengkewu, jsong}@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract—To meet the requirements of hyper-reliable and low-
latency communication (HRLLC) scenarios, a new design of 5G-
NR-Like LDPC codes is proposed, which majorly optimizes the
minimum distance property, to lower the error floor for short
to medium code lengths. Meanwhile, progressive row extension
techniques are employed for base matrix design, and progressive
edge growth and lifting techniques are employed for lifting de-
sign, to achieve desirable decoding performance across the nested
code rates and code lengths under given design complexity. The
hybrid list decoding algorithm is employed to further improve the
decoding performance for short block lengths. Simulation results
demonstrate the effectiveness of our new 5G-NR-Like LDPC code
design and hybrid list decoding algorithm.
Index Terms—HRLLC, 5G New Radio (NR), LDPC Codes,
Near-ML Decoding, Progressive Edge Growth and Lifting
I. INTRODUCTION
Hyper-reliable and low-latency communication (HRLLC),
as one of the six usage scenarios defined in the International
Mobile Telecommunications (IMT) 2030, is an extension of
ultra-reliable low-latency communication (uRLLC) in 5G. The
latency of HRLLC is required to be less than 1 ms and the
reliability of HRLLC is required to be higher than 1−10−5 [1].
To meet the latency and reliability requirements for HRLLC,
channel coding schemes must be designed with excellent error
floor performance at short to medium code lengths.
Quasi-cyclic (QC-) low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes
with rate-compatibility and length-scalability are employed in
the 5G new radio (NR) enhanced mobile broadband (eMBB)
scenarios [2], for their excellent decoding threshold perfor-
mance at block error rates (BLER) around 10−2. Nevertheless,
error floors can be observed at BLER below 10−5 for several
code rates and code lengths of 5G-NR LDPC codes [3]. For
short to medium code lengths, 5G-NR LDPC codes might not
show performance advantages under belief propagation (BP)
decoding compared to other typical short-length channel codes
[4], such as BCH codes, circulant redundancy check (CRC-)
aided Polar codes, etc. However, since the design of 5G-NR
LDPC codes takes several implementation-oriented features
into account, and the hardware implementation of the encoders
and decoders of 5G-NR LDPC codes has been thoughtfully
considered and widely adopted, the optimized base matrix and
lifting design and improved decoding algorithms could be a
more direct and simple choice to be employed for HRLLC.
The error floor performance of LDPC codes and the de-
coding performance at short code lengths depend on the code
weight spectrum under maximum likelihood (ML) decoding
and the trapping set distribution under BP decoding. 5G-
NR LDPC codes are designed to achieve better threshold
performance under BP decoding, thus their base matrices
have good asymptotic decoding thresholds analyzed by multi-
edge-type (MET-) density evolution (DE) [5]. However, the
minimum distances of 5G-NR LDPC codes are restricted by
the upper bounds determined by the base matrices [6], [7], [8],
and might not be optimized for some code lengths and code
rates, which are harmful to the decoding performance at short
code lengths under either BP or ML decoding [4]. Moreover,
the systematic design methods of the base matrix and lifting
are required to achieve desirable decoding performance across
all the nested code rates and code lengths for 5G-NR LDPC
codes. There are 5G-NR-Like LDPC designs in previous work
[9], [10]. However, they are only for especially short code
lengths or the error floor performance is not notably improved.
The decoding performance of LDPC codes with short block
length is constrained under BP decoding since the trapping sets
are hard to be eliminated. Thus, near-ML decoding algorithms
are crucial for LDPC codes to further approach the finite block
length bounds [11]. The saturated min-sum (SMS) decoding
algorithm [12] could significantly improve the performance
at information bit length k < 200 but become less efficient
when k grows larger because of the list choice. The hybrid list
decoding algorithms could largely reduce the average decoding
complexity at low BLER and their advantages are shown in
[13], which could achieve near-ML decoding performance for
short 5G-NR LDPC codes.
In this paper, the new design of the base matrices and lifting
for 5G-NR-Like LDPC codes is proposed, where 5G-NR-Like
LDPC codes refer to LDPC codes with the same structures
and features as 5G-NR LDPC codes. In the new base matrix
design, almost all the implementation-oriented features of 5G-
NR LDPC codes are maintained, while the minimum distance
upper bounds are optimized progressively with the extension
of each row. The 3D-G-PEGL methods in [14] are employed
for the lifting design of 5G-NR-Like LDPC codes, while the
minimum distance criterion is considered together with cycle
classification and BLER evaluation criteria. The new hybrid
decoding list algorithm called improved saturated BP decoding
2025 IEEE International Symposium on Broadband Multimedia Systems and Broadcasting (BMSB) | 979-8-3315-1998-8/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/BMSB65076.2025.11165523
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:27:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
is employed for 5G-NR-Like LDPC codes. From simulation
results, the constructed 5G-NR-Like LDPC codes show lower
error floor for short block lengths, under both the BP and
the hybrid list decoding algorithms, which demonstrates the
effectiveness of the new 5G-NR-Like LDPC code design and
the hybrid list decoding algorithm.
II. BASE MATRIX DESIGN
5G-NR LDPC codes are a class of rate-compatible length-
scalable QC-LDPC codes with features including information
node puncturing, information node, and parity-check node
extension. Specifically, as shown in [5], 5G-NR LDPC codes
have two base graphs or base matrices BG1 and BG2, and
for both BG1 and BG2, the largest base matrices have the
following structures.
B =

(BH)G×(Kmax+G)
0G×(Mmax−G)
(BU)(Mmax−G)×(Kmax+G)
I(Mmax−G)×(Mmax−G)

,
(1)
where BH and BU denote the highest-rate code part and
the incremental redundancy code part, respectively, and 0
and 1 denote the all-zero matrix and the identity matrix,
respectively. The first Kmax columns in B are called infor-
mation columns, which correspond to the Kmax information
nodes in the base graph, while the last Mmax columns are
called parity-check columns, which correspond to the Mmax
parity-check nodes in the base graph. The information node
extension technique is employed to provide base matrices of
different sizes for different ranges of code lengths. while the
parity-check node extension could be employed to support
different code rates. Specifically, the base matrix BK,M with
K information columns and M parity-check columns could
be derived from B such that
BK,M = B [1 : M, {1 : K} ∪{Kmax + 1 : Kmax + M}] ,
(2)
which means BK,M are constructed by the first M rows and
the 1-st to K-th and (Kmax+1)-th to (Kmax+M)-th columns
of B. Generally, the potential K is selected in the set Φ while
the potential M satisfies G ≤M ≤Mmax. Since the first V
information columns are punctured, the code rate of BK,M is
RK,M = K/(K + M −V ).
The general design principle of the new 5G-NR-Like base
matrix is to optimize the minimum distance upper bounds for
each (K, M), while maintaining the good asymptotic decoding
thresholds. The design constraints are set similar to original
5G-NR LDPC codes, to maintain the low hardware encoding
and decoding complexity. The details of our base matrix design
are illustrated as follows.
We design a base graph with exactly the same size parame-
ters Kmin, Kmax, Mmax, G, V as those in 5G-NR LDPC BG2.
For the highest-rate code part BH, we introduce more degree-
3 columns to increase its minimum distance upper bound,
and only one degree-2 column is left at the rightmost of
BH to keep the general lower triangular structure which is
beneficial for encoding. We keep the maximum number of
the same degree-3 columns in BH as low as possible, to
decrease the number of potential harmful cycles. Furthermore,
the V = 2 punctured columns in BH should be different
to make the punctured bits recoverable. Taking into account
these constraints and the equivalence of row and column
permutation, BH is nearly determined and finally chosen as
shown in Fig. 1.
For the incremental redundancy code part, the design con-
straints are listed as follows.
1) Punctured Columns: For the V = 2 punctured columns,
any two consecutive rows in BU are not allowed the same,
and for each punctured column, four consecutive 1 should not
appear in BU part, for better recovering the punctured bits.
2) Not Punctured Columns: For not-punctured columns,
every two consecutive rows in BU are orthogonal, and the
overlapped parts of ’1’s of any two rows in BU are as short
as possible. Similar as the quasi-row orthogonality for 5G-
NR LDPC codes, these constraints could largely increase the
throughput of hardware decoders. To keep the increasing speed
of the minimum distance upper bounds when the parity-check
column number M increases, BU are split into several parts by
row, with not more than ∆M consecutive rows for each part.
For each part, the column weight would be at least 1, except
the degree-2 column in BH and at most 1 more columns,
which is similar to that in [15]. The row weight for each row
in BU and for each K is constrained, to keep a similar density
of ’1’s with original 5G-NR LDPC codes and thus a similar
implementation complexity. The row weight for K = 6, 8, 10
are set as not more than 4, 5, 6 in this paper, respectively.
For simplicity, we denote all the design constraints for BH
described above as CH, and all the design constraints for
BU described above as CU. The detailed base matrix design
process for new 5G-NR-Like LDPC codes is shown in Alg. 1.
The design process of BH is generally simple, as described
above. After BH is constructed, BU is then constructed by
progressive row extension. i.e., the 1-th to the (Mmax −G)-th
rows of BU are constructed progressively, and after the M-th
row of BU is constructed, multiple candidates of the 1-th to
the M-th rows of BU are reserved to achieve better trade-off
of the performance of each supported BK,M. These candidates
are selected according to the criteria of asymptotic decoding
threshold and minimum distance upper bound. Specifically, the
gap between the asymptotic decoding threshold of BK,M and
the Shannon limit is denote as dSNRK,M, while the minimum
distance upper bound of BK,M is denoted as dK,M. Then the
asymptotic decoding threshold dSNRK,M is controlled by a
given threshold δK for each M, while the increasing rate of
minimum distance upper bound dK,M is controlled for each
K, i.e., dK,M ≥dK,G + ∆K(M −G), where the parameter
∆K is the threshold of increasing rate for dK,M, and dK,G
could be computed when BH is constructed. Note that a small
variation ϵ is allowed to control the number of candidates in
a given range after each row extension step. In our design,
δK = 0.65, 0.60, 0.55(dB) and ∆K = 4.86, 3.66, 3.5 for K =
6, 8, 10, respectively. The other parameters are set as ϵ = 0.05,
α ∼103 and β ∼107.
Furthermore, the asymptotic decoding thresholds mentioned
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:27:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Algorithm 1 Base Matrix Design for New 5G-NR-Like LDPC
Codes
Input: Basic parameters Φ, Mmax, G, V , Design constraints
CH, CU, Threshold parameters δK, ∆K, ϵ, α, β.
Output: Largest base matrix B.
1: Construct the highest code rate part BH according to the
design constraints CH.
2: Initialize the candidate set Ψ = {∅} of constructed rows
in BU, where ∅means that no rows are constructed.
3: for G + 1 ≤M ≤Mmax do
4:
Ψnew ←{}.
5:
for ψ ∈Ψ do
6:
Generate the candidate set Ωof (M −G)-th row of
BU according to the design constraints CU given ψ.
7:
Ψnew ←Ψnew ∪{[ψ; ω]|ω ∈Ω}.
8:
end for
9:
Ψ ←Ψnew, Ψnew ←{}.
10:
for ψ ∈Ψ do
11:
Generate the corresponding base matrices BK,M of
Ψ, for all K ∈Φ.
12:
Compute dSNRK,M and dK,M for each BK,M.
13:
if dSNRK,M < δK and dK,M ≥dK,G + ∆K(M −
G), ∀K ∈Φ then
14:
Ψnew ←Ψnew ∪{ψ}.
15:
end if
16:
end for
17:
if α < |Φnew| < β then
18:
Ψ ←Ψnew.
19:
else
20:
Adjust the parameters δK, ∆K to δ′
K, ∆′
K according
to |Φnew| such that |δ′
K −δK| < ϵδK and |∆′
K −
∆K| < ϵ∆K, Ψnew ←{}, go to row 10.
21:
end if
22: end for
23: Finally select the candidate set Ψ and get constructed B.
above are analyzed via the MET-DE tool with totally I = 25
iterations under layered BP decoding over binary input (BI-)
additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels. Meanwhile,
simplified methods in [6] could be employed for the computa-
tion of minimum distance upper bounds of 5G-NR-Like LDPC
codes, since the 5G-NR-Like LDPC codes have Raptor-Like
structure. The number of punctured columns is V > 1 for 5G-
NR-like LDPC codes, thus theorems 6 and 8 in [6] should be
extended for this case, and the following theorem is required.
Theorem 1: Assume a Raptor-Like base matrix B is defined
as follows, with the first V > 1 column punctured. If B has a
non-zero minimum distance upper bound dmin,upp > 0 which
can be computed as in [8], B has no parallel edges and all the
punctured columns have not smaller than V non-zero elements
in BH, then dmin,upp could be achieved in some M ×(M +1)
sub-matrix of B, such that all the last (M −G) parity-check
Punctured Columns
𝐁𝐻
𝐁𝑈
𝟎
𝑰
Fig. 1. The new constructed 5G-NR-Like LDPC base matrix B, where the
big black squares and small black crosses represents the elements 1 and 0,
respectively.
columns of B are in that sub-matrix.
B =

(BH)G×(K+G)
0G×(M−G)
(BU)(M−G)×(K+G)
I(M−G)×(M−G)

.
Proof: Since the space of this paper is limited, please see
the attached link1.
The newly constructed 5G-NR-Like LDPC base matrix B
is shown in Fig. 1. There are totally 204 non-zero edges
in B, while for 5G-NR LDPC BG2, there are totally 197
non-zero edges. The similar number of non-zero edges would
result in a similar description and implementation complexity.
The quasi-row orthogonality and full-row orthogonality are
easy to see in Fig. 1. Moreover, the comparison of minimum
distance upper bounds and asymptotic decoding thresholds are
shown in Fig. 2. It can be observed that at the expense of at
most 0.15dB SNR loss in asymptotic decoding thresholds, the
minimum distance upper bounds of new 5G-NR-Like LDPC
base matrices would improve to at least 1.5x compared with
that of 5G-NR LDPC BG2. As shown in the simulation results
of Section V, though the slight loss of asymptotic decoding
thresholds would lead to negligible threshold performance loss
for finite code lengths, the error floor performance of new 5G-
NR Like LDPC codes would be largely improved, especially
for short to medium code lengths. The reason is that improved
minimum distance upper bounds offer larger space for the
minimum distance optimization for finite code lengths, which
notably affects the error floor performance for 5G-NR LDPC
codes.
III. LIFTING DESIGN
The parity-check matrix of QC-LDPC codes can be derived
by lifting the base matrix with lifting factor Z. Assuming that
the base matrix has no parallel edges, the parity-check matrix
could be derived by substituting the zero elements with Z ×Z
zero matrices and the non-zero elements with Z ×Z circulant
matrices. The position of the non-zero element at the first row
1https://github.com/Hezt20/New-5G-NR-Like-LDPC-Design
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:27:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
0 . 1
0 . 2
0 . 3
0 . 4
0 . 5
0 . 6
0 . 7
0 . 8
0 . 9
1 0
1 0 0
M
i n i m u m  D i s t a n c e  U p p e r  B o u n d
C o d e  R a t e

N e w  5 G - N R - L i k e , 

N e w  5 G - N R - L i k e , 

N e w  5 G - N R - L i k e , 

O r i g i n a l  5 G - N R , 

O r i g i n a l  5 G - N R , 

O r i g i n a l  5 G - N R , 
(a)
0 . 1
0 . 2
0 . 3
0 . 4
0 . 5
0 . 6
0 . 7
0 . 8
0 . 9
0 . 3 5
0 . 4 0
0 . 4 5
0 . 5 0
0 . 5 5
0 . 6 0
0 . 6 5
0 . 7 0
0 . 7 5
0 . 8 0
S N R  G a p  f r o m  S h a n n o n  L i m i t  ( d B )
C o d e  R a t e

N e w  5 G - N R - L i k e , 

N e w  5 G - N R - L i k e , 

N e w  5 G - N R - L i k e , 

O r i g i n a l  5 G - N R , 

O r i g i n a l  5 G - N R , 

O r i g i n a l  5 G - N R , 
(b)
Fig. 2. The comparison of new constructed 5G-NR-Like LDPC base matrix B
and original 5G-NR LDPC BG2. (a) Minimum distance upper bounds versus
code rates, (b) SNR gap of the asymptotic decoding thresholds from Shannon
limits (dB) versus the code rates.
of the circulant matrix is defined as the lifting value s ∈[0, Z−
1]. By changing the non-zero elements in the base matrix with
their corresponding lifting values, and the zero elements with
−1, the exponent matrix can represent the parity-check matrix
of QC-LDPC codes equivalently, when the lifting factor Z is
determined.
For 5G-NR LDPC codes, there are eight families of lifting
supported, and each family of lifting is defined by the set of
lifting factors ΨA = {Zγ = A2γ−1, 1 ≤γ ≤Γ}, For each
set of lifting factors ΨA, the lifting of the largest base matrix
B with the largest lifting factor ZΓ forms an exponent matrix
P, and for each supported (K, M) and Zγ, the corresponding
exponent matrix can be derived by first getting the sub-matrix
PK,M of P corresponding to BK,M, and then the exponent
matrix PK,M,γ via modulo lifting, i.e.,
PK,M,γ ≡PK,M modZγ,
(3)
where the elements −1 remain −1 in the modulo operations. It
can be observed that the exponent matrix PK1,M1,γ1 is nested
in the exponent matrix PK2,M2,γ2 for any K1 ≤K2, M1 ≤
M2, and γ1 ≤γ2. Given the sets Φ, ΨA and the parameters
G, Mmax, the potential tuples (K, M, γ) form a 3D-grid. The
lifting of our new 5G-NR-Like LDPC codes has similar nested
structure as 5G-NR LDPC codes, and thus the 3D-grid based
progressive edge growth and lifting (3D-G-PEGL) method is
employed to construct the lifting of new 5G-NR-Like LDPC
codes, to achieve desirable performance across different code
rates and code lengths within limited design complexity. The
3D-G-PEGL method has been employed in our previous work
[14], and thus only briefly introduced in this paper. Note that
Algorithm 2 Lifting Design for 5G-NR-Like LDPC Codes
Input: The parameters Φ, ΨA, G, Mmax. Largest base matrix
B and its edge indexing. The threshold values σth,1, σth,2.
Output: The final exponent matrix P.
1: Construct the 3D-grid Ξ and ensure the growing path
χ, such that all the grid nodes are indexed in order as
1, 2, · · · , Γ|Φ|(Mmax −G + 1).
2: Initialize the BLER tested grid node indexes as Υ ←∅.
3: for s ←1 to Γ|Φ|(Mmax −G + 1) do
4:
if s = 1 then
5:
Ξ ←BeginningOp(Ξ).
6:
else
7:
Ξ ←GridGrowth(Ξ, s).
8:
end if
9:
while σ(Ξ, s) > σth,1 do
10:
Ξ ←CyclePruning(Ξ, s).
11:
Ξ ←MinDistPruning(Ξ, s).
12:
Ξ ←GridUpdate(Ξ, s).
13:
Ξ ←DiversityPruning(Ξ, s).
14:
Ξ ←GridUpdate(Ξ, s).
15:
end while
16:
for s0 ←1 to s do
17:
if σ(Ξ, s) < σth,2 and s0 /∈Υ then
18:
Ξ ←BLERPruning(Ξ, s0).
19:
Ξ ←GridUpdate(Ξ, s).
20:
Υ ←Υ ∪{s0}.
21:
end if
22:
end for
23: end for
24: P ←FinalSelect(Ψ).
compared with our previous designs, different numbers K of
information columns are considered and the growing path can
be flexibly selected in the 3D-grid, which brings more design
freedom and is beneficial for a better performance trade-off.
The detailed process of lifting design is shown in Alg. 2.
For simplicity, the basic concepts are defined as follows.
1) The 3D-grid Ψ: There are totally Γ|Φ|(Mmax −G + 1)
grid nodes in Ψ, where each node (K, M, γ) in Ψ saves all
the potential candidate exponent matrices PK,M,γ.
2) Parent nodes and child nodes: the grid node (K, M, γ)
is the parent node of (K1, M1, γ1) if and only if K1 = K and
|M −M1|+|γ −γ1| = 1, M1 ≤M, γ1 ≤γ or M1 = M, γ1 =
γ and K1 = max{K0|K0 < K, K0 ∈Φ}. Then (K1, M1, γ1)
is the child node of (K, M, γ).
3) The growing path χ: χ is a bijection that defines the
construction order of grid nodes in Ψ, which maps the set
{(K, M, γ)} to the set {1, 2, · · · Γ|Φ|(Mmax −G + 1)}.
Then the core operations in Alg. 2 are explained as follows.
1) BeginningOp: The candidate set of exponent matrices
of the grid node s = 1 is constructed and saved in Ψ.
2) GridGrowth: The candidate set of exponent matrices of
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:27:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
the grid node s is constructed based on progressive extension
and lifting of the candidate set of its parent nodes.
3) CyclePruning: The cycles are classified by their girth g
and number of 1-CNs η, which are defined in [16] and mean
the check nodes related to the incremental redundancy code
part. Cycles with smaller g and η are commonly more harmful.
The weight sum w of the cycle number for each candidate in
grid node s is computed as w = P
g,η wg,ηng,η, where ng,η is
the number of (g, η)-cycles and wg,η is the weight of (g, η)-
cycles. A typical choice for wg,η is wg,η = 64−g/22−η for
g ≤12 and wg,η = 0 for g > 12. Then the candidates satisfy
w ≥wth are pruned, where the threshold value wth can be
flexibly selected according to the requirement of σth,1.
4) MinDistPruning: The minimum distances d of candidate
exponent matrices in grid node s are computed by the methods
in [17], and the candidates satisfy d ≤dth are pruned.
5) DiversityPruning: The diversity pruning is employed to
reduce the candidate number of grid node s while maintaining
the diversity of the candidates for parent nodes, and the details
can be seen in [14].
6) GridUpdate: The grid update operation is employed to
make the 3D-grid Ψ valid after pruning the given grid nodes,
where the validity of Ψ means each exponent matrix in any
grid node s∗has its nested exponent matrix in the parent node
of s∗, and each exponent matrix in any grid node s∗has its
nested exponent matrix in the parent node of s∗.
7) BLERPruning: The BLER pruning operation is adopted
to prune the constructed grid nodes whose candidate number is
less than a given threshold value σth,2, in which the BLER of
each given exponent matrix is evaluated over given channels
with the BP decoding algorithm and the candidates that satisfy
BLER ≥BLERth are pruned.
8) FinalSelect: When all the grid nodes s are constructed
and pruned, the final exponent matrix P is selected via the
final selection operation.
Then the process in Alg. 2 is briefly illustrated as follows.
The 3D-grid Ψ and the growing path is firstly initialized,
and then each grid node is progressively constructed along
the growing path χ, and if the candidate number of current
grid node s is too large, the CyclePruning, MinDistPruning
and DiversityPruning operations are employed to reduce the
candidate number of the grid node s, while the GridUpdate
operations are employed after these pruning operations to keep
the 3D-grid Ψ valid. Then the BLERPruning operations are
further employed to the constructed grid nodes with smaller
number of candidates. Finally, the FinalSelect operation is
employed to select the final exponent matrix P. Note that the
threshold values σth,1, σth,2 are selected based on the actual
storage and computational resources. We select σth,1 ∼106
and σth,2 ∼103 in the practical construction and it takes up
to ten days for us to construct the lifting of a entire family of
5G-NR-Like LDPC codes.
IV. IMPROVED SATURATED BP DECODING ALGORITHM
In this section, we briefly introduce the improved saturated
BP decoding algorithm for the 5G-NR-Like LDPC codes. The
major idea of the SMS decoding algorithm [12] is that when
block errors happen, there would be bit errors appeared in
the s least reliable bits with high probability, and thus by
adding impulses at these s bits with all combinations of signs,
the block errors might be eliminated with the aid of BP/MS
decoding. Nevertheless, when the code length n grows larger,
these s bits would take up a smaller proportion of the n bits,
and adding impulses at these s bits is inefficient to eliminate
the block errors. By contrast, enlarging the range of adding
impulses is beneficial for hitting the block error patterns, and
with the aid of BP decoding, less bits to add the impulse is
sufficient to eliminate the block errors.
Considering these ideas, the improved saturated BP decod-
ing algorithm first selects n1 bits with fixed positions in all the
n coding bits. For 5G-NR-Like LDPC codes, the n1 bits could
be selected as the (n−v) not punctured bits since the punctured
columns have high column weight and is easy to be recovered.
Then all the combinations of at most p bits in the n1 bits are
selected as the patterns for adding impulses. For each pattern
with 1 ≤q ≤p bits, the 2q combinations of impulse noises
such that the LLR of each bit in the pattern could saturate to
+LLRmax or −LLRmax are considered. Hence it would be
C = Pp
q=1 2q n1
q

additional BP decoding rounds.
It could be observed that the improved saturated BP de-
coding algorithm could avoid the LLR ordering step, which
takes a significant part in the computational complexity of the
decoder. However, when C is determined, the patterns can
be ordered and selected according to the summation of LLR
amplitudes to match the given C. Furthermore, as shown in
Section IV, the improved saturated BP decoding algorithm
could achieve better performance under the same number of
BP decoding rounds compared to SMS decoding algorithms,
and it could approach near ML decoding performance for a
longer information bit length such as k ∼1000. Employing
the hybrid list decoding, the average decoding complexity
tends to the BP decoding complexity when BLER decreases.
The improved saturated BP decoding algorithm could achieve
similar decoding performance as the hybrid list decoding
algorithm in [13] for 5G-NR-Like LDPC codes.
V. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, the lifting design method introduced in
Section III is employed to construct a family of new 5G-NR-
Like LDPC codes based on the base matrix B shown in Fig. 1,
with the set of lifting factors ΨA = {Zγ = 3 × 2γ−1, 1 ≤
γ ≤10}. Then the decoding performance of different code
lengths and code rates for the new 5G-NR-Like LDPC codes
is simulated and compared with original 5G-NR LDPC codes
with the same code lengths and code rates, to demonstrate the
effectiveness of our design and the hybrid decoding algorithm.
The typical code rates R = 1/3, 1/2, 2/3 are chosen for
simulation, while the information bit lengths are chosen as
k = 960 and k = 384 for simulation. The simulations are
conducted over BI-AWGN channels, and the layered schedule
with the maximum I = 25 iteration is employed for BP
decoding. For the improved saturated BP decoding algorithm,
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:27:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
𝑅= 1/3
𝑅= 1/2
𝑅= 2/3
(a)
𝑅= 1/3
𝑅= 1/2
𝑅= 2/3
(b)
Fig. 3. The comparison of newly constructed 5G-NR LDPC codes and origi-
nal 5G-NR BG2 LDPC codes with (a) K = 10, Z = 96, k = KZ = 960, (b)
K = 8, Z = 48, k = KZ = 384. The typical code rates R = 1/3, 1/2, 2/3
are considered, respectively.
C is chosen as C = 2(n −v), i.e., the perturbation patterns
are selected as all the length-1 patterns. The truncated union
bounds for these LDPC codes are computed to show the
approximate ML decoding performance, which depends on the
weight distribution. Meanwhile, the finite block length bounds
[11] are shown as well to better show the finite block length
performance of the new 5G-NR-Like LDPC codes.
As shown in Fig. 3, since the minimum distances of the new
5G-NR-Like LDPC codes are notably optimized, the truncated
union bounds are greatly improved. It could be observed that
the BP and improved saturated BP decoding performance of
original 5G-NR LDPC codes are constrained by the truncated
union bounds at BLER < 10−5, while that is no longer valid
for the new 5G-NR-Like LDPC codes. Hence, no error floors
are shown and the decoding performance at BLER < 10−5 is
improved for the new 5G-NR-like LDPC codes for each code
rate and code length, though the slight losses of asymptotic
decoding performance lead to 0.1 ∼0.2dB SNR losses at
the waterfall region, which are negligible. Moreover, it can be
observed that the hybrid decoding algorithm could approach
the ML decoding performance at k = 384, while it can
hugely improve the BP decoding performance at k = 960.
Therefore, the effectiveness of our 5G-NR-Like LDPC design
and the advantages of the hybrid list decoding algorithm is
demonstrated.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a new design of 5G-NR-Like LDPC codes is
proposed, which majorly optimize the minimum distances, to
improve the ML decoding performance and then the decoding
performance at low BLER < 10−5 for short-to-medium code
lengths. Progressive edge growth and lifting techniques are
employed in both the base matrix design and the lifting design
to achieve desirable performance across nested code rates and
code lengths under the given design complexity. The hybrid list
decoding algorithm is adopted to approach the ML decoding
performance at short code lengths within the given decoding
complexity. Simulation results demonstrate the effectiveness
of the new 5G-NR-Like LDPC design and the advantages of
the hybrid list decoding algorithm. Hence, our new 5G-NR-
Like LDPC design is suitable for the HRLLC scenarios and
potentially helpful for enhanced new radio specification in 6G.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This
work
was
supported
by
the
Shenzhen
Science
and
Technology
Program
Project
under
Grant
No.
CJGJZD20230724092959002.
REFERENCES
[1] F. Tariq, M. R. A. Khandaker, K.-K. Wong, M. A. Imran, M. Bennis,
and M. Debbah, “A Speculative Study on 6G,” IEEE Wireless Commu-
nications, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 118–125, 2020.
[2] Technical Specification Group Radio Access Network: NR; Multiplexing
Channel Coding (Release 16), document 3GPP TS 38.212 v16.7.0, Sep.
2021.
[3] Evaluation of channel coding schemes, R1-1801468, 3GPP TSG RAN
WG1 Meeting #92, Huawei, HiSilicon, Feb. 2018.
[4] M. C. Cos¸kun, G. Durisi, T. Jerkovits, G. Liva, W. Ryan, B. Stein, and
F. Steiner, “Efficient Error-Correcting Codes in the Short Blocklength
Regime,” Physical Communication, vol. 34, pp. 66–79, 2019.
[5] T. Richardson and S. Kudekar, “Design of Low-Density Parity Check
Codes for 5G New Radio,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 56,
no. 3, pp. 28–34, 2018.
[6] S. V. S. Ranganathan, D. Divsalar, and R. D. Wesel, “Quasi-Cyclic
Protograph-Based Raptor-Like LDPC Codes for Short Block-Lengths,”
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 65, no. 6, pp. 3758–
3777, 2019.
[7] R. Smarandache and P. O. Vontobel, “Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes:
Influence of Proto- and Tanner-Graph Structure on Minimum Hamming
Distance Upper Bounds,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory,
vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 585–607, 2012.
[8] B. K. Butler and P. H. Siegel, “Bounds on the Minimum Distance of
Punctured Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes,” IEEE Transactions on Informa-
tion Theory, vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 4584–4597, 2013.
[9] H. Li, H. Xu, C. Chen, and B. Bai, “Efficient Construction of Quasi-
Cyclic LDPC Codes With Multiple Lifting Sizes,” IEEE Communica-
tions Letters, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 754–758, 2024.
[10] L. Li, J. Xu, J. Xu, and L. Hu, “LDPC design for 5G NR URLLC &
mMTC,” in 2020 International Wireless Communications and Mobile
Computing (IWCMC), 2020, pp. 1071–1076.
[11] Y. Polyanskiy, H. V. Poor, and S. Verdu, “Channel Coding Rate in the
Finite Blocklength Regime,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory,
vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 2307–2359, 2010.
[12] S. Scholl, P. Schl¨afer, and N. Wehn, “Saturated Min-Sum Decoding:
An “Afterburner” for LDPC Decoder Hardware,” in 2016 Design,
Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE), 2016,
pp. 1219–1224.
[13] Z. Peng and R. Yang, “Performance and Complexity Trade-Off between
Short-Length Regular and Irregular LDPC,” Journal of Computer and
Communications, vol. 12, no. 9, pp. 208–215, 2024.
[14] Z. He, K. Peng, and J. Song, “Rate-Compatible Length-Scalable Quasi-
Cyclic Spatially-Coupled LDPC Codes,” IEEE Transactions on Broad-
casting, pp. 1–15, 2024, early Access.
[15] Z. He, K. Peng, C. Zhang, and J. Song, “Low-Rate LDPC Code Design
for DTMB-A,” IEEE Transactions on Broadcasting, vol. 70, no. 2, pp.
739–746, 2024.
[16] Z. He, K. Peng, and J. Song, “Multi-Layer Progressive Tree-Structured
Edge Growth Algorithm for Nested Lifting Design of 5G-NR-Like
LDPC Codes,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 26, no. 12, pp. 2836–
2840, 2022.
[17] D. Declercq and M. Fossorier, “Improved Impulse Method to Evaluate
the Low Weight Profile of Sparse Binary Linear Codes,” in 2008 IEEE
International Symposium on Information Theory, 2008, pp. 1963–1967.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:27:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
