Multi-Stage Bit-Flipping Decoder Design for
Quantum Error-Correcting Codes
Patrick J. Moxom, Mark F. Flanagan
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University College Dublin,
Abstract—This paper proposes the use of simple bit-flipping
(BF) methods as a post processor for decoding quantum low-
density parity check codes (qLDPC) with message passing (MP).
Specifically, min-sum (MS) is used as the MP method for the
first stage of the multi-stage decoder. Two methods are proposed
that modify the low-complexity Gallager’s algorithm (GA). First,
a weighted bit-flipping (WBF) method is developed using soft
information from the MP stage. Secondly, GA is modified with
a random bit-flipping (RBF) approach. Early stopping and
loop detector stage switching methods are used to enhance the
performance of the BF stage. These methods are shown to
significantly reduce the error floor of the first stage while also
being less complex than alternative multi-stage decoders.
Index Terms—qLDPC codes, bit-flipping decoding, early stop-
ping, loop detection, message passing, complexity.
I. INTRODUCTION
In 1963 Robert Gallager published his groundbreaking
paper introducing low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1].
These codes offered excellent error correction for classical
systems despite their low computational complexity compared
to other decoding methods [2]. One of the main reasons for
their success is the use of MP methods such as min-sum (MS)
and sum-product (SP), which perform decoding via passing
messages between the nodes of the code’s Tanner graph.
The success of LDPC codes in classical error correction has
inspired their use in quantum error correction (QEC). Initially,
surface and toric codes were dominant choices in QEC due
to their high error threshold [3]. However, QEC has seen a
shift towards qLDPC codes [4], which inherit the advantages
of classical LDPC codes such as high fault tolerance, low
complexity, and scalability, making them extremely relevant
in QEC.
Despite their popularity, qLDPC codes still suffer from
some issues. Primarily, the degeneracy of qLDPC codes can
lead to convergence on incorrect codewords or decoding
failures [5]. Additionally, the Tanner graphs of qLDPC codes
can suffer from short cycles, despite the sparse nature of these
Tanner graphs, which can lead to error propagation during
decoding.
A family of generalised bicycle codes (GBCs) has been
shown to be suitable for mitigating these issues [6]. These
codes are generated by concatenating a binary circulant matrix
with its transpose. The distance of these codes is unknown;
however, they provide good error correction capabilities. For
this reason, the GBC family is used in this paper to demon-
strate the decoding capabilities of the proposed multi-stage
decoder.
GBC and other qLDPC codes can struggle to correctly
converge on an error pattern due to their degeneracy. To coun-
teract this, many post-processing techniques (PPTs) have been
proposed [7], [8]. Most notably, ordered statistics decoding
(OSD), an algorithm also used in classical decoding, can be
applied as a PPT when MP fails [5]. More specifically, order-0
OSD (OSD-0), which indicates that only one estimated error
vector is considered, has been shown to remove the error
floor for a variety of codes. Due to its performance, many
papers that highlight PPTs have used OSD-0 as a benchmark
to compare with newly proposed decoding innovations.
Although OSD-0 provides a high-performance benchmark
for PPTs, its latency is often overlooked [9], [10]. The
techniques used in the OSD algorithm, such as Gaussian
elimination and matrix inversion, are computationally taxing
[10]. Although low decoder latency is vital for both classical
and quantum systems, its importance cannot be understated
for quantum systems. Unlike classical bits, qubits suffer from
decoherence [11]. Over a very short period, qubits interact with
their environment, causing them to behave more classically,
losing the quantum properties that make them vital for quan-
tum computing [12]. As a result, a quantum decoder’s latency
must be low to prevent errors from propagating through the
system before they can be corrected, commonly referred to as
the backlog problem [13].
PPTs such as guided decimation (GD) and stabiliser inacti-
vation (SI) have been shown to reach a performance close
to OSD-0 while reducing latency and complexity [7], [8].
Despite their improvement over OSD-0, these methods involve
running MP multiple times to converge on an estimated error
vector. Since decoherence is such a prevalent issue in quantum
decoding, the use of multiple decoding rounds using latency-
prone MP algorithms is an aspect that can be improved.
Simple BF methods have been shown to be effective PPTs
for the classical LDPC decoding. In [14], GA was con-
catenated with various WBF methods [15], and was shown
to provide a reduction in the error floor. In this paper, we
investigate whether these methods can be applied as PPTs to
quantum MP algorithms such as MS to reduce the error floor.
The proposed methods use a single round of low-latency BF
decoding in place of multiple rounds of higher-latency MP
decoding.
In this paper, we introduce a novel method that concatenates
2025 35th Irish Signals and Systems Conference (ISSC) | 979-8-3315-7593-9/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ISSC67739.2025.11291312
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:29:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
MS with simple BF methods (MS-BF), which improves the
decoding performance for qLDPC codes. Additionally, MS-BF
has very little complexity and latency compared to alternative
methods such as MS-GD and MS-SI. This is due to the novel
MS-BF methods only requiring one or two stages (i.e. one MS
stage and one BF stage) compared to the multiple MP stages
performed by GD and SI.
The rest of the paper has the following structure: In Sec-
tion II, preliminaries including the QEC model and existing
decoding algorithms (MS and GA) are reviewed. In Section III,
the novel MS-BF decoder is introduced along with the BF
PPTs, namely, WBF and RBF. In Section IV the numerical
results are provided, highlighting the improvements achieved.
The reduced complexity and latency of the proposed method is
shown in Section V. Finally, closing remarks about the novel
methods are given in Section VI.
II. PRELIMINARIES
A. QEC model
QEC is vitally important for quantum computing due to
errors in the system as a result of decoherence and noise. In
classical error correction, the original codeword is recovered
by estimating the bit values of the original codeword. Qubits
adhere to the principle of superposition, which means that the
process of measuring them will collapse them into a definite
state [16]. Therefore, in order to protect the qubits, the error
pattern is recovered from the syndrome S, which is extracted
through quantum stabilisers [17]. After recovering the error
pattern, the same error can be applied to a qubit to bring it
back to its original state.
Qubit depolarising errors can take two forms, bit-flips and
phase-flips. These errors can be modelled by the X and Z Pauli
matrices, respectively, while the combination of a bit-flip and
phase-flip is modelled by a Y Pauli matrix, i.e.,
X =

0
1
1
0

,
Y =

0
−i
i
0

,
Z =

1
0
0
−1

.
In this paper, the symmetric depolarising error model is
adopted. This means that given a depolarising probability p,
the respective error probabilities are pX = pY = pZ = p/3 [18].
B. Quantum MP Decoders
Since qubits are prone to two different types of errors, two
error vectors must be recovered. Vector eX indicates (through
entries equal to 1) the locations of the bit-flips, while eZ the
phase-flips. Therefore, MP decoding must be performed twice
using two binary parity-check matrices, HX and HZ. Since
both error patterns are decoded independently, in this paper,
we will focus on the decoding of X errors only (i.e. using the
parity-check matrix HZ). Therefore, we write HZ simply as H
for convenience.
Figure 1 shows how H can be represented as a Tanner graph,
made up of check nodes and variable nodes. Assuming a
regular qLDPC matrix, every row in H represents a check node
of degree dc, with entry 1 representing an edge between the
𝐶2
𝑉0
𝑉1
𝑉2
𝑉3
𝑉4
𝑉5
𝑉6
𝑉7
𝐶1
𝐶3
𝐶0
𝑅1,0
𝜎1,5
Check Nodes
Variable Nodes
H =




0
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
1
0




Fig. 1: Tanner graph visualisation with MP examples and
corresponding parity-check matrix. With examples of check-
to-variable and variable-to-check messages passed during MP
decoding. Also shown is the corresponding parity check matrix
H.
check node and the corresponding variable nodes (represented
by the rows of degree dv).
MP algorithms operate by iteratively passing messages
between the check nodes and the variable nodes along their
respective edges, which is visualised in Figure 1. The check
node messages are given by σi, j and the variable node mes-
sages by Ri, j, and are computed according to
σi, j =
min
j′∈Ni\{j}(|Ri, j′|)×sgn




M
j′∈Ni\{ j}
HD(Ri, j′)

⊕Si


(1)
and
Ri, j = Lj +α ·
∑
i′∈Mj\{i}
σi′, j.
(2)
(1) and (2) show the calculations for the check and variable
node messages, respectively. Si represents the binary value
of the syndrome for check node i. Ni represents the set of
variable nodes connected to check node i. Mj on the other
hand, represents the check nodes connected to the variable
node j. Note that each message ignores the information that
was received from the node to which the message is sent.
This prevents redundant information from being fed back to
the same node. The min operation extracts the message of
minimum value from the set; all other received messages are
disregarded as the check node message can only be as reliable
as the least reliable variable node message received. The HD
operation returns logic 0 for positive numbers and logic 1 for
negative numbers. The sgn operation makes a sign decision
based on a XOR result of all the logic values in HD(Ri,j′) and
Si, 0 returns +1 and 1 returns −1. The normalisation factor
α is a value between 0 and 1, which is designed to speed up
the convergence of the algorithm. The optimal value is found
experimentally for each decoding algorithm.
Lj represents the likelihood that the j-th qubit experiences
an X error. Since we do not have initial information about the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:29:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
error pattern, Lj is calculated using the log likelihood ratio1
(LLR),
Lj = log
 
1−2p
3
2p
3
!
.
(3)
An iteration refers to a complete round of MP between
the check and variable nodes using (1) and (2). After every
iteration,
ˆej = HD
 
Lj +α · ∑
i∈Mj
σi, j
!
(4)
updates the estimated error vector using the check-to-variable
messages and the a priori LLR Lj, with HD being used to
convert the value to a binary representation. The iterations are
repeated until the error vector ˆe satisfies
S = ˆeHT,
(5)
or the maximum number of iterations is reached.
C. BF Decoding
In the pursuit of a low-latency second stage decoding
method, low-complexity BF methods are a promising solution.
As seen in Section II-B, MP requires the use of multiplications
and other operations, such as sgn, HD, etc., to calculate the
messages. BF employs a simple method that makes a bit-
flip decision based on threshold comparisons; this significantly
reduces the latency of BF compared to MP. The simplest BF
method is Gallager’s algorithm [1] (GA).
BF algorithms have a similar structure to MP algorithms in
that they both operate on the Tanner graph. GA employs,
E j = −∑
i∈Mj
(1−2((
M
k∈Ni
ˆek)⊕Si))
(6)
to determine which bits to flip by calculating a reliability
metric E j, which corresponds to the qubits in the error vector
ˆej. Reliability is calculated by iterating through every check
node in the neighbourhood Mj. For every connected check
node, the parity of the variable nodes in Ni is checked against
that of Si. If this parity check is satisfied, E j is decreased;
otherwise, it is increased. Once calculated, the values of ej
that correspond to max(E j) are flipped. This continues until
either (5) is satisfied or the maximum number of iterations is
reached.
III. MULTI-STAGE MP-BF DECODING ALGORITHMS
MP decoders can be prone to decoding failures due to their
degeneracy. Figure 2 shows that as the number of errors in
the system increases, the probability of recovering the original
error vector decreases (The results of Figure 2 use HX of the
B1[882,24,≤24] code where 882 is the length of the code
block, 24 is the number of logical qubits, and ≤24 is the upper
bound of the code distance). This motivates the use of PPTs as
a means to reduce the error floor. To understand the intuition
1The factor 2/3 represents the bit-flip and phase-flip probability, we include
the probability py as it represents an additional probability of either an X or
Y occurring.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
MS
GA
Fig. 2: Probability of completely recovering the original error
vector for a given number of initial X errors acting on qubits
for the B1[882,24,≤24] code.
behind using BF methods as a second stage, we must analyse
the decoding philosophy it uses. The soft information used by
MP decoders, while useful, can also prevent the decoder from
converging on a solution. If MS fails to converge after the
maximum number of iterations, this could be due to the soft
information being too weak to drive the decoder to a solution.
We may then take advantage of the hard-decision nature of
GA to converge to a solution.
The decoding ability of GA itself is limited. Comparing MS
and GA in Figure 2 shows that MS outperforms GA. GAs
usefulness as a second stage decoder is due to the error vector
from the MP stage being passed to the BF stage. Essentially,
the MP stage should recover most of the error pattern, leaving
GA to clean up the remaining errors after MP fails to converge.
In this section, we will describe the early stopping method, and
introduce the novel WBF and RBF decoders.
A. MP Early Stopping
When the MP decoder gets stuck, it continues to try to
converge on a solution until the maximum number of iterations
is reached. In its attempts to converge, MP often introduces
more errors into the error vector. This is not ideal for GA,
which has a limited performance compared to MS. A solution
to this issue is to identify a point at which the MP decoder
has not yet started to introduce more errors into the error
vector estimate, and save the current decoder output for the
next stage. The early stopping method [19] saves the current
error vector for the next stage when the Hamming distance
dH( ˆS, ˆSpre), between the current syndrome ˆS, and the previous
syndrome ˆSpre, is less than or equal to the variable node
degree dv. This is a reliable way of detecting a stage when the
algorithm is still converging and has not yet begun to introduce
errors that may reduce the performance of the subsequent BF
stage.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:29:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
0
10
20
30
40
50
Iterations
0
20
40
60
80
100
Number of Unsatisfied Syndromes
With Early Stopping
Without Early Stopping
Max.
Iterations
Early
Stopping
Fig. 3: The number of unmatched syndromes during the
decoding iterations of MS and GA as a PPT. The effect of
GA is compared for two cases, after MS is cut short due
to early stopping, and after the maximum iteration limit is
reached. The results shown are for the B1[882,24, ≤24] with
α = 0.75 and a maximum of 25 iterations.
Figure 3 shows the effect2 of the early stopping method
in the second stage. With early stopping, the number of
unsatisfied syndromes are much lower than if the maximum
number of iterations was reached. As a result, GA was much
more likely to converge to a solution instead of becoming
caught in a loop due to the increased number of residual errors.
For all algorithms proposed in this section, the decoder does
not immediately move to the next stage if the early stopping
condition is met, as there is still a chance that MS could
converge. Instead, the error vector ˆeES is saved, as well as
the soft information when early stopping occurs, and this is
passed to the BF stage if MS reaches the maximum number
of iterations.
Algorithm 1 MP-BF Post-processing
1: [ˆe, ˆ
eES] ←−MP(H,S,α)
w/ early stopping
2: if S = ˆeHT then
3:
Return ˆe
4: else
5:
if early stopping activated then
6:
ˆe = ˆ
eES
7:
end if
8:
ˆe ←−BF(H,S, ˆe)
9:
if S = ˆeHT then
10:
Return ˆe
11:
end if
12: end if
13: Return decoding failure
2Typically, the maximum number of iterations is much higher (range of 50
- 100); it was made smaller in this case to make the figure more readable.
B. Two Stage MP-BF Decoder
The individual performance results and the intuition behind
the decoding philosophies of the MP and BF decoders point
to BF being a strong candidate for post-processing. Combined
with the early stopping technique, the BF decoder should
greatly reduce the error floor when a small number of residual
errors are present after MP. The proposed concatenation of
both stages3 is described in Algorithm 1.
C. Weighted BF Decoder: Using ’Lost-in-Between’ Reliability
GA only uses hard information when calculating reliability,
as seen in (6). However, in principle the soft information
associated with qubits can be used to calculate check-node
reliability [7]. This can in turn be used to implement WBF
methods, which have been shown to have increased perfor-
mance over GA. In classical LDPC decoding, soft information
refers to the confidence level in the correctness of a received
bit. Higher noise generally reduces this confidence, making the
decision less reliable. Soft information takes a different form
for quantum systems, as errors occur due to decoherence rather
than due to noise in a physical channel4.
Recall from Section II-B that the check and variable nodes
pass messages back and forth regarding their reliability. This
information can be used to estimate the reliability of each
check node. The greater in magnitude of Ri, j, the more likely
it is that the corresponding error bit estimate is correct. The
reliability of the check nodes can be calculated by
Wi = ∑
j∈Ni
Ri, j
.
(7)
We refer to this reliability as the ’lost-in-between’ reliability.
If the sum of the magnitudes of variable node messages in Ni
are low, this implies that the messages Ri, j are near 0, causing
them to be near the decision threshold in (4).
’lost-in-between’ refers to the fact that the decoder is lost
in between two valid codewords. When the codeword is being
pulled equally between two valid codewords, e1, and e2 such
that S = e1HT = e2HT, the qubits that correspond to the lowest
magnitude Ri, j are responsible for the non-convergence.
Intuitively, the lower the value of Wi, the more likely it is
that the corresponding check-node has erroneous qubits in Ni.
Although WBF algorithms have been implemented in classical
decoding [15], the proposed method is the first time, to the
best of the authors’ knowledge, that a WBF decoder has been
designed using the ’lost-in-between’ reliability. Our method
employs an augmented version of (6),
E j = −∑
i∈Mj
(1−2Wi((
M
k∈Ni
ek)⊕Si))
(8)
where Wi is the soft information described in (7), to implement
the WBF decoder.
3Algorithm 1 fully describes the GA method. If WBF is implemented, the
reliability values Wi, must be calculated as described in Section II-C after MP
fails to converge. Wi is then passed to BF as another parameter from the MP
operation
4While classical noise can occur at stages of quantum error correction,
this work concentrates on the impacts of decoherence, which is the principal
mechanism for errors in quantum systems [12].
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:29:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
0
10
20
30
40
50
Iterations
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Number of Unsatisfied Syndromes
MS-RBF
MS-GA
Max.
Iterations
Loop
Detected
Fig. 4: The number of unmatched syndromes during the de-
coding iterations of MS for two cases: with GA, and with RBF.
Results are shown for the B1[882,24, ≤24] with α = 0.75 and
a maximum of 25 iterations.
D. Three Stage RBF Decoder
Despite its robustness for correcting low-weight error pat-
terns, BF methods can still occasionally fail to converge. This
usually occurs due to cycles in the Tanner graph, causing GA
to loop through a set of potential error vectors. The RBF
approach has been shown to mitigate this problem for the
classical case [14]. Our novel decoder implements RBF in
the quantum decoder for the first time. RBF implements a
loop detector in GA that begins to store error vectors starting
from iteration L1. The loop detector is capable of storing up
to L2 iterations. At each iteration, the current error estimate
is compared against the set of error vectors stored in the loop
detector. If any of the stored errors match the current one, a
random permutation of the least reliable qubits are flipped.
RBF finds the qubits that correspond to max(E j). A random
subset of these qubits of these qubits of size q are flipped,
where 0 < q ≤b, and b is the length of max(E j). This prevents
the decoder from iterating through the same set of error vectors
when a loop occurs, increasing the likelihood of converging
on a valid error pattern. The effect of RBF compared to GA
is demonstrated in Figure 4.
IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS
Figure 5 shows the logical error rate of the proposed WBF
and RBF methods, together with the performance of state-
of-the-art methods under the same conditions. As expected,
MS alone suffers from a higher error floor compared to the
other decoding methods. MS-GA slightly improves upon MS,
reducing the error floor by about half an order of magnitude.
As shown in Figure 2, GA suffers from only being able to
correct a small number of residual errors. This is because GA
becomes trapped in a loop when the number of uncorrected
errors is high. WBF and RBF help to stop these loops from
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
Depolarising Probability (p)
10-8
10-6
10-4
10-2
100
Logical Error Rate
MS
MS-GA
MS-RBF
MS-WBF
MS-SI
MS-OSD
Fig. 5: Comparison of BF, SI and OSD on B1[882,24, ≤24]
code. The MS stage uses a normalisation factor of 0.75 for GA
and WBF, 0.625 for OSD, 0.9 for SI, and 0.875 for RBF. A
maximum number of iterations of 100 is used for all methods.
Flooded scheduling is used for all methods.
occurring. As a result, at p = 0.05 the performance increases
by almost two orders of magnitude for WBF, and almost three
orders of magnitude for RBF.
These results show that significant gains can be achieved
with simple BF decoders when additional methods are imple-
mented to protect GA from trapping sets. Although SI and
OSD decoders still outperform the proposed BF methods5,
RBF and WBF offer a good compromise between decoding
ability and complexity. This compromise is achieved through
the low complexity feature of the proposed methods, which is
detailed in the next section.
V. MS-BF COMPLEXITY & LATENCY ANALYSIS
The key advantage that MS-BF offers over alternative
methods such as OSD-0, SI, and GD is its reduced complexity.
All of these algorithms typically converge during the first stage
of MS, giving a similar average complexity, especially for low
depolarising probabilities. The worst-case complexities must
be analysed to see the advantages of MS-BF.
MS-BF requires two rounds at most, each with T iterations.
With the complexity of MS being O(Tn), the worst-case
complexity of MS-BF is O(2Tn). This complexity scales very
well compared to the worst-case complexity of SI6 and GD,
which are both O(Tn2), and OSD-0 is O(n3). Similarly to GD,
5MS-GD was not included in Figure 5 as [8] only implemented MS-GD
using serial scheduling, it was deemed unfair to compare to the methods
implementing flooded scheduling. However, when MS-GD was compared to
MS-SI, both with serial scheduling, the performance was found to be very
similar. Results are not included due to space limitations.
6In the worst-case scenario we assume that SI continues inactivating check
nodes until the entire qLDPC matrix is inactivated, or a solution is found.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:29:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
BF improves on SI and OSD-0 as there is no longer a need to
solve a linear system of equations. Furthermore, SI and GD
need n rounds of BP in a worst-case scenario, whereas BF
only needs two.
MS-BF having a fixed number of rounds for its worst case
means that its scales very well with increased depolarising
probability. The average complexity lies between O(Tn) and
O(2Tn), depending on the error rate. At a pX of 0.05, the
average complexity of MS-GD is O(2.91Tn), which is already
in excess of the maximum possible MS-BF complexity of
O(2n).
pX
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
ravg,GD
2.91
9.82
60.46
231.7
ravg,BF
1.08
1.14
1.32
1.57
TABLE I: Average number of decimation rounds of MS-GD
[8] compared with the average number of MS-BF rounds for
the B1[882,24,≤24] code.
The average number of rounds for different bit-flipping
errors between BF and GD are compared in Table I. As the
depolarising probability increases, the number of GD rounds
increases exponentially, whereas MS-BF takes less than 2
rounds.
The decoding latency refers to the time it takes for the
decoder to decode a codeword. When comparing MS-BF with
MS-(GD or SI) the latency of the first stage is assumed to be
equal on average, as they both use the MS algorithm. For the
post-processing stage, BF has reduced latency in comparison
to MS. BFs per-iteration latency is small thanks to simple
XOR operations and flips being determined by threshold
decisions. While MS has a larger per-iteration latency due
to operations such as min, sgn, HD as well as message
calculations. Additionally, SI and GD potentially use multiple
rounds of MS, compared to a single round of BF, further
increasing the latency between syndrome input and decoder
output.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper proposes the use of three BF techniques as
a post-processor to MP algorithms such as MS. The three
decoders, MS-(GA, WBF, RBF), are shown to reduce the error
floor, with RBF being the most competitive with PPTs like
SI. The use of the early stopping method prevents the MP
decoders from allowing additional errors to propagate through
the system. This improves the performance of the second-
stage BF methods. The primary advantage of MS-BF is its
reduced complexity and latency compared to MS-(GD and SI).
Benchmark methods like OSD-0, SI, and GD have exponential
and super-linear complexity scaling, respectively. MP-BF has
linear complexity and is shown to use much fewer MP rounds
than GD, making it especially useful for decoding large-scale
qLDPC codes.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors also acknowledge both Sana Javed and Dr.
Francisco Miguel Garcia-Herrero for providing access to the
B1 code.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Transactions on
Information Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[2] N. P. Breuckmann and J. N. Eberhardt, “Quantum low-density parity-
check codes,” PRX Quantum, vol. 2, p. 040101, Oct 2021.
[3] S. B. Bravyi and A. Y. Kitaev, “Quantum codes on a lattice with
boundary,” arXiv: Quantum Physics, Nov 1998.
[4] S. Bravyi, A. W. Cross, J. M. Gambetta, D. Maslov, P. Rall, and
T. J. Yoder, “High-threshold and low-overhead fault-tolerant quantum
memory,” Nature, vol. 627, no. 8005, p. 778782, Mar. 2024.
[5] P. Panteleev and G. Kalachev, “Degenerate quantum LDPC codes with
good finite length performance,” Quantum, vol. 5, p. 585, Nov. 2021.
[6] A. Kovalev and L. Pryadko, “Quantum kronecker sum-product low-
density parity-check codes with finite rate,” Physical Review A, vol. 88,
07 2013.
[7] J. du Crest, M. Mhalla, and V. Savin, “Stabilizer inactivation for
message-passing decoding of quantum LDPC codes,” arXiv: Quantum
Physics, 2023.
[8] H. Yao, “Belief propagation decoding of quantum LDPC codes with
guided decimation,” In 2024 IEEE International Symposium on Infor-
mation Theory (ISIT), pp. 2478–2483, July 2024.
[9] J. Valls, F. Garcia-Herrero, N. Raveendran, and B. Vasi, “Syndrome-
based min-sum vs OSD-0 decoders: FPGA implementation and analysis
for quantum LDPC codes,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 138 734–138 743,
2021.
[10] A. Bogdanov, J. Pelzl, C. Paar, M. Mertens, and A. Rupp, “A parallel
hardware architecture for fast gaussian elimination over GF(2),” in
2006 14th Annual IEEE Symposium on Field-Programmable Custom
Computing Machines, 2006, pp. 237–248.
[11] L. Chirolli and G. Burkard, “Decoherence in solid-state qubits,” Ad-
vances in Physics, vol. 57, no. 3, p. 225285, May 2008.
[12] W. H. Zurek, “Decoherence and the transition from quantum to classical
– revisited,” arXiv: Quantum Physics, 2003.
[13] B. Skoric, “Parallel window decoding enables scalable fault tolerant
quantum computation,” Nat. Commun, 2023.
[14] T. Chang, P.-H. Wang, and Y. Su, “Multi-stage bit-flipping decoding
algorithms for LDPC codes,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. PP,
pp. 1–1, 06 2019.
[15] H. Huang, Y. Wang, and G. Wei, “Mixed modified weighted bit-flipping
decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IET Communications,
vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 283–290, 2015.
[16] M. Namiki and S. Pascazio, “Wave-function collapse by measurement
and its simulation,” Phys. Rev. A, vol. 44, pp. 39–53, Jul 1991.
[17] D. Gottesman, “Stabilizer codes and quantum error correction,” arXiv:
Quantum Physics, 1997.
[18] H. Bombin, R. S. Andrist, M. Ohzeki, H. G. Katzgraber, and M. A.
Martin-Delgado, “Strong resilience of topological codes to depolariza-
tion,” Physical Review X, vol. 2, no. 2, Apr. 2012.
[19] S. Javed, F. Garcia-Herrero, B. Vasic, and M. F. Flanagan, “Low-
complexity linear programming based decoding of quantum LDPC
codes,” arXiv: Quantum Physics, Jan 2024.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:29:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
