IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 29, NO. 6, JUNE 2025

1385

A Cross-Layer Scheduling Method for Pipelined Layered Multi-Edge Type QC-LDPC Decoder With Better Conflict Resolution
Dongxu Chang , Qingqing Peng , Guanghui Wang , and Guiying Yan

Abstract— For multi-edge type quasi-cyclic low-density paritycheck (MET-QC-LDPC) codes, the presence of common variable nodes shared between rows within a single layer poses great challenges for the hardware design of the decoder. In this study, a cross-layer update scheduling method for pipelined layered MET-QC-LDPC codes is proposed to achieve improved conflict resolution. Through a probabilistic analysis, we show that by pairing layers with relatively small common degrees and performing alternating updates between the paired layers, better conflict resolution can be achieved than the layer-bylayer updating approach. Experimental results demonstrate that, at medium to low code rates, 50% to 75% of memory conflicts can be mitigated through the proposed cross-layer scheduling compared to the layer-by-layer scheduling approach, without compromising decoding performance.
Index Terms— Low-density parity-check code, scheduling policy, MET-QC-LDPC, memory conflict.
I. INTRODUCTION
LOW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) code [1] has been widely used in communication fields, such as 5G New Radio (NR) [2], IEEE 802.11 (WiFi) [3]. It was demonstrated by MacKay and Neal in 1996 [4] that LDPC codes can approach the Shannon limit. The belief propagation (BP) decoding algorithm of LDPC code is most commonly used due to its low complexity and good performance in practice.
Quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) codes, as a type of structured LDPC code, feature a parity-check matrix constructed from circularly shifted identity submatrices [5]. Owing to their exceptional hardware compatibility and low encoding/ decoding complexity, QC-LDPC codes have been adopted in the 5G New Radio (NR) standard for data channels [6].
As for multi-edge type QC-LDPC (MET-QC-LDPC) code, it is considered as a strong candidate at many modern high performance error correcting proprietary solutions and standards [7], [8]. While requiring more iterations for decoder convergence, ME-QC-LDPC codes can achieve better iterative decoding thresholds and decoding performance [9], [10], and
Received 28 February 2025; revised 7 April 2025; accepted 17 April 2025. Date of publication 21 April 2025; date of current version 12 June 2025. This work is partially supported by the National Key R&D Program of China(2023YFA1009600). The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was M. Battaglioni. (Corresponding author: Guanghui Wang.)
Dongxu Chang, Qingqing Peng, and Guanghui Wang are with the School of Mathematics, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong 250100, China (e-mail: dongxuchang@mail.sdu.edu.cn; pqing@mail.sdu.edu.cn; ghwang@sdu.edu.cn).
Guiying Yan is with the Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, CAS, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China (e-mail: yangy@amss.ac.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2025.3562626

their more flexible design constraints ensure that a potentially larger code distance can be achieved [11], [12].
However, while single-edge QC-LDPC code can achieve high clock frequency and high data throughput in hardware implementation by utilizing the pipelined decoding architecture [13] of layered belief propagation (LBP) [14], the hardware design for MET-QC-LDPC decoders presents greater complexity. This complexity arises due to the potential existence of commonly connected variable nodes between the check nodes within the same layer, where one layer refers to all the rows obtained from a single row of the base graph after lifting. On the one hand, this characteristic limits the per-layer parallel decoding capability of MET-QC-LDPC codes; on the other hand, it increases the susceptibility of codes to memory conflicts in pipelined decoding architectures. Specifically, memory conflicts will occur when the information that needs to be read in the current row has not yet been written in the previous row. To resolve such conflicts, idle cycles are required to delay the reading of information, which subsequently increases decoding latency and reduces the throughput of the decoder.
It is noteworthy that different update orders for check nodes and variable nodes can result in varying numbers of required idle cycles. Prior works [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20], [21] have proposed various decoding scheduling algorithms aimed at mitigating memory conflicts in LDPC codes. However, for multi-edge type LDPC codes, it is necessary to account for the properties of multi-edges to further refine the design of decoding schedules. Therefore, how to adjust the decoding order to alleviate memory conflicts in MET-QC-LDPC decoding is crucial for the industrial deployment and application of MET-QC-LDPC codes.
In this study, a scheduling policy of the pipelined layered decoder that alternately selects rows from different layers for updating is proposed. Through probabilistic analysis, we demonstrate that when the updated rows are selected alternately from layers with small common degrees, this alternating update approach can alleviate memory conflicts, resulting in better latency performance compared to layerby-layer updates. To support this approach, an algorithm is developed to pair layers with small common degrees. Experimental results demonstrate that 50% to 75% of memory conflicts can be mitigated through the proposed cross-layer scheduling at medium to low code rates without compromising decoding performance.
The rest of the letter is organized as follows: Section II provides a brief introduction to MET-QC-LDPC codes, the LBP decoding algorithm, and memory conflicts in pipelined

1558-2558 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:25:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1386

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 29, NO. 6, JUNE 2025

decoding architectures. Section III presents the proposed cross-layer scheduling approach. Section IV presents the results of the simulation experiments. We conclude in Section V.

II. PRELIMINARIES
A. Multi-Edge Type QC-LDPC Codes
A QC-LDPC code can be described by a parity-check matrix H which is composed of square submatrices. Each submatrice could be either a zero matrix or a circulant permutation matrix. Given a lifting degree Z, the corresponding base matrix B of H can be defined as follows: if Bi,j = l is a positive integer, then it is replaced by an Z × Z circulant permutation matrix Hi,j, where Hi,j has exactly l ones in each column. The parameter l is referred to as the multiplicity of the QC block. If there exists a Bi,j > 1, the QC-LDPC code defined by the corresponding H is referred to as a MET-QC-LDPC code. On the other hand, if Bi,j = 0, then it is replaced by an Z × Z zero matrix.

B. Layered Belief Propagation

The message-passing process of BP decoding consists of V2C message updates and C2V message updates. The message update rule of V2C is

mi(→ l) α = m0 +

mh(l→−1i),

(1)

h∈N (i)\α

and the message update rule of C2V is





mα(l→ ) i = 2 tanh−1 

tanh m(jl→−α1)/2  (2)

j∈N (α)\i

where m0 is the channel message in LLR form, l is the number of iterations, N (v) represents the nodes connected directly to node v, mi(→ l) α means the message from variable node i to check node α in iteration l and m(αl→ ) i means the message from check node α to variable node i in iteration l. The initial message m(i→ 0)α and mα(0→) i is 0. In practical implementation, min-sum or normalized min-sum algorithm are often used to reduce the decoding complexity of (2).
In each decoding iteration, LBP [14] sequentially selects each check node in the graph and updates the information on all edges connected to the selected check node. Specifically, it performs V2C message updates along all edges connected to the selected check node, followed by C2V message updates. Different update schedules can result in different decoding
performances [22].

C. Memory Conflicts in Pipelining
The pipelined decoding architecture achieves high throughput by effectively utilizing hardware resources [13], [23]. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the information associated with the variable nodes is read and written in a pipelined manner, where t represents the latency of the end of a read and start of a write for a layer, measured in clock cycles. During this process, the decoder simultaneously reads the information of the variable

Fig. 1. Idle cycle in the pipelined decoding architecture.
Fig. 2. The decoding order for cross-layer scheduling approach.
nodes in the current decoding layer while writing the updated information of the variable nodes from the previously decoded layer.
However, when there are correlations between the input and output information, memory conflicts can occur, necessitating the insertion of idle cycles to prevent such conflicts. For example, in Fig. 1, one idle cycle needs to be inserted to avoid memory conflicts. It can be observed that the number of required idle cycles is primarily determined by the number of commonly connected variable nodes of adjacent check nodes in the decoding order. Following [15] and [17], we characterize the number of idle cycles required for a given decoding schedule using the sum of the common degrees of adjacent check nodes in the decoding sequence.
III. CROSS-LAYER SCHEDULING APPROACH For single-edge type QC-LDPC codes, the rows within the same layer are mutually orthogonal. Consequently, the Z rows in the same layer can be decoded in parallel without causing any memory conflict, thereby reducing decoding latency [18], [24]. In contrast, for MET-QC-LDPC codes, the layer-by-layer updating approach can result in memory conflicts due to the presence of multi-edges, leading to additional latency. This latency, however, can be mitigated through the implementation of a cross-layer scheduling approach, which is defined as follows. Definition 1 (Cross-layer Scheduling): Consider a METQC-LDPC code with 2t layers. Define the scheduling sequence as Scl = {s1,1, s1,2; s2,1, s2,2; · · · ; st,1, st,2}, where si,j represents distinct layers. In cross-layer scheduling, layers are updated during each iteration according to the order specified by Scl. As illustrated in Fig. 2, two layers, si,1 and si,2, are selected for updates at step i. First, the decoder selects p mutually orthogonal rows from si,1 for parallel updates. Subsequently, the decoder selects p mutually orthogonal rows from si,2 for parallel updates. This alternating process continues between si,1 and si,2, updating rows until all rows in both layers have been processed. The decoding process then moves to the next pair of layers, si+1,1 and si+1,2, and repeats.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:25:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHANG et al.: CROSS-LAYER SCHEDULING METHOD FOR PIPELINED LAYERED MET-QC-LDPC DECODER

1387

Note that in Definition 1, an even number of layers is assumed. However, when the number of layers is odd, the final group of layers can consist of either one or three layers, and a similar decoding process can be applied. Unlike the traditional layer-by-layer updating approach, the cross-layer scheduling method updates rows from different layers before completing all updates within a single layer. By processing multiple layers simultaneously, the hardware complexity of the decoder does not experience much increase. We show that when the pairwise grouped layers have a low degree of overlap in the base graph, the cross-layer scheduling method is more effective in avoiding memory conflicts compared to the layerby-layer update approach.
Consider a protograph-based LDPC code derived from a given base graph through a z-fold lifting process and random permutation, where z approaches infinity. Without loss of generality, we assume that each layer consists of two QC blocks. For a specific layer, denoted as si,1, let the multiplicities of its two QC blocks be a1 and a2, respectively. Suppose the decoder has already updated p mutually orthogonal rows within this layer.
If p additional mutually orthogonal rows within si,1 are randomly selected for the subsequent update, the expected common degrees, denoted as Ec, between the previously updated rows and the newly selected rows is given by

Ec

=

(a1

− 1)a1p z

+

(a2

− 1)a2p z

1 + o( ),
z

where the common degree here refers to the number of

columns that are connected to both the previously updated

p rows and the newly selected p rows.

Alternatively, if the next update selects p mutually orthog-

onal rows from a different layer, si,2, where the multiplicities
of its two QC blocks are b1 and b2 (with the condition
b1 +b2 = a1 +a2), then the expected common degree, denoted as Ec′ , between the updated rows from si,1 and the newly updated rows from si,2 are given by

Ec′

=

b1a1p z

+

b2a2p z

+

1 o( ).
z

From the definition, Ec and Ec′ represent the expected memory conflicts under the layer-by-layer scheduling and

cross-layer scheduling schemes, respectively. Therefore, com-

paring their values can reflect the effectiveness of these

scheduling schemes in handling memory conflicts.

Without loss of generality, assume a1 ≤ a2. Then the

following holds:

a21

+ a1a2 p + o( 1 )

z

z

≤

Ec′

≤

a22

+ a1a2 p z

1 + o( ),
z

where equality on the left-hand side is achieved when b1 = a1 + a2, b2 = 0, while equality on the right-hand side is achieved when b1 = 0, b2 = a1 + a2. Since

a21

+

a1a2 p

+

1 o( )

≤

a21

+

a22 p

+

1 o( )

z

z

z

z

≈

Ec

≤

a22

+ a1a2 p z

1 + o( ),
z

it can be observed that when b1 is relatively large and b2 is relatively small—i.e., when there is a significant difference

Algorithm 1 Paired Algorithm for Cross-Layer Scheduling Input: Base graph B of the MET-QC-LDPC codes with m
layers Output: Scheduling sequence Scl
1: Let s be the layer with the highest degree that is not in Scl;
2: Let s′ be the layer with the smallest common degree with s that is not in Scl;
3: if s and s′ are distinct then 4: Add {s, s′} to the end of S; 5: else 6: Add {s} to the end of S; 7: end if 8: If there are still layers not included in S, repeat steps 1
to 7;
between the multiplicities of the QC blocks corresponding to si,1 and si,2—cross-layer scheduling results in reduced latency. Conversely, when b1 is relatively small and b2 is relatively large—i.e., when the difference in the multiplicities of the QC blocks corresponding to si,1 and si,2 is minor— layer-by-layer scheduling can achieve lower latency.
Therefore, if layers with greatly different multiplicities can be effectively paired, the cross-layer scheduling approach can mitigate memory conflicts during the decoding process of MET-QC-LDPC codes, thereby reducing decoding latency. To facilitate this pairing, we define the common degree between layers as follows:
Definition 2 (Common Degree of Layers): The common degree between two layers is defined as the sum of the minimum multiplicities of each variable node associated with the two layers in the base graph.
For example, let si,1 and si,2 represent two layers, each consisting of two QC blocks. The multiplicities of the two QC blocks in si,1 are denoted as a1 and a2, while those in s2 are denoted as b1 and b2. The common degree between si,1 and si,2 is then calculated as min(a1, b1) + min(a2, b2).
We employ Algorithm 1 to pair layers with relatively small common degrees in the MET-QC-LDPC code, thereby enabling cross-layer scheduling to achieve favorable results. In Algorithm 1, the scheduling sequence Scl for cross-layer scheduling is determined by greedily pairing layers with the smallest common degrees, following descending order of layer degrees. This degree-based pairing method is shown to achieve highly effective performance in experiments. The first step of Algorithm 1 involves selecting a layer for pairing based on its degree, while the second step identifies the layer to be paired with, based on the size of their common degree. If multiple layers meet the selection criteria in either step, one of them can be randomly chosen.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, we evaluate the extent of memory conflicts in MET-QC-LDPC codes under different scheduling strategies. Specifically, three scheduling methods are examined: layer-by-layer scheduling, cross-layer scheduling, and the layer-by-layer scheduling optimized based on the traveling

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:25:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1388

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 29, NO. 6, JUNE 2025

Fig. 3. The base matrix of the MET-QC-LDPC code proposed in [25].

Fig. 5. The memory conflicts in one iteration under the layer-by-layer scheduling and the cross-layer scheduling for different code rates.

of the code are mainly concentrated in the high-rate region,

and the memory conflicts caused by multi-edge constitute the

dominant portion of the overall memory conflicts across dif-

ferent code rates. Since these methods only adjust the update

order of the layers without optimizing the memory conflicts

caused by the multiple edges within the layers, this component

becomes the main bottleneck in memory conflicts at various

Fig. 4. The memory conflicts in one iteration under the layer-by-layer code rates. The effects of other existing memory conflicts opti-

scheduling and the cross-layer scheduling for different code rates.

mization techniques exhibit similar behavior since the memory

conflicts under multi-edge are not addressed [17], [18], [19],

salesman problem as presented in [15] and [16], which is [20], [21]. In contrast, the cross-layer scheduling approach

denoted as TSP-layer-by-layer. And the TSP is solved using significantly alleviates memory conflicts in the pipelined LBP

the differential evolution algorithm. The degree of memory decoder compared to other scheduling approaches. At higher

conflicts is quantified by the sum of the common degrees of code rates, where the base matrix contains fewer layers, the

adjacent check nodes in the decoding order within a single benefits of the cross-layer scheduling approach are limited due

iteration.

to the smaller pool of layers available for pairing. However,

In Fig. 4, the memory conflict situations under different at lower code rates, where the base matrix includes a larger

scheduling schemes are presented based on the rate-compatible number of layers, pairing layers with small common degrees

LDPC code with good threshold performance provided in [25], effectively mitigates memory conflicts through the cross-layer

whose base matrix B is provided in Fig. 3. The first column scheduling approach. At medium to low code rates, 50% to

of the base matrix B is punctured, resulting in a range of 75% of memory conflicts can be mitigated. Moreover, under

code rates expressed as 8/(9 + i), varying from 8/9 to 1/3. different values of p, the cross-layer scheduling method con-

The information block length is set to k = 1032, and the sistently demonstrates a stable advantage in handling memory

base matrix B is lifted using the QC-PEGA method [26]. The conflicts. Therefore, by alleviating memory conflicts, the idle

number of p is set to 5, 10, and 15, respectively. It should cycles in latency can be reduced, thereby decreasing the overall

be noted that, apart from the scheduling order of layers, latency and improving throughput.

the update order of rows within a layer also influences the To further verify the effectiveness of cross-layer schedul-

degree of memory conflicts. To achieve better memory conflict ing in handling memory conflicts in MET-QC-LDPC codes,

management, under each scheduling method, we employ a we compare the memory conflicts under different scheduling

greedy approach within the given layer to select rows in a schemes of the MET-QC-LDPC code proposed in the 3GPP

manner that minimizes memory conflicts during the current meeting [27], where the information length k is set to be 384.

update.

The results are presented in Fig. 5, where p is set to 3 and 6,

As shown in Fig. 4, the memory conflict situations of respectively. It can be observed that cross-layer scheduling can

different scheduling strategies under various code rates are pre- greatly alleviate memory conflicts for various values of p, and

sented. It can be observed that the TSP-layer-by-layer updating its ability to mitigate memory conflicts improves as the code

method can mitigate memory conflicts to a certain extent. rate decreases and the number of rows in the parity-check

However, since this approach does not account for memory matrix increases.

conflicts within layers caused by the property of multi-edge, In Fig. 6, we present the block error rate (BLER) per-

these severe conflicts remain unaddressed. Specifically, it can formance under various scheduling strategies for the code

be observed that under both layer-by-layer scheduling and in Fig. 3. The results for code rates of 4/5, 2/3, 4/7, 4/9,

TSP-layer-by-layer scheduling, the memory conflicts in sce- and 4/11 are presented separately. The maximum number of

narios with high rate and a small number of layers are quite iterations is set to be 20. The results demonstrate that all three

close to those in scenarios with low rate and a large number scheduling approaches achieve identical BLER performance.

of layers. This phenomenon arises because the multiple edges This indicates that the cross-layer scheduling approach effec-
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:25:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHANG et al.: CROSS-LAYER SCHEDULING METHOD FOR PIPELINED LAYERED MET-QC-LDPC DECODER

1389

Fig. 6. BLER performance comparison for layer-by-layer scheduling and cross-layer scheduling.

tively mitigates memory conflicts in the pipelined decoding architecture without compromising decoding performance.
V. CONCLUSION
In this study, we proposed a cross-layer scheduling decoding approach specifically designed for MET-QC-LDPC codes in pipelined LBP decoding architectures. By pairing layers with small common degrees and alternately decoding the paired layers, the proposed approach effectively alleviates memory conflicts in pipelined decoding without any degradation in decoding performance. In our simulation experiments, at medium to low code rates, 50% to 75% of memory conflicts can be mitigated. We believe that further optimization could yield even greater reductions in memory conflicts under the cross-layer scheduling approach. For example, this study employed a greedy algorithm for the layer-pairing process. Future research could investigate more advanced optimization strategies to achieve better layer pairings.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] 5G NR; Multiplexing and Channel Coding (release 15), document TS 38.212, 3GPP, 2018.
[3] IEEE Standard for Information Technology-telecommunications and Information Exchange Between Systems-local and Metropolitan Area Networks-specific Requirements Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications, IEEE Standard Std 802.11, 2007.
[4] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 457–458, 1997.
[5] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.
[6] T. Richardson and S. Kudekar, “Design of low-density parity check codes for 5G new radio,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 28–34, Mar. 2018.
[7] K.-J. Kim et al., “Low-density parity-check codes for ATSC 3.0,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 189–196, Mar. 2016.
[8] Blue Book, Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS) Recommendation for Space Data System Standards, CCSDS Standard 131.0-B-3, T. Synchronization C. Coding, Sep. 2017.
[9] F. Mattoussi, V. Roca, and B. Sayadi, “GLDPC-staircase AL-FEC codes: A fundamental study and new results,” EURASIP J. Wireless Commun. Netw., vol. 2016, no. 1, pp. 1–28, Dec. 2016.
[10] S. J. Johnson, “Reported thresholds and BER performance for LDPC and LDPC-like codes,” Dept. Electr. Comput. Eng., Univ. Newcastle, Callaghan, NSW, Australia, Tech. Rep., 2012. [Online]. Available: https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/document?repid=rep1&type=pdf&doi= 85748f5929c5d24056f828371b2f465e7c0b846c

[11] M.-R. Sadeghi and F. Amirzade, “Analytical lower bound on the lifting degree of multiple-edge QC-LDPC codes with girth 6,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 22, no. 8, pp. 1528–1531, Aug. 2018.
[12] M.-R. Sadeghi, “Optimal search for girth-8 quasi cyclic and spatially coupled multiple-edge LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 1466–1469, Sep. 2019.
[13] T. Bhatt, V. Sundaramurthy, V. Stolpman, and D. McCain, “Pipelined block-serial decoder architecture for structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech Signal Process., vol. 4, May 2006, p. 4.
[14] D. E. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst. (SIPS), Oct. 2004, pp. 107–112.
[15] C. Marchand, J.-B. Dore, L. Conde-Canencia, and E. Boutillon, “Conflict resolution for pipelined layered LDPC decoders,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst., Oct. 2009, pp. 220–225.
[16] Z. Wu and K. Su, “Updating conflict solution for pipelined layered LDPC decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Signal Process., Commun. Comput. (ICSPCC), Sep. 2015, pp. 1–6.
[17] E. Dupraz, F. Leduc-Primeau, and F. Gagnon, “Low-latency LDPC decoding achieved by code and architecture co-design,” in Proc. IEEE 10th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process. (ISTC), Dec. 2018, pp. 1–5.
[18] M. Rovini, G. Gentile, F. Rossi, and L. Fanucci, “A scalable decoder architecture for IEEE 802.11 n LDPC codes,” in Proc. EEE Global Telecommun. Conf. (IEEE GLOBECOM), Apr. 2007, pp. 3270–3274.
[19] V. L. Petrovic´, M. M. Markovic´, D. M. E. Mezeni, L. V. Saranovac, and A. Radoševic´, “Flexible high throughput QC-LDPC decoder with perfect pipeline conflicts resolution and efficient hardware utilization,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 67, no. 12, pp. 5454–5467, Dec. 2020.
[20] Z. Wang, Z. Xie, K. Gong, J. Yan, and L. Chen, “High-performance QC-LDPC layered decoder based on shortcut updating,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett., vol. 31, pp. 596–600, 2024.
[21] Y. Li, D. Liu, X. Zhou, and W. Chen, “Speed up QC-LDPC decoder through memory subsystem optimization,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Electron. Commun. Artif. Intell. (IWECAI), Jan. 2022, pp. 97–102.
[22] D. Chang, G. Wang, G. Yan, and D. Yin, “An optimization model for offline scheduling policy of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 28, no. 8, pp. 1740–1744, Jun. 2024.
[23] Y. Sun, M. Karkooti, and J. R. Cavallaro, “High throughput, parallel, scalable LDPC encoder/decoder architecture for OFDM systems,” in Proc. IEEE Dallas/CAS Workshop Design, Appl., Integr. Softw., Oct. 2006, pp. 39–42.
[24] N. Jiang, K. Peng, J. Song, C. Pan, and Z. Yang, “High-throughput QCLDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 251–259, Jun. 2009.
[25] T.-Y. Chen, K. Vakilinia, D. Divsalar, and R. D. Wesel, “Protographbased raptor-like LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 63, no. 5, pp. 1522–1532, May 2015.
[26] Z. Li and B. V. K. Vijaya Kumar, “A class of good quasi-cyclic lowdensity parity check codes based on progressive edge growth graph,” in Proc. Conf. Rec. 38th Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst. Comput., 2004, pp. 1990–1994.
[27] Discussion on LDPC Coding Scheme of Code Structure, Granularity and HARQ-IR, document R1-167532, 3GPP, Gothenburg, Sweden, Aug. 2016.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:25:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

