12th International Conference on Electrical, Electronics and Computer Engineering (IcETRAN), Čačak, 9-12 June 2025 
979-8-3315-8557-0/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE
Iterative Decoding Algorithms 
Powered by Deep Learning
Dimitrije Jovanović 
School of Electrical Engineering 
University of Belgrade 
Belgrade, Serbia 
jd235018p@student.etf.bg.ac.rs 
0009-0001-5842-9139 
Predrag Ivaniš 
School of Electrical Engineering 
University of Belgrade 
Belgrade, Serbia 
predrag.ivanis@etf.rs 
0000-0003-4565-1141
Abstract—In this paper, we analyze the performance of neural 
belief propagation (BP) decoding on the additive white Gaussian 
noise (AWGN) channel, compared to the traditional BP algorithm. 
Previous investigations have shown that assigning pre-trained 
weights to BP messages can significantly improve the decoding 
performance in case of high-density parity-check (HDPC) codes, 
by reducing the negative impact of short cycles. These weights are 
trained by a neural network whose structure matches the trellis of 
the decoder. Specifically, we show that medium-density parity-
check (MDPC) codes decoded with neural BP algorithm can 
achieve lower bit error rate versus HDPC codes with the same 
codeword length and the same code rate.  
Keywords—deep learning, neural network, belief propagation, 
MDPC codes, AWGN channel, TensorFlow 
I. INTRODUCTION
Linear binary block codes are often classified by the number 
of ones in their parity-check matrix, since this metric is tied both 
to decoding performance and complexity. Bose-Chaudhuri-
Hocquenghem (BCH) codes [1], [2] are classical algebraic 
codes, constructed to reach the guaranteed number of errors that 
can be corrected. However, corresponding decoding algorithms 
have high complexity that increases with the square of codeword 
length. Thus, BCH codes belong to high-density parity-check 
(HDPC) codes. On the other end of the spectrum, low-density 
parity-check (LDPC) codes [3] are powerful, easy to implement, 
and used in many communication standards, such as 10GBASE-
T, DVB, WiMAX, Wi-Fi, and 5G-NR [4]. Sparsity of the parity 
check matrix of LDPC codes enables construction of the 
decoding algorithms with complexity that increases with 
codeword length at linear rate, which makes possible the use of 
longer and stronger codes. Although the maximal guaranteed 
number of errors that can be corrected is not high, LDPC 
decoders on average have large corrective ability. 
Moderate-density parity-check (MDPC) codes have parity 
check matrix density between LDPC and HDPC codes. They 
were introduced in [5] as an alternative for high-rate, short-
structured LDPC codes, which have a small constant row weight, 
typically below 10. The row weight of MDPC codes [6] is of 
order 𝑂(√𝑛log 𝑛), where 𝑛 is the codeword length. Recently, 
quasi-cyclic MDPC codes have gained popularity in McEliece 
cryptosystems [6], [7], [8], [9]. 
Belief propagation (BP) is an iterative decoding algorithm 
[10] primarily used for decoding LDPC codes. It is based on
passing probability messages between nodes of the Tanner graph
[11] of the code. The aim is to maximize the resulting a posteriori
probabilities, on which the hard decision is applied at the end. If
the Tanner graph does not have cycles, the hard decision
produces a valid codeword. Since codes used in practice have 
cycles, BP algorithm does not guarantee to decode correctly. The 
number of short cycles increases with the code density. 
Therefore, HDPC codes have poor performance when decoded 
with BP algorithm. 
Deep learning, in combination with belief propagation 
algorithm, was introduced in [12], with the aim to improve the 
performance of dense parity-check matrices. The method 
introduces weights that multiply the messages that pass between 
nodes of the Tanner graph. It has been shown that in the case of 
HDPC codes, weight factors can significantly reduce the 
negative impact of short cycles and avoid trapping sets in 
decoding process. These deep learning techniques were then 
applied to the offset min-sum (OMS) approximation in [13]. 
Neural OMS, where the offset is the result of deep learning, 
achieves better performance than the standard version, where the 
value of the offset is experimentally determined. The authors of 
the mentioned works then jointly published the deep learning 
version of the normalized min-sum (NMS) algorithm [14]. These 
papers only considered short HDPC codes, to clearly show the 
improvement of the standard BP decoder when the messages are 
weighted. 
In this paper, we analyze the performance of neural BP 
decoding on the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel 
for different variants: sum-product, normalized min-sum and 
offset min-sum. We compare each variant of neural BP with 
corresponding standard BP propagation algorithm, expecting the 
neural BP to achieve far better performance. We also compare 
HDPC and MDPC codes with equal code rates. It has been 
shown [5] that MDPC codes outperform equivalent HDPC codes 
when decoded with standard BP algorithm. In case of MDPC 
codes, we are interested to see if the neural BP decoding is still 
better than the standard BP decoding, as already shown in case 
of short HDPC codes. 
This paper is structured as follows. In Section II we explain 
the standard sum-product algorithm, a typical version of BP 
algorithm which has a simple practical implementation. Neural 
BP decoder introduces deep learning techniques to improve the 
decoding process, which we explain in Section III. Section IV 
covers the main approximations of the sum-product decoder: 
normalized min-sum and offset min-sum algorithm. The 
standard 
and neural variant are 
compared 
for 
each 
approximation. Results of the experiments are provided and 
discussed in section V. Section VI concludes the paper. 
2025 12th International Conference on Electrical, Electronic and Computing Engineering (IcETRAN) | 979-8-3315-8557-0/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICETRAN66854.2025.11114279
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:33:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
II. STANDARD BP DECODER 
A. Message Passing on the Tanner Graph 
Let (𝑛, 𝑘) be a linear block code, where 𝑛 is the length of one 
codeword and 𝑘 is the length of one uncoded message. Encoding 
each message introduces 𝑟= 𝑛−𝑘 redundant bits and produces 
a codeword. Code (𝑛, 𝑘) is defined by a parity-check matrix of 
dimensions 𝑟× 𝑛. 
Message passing decoders [3] are graphically represented by 
the appropriate Tanner graph - a bipartite graph, isomorphic to 
the parity-check matrix [11]. One partition contains variable 
nodes 𝑣, which correspond to the columns, and the other 
partition contains check nodes 𝑐, which correspond to the rows 
of the matrix. The edges of the Tanner graph correspond to non-
zero elements of parity-check matrix: if there is an edge between 
variable node 𝑣 and check node 𝑐, the matrix element (𝑐, 𝑣) is 
equal to 1. For example, parity-check matrix and Tanner graph 
for the Hamming(7,4) code are shown in Fig. 1. 
Belief propagation (BP) [10] belongs to the class of message 
passing decoders, in which edges of the Tanner graph transfer 
messages between connected nodes, which are either 
probabilities, likelihood ratios, or most commonly log-
likelihood ratios (LLR). When a node receives messages from 
its edges, it will produce a message that will be sent on a given 
edge. The transmitting message on one edge is calculated by 
combining all received messages, except the one received on the 
transmitting edge. At the end of one decoding iteration, variable 
nodes contain “soft output” LLR values. Hard decision over the 
soft output produces the codeword estimation. Soft output 
converges to a posteriori LLRs during the decoding iterations, 
which hopefully recovers the original codeword. 
B. Sum-Product Algorithm 
The iterative version of BP decoding commonly used for 
practical implementation is called the sum-product algorithm 
(SPA). In the rest of the paper, we will use the terms belief 
propagation (BP) and sum-product (SPA) interchangeably. 
We examine the transmission of binary codewords over the 
AWGN channel. Before entering the channel, BPSK modulation 
is applied to the binary codeword vector 𝐗, where bits 0,1 are 
mapped to symbols +1,-1 respectively, resulting in a vector 
𝐗𝐵𝑃𝑆𝐾. Noise vector 𝐍 of mean 0 and variance 𝜎2 is added to the 
codeword, and the vector 𝐘= 𝐗𝐵𝑃𝑆𝐾+ 𝐍 enters the receiver. 
Channel quality can be characterized by energy per bit divided 
by the noise power density 𝐸𝑏/𝑁0. Here in particular, we have 
𝐸𝑏=
𝑛
2𝑘 and 𝑁0 = 𝜎2.  
Historically, propagated messages in SPA algorithm are 
either probabilities or likelihood ratios [3]. We consider the SPA 
algorithm in log-domain, where the messages are log-likelihood 
ratios (LLR), as it is much simpler for practical implementation 
[15]. Log-domain replaces multiplications with additions and 
does not require normalization. 
Log-likelihood ratio (LLR) for the 𝑣-th element of the 
received word 𝑦𝑣, in case of AWGN channel [15], is equal to 
 
𝑙𝑣= log (
𝑃(𝑥𝑣=0|𝑦𝑣)
𝑃(𝑥𝑣=1|𝑦𝑣)) =
2𝑦𝑣
𝜎2   
() 
 
Fig. 1. Parity-check matrix and Tanner graph of the Hamming(7, 4) code 
After each iteration 𝑖, the decoder produces the soft output, 
vector 𝑠𝑖, that is supposed to converge to a posteriori LLR 
values. After the given number of iterations, the hard decision on 
𝑠𝑖 gives the estimate 𝑥̂𝑖 of the original codeword. 
The bit of the decoder output that corresponds to the variable 
node 𝑣 is 
 
𝑥̂𝑣
𝑖= {1, 𝑠𝑣
𝑖< 0,
0, 𝑠𝑣
𝑖≥0.  
() 
The message that the variable node 𝑣 sends to the check 
node 𝑐 at iteration 𝑖 is equal to 
 
𝜇𝑣,𝑐
𝑖
= 𝑙𝑣+ ∑
𝜇𝑐′,𝑣
𝑖−1
𝑐′∈𝐶𝑣\{𝑐}
 , 
() 
where 𝐶𝑣 is the set of all check nodes connected to the variable 
node 𝑣. 
The message that the check node 𝑐 sends to the variable node 
𝑣 the at iteration 𝑖 is equal to 
 
𝜇𝑐,𝑣
𝑖
= 2tanh−1 (∏
tanh (
𝜇𝑣′,𝑐
𝑖
2 )
𝑣′∈𝑉𝑐\{𝑣}
) , 
() 
where 𝑉𝑐 is the set of all variable nodes connected to the control 
node 𝑐. At the beginning of the algorithm, we set 𝜇𝑐,𝑣
0
= 0 . 
Soft output at iteration 𝑖 is equal to 
 
𝑠𝑣
𝑖= 𝑙𝑣+ ∑
𝜇𝑐′,𝑣
𝑖
𝑐′∈𝐶𝑣
 . 
() 
Sum-product decoding on cycle-free Tanner graphs gives 
the optimal error-correcting performance. However, cycle-free 
codes have mostly no practical usage due to a very poor tradeoff 
between code rate and the minimal Hamming distance [16]. On 
the other hand, sum-product produces poor bit error rate (BER) 
results for HDPC codes, which have many short cycles. Sum-
product is predominantly used in case of LDPC codes, which 
have a very low number of edges, and therefore long cycles.  
III. NEURAL BP DECODER 
The model of neural BP decoder consists of offline 
supervised learning, and binary classification [17]. A 
feedforward neural network with backpropagation [18] is used 
for learning, and classes in classificaton correspond to binary 
values of decoder output. 
Neural belief propagation is based on weights attached to 
log-likelihood ratio (LLR) messages. Weights are trained using 
a neural network, which is mapped to trellis of the decoder [12]. 
One decoding iteration consists of two layers of the network. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:33:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
A. Trellis as a Neural Network 
Steps of message passing decoding can be represented by the 
trellis structure. Decoding starts from variable nodes (input 
layer) which send messages to their neighboring check nodes 
over corresponding edges (first hidden layer). Check nodes send 
messages back to their neighboring variable nodes over the edges 
(second hidden layer). This message exchange in two phases 
constitutes one decoding iteration. Trellis ends at the variable 
nodes (output layer). 
Neurons of the input layer correspond to channel input values 
in variable nodes at the beginning of decoding algorithm. 
Elements of hidden layers correspond to the edges of the Tanner 
graph. Elements of the output layer correspond to bits of the 
decoded codeword. 
Odd hidden layers (check layers) generate messages from 
check to variable nodes. Even hidden layers (variable layers) 
generate messages from variable to check nodes. Neurons of two 
successive hidden layers are connected according to adjacency 
of corresponding edges. One neuron of a variable layer is 
connected to the neuron of the following check layer, if the 
corresponding edges share the same variable node in the Tanner 
graph. One neuron of a check layer is connected to the neuron of 
the following variable layer, if the corresponding edges share the 
same check node in the Tanner graph.  
The final marginalization can be done only once, at the output 
layer (the last iteration). On the other hand, marginalization can 
be added after every odd hidden layer (every iteration), which 
was suggested in [12]. In that case, gradient will get updated 
more frequently, and backpropagation will improve the learning 
of the lower layers. This approach is called multiloss, which 
means the loss function is calculated based on the output of 
multiple layers. 
As an example, we will use the Hamming(7,4) code. The 
Tanner graph is illustrated in Fig. 1. It has 𝑛= 7 variable nodes 
(in blue) and 𝑟= 𝑛−𝑘= 3 check nodes (in green), and the 
total number of edges is 12. The neural network is illustrated in 
Fig. 2. The input layer (in red) has 7 neurons. Check hidden 
layers (odd, in green) and variable hidden layers (even, in blue) 
each have 12 neurons. Marginalization layers (in yellow) each 
have 7 neurons. 
B. Neural Sum-Product Algorithm 
Neural BP decoder is a generalization of standard BP decoder 
in which messages are multiplied with corresponding weights. 
Equations for sum-product algorithm are generalized by 
multiplying the messages with corresponding weights [12]. 
The goal is to learn the weights of messages so that the 
decoder outputs a codeword, as close to the transmitted 
codeword as possible. Let 𝑖 be the current decoding iteration. 
The following equations (6), (7), (8) represent the neural SPA 
algorithm. 
 
𝜇𝑣,𝑐
𝑖
= 𝑤𝑣,𝑖𝑛
𝑖
𝑙𝑣+ ∑
𝑤𝑣,𝑐,𝑐′
𝑖
𝜇𝑐′,𝑣
𝑖−1
𝑐′∈𝐶𝑣\{𝑐}
 , 
() 
 
𝜇𝑐,𝑣
𝑖
= 2tanh−1 (∏
tanh (
𝜇𝑣′,𝑐
𝑖
2 )
𝑣′∈𝑉𝑐\{𝑣}
)  
() 
 
𝑠𝑣
𝑖= 𝜎(𝑤𝑣,𝑜𝑢𝑡
𝑖
𝑙𝑣+ ∑
𝑤𝑐′,𝑣,𝑜𝑢𝑡
𝑖
𝜇𝑐′,𝑣
𝑖
𝑐′∈𝐶𝑣
)  
() 
 
Fig. 2. Feedforward neural network with multiloss [12] for the Hamming(7,4) 
code. There are five hidden layers, corresponding to 3 decoding iterations 
Sigmoid function 𝜎(𝑥) =
1
1+𝑒−𝑥 is used in (8) to limit the 
final output inside the range [0,1]. This allows us to train the 
network by minimizing the cross-entropy loss function [19] 
𝐿(𝑠, 𝑦) = −
1
𝑛∑
∑
𝑦𝑣
𝑛
𝑣=1
𝑇
𝑖=1
log(𝑠𝑣
𝑖) 
 
                   +(1 −𝑦𝑣) log(1 −𝑠𝑣
𝑖)  
() 
where 𝑇 is the last decoding iteration. 
If the applied weights are all equal to 1, the neural SPA 
reduces down to standard SPA algorithm, i.e., (6), (7), (8) 
become (3), (4), (5). This means that if the parameters of the 
neural network are optimally chosen, the performance of the 
neural SPA cannot be worse than the standard SPA algorithm 
[12]. 
The weights in neural SPA are trained by mini-batch gradient 
descent algorithm [20], which calculates the gradient from small 
sets of samples, rather than from the whole dataset. Within one 
mini-batch, the gradient of training loss is used to update the 
weights. The training continues until the moment we get the 
deviation from the desired output that is low enough. In case of 
multiloss, backpropagation is used to compute the gradient, and 
the gradient is used to update the weights [12]. 
Both the standard and neural BP decoders are symmetric, 
meaning that the message passing symmetry condition is 
satisfied [12]. That implies the bit error probability is 
independent of the transmitted codeword [21]. For that reason, 
during the training phase, it is enough to use a single codeword 
on which the noise is added. The zero codeword can be used in 
general, since it belongs to every linear code. 
The total number of weights increases with code length and 
density. Let 𝑖 be the current decoding iteration. Weights 𝑤𝑣,𝑖𝑛
𝑖
 
and 𝑤𝑣,𝑜𝑢𝑡
𝑖
 correspond to the variable node 𝑣, so the total number 
of each is equal to code length 𝑛.  
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:33:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
TABLE I.  
NUMBER OF WEIGTHS PER DECODING ITERATION 
Code 
Edges 
Extrinsic 
edges 
Weights 
BCH(127,106) 
1008 
7832 
9094
= 2 ∙127 + 1008 + 7832 
MDPC(127,106) 
756 
4172 
5182
= 2 ∙127 + 756 + 4172 
MDPC(127,92) 
770 
5074 
6098
= 2 ∙127 + 770 + 5074 
 
For one variable node 𝑣, the number of weights 𝑤𝑣,𝑐,𝑐′
𝑖
 is 
equal to the number of extrinsic edges for each edge (𝑐, 𝑣). So, 
the total number of weights 𝑤𝑣,𝑐,𝑐′
𝑖
 is the sum of the number of 
extrinsic weights over all variable nodes 𝑣. For one variable node 
𝑣, number of weigths 𝑤𝑐′,𝑣,𝑜𝑢𝑡
𝑖
 is equal to the number of edges 
containing 𝑣, so the total number of weigths 𝑤𝑐′,𝑣,𝑜𝑢𝑡
𝑖
 is equal to 
the number of edges in the Tanner graph. The values for the 
examples of codes are given in Table I. 
IV. MIN-SUM APPROXIMATIONS OF BP DECODER 
Min-sum approximation was introduced [22] to reduce the 
complexity of sum-product algorithm, mainly caused by many 
hyperbolic 
function 
calculations 
and 
floating-point 
multiplications. The intention was to greatly lessen the 
computation 
while keeping 
the 
decoding 
performance 
reasonably high. For the basic min-sum, equation (4) from sum-
product decoder is replaced by 
 
𝜇𝑐,𝑣
𝑖
=
min
𝑣′∈𝑉𝑐\{𝑣}|𝜇𝑣′,𝑐
𝑖
| ∏
sign(𝜇𝑣′,𝑐
𝑖
)
𝑣′∈𝑉𝑐\{𝑣}
 . 
() 
For all min-sum variants, equations (3) and (5) remain the 
same as the standard sum-product algorithm. The only equation 
that is changed is (4), to simplify the calculation of 𝑐𝑣 messages. 
A. Normalized Min-Sum Algorithm 
Messages in basic min-sum decoder often have very high 
magnitudes, which causes overshooting and BER degradation 
[14]. To reduce the magnitude, 𝑐𝑣 message can be multiplied 
with a weight [22]. 
Normalized min-sum algorithm (NMS) scales the 𝑐𝑣 
messages from check to variable nodes with a fixed weight, 
denoted by 𝑤, which is empirically determined. For example, the 
built-in MATLAB function ldpcDecode [23] in case of 
normalized min-sum has a default scaling weight 𝑤= 0.75. For 
the standard NMS, equation (4) is replaced by 
 
𝜇𝑐,𝑣
𝑖
= 𝑤( min
𝑣′∈𝑉𝑐\{𝑣}|𝜇𝑣′,𝑐
𝑖
| ∏
sign(𝜇𝑣′,𝑐
𝑖
)
𝑣′∈𝑉𝑐\{𝑣}
)  
() 
B. Neural Normalized Min-Sum Algorithm 
Weights in neural sum-product are introduced to reduce the 
negative impact of short cycles of the Tanner graph. Weights in 
neural min-sum are used for that purpose as well, but mainly to 
avoid overshooting [14]. For the neural NMS, equation (4) is 
replaced by 
 
𝜇𝑐,𝑣
𝑖
= 𝑤𝑐,𝑣
𝑖( min
𝑣′∈𝑉𝑐\{𝑣}|𝜇𝑣′,𝑐
𝑖
| ∏
sign(𝜇𝑣′,𝑐
𝑖
)
𝑣′∈𝑉𝑐\{𝑣}
)  () 
Let 𝑖 be the current decoding iteration. For one variable node 
𝑣, number of weigths 𝑤𝑐,𝑣
𝑖 is equal to the number of edges 
containing 𝑣, so the total number of weigths 𝑤𝑐,𝑣
𝑖 is equal to the 
number of edges in the Tanner graph. 
C. Offset Min-Sum Algorithm 
To avoid messages with a too large magnitude, first factor of 
the 𝑐𝑣 message can be subtracted by an offset, denoted by 𝛽, 
instead of multiplying the whole 𝑐𝑣 message with a weight [22]. 
Compared to normalized min-sum this algorithm is even more 
computationally simple, since subtraction is less complex than 
multiplication. 
Offset min-sum (OMS) introduces a fixed offset bias in 𝑐𝑣 
message which is empirically determined. For example, the 
MATLAB function ldpcDecode for offset min-sum has a default 
offset 𝛽= 0.5. For the standard OMS, equation (4) is replaced 
by 
𝜇𝑐,𝑣
𝑖
= max ( min
𝑣′∈𝑉𝑐\{𝑣}|𝜇𝑣′,𝑐
𝑖
| −𝛽, 0) 
                                         ∙∏
sign(𝜇𝑣′,𝑐
𝑖
)
𝑣′∈𝑉𝑐\{𝑣}
  
() 
D. Neural Offset Min-Sum Algorithm 
In the neural version offset min-sum, the only difference 
from the standard version is that the offset is learned from 
training data instead of being fixed from beginning [13]. For the 
neural OMS, equation (4) is replaced by 
𝜇𝑐,𝑣
𝑖
= max ( min
𝑣′∈𝑉𝑐\{𝑣}|𝜇𝑣′,𝑐
𝑖
| −𝛽𝑐,𝑣
𝑖, 0) 
                                       ∙∏
sign(𝜇𝑣′,𝑐
𝑖
)
𝑣′∈𝑉𝑐\{𝑣}
  
() 
Let 𝑖 be the current decoding iteration. For one variable node 
𝑣, number of weigths 𝛽𝑐,𝑣
𝑖 is equal to the number of edges 
containing 𝑣, so the total number of weigths 𝛽𝑐,𝑣
𝑖 is equal to the 
number of edges in the Tanner graph. 
V. EXPERIMENTS 
The baseline for our software implementation was the 
program [24]. The program originally included a full 
implementation of neural NMS and neural OMS, even for 
recurrent neural networks, which is outside the scope of this 
paper. However, neural SPA algorithm, which is the most 
complex, was not implemented at all. We developed the missing 
neural SPA decoder, according to (4), (5), (6) from [12]. To 
allow incremental learning and selection of the best run, we 
implemented the saving and restoring of weights values, e.g., the 
result of offline learning. 
A. Common Setup 
HDPC codes tested in experiments belong to the class of 
BCH codes, and tested MDPC codes are cyclical. Parity-check 
matrices of a cyclical MDPC code can be constructed by cyclic 
shifts of the idempotent polynomial, which is created from 
cyclotomic cosets [5]. 
We tested the decoding of BCH(127,106), MDPC(127,106) 
and MDPC(127,92) codes, to first compare BCH and MDPC 
codes with equal rates, and then to test a MDPC code of some 
different rate. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:33:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
The training of all neural networks was performed using 
TensorFlow [25], [26] with Adam update rule [27] for the 
weights. Binary cross-entropy was used as the loss function for 
supervised learning. 
Since all the considered decoders are symmetric, it is enough 
to use a single codeword, both in training phase and testing 
phase, without loss of generality [21]. Training dataset is created 
by transmitting the zero binary codeword, modulated with 
BPSK, over the AWGN channel. This way, we do not need to 
know the generator matrix to construct the codewords from a 
random message. 
The range of values 1-8 dB for 𝐸𝑏/𝑁0 is considered. Mini-
batch gradient descent was used, and each mini-batch consists of 
120 noisy words [12], [13], [14]. All eight 𝐸𝑏/𝑁0 values are 
uniformly present, and noisy words in the batch go from the 
lowest to highest 𝐸𝑏/𝑁0  value. That is, the first 15 words 
correspond to  𝐸𝑏/𝑁0 = 1 dB, next 15 words to 𝐸𝑏/𝑁0 = 2 dB, 
etc. 
In general, the mini-batch size and learning rate are chosen 
based on the length of the given code. Smaller mini-batch sizes 
and smaller learning rates are used for longer codes [14]. Our 
codes have similar code length, so the mini-batch size is kept as 
120. In our case, the learning rate is also chosen based on the 
decoding algorithm, which is specified in following experiments. 
All weights are initialized with normal distribution.  
B. Experiment 1 – Standard SPA and Neural SPA Decoder 
We simulate the decoding of BCH(127,106) code and 
MDPC(127,106) code according to three cases: 
• Standard sum-product limited to 5 iterations. 
• Standard sum-product limited to 50 iterations. 
• Neural sum-product limited to 5 iterations. 
The purpose of this experiment is twofold: to see the impact 
of code density on decoding performance, and to compare 
performance of standard and neural belief propagation. 
In the case of standard SPA algorithm, we compare decoding 
of BCH(127,106) code and MDPC(127,106) code. Simulations 
in Fig. 3. show that the MDPC code achieves far better 
performance. The rate of both codes is 21/127. However, the row 
weight of BCH code is 48 and for MDPC code [5] it is 32. Since 
this high-density BCH code has a greater density, the bits of the 
codeword are more susceptible to noise added in during 
transmission. 
We now compare decoding with standard SPA versus neural 
SPA algorithm. To analyze the impact of neural algorithm, we 
do that separately for each code. The simulation shows that for 
BCH code, neural SPA with 5 iterations achieves better 
performance than standard SPA even when 50 iterations is 
allowed. This means that the complexity reduction factor [12] is 
more than 10, when using neural instead of standard SPA. For 
MDPC code, the complexity reduction factor is much smaller. 
The reason for this is that the standard SPA is not suited for high-
density BCH codes, and so the neural SPA greatly improves the 
performance. On the other hand, standard SPA decoding of 
MDPC codes already achieves low BER values, so that the 
neural SPA does add much improvement.  
At the end, we again compare BCH(127,106) and 
MDPC(127,106) codes, that have the same code rate. We can see 
that  neural SPA decoding  of BCH code  can achieve nearly the  
 
Fig. 3. Simulation results of experiment 1 – Comparison of the standard SPA 
and neural SPA decoder 
 
Fig. 4. Simulation results of experiment 2 – Comparison of the neural SPA, 
neural NMS and neural OMS decoder 
same BER as MDPC code, decoded with standard SPA, both 
with maximum number of iterations limited to 5. For 𝐸𝑏/𝑁0 =
7 dB, they even have the same BER. 
C. Experiment 2 – Neural SPA, NMS and OMS Decoder 
We simulate the decoding of MDPC(127,106) code 
according to four cases: 
• Standard sum-product limited to 5 iterations. 
• Neural sum-product limited to 5 iterations. 
• Neural normalized min-sum limited to 5 iterations. 
• Neural offset min-sum limited to 5 iterations. 
The purpose of this experiment is to compare the 
performance of neural BP, implemented as sum-product, with its 
approximations.  
Normalized min-sum and offset min-sum were introduced to 
simplify the computations of BP decoding, but for cost of 
lowering its performance. From Fig. 4, we can see that the neural 
SPA and its neural approximations can achieve similar 
performance, if the learning is good enough. Also, with dashed 
lines are shown the alternative results, affected by overfitting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
          
   
                           
                          
                           
                                 
                           
                            
                                  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
          
   
                                        
                           
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:33:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
 
Fig. 5. Simulation results of experiment 3 – Incremental learning for neural 
SPA decoding of MDPC(127,92) code 
D. Experiment 3 – Incremental Learning of Neural SPA 
We present the results of neural SPA decoding of 
MDPC(127,92) code, when different number of mini-batches are 
used to train the weights, ranging from 10000 to 70000. 
To achieve the best learning result, we divide the learning 
process into smaller steps. For example, instead of applying 
70000 mini-batches in one run, we perform learning in 7 separate 
runs (epochs), each with 10000 mini-batches. We save the 
weights at the end of one run and restore them at the beginning 
of the next run. Then, we visualize all middle results and stop 
before overfitting. 
From the simulations shown in Fig. 5., we can see that for 
30000 mini-batches we get the best BER value for 𝐸𝑏/𝑁0 =
7 dB compared to other curves, and for 8 dB there were no 
errors. Meaning, there is a threshold of the number of mini-
batches at which overfitting starts to happen, and the increase 
will not improve the performance. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
We applied and validated the neural BP algorithm for 
decoding several short MDPC codes of different rates. We have 
shown that all BP variants (sum-product, normalized min-sum, 
offset min-sum) perform better when the messages in the Tanner 
graph are weighted. At the same time, we compared the results 
between MDPC and HDPC codes of equivalent rates. Lastly, we 
have shown that neural BP decoding of HDPC codes can achieve 
nearly the same bit error rate as standard BP decoding of MDPC 
codes of the same rate. 
Future work will focus on training the neural decoder from 
the dataset of codewords the standard BP could not decode. Also, 
the plan is to analyze how many iterations of neural BP are 
equivalent to iterations for which the standard BP converges. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank Dr Predrag Tadić, School of 
Electrical Engineering, University of Belgrade, for his helpful 
comments in the preparation of this paper. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Hocquenghem, “Codes correcteurs d'erreurs,” Chiffres, vol. 2, 1959, 
pp. 147–156. 
[2] R. C. Bose and D. K. Ray-Chaudhuri,  “On a class of error correcting 
binary group codes,” Inform. Control, vol.  , 1960, pp 68–79. 
[3] R. Gallagher, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. 
Theory, vol. 8, 1962, pp. 21–28. 
[4] T. Ohtsuki, “LDPC codes in communications and broadcasting,” IEICE 
Trans. Commun., 2007, pp. 440-453.  
[5] S. Ouzan and Y. Be’ery, “Moderate-density parity-check codes,” 
arXiv:0911.3262, 2009. 
[6] R. Misoczki, J.-P. Tillich, N. Sendrier, and P. Barreto, “MDPC-McEliece: 
New McEliece variants from moderate density parity-check codes,” IEEE 
Internat. Symp. Inform. Theory, 2013, pp. 2069–2073. 
[7] R.J. McEliece, “A public-key cryptosystem based on algebraic coding 
theory,” DSN Progress Report, 1978, pp 114–116. 
[8] M. Baldi, P. Santini, and F. Chiaraluce, “Soft McEliece: MDPC code-
based McEliece cryptosystems with very compact keys through real-
valued intentional errors,” IEEE Internat. Symp. Inform. Theory, 2016, pp. 
795–799. 
[9] BIKE team, “BIKE - bit-flipping key encapsulation,” available at 
https://bikesuite.org/  
[10] J. Pearl, “Reverend Bayes on inference engines: A distributed hierarchical 
approach,” Proc. of the 2nd Nat. Conf. Artificial Intelligence, 2009, 
pp. 133–136. 
[11] L. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE 
Trans. Inform.Theory, vol. 27, 1981, pp. 533–547. 
[12] E. Nachmani, Y. Be’ery, and D. Burshtein, “Learning to decode linear 
codes using deep learning,”   th Annual Allerton Conf.,     . 
[13] L. Lugosch and W.J. Gross, “Neural offset min-sum decoding IEEE 
Internat. Symp. Inform. Theory, 2017, pp. 1361–1365. 
[14] E. Nachmani, E. Marciano, L. Lugosch, W.J. Gross, D. Burshtein, and Y. 
Be’ery, “Deep learning methods for improved decoding of linear codes”, 
IEEE Sel. Topics in Signal Processing, vol. 12, 2018, pp. 119 –131. 
[15] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, D.M. Arnold, and A. Dholakia, “Efficient 
implementations of the sum-product algorithm for decoding LDPC 
codes,” Proc. IEEE Global Telecomms. Conf, vol. 2, 2001. 
[16] T. Etzion, A. Trachtenberg, and A. Vardy, “Which codes have cycle-free 
Tanner graphs?,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, 1999, pp. 2173–
2181. 
[17] I.H. Sarker, “Machine learning: algorithms, real-world applications 
and research directions,” SN computer science, vol. 2, 2021.  
[18] D. Rumelhart, G.E. Hinton, and R.J. Williams, “Learning representations 
by back-propagating errors,” Nature, vol. 323, 1986, pp. 533–536. 
[19] A. Mao, M, Mohri, and Y. Zhong, “Cross-entropy loss functions: 
theoretical analysis and applications,” Proc. of the 40th Inter. Conf. 
Machine Learning, 2023, pp. 23803–23828. 
[20] S. Ruder, “An overview of gradient descent optimization algorithms,” 
arXiv:1609.04747, 2016. 
[21] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Modern coding theory,” Cambridge 
University Press, 2008. 
[22] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. P. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu, 
“Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Comm., 
vol. 53, 2005, pp. 1288–1299. 
[23] MathWorks, “ldpcDecode,” available at 
https://www.mathworks.com/help/comm/ref/ldpcdecode.html  
[24] L. Lugosch, “Neural min-sum decoding in TensorFlow,” available at 
https://github.com/lorenlugosch/neural-min-sum-decoding   
[25] M. Abadi et al., “TensorFlow: a system for large-scale machine learning,” 
Proc. of the 12th USENIX conf., 2016, pp. 265–283. 
[26] TensorFlow, “TensorFlow Core Guide,” available at 
https://www.tensorflow.org/guide/  
[27] D.P. Kingma,  and  J. Ba,  “Adam: a method for stochastic optimization,” 
Internat. Conf. Learning Representations, 2015.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
          
   
                     
                                            
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:33:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
