1118

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 43, NO. 3, MARCH 2007

Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes for the Magnetic Recording Channel: Code Design and VLSI Implementation
Hao Zhong1, Tong Zhong1, and Erich F. Haratsch2

Department of Electrical, Computer and Systems Engineering, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180 USA Agere System Inc., Allentown, PA 18109 USA

By implementing a field-programmable gate array (FPGA)-based simulator, we investigate the performance of randomly constructed

high-rate quasi-cyclic (QC) low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes for the magnetic recording channel at very low block sector error

rates. On the basis of extensive simulations, we conjecture guidelines for designing randomly constructed high-rate regular QC-LDPC

dcoodneostwsiuthffelrowfroermroerrrfloororflofoorr,tahtelmeaasgt naettbiclorcekcoerrdrionrgrcahteasnonfel1.0Ex9p,earnimdecnatnalrreeasliuzletssisghnoiwfictahnatt

our high-rate regular QC-LDPC coding gains over Reed–Solomon

codes codes

that are used in current practice. Furthermore, we develop a QC-LDPC decoder hardware architecture that is well suited to achieving

high decoding throughput. Finally, to evaluate the implementation feasibility of LDPC codes for the magnetic recording channel, using

0.13 m standard cell and memory libraries, we designed a read channel signal processing datapath consisting of a parallel max-log-MAP

detector and a QC-LDPC decoder, which can achieve a throughput up to 1.8 Gb/s.

Index Terms—Decoder, error floor, LDPC, VLSI architecture.

I. INTRODUCTION
R ECENTLY, there has been a great interest in replacing Reed–Solomon codes with low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes in the magnetic recording channel [1]–[3]. Hard disk drive storage systems require powerful error correction codes that achieve very low block error rates with high code rate. However, due to the lack of accurate analytical methods, it remains a challenge to accurately predict the error-correcting performance of LDPC codes at very low block error rates. In the past, LDPC codes have been evaluated for the magnetic recording channel mainly based on computer simulations, with which block error rates of only about 10 to 10 could be reached. Therefore, a high-speed dedicated hardware simulator is necessary to empirically investigate the performance of LDPC codes. Only recently, hardware simulators based on field-programmable gate array (FPGA) devices [4]–[6] have been implemented to investigate the performance of various LDPC codes. The authors of [5], [6] investigated how column weight and small cycles may affect the error floor of disjoint difference set (DDS) and array LDPC codes under the magnetic recording channel.
To be a promising candidate for the magnetic recording channel, LDPC codes must not only achieve very low block error rate with a high code rate, but also be suitable for high-speed VLSI implementation to meet the high data rate requirements of hard disk drives. Prior work [7]–[11] has
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2006.888607
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.

demonstrated that quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes are one family of such implementation-oriented LDPC codes. The parity check matrix of a QC-LDPC code consists of arrays of circulants. A circulant is a square matrix in which each row is the cyclic shift of the row above it, and the first row is the cyclic shift of the last row. However, discussion on how the structural parameters of the QC-LDPC code parity check matrix, e.g., the circulant size and weight, may affect the performance at very low error rate is largely missing in the open literature.
The contributions of this paper are as follows. 1) By implementing iterative detection and decoding on an FPGA simulator for the magnetic recording channel, we demonstrate that randomly constructed high-rate regular QC-LDPC codes with column weight 4 can be free of error floors at block error rates of about 10 . 2) Based on extensive simulations, we observe that circulant size and weight largely affect the performance of randomly constructed high-rate regular QC-LDPC codes. We therefore postulate empirical guidelines for designing randomly constructed high-rate regular QC-LDPC codes with low error floor. In this regard, this work is complementary to the results in [5], [6] that focus on two types of more deterministic code construction approaches. 3) We improve our previously developed QC-LDPC decoder VLSI architecture [10] thereby supporting more flexible tradeoffs between decoding throughput and silicon area. This new architecture allows to implement high-rate QC-LDPC codes with low error floor for very high decoding throughput. 4) To evaluate the VLSI implementation feasibility, using 0.13 m CMOS standard cell and memory libraries, we designed a read channel signal processing application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC) consisting of a parallel max-log-MAP detector and a QC-LDPC decoder, which occupies 49 mm silicon area and can achieve a throughput up to 1.8 Gb/s.

0018-9464/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:25:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHONG et al.: QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES FOR THE MAGNETIC RECORDING CHANNEL

1119

incoming data sequence, where each sub-detector employs the

well-known sliding window method [13]. The QC-LDPC de-

coder is implemented based on the partially parallel decoder ar-

chitecture presented in [10]. Following the turbo principle, the

soft extrinsic information from the QC-LDPC detector output

may be fed back to the max-log-MAP detector to improve the

performance. One cycle of soft information exchange between

the detector and decoder is referred to as one global iteration.

Fig. 1. FPGA-based simulator system.

As shown in Fig. 1, the PC host provides randomly generated codewords for simulation. Due to the speed mismatch between

the FPGA simulation and the data transfer between the simu-

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the read channel iterative detection and decoding FPGA simulator platform implementation. Section III discusses the construction of low error floor random QC-LDPC codes and presents the simulation results for randomly constructed regular high-rate QC-LDPC codes with different code lengths and rates. Section IV presents an improved decoder architecture that supports flexible tradeoffs between throughput and silicon area. Section V presents the ASIC implementation results, and Section VI draws the conclusions.

lator and PC host, each random codeword is used for 10 rounds of FPGA simulations.
The finite precision parameters of this simulator are outlined as follows. a) The output of the AWGN generator is 6 bits. b) In the max-log-MAP detector, the path metrics are 9 bits, and the detector soft output is 6 bits. c) In the QC-LDPC decoder, the internal decoding messages and soft outputs are 6 bits. The number of global iterations between the detector and decoder can be adjusted to realize different tradeoffs between performance and simulation throughput. If we set the number of global iterations to 4 (i.e., the decoder feeds back soft output to the de-

II. FPGA SIMULATOR FOR THE READ CHANNEL WITH ITERATIVE DETECTION AND DECODING
Fig. 1 shows the diagram of the iterative detection and decoding simulator that consists of two Altera Stratix-II 180

tector by up to 4 times) and the number of internal decoding iterations to 4 (i.e., for each global iteration, the decoder carries out 4 internal decoding iterations), this simulator can reach sector error rates down to 10 within 1–2 days.

FPGA devices.1 The first FPGA device models the magnetic recording channel as extended partial response class 4 (EPR4) signal in presence of additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN). Although realistic read channel can be much more complex

III. SIMULATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The parity check matrix of a QC-LDPC code can be written as

than the channel model used throughout this work (i.e., ideal

EPR4 plus pure AWGN noise), such ideal and widely used

channel model may dramatically increase the simulation speed

while ensuring good fidelity. The AWGN generator is designed

...

based on the quantized version of the Box–Muller method [12].

It generates a random sample with Gaussian distribution (zero

mean and standard deviation

) using two random samples

and uniformly distributed between [0, 1] as follows:

where each sub-matrix is a

circulant over GF(2).

Notice that a zero matrix is a special case of circulants with

where and

the weight 0. In this work, we focus on randomly constructed high-rate regular QC-LDPC codes, where all the nonzero circulants have the same weight. Given the structural parameters, in-

An array of 64-bit linear feedback shift registers is used to cluding

, column weight , and nonzero circulant weight

generate the random samples and . The functions

, we randomly construct the parity check matrix subject to the

and

are implemented using lookup tables. The calculated constraint that there are no cycles of degree 4. In all the parity

sample is scaled according to the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) check matrices (for code rate no less than 8/9) we have ever

at the output of the AWGN generator. To achieve high-speed constructed, at most there are only one or two redundant rows.

simulation, 16 independent AWGN generators are imple- Hence, the code rate can be approximated as

.

mented to feed the successive signal detector with a wide data Leveraging the FPGA simulator, we investigated how those

bandwidth.

code parity check matrix structural parameters affect the perfor-

The second FPGA device implements the iterative detection mance of high-rate QC-LDPC codes, as discussed below. All the

and decoding datapath consisting of a parallel max-log-MAP simulated block error rates presented in the following were ob-

detector and a QC-LDPC decoder. To support high throughput, tained under the condition that at least 10 erroneous sectors are

the parallel max-log-MAP detector contains multiple identical captured. For the simulation results presented below, we con-

sub-detectors operating in parallel on different portions of the figured the simulator as follows: i) the decoder may feed back

1As the currently largest FPGA on the market, the Altera Stratix-II 180 FPGA device contains 186 576 equivalent 4-input lookup tables (LUTs) and 9 Mb of on-chip memory.

soft information to the detector up to four times and ii) for each global iteration, the QC-LDPC decoder carries out four internal decoding iterations.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:25:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1120

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 43, NO. 3, MARCH 2007

Fig. 3. Block error rate performance under difference code lengths and strucFig. 2. Block error rate performance for random QC-LDPC codes with column tural parameters. weights 3 and 4.

Because the computational complexity for LDPC decoding

is proportional to the parity check matrix column weight ,

QC-LDPC codes with small values of should be preferred.

Therefore, we first investigated high-rate QC-LDPC codes with

column weight 3. Nevertheless, our simulations suggest that

QC-LDPC codes with

badly suffer from error floor, as

shown in Fig. 2, whereas QC-LDPC codes with

have

much better resilience to error floor.

Therefore, we focused on high-rate QC-LDPC codes with

column weight 4 and investigated how the other parity check

matrix structural parameters, including circulant size and

nonzero circulant weight , affect the performance. In this

regard, we constructed several rate-8/9 QC-LDPC codes with

two different code lengths, i.e., 4608 and 8640. For the code of

length 4608, we considered four different sets of parity check

matrix structural parameters, including: 1)

(i.e.,

and

) and equals either 0 or 1; 2)

(i.e.,

and

) and

for all circulants; 3)

Fig. 4. Block error rate performance under different code lengths and rates.

(i.e.,

and

) and

for all circulants; and 4)

(i.e.,

and

) and

for all circulants.

For the code length of 8640, we considered three different From the above simulation results, we conjecture the fol-

sets of parameters, including: i)

(i.e.,

and lowing guidelines for designing randomly constructed high-rate

) and equals either 0 or 1; ii)

(i.e.,

and QC-LDPC codes with column weight 4 and low error floors for

) and

for all circulants; iii)

(i.e.,

the magnetic recording channel: i) make the circulant size rel-

and

) and

for all circulants. Fig. 3 shows the atively large and ii) keep the circulant weight at either 1 or 2.

simulation results for these randomly constructed QC-LDPC Accordingly, we constructed several high-rate QC-LDPC codes

codes. The length-4608 code with

and

, and with different code lengths and rates, for which the simulated

length-8640 code with

suffer from error floor, while performance is shown in Fig. 4. All the codes have column

an error floor does not show up for the other codes in the block weight 4 and circulant weight 2, while the code rates vary from

error rate region that can be observed by this FPGA simulator.

to

. Although the performance curve slopes vary for

The above results suggest that the circulant size should not be different code lengths and code rates, none of these codes are

too small relative to the size of the code parity check matrix. On explicitly subject to error floor at the block error rate of 10 .

the other hand, if the circulant size is so large that the circulant We note that, although iterative detection and decoding

weight has to be larger than 2, e.g., the length-4608 code with can achieve very good error correcting performance, it de-

and

, the the performance tends to degrade and mands much higher silicon overhead and/or leads to significant

is seriously subject to error floor.

throughput degradation compared with noniterative detection

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:25:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHONG et al.: QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES FOR THE MAGNETIC RECORDING CHANNEL

1121

error rates for RS codes are calculated based on the code minimum distance and the simulated symbol error probability at the output of a hard-output Viterbi detector.

IV. QC-LDPC DECODER DESIGN FOR HIGH THROUGHPUT

As discussed above, in order to achieve a low error floor, the

circulant size (i.e., the value for ) of randomly constructed

high-rate QC-LDPC codes should be relatively large. The

QC-LDPC decoder architectures presented in [9], [10] are

suitable for high-speed decoding due to their simple data-

path and fixed interconnect structure. However, the decoding

parallelism in these decoders is inversely proportional to ,

i.e., the computations of each group of variable or check

nodes are mapped onto a single hardware processing unit in

a time-division multiplexed manner. Large values for will

directly reduce the achievable throughput of such decoders.

To solve this problem, we propose an improved decoder ar-

chitecture that can map the computations for each group of

(where is divisible by and is defined as the ratio )

variable or check nodes onto a single hardware processing unit,

leading to an times improvement of the decoding parallelism.

Fig. 6(a) shows the decoder architecture for a QC-LDPC code

with a

parity check matrix. It contains groups

of check node computation units (CNUs) and groups of vari-

able node computation units (VNUs), where each group con-

tains CNUs or VNUs. Each CNU (VUN) performs the com-

putations associated with consecutive rows (columns) in the

parity check matrix in a time-division multiplexed mode. All

the decoding messages and channel messages are stored in a

memory fabric, as shown in Fig. 6(a). Each decoding iteration

takes clock cycles.

• During the first clock cycles, the decoder works in check

node processing mode, i.e., carrying out the computations

associated with all the

check nodes;

• During the second clock cycles, the decoder works in

variable node processing mode, i.e., carrying out the com-

putations associated with all the variable nodes.

The real challenge in the decoder design is how to design the

memory fabric and interconnect between the memory fabric and

Fig. 5. Block error rate performance of QC-LPDC codes with and without iterative detection/decoding and their competing RS codes (note that the RS codes in (a) and (b) are constructed under GF(2 ) and GF(2 ), respectively.

CNU/VNU array in such a way that all the messages required for the same variable or check node computation are sent to the same VNU or CNU at the same clock cycle. In the following,

we present our solution to tackle this issue.

and decoding (i.e., the decoder does not feed back soft in-

formation to the detector at all). Therefore, it is of interest to

investigate the potential performance degradation if no global

iteration is performed. Fig. 5(a) and (b) shows the simulated

performance of rate- codes with code lengths of 4608

and 8640

, respectively. For the scenarios

without global iterations, the LDPC decoder carries out up to

16 internal decoding iterations. The simulation results show

that the scheme without global iterations incurs about 1 dB

loss compared with their counterparts with global iterations

(notice that, in the scenarios with global iterations, the decoder

feeds back the soft information to the detector up to 4 times).

Furthermore, for the purpose of comparison, we also plot the

block error rate curves when rate- Reed–Solomon (RS)

The memory fabric mainly contains arrays of decoding mes-

sage memory blocks (DMMBs) and channel message memory

blocks (CMMBs). Recall that represents the weight of

nonzero circulants. All the decoding messages associated

with one nonzero circulant are stored in DMMBs. Notice

that each nonzero circulant can be considered as a sum of

permutation matrices. Each DMMB stores the decoding mes-

sages associated with the 1’s in each permutation matrix. The

address space of each DMMB is

, and each address

location stores decoding messages. Let

de-

note the decoding messages sorted in ascending order by the

column index of the corresponding 1’s in the permutation ma-

trix. At the th address location, DMMB stores the decoding

messages

. For nonzero circulant

, the corresponding DMMB group has the architecture as

codes with comparable code lengths are being used. The block shown in Fig. 6(b), which is explained below.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:25:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1122

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 43, NO. 3, MARCH 2007

H Fig. 6 (a) General decoder architecture, and (b) storage of the decoding messages associated with nonzero circulant .

Each DMMB is a dual-port memory and has one port al-

denote the channel messages sorted in as-

ways configured for read and another one always configured cending order by the column index, then each CMMB stores

for write. The read address of each DMMB is generated by a channel messages

at the th address

binary counter. Let

represent the column indices of location. Since the channel messages are only used in variable

the nonzero entries in the first row of the circulant . In node processing mode, the CMMBs only send the data to the

each decoding iteration, the state of the binary counter associ- corresponding VNU groups. The read address of each CMMB

ated with

is initialized as

at is generated by a binary counter that is initialized to 0 at the be-

the beginning of the check node processing mode and initial- ginning of the variable node processing mode.

ized as 0 at the beginning of the variable node processing mode.

The write address is simply a delayed version of the read address depending on how many pipeline stages are inserted in

V. ASIC IMPLEMENTATION

the datapath between the DMMB memory data output and input Using 0.13 m CMOS standard cell and memory libraries,

ports. The barrel shifter is a combinational circuit that can ro- we designed a detection/decoding ASIC consisting of a par-

tate the input by any number of bits in a single operation. The allel max-log-MAP detector and a QC-LDPC decoder. The

barrel shifters associated with

are configured to ro- QC-LDPC code has a code length of 4608 and code rate of 8/9.

tate

decoding messages. As illustrated in Fig. 6(b), the The code parity check matrix contains 4 36 circulants, where

DMMB group associated with circulant connects with the each circulant has the size of 128 and weight of 1. The detector

th group of CNUs and th group of VNUs.

and decoder follow the same finite precision configurations

Example: Given a circulant with size

and weight as those in the FPGA simulator (as described in Section II).

, let column indices of the two nonzero entries in the The detector contains nine identical sub-detectors that execute

first row of the circulant to be 39 and 67, respectively. Assume sliding window detection in parallel, where the length of the

the parallelism of VNU/CNU group is

. Thus, the de- sliding window is 16. The QC-LDPC decoder contains four

coding messages associated with this circulant are stored in CNU groups and 36 VNU groups, and each CNU (VNU) group

two DMMBs in which each address contains four decoding contains eight CNUs (VNUs).

messages

. The relevant messages This ASIC chip is designed using Chartered 0.13 m CMOS

passing is as follows. 1) At every clock cycle during check node standard cell and SRAM libraries with eight metal layers. Syn-

processing mode, the CNUs connected to the DMMBs read opsys tools are used throughout the design hierarchy: VCS-MX

four variable-to-check messages from each of DMMBs with is used for functional simulation and post-simulation, Design

initial address 39

and 67

, respec- Compiler is used for logic synthesis, optimization, and scan in-

tively. Then the check-to-variable messages are calculated by sertion, Formality is used for formal verification, Astro is used

CNUs and written back to the DMMBs. The messages read by for floor planning, placement, and routing, and PrimeTime is

or written to the CNUs pass through barrel shifters and rotate used for pre/post-layout static timing analysis (STA). The layout

position for the first set decoding messages and plot of the entire design is shown in Fig. 7.

positions for the second set decoding messages. 2) It consumes about 2 million gates and 320 memory macros.

At every clock cycle during variable node processing mode, the All the memory macros are placed in rings around the perimeter

VNUs connected to the DMMBs read four check-to-variable of the core and occupy a total area of 15.6 mm . The die occu-

messages from each DMMB with initial address as 0. Then pies 49 mm with 50% utilization efficiency. To increase the

the variable-to-check messages are calculated by VNUs and clock frequency, the datapath is deeply pipelined and the re-

written back to the DMMBs.

timing technique is used to balance the pipeline stages. Based

The memory fabric contains CMMB blocks, each of which on the post-layout timing analysis with worst case libraries,

stores the channel messages for each group of consecutive the clock frequency can be set up to 225 MHz (at the power

variable nodes. Each CMMB is a single-port memory with the supply of 1.2 V), with the critical path located in memory ac-

address space of

. Each memory location stores cess. The decoding throughput is calculated as follows: For a

channel messages. The storage pattern of the channel mes- QC-LDPC code with parity check matrix

, let de-

sages in one CMMB is the same as the pattern in DMMB: Let note the clock frequency, represent the decoding parallelism

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:25:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHONG et al.: QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES FOR THE MAGNETIC RECORDING CHANNEL

1123

weight 4 can achieve error-floor-free performance for sector error rates down to at least . Based on extensive FPGA simulations, we postulated empirical guidelines for designing randomly constructed high-rate QC-LDPC codes with low error floors. Moreover, by improving published decoder architectures, we presented a new decoder architecture that is better suited to achieving high throughput for high rate QC-LDPC codes. Finally, a detector/decoder ASIC design has been presented to demonstrate the silicon implementation feasibility of LDPC-based read channel signal processing.

Fig. 7. ASIC layout plot.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by SRC Contract No. 2004-HJ1192.

TABLE I IMPLEMENTATION METRICS

improvement factor, and represent the maximum decoding it-

eration number, we have the worst case decoding throughput as

. Notice that channel message memory ini-

tialization does not incur decoding throughput overhead since

we use two sets of channel message memory blocks (i.e., when

one set is being used for current decoding, another one is being

initialized by the next input data block). In this design, we use

the parameters as

MHz,

,

, and

and

, which leads to 1.8 Gb/s. This is the worst

case throughput that can be guaranteed at low SNRs. At higher

SNRs, because of the on-line parity-check for early decoding

termination, the average number of decoding iterations can be

less or much less than 16, leading to a potentially higher av-

erage decoding throughput. For the case with global iteration,

the throughput will reduce to about 360 Mb/s if the decoder

feeds back soft information to the detector four times for four

global iterations and carries out four internal iterations each

time. The estimated power consumption is 1.7 W at 1.2 V power

supply, 25 C temperature, and 225 MHz clock. The implemen-

tation metrics are summarized in Table I.

VI. CONCLUSION
Using an FPGA-based simulator, we empirically evaluated high-rate QC-LDPC codes for the magnetic recording channel at low block error rates. We demonstrated that randomly constructed high-rate regular QC-LDPC codes with column

REFERENCES
[1] A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, T. Mittelholzer, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Capacity-approaching codes: Can they be applied to the magnetic recording channel?,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 122–130, Feb. 2004.
[2] Y.-H. Kwon, M.-K. Oh, and D.-J. Park, “A new LDPC decoding algorithm aided by segmented cyclic redundancy checks for magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 41, no. 7, pp. 2318–2320, Jul. 2005.
[3] T. Kanaoka and T. Morita, “Structured LDPC codes with reversed MTR/ECC for magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 2561–2563, Oct. 2006.
[4] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, J. Thorpe, and C. Jones, “Constructing LDPC codes from simple loop-free encoding modules,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, May 2005, pp. 658–662.
[5] L. Sun, H. Song, and B. V. K. V. Kumar, “Proc. of IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, Mar. 2005, pp. 1101–1104.
[6] L. Sun, H. Song, B. V. K. V. Kumar, and Z. Keirn, “Field-programmable gate-array-based investigation of the error floor of low-density parity check codes for magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 41, no. 10, pp. 2983–2985, Oct. 2005.
[7] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “Architecture-aware low-density parity-check codes,” in IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), May 2003, pp. 57–60.
[8] D. E. Hocevar, “Architecture-aware low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, 2003, pp. 2708–2712.
[9] J. K.-S. Lee, B. Lee, J. Thorpe, K. Andrews, S. Dolinar, and J. Hamkins, “A scalable architecture of a structured LDPC decoder,” in Int. Symp. Information Theory, Jul. 2003.
[10] H. Zhong and T. Zhang, “Block-LDPC: A practical LDPC coding system design approach,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 766–775, Apr. 2005.
[11] Z. Li, L. Chen, S. Lin, W. Fong, and P.-S. Yeh, “Efficient encoding of quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 71–81, Jan. 2006.
[12] E. W. Weisstein, “From MathWorld—A Wolfram Web Resource.” [Online]. Available: http://mathworld.wolfram.com/Box-MullerTransformation.html
[13] A. J. Viterbi, “An intuitive justification and a simplified implementation of the MAP decoder for convolutional codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 260–264, Feb. 1998.
Manuscript received March 3, 2006; revised November 17, 2006. Corresponding author: H. Zhong (e-mail: hzhong@agere.com).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:25:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

