This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the WCNC 2007 proceedings.

A Modified PEG Algorithm for Construction of LDPC Codes with Strictly Concentrated Check-Node Degree Distributions

Hua Chen Department of Electronic Engineering
Tsinghua University Beijing 100084, P. R. China Email: chh00@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Zhigang Cao Department of Electronic Engineering
Tsinghua University Beijing 100084, P. R. China Email: czg-dee@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract— Progressive Edge-Growth (PEG) algorithm is a good approach to construct low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes with large girth at finite block lengths. However, the checknode degrees of PEG codes are usually loosely concentrated for both regular (more than one degree) and irregular codes (more than two degrees). In this paper, we propose a modified PEG algorithm for construction of LDPC codes with strictly concentrated check-node degrees, which yields both completely regular codes and strictly right-concentrated irregular codes with two consecutive check-node degrees. Moreover, our algorithm further improves the girth histogram of the codes for better performance. Simulation results show that even under strictly concentrated check-node degrees, our proposed algorithm slightly improves the performance of both regular and irregular PEG codes, especially for irregular codes at high SNR values.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes [1] have attracted considerable attention because of their capacity-achieving performance and low decoding complexity. Recently, constructing good LDPC codes at finite block lengths has been the subject of intense research, which is of great practical importance. Progressive Edge-Growth (PEG) algorithm [2]–[4] is known as one of the most successful approaches to construct good LDPC codes with large girth at finite block lengths. PEG algorithm is a simple method for construction of Tanner graphs with large girth by progressively establishing edges between symbol nodes and check nodes. It is flexible in code parameters (i.e. block lengths and rates) and can be applied to both regular and irregular codes. Benefited from large girth, the codes constructed by PEG algorithm have very good performance in the water-fall region, especially for irregular codes with symbol-node degree distributions optimized by density evolution [5].
However, one problem about PEG algorithm is that while PEG algorithm is flexible in the choice of symbol-node degree distributions, the check-node degrees, which are made as uniform as possible by the algorithm, are only loosely concentrated. Although PEG algorithm tends to produce codes with uniform check-node degrees, or codes with two consecutive nonzero check-node degrees [4], such concentration is

only in a best-effort way and there is no guarantee about it. In fact, PEG algorithm yields codes with three nonzero check-node degrees for both regular and irregular symbolnode degree distributions in many cases. For example, for rate-1/2 (1008, 504) codes constructed by PEG algorithm, the code with symbol-node degree ds = 3 has three consecutive check-node degrees 5, 6 and 7, and the code with optimized symbol-node degree distribution given in Table I of [5] with maximum degree 11 has three consecutive degrees 7, 8 and 9. However, in [6] it is shown that a strictly concentrated check-node degree distribution ρ(x) = ρxd + (1 − ρ)xd−1 maximizes the convergence speed of the code. Moreover, strictly concentrated check-node degrees are more desirable for the hardware implementation of iterative decoder, since the number of entries in the check-node degree distribution is minimized.
In this paper, we propose a modified PEG algorithm which allows the flexibility to specify both symbol- and checknode degree distributions at the same time. In particular, it can construct both regular and irregular codes with strictly concentrated check-node degree distributions. Moreover, our algorithm can further improve the girth histogram of PEG codes for better performance. Simulation results show that even under strictly concentrated check-node degrees, our modified algorithm slightly improves the performance of both regular and irregular PEG codes, especially for irregular codes at high SNR values.
This paper is organized as follows: Section II discusses the check-node degree distributions of PEG algorithm, Section III describes our proposed modification to PEG algorithm, and Section IV shows our simulation results. Finally, we conclude our paper in Section V.
II. CHECK-NODE DEGREE DISTRIBUTIONS OF PEG CODES
PEG algorithm [2]–[4] starts with a given symbol-node degree distribution, and builds up a Tanner graph on an edgeby-edge basis with as large a girth as possible. When a new edge is placed into the graph, the algorithm expands a tree

1525-3511/07/$25.00 ©2007 IEEE

565

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:27:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the WCNC 2007 proceedings.

from symbol node sj up to

N¯slj+1 = a check

φ or node

the cardinality in the set N¯slj

node degree is chosen. Here

depth l so that N¯slj = φ but of Nslj stops increasing, then
with minimum current checkNslj and N¯slj denote the set

of all check nodes reached by a tree spreading from sj

within depth l, and its complement respectively [2]–[4]. Such

an edge-selection procedure makes the check-node degree as

uniform as possible, but only in a best-effort way, i.e. loosely

concentrated check-node degree distributions, since there is no

limit on the maximum degree of the check nodes.

It is mentioned in [4] that setting appropriate maximum

degrees on individual check nodes is possible. However, in

the later stage of PEG construction it is likely that all check nodes in the set N¯slj have reached their maximum degrees, and we have to choose some candidate check node in the set N¯s˜lj for some ˜l < l, which leads to a lowered local girth g = 2˜l + 4 < 2l + 4 at symbol node sj. This would terribly

decrease the girth of resulting PEG graph, thus impact the

performance of iterative decoding.

To construct completely regular codes without lowering

the girth, an algorithm was proposed in [7]. The idea is to

re-connect some of the edges in the PEG graph, and the algorithm begins with a pair of selected check nodes c− and c+ whose degrees deviate from the desired degree c. In order to avoid lowering the girth of the graph, the selection of c− and c+ should be repeated in an iterative fashion until all

check nodes have the same degree c and the girth of the

graph is not lowered. While the algorithm is complicated,

it cannot be applied to construction of irregular codes with

strictly concentrated check-node degrees. For irregular codes,

a modified PEG algorithm is presented in [8], which allows

the specification of check-node degree distributions. While

the algorithm is complicated in that it uses the degree-

check-node distributions, it shows a higher error floor for

transmission over AWGN channel than original PEG algorithm

[8].

III. MODIFIED PEG ALGORITHM
In this section, we show how PEG algorithm can be modified to construct codes under strictly concentrated check-node degree distributions for both regular and irregular codes even with slightly improved performance. The idea of our algorithm is twofold: we first present a modified PEG algorithm to construct codes with strictly concentrated check-node degrees without decreasing the girth of the code, then we show that the girth histogram of the code can be further improved for better performance even under strictly concentrated checknode degrees.

A. Strictly Concentrated Check-Node Degree Distributions
As mentioned in Section II, simply setting appropriate maximum degrees on individual check nodes would decrease the girth of the graph. To construct codes under strictly concentrated check-node degree distributions, yet without loss in the girth of the graph, we propose the free check-node degree instead of the check-node degree in the edge-selection

procedure. The free degree dfree(ci) of a check node ci is defined as the excess degree between the maximum degree dmax(ci) and the current degree d(ci) of check node ci:

dfree(ci) = dmax(ci) − d(ci)

(1)

In our proposed algorithm, the edge-selection procedure always choose a candidate check node in the set N¯slj with maximum free degree. The idea of free check-node degree is useful

in that it can balance the differences of maximum check-node

degrees between various check nodes, and establish the edges

incident to different check nodes more uniformly. And in the

later stage of PEG construction, all check nodes tend to have

the same free degrees, so it is much less likely that there are no check nodes with positive free degree in the set N¯slj , thus the local girth g = 2l + 4 is less likely to be degraded.

However, even we always choose check nodes with max-

imum free check nodes, sometimes it still happens that all check nodes in the set N¯slj have zero free degrees. In this situation, we can exchange the maximum degrees between

some check nodes, as long as the overall degree distribution

of the code, i.e. the distributions of the maximum check-node

degrees, has not been changed. This can be described as the

following maximum check-node degree exchange procedure. Our main idea is to find a candidate check node c˜i with positive free degree dfree(c˜i) from the set Nslj which satisfies

dmax(c˜i) > dmax(ci) = d(ci) ≥ d(c˜i)

(2)

Thus if we exchange the maximum check-node degree of ci and c˜i, the free degree of ci

dfree(ci) = dmax(c˜i) − d(ci) > 0

(3)

is positive, and c˜i still has a non-negative free degree

dfree(c˜i) = dmax(ci) − d(c˜i) ≥ 0

(4)

We observe that after such a check-node degree exchange procedure, we can choose check node ci which is in the set N¯slj , so the local girth g = 2l + 4 will not decrease. Furthermore, since the maximum check-node degree exchange procedure is only needed at the later stage of PEG construction, where most edges have been placed into the Tanner graph, there is only little overhead for the maximum check-node degree exchange procedure in our modified algorithm.
The full algorithm to construct a Tanner graph with n symbol nodes and m check nodes can be summarized as Algorithm 1.

B. Improved Girth Histogram
All the above efforts of free check-node degree and maximum check-node degree exchange aim to keep the girth of the graph from lowering even under strictly concentrated checknode degree distributions. In this subsection, we show that the girth histogram of the code can be further improved for better performance. This is especially useful when Algorithm 1 fails to maintain the girth of the code, which does happen for some check-node degree distributions, since the girth histogram is of greater importance than the girth for the performance of

566
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:27:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the WCNC 2007 proceedings.

Algorithm 1 Modified PEG Algorithm

1: Order the symbol-node degree sequences such that d(sj) ≤ d(s˜j) for j < ˜j.
2: Randomly choose the maximum check-node degree se-

quences dmax(ci) for all i from desired check-node degree

distributions.

3: Set dfree(ci) = dmax(ci) for all i.

4: for j = 0 to n − 1 do

5: for k = 0 to d(sj) − 1 do

6:

if k = 0 then

7:

Es0j ← edge(ci, sj), where Es0j is the first edge

incident to sj, and ci is a check node such that

it has the maximum free check-node degree under

the current graph setting Es0 Es1 ··· Esj−1.

8:

dfree(ci) = dfree(ci) − 1.

9:

else

10:

Expand a subgraph from symbol node sj up to

depth l under the current graph setting such that

11:

the cardinality of than m, or N¯slj =

Nφslbj usttoN¯psslj+i1nc=reaφs.ing

if dfree(ci) > 0 for some ci in the set

but N¯slj

is less then

12:

Randomly choose a candidate ci with maximum

free degree in the set N¯slj = φ.

13:

else

14:

Randomly choose a candidate ci among all

check nodes in the set N¯slj = φ, and start the

check-node degree exchange procedure to find

a check node c˜i in the set Nslj that satisfies Eq. (2) and exchanges the maximum degree of ci

and c˜i.

15:

end if

16:

Eskj ← edge(ci, sj), where Eskj is the k-th edge

incident to sj.

17:

dfree(ci) = dfree(ci) − 1.

18:

end if

19: end for

20: end for

iterative decoding [4]. In [9], the average of the local girths is suggested as a heuristic to search good codes from code ensembles, and a more elegant “loopiness” measure is used in [10] for construction of good LDPC codes.
To further improve the girth histogram of PEG graphs, we present a modification to choose candidate check node ci such that the girth histogram is maximized instead of the girth in the edge-selection procedure, while in standard PEG algorithm [2]–[4], either the one with the smallest index or just one at random is chosen. The main idea is a fast and simple method to calculate the evolution of the girth histogram without actually computing it using trellis-based search due to high complexity, if some check node ci is assumed to be placed into the Tanner graph. This procedure includes the following two steps:
1) Modified spreading subgraph of symbol node sj: When spreading the subgraph from symbol node sj, every edge in the

TABLE I REGULAR (1008, 504) CODES CONSTRUCTED BY PEG AND OUR
MODIFIED ALGORITHM WITH ds = 3 AND dc = 6

(a) Check-node degree sequences

Algorithm
PEG Proposed

degree sequences 56 7 24 456 24 – 504 –

Algorithm
PEG Proposed

(b) Girth histogram

girth histogram

8

10

171 837

88 920

Aver. local girth
9.66 9.83

current Tanner graph setting is allowed to appear once and

only once to avoid duplicate vertices or edges. Furthermore,

when the subgraph grows from depth l to l + 1, only the nodes

(symbol or check nodes) currently in depth l are expanded,

while in standard PEG algorithm, all nodes within depth l

are expanded. Under the modified subgraph setting, for any

candidate check node ci, all the symbol nodes that are in a
shortest path from sj to ci, whose length is 2l + 3, as well as Nslj and N¯slj , can be obtained in a recursive way as in standard PEG algorithm.

2) Maximization of the girth histogram: As soon as we

gather the information of all the symbol nodes in all the length-

(2l+3) shortest paths from sj to ci, we can choose a candidate ci such that

min
ci ∈N¯slj

N (ci, sj)

(5)

where N (ci, sj) is the number of symbol nodes s˜j such that they are in some shortest path from sj to ci and their local girths were larger than 2l + 4, i.e. N (ci, sj) is the number of symbol nodes with their local girths lowered to 2l + 4 due to the placement of edge (ci, sj) into the Tanner graph. Minimization of N (ci, sj), i.e. the evolution of the girth histogram, guarantees that the girth histogram is maximized
for the placement of a new edge.
The above two-step procedure can be easily incorporated
into Algorithm 1 for better performance. The only change that has to be made is that a candidate check node ci that has maximum free check-node degree and minimizes (5) should
be chosen.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, we show simulation results of our modified algorithm for both regular and irregular codes. For comparison purpose, we construct codes in accordance with the parameters of original PEG algorithm [2], [4].

A. Regular codes
Following [2], we use PEG and our modified algorithm to construct (1008, 504) codes with symbol-node degree ds = 3 and check-node degree dc = 6.

567
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:27:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the WCNC 2007 proceedings.

Error Probablity

80 iterations

TABLE II

100

IRREGULAR (1008, 504) CODES CONSTRUCTED BY PEG AND OUR

PEG, bit error

Proposed, bit error

MODIFIED ALGORITHM BASED ON OPTIMIZED DEGREE DISTRIBUTION

10−1

PEG, block error Proposed, block error

WITH MAXIMUM SYMBOL-BODE DEGREE 11

(a) Check-node degree sequences

10−2

degree sequences

Algorithm 7

89

10−3

PEG 250 252 2

Proposed 248 256 –

(b) Girth histogram

10−4

girth histogram

Algorithm 6

8

Aver. local girth

10−5

PEG

896 112

6.22

Proposed 402 606

7.20

10−6

10−7

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

E /N (dB)
b0

Fig. 1. Bit- and block- error rates of rate-1/2 regular (1008, 504) code constructed by PEG and our modified algorithm.

Table I(a) shows the check-node degree sequences of the two codes, and the check-node degree distributions from node perspective are

ρ (x) = 0.04762x5 + 0.90476x6 + 0.04762x7

P EG
ρ

(x) = x6

P roposed

We observe that the code constructed by PEG algorithm has three check-node degrees (i.e. 5, 6 and 7), and only 90% of the check nodes have a degree of 6, so its check-node degree is only concentrated in a loose sense, and thus the code is not a strict regular code. While the code constructed by our modified algorithm has only one check-node degree (i.e. 6), so it is strictly concentrated and thus is strictly regular.
Table I(b) compares the girth histogram of the two codes. In PEG graph, 171 symbol nodes have a local girth of 8 and 837 symbol nodes have a local girth of 10, while in our code, 88 symbol nodes have a local girth of 8 and 920 symbol nodes have a girth of 10. The average local girth of the two codes is 9.66 and 9.83 respectively. We observe that even under strictly concentrated check-node degree distributions, our modified algorithm still slightly improves the girth histogram of regular PEG codes.
Fig. 1 gives the bit- and block- error rate curves for the two codes. We observe that while the two codes have more or less the same performance, our code performs slightly better. So our modified algorithm not only yields completely regular codes, but also slightly improves the performance of PEG codes for regular symbol-node degree.

B. Irregular codes
For irregular codes, we use PEG and our modified algorithm to construct rate-1/2 (1008, 504) codes based on optimized degree distribution given in Table I of [5] with maximum symbol-node degree 11.

The check-node degree sequences of the two irregular codes are shown in Table II(a), and the check-node degree distributions from node perspective are

ρ (x) = 0.49603x7 + 0.5x8 + 0.00397x9

P EG
ρ

(x) = 0.49206x7 + 0.50794x8

P roposed

We observe that PEG algorithm yields irregular code with three check-node degrees (i.e. 7, 8 and 9), while our modified algorithm yields exactly the same degree distribution given by density evolution, which has only two consecutive checknode degrees. While the difference between the two checknode degree distributions is small, strictly concentrated checknode degrees are better for the maximization of convergence speed of the codes as well as the hardware implementation of iterative decoder.
We compare the girth histograms of the two irregular codes in Table II(b). In PEG Tanner graph, 896 symbol nodes have a local girth of 6 and 112 symbol nodes have a local girth of 8, while in our code, 402 symbol nodes have a local girth of 6 and 606 symbol nodes have a local girth of 8. The average local girth of the two codes is 6.22 and 7.20 respectively, which indicates about a gain of 1 in the girth histogram. We observe that our algorithm improves the girth histogram of irregular codes under strictly concentrated check-node degree distributions considerably.
We show the bit- and block- error rate curves of the two codes in Fig. 2. We observe that at low SNR values (i.e. in the water-fall region), the two codes have more or less the same performance, while at high SNR values (i.e. in the errorfloor region), the code constructed by our modified algorithm outperforms the corresponding PEG code considerably.
We examine the errors for both codes at high SNR values to analyze the improvement in the error-floor region, as proposed in [11]. It is known that under iterative decoding, for the AWGN channel errors at high SNR values are mainly caused by low-weight codewords and near-codewords [12] (which is further referred to as trapping sets in [13]). Low-weight codewords cause undetected errors, while trapping sets are main contributors to detected errors. In [13], the notation (a, b) is used to denote a trapping set with a symbol nodes and b

568
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:27:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the WCNC 2007 proceedings.

80 iterations
10−1

PEG, bit error

Proposed, bit error

PEG, block error

10−2

Proposed, block error

10−3

Error Probablity

10−4

10−5

10−6

10−7

1.5

2

2.5

3

E /N (dB)
b0

Fig. 2. Bit- and block- error rates of rate-1/2 irregular (1008, 504) code constructed by PEG and our modified algorithm.

unsatisfied check nodes. (a, b) trapping sets with both small value of a and b dominantly give rise to detected errors, as such trapping sets tend to be error states from which the iterative decoder cannot escape [12], [13].
In our simulations, at the highest simulated Eb/N0, i.e. 2.8 dB, for the PEG codes, 6.7% of the errors found are undetected errors, and for our code, the percentage of undetected errors is 21.9%, which means that errors at high SNR values are mainly due to small trapping sets here. Moreover, the trapping sets for our code are on average larger than the PEG code. For example, for the PEG code, the smallest trapping set with b = 1 are (10, 1), while for our code is (16, 1). Furthermore, other small trapping sets for the PEG code are (12, 2), (14, 2), (16, 2) and (9, 3), while for our code are (16, 2), (2, 3). We observe that larger values of a and b for the trapping sets are the main reason for better performance of our modified algorithm over PEG algorithm. So for irregular codes, even under strictly concentrated check-node degree distributions, our modified algorithm increases the size of smallest trapping sets and improves the performance of the PEG codes at high SNR values.
V. CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
Progressive Edge-Growth (PEG) algorithm is known as a successful approach to construct low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes with large girth at finite block lengths with good performance. However, PEG algorithm yields loosely concentrated check-node degree distributions, while strictly concentrated check-node degrees are more desirable for the maximization of convergence speed of the codes as well as the hardware implementation of iterative decoder. In this paper, we proposed a modification to PEG algorithm for construction of LDPC codes with improved girth histogram under strictly concentrated check-node degree distributions. While

our modified algorithm constructed both completely regular
codes and strictly concentrated irregular codes with two check-
node degrees, it also improved the girth histogram of the codes
for better performance. Simulation results showed that our
modified algorithm slightly improved the performance of both
regular and irregular PEG codes, especially for irregular codes
at high SNR values.
One thing needs further discussion about our algorithm.
Although for irregular codes, we only discussed concen-
trated check-node degree distributions in our paper, i.e. right-
concentrated degree distributions, our algorithm can also con-
struct codes with exactly the degree distributions for non right-
concentrated degree distributions, as our algorithm provides
the flexibility to choose an arbitrary check-node degree dis-
tribution as long as it forms a valid degree distribution along
with the symbol-node degree distribution. Non-concentrated
check-node degree distributions are useful for Unequal Error
Protection (UEP), as recently discussed in [14].
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1963.
[2] X. Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., San Antonio, Texas, USA, pp. 995-1001, Nov. 2001.
[3] X. Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Irregular progressive edgegrowth (PEG) Tanner graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Intl. Symp. Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, pp. 480, June30-July 5, 2002.
[4] X. Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 51, pp. 386-398, Jan. 2005.
[5] T. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619-637, Feb. 2001.
[6] S. Y. Chung, T. Richardson, R. Urbanke, “Analysis of sum-product decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. on Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 657-670, Feb. 2001.
[7] G. Richter, “Construction of completely regular LDPC codes with large girth,” in Proc. ETH Zurich 2003 Winter School on Coding and Information Theory, Ascona, Switzerland, Feb. 2003. Available [Online] at http://www.isi.ee.ethz.ch/winterschool/docs/richter.pdf.
[8] G. Richter, “An improvement of the PEG algorithm for LDPC codes in the waterfall region”, in Proc. International Conference on “Computer as a tool” (EUROCON), Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro, Nov. 2005.
[9] Y. Mao and A. Banihashemi, “A heuristic search for good low-density parity-check codes at short block lengths,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comm., Helsinki, Finland, pp. 41-44, Jun. 2001.
[10] J. Thorpe, “Design of LDPC graphs for hardware implementation,” in Proc. IEEE Intl. Symp. Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, pp. 483, June 30-July 5, 2002.
[11] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Improved progressive-edge-growth (PEG) construction of irregular LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., Dallas, Texas, USA, Nov. 29–Dec. 3, 2004, pp. 489–492.
[12] D. J. C. Mackay and M. S. Postol, “Weakness of Margulis and Ramanujan-Margulis low-density parity-check codes,” Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science 74, http://www.elsevier.nl/ locate/entcs/volume74.html, 2003.
[13] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing, UrbanaChampaign, pp. 1426-1435, Oct. 2003.
[14] L. Sassatelli, W. Henkel, D. Declercq, “Check-irregular LDPC codes for unequal error protection under iterative decoding,” in Proc. 4th Int. Symp. on Turbo Codes & Related Topics, Munich, Germany, Apr. 2006.

569
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:27:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

