IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 3, MARCH 2007

387

Transactions Letters

Unequal Error Protection Using Partially Regular LDPC Codes
Nazanin Rahnavard, Member, IEEE, Hossein Pishro-Nik, Member, IEEE, and Faramarz Fekri, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper, we propose a scheme to construct lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes that are suitable for unequal error protection (UEP). We derive density evolution (DE) formulas for the proposed unequal error protecting LDPC ensembles over the binary erasure channel (BEC). Using the DE formulas, we optimize the codes. For the finite-length cases, we compare our codes with some other LDPC codes, the time-sharing method, and a previous work on UEP using LDPC codes. Simulation results indicate the superiority of the proposed design methodology for UEP.
Index Terms—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, unequal density evolution (UDE), unequal error protection (UEP).
I. INTRODUCTION
MOST error-correcting codes are designed for the equal error protection (EEP) of all data. However, on several important applications, certain parts of the information may need a higher level of protection against error than other parts. For example, in optical networks, errors that occur in the header bits of a packet cause more serious damage to the subsequent process than errors within the payload. Since repeat-request protocols are not an option for error-free data delivery in optical networks (because of their multihop nature and high-speed data transmission requirement), we are left with three options. First, EEP codes with high protection for the entire packet could be used. This is not efficient, since EEP codes provide far more protection than is necessary by adding excessive redundancy. Second, two different codes could be used (time-sharing method). This approach is not prudent, since the header is very short and the performance of codes is poor for short lengths. Finally, a more interesting and challenging solution is the construction of a single code that induces a selective protection property known as unequal error protection (UEP).
Masnick and Wolf were the first to introduce UEP codes [1]. Later, other UEP codes were designed using different ap-
Paper approved by A. H. Banihashemi, the Editor for Coding and Communication Theory of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received August 30, 2004; revised August 7, 2005; June 5, 2006; and July 17, 2006. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCF-0430964. This paper was presented in part at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Chicago, IL, June 27–July 2, 2004.
N. Rahnavard and F. Fekri are with the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332-0250 USA (e-mail: nazanin@ece.gatech.edu; fekri@ece.gatech.edu).
H. Pishro-Nik was with the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332-0250 USA. He is now with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Massachusetts–Amherst, Amherst, MA 01003 USA (e-mail: pishro@ecs.umass.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2007.892436

proaches, e.g., [2] and [3]. However, there has been little work

concerning the design of low-density parity-check (LDPC)

codes with the UEP property. In [4], the authors proposed

UEP-LDPC codes that are based on cyclic difference families

(CDFs). In [5], we investigated the notion of UEP-LDPC codes

based on irregular random graphs with the degree distributions

that are optimized by unequal density evolution (UDE) for-

mulas over the binary erasure channel (BEC). In this letter, we

extend the discussion.

Throughout the letter, we assume the following terminology.

An LDPC ensemble can be defined to be the set of bipartite

Tanner graphs with degree distribution pairs

and

, where

is the fraction of edges

connected to variable (check) nodes of degree . The codes re-

ported in the letter are randomly constructed following the de-

scriptions of [6] and [7].

The letter is organized as follows. In Section II, a design

method for UEP using LDPC codes is explained, and the sim-

ulation results are given. Efficient encoding is also explored for

the proposed codes. Sections III and IV compare our method

with time-sharing and CDF methods, respectively. Finally, we

conclude the paper in Section V.

II. UEP USING LDPC CODES

Up until now, different schemes for designing capacity

achieving (CA) LDPC codes over the BEC have been devised,

e.g., [8]. These schemes are based on designing codes of rate

with the threshold channel-erasure probability as close

as possible to

. When the channel-erasure probability is

less than , the average bit-error rate (BER) (the probability

that a bit is not recovered after the decoding stops) goes to zero

when long enough code lengths and a large enough number

of decoding iterations are considered. Therefore, CA codes

are superior to the UEP codes asymptotically, as they provide

small enough error rates for all data. However, short-to-mod-

erate-length codes are preferable in practice. For these lengths,

UEP codes are desirable. In the proposed UEP design, we

neither optimize the codes based on nor use the average

BER of all data in our analysis. Instead, we divide the codeword

into different groups, and investigate the average BER for each

group. The codes are optimized such that some information bits

have lower BER than the other bits.

Throughout the letter, we are only concerned with the per-

formance of information bits, thus UEP for information bits is

considered. Therefore, we need to determine the positions of

the information bits in the codeword. For an

LDPC code

that is defined by a parity-check matrix , not every arbitrary

0090-6778/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:25:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

388

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 3, MARCH 2007

introduced. These parameters denote the expected fractions of the erasure messages at the th iteration that are passed from the variable nodes that correspond to the MIB, LIB, and PB, respectively. Furthermore, let denote the probability that an erasure message is passed from the check nodes to the variable nodes at the th iteration. Then, the UDE formulas are given as

Fig. 1. Tanner graph of the proposed ensemble for the UEP property.

collection of bits in the codeword can correspond to the infor-

mation bits. The following should be satisfied by .

Fact 1: Let an

matrix

be

the parity-check matrix corresponding to an

linear code.

To have

as the positions of the information bits

in the codeword, matrix

must be full rank, where

.

Proof: Let us define

,

, and

. Then, is a valid code-

word if and only if

. Using this equation,

we can find parity bits (PB) as a function of information

bits if and only if is full rank.

In this letter, the information bits are divided into two groups

with two levels of importance. One group consists of the

more important bits (MIB) that need higher protection. The

other group contains the less important bits (LIB). Next, we

describe how to design UEP-LDPC codes. For simplicity, we

use asymptotic tools for designing the UEP codes. However,

the results are used in constructing finite-length codes.

A. Problem Statement

Suppose we want to transmit information bits with two

levels of importance over an erasure channel with erasure prob-

ability . For this, we want to design an

UEP code having

rate . Let

(where

) be the number of MIB

and

be the number of LIB. Let

be

the number of PB.

Next, a method for the UEP is proposed. In this method, we

consider the conventional bipartite Tanner graph with variable

nodes and check nodes. For the simplicity of design, we as-

sume having partially regular ensembles. By partially regular,

we mean that all the MIB, LIB, and PB have the same degrees

, , and , respectively. Further, all check nodes have the

same degree . Fig. 1 shows the Tanner graph of this ensemble.

Let

denote the corresponding parity-check

matrix of this graph, where , , and are submatrices

that correspond to the MIB, LIB, and PB, respectively. By Fact

1, we conclude that the assumption of separating information

bits and PB as specified above is valid if and only if is full

rank. Next, we derive DE formulas for the proposed partially

regular ensemble.

(1)

(2)

(3)

where

, and are the fractions of the edges that are

connected to the MIB, LIB, and PB, respectively. These parame-

ters can be obtained by

,

and

, in which

.

The following lemma points out the UEP property of the pro-

posed ensemble.

Lemma 1: Let be the erasure probability of a BEC and

be the UEP gain at the th decoding it-

eration. Then, increases when the erasure probability of the

channel, , decreases. Moreover, is an increasing function

of the number of iterations .

Proof: Using (2), we have

. Since

, we need to show that is an increasing function

of . This can be proven by induction. Assume

. From

(3), we have

. This implies that

. Now we assume that

. From (2), we

have

,

, and

. Using (3),

we conclude that lemma.

. This proves the first part of the

To prove the second part, we must show that is a de-

creasing function of . This can be done by induction on . First,

note that that

. From (3), we have

. Now assume . Let

(4)

We have

and

in which

. Using (4), the value of

can

be seen to be negative since

. Therefore, we have

. This completes the proof.

Using the UDE formulas, the asymptotic behavior of a code

for a given degree distribution can be estimated.1 Moreover, we

can optimize the degrees such that we have low error rates for

MIB while keeping the overall performance comparable with

other codes. For a given and , we need to find optimal values

for

, and . However, we have one equality constraint

that is imposed by the edges as

B. UEP DE
Let us consider the standard iterative decoding algorithm for the BEC. To achieve UEP with a significant gap among the different protection levels, we modify the DE formulas introduced in [9]. In our formulation, three parameters , , and are

(5)
1An alternative way to obtain the performance of a code over the BEC is by determining the stopping sets’ characteristics. Such an approach is more complicated, especially for the UEP case. However, the results of two approaches will be consistent asymptotically.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:25:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 3, MARCH 2007

389

TABLE I
m l p DEGREE DISTRIBUTIONS, , , AND OF SOME OPTIMIZED UEP-LDPC  : CODES OF RATE 1/2 AND = 0 1 FOUND BY THE PROPOSED METHOD

Therefore, we have three independent variables to optimize. We

considered as the dependent variable. By assuming a max-

imum value for the degrees

and considering

, we can easily search through all the possible values for the

degrees and select the ones that result in very low error rates for

MIB. The cost function is considered as (for some large in-

teger ).

Example: Assume we want to design a UEP code with

and rate 1/2. By setting

,

,2 and

,

we minimized the cost function . Table I shows the degrees,

, , and for two optimized codes.

As it is shown in the table, asymptotically, the performance

gaps between the BERs of MIB and the rest of the codeword

bits are several orders of magnitude for 25 decoding iterations.

Increasing the number of iterations results in even larger gaps.

To measure the performance of the proposed codes for the fi-

nite-length case, we found the BER versus for Code 1

when the length of the code is

[Fig. 2(a)].

Two other codes were chosen for comparison with our code:

the regular (3,6)

and a BEC-optimized irregular

code, referred to as Code A, found from [10] by setting the max-

imum allowable degree to 25. The degree distribution of Code

A3 is given by

and

with

. To have a fair comparison, we showed the performance of

highest-degree nodes (as MIB) and rest of the nodes (LIB and PB) separately for Code A. As we can see in Fig. 2(a), there is a large gap between the BERs of the MIB and LIB in

Fig. 2. (a) Comparison of the BERs of Code 1 with Code A and the regular (3,6). All codes are of length 4000 and rate 1/2. (b) Recovery convergence rate
of MIB and LIB Code 1 at " = 0:42.

the proposed code.4 This gap is at least two orders of magnitude,

and it increases when the channel erasure probability decreases

as in Lemma 1 for the asymptotic case. Moreover, the perfor-

mance of the MIB in the proposed code is always better than

the performance of the MIB in the two other codes. In addition,

the error floor in the LIB and PB are lower in the proposed code

in comparison with Code A. We also note that the performance

of the proposed code is far better than the performance of the

regular (3,6) for

. For smaller , the performance

of the regular (3,6) beats the performance of LIB in the pro-

posed method. This is because of the well-known result that the

regular (3,6) does not show an error floor, unlike the irregular

codes.

2If we optimize a code for a large value of ", asymptotically, the code will have a good performance for large " s. On the other hand, if we optimize a code for a small value of ", asymptotically, the code will have a good performance in the
error-floor region.

However, we note that the performance of MIB in the proposed

code is superior to the performance of the regular (3,6).

It is worth noting that not only will MIB be retrieved with

much less error than LIB, but also MIB converges in fewer de-

coding iterations than LIB. This can be seen in Fig. 2(b) for

Code 1 at

. This is useful when fast decoding for MIB

is needed.

We also illustrated the performance of Code 1 when

(Fig. 3). Again, we compared the proposed code with the

regular (3,6) and Code A of lengths 1000. As we can see, the

proposed code is superior to the regular (3,6) in the shown range.

Moreover, although the performances of LIB and PB are close

in Code 1 and Code A, the performance of MIB is far better than

the performance of the 50 highest-degree nodes in Code A.

C. Efficient Encoding

3We need to make a subtle change to the distribution of finite-length codes.
For example, we used (x) = 0:249625x + 0:2475x + 0:148125x + 0:0035x +0:35125x and (x) = 0:249x + 0:2475x + 0:15x + 0:0035x + 0:35x , for n = 4000 and n = 1000, respectively. In both cases, " = 0:489.
4The BER for MIB is found by averaging over the fraction of the bits in MIB that has not been recovered when decoding stops. Similarly, BERs of LIB and PB can be obtained.

As we can see in Table I, the degree-distribution optimiza-

tion has resulted in

. We also observed the same result for

most of the other UEP code designs. In fact, we exploit this prop-

erty of the parity nodes to simplify the encoding of the proposed

codes as follows. Since

, all columns of have weight

two. However, given that is

and full rank by Fact 1,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:25:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

390

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 3, MARCH 2007

Fig. 3. Comparison of the BERs of Code 1 with Code A and the regular (3,6). Fig. 5. Comparison of the proposed UEP method with the time-sharing

All codes are of length 1000 and rate 1/2.

method.

Fig. 4. Efficient encoding for the proposed UEP codes having d = 2.

can be done by trial and error. Fig. 5 compares the performance

of UEP Code 1 of length 4000,

, and

with

the time-sharing method having

and

.

The codes that are used in the time-sharing method are the best

codes that we find from [10] for the given rates. They have the

following degree distributions:

no more than columns of weight two are allowed. To over-

come this problem, we use the method proposed in [11]. One of

the weight-two columns is replaced with a weight-one column.

This does not have an important effect on the performance of the

code, but ensures that is full rank. It can be shown that is

either a dual-diagonal matrix or a column permutation of

[11]. In other words,

, where is a random permuta-

tion matrix. A systematic generator matrix for the parity-check

matrix

is given by

, in

which

. The matrix corresponds to a differ-

ential encoder whose transfer function is

[11]. The

encoder for these codes is depicted in Fig. 4. Thus, these codes

are a generalized form of the repeat-accumulate (RA) codes for

which is equal to the identity matrix.

with

and

, respectively. To have better

performance for MIB and LIB in the time-sharing method,

we assume that MIB and LIB correspond to the higher degree

variable nodes in

and , respectively. Fig. 5 indicates

that the proposed UEP scheme outperforms the time-sharing

scheme for

. For example, at

, the MIB

(LIB) in Code 1 has more than two orders of magnitude (about

III. COMPARISON WITH THE TIME-SHARING METHOD

one order of magnitude) less BER in comparison with the case

One approach to UEP is the time-sharing method. In this method, several codes of different rates are used for different parts of the data. This method increases the complexity of the

where

is used. Further, the superiority of the pro-

posed method versus time-sharing increases when the channel

erasure probability decreases.

system. Additionally, since the MIB is usually very short, the code length would be short. We expect that this causes perfor-

IV. COMPARISON WITH THE PREVIOUS UEP-LDPC CODES

mance degradation. The following simulation confirms that the In [4], authors proposed UEP-LDPC codes constructed based

time-sharing technique does not perform as well as the proposed on the orbits of CDFs. We note that the codes have very high

method. Suppose we want two levels of protection for a message protection for some codeword bits. This approach is desirable

whose fraction is MIB. In the first method, a UEP code of rate in applications such as holographic memory systems, where the

is considered. Alternatively, we can design two codes

noise has a nonuniform pattern. Therefore, different protection

and with rates and for MIB and LIB, respectively. levels for codeword bits are provided to achieve uniform BER

By fixing the total number of the PB in both methods, we get after the decoding. In applications where UEP for information

. For a given and , we can bits is needed, this approach may not be efficient. Specifically, it

have different pairs of and , where choosing the best pair can be shown that the most highly protected codeword bits in [4]

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:25:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 3, MARCH 2007

391

the BER versus SNR for the information bits. Note that BER of the PB was not shown in this figure. The number over each graph represents the number of information bits in each part. It is concluded that although our proposed code has a slightly higher rate, it has much better performance than the code in [4].

Fig. 6. Structure of the parity-check matrix constructed using the CDF method.

V. CONCLUSION
This letter investigated the design of high-performance UEPLDPC codes over the BEC. A method based on partially regular random graphs was proposed. We derived UDE formulas over the BEC to optimize the codes for the UEP property. Using the DE formulas, we found codes with good performance that also have a significant UEP property. Simulation results show that we achieve much higher protection for the MIB in comparison with the LIB. Our results were compared with a BEC-optimized irregular code and the regular (3,6) code for lengths 4000 and 1000. We also compared our method with the time-sharing method and the previous UEP-LDPC method. The results suggest the superiority of the proposed method versus the aforementioned methods for the UEP.

Fig. 7. Comparison of the codes designed by the CDF method and the proposed method.

are not the information bits. This is because of the parity-check

matrix structure that is used. As an example, a code of length

and

would have an matrix of the form de-

picted in Fig. 6, in which is a 316 79 submatrix, and

are 158 79, and

, and are 79 79 submatrices.

Note that all elements in the gray part of are zeros. More-

over, the bits corresponding to are the most protected bits.

We claim that the codeword bits corresponding to are the PB.

Otherwise, we must have rank

,

which is impossible. Therefore, the most highly protected bits

are the PB. By a similar argument, it is shown that and

cannot together correspond to the information bits. Therefore, a

possible choice for information bits can correspond to , ,

and . For comparison, we also give a code based on our pro-

posed method having length

, and

. It should be mentioned that

in this example, the channel is AWGN. We used the same code

that we designed using DE formulas over the BEC. Fig. 7 shows

REFERENCES
[1] B. Masnick and J. Wolf, “On linear unequal error protection codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-3, no. 10, pp. 600–607, Oct. 1967.
[2] C. C. Kilgus and W. C. Gore, “Cyclic codes with unequal error protection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-17, no. 3, pp. 214–215, Mar. 1971.
[3] I. Boyarinov and G. Katsman, “Linear unequal error protection codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 3, pp. 168–175, Mar. 1981.
[4] B. Vasic, A. Cvetkovic, S. Sankaranarayanan, and M. Marcellin, “Adaptive error protection low-density parity-check codes for joint source-channel coding schemes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jun.–Jul. 2003, p. 267.
[5] N. Rahnavard and F. Fekri, “Unequal error protection using low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jun.–Jul. 2004, p. 449.
[6] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[7] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[8] P. Oswald and A. Shokrollahi, “Capacity-achieving sequences for the erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 12, pp. 3017–3028, Dec. 2002.
[9] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, D. A. Spielman, and V. Stemann, “Practical loss-resilient codes,” in Proc. 29th Annu. ACM Symp. Theory Comput., 1997, pp. 150–159.
[10] Ecole Polytech. Federale de Lausanne (EPFL). Lausanne, Switzerland [Online]. Available: http://ltchwww.epfl.ch/research/ldpcopt/
[11] M. Yang, Y. Li, and W. Ryan, “Design of efficiently encodable moderate-length high-rate irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 564–571, Apr. 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:25:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

