Semi-Random Construction of Rate-Compatible Low-Density Parity-Check Codes

Liang Chen, Songyan Wu, Shijun Yan, Ziyu Wu, Wenjun Zhang, Yunfeng Guan
Institute of Image Communication and Information Processing Shanghai Jiao Tong University Shanghai, China

Abstract
This paper presents a semi-random construction of rate-compatible low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. We analyze some crucial properties determining the performance of LDPC codes to direct our construction approach. The new parity-check matrices corresponding to lower-rate codes are generated by computer search which is subject to these important properties. The novel construction approach is flexible as we only add new rows with certain constraints to the original parity-check matrix. The simulation results demonstrate that rate-compatible LDPC codes based on this approach work quite well.
1. Introduction
Rate-compatible low-density parity-check codes were first introduced by Li and Narayanan in [1] based on a single regular LDPC mother code. The authors pointed out that puncturing parity bits alone is insufficient for the formation of a sequence of wellperforming LDPC codes across a wide range of rates. To overcome this, lower rate codes were obtained by extending the parity-check matrices to add parity bits and higher rate codes were obtained by puncturing. In [2], Yazdani and Banihashemi constructed ratecompatible LDPC codes based on an irregular LDPC mother code optimized for a single rate, instead of the regular one in [1]. Lower rate codes were constructed by using extending with the progressive edge growth construction method while higher rate codes were obtained by using the former approach of puncturing. In another related work, Tian et al. [3] proposed a different way to construct rate-compatible LDPC codes by nulling the information bits to achieve lower rates.
In this paper, we present a novel semi-random approach to construct rate-compatible LDPC codes at

lower rates. In contrast to prior work of extending by which the rows and columns of parity-check matrices are largely added, only rows are added in our approach to form new parity-check matrices corresponding to lower-rate codes. Some important analytic properties are employed to direct our semi-random approach.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we introduce the definition of LDPC codes and message passing decoding algorithm, which proffer sufficient information for the analysis in the next section. Section III analyzes some crucial properties determining the performance of codes. These properties are very important to direct our construction approach. Section IV presents our novel semi-random approach to construct rate-compatible LDPC codes and simulation results are provided along. Section V concludes this paper.
2. Low Density Parity Check Codes
The LDPC code, which was first introduced by Gallager in 1962 [4], is a kind of binary linear block codes. A (n, λ, ρ) LDPC code means that its block length is n and the column and row weight of its parity check matrix are λ and ρ, which represent the number of 1-components in a column and a row, respectively. The column and row weights are much smaller than n to achieve a sparse matrix H. For a (n, λ, ρ) LDPC code, the number of parity check equations is as many as the number of rows of the parity check matrix: i.e., m (= n × λ / ρ) parity check bits are attached to the message. Since the total number of 1-components in the parity check matrix is the same whether it is counted in the column direction or in the row direction, the equation, n × λ = m × ρ, holds for the code parameters and the code rate can be calculated as R = 1 – λ / ρ.
An LDPC code associated with fixed row and column weights is called a regular LDPC code, and an

Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications (ICWMC'07) 0-7695-2796-5/07 $20A.0u0tho©riz2ed00lic7ensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:27:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

irregular LDPC code allows some variations in row and column weights.
A. Tanner Graph
The LDPC code is often represented by a Tanner graph to make it easy to understand the message passing decoding algorithm, which is a bipartite graph that expresses how a global function of many variables is factored into a product of local functions [5, 6, 7].
The Tanner graph consists of two sets of nodes: i.e., variable nodes, {vj}, and check nodes, {ci}. A column of the parity-check matrix corresponds to a variable node in the Tanner graph and a row corresponds to a check node. The edge between a variable node vj and a check node ci is constructed if there is 1-component at (i, j) in the parity-check matrix. Therefore each check node represents a check equation used in generating parity check bits and each variable node represents one bit in the codeword. The variable nodes that are connected to a check node are called the neighbor variable nodes of the check node. For a variable node, the neighbor check nodes can be defined similarly.
An ensemble of LDPC codes can be described with a degree distribution pair (λ(x), ρ(x)).
dv
∑ λ (x) = λ xi−1 i i=2
dc
∑ ρ ( x) = ρ xi−1 i i=2
where λi is the fraction of edges emanating from variable nodes with i edges (or a degree of i), ρi is the fraction of edges emanating from check nodes with i edges (or a degree of i) and dv and dc denote the maximum variable and check nodes degrees, respectively.
The message passing algorithm can be expressed easily based on the Tanner graph. For all the bits in a received vector, a posteriori probabilities are calculated in the variable nodes and delivered to the neighbor check nodes through the edges. Parity check operations are executed with these probabilities in all the check nodes and the results are passed again to the neighbor variable nodes.
B. Message Passing Algorithm
General parity check codes whose minimum distance is dmin can be optimally decoded if there are (dmin -1) /2 or fewer errors, whereas the LDPC codes cannot be optimally decoded. Therefore the message passing algorithm to be described below is widely used instead, although it is optimal only when there is no

cycle in the Tanner graph. In the following equations, an antipodal bit-to-symbol mapping is assumed; i.e., 0 and 1 are mapped to -1 and 1, respectively.
1) Initialize each variable node vj to the probability ratio of the corresponding received bit.

p(r | x = +1)

2r

∆=

j

j

= exp( j )

j p(r | x = −1)

σ2

j

j

2) Variable-to-check step: Each check node ci computes the likelihood ratios, Λij, by using the following equation and sends it to neighbor variable

node vj.

∏ 1−∆

Λ=

j 'i

ij

1 + ∆ j '∈N (i )\ j

j 'i

3) Check-to-variable step: Each variable node vj computes probability ratios, denoted by ∆ji, by using the following equation and sends it to neighbor check

node ci.

∏ p(r | +1)

1− Λ

∆= j

i' j

ji

p(r j

|

−1)

1 + i '∈M ( j ) \i

Λ i' j

4) For each variable node, calculate a tentative bit-

by-bit decoding xˆ using the pseudo-posteriori j

probability ∆j.

∏ p(r | +1) 1− Λ

∆= j

ij

j

p(r j

|

−1)

1 + i∈M ( j )

Λ ij

0

xˆ j

=

 1

when ∆ j ≤ 1 when ∆ j > 1

5) Check if xˆ × HT =0 is satisfied. If it is satisfied or

the maximum number of iterations is reached, the decoding algorithm finishes. Otherwise, the algorithm repeats from step 2).
The symbols, ∆ and Λ, correspond to the outgoing messages of the variable and check nodes, respectively, and N(i) and M(j) represent the set of neighbor nodes of check node ci and variable node vj, respectively. The not-notation (′) marked as superscript means that the product is calculated over the indices excluding its own index.

3. Analysis for Construction

A. Cycle and Girth

A cycle in a graph of nodes and edges is defined as a sequence of connected edges which starts from a node and ends at the same node, and satisfies the condition that no node (except the initial and the final node) appears more than once. The number of edges on a cycle is called the length of the cycle. The length of

Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications (ICWMC'07) 0-7695-2796-5/07 $20A.0u0tho©riz2ed00lic7ensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:27:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the shortest cycle in a graph is called the girth of the graph. The Tanner graph of a linear block code contains no cycles of length 2 and no cycles of odd lengths. Therefore, the girth of the Tanner graph of a linear block code is at least 4.
As mentioned in previous section, with a cycle-free Tanner graph, the message passing algorithm terminates naturally in a finite number of steps and yields optimal decoding in the sense that the symbol error probability is minimized [6, 7]. However, cyclefree Tanner graphs have poor BER performance: their minimum distance is two at code rates R > 1/2, and their error floors occur at unacceptable values of SNR [8]. When Tanner graphs have cycles, the resulting message passing algorithm is suboptimal [6, 7]. Cycles, especially short cycles in the Tanner graph, lead to inefficient decoding and prevent the sum-product algorithm from converging to the optimal decoding result [8, 9], taxing the performance of the LDPC decoders.
We discuss briefly why the code performance is affected by short cycles. Intuitively, the girth determines the smallest number of iterations for a message sent by a node (in the shortest cycle of the graph) to propagate back to the node itself. This causes loss of independence in the extrinsic information merged on a node in the iterative decoding through the successive iterations. Gallager [4] showed that the number of independent iterations M is proportional to the girth g of the Tanner graph, in particular, M < g/4 ≤ M + 1. A second reason relates to the minimum distance of the code. Tanner [5] derives a lower bound on the minimum distance dmin; this lower bound increases with the girth g of the code. Therefore, LDPC codes with large girth are to be preferred.

B. Distribution of Row Weights

In [10], Richardson and Urbanke presented the density evolution technique for determining the capacity of LDPC codes under message-passing decoding. A theorem regarding the stability condition of density evolution is presented in [11] and the entire mathematical proof is provided in [12].
Theorem 1: Assume we are given a degree distribution pair (λ, ρ) and a symmetric density P0. For l ≥ 1 define

P l

:=

P 0

⊗

λ

(Γ

−1

(

ρ

(Γ

(P l

−1

)))).

Let

∫ r := − ln(

−x
P ( x)e 2 dx)

R0

∫ ∫ and assume that esxd (( P )(x) < ∞ for all s in some

R

0

neighborhood of zero.

[Necessity] If λ '(0)ρ '(1) > er then there exists a

constant ξ = ξ (λ, ρ, x0), ξ > 0, such that for all l ∈ N , Pe(Pl) > ξ.
[Sufficiency] If λ '(0)ρ '(1) < er then there exists a

constant ξ = ξ (λ, ρ, x0), ξ > 0, such that if, for some l ∈ N , Pe(Pl(P0)) ≤ ξ then Pe(Pl) converges to zero as l

tends to infinity.

In [13], Chung et al. use a Gaussian approximation

for message densities under density evolution to

simplify the analysis of the decoding algorithm and

summarize the following theorem.

1

∏ Theorem 2: Let λ2* =

dc

e 2σ

2 n

,

( j −1)ρ j

j=2
if λ2 < λ2*, then the mean of the output message at the lth iteration mu(l) will converge to infinity as l tends to infinity if mu(0) is large enough. If λ2 > λ2*, then mu(l) cannot converge to infinity regardless of its initial

value.

Note that this condition is similar to the stability

condition

1

λ2 < dc

e2

σ

2 n

∑ ρ j ( j −1)

j=2

which can be deduced from Theorem 1, except that

dc

d c

∑ ∏ ρ ( j −1) is replaced by ( j −1)ρj . j

j =2

j =2

Using Jensen’s Inequality, we know that

d c

dc

∏ ∑ ( j −1)ρj ≤ ρ ( j −1) j

j =2

j=2

for all ρ(x), with equality iff ρk = 1 for some k ≥ 2. Therefore, the approximate stability condition is looser

than the original, which implies that stable degree

distributions under the Gaussian approximation may

not be stable under density evolution. However,

stability under density evolution guarantees stability

under the Gaussian approximation. In any case, these

two are the same if ρk = 1 for some k ≥ 2, and are very close if ρ(x) is concentrated at two consecutive degrees,

which is the case for most good degree distributions

found so far. From Mean Inequality, we know that λ2* attains the
minimum value iff all ρi are equal, so we conclude that
the selection of a uniform row weights yields good

threshold performance.

Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications (ICWMC'07) 0-7695-2796-5/07 $20A.0u0tho©riz2ed00lic7ensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:27:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Algorithm for regular LDPC codes
//calculate the number of rows which will be added ∆m = n (R0 - R) //n denotes block length of LDPC code (also the number of the columns of both original matrix and new constructed matrix) //m denotes the number of the rows of original matrix //R0 denotes the original code rate, and R denotes the target code rate k=1 //k denotes the number of rows in the matrix which are linearly dependent for (new row i = 1, i ≤ ∆m, i ++)
{insert ρ 1-components randomly in the n positions corresponding to n columns in (m+i)th row
//ρ denotes the row weight of the parity-check matrix of a regular LDPC code
for (j = 1, j < m+i, j ++) {if (jth row and (m+i)th row have more
than one 1-component in common) break this cycle, regenerate a new (m+i)th
row }
} while (k ≠ 0)
{find k' rows from (m+1)th to (m+∆m)th rows which are linearly dependent on any row in the new constructed matrix
// if the matrix has full row rank, k' =0 k= k' regenerate new k rows to substitute the formers, and also require that no two rows in the matrix have more than one 1-component in common } end
4. Novel Construction Algorithms
Employing the conclusions proposed in the previous section, we present a novel semi-random approach to construct rate-compatible LDPC codes.
The approach of extending in [1, 2] builds ratecompatible codes from high rates to low rates by adding more parity bits. Extending has low complexity and small performance loss at low code rates, but it also have some disadvantages: such as long block length which leads to low transfer efficiency and long time delay, especially when the mother code has long

block length; it demands more storage because both columns and rows are largely added.
To overcome these disadvantages, in our novel approach, only new rows are padded and no new columns are added, thereby the block length is invariable and less storage is required. This approach can be equivalently regarded as utilizing combinatorial parity extending and information nulling (which means that certain of information bits are deleted to reduce code rate [3]) simultaneously.
The conclusions proposed in the previous section are employed to direct the process of row adding. First, we must guarantee that no short cycles of length 4 are newly generated. Secondly, the weight of new row should maintain uniform and be close to the ones of the original rows of the mother code’s parity-check matrix to obtain better threshold performance. In addition, the new matrices should have a full rank to achieve the desired code rate.
If the mother code is a regular LDPC code, we can easily present a semi-random construction approach for lower-rate codes (see Algorithm for regular LDPC codes for details). If the mother code is a irregular one, we need to calculate the mean of the row weights of the original matrix and round off to a nearest integer at first. We employ this integer as the weight of newly added rows to construct new matrix, and the succeeding process is similar to the Algorithm for regular LDPC codes. It is noted that the new ratecompatible LDPC codes are usually irregular codes in spite of the type of the mother code. Their error performance depends on the degree distributions of the variable nodes and check nodes of their Tanner graphs as well [11]. Therefore, our approach is only a semirandom technique which does not ensure elegant degree distributions of the generated rate-compatible codes.
We use a (1536, 3, 6)-regular LDPC code as the mother code. Fig. 1 presents the bit error rate (BER) results for additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels of a set of rate-compatible LDPC codes of rates 8/16, 8/17, 8/18, 8/19 constructed by our construction approach. The simulation results show that good performance is achieved at lower rates based on our approach.

Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications (ICWMC'07) 0-7695-2796-5/07 $20A.0u0tho©riz2ed00lic7ensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:27:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 1. Eb/N0 simulation results for AWGN channels.
5. Conclusion
A novel approach for the construction of ratecompatible LDPC codes based on computer search is presented. The search is subject to some proposed important analytic properties. The simulation results demonstrate that the lower-rate codes constructed by using this approach work quite well. Ongoing and future work includes further introduction of new useful constraints into semi-random construction to improve the performance and implementation flexibility.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to acknowledge Jia Zhu and Dawei Wang of Institute of Wireless Communications at Shanghai Jiao Tong University for providing useful tools for simulations. This work was supported by National Nature Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grant No. 60332030 and National Hi-Tech Research and Development Program of China under Grant No. 2003AA123310.
6. References
[1] J. Li and K. Narayanan, “Rate-Compatible Low Density Parity Check Codes for Capacity-Approaching ARQ Scheme in Packet Data Communications,” in Proc. IASTED Int. Conf. on Commun., Internet, and Inform. Tech. (CIIT), St. Thomas, Virgin Islands, USA, Nov. 2002, pp. 201–206.
[2] M. R. Yazdani and A. H. Banihashemi, “On construction of rate-compatible low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 159–161, Mar. 2004.
[3] T. Tian, C. Jones, and J. D. Villasenor, “Rate-compatible low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp.

Inform. Theory (ISIT), Chicago, IL, USA, Jun./Jul. 2004, pp. 152.
[4] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 533-547, Jan. 1962.
[5] R. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 27, pp. 533-547, Sep. 1981.
[6] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 498-519, Feb. 2001.
[7] F. R. Kschischang, “Iterative decoding of compound codes by probability propagation in graphical models,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 219-230, Feb. 1998.
[8] T. Etzion, A. Trachtenberg, and A. Vardy, “Which codes have cycle-free Tanner graphs?,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2173–2181, Sept. 1999.
[9] R.J. McEliece, D.J.C. Mackay, and J.F. Cheng, “Turbo decoding as an instance of Pearl’s “belief propagation” algorithm,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 140–152, Feb. 1998.
[10] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of lowdensity parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2000.
[11] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[12] T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Fixed Points and Stability of Density Evolution,” Commun. Inform. Syst., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 103–116, Sep. 2004.
[13] S.-Y. Chung, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Analysis of sumproduct decoding of low-density paritycheck codes using a Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 657–670, Feb.2001.

Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications (ICWMC'07) 0-7695-2796-5/07 $20A.0u0tho©riz2ed00lic7ensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:27:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

