This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the WCNC 2007 proceedings.
Greedy Check Allocation for Irregular LDPC Codes Optimization in Multicarrier Systems
Asad Mahmood, Emmanuel Jaffrot Department UEI, Ecole Nationale Superieure de Techniques Avancees, 32 Bvd Victor - 75739 Paris, France. Email: mahmood, jaffrot@ensta.fr

Abstract— The capacity approaching performances [1] of different types of Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes have led them to undergo extensive research in recent years. Along with asymptotic performances analysis, the optimization of ‘irregularity’ profile for different channels and the performance analysis of practical finite-length codes has also been extensively explored. With multi-carrier communications becoming the physical layer choice for many emerging wireless systems, a feasible solution for optimizing the irregularity profile of irregular LDPC codes for a frequency selective channel is a problem of particular importance and interest. This paper proposes a simple-to-implement Greedy ‘Check’ Allocation (GCA) based method for the construction of BER-optimized irregular LDPC codes using the criterion of Gallager upper bound [2] for probabilistic decoding. A comparison of our GCA algorithm with some existing works [3] on the irregular LDPC codes optimization for multicarrier systems based on the classical gaussian approximation of the ‘Density Evolution’ approach, shows that the same irregularity behavior can be achieved with a much simpler method.
I. INTRODUCTION
The works of Mackay [4] re-discovered the capacity approaching behavior of Low Density parity Check (LDPC) Codes that were initially proposed by Gallager [5]. This not only led to define LDPC codes as channel codes in some recent wireless standards [6] but also made LDPC codes as one of the most researched areas in channel coding in recent years.
The performance of LDPC codes rely on the number of statistical independent iterations of the probabilistic decoding algorithm which is defined by the sparsity of the parity check matrix H of dimension (m × n) with m and n representing the the amount of redundancy added and the code-word length respectively. In other words each column of the H matrix represents a bit of the code-word to be transmitted, whereas each row represents a parity-check constraint involving some bits of the code-word. This matrix is also conventionally represented by a bi-partite graph [7] consisting of two types of nodes, ‘bit-nodes’ (one for each bit in the code-word) and ‘check-nodes’ (one for each parity-check constraint). Their in-between non-directional connection line is called an ‘edge’ . The sparsity of the parity check matrix is classically represented by the parameters of ‘j’ and ‘k’, each representing the number of 1’s in the columns and rows of H respectively. Gallager [5] initially proposed codes based on small fixed values of ‘j’ and ‘k’ for all columns and rows to define a ‘lowdensity’ H matrix. Such codes are commonly referred to as the ‘regular’ LDPC codes. However, it was first demonstrated by Richardson [1] that if one or both of these parameters (‘j’ and

‘k’) are allowed to vary for different bit/check nodes, then the resultant might be called as ’Irregular’ LDPC code and the Asymptotic Bit Error Rate (BER) performance of irregular LDPC was found to be nearer to the channel capacity limits than its ‘regular’ counterpart. In physical layer modulation techniques, multicarrier approaches are clearly proving their edge over the rest with their adoption in standards of emerging wired and wireless communication systems like DSL, WLAN, UWB, WiMAX etc.
Some works (as will be mentioned in the next section) have already been performed regarding optimization of Irregular LDPC codes for multicarrier systems.This paper concerns the same direction and proposes a novel simple-to-implement Greedy ‘Check-node’ Allocation (GCA) based methodology for optimization of the irregularity profile of irregular LDPC codes with respect to BER, using the criterion of Gallager BER upper bound [5], in the case of a frequency selective multicarrrier channel. Irregular LDPC codes and the existing optimization methodologies for their irregularity are given in section II. Section III presents our proposed Greedy Check Allocation (GCA) optimization method and Section IV deals with the ’Girth Conditioning’ method Finally, Simulation results showing the irregularity profile of BER-optimized irregular LDPC codes over a real channel are presented in section V along with the conclusions in section VI.

II. OPTIMIZATION OF IRREGULAR LDPC CODES

Irregular LDPC codes are conventionally described by

their ‘irregularity profile’ which is represented by means

of two polynomials, λ(x) =

j max j=2

λj xj−1

and

ρ(x)

=

kmax k=2

ρk xk−1

where

λj

is

the

fraction

of

the

edges

which

are connected to the degree j data nodes and ρk is the fraction

of the edges which are connected to the degree k check

nodes with jmax and kmax representing the maximum allowed

degree for data and check nodes respectively. A ‘degree’ j

data node (resp. a degree k check node) is a node connected

to exactly j(resp. k) edges.

The optimization of irregularity refers to the optimal dis-

tribution of a given total number of edges amongst different

nodes. In other words the optimization process results in giving

a family of codes corresponding to the optimal irregularity

profile for a given Channel State Information (CSI). Since

varying bit-nodes’ degrees has a more profound impact on

BER than varying the degrees of check-nodes, so generally the

degree of check-nodes is assumed constant ( as will be in our

1525-3511/07/$25.00 ©2007 IEEE

688

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:28:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the WCNC 2007 proceedings.

case ). Different works have been performed to optimize the irregularity profile with respect to several performance criteria (BER, throughput etc.) and for many channels as that of BEC [8], AWGN [1], Rayleigh Fading [9], Multicarrier[3] etc.
The problem of finding the optimal code-word for a given CSI requires tackling the problem in two steps. First an optimization method is required to find the family of codes corresponding to the optimal irregularity profile for a given objective (BER, throughput etc.), which is generally in continuousspace and is a non-linear function of the variables (λk, ρk). This step therefore generally becomes a non-linear constraint satisfaction problem which involves continuous space parameters and hence belongs to a problem class where non-linear and exhaustive search based optimization techniques come to work. Given an optimal irregularity profile with a corresponding family of codes, then comes the problem of finding the best ‘connectivity’/code-word for the respective CSI. The classical ’greedy’ optimization approach is conventionally employed in this regard for the optimal distribution of discrete entities like bit-nodes, edge-nodes and edges ( that define the irregular LDPC code structure in terms of bi-partite graph) using a welldefined optimization criterion (BER, throughput etc.).
Concerning the initial step exhaustive search based optimization techniques, the technique of Differential Evolution (DE) [10], which is an efficient modified version of Genetic Algorithm, has conventionally been employed for irregularity profile optimization. The main properties of DE are 1) ‘Initialization’ in which a random first generation of vectors is created with changes over time, 2) ‘Mutation and Recombination’ which defines how to modify the population in each generation, 3) ‘Selection’ of the survivors and finally 5) the ‘Stopping Criterion’. Its name comes from the differential nature of the mutation step, in which at each round random pair-wise differences of two pairs of population vectors are added to population members – the details of it can be consulted from [10]. Richardson [1] was the first to use this optimization approach for the problem of irregularity profile optimization employing the channel threshold1 criterion. DE has also been used for optimizing irregular LDPC profile in BEC channels [8] with respect to channel threshold and in frequency selective multicarrier channels [3] with respect to BER.
Concerning the second step of ‘greedy’ based optimization methods for optimal ‘connectivity’, a ‘Bit Filling’ algorithm was proposed in [11] which proposes to maximize the coderate (k/n) given an irregularity profile and using the criterion of code-matrix homogeneity. Basic idea was to incremently add the bit-nodes (corresponding to the columns of paritycheck matrix) , each time picking the check-nodes that result in least perturbation of the code-matrix homogeneity and also respecting the pre-defined girth constraint. This method was later employed to design codes with ‘largest possible’ girth [12]. Similarly a ‘Progressive Edge Growth’ (PEG) algorithm
1It is defined as the noise limit below which all the codes from the code ensemble reach a very small probability of error if the code-block length is taken to infinity.

[13] has also been recently proposed to find the optimal irregular LDPC code for a given CSI and ‘irregularity’ profile. It performs an edge-by-edge allocation each time selectng the case which has least effect on the girth thereby optimizing irregularity profile for girth maximization.
This paper is unique in the sense that it performs the irregularity profile optimization and the code-word exploration or ‘connectivity’ at the very same time to find a code-word for a given CSI that may approach the performance of the optimal code for that CSI but that could be found by a much simpler ‘greedy’ method. The corresponding advantages and dis-advantages of our proposed algorithm with respect to conventional optimization techniques as that of DE have been analyed.
III. GREEDY CHECK ALLOCATION (GCA) ALGORITHM
The underlying philosophy of GCA algorithm is greedy allocation of the check nodes one-by-one each time finding the k ’best’ bit-nodes to be connected with this check-node, where k refers to the degree of the check nodes. In this regard Gallager’s [2] upper bound on probabilistic decoding using hard decoding analysis was employed. The initial probability of error of received bits is different for different sub-carriers after passing through a frequency selective multicarrier channel, unlike the same probability of error for all the code-bits for an AWGN case. Using Gallager’s [2] modified hard decoding algorithm, the probability of error after a decoding iteration can be represented as:

Pni+1 = Pn0 − Pnerr−corr(Pni ) + Pnerr−add(Pni )

(1)

where Pni refers to the probability of error of the digit in subcarrier n after i iterations. As shown in equation (1), the probability of correcting an error ( Pnerr−corr(Pni ) ) and that of corrupting a correct value ( Pnerr−add(Pni ) ) in the previous
iteration are subsequently subtracted and added from the initial probability of error Pn0. If Gallager’s [2] modified decoding algorithm is used, where a digit is changed whenever b or more

of the parity check constraints rising from the digit are violated, the probability of correcting an error (P err−corr(Pni )) in each iteration may be given as [2] :

j(n)−1

l

Pn0 ·

Cjl−1 ·

1+

kk(=n)1(1 − 2.pil k ) 2

·

(2)

l=b

l =1

l

1−

k(n) k =1

(1

−

2.pli

k

)

2
l =1

and similarly the probability of adding an error in the place

of a correctly received error in an iteration as:

j(n)−1

l

(1 − Pn0) ·

Cjl−1 ·

1−

l=b

l =1

k(n) k =1

(1

−

2.pil

k

)

2

·

(3)

l 1+
l =1

kk(=n)1(1 − 2.pil k ) 2

689
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:28:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the WCNC 2007 proceedings.

where Cjl−1 represents the binomial coefficient. An increase in the number of ’neighbors’ of a check-node sharing the same check-node generally results in an increase in the probability of error of that bit-node. This can be attributed to the increase in the probability of false information that a check-node is getting for a bit-node from its ‘neighbors’. Hence the number of bit nodes connected to a check-node (= check-node degree) were kept constant in our case while seeking to optimize the bit-node degree for a given SNR so as to minimize the overall average BER. The effect of the number of check nodes connected to a bit-node on the bit-node’s BER can easily be observed from equation (1) where the greatest decrease in Pni happens when the difference between R.H.S and L.H.S is largest in the inequality below.

(1

− Pn0) Pn0

≤

2l−j−1 l =1

1+ 1−

kk(=n)1(1 − 2.pil k ) kk(=n)1(1 − 2.pli k )

(4)

Hence larger the number of the check nodes j attached to a

bit-node, greater would be the R.H.S in the inequality above or

in other words larger would be the decrease in the probability

of error.

Since here we are concerned with the multicarrier systems

where the overall BER is the average of the BER over all the

subcarriers, hence if we represent the BER at subcarrier n as fnBER which is generally a function of channel SNR αn and the power allocated to the symbol at this channel pn , then

the overall BER can be represented as

BERavg

=

1 N

N
fnBER (αn
n=1

· pn)

(5)

thus in order to seek for minimization of BER, for the allocation of each check-node we will be looking for the k

bit-nodes which result in the largest decrease in probability of

error if a check-node is added to them.

Thus the general algorithm procedure is that starting from one check, we search for k bit-nodes which result in the

largest decrease in probability of error if the number of

check-nodes they are connected to are increased by one.

The new check-node is allocated to these ‘k’ bit-nodes, their

probability of error values are updated with respect to their

updated number of connected check-nodes and then the same

procedure is repeated till all the check-nodes are allocated

in this manner to different bit-nodes. While looking for the

bit-nodes with maximum decrease in BER, the constraints of

maximum permissible number of check nodes per bit-node and

the minimum required girth of the code are also verified before

allocation of a check to a bit-node. The irregularity profile is

optimized for only one iteration of the probabilistic decoding

but the performances of other irregular profile configurations

with poorer BER results after one decoding iteration, generally

tends to keep this trend if the number of iterations is increased.

IV. GIRTH CONDITIONING METHODOLOGY
When the LDPC codes are represented by means of a bipartite graph, a closed path with edges starting from and

TABLE I GREEDY CHECK ALLOCATION (GCA) ALGORITHM FOR BER-OPTIMAL
IRREGULARITY GRAPH

1:

for( j = 1 : N checks )

2:

valid − nodes = setdif f ( [1 : N bits] , Njbm itasx )

3:

jvalid−nodes = jvalid−nodes + 1

4:

Calc. Pen−new using eq. (1) with new j value

5:

∆Pen = Pen−new − Pen−old

6:

∆Pesort = sort(∆Pevalid−nodes)

7:

Girth − invalid = Girth − routine(∆Pesort)

8:

valid − nodes = setdif f ( valid − nodes , girth − invalid )

9:

H(j, valid − nodes(1 : k)) = 1

10:

Njbm itasx = f ind(n∀ jn > jmax)

11:

Pen−new = Pen−old

12: end

ending at the very same bit-node is called a ‘cycle’ of ‘e’ edges. ‘Girth’ ( =(No. of edges in a cycle)/2) = refers to the length of the shortest cycle in a graph. The importance of large girth stems from the fact that when decoding LDPC codes using the sum-product algorithm, the number of independent iterations in the decoding algorithm are directly proportional to the girth of the bi-partite graph of the corresponding code. This becomes important as it is known that the minimum distance of the code increases with the girth of the code graph [7] .
It is also known that the cycles with 4-edges or a graph with girth 2 affects negatively the decoding performance of the probabilistic decoding in a very strong manner. Hence in our irregularity profile optimization , we avoided the presence of cycles of length 4 (= girth 2). This was realized by finding out the ‘girth-2 invalid’ nodes before the allocation of each check node. A girth-2 cycle occurs whenever there are two or more similar bit-nodes connected to two different check-nodes. Hence before allocating a check-node to a bit-node, our girth2 avoidance policy ensured that none of the ‘neighbors’ of this bit-node is connected to the check-node to be allocated. The ‘neighbors’ are the bit-nodes that are connected to each other by a distance of 2-edges or which share at least one same check-node. If this was not found to be true, this bit-node is not allocated the check-node. Starting from the first valid bit-node, this procedure is repeated each time removing the girth-invalid bit-nodes from the valid-nodes and till we have found ‘k’ ‘girth-valid’ nodes, an allocation of check node to whom will not result in the birth of a cycle of length 4 in the code graph.
Same methodology can be used to avoid cycles of larger length but then more distant neighborhood would have to be considered. Table 2 demonstrates the basic structure of the algorithm for cycle-avoidance which was invoked in the line 7 of the GCA algorithm given in table 1. The outer ‘for’ loop in the table 2 algorithm is for the ‘k’ bit-nodes to be allocated to the new-check-node while the inner ‘for’ loop is to ensure that

690
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:28:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the WCNC 2007 proceedings.
TABLE II CYCLE-4 AVOIDANCE ALGORITHM

1: for( ni = 1 : k )

2:

bi = valid − sort(ni)

3:

Nnceigh(bi) = f ind(H(:, bi))

4:

for( ci = 1 : length(Nnceigh(bi)) )

5:

Nnc−eingehw = ( Nnc−eingehw , Nnc−eingehw (bi) )

6:

Nnbeigh(ci) = setdiff ( find ( H (Nnceigh(bi), :)), bi)

7:

Nnb−eingehw = ( Nnb−eingehw , Nnc−eingehw (ci) )

8:

end

9:

valid-sort = setdiff(valid-sort, Nnb−eingehw)

10: end

Fig. 1. BER Optimized Irregularity Profile without Cycle Avoidance

none of the ‘neighbors’ of the concerned bit-node is already connected to the check-node to be allocated in order to avoid length-4 cycles.

V. SIMULATION RESULTS
For simulation purposes we compared our irregularity profile optimization results with the works of Mannoni [14] also related to the optimization of irregular LDPC with respect to the frequency selective multicarrier channel. Hence in order to facilitate the comparisons, the same channel impulse response used in [14] was employed for our simulation purposes and which corresponds to a typical ADSL channel with the impulse response given as:
hA = [0.06, 0.72, 0.54, 0.36, 0.18, 0.114, 0.078, 0.054, 0.033, 0.018, 0.012]
Using the GCA algorithm the obtained irregularity profile along with the normalized BER for the above mentioned channel at an SNR of 5dB (same as used in [14]) is given in figure (1) where no cycle-avoidance was done . The optimized irregularity profile using avoidance of cycles of length 4 is given in figure (2).
It was found that the optimized profile shows the same behavior as was observed by Mannoni while optimizing the irregularity profile using the ‘Differential Evolution’ optimization. The connections on the information bits are found to be inversely proportional to the channel shape. This kind of profile could be interpreted as a compensation for the channel selectivity. A bit which is connected to a large number of check nodes is well protected against the additive noise because it gets lots of information coming from the other bits during the decoding process. So, an information bit transmitted on a subcarrier with a small SNR must have a large connection degree in order to be well protected. This becomes especially true when the overall average BER is being seeked to improve (as in our GCA algorithm) by gradual improvement of the worst subcarriers.
In terms of complexity, the simplistic operations involved in GCA like selection, assignment and sorting are clearly indicative of its complexity advantages over the optimization approach used in [14]. The approach in [14] not only relies on

Fig. 2. BER Optimized Irregularity Profile with Length-4 Cycles Avoidance
the complex ‘Gaussian Approximation’ of the message passing algorithm but also the employed optimization technique (Differential Evolution) is a variant of genetic algorithm, which requires exhaustive vector handling in the intermediary steps as those of mutation and new generation selection.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have targeted the problem of optimizing the irregularity profile of irregular LDPC codes for frequency selective multicarrier systems to minimize the average BER. A simple-to-implement optimization methodology based on one-by-one ‘greedy’ allocation of check-nodes was proposed in order to seek BER-Optimized irregularity profile and edgeconnectivity at the same time. The irregularity profiles of the resultant code-words were found to be similar in nature to those earlier established in the works of [14] thus clearly showing the advantages of our approach which obtains the same irregularity profile behavior with much lesser complexity. The continuation of the work involves quantification of the BER difference from the optimal and the implementation of the two methods over a real-time implementation platform

691
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:28:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the WCNC 2007 proceedings.
(FPGA, DSP etc.) in order to obtain the time gain coefficient exhibiting the ‘fast’ nature of our proposed algorithm.
REFERENCES
[1] T. Richardson, M. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke. Design of capacity approaching low-density parity-check codes. In IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, volume 47, pages 1729–133, February 2001.
[2] R.G. Gallager. Low-density parity-check codes. In IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, volume 8, pages 21–28, 1962.
[3] V. Mannoni, D. Declercq, and G. Gelle. Low-density parity-check codes. In Proc. 13th IEEE International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications, 2002., volume 1, pages 222–226, September 2002.
[4] D. J. C. MacKay. Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 45(2):399–431, 1999.
[5] R.G. Gallager. Low-density parity-check codes. In PhD. Thesis, MIT, 1963.
[6] M. Eroz, F.W. Sun, and L.N. Lee. Dvb-s2 low density parity check codes with near shannon limit performance. In International Journal of Satellite Communications and Networking, volume 22, pages 269–279, June 2004.
[7] R. Tanner. A recursive approach to low complexity codes. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 27(5):533–547, 1981.
[8] A. Shokrollahi and R. Storn. Design of efficient erasure codes with differential evolution. Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, 1(5):On Page 5, 2000.
[9] J. Hou, P. H. Siegel, and L. B. Milstein. Performance analysis and code optimization of low density parit y check codes on rayleigh fading channels. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 19(5):924–934, 2001.
[10] R. Storn and K.Price. Differential evolution : A simple and efficient heuristic for global optimization over continuous spaces. J. of Global Optimization, 11(4):341–359, 1997.
[11] J. Campello, D. Modha, and S. Rajagopalan. Designing ldpc codes using bit-filling. Proc. Int. Conf. Communications (ICC), Helsinki, Finland, 2001.
[12] J. Campello and D. Modha. Extended bit-filling and ldpc code design. IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, 2001, 2:985–989, 2001.
[13] X.Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D.M. Arnold. Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graphs. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 51(1):386–398, 2005.
[14] V. Mannoni, D. Declercq, and G. Gelle. Optimized irregular ldpc codes for multicarrier modulations over frequency selective channels. EURASIP Journal on Applied Signal Processing, 2005. Special issue on Multicarrier Modulations.
692
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:28:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

