1080

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 3, MARCH 2007

TS-LDPC Codes: Turbo-Structured Codes With Large Girth
Jin Lu, Member, IEEE, and José M. F. Moura, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—We consider turbo-structured low-density paritycheck (TS-LDPC) codes—structured regular codes whose Tanner graph is composed of two trees connected by an interleaver. TS-LDPC codes with good girth properties are easy to construct: careful design of the interleaver component prevents short cycles
 of any desired length in its Tanner graph. We present algorithms
to construct TS-LDPC codes with arbitrary column weight j 2 and row weight k and arbitrary girth g. We develop a linear complexity encoding algorithm for a type of TS-LDPC codes—encoding friendly TS-LDPC (EFTS-LDPC) codes. Simulation results demonstrate that the bit-error rate (BER) performance at low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is competitive with the error performance of random LDPC codes of the same size, with better error floor properties at high SNR.
Index Terms—Error floor, girth, interleaver, low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes, turbo-structured.

I. INTRODUCTION

LOW-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, [1], are being considered in numerous applications including digital

communication systems and magnetic recording channels.

Their bit-error rate (BER) performance using iterative decoding

is close to the Shannon limit, [2].

There are several ways to specify LDPC codes. In this paper,

we use indistinctly the code parity-check matrix and its asso-

ciated bipartite Tanner graph, [3]. We adopt the common nota-

tion of referring to a code with block length and column and

row weights and , respectively, as an

-LDPC code.

The rate of the code is (approximately) given by

. An

important parameter affecting the performance of the code is the

length of the shortest cycle in its Tanner graph. This parameter

is the girth of the code. The relation of girth to performance

is not completely understood. Codes with four-cycles and pro-

jective geometry codes, which may have limited girth, can per-

form well, [4]. However, in general, in codes with small , i.e.,

with short cycles in the Tanner graph, the decoding algorithm

Manuscript received November 19, 2004; revised November 18, 2006. This work was supported by the Data Storage Systems Center (DSSC) at Carnegie Mellon University. The material in this paper was presented in part at IEEE 4th International Workshop on Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications (SPAWC), Rome, Italy, June 2003.
J. Lu is with Sun Microsystems, Louisville, CO 80028 USA (e-mail: j.lu@sun.com).
J. M. F. Moura is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890 USA (e-mail: moura@ece.cmu.edu).
Communicated by M. P. C. Fossorier, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques.
Color versions of Figures 6, 9–13, and 15–24 in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2006.890690

takes longer to converge or may fail to converge to the optimal

decoding result. On the other hand, for codes with very large

girth , the first

decoding iterations correspond to op-

timal decoding iterations. For moderate to high signal-to-noise

ratio (SNR), it is with very high probability that the decoding

success is reached within the “optimal”

iterations when

is large. Therefore, we can actually achieve optimal decoding

results in the sense that the probability of symbol error is mini-

mized. Furthermore, [3] shows that a lower bound on the min-

imum distance

of LDPC codes increases exponentially

with the girth . Therefore, it is desirable to have LDPC codes

with good girth properties.

An important consideration for the practical application of

LDPC codes is the regularity and structure of their encoding and

decoding implementation. Recently, structured regular LDPC

codes have drawn much attention in the sense that they facilitate

low-complexity encoder and decoder designs. We briefly review

several typical designs of structured regular LDPC codes in this

paper.

We discuss here very briefly recent literature on designs

of LDPC codes. A more extensive review of LDPC codes is

in [5], [6]. Kou, Lin, and Fossorier [7], [8] developed LDPC

codes based on finite geometries and incidence structures. Fi-

nite-geometry LDPC codes can be designed over a wide variety

of block lengths and code rates and achieve good minimum

distances. Finite-geometry LDPC codes have girth . Another

method to construct structured -cycle-free regular LDPC

codes is based on balanced incomplete block designs (BIBD)

[9]–[13]. A BIBD is defined as a collection of equal size

blocks, comprising elements drawn from a set , such that each

pair of distinct elements

of occurs in exactly blocks

of . BIBD-based codes are well structured, free of -cycles,

i.e., with girth

, but exhibit a large number of -cycles in

their Tanner graphs. Finite-geometry codes and BIBD codes are

examples of cyclic and quasi-cyclic [14], [15] codes. For these

codes with column weight

the girth is less than or equal

to , see Fossorier, [16], and our own paper [17]. This pre-

vents the girth of

-cyclic and quasi-cyclic LDPC codes

of growing according to the prediction

derived by [1] for random LDPC codes; hence, such codes with

very long code block lengths perform poorly.

Hu, Eleftheriou, and Arnold propose in [18] a nonalgebraic

method named progressive edge-growth (PEG). They present

examples of codes of girth

by progressively establishing

edges between bit and check nodes in an edge-by-edge manner.

PEG optimizes the placement of a new edge on the Tanner graph

with the goal of maximizing the local girth. Reference [16] con-

structed LDPC codes from circulant permutation matrices. It

0018-9448/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:25:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LU AND MOURA: TS-LDPC CODES: TURBO-STRUCTURED CODES WITH LARGE GIRTH

1081

Fig. 1. Left: The encoder structure for the concatenated LDPC codes in [22]. Right: The parity-check matrix H for the concatenated LDPC codes in [21], [22].

presents conditions for such codes to achieve girth up to

. Fig. 2. The decoder Tanner graph of a TS-LDPC code: h = 4, j = 3, and

References [19], [20] also provide good constructions for struc- k = 4.

tured LDPC codes with large girth.

This paper considers a class of structured regular LDPC

codes, the turbo-structured LDPC (TS-LDPC) codes, that

can be designed with arbitrary large girth by appropriately

choosing the code block length . We describe an algorithm

to construct TS-LDPC codes with any desired column and

row weights

and , hence, with any desired practical

rate . TS-LDPC codes are hardware friendly: they are regular

and structured, and their parity-check matrix , which can be

very large, is determined from a much smaller object, the shift

matrix , so that their memory requirements can be negligible. We show by simulation that the BER performance of TS-LDPC Fig. 3. Parity-check matrix H of a (6666; 3; 6) TS-LDPC code with girth 10.

codes is competitive with that of random LDPC codes, with

better error floor properties. Finally, we exploit the specific

structure of the Tanner graph of a particular type of TS-LDPC the code in [22] has rectangular blocks, the two right ones cor-

codes—encoding-friendly TS-LDPC (EFTS-LDPC) codes to responding to the parity bits of each encoder component.

derive an encoding algorithm with linear complexity.

We comment briefly on the relation between TS-LDPC codes

The Tanner graph of TS-LDPC codes is composed of two and generalized quasi-cyclic LDPC (GQC-LDPC) codes, a

trees, an upper tree and a lower tree , that are connected class of LDPC code designs that we described recently in [17],

in a turbo-like manner by an interleaver . This turbo structure [23]–[25]. In the terminology of TS-LDPC codes, GQC-LDPC

is exploited to facilitate the systematic design of LDPC codes codes are simply reduced to an interleaver, no upper or lower

with large girth and flexible code rates . Turbo structures have trees are present like in TS-LDPC codes. At first sight, it seems

been used in [21], [22] to construct LDPC codes. The codes pro- that the TS-LDPC codes generalize GQC-LDPC codes. On

posed by these authors combine two LDPC codes as component the one hand, they are distinct from GQC-LDPC codes since

codes on the encoder side. Reference [21] directly borrows the they add to the interleaver the upper and lower trees in their

structure of the turbo encoder, replacing the recursive convolu- code Tanner graph; on the other hand, they seem to borrow in

tional codes commonly used in turbo codes with a tree code—a some generic sense ideas from the design of GQC-LDPC codes

specific LDPC code whose associated graph for the code-gen- including“grouping and shifting” to avoid cycles within the

erating matrix , not for the parity-check matrix , is a tree. interleaver. In this restricted sense, Algorithm 1 for TS-LDPC

In [22], the encoder is a parallel concatenation of two LDPC codes extends Algorithm 1 for GQC-LDPC codes, see [24].

codes without an interleaver, as shown on the left of Fig. 1. Our However, the addition of the upper and lower trees in the

TS-LDPC codes stand in sharp contrast with the codes in [21], TS-LDPC codes adds additional constraints and degrees of

[22]: they are turbo-like from the decoder point of view, see freedom to the design process not present for the GQC-LDPC

Fig. 2, i.e., from the parity-check matrix and its associated codes. The design constraints on the interleaver being different,

Tanner graph; their Tanner graphs are NOT the concatenation the details of the construction and the theorems underlying the

of two trees through an interleaver as our decoders are. Fig. 1 construction of TS-LDPC codes are quite different from the

on the right shows the parity-check matrices for the codes in corresponding results for GQC-LDPC codes.

[21], [22] and Fig. 3 for a TS-LDPC code. The structure of these Both codes can be designed with flexible girth and code rates

matrices bear no resemblance. The top and lower tree structures but their designs are very different and they represent distinct

of the TS-LDPC codes give rise to the top and bottom diagonal tradeoffs: usually, for codes of similar girth, GQC-LDPC codes

lines in , while the cloud of points in arises from the in- have smaller block length , or, in alternative, for codes with

terleaver. In contradistinction to this structure, the matrix for similar block length , GQC-LDPC codes can be designed

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:25:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1082

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 3, MARCH 2007

with larger girth; for similar girth, TS-LDPC codes have shorter diameter, which may lead to faster convergence; and, for TS-LDPC codes, we can design faster decoding, [26], and faster (linear) encoding algorithms, see Section V.

II. TS-LDPC CODES

As shown in Fig. 2, the Tanner graph of TS-LDPC codes is

composed of three components: two height-balanced trees, de-

noted as an upper-tree and a lower-tree , and an inter-

leaver that connects and . The leaf nodes of are bit

nodes (circles), whereas the leaf nodes of are check nodes

(squares). The number of layers or tiers in the trees and is

kept the same and given by . We require to be an even number

because we start the upper tree from a check node and require its

leaf nodes to be bit nodes, and, similarly, we start the lower tree

from a bit node and require its leaf nodes to be check nodes. The

two trees are “coupled” in a turbo-like manner such that many

edges join the leaf nodes of and together, see Fig. 2. The

structure formed by the edges connecting the leaf nodes of

and the leaf nodes of is named the interleaver .

The first tier of contains only one check node . To

match , we let the root of be a bit node and connect

to . For the TS-LDPC code in Fig. 2, the height of the tree is

, and the column and row weights are, respectively,

and

. The rate of the code is

where denotes the parity-check matrix and is the code block

length. This rate can be arbitrarily adjustable as long as we can

design TS-LDPC codes with appropriate values for and . We

will present an algorithm to achieve just that.

Fig. 4. Auxiliary nodes of T .
Fig. 5. Left: A type I cycle. Right: A type II cycle.
whose labels are appropriately shifted. Section III-D discusses the number of groups needed. Based on the discussions in Sections III-A-D, Section III-E shows the detailed algorithm to construct TS-LDPC codes. Finally, Section III-F discusses the advantages provided by the structure of TS-LDPC codes in terms of the memory required to store them. A. Auxiliary Nodes and -Alternate-Decimal Indexing

III. INTERLEAVER DESIGN

Because of the regularity of the code, by construction, each

leaf node in is to be connected to

leaf nodes in

This section considers the design of TS-LDPC codes, in par- . This is a one-to- mapping, while the standard interleaver

ticular the design of the interleaver . The interleaver is de- is a one-to-one mapping between elements of two sets with the

signed by specifying the rules of how to connect the leaf bit same size. To get a standard interleaver, we introduce “auxiliary

nodes in the upper tree to the leaf check nodes in the lower nodes” (solid triangles) as shown in Fig. 4 to facilitate the code

tree . Interleaver designs for turbo codes have been exten- design. For each leaf node in , we add auxiliary nodes as

sively studied [27]–[30]. For example, an -random interleaver its children. Similarly, each leaf node in has

auxiliary

[27] guarantees that any two positions within distance are nodes as its descendants.

mapped to two positions with distance greater than after in- Due to the tree structure of the upper and lower components

terleaving. The functions of the interleavers for turbo codes are of the codes, cycles present in TS-LDPC codes must contain at

to avoid low-weight codewords and to decrease the correlation least four “auxiliary nodes”—two auxiliary nodes of and two

between the extrinsic information and the input data sequence. auxiliary nodes of . We use this observation to classify cycles

They are not designed to construct Tanner graphs with large into two disjoint categories: Type I cycles contain four and only

girth. Hence, we can not directly borrow the existing interleaver four auxiliary nodes; type II cycles are all the other cycles in the

designs for turbo codes, say, the -random interleaver, for de- code and contain six or more auxiliary nodes. We will dispose

signing TS-LDPC codes. We need to develop new interleavers of each of these two types of cycles separately. Fig. 5 shows on

that suit the structure of TS-LDPC codes and lead to TS-LDPC the left a type I cycle and on the right a type II cycle.

codes with large girth.

For with tiers, there are

auxil-

Section III-A introduces -alternate-decimal indexing that iary nodes of . We address the interleaver design problem

is used in labeling the nodes in the Tanner graph and in deter- algebraically by indexing all the auxiliary nodes of and .

mining how to connect the leaf nodes in and . We design We start by numbering the auxiliary nodes in from to

these rules to prevent cycles of length smaller than the desired

in the following format—the -al-

girth . We achieve this by categorizing the cycles in two types: ternate-decimal format, where

and

. We

type I and type II cycles. Section III-B specifies the connecting need digits in the -alternate-decimal indexing to label all

rules to avoid type I cycles. Type II cycles are considered in the auxiliary nodes in . These digits are numbered from

Section III-C—they are prevented by “grouping and shifting:” to , starting from the rightmost one. The odd-numbered digits

we group the leaf nodes and connect leaf nodes in distinct trees take values to and the even-numbered digits take values

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:25:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LU AND MOURA: TS-LDPC CODES: TURBO-STRUCTURED CODES WITH LARGE GIRTH

1083

to . We refer to the position of each digit as its coordi-

nate. Similarly, we index all the auxiliary nodes of from to

and represent also all these indices in

-alternate-decimal format.

To be concrete, we provide an example. The index

of

the auxiliary node in in Fig. 4, in

-alternate-decimal

form, is

A A A A (1) Fig. 6. Left: Type I cycle with four auxiliary nodes , , , and . Right: A path of length 3 that contains two auxiliary nodes is actually a path of length1.

In (1), ,

, represents the th digit. The coordinate

of is . The corresponding value of

in decimals is

the digit-wise reversal operator by

in (1), its digit-wise reversal is

. For the index

From here on, when we refer to “indices” of nodes we mean

their

-alternate-decimal or

-alternate-decimal

representations.

(2)

Before establishing the connection rules, we first prove the following auxiliary lemma.

Lemma 1:

(a) Let the distance between two auxiliary nodes and

within be

. and are indices for

and , respectively. If is the leftmost coordinate where

the digits of and differ from each other, then

.

(b) Denote the distance between two auxiliary nodes and

within as

. and are indices for

and . If is the leftmost coordinate where the digits of

and differ from each other, then

.

Proof: We first prove part (a) of the lemma. From the defi-

nition of the -alternate-decimal indexing, the first common

We state the advantage of the digit-wise reversal interleaver in the following theorem.

Theorem 1: Connecting the auxiliary nodes indexed by

in to the auxiliary nodes indexed by

in guar-

antees that any resulting type I cycle is at least of length ,

where denotes the number of tiers in .

Proof: From its definition, a type I cycle contains four aux-

iliary nodes , , , and as shown on the left in Fig. 6.

Their associated indices are , , , and , respectively.

Denote the distance between and within the tree

as

, and the distance of and within as

. According to the left plot in Fig. 6, the length of a

type I cycle is:

ancestor of the auxiliary nodes and is in the

th

tier of where is the leftmost coordinate where the digits of

(3)

and differ from each other and denotes the number of

tiers in . For example, with reference to the index in Fig. 4,

let

and

be the indices of two auxiliary

nodes and of . Since the leftmost coordinate where the

digits of and differ from each other is the fourth, then

the first common ancestor of the auxiliary nodes and is

the root of , located in the first tier of .

However, as auxiliary nodes , , , and are imaginary

nodes, the type I cycle does not contain them as vertices. For

example, the path of length 3 with two auxiliary nodes and

shown on the right in Fig. 6 is actually a path of length in

the Tanner graph. Therefore, the actual cycle length is

,

i.e.,

To find the shortest path in that connects and , we have

to go up tiers from to reach its first common ancestor and

(4)

then go downwards tiers from to . Therefore, the distance

through the tree between and is

. Sim-

ilarly, we can prove part (b) of the lemma. This completes the

proof.

We now consider the connection rule to avoid type I cycles.

We relate the distance

to the value of their indices.

By Lemma 1,

, where is the leftmost coordi-

nate where the digits of and differ from each other. Let

represent the height of . After digit-wise reversal, the digits

of and at the coordinate become the digits of

and

at the coordinate

, respectively. So, the

B. Avoiding Short Type I Cycles—Digit-Wise Reversal

digits of

and

at the coordinate

are dif-

ferent. According to the connecting rule stated in the theorem,

We start from a simple interleaver design—digit-wise re-

and

, so the digits of and at

versal, [31]. For an index

in -alternate-decimal form the coordinate

are different. Therefore, by Lemma 1

with digits, its digit-wise reversal interchanges the th digit

and the

th digit for

. We represent

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:25:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1084

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 3, MARCH 2007

By (4), the length of such a type I cycle is then

type I cycle formed is at least of length , where denotes the number of tiers in .

From the above analysis, all type I cycles that result from following the connection rule in Theorem 1 are at least of length
. This completes the proof.
Theorem 1 states that to increase the length of type I cycles we need simply to increase the number of tiers in the upper and lower trees.
C. Avoiding Type II Cycles—Grouping and Shifting

The proof of Theorem 2 is similar to that of Theorem 1 and

is omitted here.

By Theorem 2, we are free to choose any shift in the

rule

because the length of any type

I cycle is guaranteed to be greater than or equal to . The

freedom to choose the values of

is exploited to avoid

short type II cycles. This is the subject of Theorem 3 and

Section III-C2.

We observe that each type II cycle with edges in the inter-

leaver is associated with shifts

The connection rule in Theorem 1 prevents short type I cy-

cles. We now consider the connection rule to avoid short type

II cycles. To exclude short type II cycles, we propose grouping

and shifting.

Shifting We define the shift to be a constant in

-al-

ternate-decimal format that is added to the original index

to form a new index. We illustrate it with an ex-

ample. Let

, the shift

,

and represent by the digit-wise addition (with no carry). Then

We say that the type II cycle is characterized by the shift se-

quence

. The index labels

of the shift sequence characterizing a type II cycle satisfy the

following two conditions:

(i)

,

;

(ii)

,

,

and
and and

,
and .

(5)

In (5),

, where

if is even and

if is odd. In a similar fashion, we

represent the digit-wise subtraction by .

Grouping We divide the auxiliary nodes of into groups of

the same size according to their indices. Those auxiliary nodes

whose indices have the same leftmost digits are placed in the

same group. The auxiliary nodes of can, likewise, be clas-

sified into groups based also on whether their indices have the

same leftmost digits. We will derive in Section III-D, in partic-

ular, Lemma 3, the number of groups that we need for each tree

to achieve a given girth , i.e., what is the relationship between

and .

After clustering the auxiliary nodes into groups, we further let

the shift to be the same when we connect the auxiliary nodes

of in the same group to the auxiliary nodes of in the same

group. Denote by the shift introduced when we connect the

auxiliary nodes of in the th group to the auxiliary nodes of

in the th group. For different and , the shifts may

be the same or different from each other. The mapping rule for

the interleaver is now the following.

Connection rule to avoid type II cycles Connect the auxil-

iary node indexed by

in the th group in to the auxil-

iary node indexed by

in the th group in .

For example, the two type II cycles of length six on the bottom left and bottom right of Fig. 7 contain four edges in the interleaver. They are characterized by the same shift sequence

The type II cycle shown on the top of Fig. 7 contains six edges in the interleaver; it is characterized by the shift sequence

Given a shift sequence

that

satisfies conditions (i) and (ii) above, we define further its accu-

mulated alternate sum to be

(6)

The following theorem helps to eliminate type II cycles with edges in the interleaver.

Theorem 3: Let

be a

shift sequence that contains shifts.

We will show that in fact this rule prevents short type II cycles.

But, first, we need to make sure that using this rule does not

introduce short type I cycles. This is settled in the next theorem

that shows that type I cycles do not depend on the shift . is the accumulated alternate sum of and has digits

Theorem 2: Connecting the auxiliary node indexed by in its

-alternate-decimal expansion. If

con-

in the th group in to the auxiliary node indexed by tains at most

consecutive digits “ ” in its

in the th group in guarantees that any

-alternate-decimal expansion, then any type II

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:25:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LU AND MOURA: TS-LDPC CODES: TURBO-STRUCTURED CODES WITH LARGE GIRTH

1085

Fig. 7. Three different type II cycles of length 6.

the auxiliary node is

. Again,

let

. The index for the auxiliary node is

.

Continuing to trace the cycle and finding the relationships

between the indices of the auxiliary nodes, when we reach the

auxiliary node , we find that

.

The relationship between and is

.

Iterating in the definition of , we have

(8)

Fig. 8. Type II cycle with 2k edges in the interleaver.

Since the cycle has edges in , then the distance between

auxiliary nodes

and ,

, through is

cycle characterized by

has length NO less than less than or equal to . By Lemma 1, we know that only the

.

rightmost digits of ,

, can be nonzero, the

Proof: We prove Theorem 3 by proving an equivalent other digits of have to be zero. Note that, for the digit-wise add

proposition: If there exists a type II cycle with edges in , there is no carry. Therefore, only the rightmost digits of

the interleaver and its length is less than

, then the

associated

MUST contain more

than

consecutive digits “ .” Fig. 8 shows a type II

cycle with edges in the interleaver. Let this type II cycle

contain edges in and edges in .

By assumption, the length of this type II cycle is less than

. Since the length of the type II cycle is

,

then

can be nonzero. Similarly, we derive that only the right-

most digits of

can be nonzero. From the definition

of the digit-wise reversal , only the leftmost digits of

can be nonzero. According to (8), we derive that

only the leftmost digits and the rightmost digits of

can be nonzero. That means that the intermediate

digits of are zero. Since by (7)

, then

contains more than

consec-

(7) utive zeros. Thus, if a cycle has edges in the interleaver and

its length is less than

, then its associated contains

Since there are edges in the interleaver, the cycle contains more than consecutive zeros in its -alternate-decimal

auxiliary nodes, auxiliary nodes

in , representation. This completes the proof.

and auxiliary nodes

in . With reference

to the plot in Fig. 8, and assuming that the index for the aux- D. Minimum Number of Groups in Each Tree

iliary node is , according to the connecting rule pre- There is a tradeoff when deciding the number of groups to

sented in Theorem 2, the index for the auxiliary node

is choose in each tree. On the one hand, to get compact TS-LDPC

. Let denote the difference be- codes, we prefer a small number of groups in and . To

tween

and , i.e.,

. The index for reduce the number of groups, the number of the common

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:25:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1086

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 3, MARCH 2007

Fig. 9. Left: A type II cycle that can NOT be excluded by any choice of the shifts S
that the cycle shown on the left always exists.

and S . Right: A subsidiary figure with auxiliary nodes to prove

Fig. 10. Left: A length 8 cycle that can NOT be excluded by any choice of the shifts S any choice of the shifts S and S .

and S . Right: A length 12 cycle that can NOT be excluded by

leftmost digits of the indices of the auxiliary nodes in the same group should be as small as possible. On the other hand, a smaller number of groups decreases the number of free parameters in the code design. We will see that a specific class of type II cycles constrains how small the minimum number of groups in each tree can be.

Since

and , , , are auxiliary nodes of

, , , , respectively, we derive that

and

are different only in the rightmost digit. Moreover, since , ,

, are connected to the same check-node group as shown on

the right in Fig. 9, the rightmost digits of , , , are also the

same. Hence, by the above reasoning

Lemma 2: The cycle shown on the left in Fig. 9 always exists

(11)

for any possible values of the related shifts

and

By (11), we derive that

when indices of the bit nodes

. ( , , , and are and , respectively.)

(12)

Proof: As shown on the right in Fig. 9, we add auxiliary Combining (10) and (12), we derive that

nodes , , , , , , , and to the cycle shown on the

left in Fig. 9. Let , , , , , , , and be

the indices of the auxiliary nodes , , , , , , , and ,

respectively. Suppose that the cycle shown on the left in Fig. 9

does not exist for certain values of the shifts

and

.

With reference to the plot on the right in Fig. 9, the two check

nodes and should be different. Similar to (8), we derive

that

(13)

Since and are connected to the same check node ,

and are different only in the rightmost digit by definition.

Therefore, all the digits of

are zeros except for

the rightmost one. Since

by (13),

should also have all zero digits except for the rightmost digit.

Hence, and are different only in the rightmost digit,

which implies that the two auxiliary nodes and are chil-

dren of the same check node. However, as shown on the right

(9)

in Fig. 9, is connected to and is connected to . Hence, and are the same check node. This contradicts the

where

,

,

. Equation (9) can be simplified as

, and assumption that and are different. Therefore, the cycle shown on the left in Fig. 9 always exists for any choices of the

shifts

and

when

. This

(10) completes the proof.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:25:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LU AND MOURA: TS-LDPC CODES: TURBO-STRUCTURED CODES WITH LARGE GIRTH

1087

Fig. 11. Left: A type II cycle that CAN be excluded by choosing appropriate shifts S

,S

,S

, and S

. Right: An auxiliary figure to show

that the cycle shown on the left CAN be excluded.

Fig. 10 shows two specific examples of the cycle described

in Lemma 2 . The left plot shows a length cycle that cannot

be excluded by choosing appropriate shifts and ; the

right plot shows a length cycle that cannot be excluded by

choosing appropriate shifts

and .

To eliminate the cycle shown on the left in Fig. 9, we intro-

duce more subgroups to divide the two check nodes and

into two different groups, as shown on the left in Fig. 11. Sim-

ilar to the proof of Lemma 2 and with reference to the right plot

in Fig. 11, we derive that

Since

by (12), (14) can be simplified as

(14)
A B Fig. 12. Divide check nodes and into subgroups to avoid a length 8 cycle.

(15)

As analyzed before, has only one nonzero digit—the right-

most one. However, this time, we have the freedom to choose

appropriate values of the shifts

,

,

, and

to make their summation having nonzero digits other

than the rightmost one, e.g., the second to the rightmost digit.

Hence, by (15),

can be made to have nonzero digits

other than the rightmost one, which means that the two check

nodes and can be different. It follows that the cycle

shown on the left in Fig. 11 can be avoided by carefully choosing

shifts

,

,

, and

. This shows that, to

achieve a desired girth , we should require that the number of

groups in which we divide the auxiliary nodes of and be

larger than a certain minimum, which is a function of the girth .

We now consider the question of determining the minimum

number of groups to achieve the girth and how this relates to

the parameter in Section III-C. Let and represent the

minimum number of groups needed for and , respectively.

Then we have the following lemma.

Lemma 3: To achieve a girth , the minimum number of groups and are

Proof: Let us first look at an example. As analyzed be-

fore, the length cycle shown on the left in Fig. 10 cannot be

avoided when the two check nodes and are in the same

group. To avoid this length cycle, and must be in two dif-

ferent groups, as shown in Fig. 12. Since connects to the aux-

iliary node and connects to the auxiliary node in Fig. 12,

and must connect to check nodes in two different groups.

Further, since and can be any two auxiliary nodes whose in-

dices are different only in the two rightmost digits, we conclude

that any two auxiliary nodes whose two rightmost digits are dif-

ferent should be connected to different groups. Since there are

categories of such auxiliary nodes, we need

at least

groups in . Similarly, to avoid the

length cycle shown on the right in Fig. 10, we need at least

groups in .

More generally, to avoid the cycle with length

as shown on the left in Fig. 9, we derive the following. When

is odd, at least

groups in

are needed; when is even, at least

groups in are necessary.

The above relationship can be compactly written as

(18)

(16) Now we study the number of groups needed for . To avoid
(17) the cycle shown on the left in Fig. 13, we divide the two bit

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:25:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1088

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 3, MARCH 2007

Fig. 13. Left: A type of cycle that can N OT be excluded by choices of shifts S
cycles.

and S

E F Right: Divide bit nodes and into subgroups to avoid

nodes and into different subgroups, as shown on the right in Fig. 13. Symmetrically, we derive that
(19)
where is the girth to be achieved and is the minimum number of groups needed for . This completes the proof.

along the dashed thicker diagonals there are five ’s in each row, so that per row there are six ’s.
We have the following relation between the column weight , the row weight , the girth , and the code block length of TS-LDPC codes that we construct when the girth is small:
(23)

On the other hand, if the indices of the auxiliary nodes in the When the girth is large, we need to apply Algorithm 1 to find

same group must have leftmost digits in common, and

the code block length required.

are given by

(20) Algorithm 1 TS-LDPC codes with girth

So, to achieve girth , the parameter number of groups has to satisfy

(21) that determines the

Initialization Set matrix

, the empty matrix.

Determine the elements of the matrix row by row.

. Set

and

(22) step a:

and set its flag to .

for

to

do

Equation (22) determines the minimum value of the parameter for all closed paths of length in the current

to achieve a girth .

entries of the shift matrix that pass the entry do

E. Construction of TS-LDPC Codes

Check if more than

contains consecutive zeros

We use Theorem 3 to reduce the construction of TS-LDPC

are the consecutive

codes with desired girth to designing a matrix that collects

corners of the closed path considered

appropriate shifts . By choosing suitably these shifts

if

contains more than

according to Theorem 3, we can avoid all short type I and type

consecutive zeros then

II cycles up to the desired length

. We present next an

set the flag to be and stop the for loop;

algorithm that finds

for TS-LDPC codes with girth

else

. The matrix is

, which is much smaller than the

keep the flag to .

TS-LDPC code parity-check matrix . The algorithm is greedy;

end if

we determine shifts , one at a time, its value being strongly end for

dependent on the previously determined shifts. Different initial end for

settings of will lead to different matrices . If the algorithm if the value of the flag is then

fails to generate a matrix , it is restarted with different initial discard the current candidate for , go back to step a to

settings. To construct a TS-LDPC code with column weight , select another possible value for .

row weight , and tier (number of tiers contained in the upper else

tree ), the number of candidate matrices is

fill the entry

of with the current value . Set

, which is exponential in the number of groups

the values of and to the next element of that is

and . Large girth may require increasing the number of to be determined.

tiers in the upper and lower trees.

if all the elements of have already been properly

As an illustration, we applied Algorithm 1 to construct a chosen then

regular LDPC code, with rate

and girth

go to step b

. Its structure is given by the

matrix

else

shown in Fig. 3.

go back to step a

We can clearly identify , , and the interleaver compo- end if

nent from the constructed matrix, as labeled in Fig. 3. In this end if

matrix, along the solid lines, there is a single in each row, while step b: End, output the shift matrix

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:25:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LU AND MOURA: TS-LDPC CODES: TURBO-STRUCTURED CODES WITH LARGE GIRTH

1089

. In the high-SNR region, is a dominant factor in

determining the code BER performance. Therefore, TS-LDPC

codes with girth outperform random codes when the SNR is

high. This is in agreement with our simulation studies.

We now study column weight

codes. Fig. 15 shows the

BER performance for a column weight

TS-LDPC code

with girth . For comparison, we also show the BER perfor-

mance of a randomly constructed LDPC code (no -cycles) with

column weight

(dashed line). Both codes have the same

block length and the same code rate . Since there exist

many explicitly constructed LDPC codes with high girth, we

also incorporate a

LDPC code constructed from

rectangular integer lattices [20] in our simulations. In particular,

the constructed LDPC code is based on the lattice construction

of -

-configurations [20] and has girth .

Fig. 15 shows that the BER performance of the TS-LDPC

Fig. 14. Comparison of BER performance for a (4686; 2; 6) TS-LDPC code with girth 16, rate 2=3, and a randomly constructed (4686; 2; 6) LDPC code (no 4-cycles).

code outperforms that of the random LDPC code at BER while at low SNR, both codes have identical error-cor-
recting performance. The BER performance of the TS-LDPC code is also slightly better than that of the LDPC code con-

structed from rectangular integer lattices at high SNR.

F. Efficient Memory Utilization

The construction of TS-LDPC codes is based on interleaving

In general, an

-LDPC code is represented by an

parity-check matrix . Its efficient storage records only the

nonzero column indices in each row, hence, at least

in-

dices needs to be stored. In contrast, for a TS-LDPC code we

need only to store its small shift generating matrix . For ex-

ample, for the

matrix with girth

shown

in Fig. 3, according to (16) and (17),

, and

so the shift matrix is

. Hence, instead of storing the

column indices required for generic LDPC

codes, TS-LDPC require only storing

shifts, re-

ducing the memory by a factor of .

IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION

edges between the leaf nodes of upper and lower trees. Cycles

are avoided by controlling the interleaver. The variables in the

upper and lower trees are strongly connected only through leaf

nodes. During the decoding process, the computation of the like-

lihood for non-leaf nodes of the upper and lower trees depends

on the information from the leaf nodes of the trees. It is inter-

esting to check the error events of the iterative decoder to see if

specific error concentrations in the non-leaf nodes occur. This

is not supported by the experimental evidence shown in Fig. 16

that plots these BER for the

TS-LDPC code con-

structed above. This figure shows that the BER for non-leaf

nodes is slightly better than that for leaf nodes. The figure also

shows that the BER for undetected codeword errors is much

We compare by simulation the BER of the TS-LDPC codes

with the BER of randomly constructed LDPC codes that are

free of -cycles [32] in additive white Gauss noise (AWGN)

channels. The codes are decoded with the sum–product algo-

rithm [33]. We adopt the rate normalized SNR defined in [32]:

SNR

, where denotes the code rate.

We first compare the performance of TS-LDPC codes and

random codes free of -cycles with column weight

. We

consider TS-LDPC codes with girth

. Fig. 14 compares

the BER performance for two

LDPC codes

with rate

: a random ( -cycle free) and a TS-LDPC

code of girth

. In the high-SNR region, the TS-LDPC

code outperforms the random code: at BER

this

gain is 1.2 dB. In the low-SNR region, the TS-LDPC code has

performance comparable to that of the random code. The slope

of the BER curve for the random LDPC code decreases with

the SNR in the high-SNR region, implying that for this code the

error floor occurs when the BER reaches , which is not the

case for the girth TS-LDPC code.

For LDPC codes with column weight

, we can derive

that the minimum distance

, where is the girth. For

the TS-LDPC code with girth

,

; for the random

LDPC code that is free of -cycles, since the girth is only ,

lower than the BER for non-leaf and leaf nodes, as expected.

We study now TS-LDPC codes with girth . The plot in

Fig. 17 shows the BER performance for a column weight

TS-LDPC code with girth . For comparison, we show the

BER performance of a randomly constructed LDPC code (no

-cycles) with column weight

(dashed line) as well. Both

codes have the same block length and the same code rate

. We also study by simulation three other structured regular

LDPC codes: finite-geometry LDPC code [7]; LU LDPC

code [19]; and GQC-LDPC code [17], [23]–[25]. The finite-

geometry LDPC code we use is an extended code constructed

from the TYPE-I 2-D EG-LDPC code. The code constructed

has code block length and code rate 0.5. LU LDPC

code constructed has code block length , girth , and code

rate

. The GQC-LDPC code constructed has code block

length , girth , and code rate .

Fig. 17 shows that the BER performance of the TS-LDPC

code is 0.12 dB better than that of the random LDPC code at

BER

, while at low SNR, both codes have similar

error-correcting performance. Using results from [3], we can

compute that the

TS-LDPC code has minimum dis-

tance

. Since this lower bound on derived in

[3] is not tight, the actual

of the

TS-LDPC

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:25:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1090

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 3, MARCH 2007

Fig. 15. BER performance comparison between a (6084; 3; 12) TS-LDPC code with girth 8, rate 3=4, a randomly constructed (6084; 3; 12) LDPC code (no 4-cycles), and a (6108; 3; 12) LDPC code on rectangular integer lattices.

Fig. 16. BER performance of leaf nodes, non-leaf nodes, and undetected error events for a (6084; 3; 12) TS-LDPC code.

code may be much larger than . Again, in the high-SNR re- vation, shown in Fig. 16 for the

TS-LDPC code,

gion, is a dominant factor in determining the code BER that the BER performance of non-leaf nodes is either compa-

performance. This explains why the TS-LDPC code with girth rable or slightly better than the BER performance of leaf nodes.

has good BER performance in the high-SNR region. We also

notice that at moderate-to-high SNR the TS-LDPC code outperforms the GQC-LDPC code, which suggests that TS-LDPC

V. EFFICIENT ENCODING FOR TS-LDPC CODES

codes have better BER performances than GQC-LDPC codes with the same code parameters. Further, the TS-LDPC code, finite-geometry LDPC code, and LU LDPC code have similar BER performances. The finite-geometry LDPC code and the LU LDPC code have good BER performances since they have large minimum distance [7], [19].

TS-LDPC codes, or a variant of TS-LDPC codes, can be encoded with linear complexity. We first describe this variant—encoding friendly TS-LDPC (EFTS-LDPC) codes, then we show how EFTS-LDPC codes can be encoded in linear complexity.

Again, we compare the BER performance for non-leaf and A. Encoding Friendly TS-LDPC (EFTS-LDPC) Codes

leaf nodes for the same

TS-LDPC code just dis-

cussed. This is shown in Fig. 18 that also plots the undetected The Tanner graph of an EFTS-LDPC code still contains an

error rate. These simulation results confirm the previous obser- upper tree and a lower tree that are interconnected by

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:25:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LU AND MOURA: TS-LDPC CODES: TURBO-STRUCTURED CODES WITH LARGE GIRTH

1091

Fig. 17. BER performance comparison between a (6666; 3; 6) TS-LDPC code with girth 10, rate 1=2, a randomly constructed (6666; 3; 6) LDPC code (no 4-cycles), a (6666; 3; 6) GQC-LDPC code with girth 10, rate 1=2, an extended type-I 2-D EG-LDPC code with code block length 8190 and code rate 0:5 (LDPC code based on finite geometries), and LU(3; 19) LDPC code with code block length 6859 and code rate 0:4514.

Fig. 18. BER performance of leaf-nodes, nonleaf-nodes, and undetected error events for a (6666,3,6) TS-LDPC code.

an interleaver . There are no restrictions on the upper tree of the EFTS-LDPC code, which can be exactly the same as the
part of the standard TS-LDPC codes. The of the EFTSLDPC code is restricted so that the degree of its bit nodes is two. In addition, the root of the is changed from a bit node to a check node, as shown in Fig. 19. The Tanner graph for an EFTS-LDPC code is shown in Fig. 19. EFTS-LDPC codes are slightly irregular. These modifications enable EFTS-LDPC codes to be encoded with linear complexity.

B. Linear-Complexity Encoding of EFTS-LDPC Codes

Since an LDPC code is equivalently represented by its Tanner

graph , we explain how to encode EFTS-LDPC codes using

their Tanner graph.

To achieve linear-complexity encoding, we need to first re-

move the root (a check node) of the lower tree from the

Tanner graph of the EFTS-LDPC codes. We will show in the

Fig. 19. EFTS-LDPC codes: A variant of TS-LDPC codes (EFTS-LDPC codes).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:25:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1092

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 3, MARCH 2007

Fig. 20. Tanner graph for an EFTS-LDPC code (The bit node degree of T is
even).

Fig. 22. Tanner graph for an EFTS-LDPC code. (The bit node degree of T is
odd.)

summation in the binary field is a vector of ’s. Therefore, we can remove one of those parity-check equations in without changing the underlying code structure. We again choose to remove the parity-check equation denoted by the root of . For example, Fig. 22 shows an EFTS-LDPC code. The bit node degree of is , an odd number. The root of can be removed from its Tanner graph without changing the code, as shown in Fig. 23. This completes the proof.

Fig. 21. An equivalent representation of the Tanner graph shown in Fig. 20.

After removing the root of , we use Algorithm 2 to encode

(The root of T is removed.)

an EFTS-LDPC code.

following lemma that removing the root of will not alter the Algorithm 2 Encoding algorithms for EFTS-LDPC codes (

underlying code structure.

contains tiers)

Lemma 4: The parity-check equation denoted by the root of is redundant and can be removed from the parity-check matrix without changing the underlying code structure. Proof: We discuss two different cases: the bit node degree of is even; the bit node degree of is odd. 1) The Bit Node Degree of Is Even: Since all the bit nodes in have uniform degree two by definition, then the degree of all the bit nodes is even, which means that each column of contains an even number of ’s. Hence, the sum of all the rows of in the binary field is a vector of ’s. Therefore, one row of is linearly dependent on the remaining rows and can be

Initialization

Encode , get the values of all the bit nodes in ,

including the leaf nodes;

Compute values of the bit nodes in tier

of

based on the values of the leaf-nodes of ;

for

to step–2 do

Compute values of the bit nodes in tier of based on the

values of bit nodes in tier

of ;

end for

Output the encoding result.

removed without affecting the code. We choose to remove the Next, we show that the encoding complexity of Algorithm 2 is

row that corresponds to the root of . For example, Fig. 20 linear in the block length . We first study the encoding process

shows an EFTS-LDPC code. The bit node degree of its is for the upper tree . The upper tree can be easily encoded

two, an even number. The root of its can be removed to in linear time, as shown in the following lemma.

generate an equivalent Tanner graph, as shown in Fig. 21. 2) The Bit Node Degree of is Odd: By construction,
check nodes in connect to either leaf nodes of or bit

Lemma 5: The upper tree plexity.

can be encoded in linear com-

nodes of . Since each leaf node of is connected to

The proof is straightforward. We omit it here. We look at an

check nodes in and is an odd number, then each leaf node example. Fig. 24 shows an upper tree . We encode as

of is connected to an even number of check nodes in . follows:

Further, every bit node in is connected to exactly two check a. Acquire the values of the information bits , , , ,

nodes in by construction. Hence, every bit node is connected

, , , , , , , , , and .

to an even number of check nodes in . If we sum up those b. Compute the parity bit from the parity-check equation

parity-check equations denoted by the check nodes in , the

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:25:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LU AND MOURA: TS-LDPC CODES: TURBO-STRUCTURED CODES WITH LARGE GIRTH

1093

equations is used to obtain the value of a parity bit. When em-

ploying the th parity-check equation to determine the value of a

parity bit,

XOR operations are needed. So,

XOR operations are required to obtain all the parity bits. Let

denote the average number of bits in the

parity-check equations, then the encoding complexity can be

expressed as

. For LDPC codes with uniform row

weight , the encoding complexity is

. From the

above analysis, the encoding process proposed can be accom-

plished in linear time.

VI. CONCLUSION

Fig. 23. An equivalent representation of the Tanner graph shown in Fig. 22.
(The root of T is removed.)

Fig. 24. Upper tree T of an EFTS-LDPC code.

c. Compute the parity bits , ,

from the parity-check equations

;

;

;

.

, , , and to :
; ;

This paper proposes a class of well-structured regular LDPC

codes—the turbo-structured (TS-LDPC) codes. We showed

through a series of theorems that we can design TS-LDPC

codes with arbitrary desired column and row weights and ,

hence, with any practical rate and arbitrary girth . TS-LDPC

codes can be designed by specifying a shift matrix , a much

smaller object than the parity-check matrix , hence, re-

quiring much less memory to store them. TS-LDPC codes with

girth

have good BER performance, with lower error

floor at high SNR than equivalent size and rate -cycle-free

random codes. We further showed that a variant of TS-LDPC

codes—EFTS-LDPC codes—can be encoded efficiently in

linear complexity. These characteristics of flexible code rates,

arbitrary large girth, good error floor performance, efficient

storage, and efficient encoding make TS-LDPC codes attractive

for applications such as digital communication systems and

data storage systems.

The complexity of the above encoding process is only

XOR operations.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

After encoding , we notice that all the bit nodes in

represent parity bits. Let represent the number of tiers in .

Since the degree of every bit node in is two, the value of

depends only on the values of the bit nodes in the lower tier.

Particularly, the values of the bit nodes in tier

of are

The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their suggestions that significantly improved the presentation of the results in this paper and to Dr. Marc P. C. Fossorier for his leadership with this paper.

based only on the values of the leaf nodes of . Hence, we can

compute the values of the bits in tier by tier, starting from

REFERENCES

the bottom tier. Each time we succeed in obtaining the values

of all the bits in a given tier, say, the th tier, we can then

compute the values of all the bits in the

th tier. This

encoding process keeps going on until the values of all the bits

in the second tier are known (the first tier has been removed by

Lemma 4). In this way, we encode all the bits in .

We, again, look at an example. Fig. 23 shows the Tanner graph

for an EFTS-LDPC code. Following Algorithm 2, we encode it

as follows.

a. Encode the upper tree as shown earlier.

b. Compute the parity bits to from the parity-check

equations to , respectively.

c. Compute the parity bits , , , and :

;

;

;

.

We evaluate the computational complexity of Algorithm 2.

Let ,

, denote the number of bits contained

in the th parity-check equation. Each of the parity-check

[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Good codes based on very sparse matrices,” in Cryptography and Coding, 5th IMA Conf. (Lecture Notes in Computer Science), C. Boyd, Ed. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag, 1995, vol. 1025, pp. 110–111.
[3] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[4] J. Xu, H. Tang, Y. Kou, S. Lin, and K. A. S. Abdel-Ghaffar, “A general class of LDPC finite geometry codes and their performance,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, Jun./Jul. 2002, p. 309.
[5] J. M. F. Moura, J. Lu, and H. Zhang, “Structured LDPC codes with large girth,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 42–55, Jan. 2004.
[6] B. Vasic´ and O. Milenkovic, “Combinatorial constructions of low-density parity-check codes for iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1156–1176, Jun. 2004.
[7] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[8] ——, “Low density parity check codes: Construction based on finite geometries,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom 2000, San Francisco, CA, Nov. 2000, vol. 2, pp. 825–829.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:25:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1094

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 3, MARCH 2007

[9] J. H. Dinitz and D. R. Stinson, “A brief introduction to design theory,” in Contemporary Design Theory: A Collection of Surveys, J. H. Dinitz and D. R. Stinson, Eds. New York: Wiley, 1992, ch. 1, pp. 1–12.
[10] D. J. C. MacKay and M. C. Davey, “Evaluation of Gallager codes for short block length and high rate applications, in codes,” in Systems and Graphical Models; IMA Volumes in Mathematics and its Applications, B. Marcus and J. Rosenthal, Eds. New York: Springer-Verlag, 2000, vol. 123, pp. 113–130.
[11] S. J. Johnson and S. R. Weller, “Construction of low-density paritycheck codes from kirkman triple systems,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom 2001, San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001, vol. 2, pp. 970–974.
[12] ——, “Regular low-density parity-check codes from combinatorial design,” in Proc. IEEE Information Technology Workshop, Cairns, Australia, Sep. 2001, pp. 90–92.
[13] B. Vasic, “Structured iteratively decodable codes based on steiner systems and their application in magnetic recording,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom 2001, San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001, vol. 5, pp. 2954–2960.
[14] R. L. Townsend and E. J. Weldon, “Self-orthogonal quasi-cyclic code,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-13, no. 2, pp. 183–195, Apr. 1967.
[15] M. Karlin, “New binary coding results by circulants,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-15, no. 1, pp. 81–92, Jan. 1969.
[16] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.
[17] J. Lu, J. M. F. Moura, and U. Niesen, “Grouping-and-shifting designs for structured LDPC codes with large girth,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Chicago, IL, Jun./Jul. 2004, p. 236.
[18] X. Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Progressive edge-growth tanner graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom 2001, San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001, pp. 995–1001.
[19] J. L. Kim, U. N. Peled, I. Perepelitsa, V. Pless, and S. Friedland, “Explicit construction of families of LDPC codes with-cycles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 10, pp. 2378–2388, Oct. 2004.
[20] B. Vasic, K. Pedagani, and M. Ivkovic, “High-rate girth-eight low-density parity-check codes on rectangular integer lattices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1248–1252, Aug. 2004.
[21] L. Ping and K. Y. Wu, “Concatenated tree codes: A low-complexity, high-performance approach,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 791–799, Feb. 2001.

[22] H. Behairy and S.-C. Chang, “Parallel concatenated Gallager codes for CDMA applications,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom 2001, San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2006, vol. 2, pp. 1002–1006.
[23] J. Lu and J. M. F. Moura, “Partition and shift LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 41, no. 10, pp. 2977–2979, Oct. 2005.
[24] ——, “Structured LDPC codes for high-density recording: Large girth and low error floor,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 208–213, Feb. 2006.
[25] J. Lu, J. M. F. Moura, and U. Niesen, Generalized Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes: Regular Structure and Arbitrary Girth, Oct. 2004, submitted for publication.
[26] J. Lu and J. M. F. Moura, “Turbo like decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE INTERMAG 2003, Boston, MA, Mar./Apr. 2003, pp. D1–11.
[27] S. Dolinar and D. Divsalar, Weight Distribution for Turbo Codes Using Random and Nonrandom Permutations, JPL, Pasadena, CA, Progr. Rep. 42-122, Aug. 1995, pp. 56–65.
[28] H. R. Sadjadpour, M. Salehi, N. J. A. Sloane, and G. Nebe, “Interleaver design for short block length turbo codes,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Communications 2000, New Orleans, LA, Jun. 2000, vol. 2, pp. 628–632.
[29] M. Ferrari, F. Scalise, and S. Bellini, “Prunable s-random interleavers,” in Int. Conf. Communications 2002, New York, Apr. 2002, vol. 3, pp. 1711–1715.
[30] P. Popovski, L. Kocarev, and A. Risteski, “Design of flexible-length s-random interleaver for turbo codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 7, pp. 461–463, Jul. 2004.
[31] J. Lu and J. M. F. Moura, “Turbo design for LDPC codes with large girth,” in IEEE Int. Workshop on Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications (SPAWC), Rome, Italy, Jun. 2003, pp. 90–94.
[32] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf.. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[33] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H. A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:25:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

