344

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 42, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2006

Low-Density Parity-Check Codes With Run Length
Limited (RLL) Constraints
Zongwang Li and B. V. K. Vijaya Kumar
Data Storage Systems Center, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
This paper addresses a new scheme by Vasic and Pedagani to combine low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes with run length limited (RLL) constraints. In this method, the RLL constraints are embedded into the LDPC codewords by deliberately flipping the bits of LDPC codewords that violate the RLL constraints. It is important to keep the number of flipped bits small in order to not overburden the LDPC decoder. In this paper, we introduce a method to control the number of flipped bits by using pseudorandom sequences. We present a new low-complexity iterative decoding and detection scheme to correct both the flipped bits and channel errors in a partial response channel. Analyses and simulation results show that the proposed method has good performance and reasonable complexity for (0 ) RLL constraints.
Index Terms—EPR4, LDPC codes, modulation codes, RLL.

I. INTRODUCTION

M ODULATION coding, also known as constrained coding, transforms arbitrary user data sequences into

sequences that satisfy a given constraint [1]. The purpose of

modulation coding is to improve the performance of the system

by matching the characteristics of the recorded signals to those

of the channel. For instance, run length limited (RLL) con-

straints, also called the

constraints, in which there must

be at least “0”s and at most “0”s between two consecutive

“1”s, help to mitigate the inter-symbol interference and to

improve clocking. The encoder that maps the incoming bit se-

quence into an RLL-constrained sequence can be described by a

synchronous finite state machine [2]. Block codes are typically

used to limit error propagation in the decoder. In addition to

modulation coding, error-correction coding (ECC) is required

to protect the data against random or burst errors, especially in

high-density data storage systems. With iterative soft decoding

algorithms [3], low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [4] can

offer excellent error correction performance for both additive

white Gaussian noise (AWGN) and partial response (PR)

channels [5]–[8]. Their excellent error correction performance,

low complexity, and inherent parallel decoding architecture

make LDPC codes attractive for high-density data storage

applications. The superior error correction performance of

LDPC decoders is mainly due to iterative soft decoding which

requires soft inputs (e.g., log likelihood ratios) rather than

hard bits. However, standard RLL decoders that appear before

LDPC decoders output only hard bits making the standard RLL

encoders unsuitable for soft iterative decoding. Some research

[9]–[11], including Immink’s reverse concatenation scheme,

has been reported in joint soft iterative decoding of the RLL

code and the error correction code (ECC), but the complexity of

the resulting structure is unattractive for high-rate RLL codes.

Vasic and Pedagani [12] recently proposed a method to sat-

isfy an RLL constraint based on deliberate bit-flippings in the

LDPC codeword with the expectation that the LDPC decoder

Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2005.861044

can still recover the information bits with good accuracy even

in the presence of such deliberately introduced errors. How-

ever, in this case, the LDPC codes should have a very large

minimum distance and the Shannon capacity of the modula-

tion constraint should be very close to 1 (in the example in

[12], a (0, 15) RLL constraint is used). Otherwise, there will

be a high error floor because the number of flipped bits may

be too large. Another proposed method [13] is to generate an

LDPC codeword (or a sequence within a very small Hamming

distance to a codeword) satisfying

RLL constraints. Nev-

ertheless, this method also works well only for large (e.g., 14)

which limits its practical application. This paper is concerned

with an efficient method to combine LDPC codes with

RLL constraints for smaller (e.g., 5 to 7) useful in some prac-

tical magnetic recording systems. In the proposed method, the

LDPC codeword is XOR’ed with a controllable pseudorandom

sequence generated by a linear feedback shift register (LFSR).

The XOR’ed sequence is forced to satisfy the RLL constraints

by flipping the bits that violate the RLL constraints. By trying

different initial values of the LFSR, the number of flipped bits

can be reduced to be within the error-correcting capacity of the

LDPC code being used.

The rest of this paper is structured as follows. In Section II,

we present the overall channel model, including the LDPC en-

coding method with RLL constraints, and the new iterative de-

tection and decoding scheme. Section III analyzes the method

of satisfying an RLL constraint by bit flipping. Simulation re-

sults are given in Section IV. Section V provides a complexity

analysis, and we conclude in Section VI.

II. LDPC-CODED CHANNEL WITH RLL CONSTRAINTS
In this section, we investigate the LDPC-coded channel with RLL constraint based on a bit-flipping method. Fig. 1 shows the LDPC-coded PR channel with RLL constraints. In the recording stage, user bits are organized into blocks of the size determined by the LDPC code and input to the proposed LDPC encoder and RLL constraint module. Structured LDPC codes [14], [15] are used in our investigations because of their hardware-friendly nature, but the proposed scheme of satisfying RLL constraints can

0018-9464/$20.00 © 2006 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:10:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI AND KUMAR: LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES WITH RUN LENGTH LIMITED (RLL) CONSTRAINTS

345

Fig. 1. LDPC coded PR equalized channel with RLL constraints.

Fig. 3. Iterative detection and decoding scheme.

The channel detector is a symbol by symbol a posteriori probability (APP) detector. The APP ratio in the log domain, also called the log likelihood ratio (LLR), is defined as

(1)

Fig. 2. LDPC encoder with RLL constraints based on bit-flipping method.

where is the received vector from the PR channel with white Gaussian noise, and is the th element of the recorded bit vector in Fig. 2. By using Bayes’s rule, (1) is further expressed as
(2)

be applied with any LDPC code. In this paper, we assume an ideally equalized EPR4 channel, but the proposed scheme can be applied to other partial response targets [16]. White Gaussian noise is added after the ideal PR channel. In read-back, an iterative soft detection and decoding scheme is proposed to recover the user bits from the distorted LDPC coded and RLL constrained block.
A. LDPC Encoding With RLL Constraints
The LDPC encoding method with RLL constraints is shown schematically in Fig. 2. RLL constraints are enforced via bit flipping. First, a user-bit block is encoded to an LDPC codeword. The resulting LDPC codeword is XOR’ed (i.e., added modulo 2) with a pseudorandom binary sequence generated by a linear feedback shift register (LFSR) for a certain initial value (i.e., seed). The RLL constraints are enforced by deliberately flipping bits wherever RLL constraints are violated [12]. If the number of flipped bits is smaller than a predefined threshold value, it is accepted for recording. If this number of flipped bits exceeds the threshold, a new LFSR pseudorandom sequence (based on a different initial value) is tried, expecting that the number of flipped bits will decrease. If a preselected maximum number of LFSR attempts is reached, the XOR’ed sequence exhibiting the smallest number of bit flips is accepted for recording. This sequence is multiplexed with the corresponding LFSR initial value, which is protected by a powerful short block code since this LFSR initial value is critical for decoding. By using the pseudorandom binary sequence, the number of flipped bits can be reduced making the LDPC decoder’s task easier.

where the second term is the a priori information of . The

a priori term is zero if the binary inputs are equally probable.

However, in iterative detection it represents the extrinsic infor-

mation from the LDPC decoder. By using the Bahl–Cocke–Je-

linek–Raviv (BCJR) algorithm [17], the computation of (2) can

be separated into a forward and backward calculation. The soft-

output Viterbi algorithm (SOVA) is an alternative to the BCJR

algorithm with lower complexity [18], [19]. Vector is the con-

catenation of LFSR initial value codeword and RLL con-

strained sequence . The constrained sequence is the LDPC

codeword XOR’ed with a pseudorandom sequence and it con-

tains bit errors deliberately introduced when flipping bits. The

LLR vector

is demultiplexed into two parts:

and

.

, the LLR of the LFSR initial value codeword ,

is fed to a short and simple block code decoder. Then the LFSR

initial value is recovered and the LFSR reproduces the pseudo

random sequence . Before being input to the LDPC decoder,

the sign bits of

, which are the LLRs of , are XOR’ed

with to obtain the initial LLR vector

corresponding

to the LDPC codeword . The XOR’ed LLR is

(3)

Based on

, iterative LDPC decoding is performed using

the sum product algorithm (SPA) [20]. If all checksums are 0’s

or if the maximum number of decoding iterations is reached, the

iterative decoder calculates the LLR of codeword bit as [20]

(4)

where

is the check node set connected to variable node ,

B. Iterative Detection and Decoding Scheme

and

is the incoming LLR from check node

to

variable node . Then the corresponding decoded bit is An iterative detection and decoding scheme corresponding

to the LDPC encoder and RLL constraint scheme is shown in Fig. 3.

if if

(5)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:10:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

346

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 42, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2006

Fig. 4. (0; k) RLL constraint by bit flipping.
TABLE I BIT PATTERNS AND THEIR PROBABILITIES

Fig. 5. Trellis diagram of the occurrence of patterns in a sequence of length 21 and with segment length 2 and 5.
The expected length of type-I patterns of Table I is

(8)

The extrinsic information of variable node is

and the length of the type-II pattern is

(6)

(9)

Before being fed back to the channel detector, the sign of is XOR’ed with to obtain the extrinsic information vector of the . The XOR’ed extrinsic information is

If we assume that there are segments on average of type-II patterns in a sequence of length , then the average number of segments in the sequence is
(10)

(7) The ending portion of a constrained sequence cannot be a type-II

pattern unless it is of length . Thus, there exist at most

Iterative channel detection is performed based on and . If all checksums are 0’s or if both the maximum number of detection and decoding iterations are reached, the LDPC decoder outputs the decoded user bits which can be separated from for systematic codes.

segments that will definitely be type-I patterns for

those sequences with ending portions of length

. The

transitions from type-I patterns to type-II patterns and to ending

portions can be described by a trellis diagram as described in

[21]. An example trellis diagram for

, and

(i.e.,

) is shown in Fig. 5. In Fig. 5, is the

III. ANALYSIS OF BIT FLIPPING TO ACHIEVE RLL CONSTRAINTS

A graph representing the

RLL constraint is shown in

Fig. 4. The set of all sequences satisfying this constraint is con-

veniently described by the labels along the path of Fig. 4. The

traditional way of satisfying RLL constraints is by encoding

the sequence with block modulation codes. In the bit flipping

scheme to achieve the RLL constraints, a bit is flipped if it is

found not in the path of RLL constraint diagram. As shown in

Fig. 4, if a bit 0 appears at state , it will be deliberately flipped

to bit 1.

To determine the occurrence probability of bit flipping, bits

in the XOR’ed sequence are assumed to be independent and to

starting point of the constrained sequence, and

are the ending points of constrained sequences with

segments of type-II patterns. For example, starting at and

ending at denotes the case of an all-zero input sequence

which requires 4 bit flips (i.e., every fifth zero is flipped to one).

Along all the paths from the starting point to the ending points

, there are three types of segments: type-II pat-

terns of length

with occurrence probability

, type-I patterns with length and occurrence prob-

ability

, type-I patterns with length and occurrence

probability 1 (ending portions of the sequence that will defi-

nitely be type-I patterns). Thus, the probability of the number

of flipped bits in a sequence of length is given as follows:

be equally probable. The possible bit patterns in a

con-

strained sequence and their occurrence probabilities are shown

in Table I. These patterns can be divided into two categories,

one without bit flipping (i.e., containing or fewer zeros) and

the other with bit flipping (i.e., containing

zeros). No ac-

(11)

tion needs to be taken for the former category and the last zero

will be flipped to one in the latter. From Table I, we are able to In (11), the summation refers to the probability of

approximate the occurrence probability of bit flipping as a func- ending portions of type-I whereas the other term is the proba-

tion of the number of flipped bits.

bility of observing type-II segments out of a total

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:10:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI AND KUMAR: LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES WITH RUN LENGTH LIMITED (RLL) CONSTRAINTS

347

 Fig. 6. Occurrence probability of the number of flipped bits n x for (0, k) Fig. 7. Occurrence probability of flipped bits for (0, 6) RLL constraint with

RLL constraints.

different number of XORing attempts.

segments. Thus, the probability of the number of flipped bits is
(12)

Fig. 6 shows the probability of the number of flipped bits

in a sequence of length

to satisfy

RLL

constraints for different values. Smaller would be preferred

for timing recovery reasons. But even when is as large as 9, the

flipping occurrence probabilities are still nonnegligible (about

10 even when the number of flipped bits is larger than 15.

As a result, LDPC codes should have a large minimum distance

and high complexity (e.g., large column weight) to recover the

error bits.

In the proposed scheme of Fig. 2, assuming that the XOR’ed

sequences are uncorrelated to each other, the bit flipping prob-

ability of XORing times is (similar to the case in [22] for bit

stuffing)

Fig. 8. BER performance of the PEG-QC-LDPC code (4608, 4096) with the (0, 7) RLL constraint.

(13)

Thus, it is possible to reduce the occurrence probability of

flipped bits by increasing the number of XORing attempts.

The bit flipping probabilities of a (0, 6) RLL constrained se-

quence of length

with different number of XORing

attempts are shown in Fig. 7. Without XORing, the number of

flipped bits is large and with relatively high occurrence proba-

bility (e.g., 40 flipped bits with occurrence probability 10 ).

It is difficult to find an LDPC code with minimum distance

large enough for this application. By increasing the number of

XORing attempts to 400, the number of flipped bits is reduced to

10 with low occurrence probability 10 (and 12 with proba-

bility 10 ). LDPC codes with relatively low complexity can

handle the small number of flipped bits.

constraint systems. EG(63, 37) code [14], [23] and its shortened version (a shortened EG(35, 9) code can be used to encode 9 bit LFSR initial value) are chosen for encoding the LFSR initial value bits here. An ideally equalized EPR4 channel is used in simulations. The maximum number of LDPC decoding iterations used is 10, and the maximum number of channel detection iterations is 5.
Fig. 8 shows the bit error rate (BER) performance of the PEG-QC-LDPC code (4608, 4096) with the (0, 7) RLL constraint over an EPR4 channel. The performance of the bit flipping RLL scheme without XORing attempt exhibits more than 2 dB loss over the LDPC coded system without RLL constraints. Its performance loss is only 0.15 dB after only 20 maximum XORing attempts at BER 10 .

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS

Fig. 9 shows the BER comparison of the bit flipping RLL constraint scheme and the more conventional RLL

In simulation, a progressive edge growth quasi-cyclic LDPC encoding scheme. The PEG-QC-LDPC code (4608, 4096)

(PEG-QC-LDPC) code with size (4608, 4096), code rate 8/9 and with the (0, 6) RLL constraint over an EPR4 channel is

column weight 4 [15] are tested with (0, 5), (0, 6) and (0, 7) RLL used in the bit flipping scheme. We assume a (0, 6) RLL

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:10:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

348

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 42, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2006

Fig. 9. BER comparison of the RLL constraint with bit flipping scheme and the RLL encode scheme.
code with code rate 32/33 for the conventional encoding [24]–[27]. Thus, a PEG based random LDPC code with size (4502, 4096) is chosen for concatenation with the conventional RLL encoder (one method is the reverse concatenation in [9]) to ensure that both schemes have the same block size of 4096 user bits and same total code rate of ( is the number of encoded LFSR initial value bits). To simplify the comparison, we assume that the RLL decoder does not introduce any errors, which represents a more favorable assumption for the conventional RLL decoder. In our simulations, we account for the RLL code rate, but do not use a real RLL code. Thus, RLL encoding scheme in this simulation will exhibit better performance than in practice. Fig. 9 shows that the BER performance (at a target BER of 10 ) of RLL encoding scheme is a little bit worse than that of the bit flipping scheme with six maximum allowable flipped bits (in this case the XORing will continue until the number of flipped bits is not greater than 6) and the BER performance of a different scheme that limits the number of XORing attempts to 512 (in this case the number of flipped bits is not controlled). In both bit flipping schemes, the bit sequence being recorded satisfies the (0, 6) RLL constraint. The performance of RLL encoding scheme shown here is for the ideal case, so its practical performance should be much worse than that of the bit-flipping scheme.
V. COMPLEXITY ANALYSIS

e.g., 5 bits counter for the (0, 7) RLL constraint with only 20 XORing attempts. The threshold decision module needs a small size comparator and a buffer with size equal to the codeword length is needed to store the XOR’ed bit sequence. For these simple operations in the loop, the RLL constraint can be performed serially at very high speed with low computation complexity and parallel or partially-parallel RLL constraint can also be performed by duplicating the modules inside the loop, e.g., only 20 RLL constraints in parallel are needed for the (0, 7) RLL constraint. A simple small size block encoder is needed to protect the initial value of the LFSR. Its block size is very small for the range of initial value is small, e.g., 8 bits for the range of 0 to 200. Thus, a (34, 8) block code shortened from the EG(63, 37) can protect these initial value bits in our simulations.
Compared to the traditional read-back scheme, the proposed scheme in Fig. 2 eliminates the requirement of a decoder for modulation codes and it only needs the LFSR (13 bits is enough for code length 4608), two XOR gates, and a very simple block code decoder for the LFSR initial value that only needs to decode a few bits.

VI. CONCLUSION

We extended a novel scheme that combines LDPC codes and

RLL constraints based on the bit flipping method. By XORing

the LDPC codewords with pseudorandom sequences generated

by an LFSR before bit flipping, the number of flipped bits can

be reduced so that it is not beyond the error correcting capacity

of the LDPC codes. A related iterative detection and decoding

scheme is proposed for this new RLL constraint scheme. For

those

RLL constraints with middle to large value

, both analysis and simulations show that the proposed

scheme is efficient. Its performance is only within several

tenths of decibel loss compared to the system not employing

RLL constraints. Moreover, its performance is better than that

of the RLL encoding scheme using best-known RLL code and

assuming perfect RLL decoding. Furthermore, the complexity

of the proposed scheme is reasonable.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported in part by grants from the Information Storage Industry Consortium (INSIC) EHDR program and the Tape program, and in part by grants from the Information Storage Industry Consortium (INSIC) Tape program and by the Multi-Terabyte Tape System (MTS) project being funded by U.S. Government Advanced Technology Program (ATP).

Here we provide some analysis of the complexity introduced

REFERENCES

by the proposed scheme based on LFSR XORing method. In Fig. 2, the RLL constraint loop includes an LFSR, an XOR, a bit flipping RLL constraint module, a threshold decision module, and an LFSR initial value adjuster. All of these modules add extra complexity to the system. Fortunately, operations inside the loop are very simple and the number of the loop repetitions can be limited to a reasonable range, e.g., 20 or less for the (0, 7) RLL constraint. The registers of LFSR are very small, e.g., 13 bit-register is enough for a LDPC code with block length 4608. The bit flipping RLL constraint module needs a small counter,

[1] B. H. Marcus, P. H. Siegel, and J. K. Wolf, “Finite-state modulation codes for data storage,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 5–37, Jan. 1992.
[2] B. Marcus, “Sofic systems and encoding data,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-31, no. 3, pp. 366–377, May 1985.
[3] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: turbo-codes,” in ICC Proc., May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[4] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[5] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:10:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI AND KUMAR: LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES WITH RUN LENGTH LIMITED (RLL) CONSTRAINTS

349

[6] A. Kavcic, X. Ma, and N. Varnica, “Matched information rate codes for partial response channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 973–989, Mar. 2005.
[7] T. J. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[8] B. M Kurkoski, P. H. Siegel, and J. K. Wolf, “Joint message-passing decoding of LDPC codes and partial-response channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1410–1422, Jun. 2002.
[9] K. A. S. Immink, “A practical method for approaching the channel capacity of constrained channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 43, no. 5, pp. 1389–1399, Sep. 1997.
[10] J. L. Fan and J. M. Cioffi, “Constrained coding techniques for soft iterative decoders,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, Rio De Janeiro, Brazil, 1999, pp. 723–727.
[11] K. Anim-Appiah and S. W. McLaughlin, “Turbo codes cascaded with high-rate block codes for (0; k)-constrained channels,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 677–685, Apr. 2001.
[12] B. Vasic and K. Pedagani, “Run-length-limited low-density parity check codes based on deliberate error insertion,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 1738–1743, May 2004.
[13] D. J. C. MacKay, “Almost-certainly run length-limiting codes,” in Proc. 8th IMA Cryptography and Coding Conf., Dec. 17–19, 2001.
[14] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[15] Z. Li and V. Bhagavatula, “A new class of quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes based on progressive edge growth graph,” in Proc. 38th Asilomar Conf. Signals, Systems and Computers, vol. 2, Nov. 7–10, 2004, pp. 1990–1994.
[16] T. Conway, “A new target response with parity coding for high density magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 2382–2386, Jul. 1998.
[17] L. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-20, no. 2, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.

[18] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of binary block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 429–445, Mar. 1996.
[19] A. Ghrayeb and W. E. Ryan, “Concatenated coding and iterative SOVA decoding with PR4 signaling,” in Proc. IEEE ICC2000, vol. 2, Jun. 18–22, 2000, pp. 597–601.
[20] X. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and A. Dholakia, “Efficient implementations of the sum-product algorithm for decoding LDPC codes,” in IEEE GLOBECOM’01, vol. 2, Nov. 25–29, 2001, pp. 1036–1036E.
[21] M. Jin, K. A. S. Immink, and B. Farhang-Boroujeny, “Design techniques for weakly constrained codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 51, no. 5, pp. 709–714, May 2003.
[22] A. J. V. Wijngaarden and K. A. S. Immink, “On guided scrambling with guaranteed maximum run-length constraints,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory (ISIT), Chicago, IL, Jun. 2004.
[23] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Jr., Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1983.
[24] A. J. V. Wijingaarden and E. Soljanin, “A combinatorial technique for constructing high-rate MTR-RLL codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 582–588, Apr. 2001.
[25] A. Patapoutian, J. Stander, P. McEwen, B. Zafer, and J. Fitzpatrick, “Rate 32/33, (d = 0; k = 6) Runlength Limited Modulation Code Having Optimized Error Propagation,” U.S. Patent 6 184 806, Feb. 2001.
[26] A. J. van Wijngaarden and K. A. S. Immink, “Combinatorial construction of high rate runlength-limited codes,” in IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM’96), 1996, pp. 343–347.
[27] , “Maximum run- length limited codes with error control capabilities,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 602–611, Apr. 2001.
Manuscript received November 17, 2004; revised October 29, 2005 (e-mail: kumar@ece.cmu.edu)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:10:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

