308

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2006

Iterative Decoding of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes Over Compound Channels
Ilan Sutskover and Shlomo Shamai (Shitz), Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—We present a setting for decoding of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes jointly with channel estimation, which is suitable for transmission over memoryless compound channels. We show that the performance of the combined scheme can be rigorously evaluated by means of density evolution, and focus on density evolution as a tool for designing a channel estimator that matches not only to the channel, but also to the LDPC ensemble, as well. The utility of the concept is exemplified for a compound binary symmetric channel and an unknown phase additive white Gaussian channel.
Index Terms—Channel coding, channel estimation, compound channel, density evolution, iterative decoding, joint detection and estimation, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, turbo codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes have proven themselves to be extremely useful for error protection in transmission over a memoryless noisy channel when the channel statistics are known [2]. Iterative decoding, either of LDPC codes or of turbo codes, has been considered also in conjunction with certain unknown channel parameters, e.g., [3]–[5] address iterative decoding and channel estimation for turbo codes and Rayleigh fading channels, [6] deals with blind turbo equalization, [7] examines turbo codes over an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel with unknown phase rotation, [8] investigates LDPC decoding at the same channel conditions, and [9] does it at closely related channel conditions.
In this paper, decoding of LDPC codes over compound channels [10] is considered. Examples of such channels include the complex AWGN with phase uncertainty and/or frequency uncertainty, the block fading AWGN channel, and the binary symmetric channel (BSC) with unknown transition probability.
In the literature, several strategies are taken when parameter uncertainty exists. Among these strategies, we can find the following nonexhaustive list: schemes that improve their estimation from one coded block to the next [7], [11], systems that patch soft-in soft-out (SISO) channel estimators to SISO decoders [7], [12]–[14], and frameworks that use factor graphs to
Paper approved by A. Anastasopoulos, the Editor for Wireless Communications of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received November 15, 2003; revised December 14, 2004 and April 27, 2005. This work was supported by the Fund for Promotion of Research at Technion. This paper was presented in part at the 22nd Convention of Electrical Engineers in Israel, Tel Aviv, Israel, December 2002, and in part at the 3rd International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, September 2003.
The authors are with the Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Technion—Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 32000, Israel (e-mail: ilan@siglab.technion.ac.il).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2005.863730

represent the channel parameter [9], [8], [15]. To the best of our

knowledge, numerical analysis of complete systems (joint de-

coding and estimation/equalization) appears only in [9], [16],

and [17]. All other methods are analyzed via Monte Carlo simu-

lations. The reader is also referred to [15] for an additional liter-

ature review. It is worth mentioning that the work of [15] follows

[18] where continuous random variables (such as phase rotation

or transition probability) are represented by parameterized fam-

ilies of probability density functions (pdfs). In this sense, our

work does not go beyond the simple delta function as a pdf.

With respect to analysis and architectural design, the work

most close in nature to the study presented in this paper is per-

haps the work of Nuriyev and Anastasopoulos [9]. The authors

of [9] present results for joint decoding and phase estimation

when LDPC codes are used. Their setting, unlike the setting

used in this paper, is Bayesian. In an AWGN, a constant phase,

uniformly distributed over

, is assumed to govern short

subblocks of the coded block (frequency hopping is the main

application in mind). Several message-passing decoders are pro-

posed and analyzed via density evolution. Aside from the facts

that [9] is specialized to block-noncoherent AWGN channels,

while our setting is general and may apply to any set of memory-

less compound channels,1 and that [9] averages over the channel

parameter, while our setting does not, the core difference be-

tween both approaches lies in the way they justify the tree prop-

erty, which leads to meticulous density evolution calculations.

While in [9] independence among incoming messages stems

from the true (modeled) independence of the different phase ro-

tations, this assumption does not hold in the setup in this paper;

in the latter, independence is forced by breaking the channel

state node (i.e., the parameter of the channel realization) into

multiple noncooperative channel state nodes. This newly im-

posed structure may incur a loss of information but allows for

rigorous performance analysis and optimization. As this paper

will show, this optimization does produce a performance gain.

Splitting the channel parameter node into multiple noncoop-

erative nodes is a fundamental idea in this paper. One way to

consider this idea is by similarity to the way parity-check con-

straints are handled. While a legal codeword must obey all con-

straints simultaneously, iterative algorithms usually do not im-

pose this condition during the decoding process. Similarly, dif-

ferent channel state nodes are not required to advocate the same

1In fact, a finite set of representatives is used for the analysis and the design of the estimators. When sampled at a sufficiently dense rate, it is expected that the performance of the system is meaningful also for many compound channels with continuous alphabet parameters, such as the AWGN with constant unknown phase rotation.

0090-6778/$20.00 © 2006 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:10:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SUTSKOVER AND SHAMAI: ITERATIVE DECODING OF LDPC CODES OVER COMPOUND CHANNELS

309

realization of the channel. Another way to address this idea is by approaches the average performance over the ensemble in prob-

letting the channel state nodes reflect the estimation algorithm, ability and exponentially fast. The concentration property im-

i.e., consider them as processors. Such an approach already ex- plies that, for large block lengths, the ensemble average perfor-

ists in the literature, for example, see Forney’s “normal realiza- mance is a good indicator for the performance of any individual

tions” [19, p. 534], where vertices of the normal graph have the role of computations.
The structure of this paper is as follows. A short survey of LDPC codes and iterative decoding is given in Section II. Then, the problem is stated in Section III, and a unified solution approach is presented in Section IV. The presented approach is a message-passing algorithm that can support a broad variety of estimation operators. Section V, which is one of the main con-

code in the ensemble. The tree property in conjunction with a memoryless channel
imply independence among input messages toward any node, asymptotically. A technique called density evolution [2] allows analysis of performance to any finite number of iterations with an asymptotically large block length. This is done by tracking the (conditional) density of the output of any node as a function of the (conditional) densities at the input.

tributions of this paper, introduces a concept that allows for a channel estimator design process such that the estimator is not

III. PROBLEM FORMULATION

only channel-dependent, but also code-dependent. This is done by presetting the estimator nodes’ transfer function at each iteration as a function of the input density functions at that instant, as calculated by density evolution. Section VI then demonstrates the idea over two specific channel models, namely, the com-

In this paper, we are interested in the performance of iterative decoding of LDPC codes over memoryless compound channels [10]. A memoryless compound channel is a family of channels
such that

pound BSC and the random phase-impaired AWGN channel;

it exemplifies some further analytical properties for the particu-

larly investigated cases and compares performance against other

systems. Section VII presents the conclusion.

where is the channel input and is the channel output. Here,

both the encoder and the decoder are ignorant of the specific

II. PRELIMINARIES

A bipartite graph is associated with each LDPC code (a de-

tailed presentation can be found in [2]). Variable nodes are as-

sociated with the codeword’s symbols. Check nodes are asso-

ciated with the code’s parity-check equations. Let be a de-

gree sequence, i.e.,

is a set of positive real num-

bers such that

. Let be another degree sequence. A

-ensemble of LDPC graphs (each graph is associated with

a unique LDPC code) is an ensemble of bipartite graphs such

that the fraction of edges that incident a variable (resp., check)

node of degree is (resp., ). We restrict ourselves in this

paper to binary LDPC codes only. Extension of the concept to

channel over which the transmission is carried out, but are fully informed with the class of channels to whom the channel belongs and with the code used for transmission. Note, however, that the error-correcting code is fixed in this setup independently of the realized channel . This paper does not address differential modulation techniques, such as in [22]. Moreover, a combination of blind iterative decoding and differential modulation in the presence of a (perhaps partially) unknown channel should be carefully treated, as explained in [6, Sec. VII]; however, see [23].
A good decoding technique that is ignorant of the realization is now sought.

symbols of larger alphabet are natural. Nevertheless, modulation by grouping several bits per symbol will be applied when

IV. UNIFIED STRUCTURE OF THE PROPOSED ALGORITHMS

appropriate.

A new definition of ensembles is hereby presented, which

The sum–product algorithm [20], [21] is typically used for incorporates a “channel estimation” ensemble to an LDPC en-

decoding LDPC codes; it is a message-passing algorithm that semble. The ensemble contains bipartite graphs with three types

operates on the associated LDPC graph. When this graph is a of nodes arranged in three layers: check nodes, variable nodes,

tree, an output message is in a one-to-one relation with the pos- and estimator nodes. A message-passing algorithm performs

terior probability of a bit given all available measurements, and, both the decoding and the channel estimation, and density evo-

hence, the algorithm is optimal with respect to bit-error prob- lution shall be used to evaluate the performance of the complete

ability. Over any subgraph that is a tree, the passed messages system.

represent true log-likelihood ratio (LLR) values at the first iter- Definition 1: An ensemble of joint code-estimator (bipartite)

ations (until the first instant a message traverses a cycle). Hard graphs is defined by the triplet2

, where , , and

decoding values can therefore be obtained by slicing at zero.

are degree sequences. The degree sequences and relate

When an LDPC code is uniformly drawn from a given

to the connectivity between variable nodes and check nodes.

ensemble, two important properties can be shown to hold [2]: The degree sequence holds the fractions of edges between

a tree property and a concentration property. The tree property variable nodes and estimator nodes with respect to the estimator

asserts that a randomly chosen edge in the graph spans a tree up node degrees (i.e., a “left” degree sequence). Each variable node

to any fixed depth, with probability that approaches one as the

block length approaches infinity. The concentration property asserts that after a finite number of iterations, the performance of any message-passing decoder over a randomly selected graph

2Note that the number of estimator nodes thus equals n ( =i), where n is the number of variable nodes. This identity also corrects Definition 1 in
both [16] and [24].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:10:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

310

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2006

The general structure of the suggested algorithm is the following.
Algorithm 1: The algorithm operates on the graph depicted in Fig. 1. It starts with an initialization and then iterates using a parallel scheduling: left–left–right–right.
• Initialization: Given a measurement vector , set the measurement-to-variable messages as

(1)

Fig. 1. Three-layered graph associated with the proposed approach. The interleaving between variable nodes and estimator nodes may be excluded (see also Appendix I).

for some function

.

• Check-to-Variable messages:

is connected to a single estimator node via a single edge (see also Fig. 1).
Three-layered graphs are used in the literature (e.g., see [25] and [26]). However, in the papers we are aware of, these graphs

• Variable-to-Estimator messages: For each variable node

, the output message

to an estimator node is given

by

can be classified into two types: graphs in which the third layer

represents the channel effects in a format of a “code” (e.g., [25],

[26], and [15]), and graphs in which the third layer consists of one node which is used for operations such as estimation or demodulation (e.g., [8]). The work of [9] uses many estimation nodes at the third layer, but only a single node for any single

• Estimator-to-Variable messages: For each estimator node

, the output message

to a variable node is given

by

constant unknown parameter. As explained in the Introduction,

the use of multiple nodes for a single parameter is new, and its

(2)

purpose is to facilitate rigorous density evolution calculations

and the optimization process that may follow. The fact that a variable node is connected to a single estimator
node incurs no loss of generality; multiple estimator nodes connected to a single variable node are allowed to merge, and the functionality of the merged node is at least as good as the func-

for some function

whose range is . We denote by

the channel measurement that corresponds to variable node

.

• Variable-to-Check messages:

tionality of the separation. Note also that Definition 1 allows

dependence of the sequence on the block length .

The estimation subgraph is uniformly drawn according to

, independently of the drawn code subgraph, and the latter where

denotes the unique estimator node that is

is commonly uniformly drawn according to and .

connected to variable node .

Interestingly, the system proposed above can be presented • Termination: For each variable node , the output message

as an iteration-varying channel estimator operating jointly (i.e.,

is given by

turbo-like) with an LDPC simple decoder. The main differences

from the commonly used schemes lie at the channel estimator

“black box;” any output there is a function of only a few inputs

(to retain the message-passing property). Moreover, the transfer function employed by the estimator depends on the number of iterations and varies accordingly. Additionally, an interleaver is optionally placed between the LDPC decoder and the estimator.

In general, the function

needs to be chosen according

to the type of compound channel. It is reasonable, though, to

choose

to have the structure of the LLR function for a

known realization . For example, the realization that forms

A. Notation

the threshold for the known channel is used in the case of the compound BSC; for the regular (3, 6) LDPC code, the threshold

stands for the channel output space (i.e., mea- is given by

[2], and thus we choose here

surements space). The input of the decoder is a vector

, where

. A similar set-

, where is the block length. ting suits the binary input AWGN (BIAWGN) with an unknown

Variable nodes, check nodes, and estimator nodes are denoted noise variance (e.g., for the (3, 6) code, the threshold is

by , , and , respectively. For a node , the set of nodes [2], so we may choose to use

). In the

connected to it from the right (resp., from the left) is indicated complex AWGN case with an unknown phase offset, a reason-

by

[resp., ].

able initialization is

for some value of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:10:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SUTSKOVER AND SHAMAI: ITERATIVE DECODING OF LDPC CODES OVER COMPOUND CHANNELS

311

, which is typically set to zero with no prior knowledge of the

realized phase rotation.

The function shall be described later, but it is important

to notice that retains the desired message-passing nature of

the algorithm. For the new message-passing algorithm, we can

show again the two important properties (i.e., the tree property

and the concentration property) that allow us to rigorously ana-

lyze the system’s performance by means of density evolution.

Lemma 1 (Tree Property): Consider a

ensemble,

where the maximal estimator node degree grows at most sub-

polynomially with the block length. Then, a randomly chosen

edge in the graph spans a tree up to any fixed depth, with prob-

ability that approaches one as the block length approaches in-

finity.

With this property, which is proven in Appendix I, we can

claim the independence of incoming messages when the com-

pound channel is memoryless. Such independence is a suffi-

cient prerequisite for precise analysis via density evolution. For

any channel realization

, the performance of the de-

coding process (which is done together with estimation steps)

can be numerically evaluated. With the graph structure intro-

duced above, this process can be carried out for any admissible

function employed by the estimation nodes. Note that such anal-

ysis is not rigorous for any finite number of iterations if the

graph has a single estimator node, e.g., as in the constant phase

model of [8].

Proposition 1 (Concentration Property): The decoding per-

formance of an individual in the ensemble, using a message-

passing decoder, is approaching the ensemble’s average in prob-

ability and exponentially fast.

The proof is identical to that of [2, Th. 2], except that the

edge exposure process contains now also the estimator-variable

edges,3 and the constants used may be different. The proof tech-

nique does not extend to the single-node graph constellation of

[8].

The threshold is commonly defined as the “best” channel that

does not result in convergence to zero error probability. How-

ever, this definition implicitly assumes an order on the consid-

ered channels under the specific decoding algorithm. With a

suboptimal estimation, such an order (referred to also as mono-

tonicity) may be hard to prove, even for channels that are well or-

dered by, for example, physical degradation [27], such as a BSC

with an unknown transition probability and a complex AWGN

with an unknown phase rotation. Nevertheless, for any finite set

of channels

, monotonicity

can be tested by density evolution. Indeed, over the exemplified

channels, monotonicity was verified for all of our sampled grids

for channels “under the threshold” (i.e., channels for which suc-

cessful decoding is possible.)

Before going into detail, we emphasize that the methods considered in this paper do not employ, essentially, pilot symbols or training sequences (e.g., [3], [9], and [28]). With respect to pilot symbols, two types of gains are conventionally sought: improved channel estimation (see previous references) and triggering convergence of iterative decoding [29] (even where the channel is fully known!); the term “code doping” is usually used for the latter task. It is interesting to observe that with respect to the performance of LDPC codes, “hard” doping is equivalent to operating over one graph ensemble instead of another. However, for LDPC codes, design methods such as in [30] are thorough, and should provide much better results than the heuristic doping process. Thus, for LDPC codes, pilot symbols serve only for channel estimation improvement. Their effect on performance is not within the scope of this paper, though this paper provides a comfortable neighborhood for the exploration of the effect of pilot symbols.
In general, several types of approaches may be suggested, assuming no stochastic model underlies the channel parameter.
• An empirical offline relation can be used between the estimator node input messages and the identity of the realized channel. For example, in [7], a relation between a phase offset and the mean absolute value of the input LLR messages is found and used.
• Approximations to the known channel LLR values may be used. For example, see [31].
• Iteration-invariant estimators may be used. Their selection is typically only channel-dependent.
Example 1: Consider the compound BSC. Let . Then, the estimator function

(3)

is a hard-decision-based version of the probability estimator ac-

cording to Krichevski and Trofimov (KT) [32]. The multiplica-

tion by

relates the result to an LLR-type output mes-

sage. A generalization to soft values may be given by

which can be shown to minimize

, where

is the Kullback–Leibler divergence, and

is a

Bernoulli source with parameter that has to be fitted to a se-

quence of Bernoulli sources with parameters . Alternatively

V. DESIGN OF CHANNEL ESTIMATOR TRANSFER FUNCTIONS

The previous discussion did not address the transfer function

of the estimator nodes. Actually, as long as estimator nodes are

message-passing, performance can be traced for any transfer

function. We now ask, which transfer function

is it proper

to use?

can be shown to minimize

.

Other examples include the minimum mean-square error

(MMSE)-like estimation proposed by [3] for flat-fading chan-

nels, the Gibbs sampler employed by [6] for blind turbo

3Note that the proof in [2] requires that the graphs are uniformly drawn.

equalization and decoding of turbo codes, and the turbo

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:10:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

312

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2006

synchronization process that incorporates the expectation-max- nodes, the output density corresponds to a mixture of densities

imization (EM) algorithm [12], [13].

from both types, weighted by the fraction of possible combina-

In addition to the proposed estimation methods described tions that yield a zero modulo-2 sum. The same holds for es-

above, a new type of estimator is now suggested. Our method timator output messages, except that the constraints associated

uses density evolution not only for performance analysis, but with check equations are removed. An efficient implementation

also for design of good channel estimators that are matched to of the design process is possible by storing, for each

,

both the channel and the given LDPC ensemble.

only the latest distributions

,

, and

for the

Suppose that is fixed and

are given. Also, th design iteration. If transmission of the all-zero codeword

assume that some symmetry conditions are retained by all steps cannot be assumed, then twice the storage may be needed for

of the algorithm until iteration , so that the performance of 0-type densities and for 1-type densities.

the algorithm is independent of the transmitted codeword and We also note that the approach of adapting the channel esti-

the all-zero codeword may be assumed to be transmitted; this mator to the LDPC code and to the channel is, in some sense,

latter assumption will be abandoned later. Let

be a finite dual to an approach presented in [34]. In [34], a concept of de-

set of representatives from .

signing an LDPC code matched to a given equalizer is intro-

Under the assumptions, for each

, densities (con-

ditioned on transmission of the all-zero codeword) may be

traced by means of density evolution. Then, some statistics

of the input messages toward an estimator node is defined

(e.g.,

). Denote

its density as

for the considered channel

. The

density

can be evaluated (analytically or using Monte

Carlo simulation) as is a function of i.i.d. messages. With

duced. Also, as remarked in that work, both approaches may be

applied to several other iterative signal-processing techniques.

Finally, we have another look at the joint estimation-de-

coding setting. The design process of a joint estimation-de-

coding system encompasses three components: selection of

the estimation ensemble (perhaps even estimation + code

ensemble), definition of the function , and definition of

the functions

. All three may have a significant impact

on performance. In this paper, focus is being put only on

respect to some optimization criterion, a function

is the design of

, assuming that the other two factors are

chosen. For example, the maximum-likelihood (ML) criterion predetermined. Selection of the estimation ensemble, given the

may be used, i.e.,

other two factors, can be done using some gradient descent

techniques, such as in [30], [35], and many others. It is further

noted that if attention is solely devoted to infinite-length blocks,

(4) then an infinite-degree estimator node should be optimum.

Moreover, with an estimator node of infinite degree, one can

When

is decided, its density

can be eval-

uated by a simple change of measures. Finally, we define the

function

as the

LLR transformation of the measurement , assuming that the

realized channel is

. The estimator’s output density,

conditioned on

, is easily obtained (and, in fact, can be

simplify the density evolution analysis as well as the selection

of

by a great deal. The selection of the estimation

ensemble, in general, however, is considered as beyond the

scope of this paper. Once

are wisely designed, as shown

above, the importance of

rises. The proper selection of

remains an important question for future studies.

computed once per the entire process for each

). The true

density of the output message is then simply the expectation of

VI. APPLICATION TO TWO IMPORTANT CHANNEL FAMILIES

this conditional density over .

A. Compound BSC

In the discussion above, we assumed that the all-zero codeword was transmitted, as some symmetry conditions similar to those in [2] were presumed to hold. However, for many compound channels, the performance of the suggested decoder is not guaranteed to be independent of the transmitted codeword, mainly due to the adaptive design of the estimator function
. As a remedy, we suggest using a technique originally devised by Friedlander and Burshtein [17], [33] for decoding LDPC codes over intersymbol interference (ISI) channels. Here, instead of tracking a single density at each iteration, two conditional densities are to be tracked: one associated with code bits having the value 1, and the other associated with code bits having the value 0. We call the first type of density a 1-type density and the latter a 0-type density. With respect to messages passed from variable nodes to check nodes, the output den-

A compound BSC is a binary symmetric channel with an un-

known transition probability . The estimator node in this case

obtains an estimate of , denoted by , and uses it to convey mes-

sages of the format

. We use the ML criterion in

(4) to evaluate . All messages are scalars.

Proposition 2: The performance of a message-passing algo-

rithm that obeys the symmetry conditions in [2] and the sym-

metry conditions stated below is independent of the transmitted

codeword if the channel obeys the symmetry condition in [2].

The proof is almost identical to the proof in [2], and is thus

omitted. The additional symmetry conditions referred to by

Proposition 2 are given here.

• Variable node symmetry: The variable-to-estimator message as a function of the check-to-variable messages obeys

sity corresponds to convolutions of densities of the same type.

With respect to messages passed from check nodes to variable

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:10:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SUTSKOVER AND SHAMAI: ITERATIVE DECODING OF LDPC CODES OVER COMPOUND CHANNELS

313

+ Fig. 2. Density-evolution-based comparison among three channel estimators and the known channel case. Legend: the known channel is marked with . The
iteration variant estimator (based on the ML criterion) is marked with o. An iteration invariant (KT) estimator is described by a plain line. The 3 marks stand for
= 0 07 application of an ML estimator for the first five iterations and then application of the KT estimator for the other five iterations. Demonstration is carried over the
regular (4, 8, 500) code + estimator ensemble. (a) P versus  the channel parameter, at the tenth iteration. (b) P versus iteration number, at  : .

• Channel-estimation node symmetry: An estimator node

of degree is passing a message to a variable node

as a function of other variable-to-estimator messages

and the measurements

. Then, for all

, we have

able nodes, both before passing a message to the estimator node and after receiving a message from the estimator node.
Proposition 3 now allows design of transfer functions by design of functions , while safely relying on the all-zero codeword transmission assumption which simplifies computations.
Fig. 2 compares the performance of the proposed method (using the intermediate statistics

(5)

and

, the initial assumed prior, is an antisymmetric

function of the measurement .

The following proposition shows a rather general structure of

channel-estimation functions that abide by the symmetry con-

ditions above.

Proposition 3: Define

; then, a

channel estimator that sends

and applying the ML rule (4) to the density

) with the fixed

KT estimator of (3) (note that this function obeys Proposition 3).

Also shown is the known channel case.

B. Unknown Phase Complex AWGN
Consider a complex AWGN channel with an unknown phase offset

(6)

is admissible with respect to the symmetry conditions imposed

above, for any function .

Proof: We have to show that the function in (6) obeys the

channel-estimation node symmetry condition in (5). For any ar-

bitrary

, we have

where , , and are complex vectors,

, and the

phase offset is constant over a block. Write

and the same for any other complex scalar/vector, in particular,

.

Decoding takes here the viewpoint of bit-interleaved coded

modulation, meaning that, for a known channel, a binary al-

phabet is considered, and the factor graph is expended into three

layers to have check nodes, real variable nodes ( ’s), and com-

plex variable nodes ( ’s). Every complex variable node has a

unique set of real variable nodes associated with it.

When the phase rotation is fixed but unknown, some modi-

fications are required for the graph. A three-layer graph is still

sufficient here. Conceptually, a fourth layer should be created,

Observe that for practical reasons, it is possible or recom- where estimator nodes are connected to complex symbol nodes.

mended to perform the multiplications by

at the vari- However, since a complex symbol node is connected only to a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:10:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

314

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2006

Fig. 3. BER performance comparison between the algorithm presented in this paper and the algorithm in [12]. The latter is represented by the thicker lines. The same regular (3, 6) code was used for simulating both algorithms. Estimator nodes for the former algorithm are of degree 80 (i.e., connected to 40 in-phase and 40 quadrature variable nodes.). (a) Block length is 1000 QPSK symbols. (b) Block length is 3000 QPSK symbols.

few variable nodes (two for QPSK), it is possible to directly connect the variable nodes to the estimator nodes while absorbing

the functionality of the complex-symbol nodes into the associ-

ated estimator nodes. To retain the capabilities of the four-layer graph, the variables associated with the real part and the imag-

inary part of a complex symbol must both be connected to the same estimator node.4

In accordance with the concept introduced in the previous

sections, an adaptation for the complex AWGN channel with unknown phase rotation is now introduced. QPSK encoding is

assumed (signal power equals 2), and

stands for the pair

of real variable nodes associated with the in-phase and quadrature components of a complex variable node . Gray mapping

is used.

Algorithm 2:

• Initialization: In the absence of knowledge of the angle ,

the algorithm rotates the phase by a quantity , after which it assumes that the phase offset is corrected. Therefore

• Variable-to-Estimator messages:
where denotes a real variable node (I or Q). • Estimator-to-Variable messages:

where stands for the conjugate of a complex scalar.

Calculate

where

is predeter-

mined by the ML criterion (4), and set

• Variable-to-Check messages:

It will be assumed henceforth, without loss of generality, that

as the value of

may be absorbed into the phase

shift .

• Check-to-Variable messages:

where

denotes the unique estimator node that is

connected to variable node .

• Termination: For each variable node , the output message

is given by

Fig. 3 compares the bit-error rate (BER) performance of the

presented algorithm with the performance of the algorithm of

Steendam et al. [12]. Though its derivation relies on the ana-

where and denote real variable nodes (I or Q).

lytical foundations of the EM algorithm (see also [13]), the algorithm in [12] eventually boils down to the production of a

4A practical way to do so is to use even-degree estimator nodes and to declare vector of soft bits (i.e., the expectation of the bits with respect

the I/Q identities only as a last step.

to the extrinsic information) followed by an estimation of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:10:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SUTSKOVER AND SHAMAI: ITERATIVE DECODING OF LDPC CODES OVER COMPOUND CHANNELS

315

Fig. 4. FER performance comparison between the algorithm presented in this paper and the algorithm in [12]. The latter is represented by the thicker lines. The FER curves were obtained by the same simulations that yield Fig. 3. (a) Block length is 1000 QPSK symbols. (b) Block length is 3000 QPSK symbols.
enough phase compensation was previously applied, and higher offsets are estimated now

Fig. 5. Maps obtained by the channel estimation design process at two

different iteration numbers. A grid with 5 separation is depicted, and the color

changes show the appropriate decision regions. The noisy behavior outside of

the formed circle is due to limited precision and relates to values of extremely

(7)

low probabilities. (a) Iteration number 1. (b) Iteration number 4.

phase offset as the angle of the inner product of the measurements vector and the expected bits vector. Therefore, this algorithm may challenge, in particular, the multiple estimator nodes approach promoted in this paper. The results indicate that the reference algorithm performs a bit better under phase offsets conditions in which both algorithms allow for reliable communication. However, this comes at the price of robustness to larger phase offsets. While the algorithm described in this paper5 does allow for reliable communication at offset as high as 50 , the algorithm of [12] does not allow reliable communication at 50 offset (not even at 45 offset when short blocks are considered). This is also evident from Fig. 4, which compares the frame-error rate (FER) performance of the two algorithms.
Fig. 5 demonstrates two maps generated by the design process described in this paper. Note that the “center of mass” is shifted from the origin due to the fact that, under large phase offsets, the estimation ability of the code bits is poor. Also, when considering a more advanced iteration, the decision regions tend to stretch to lower angles. A reasonable interpretation of this behavior is the following. Along the decoding process, the reliability of the decoding should improve, yielding a better phaseoffset correction. If a large phase is detected, then apparently not

Fig. 6 shows phase threshold versus

, for an LDPC

code with

,

,

, and an es-

timator with

. The code rate is approximately 0.5.

The lower diamond-embedded line corresponds to a decoder

that does not try to correct the phase offset. The dashed line

corresponds to an upper bound on such a decoding technique,

which assumes only a power reduction due to the phase rota-

tion (with no additional penalty due to interference). The + line

demonstrates the performance of our joint decoding-estimation

system, when the grid, , is between

and 45 , with a step

of 3 . The line corresponds to the same step size, but the grid

is between . The results presented here are slightly better

than those obtained by [7].

In [24], it is also shown and explained that the performance

of Algorithm 2 is not independent of the transmitted codeword,

and conditioning on the different bit types should be applied for

analysis by density evolution. We elaborate now on some steps

of the density evolution process. For the sake of brevity, a reg-

ular ensemble is assumed, having variable, check, and estimator

degrees of , , and , respectively. Values (in ) as-

sociated with variable nodes and are given by and ,

respectively.

The initial message for has the conditioned pdf given in

5The grid of phases chosen in the demonstrated results is between 0 and 45 , (7), where

has the same statistic characterization

in steps of 1 .

of the complex scalar . A similar equation can be shown for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:10:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

316

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2006

Fig. 6. Phase threshold versus E =N for the LDPC code ensemble  = 0:37,  = 0:63, and  =  = 0:5 and an estimator with  = 1:0.

It is conjectured that this property holds for irregular LDPC

codes as well.7

An interesting property of the ML criterion that allows cutting

in half the computational complexity (by using only half of the

grid of channels) is the following.

Proposition 4: The ML map evaluated by the above density

evolution process, , is antisymmetric as a function of , if

the initial phase rotation is

.

Proof: First, we observe that the distribution of the

rough phase estimate is the same as that of a variable

, where

is a

complex Bernoulli variable in

, is the complex

conjugate of the hard decision on the variable-to-estimator

message, and

.

Now, it is clear from (7) that for

, the measure-

ment-to-variable densities are symmetric with respect to , that

is,

. This, of course, implies that the distribu-

tions of and

are symmetric with respect to

. Note that has the same distribution of

.

Thus, by construction, for any complex scalar

, and it turns out that for any , and that this density is a mixture of two Gaussians.
Let

and by

be the density of the outgoing Check-to-Variable message,

assuming that of the incoming messages are of 1-type den-

sity and

messages are of 0-type density. Then,

, where

(8)

(9)

The ML map8 thus obeys

, which

means that is an antisymmetric function of .

The estimator-to-variable density is the expectation of densi-

ties like those in (7). As the integrands are symmetric with re-

spect to , we conclude again that and are symmetric

with respect to . This guarantees that

for any

iteration, which maintains the property that

as

claimed.

VII. CONCLUSION

is the probability that input messages relate in fact to a 1-type

variable node. Here, is the set of even (odd) numbers less

than or equal to

for a 0-type (1-type) variable destiny.

In fact, (8) assumes that all

bits that participate in a cer-

tain parity-check constraint are independent and of equal prob-

ability. If the minimum check node degree is exactly the min-

imum distance of the dual code (in general, it is an upper bound

to the distance), then [36, Ch. 5, Sec. 5, Th. 8]6 can be used to

guarantee that, indeed, the

inputs are independent and

equiprobable. However, for irregular codes, this approach does

not apply. Luckily, as shown by Wang et al. [37, Th. 2] for reg-

ular LDPC codes, the number of nodes whose input messages

fail to obey this condition vanishes with the block length ap-

proaching infinity (i.e., the inputs approach i.i.d. in probability).

A scheme for iterative joint decoding and channel estimation was proposed, which is suitable to many classes of channels. The scheme suggests a nonstandard approach for the connection of the channel estimation stage and the decoding stage, allowing for rigorous numerical analysis of the bit-error probability of the entire scheme by density evolution. Stemming out of this new capability is a concept of design of channel estimators that are adapted to the specific LDPC code ensemble in use, the number of iterations, and the considered compound channel. The solution presented operates under a non-Bayesian criterion, i.e., no distribution is assumed on the parameter that rules the realization of the channel. Numerical results show comparable performance to advanced techniques known in the literature. In the specific case of phase offset in an AWGN channel when QPSK

6Denote by d the minimum distance of the dual code. The theorem says that
 0 any vector of r code symbols is uniformly distributed (over a discrete set) for
r d 1, and d is the largest number with this property. Note that if a
vector is uniformly distributed, then its marginals are i.i.d. and equiprobable.

7Note that Figs. 3–5 are drawn for a regular (3, 6) code. Fig. 6, which corresponds to an irregular code, is plotted under the assumption that the conjecture holds.
8Other maps may have the same property.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:10:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SUTSKOVER AND SHAMAI: ITERATIVE DECODING OF LDPC CODES OVER COMPOUND CHANNELS

317

modulation is used, the proposed algorithm showed to be robust to offsets as large as 50 , which seems to be the state of the art for these kinds of algorithms. Those results were demonstrated even for a nonoptimized ensemble and, therefore, highlight the importance of the selection of channel estimator.

APPENDIX PROOF OF LEMMA 1

We will now show that a tree property holds for a more useful

scenario of random interleaving at the “right” part of the graph

and a deterministic fixed interleaving at the “left” part of the

graph. This scenario helps addressing physical-like issues, such

as constant channel parameters over short subblocks (as in fre-

quency hopping, for example) or an approximation of a slowly

varying channel (which is a channel with memory).

To show the tree property, consider “mega-nodes,” where

each mega-node corresponds to a unique estimator node. The

mega-node absorbs into it all of the variable nodes attached to

the corresponding estimator node. Thus, the number of sockets

associated with this mega-node is the sum of the number of

sockets of each variable node attached to the corresponding

estimator node. For simplicity, we assume henceforth that

our graph is regular, so a mega-node has

sockets. The

interleaving between the “left”

sockets and the “right”

sockets, where is the number of check nodes, is the

exact uniform interleaving between the variable nodes’

sockets and check node sockets. Thus, from [2, App. A],

we conclude that the probability of a depth neighborhood in

the new graph is lower bounded by

where the variables and denote the number of “left”

nodes (mega-nodes) and “right” nodes (check nodes) ex-

isting in a tree-like neighborhood of depth . Also, from

[2, App. A], these values obey

and

. We also have

(or, in

an irregular graph, is lower bounded by over the maximal

estimator node degree). Hence, we conclude that a sufficient

condition for convergence to a tree-like neighborhood in proba-

bility is that grows subpolynomially with . For example,

or

constant.

Until now, we have shown that the graph containing the mega-

nodes is cycle-free up to any fixed depth, in probability. Since

the subgraph hidden inside a mega-node (one estimator node

connected to several variable nodes) is itself a tree, we can safely

conclude that the three-layered graph has the tree property, as

well.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank J. Ziv for insightful discussions in the preliminary phases of this research and the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments. I. Sutskover would also like to thank Y. Shany for constructive discussions.

REFERENCES
[1] I. Sutskover and S. Shamai, “Iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes over compound channels,” Elect. Eng. Dept., Technion, Haifa, Israel, CCIT Rep. 458, EE Rep. 1402, 2004.
[2] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[3] M. Valenti and B. Woerner, “Iterative channel estimation and decoding of pilot symbol assisted turbo codes over flat-fading channels,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 19, no. 9, pp. 1697–1705, Sep. 2001.
[4] C. Komninakis and R. Wesel, “Joint iterative channel estimation and decoding in flat correlated Rayleigh fading,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 19, no. 9, pp. 1706–1717, Sep. 2001.
[5] T. Minowa and H. Imai, “Robustness of iterative principles to channel estimation mismatch,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, Jun. 2002, p. 469.
[6] X. Wang and R. Chen, “Blind turbo equalization in Gaussian and impulsive noise,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 50, no. 4, pp. 1092–1105, Jul. 2001.
[7] W. Oh and K. Cheun, “Joint decoding and carrier phase recovery algorithm for turbo codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 9, pp. 375–377, Sep. 2001.
[8] J. Dauwels and H.-A. Loeliger, “Joint decoding and phase estimation: An exercise in factor graphs,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Yokohama, Japan, Jun. 2003, p. 231.
[9] R. Nuriyev and A. Anastasopoulos, “Pilot-symbol-assisted coded transmission over the block-noncoherent AWGN channel,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 953–963, Jun. 2003.
[10] A. Lapidoth and P. Narayan, “Reliable communication under channel uncertainty,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 44, no. 6, pp. 2148–2177, Oct. 1998.
[11] A. Burr and L. Zhang, “Iterative joint synchronization and turbo-decoding,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, Jun. 2002, p. 414.
[12] H. Steendam, N. Noels, and M. Moeneclaey, “Iterative carrier phase synchronization for low-density parity-check coded systems,” in Proc. ICC, vol. 5, Anchorage, AK, 2003, pp. 3120–3124.
[13] N. Noels, C. Herzet, A. Dejonghe, V. Lottici, H. Steendam, M. Moeneclaey, M. Luise, and L. Vandendorpe, “Turbo synchronization: An EM algorithm interpretation,” in Proc. ICC, Anchorage, AK, 2003, pp. 2933–2937.
[14] W. Matsumoto and H. Imai, “Blind synchronization with enhanced sum-product algorithm for low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Wireless Pers. Multimedia Commun., vol. 3, Honolulu, HI, Oct. 2002, pp. 966–970.
[15] G. Colavolpe, A. Barbieri, and G. Caire, “Algorithms for iterative decoding in the presence of strong phase noise,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 1748–1757, Sep. 2005.
[16] I. Sutskover, S. Shamai, and J. Ziv, “Iterative decoding of low-density parity-check codes over compound channels,” in Proc. IEEE 22nd Conv. Elect. Eng. Israel, Tel-Aviv, Israel, Dec. 2002, pp. 265–267.
[17] T. Friedlander and D. Burshtein, “Decoding algorithms for LDPC codes transmitted over channels with ISI,” in Proc. IEEE 22nd Conv. Elect. Eng. Israel, Tel-Aviv, Israel, Dec. 2002, p. 268.
[18] A. Worthen and W. Stark, “Unified design of iterative receivers using factor graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 843–849, Feb. 2001.
[19] G. Forney, “Codes on graphs: Normal realizations,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 520–548, Feb. 2001.
[20] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Linköping Univ., Dept. Elect. Eng., Linköping, Sweden, 1996.
[21] R. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[22] H. Jin and T. Richardson, “Design of low-density parity-check codes for noncoherent MPSK communication,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, Jun. 2002, p. 169.
[23] C. Wang and D. Sklar, “Performance of a turbo coded system with DPSK modulation using enhanced decoding metrics and matched channel side information,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 2002, pp. 773–777.
[24] I. Sutskover, S. Shamai, and J. Ziv, “A novel approach to iterative joint decoding and phase estimation,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 2003, pp. 83–86.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:10:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

318

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2006

[25] B. Kurkoski, P. H. Siegel, and J. K. Wolf, “Joint message-passing decoding of LDPC codes and partial-response channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1410–1422, Jun. 2002. [26] J. Garcia-Frais, “Decoding of low-density parity-check codes over finite-
state binary Markov channels,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Washington, DC, Jun. 2001, p. 72. [27] T. Cover and J. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory. New York: Wiley, 1991. [28] H. Shin, S. Kim, and J. H. Lee, “Turbo decoding in a Rayleigh fading channel with estimated channel state information,” in Proc. VTC, 2000, pp. 1358–1363. [29] S. ten Brink, “Code doping for triggering iterative decoding convergence,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Washington, DC, Jun. 2001, p. 235. [30] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001. [31] M. Wang, W. Xiao, and T. Brown, “Soft decision metric generation for QAM with channel estimation error,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 7, pp. 1058–1061, Jul. 2002. [32] R. Krichevsky and V. Trofimov, “The performance of universal encoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 2, pp. 199–207, Mar. 1981. [33] T. Friedlander, “Decoding algorithms for LDPC codes transmitted over channels with ISI,” M.S. thesis, Tel Aviv Univ., Dept. Elect. Eng., Tel Aviv, Israel, 2002. [34] K. Narayanan, X. Wang, and G. Yue, “LDPC code design for turbo equalization,” in Proc. ITW, Bangalore, India, Oct. 2002, pp. 57–60. [35] D. Burshtein and G. Miller, “Bounds on the performance of belief propagation decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 112–122, Jan. 2002. [36] F. MacWilliams and N. Sloane, The Theory of Error-Correcting Codes. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North-Holland, 1977. [37] C.-C. Wang, S. Kulkarni, and H. Poor, “Density evolution for asymmetric memoryless channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 12, pp. 4216–4236, Dec. 2005.

Shlomo Shamai (Shitz) (S’80–M’82–SM’89–F’94) received the B.Sc., M.Sc., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the Technion—Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel, in 1975, 1981, and 1986, respectively.
During 1975–1985, he was with the Communications Research Laboratories in the capacity of a Senior Research Engineer. Since 1986, he has been with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Technion—Israel Institute of Technology, where he is now the William Fondiller Professor of Telecommunications. His research interests include topics in information theory and statistical communications. He is especially interested in theoretical limits in communication with practical constraints, multi-user information theory and spread spectrum systems, multiple-input-multiple-output communications systems, information theoretic models for wireless networks and systems, information theoretic aspects of magnetic recording, channel coding, combined modulation and coding, turbo codes and LDPC, in channel, source, and combined source-channel applications, iterative detection and decoding algorithms, coherent and noncoherent detection, and information theoretic aspects of digital communication in optical channels. Dr. Shamai (Shitz) is a member of the Union Radio Scientifique Internationale (URSI). He was the recipient of the 1999 van der Pol Gold Medal of URSI and a corecipient of the 2000 IEEE Donald G. Fink Prize Paper Award, the 2003 and 2004 Joint IT/COM Societies Paper Award. He was also the recipient of the 2000 Technion Henry Taub Prize for Excellence in Research. He has served as an Associate Editor for the Shannon Theory of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY and serves on the Board of Governors of the IEEE Information Theory Society.

Ilan Sutskover was born in Hadera, Israel, on October 19, 1971. He received the B.Sc., M.Sc., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the Technion—Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel, in 1997, 2000, and 2005, respectively.
Since 2000, and in parallel to his Ph.D. studies, he has also been a Senior Research Engineer with Intel Corporation, Petach-Tikva, Israel, where he focuses on next-generation cellular and wireless communication systems. His research interests include multiuser information theory, iterative decoding algorithms, universal source coding, and lossless image compression.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:10:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

