200

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 42, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2006

System Perspectives for the Application of Structured
LDPC Codes to Data Storage Devices
Erozan M. Kurtas, Alexander V. Kuznetsov, and Ivana Djurdjevic
Seagate Research, Pittsburgh, PA 15222 USA
We have three main goals in this paper. First, we will show the equivalences and relationships among some of the well-known classes of structured low density parity check (LDPC) codes. Second, we consider application of these codes to magnetic recording channel. We will make performance comparisons not only with bit-error-rate (BER) metric but also with sector failure rate (SFR) as the comparison dimension. Such a comparison is more meaningful from a system analysis perspective. Finally, we consider the case of these structured LDPC codes concatenated with conventional Reed–Solomon (RS) codes. We believe LDPC codes will not completely replace RS codes in the future storage devices. From this perspective, for LDPC codes to be contenders for future architectures, they will need to work in harmony with the outer RS codes. This implies that we have to take into account the redundancy introduced by the overall coding scheme, that is, RS code in concatenation with LDPC code, to reach meaningful comparisons from a system design perspective.
Index Terms—Data storage read channel, iterative decoding, LDPC codes, Reed–Solomon codes, sector failure rate.

I. INTRODUCTION
S INCE the first application of low density parity check (LDPC) codes [1] to recording channels in 1999 [2], numerous papers have been published on the subject. The study in [2] has focused on the application of random LDPC codes. These codes are based on large and sparse binary parity check matrices where the locations of ones are assigned at random ([3, Ch. 36], and the references therein). Since the circuit implementation of the random LDPC codes poses great complexity and design challenges, the focus of research has shifted to LDPC codes which have structure and are easier to implement. We classify these LDPC codes which exhibit structure in their parity check matrices and lend themselves into a simpler circuit design as structured LDPC codes. In particular, one can consider the following classes of structured LDPC codes.
1) Finite Geometry LDPC codes [4]. 2) Repeat Accumulate (RA), Irregular RA (IRA) and ex-
tended IRA (eIRA) codes [5]–[7]. 3) Array LDPC codes [8]. 4) Combinatorial LDPC codes ([3, Ch. 38] and references
therein). 5) Reed–Solomon based LDPC codes [9]. 6) Turbo Product codes [10], ([3, Ch. 37] and references
therein). The above classes of structured LDPC codes are known to perform well with iterative decoding algorithms, such as belief propagation. In this paper, we will show that these classes of codes are not disjoint and that there are equivalences and relationships among them. Furthermore, we consider applications of these codes to magnetic recording channels from the system perspective. To study the performance of structured LDPC codes in magnetic recording channels, we compare not only their bit error rate (BER), but also their sector failure rate (SFR) performance. Such a comparison is more meaningful
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2005.861751

from a system analysis perspective. Finally, we consider the concatenation of structured LDPC codes and conventional Reed–Solomon (RS) codes. In such a coding scheme, we have to take into account the overall redundancy, that is RS parity plus LDPC parity, to reach meaningful system comparisons of different iterative channels. As we will see, when we include the RS overhead into the evaluation of structured LDPC codes, their usefulness will become a function of the RS overhead level. In other words, for LDPC codes to be contenders for future iterative magnetic recording channel architectures, they will need to work in harmony with the outer RS codes.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, for the sake of completeness, we briefly introduce the reader to different well-known classes of structured LDPC codes. Section III exhibits the equivalences and relationships among them, and provides a very useful way of understanding the structure of underlying codes. The channel model is given in Section IV. In Section V, we give examples of the BER and SFR simulation results for different structured LDPC codes. In particular, we compare the “best” codes from each family against each other using both BER and SFR metrics. Section VI provides SFR results for different amounts of RS overhead, showing that the error correcting capability T of RS code should be optimized to achieve the best performance. We conclude the paper in Section VII.

II. OVERVIEW OF THE CLASSES OF STRUCTURED LDPC CODES

An LDPC code is defined by its sparse parity check matrix

[1]. In other words, for a given

binary parity check ma-

trix with small number of 1-entries, the corresponding LDPC

code of length is defined as a null space of

An LDPC matrix can be constructed randomly, using a computer search, or systematically, using different objects in combinatorial mathematics. In this paper, we focus on applications of LDPC codes constructed systematically, since systematic constructions can offer low complexity encoding and decoding. We

0018-9464/$20.00 © 2006 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:11:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KURTAS et al.: SYSTEM PERSPECTIVES FOR THE APPLICATION OF STRUCTURED LDPC CODES

201

refer to LDPC codes constructed systematically as structured LDPC codes. Many systematic constructions have been proposed by different researchers. In the following, we briefly describe several classes of structured LDPC codes considered in this paper.
Besides the classification into structured and random, LDPC codes can also be grouped into regular and irregular. If all the columns have the same number of ones and all the rows have the same number of ones in an LDPC matrix, the corresponding LDPC code is said to be regular; otherwise, an LDPC code is irregular.

A. Finite Geometry LDPC Codes

A class of LDPC codes constructed based on lines and points

in Euclidean or Projective geometry was introduced in [4]. In

[11], this class has been generalized to a larger class of finite

geometry (FG) LDPC codes constructed based on flats of two

consecutive dimensions in Euclidean or Projective geometry.

To construct a finite geometry LDPC code one has to find flats

of two consecutive dimensions in a particular geometry, e.g.,

-flats and -flats. For each -flat , an incidence vector

is formed. The vector is a binary vector with the number

of entries equal to the number of

-flats considered. Its

th entry is labeled by the th

-flat, and

if the th otherwise

-flat is contained in

The incidence vectors are then used to form rows or columns of an LDPC matrix. In some special cases, constructed LDPC matrix consists of circulant matrices, or permutation matrices [12]. Most of the constructed FG-LDPC codes are regular.

B. Reed–Solomon Based LDPC Codes

This class of regular LDPC codes is constructed using an RS

code of dimension two with symbols from

, where is a

prime power [9]. For each codeword in an underlying RS code,

a binary vector is formed by mapping every code symbol into

its location vector. A location vector of a symbol in

is

defined as a binary -tuple consisting of zeros and a single

1-entry. There is a one-to-one correspondence between a symbol

in

and a position of 1-entry in its location vector. The bi-

nary vectors obtained for RS codewords are called symbol loca-

tion vectors and they are used to form rows of an LDPC matrix.

The RS code used for the construction can be full length, punc-

tured, shortened, or extended. The obtained LDPC matrix con-

sists of permutation matrices, and in some special cases those

permutation matrices are circulants.

which

if the th element of occurs in the th block of

, and

otherwise. If one thinks of points of the design

as parity-check equations and of blocks of the design as bits of

a linear block code, then it is possible to define the parity-check

matrix of an LDPC code as the block-point incidence matrix

of the design. Since in a BIBD each block contains the same

number of points , and every point is contained in the same

number of blocks, can be considered as a parity-check ma-

trix of a regular LDPC code. Examples of BIBDs used for LDPC

code construction are Kirkman systems, difference families, and

integer lattices [3].

As an example, we outline the lattice LDPC code construc-

tion. The number of parity bits in the lattice code is equal to

, where is a prime, and

is an arbitrary integer. We

consider a rectangular subset of the integer lattice, defined by

Let

be an one-to-one mapping from the set to

the point set . An example of such mapping is a simple linear

mapping

. The numbers

are

referred to as point labels. A line is a set of points specified

by its slope

and a starting point. A line of

slope starting at the point , contains the points

, where

. Blocks

are defined as lines of different slopes connecting points of an

integer lattice. The number of blocks is equal to .

Integer lattices define -configurations with index . Here,

each 2-tuple is contained in at most

block.

D. Array LDPC Codes

Array codes [14], [15] are error correcting codes defined on

two-dimensional (2-D) arrays and used to detect and correct

error bursts. Their construction is analogous to the construction

of Reed–Solomon codes [15], with symbols from rings of binary

polynomials rather then Galois fields. The algebraic decoder for

an array code can handle one symbol error and multiple symbol

erasures. Unlike Reed–Solomon codes, where the symbol size

in bits is usually small due to the complexity of Galois field op-

erations, the decoding complexity for array codes is reasonable

even if the symbol size is very large.

An array code is defined on a

binary array, where is

an odd prime number. Another parameter

, specifies the

number of parity-checks that the code bits satisfy. An array

, for

and

, is a codeword of the array

code if it satisfies the following set of constraints:

(1)

C. LDPC Codes Constructed From Combinatorial Objects

for

and

. The notation means a unique

An LDPC matrix can be formed from a Balanced Incomplete number between 0 and inclusive such that

.

Block Design (BIBD). A BIBD with parameters

is an Furthermore, the last row is automatically set to be zero, i.e.,

ordered pair

, where is a -element set and is a col-

for

.

lection of -subsets of , called blocks, such that each element To form a binary codeword of an array code, we can arrange

of is contained in exactly blocks and any 2-subset of is the elements of a 2-D array into a single vector with elements

contained in exactly blocks [13]. We define the point-block in- obtained by reading the elements column-wise. Let denote the

cidence matrix of a

design as a matrix

, in permutation matrix that represents one downward cyclic shift of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:11:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

202

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 42, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2006

a column vector. Then, it is easy to show that the following peated bits are permuted and sent through

precoder

matrix:

called in [5] an accumulator or differential encoder. This en-

coding scheme is shown to be capable of operating near capacity

limits, but has a drawback that it employs low rate repetition

codes. In [6], the RA codes were generalized in such a way that

...

...

...

some bits were repeated more often than others yielding the notion of an irregular repeat accumulate (IRA) code. Such codes

are capable of operating even closer to capacity limits that RA

is orthogonal on any codeword in an array code. Note that this

matrix is regular, and that the constraint that the last row in a 2-D

array is zero is not necessarily satisfied. Hence,

does not correspond to an original array code, but it is sparse

and it does define an LDPC code, which we call regular array

LDPC code. A parity check matrix

of an original array

code can be obtained by removing every th column and every

codes, and can be of higher code rates. A class of efficiently encodable moderate-length high-rate irregular LDPC codes was proposed in [7]. These codes are called extended IRA (eIRA) codes. In order to simplify encoding process, i.e., to do encoding and decoding using only parity check matrix (the generator matrix is not required), the authors proposed to use parity check matrices having the following form:

th row in

. This matrix is also sparse, and con-

sequently array codes indeed can be viewed as LDPC codes.

However, since the number of 1-entries in every column (row) where is a sparse matrix (to be randomly generated by the

is not the same, array codes, in fact, belong to a class of irregular computer), and is the following structured matrix:

LDPC codes. Note also that the number of columns in

is

, which means that in forming an array codeword, the

last zero row of

array is omitted.

Fan was the first one to show that array codes have sparse

binary parity check matrices and that they can be viewed as

LDPC codes [8].

From (1) follows that modulo 2 sum on every -slope diag-

onal

is zero. We can extend this set of constraints When has such a form, the encoding can be performed di-

by adding the constraint that modulo 2 sum on every -slope rectly using by calculating parity bits recursively.

diagonal is zero. An -slope diagonal is a column. We call a

class of LDPC codes that includes the possibility to have these additional constraints, a class of extended array LDPC codes
(regular or irregular).

III. RELATIONSHIPS AND EQUIVALENCES AMONG CLASSES OF STRUCTURED LDPC CODES

We will say that two linear binary

codes are equivalent

E. TPC/SPC Codes

The class of TPC/SPC codes and their applications to par-

tial response channels have been extensively studied in [10]. A

TPC/SPC code, similarly to an array code, is defined on a 2-D

binary

array, with not necessarily a prime. This 2-D

array has to satisfy the constraint that modulo 2 sum of each

column and each row is zero. Like array codes, TPC/SPC codes

can also be viewed as LDPC codes. For

, let de-

note an

matrix with th row consisting of all ones, and

with all other entries equal to zero. A parity-check matrix of an

TPC/SPC code is

if and only if one of the following two statements is true. 1)

The two codes contain the same set of binary -tuples. 2) By

permuting bits in all codewords of one code in the same way

(using the same permutation), we obtain the set of codewords in

another code.

After examining the parity check matrices of the above de-

scribed classes of LDPC codes, one can show that the following

equivalences exist.

Lemma 1: An RS-based LDPC code formed from a

extended RS code over

, with a prime power, is

equivalent to an EG-Gallager LDPC code formed from inci-

dence vectors of lines in

.

Lemma 2: RS-based LDPC code constructed from the

extended RS code over

, with a prime, of

When is a prime, a TPC/SPC code belongs to the class of extended regular array LDPC codes.
Note that both array and TPC/SPC code can be shortened by removing (deleting) certain number of columns.

column weight , is equivalent to a regular array LDPC code

with parameters and

.

Lemma 3: Lattice LDPC code with parameters and

, with a prime, is equivalent to a regular array LDPC code

with parameters

and

.

F. RA, IRA, eIRA Codes

Lemma 4: Every extended regular

array LDPC code,

with a prime, is equivalent to an EG-Gallager LDPC code

A repeat accumulate (RA) code has the characteristics of both formed from incidence vectors of lines in

.

serial turbo codes and LDPC codes, and was proposed in [5]. Proofs are given in the Appendix.

The encoder of an RA code performs the following operations. Recall that a class of EG-Gallager LDPC codes is a subclass

First, each user bit is repeated some number of times, then all re- of a large class of finite geometry LDPC codes, and that a class

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:11:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KURTAS et al.: SYSTEM PERSPECTIVES FOR THE APPLICATION OF STRUCTURED LDPC CODES

203

Fig. 1. Relationships between classes of structured LDPC codes.

Fig. 2. Typical magnetic recording channel model.

are independent random variables with zero mean and trun-

cated Gaussian distribution with the range

.

Simulations were done for a perpendicular magnetic recording

channel with the transition response modeled as

of TPC/SPC codes intersects with a class of extended regular array LDPC codes. Hence, we can depict the relationships between classes of structured LDPC codes by the diagram shown in Fig. 1.
Parts of the equivalence results presented here can also be found in [16]. Furthermore, there are other classes of structured LDPC codes that are also equivalent to one or more of the above classes (for example, see LDPC codes introduced in [17]). In general, one can conclude that many different systematic constructions of LDPC matrices exist. However, in many cases the LDPC codes constructed using different approaches are equivalent.
IV. CHANNEL MODEL

where is the channel bit interval, is a normalized recording density, and
error function defined as

(3) ,
is an
(4)

In this case,

determines the width of the perpendic-

ular impulse response at 50% of its peak value. We used the

signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) definition for recording channels

with transition noise given in [3, Ch. 6].

V. COMPETITIVE COMPARISONS OF STRUCTURED LDPC CODES

An input signal to the channel detector is generated as shown In simulation results provided in this section, the following

in Fig. 2, where is the input channel sequence consisting are fixed: user bit density (ubd), the T-level of the outer RS code,

of coded (or uncoded) bits 0 and 1. The readback signal is soft input soft output (SISO) detection, target, and precoder.

defined as

We applied different structured LDPC codes to the perpen-

dicular recording channel model, and for different number of

(2) global iterations we obtained their BER and SFR performance. Note that BER performance is always obtained by counting. The

SFR at the level 10 and higher is determined by counting,

where

corresponds to a positive or negative transi- whereas an extension of multinomial model (see [18]) is used

tion, and

corresponds to the absence of a transition to estimate SFR below 10 .

denotes the transition jitter noise, From numerous simulation results, we chose the “best” code

and

is the additive white Gaussian noise. This model is for each class of structured LDPC codes, and depict its BER

known as the linear superposition model. We assume that

and SFR performance for a fixed number of global iterations in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:11:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

204

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 42, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2006

slightly worse than structured LDPC codes in the current simu-

lation conditions. Finally, note that at the high SNR values, the

clear winner among structured LDPC codes is the EG code with

column weight 8.

Based on the SFR characteristics, we can see that both the

RS-based LDPC code and the array LDPC code show SFR

characteristics comparable with the SFR characteristics of

the random LDPC code, and to the great extent outperform

Kirkman LDPC code and TPC/SPC.

For the BER and SFR results presented here, the number of

global iterations is fixed. However, we looked at results for dif-

ferent number of global iterations and came to the following

conclusions. After a very small number of global iterations the

RS-based LDPC code and the array LDPC code outperform all

other types of codes, but not the noniterative channel at low SNR

values. However, at moderate and high SNR values, all consid-

ered iterative channels outperform the noniterative channel, and

Fig. 3. Competitive comparison of the BER performance of different iterative the gain grows with the SNR. As the number global iterations

systems.

increases, all iterative systems clearly outperform the noniter-

ative one (as shown in Fig. 4). After a large number of global

iterations, the random LDPC code remains the best in class of

compared codes.

The EG-LDPC code with column weight 8 cannot compete

with other types of codes at low and moderate SNR values, but

looks very promising at the high SNR values.

Not included in Figs. 3 and 4 are the BER and SFR simula-

tion results for an eIRA code proposed in [7]. It provides perfor-

mance similar to the RS-based or irregular array LDPC code of

similar length and code rate. However, these two LDPC codes

have the advantage of simpler encoding/decoding due to their

highly structured parity-check matrices.

In general, obtained BER simulation results indicate that all

iterative codes perform similarly, providing significant gains

compared to the noniterative system. However, the major ob-

servation from the SFR results is that the relationship between

the BER characteristics and SFR characteristics is not obvious.

In particular, we can see different behavior of the BER curves

and SFR curves. This is not surprising since the BER character-

Fig. 4. Competitive comparison of the SFR performance of different iterative istics are based on the total number of bit errors in the sector, and

systems.

their grouping in error events is not important, whereas the SFR

characteristics definitely depend on how bit errors are grouped

Figs. 3 and 4, respectively. A single run of a channel detector in error events, and how the error events split into symbol er-

followed by a predefined number of iterations performed by it- rors. In result, codes with similar BER characteristics can have

erative decoder is called a global iteration. The RS-based LDPC different SFR characteristics, and even the code with the worse

code and Kirkman LDPC code are both of column weight 3, BER can have better SFR.

whereas irregular array LDPC code has column weights 2 and

3. We also show the performance of a random LDPC code with column weight 3. To this selection of “best” codes, we added

VI. CONCATENATION WITH AN OUTER REED–SOLOMON CODE

an EG-Gallager LDPC code with column weight 8. From sim- The performance of the magnetic recording system is not

ulation results, one can observe how this significantly larger determined solely by the SNR value. The media defects signif-

column weight affects the performance.

icantly affect the performance causing large bursts of errors.

From the BER characteristics, we see that all six iterative Whereas RS codes are very efficient in fighting both large bursts

systems show considerable coding gains over the noniterative of errors and mixtures of random and bursty errors, LDPC codes

channel when compared using the BER metric. At the mod- are mainly designed to correct random only errors. An RS code

erate and low SNR values, the random LDPC code and multiple with error correcting capability T guarantees correction of

types of structured LDPC codes show very good performance. T symbol errors. An LDPC code, in general, cannot provide

At the same time at high SNR values the random LDPC code similar error correcting guarantee. Furthermore, an LDPC code

still outperforms other types of codes. The TPC/SPC code is commonly exhibits an error floor, which is undesirable and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:11:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KURTAS et al.: SYSTEM PERSPECTIVES FOR THE APPLICATION OF STRUCTURED LDPC CODES

205

Fig. 5. SFR as a function of T for Kirkman LDPC code, for different number Fig. 6. SFR as a function of T for irregular array LDPC code, for different

G of global iterations.

number G of global iterations.

not easy to estimate. For these reasons, we believe that at this

point LDPC codes cannot completely replace RS codes for the

error correction purposes in data storage systems. Therefore,

an outer RS code has to be used if one wants to achieve reliable

storage of user data. For the best performance, the two codes,

inner LDPC and outer RS, have to work in harmony, and the

amount of RS overhead (or its error correcting capability T) has

to be chosen to optimize the performance of the overall system.

These statements are also based on the detailed and extensive

experimental analysis of different concatenated schemes, which

include two extreme cases: (a) no outer RS code, and (b) RS

code only. In our simulations these extreme cases were not the

best, and this led us to the above conclusions.

The channel linear density grows with the overall amount of

overhead. Increasing the T level of an RS code increases its

error correcting capability, but the channel linear density also

increases resulting in higher symbol error probability. For sufficiently large T, the overall performance begins to degrade (SFR Fig. 7. SFR as a function of T for irregular array LDPC code and RS-based
LDPC code.
increases). In this section, optimal T levels of an outer ECC code

are studied in simulations for selected LDPC codes. In Figs. 5 and 6 we show the SFR as a function of T
for systems with Kirkman LDPC code and irregular array LDPC code, respectively. For each iterative channel, we fixed

ferent settings. To the best of our knowledge, analytical optimization is mathematically intractable, and simulations seem to provide the only solution at this point.

SNR, user normalized density (und), and media noise percentage. Different “bathtub” curves correspond to different

VII. CONCLUSION

number G of global iterations. The list of tested T values This paper considers different structured LDPC codes for

includes

for Kirkman LDPC code, and

for array LDPC code.

Comparison of the SFR performance as a function of the error

correcting capability T of an outer RS code for two different

LDPC codes, irregular array and RS-based, is given in Fig. 7.

The main observation from these results, and numerous other

similar results not shown here, is that the optimal error correc-

tion level of an outer RS code depends on many factors, such

applications in iterative read channels of data storage systems. First, we exhibited relationships and equivalences among several well-known classes of structured LDPC codes. Based on numerous simulation results, we chose the “best” code from each class for competitive comparisons in terms of their BER and SFR performance. Finally, we considered how different T-level of an outer RS code affects the overall performance. Major observations and conclusions are as follows.

as the type of the iterative code, the number of global and local • The relationship between BER and SFR is not straightfor-

iterations, SNR value, user normalized density, and others. Full

ward. The system with better BER performance can have

system optimization requires testing a very large amount of dif-

worse SFR at a certain operating point.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:11:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

206

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 42, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2006

• To reach significant gains in terms of SFR performance with iterative systems, optimization of many parameters (e.g., number of iterations, LDPC code rate, overall code rate) is needed.
• The overall performance depends on the T level of the outer RS code. Optimal T level has to be determined in simulations.
• It is important to determine the source of drive failures. Namely, in the case of many defects on the drive and large RS overhead requirements, LDPC codes may not be the best solution. On the other hand, in the case of insufficient SNR, LDPC codes can certainly improve the performance.

this set. A line in the missing parallel bundle can be described as follows:

For values of , we obtain lines in this omitted parallel

bundle.

Let

be a binary vector of length .

Label the elements of this vector with the points in

as follows. For

, the label

corre-

sponding to and the label

corresponding to have

to satisfy:

APPENDIX PROOF OF EQUIVALENCES AMONG SEVERAL CLASSES
OF STRUCTURED LDPC CODES

1)

, or

2)

, and

,

where, if is a power of prime, the elements in

are as-

sumed to be ordered in the increasing power of a primitive ele-

Lemma 1 states that an RS-based LDPC code formed from

a

extended RS code over

, with a prime

power, is equivalent to an EG-Gallager LDPC code formed from

incidence vectors of lines in

.

Proof: To prove this lemma, we will show that symbol

ment , i.e., the elements of integers, i.e.,
For every line

, whereas if is a prime, are assumed to be ordered as increasing
. , form its incidence vector as follows. The th component of

location vectors of codewords in a 2-D RS code that form rows is 1 if and only if the point corresponding to the th element is

of an RS-based LDPC matrix also represent incidence vectors

of lines in a 2-D Euclidean geometry over the same Galois field.

Consider a 2-D Euclidean geometry over the Galois field

, where is a prime power,

. A point

in

can be represented by a 2-tuple

with

on the line; otherwise the th element is 0.

Suppose that we use a

extended RS code over

for an RS-based LDPC code construction [9]. A code-

word in this code can be formed by evaluating an information

polynomial

at all elements of

. There are points in

and each point

can be regarded as an element of

. A line in this geom-

etry is a collection of points

, where

and are two linearly independent points, i.e., there is no

element

such that

. The total number of lines

in

is

. An EG Gallager LDPC matrix consists

of submatrices

[12].

Each submatrix consists of incidence vectors of parallel lines.

Next, consider the set of distinct lines for distinct pairs

of linearly independent points

and

,

of the geometry

, where each line can be represented

as the collection of points

A symbol location vector of forms a row of an RS-based LDPC

matrix. It is obtained by replacing each code symbol by its

location vector. A location vector of

is a -tuple

consisting of 1-entry at the th position and all other zero entries.

If is a prime power, we choose

for

, and

. If is a prime, we choose

for

.

It is easy to identify that an incidence vector of a line

in

and a symbol location vector of a codeword in an

extended RS code over

of dimension 2 for information

polynomial

are equal. Since incidence vectors

Label each line determined by points

and , with

the ordered pair . A point

in

is on the line

if and only if there is

such that

of lines are used as rows of the EG Gallager LDPC matrix and symbol location vectors of codewords are used as rows of the RS-based LDPC matrix, we conclude the following: any RS-based LDPC code formed from an extended RS code over

of dimension 2 is equivalent to an EG Gallager LDPC

and

code formed from incidence vectors of lines in

. The

assumption of the particular ordering of points in the geom-

The last two equations imply that a point

is on the line etry does not violate this equivalence, since any other ordering

if and only if

will only simply permute code bits. This concludes the proof of

Lemma 1.

To prove Lemma 2, we need to show that an RS-based LDPC

code constructed from the

extended RS code over

Furthermore, note that for a fixed

different lines

, with a prime, of column weight , is equivalent to a

corresponding to different values of form a parallel bundle. regular array LDPC code with parameters and

.

Also, not all parallel bundles are included in the set of lines

Proof: Recall the parity check constraints of an array code

. There exists one parallel bundle of lines not included in defined on a

array

. A parity check

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:11:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KURTAS et al.: SYSTEM PERSPECTIVES FOR THE APPLICATION OF STRUCTURED LDPC CODES

207

constraint for the th diagonal is given as

of a slope

and it defines a row in the parity check matrix of a regular array

code. It is easy to see that this row is equal to the incidence

vector of a line in

. Since RS-based LDPC code

is equivalent with an EG code with rows in the parity check

matrix formed from the incidence vectors of lines over points,

Lemma 2 follows.

The Proof of Lemma 3 is similar to the Proof of Lemma 2

and we leave it as an exercise for the reader. Lemma 4 says

that every extended regular

array LDPC code, with a

prime, is equivalent to an EG-Gallager LDPC code formed from

incidence vectors of lines in

.

Proof: Remember that a class of extended regular array

LDPC codes contains a class of regular array LDPC codes. The

only difference is that extended regular array LDPC codes have

a possibility to include additional parity checks, which are

imposing the constraint that every column in a array sums

to zero modulo 2. From derivations in the Proof of Lemma 1, we

note that the incidence vectors of lines of type

in

form the rows of the following matrix:

For a binary array read column-wise, this parity-check matrix says that every column sums to zero modulo 2. Therefore, extended regular array LDPC codes also belong to the class of EG Gallager LDPC codes, and this proves Lemma 4.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] J. Fan, A. Friedmann, E. Kurtas, and S. W. McLaughlin, “Low density parity check codes for partial response channels,” in Proc. 37th Allerton Conf. Communications, Control and Computing, Urbana, IL, Oct. 1999.
[3] B. Vasic and E. M. Kurtas, Coding and Signal Processing for Magnetic Recording Systems. Boca Raton, FL: CRC, 2005.

[4] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low density parity check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[5] D. Divsalar, H. Jin, and R. McEliece, “Coding theorems for turbo-like codes,” in Proc. 36th Allerton Conf. Communications, Control and Computing, Urbana, IL, Sep. 1998.
[6] H. Jin, A. Khandekar, and R. McEliece, “Irregular repeat-accumulate codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 2000, pp. 1–8.
[7] M. Yang, W. Ryan, and Y. Li, “Design of efficiently encodable moderatelength high-rate LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 564–571, Apr. 2004.
[8] J. Fan, “Array codes as low-density parity check codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 2000, pp. 543–546.
[9] I. Djurdjevic, J. Xu, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, and S. Lin, “A class of lowdensity parity-check codes constructed based on Reed–Solomon codes with two information symbols,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 317–319, Jul. 2003.
[10] J. Li, K. R. Narayanan, E. Kurtas, and C. N. Georghiades, “On the performance of high-rate TPC/SPC and LDPC codes over partial response channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 723–734, May 2002.
[11] H. Tang, “Codes on finite geometries,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. California, Davis, 2002.
[12] H. Tang, J. Xu, Y. Kou, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “On algebraic construction of Gallager and circulant low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1269–1279, Jun. 2004.
[13] J. H. van Lint and R. M. Wilson, A Course in Combinatorics. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2001.
[14] M. Blaum, P. Farrell, and H. van Tilborg, “Array codes,” in Handbook of Coding Theory, V. Pless and W. Huffman, Eds. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier, 1998.
[15] M. Blaum and R. Roth, “New array codes for multiple burst error correction,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 66–77, Jan. 1993.
[16] A. Mahadevan and J. M. Morris. (2002, Jun.) On RCD SPC codes as LDPC codes based on arrays and their equivalence to some codes constructed from Euclidean geometries and partial BIBDs. CSEE Dept., Univ. Maryland, Baltimore County, Catonsville. [Online]. Available: http://www.engr.umbc.edu/morris/cspl/reports/TR2002_1.pdf
[17] J.-L. Kim, U. N. Peled, I. Perepelitsa, and V. Pless, “Explicit construction of families of LDPC codes with girth at least six,” in Proc. 40th Annu. Allerton Conf. Communications, Control and Computing, Urbana, IL, Oct. 2002.
[18] Z. A. Keirn, V. Y. Krachkovsky, E. F. Haratsch, and H. Burger, “Use of redundant bits for magnetic recording: Single-parity codes and ReedSolomon error-correcting code,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 225–230, Jan. 2004.
Manuscript received July 1, 2005 (e-mail: Erozan.M.Kurtas@Seagate.com).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:11:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

