728

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2006

Rate-Compatible Punctured Low-Density Parity-Check Codes With Short Block Lengths
Jeongseok Ha, Jaehong Kim, Demijan Klinc, and Steven W. McLaughlin, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—We consider the problem of rate-compatible puncturing of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes over additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels. In previous work, it was shown that “good” puncturing distributions exist for LDPC codes but the code length was large. In this correspondence, we give a procedure for determining the puncturing distributions for LDPC codes with short block lengths (a few thousand bits) and show that careful puncturing can produce good performance. We compare the performance of the rate-compatible punctured LDPC codes with dedicated LDPC codes across a range of rates and see that the rate-compatible codes have a favorable complexity/performance tradeoff.
Index Terms—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, puncturing, rate-adaptive, short block lengths.
I. INTRODUCTION
Over time-varying channels, error-correction codes are required to be flexible with respect to their code rates depending on the current channel state. Rate adaptability [1] can be realized with several pairs of encoders and decoders for the desired code rates, which is sometimes unacceptable due to complexity. It can also be realized by puncturing a low rate channel code (mother code), resulting in only one encoder and decoder for each mother code. It is assumed that the decoder knows the locations of punctured coded symbols. If the punctured parity bits in a lower rate code are also punctured in a higher rate code, the rateadaptive channel code is called rate-compatible [1]–[3].
Rate-compatible punctured channel codes have another advantage with type-II hybrid automatic-repeat-request (ARQ) protocols. Here, a transmitter sends partial redundancies by puncturing a mother code based on the channel state. If the receiver fails to recover the message, the receiver progressively requests additional redundancies which were previously punctured and hence not transmitted. For a given code rate the coding gain of a punctured code is usually poorer than that of the corresponding dedicated code, i.e., optimized code for the rate. Thus, punctured bits must be chosen such that the performance gap between the dedicated and punctured codes is minimized. A selection of punctured symbols is called a puncturing distribution for a code rate in this paper.
Previous work [2], [4], [5] gives a puncturing method with irregular low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, which is based on the degree distributions of irregular LDPC codes. It was shown that there exist good (capacity approaching) puncturing distributions over a broad range of code rates. Moreover, the designed puncturing distributions are rate-compatible. However, these results presume infinite block lengths. Here, we are interested in practical punctured LDPC codes

that are either regular or irregular at small block lengths (a few thousand bits). Although there have been several studies [3], [6] about rate-compatible punctured LDPC codes at moderate block lengths, the locations of punctured symbols were arbitrarily chosen in these previous works. In such a way, randomly obtained puncturing distributions may have severe performance losses especially at high code rates where significant amounts of parity bits are punctured. It is also possible for some subsets of punctured symbols to be unrecoverable, stopping sets [7]. Recently, Tian et al. [8] proposed rate-compatible LDPC codes by puncturing lower-triangular parity-check matrices where the puncturing does not violate the degree distribution profiles of mother codes.
In this paper, we propose a systematic way to find the locations of punctured symbols in LDPC codes which is rate-compatible and minimizes the performance loss due to the puncturing. Our idea is based on a fact that a punctured node will be recovered with reliable messages when it has 1) more neighboring (check) nodes, and 2) each of the check nodes has more reliable neighbors (variable nodes) except for the punctured one. For example, a punctured variable node that has check nodes whose remaining neighboring variable nodes are unpunctured will have nonzero messages from the check nodes in the first iteration. We call the process for a punctured node to have messages from check nodes as recovery by analogy with the one over binary-erasure channels. The punctured node in the preceding example will be called a one-step-recoverable (1-SR) since the node is recovered in the first iteration. The 1-SR nodes and unpunctured nodes will help recover some of the remaining punctured nodes in the second iteration, and so on. In general, the punctured nodes recovered in the kth iteration are called k-SR nodes. It is assumed that the more iterations a punctured node needs for its recovery, the less statistically reliable the recovery message is. Thus, it is better to puncture nodes that require a smaller number of iterations, which results not only in less iterations to decode codewords but also in better performance at a given code rate.
Based on this, our idea focuses on how to find nodes to be recovered in a certain number of iterations. First, we maximize the size of a group containing 1-SR nodes G1. After that, we maximize the size of a group with 2-SR nodes G2, and so on. The groups G1; G2; . . . ; GK will be used to determine the puncturing patterns for increasing the rates in a rate-compatible fashion. Namely, we will first puncture variable nodes from G1 then nodes from G2, and so on to achieve higher and higher rates.
The correspondence is organized as follows. In Section II we introduce notations and some definitions which are used in the other sections. In Section III, we describe the details of the proposed idea. In Section IV, we compare the performances of the proposed rate-compatible punctured LDPC codes with conventional (randomly) punctured LDPC codes and dedicated LDPC codes at various block lengths. Finally, in Section V, we summarize our results and discuss future work.
II. BASIC NOTATIONS

Manuscript received February 22, 2005; revised October 8, 2005. The material in this correspondence was presented in part at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Chicago, IL, June/July 2004.
J. Ha is with the School of Engineering, Information and Communications University (ICU), 305-714, Korea (e-mail: jsha@icu.ac.kr).
J. Kim and S. W. McLaughlin are with the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332 USA (e-mail: onil@ece.gatech.edu; swm@ece.gatech.edu).
D. Klinc was with Lehrstuhl für Nachrichtentechnik (LNT), Technical University Munich, Germany. He is now with the Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332 USA (e-mail: demi@gimb.org).
Communicated by M. P. Fossorier, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2005.862118

A low-density parity-check (LDPC) code is a linear block code defined by a sparse parity-check matrix H which has m rows and n columns. In this paper it is assumed that parity-check matrices are defined over GF(2). That is, the element Hj;k at the intersection of row j and column k in H is either 1 or 0. Each row represents a parity-check equation, and the columns with ’1’ in the row tells the indices of bits in a codeword which are involved in the parity-equation. That is, a codeword satisfies the parity-check equation defined by row j as
n
Hj;k 1 ck = 0 k=1

0018-9448/$20.00 © 2006 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:10:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2006

729

where c = fc1; c2; . . . ; gcn is a codeword, ck is in GF(2), and 1  j 
m: A parity-check matrix can be equivalently expressed with a bipartite

graph in which there are two types of nodes, check nodes (a set of all
= f . . . g check nodes is denoted as P p1; p2; ; pm ) and variable nodes = f . . . g (a set of all variable nodes is denoted as V v1; v2; ; vn ). Check
node pj and variable node vk correspond to row j and column k in a
parity-check matrix, respectively. The value ’1’ of Hj;k is represented
with a connection (edge) between check node j and variable node k in

the corresponding bipartite graph where no edge connects two nodes

of the same type. Such a graph is often called a Tanner graph [9]. Both

a Tanner graph and its corresponding parity-check matrix uniquely de-

fine an LDPC code. Thus, Tanner graphs and parity-check matrices are

used interchangeably here.
N For an arbitrary node v we define v as a set of all nodes that can N be reached from v by traversing only one edge. The nodes in v and N the size of v are called the neighbors of v and the degree of v, re-

spectively. Since one type of nodes have the other type of nodes as

their neighbors in Tanner graphs, a check node has variable nodes as

its neighbors and vice versa.

Puncturing of the mother code can be performed either randomly

or according to carefully chosen locations of punctured bits optimized

for a given parity-check matrix. We will refer to the first as random

puncturing and to the latter as intentional puncturing in the subsequent

sections. We often use Tanner graphs to explain our ideas, where we

refer to bits as variable nodes.

Suppose that some variable nodes are punctured. The decoder will

set their log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) to 0 at the initialization. If a

punctured variable node receives a nonzero LLR message from one of

its neighboring check nodes, it is said to be recovered, regardless of

whether the nonzero LLR value implies the correct bit value or not.

Through iterations, all punctured variable nodes have to be recovered

with the information from the unpunctured nodes.

The updating rule for variable nodes suggests that a punctured vari-

able node v will be recovered when at least one of the incoming check

node messages is nonzero. On the other hand, a check node p cannot

decide its message to the punctured node v if there is at least one punc-
N n f g tured node among p v . Accordingly, we refer to a punctured
variable node v as one-step-recoverable (1-SR) if it has at least one

neighbor p, called the survived check node, such that all variable nodes
N n f g N from the set p v are unpunctured. The check nodes from v that

do not satisfy this condition are referred to as dead check nodes. We

illustrate an example of a 1-SR node in Fig. 1 where S1 and S2 are the survived check nodes, and D is the dead check node.

In general, a punctured variable node v is called k-step recoverable

(k-SR) if v has at least one neighbor p, called the survived check node,

N n such that the set p
the others are m-SR,

fvg contains at least one (k 0 where 0  m  k 0 1.1 A k

1)-SR node
-SR node, k

while
 1,

can have multiple survived check nodes but the puncturing algorithm

that we propose in this paper guarantees an existence of at least one

survived check node for each k-SR node. We refer to it as the guaran-

teed survived check node. Notice that a k-SR node will be recovered

after exactly k iterations.

We seek an automated procedure for determining exactly which vari-

able nodes should be punctured and in which order they should be punc-

tured. What follows is a systematic search algorithm for determining

the order of nodes to be punctured. The algorithm first attempts to maxi-

mize the number of punctured nodes that are 1-SR. When no more 1-SR

nodes can be found, it proceeds with 2-SR nodes, etc., until every node

in V has been chosen to be either unpunctured or punctured. We say the
. . . search algorithm assigns the variable nodes to groups G0; G1; Gk,
where k indicates the level of recoverability of variable nodes in that

Fig. 1. One-step recoverable node; the filled and unfilled circles are
S unpunctured and punctured variable nodes, respectively. The squares and S D are the survived check nodes, and the square is the dead check node.

group. For instance, if a variable node is chosen to be unpunctured, it is assigned to G0, whereas if it is chosen to be punctured such that it will be recovered in the kth iteration, it is assigned to Gk. At any particular time during the search algorithm, all variable nodes whose status (punctured or unpunctured) has not been determined yet are in
= G1. Hence, when the algorithm starts G1 V , and when it stops = ; G1 .
To get a better understanding of the search algorithm we need a clear picture of how a node is to be recovered. Consider now a k-SR node v. We build a tree originating from v in the following way. First, we link v with its guaranteed survived check node p and subsequently link
N n f g p with all variable nodes from the set p v . In the next step, this
process is repeated on every new punctured variable node in the tree until every branch terminates with an unpunctured variable node. The resulting tree is called the recovery tree of v. We show an example of a recovery tree in Fig. 2. Later, the number of unpunctured nodes in the recovery tree of v will be of big importance, so we designate it as
S(v). In Fig. 2 S(v) is equal to 14. Assuming that v is recovered with
the message-passing decoding algorithm on the recovery tree of v, we
( ) define the recovery-error probability of v, Pe v as follows. ( ) Definition 1: (Recovery error probability Pe v of a k-SR node v) 2  1 ( ) For v Gk and k , Pe v is the probability that v is recovered
with a wrong message in the k-th iteration, where the message is based only on the information from the unpunctured nodes in the recovery tree of v.
When we transmit a punctured LDPC code over a BEC with an erasure probability of , the probability that a variable node v in Gk is recovered in its recovery tree is expressed in a recursive form as shown in Definition 2. Thus, the recovery-error probability of v is simply
(109(v; ))=2. The term 9(v; ) is also useful to compute a recovery-
error probability of a punctured variable node over AWGN channels. We will show the details of recovery-error probabilities in Section III.
Definition 2:

9(v; ) =

(1 0 ); d 01 9(
j; );

for v 2 G0 for v 2 Gk and k > 0

j=1

where G0 and Gk are sets of unpunctured nodes and k-SR nodes, respectively, dc is a degree of the survived check node of v, 
j ’s are the
2 neighbors of the survived check node except for v, and 
j Gh for 0   0 1 h k .

1A 0-SR node denotes an unpunctured node.

Definition 3: (Effective column weight of a column 
 with respect
to a subset of rows R, cwe (
; R))

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:10:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

730

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2006

then for v 2 Gk+1,

Pe

=

1 2

(1

0

d 01 j=1

9(
j ;

))

Fig. 2. Recovery tree of a 3-SR node; the squares are survived check nodes, the filled circles are unpunctured variable nodes, and the unfilled circles are punctured variable nodes.

wasunhbdFeso1reertajof1pkjraoriwistyani-ncc,dhaleirecdtce3iksn,
amrlei=atsytprfieoxcftHa:ivHse=elyt;.[
[c1Hw=0j]e;.k1(2acn;fdR01); 1isgd]ewfihneemrdega1sajn3dcjR\bRemja,

Definition 4: (Effective row weight of a row  with respect to a
subset of columns C , rwe (; C))

For
and 1

a parity-check
 k  n, let

matrix H
0 = f


= [Hj;k 2 f0; 1g]
: H;
 = 1 and 1

where 1



j ng and

m C

j \ j j 1 j be a subset of column indices, respectively. rwe (r; C) is defined as
0r C , where is a cardinality of a set.

III. ALGORITHM FOR DETERMINING PUNCTURING PATTERNS

In what follows we present a search algorithm consisting of two

steps: Grouping and Sorting. In the Grouping step we distribute all
variable nodes into groups G0; G1; . . . ; GK , while in the subsequent
Sorting step we determine the order of puncturing of nodes within each

group. We start by deriving some results on the recovery error proba-

bility, which is computed based on the information from the nodes in

the recovery tree – the exact error probability of the recovery message

seems to be too complicated. When we have to choose a new node out

of several candidates for the grouping and sorting, we will choose the

one with the smallest recovery-error probability.

2 Fact 1: The recovery error probability Pe(v) of

0 Gk>0 0 2 where

over a BEC
9(v; ) =

with
(1

an)Se(rva)suforer

probability of  v Gk and k

aisva12r(i1able

node
9(v;

v
)),

> 0 and 9(v; ) is

the same as the probability that the variable node v is recovered.

Proof: We will prove this fact by induction. For k = 1, all vari-

able nodes in the recovery tree of v are in G0. Thus,

Pe(v)

=

1 2

(1

0

(10)d

01)

=

1 2

(10(10



)S(v))

=

1 2

(1

0

9(v;



))

2 where dc is a degree of a survived check node of v. For 
 Gk, assume
that

=

1 2

(1

0

(1

0

)

S(
 ) )

=

1 2

(1

0

(1

0

)S(v))

=

1 2

(1

0

9(v;



))

where dc is a degree of the survived
S neighbors of the survived check node S 2   (v), and 
j Gh for 1 h k.

check node of except for v,

vdj,=0
1j1’s

are the
(
j) =

2 Fact 2: The recovery error probability Pe(v) of a variable node v

Gk has

over a Binary Symmetric Channel
a relation with 9(v; ), Pe(v) =

1w0i9th(v2a;n2Per)a.sure

probability

of



2 will

bPero1o0f:(10A22r)ecover=y

er1r0o9r (2pvr;o2b)a.bAilistsyuomfeathvaatrifaobrlea

node v variable

G1
node

2 
 Gk

Pe(
)

=

1 0 (1 0 2)S(
)
2

=

1

0

9(
; 2

2

)

:

2 Thus, for a variable node v Gk+1

Pe(v)

=

1

0

d

01 (1

0

j=1

2

2)S(


)

S(
 )

= =

1 1

0 0

(1 0
9(v; 2

2) 2 2)

where dc is the degree of a survived
S neighbors of the survived check node S 2   (v), and 
j Gh for 1 h k.

check node of except for v,

vdj,=0
1j1’s

are the
(
j) =

2 Fact 3: The recovery error probability of a variable node v Gk

mxtoviavo>urenir(a[vn0a1)nc1ae=]nAdids2d,0Pi(ta1exinv(()dev1)0W(=1hxi()ftQ1eo0rG(xa91u=m(0svsu0i;1a(=n(vs(p)eCm=e4h2uta)hn,xe)nw)de)hle)etwftaroaieilrtnshQmhoG(fuu21a)eu(0i=ssxs(i)ut2ah0ni=enxAQ)[21p=-1apf4n]urx)odn.dxcnuitomiofiosaner-, 2 Proof: An updated mean of a variable node v G1 will be

01(1 0 [1 0

(mu

)]d

01))

= 01(1 0 = 01(1 0

[1 0 (mu
9(v; (mu

)]S(v))) ))):

2 Assume that for a variable node 
 Gk, mu(
) = 01(1 0 9(
; (mu ))):

2 Then, for a variable node v Gk+1

mu(v) = 01

d
10

01
[1 0 (mu

)]S(


)

j=1

= 01 1 0 [1 0 (mu )] S(
 )

= 01 1 0 [1 0 (mu )]S(v) = 01(1 0 9(v; (mu )))

Pe

=

1 2

(1

0

9(
; ))

=

1 2

(1

0

(1

0

)S(
))

where mu is the mean of a log likelihood ratio message from the
channel to unpunctured variable nodes, dc is a degree of a survived

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:10:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2006

731

check node
S S 2   cept for v,

ofdv0, 
1j
j=1

’s are
(
j )

the
=

neighbors of
(v), and 
j

the survived
Gh for 1

check h

node k.

ex-

S Facts 2 and 3 tell that a k-SR node v with larger (v) has a larger

recovery error probability. Later, in the algorithm, we will look for a
S variable node with a smaller (v) as a new k-SR node.

Proposed Algorithm: Grouping

Step 0.0
Step 1.0 Step 2.0 Step 3.0 Step 3.1

G00[Hk[GIn1=ri;\o
=ti1=uaG=,plfRif1z
C11a0o;ta:fail2onounH;rnddm.e].Ra1n;F.
c1o;Ihnnr=adagrei,g1c2eSie;vms(Ream]jnpnF1)tmgydo=,.rs2mG1e0tn0saf,saopRenra
tdr1aGiltGly1=-11cnshafuger1ce,c;hjk3e2tmmh;
.apa.nt=tt.Gyr.i;1xsfmeHt=gs:,,, 
 
3[jr[[thCGFFw
)a1
iirennts\oj8dduu(=cRp!BCh;13ecaRGtswnh2,to1daefwRtoi)dr(o8Iaf3
awnot,l;!derls9R]i
aRcn1cF2eo2yis2)nw]
dGfsMGo]12,!ar1!aMj,aksGRunaea1!sybn1kuasdje!ce.sh!ta=e2otts2hfCu
ar
1b
t
wsaje.Cemn(stc1dcuinaoc
ljfhl =R2itth1
caGjwtG1!3(C1me)c.1
aisjnlulc==iht

Step 3.2 Step 3.3 Step 4.0 Step 5.0

w[tcr[athhFMwn3haai
emoentna22rrkdWieod0neneTG!a(rea1nh!e!j3ddcSe’3Sos)(pcBewl
wuataeiim)nstmero.hdtnfOiIWnPfccOi,wajn3t=(rhir’deme!resdes]rfji3xepena(P)rer!w,aeiecrcrda1wt3iekirtn;vhohPdmcaewe13olcaroyp)mwei,rara;elmaeisn(1yr]n!dti,hn(d23Pw!ac.;1itocT3hcjlok;23ehuncn)emae3;njt.)n,phc.pfaweo.ir,irnl;oreeujWd(Omsmwi!aacj(rnpt3ieOe!il=;sslijfc3mnhsywp3)pudaio)in.cev=rtgghhxee,

[ f g [ the inequality, pick one
[Update] Gk = Gk

cra3nd, oGm0ly=.

G0

G1! n fc3g

,

G1
C1!

=
n

fG!13g

n
,

G1! , Rk
and R1

= =

Rk [ f!3g, R0 = R0 [ R1 n C1c , S(
) = 1 for


 2 G1! n c3, S(c3) =
[Check Stop Condition]

I
f2Gf01

nc g S(
).
is an empty

set,

then

STOP.

Step 5.1 Step 5.2
Step 6.0

[Decision] If R1 is not empty set, go to Step 1.0.
f [No More Undetermined Rows] R1 =  : g R0 and rwe (; G1) > 0 :



2

k = k + 1, and go to Step 1.0.

C Step 3.0, G C and R1.

we form Similar

a to

set
1!

,

1
 with row indices
the cardinality of

that belong to
1
 is cwe (
;

both
R1)

3

by

Definition 3. We look for rows in which there is at least one column
j j jC j O wpAcrRowaigwit1mearhsiminane,ada,mwycreehicehnsropaiewmvfeaeicswuletlmsihsvehievcbaolehvyyfre.ahcTlawmhsc1!eooearlseur(.eo
mktwI;non-RSfsaSRno1wtdredi)nptaeohwrcd3echoe.dw3ilscu,pmehwmawiiiinnretssh.osmImifcnmwatathkyphmeeelinysirnoaocdtwassebisennewetoc,uitewtenhdiienqoraurwfSsaeemnotcesdrwiipdnonememc4arein.eln0ydda,.
choose a column from them. In terms of maximizing Gk, each ordered

pair gives us statistically the same result. Among the ordered pairs, we

will choose the one with the highest (smallest recovery error) proba-

bility to be recovered in the kth iteration. The facts 2 and 3 tell that the
S k-SR node with a smaller (c) will have a smaller recovery error probS ability. Thus, in Step 3.3 we pick up a pair with smallest (c), which is W equivalently evaluated with a measure for computational efficiency.

In Step 4.0, we update the sets with the pair chosen in Step 3.3. In
Step 5.1, the cardinality of R1 is checked. If it is not zero, Step 1.0 will be visited again. Otherwise, R1 is updated in Step 5.2 where R1 takes rows ’s with nonzero rwe (; G1) in R0. In Step 6.0 we increase k by 1 and start looking for (k + 1)-SR symbols.

The rows in Rk are the survived check nodes of the corresponding k-SR nodes. Thus, the algorithm guarantees at least one survived check

node for each k-SR node. We define a set of Gk’s from the algorithm

as

2 = fG0; G1; . . . ; GKg

; where it is assumed that the algorithm runs until G1 = , and K des-
ignates the highest number of iterations that will be required to recover

all punctured nodes.

By puncturing symbols in Gk, the maximum achievable code rate

rmax can be expressed as

rmax

=

10

r0
K jGjj=n

j=1

  1 1 1   where r0 is the mother code rate, and n is the block length of the mother

code. For a sequence of designed rates, r0 r1

rM rmax,

we can compute the required number of punctured nodes npj as

npj =

n(rj 0 r0)
rj

  for 0 j M . We will choose npj nodes from Gk’s such that the

Details of the Grouping Algorithm:
In Step 0.0, 0 (3
 ) is a set of nonzero column (row) indices in the row  (column 
), and G0, G1, and G1 are sets of unpunuctured,

1-SR and undetermined column indices, respectively. When there are

no more undetermined columns (G1 is an empty set in Step 5.0), the algorithm will stop. Rk and R1 are sets of row indices which are
(guaranteed) survived check nodes of k-SR nodes and undetermined

check nodes, respectively. Suppose a row contains a k-SR node. That
0 k-SR node is also in dv 1 other rows, where dv is a degree of the 0 k-SR node. The indices of the other dv 1 rows of all k-SR nodes will
be assigned to R0, and the rows in R0 are excluded from the candidate
rows for a new survived check node of a k-SR node. 0 (3
 ) is a set

containing the indices of all nonzero columns (rows) in row (column)

 (
).

G In G both

Step 1.0, we form a set
in 0 and G1. Thus, the

1 that contains
cardinality of

all
1

the column indices
is rwe (; G1) by

j j jG j DoGfe1rfiwnietdieo(cnr;e3Ga.s1Iens)bSwytehpic21h.0is,inwsiSmetpeloplyo4kd.0ef,noorchtreoodowsasisnirgnwaRemr1ionw. wSwiintihtcheartwhmeeminsiinimzweuiomlfl

leave us more candidate rows one of which can serve as a survived

check node for the next k-SR node. In general, there may be more than
one row with rwemin, and their indices are contained in the set 
. In

performance loss due to the puncturing is minimized. To achieve this
we choose the lower indexed group first. Next, we will take a node with a lower column index first until we have npj nodes. That is, in the process of choosing np1 nodes, first we choose G1 and take a node with the smallest column index from G1, in the next choose a node
j j with the next smallest column index and so on until we either take all
the nodes in G1 or have np1 nodes from G1. If G1 is less than np1, we will do the same process with G2 until we have np1 nodes. For np2, we will do the same process and the nodes for np2 automatically include the ones for np1. This idea gives us a set of rate-compatible punctured LDPC codes in which the punctured nodes for a lower rate
are included in the ones for all the higher rates. Although this idea
gives us reasonable performance, we elaborate more on the way how we choose punctured nodes from Gk’s, which must be rate-compatible and minimize performance loss at each rate.
Now, we discuss the Sorting step where we determine the order of
puncturing within each group G1; G2; . . . ; GK .
Proposed Algorithm: Sorting
2 [Step 0.0] [Initialization] For a given m n parity-check matrix,
j = 1, k = 1, 3c is a set of nonzero row indices in the
column c, P 0 is an empty sets, and R = f1; 2; . . . ; mg.
[Step 0.1] If j > M , STOP.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:10:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

732

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2006

[Step 0.2] [Step 0.3] [Step 0.4] [Step 1.0]
[Step 1.1]
[Step 2.0] [Step 3.0] [Step 4.0]

Pj = P npj =

nj0p1j.0

jP

j

j.

IIfpcMffwca1epkn;ecpj(2Gajc;>jks.i;sej.Rt.zfor;e)1ofcr,=ompc,gowjcG,luew=kdmemetsnaagjukxi(c+enchdj31in)tchcoeaawdsnteedf8scg(c1cocjd;j3;cteR2o2gs;)0(u.f,c.c.1fc)ho..1.r;;Icatcfhpn2ag;ytt.h,c.fe8o.r2ecr; cG1parkg2e.,

multiple and call
Pj =P npj =

jist[unccp3fhj.cn30ogd,1Ge.sk,

we
=

pick
Gk n

one from
fc3g, and

them
R=

arbitrary
R n3c ,

fIf1;G2k; .

is
..

;

an empty
mg.

set,

k

=

k + 1, and R

=

Go to Step 0.4.

j In the proposed sorting algorithm, P will contain column indices of j the variable nodes which are punctured to achieve rate r . Obviously,

for r0, P 0 is an empty set at the initialization. It is assumed that we will
M design rates from r0 to r which is less than or equal to rmax. Thus, in

Step 0.1, if j is larger than M , the algorithm will stop. Subsequently, in
j j Step 0.2, P inherits the column indices from P 01, which makes the

punctured LDPC codes rate compatible since all the punctured nodes
j j j for r 01 will be punctured again for r . In Step 0.3, np accounts for j how many additional nodes are needed to make P besides the ones j j in P 01. The loop between Step 0.4 and Step 4.0 continues until np

becomes zero. In Step 1.0 we look for nodes with the largest number
of survived check nodes which is equivalent to nodes with cwmeax.

We compute the additional number of punctured nodes to the ones in

j the
for

previous rate r nodes with a

m0a1x. iImf wume neefefdecatdivdeiticoonlaulmnondwese,itghhetaclgwomeriathxm, wlohoickhs

means the node with the maximum number of survived check nodes.
We exclude rows with k-SR nodes from R in Step 2.0. Thus, cwmeax

counts only survived check nodes of a variable node.

nodEeaschanvdardiaebgl(ecjn)od0e

ciwn mefca1x;

c2; . . . ; cpg
dead check

has cwmeax
nodes since

survived check check nodes of

anovdaersiawbliethntohdeesmaraelleeistthecrolsuumrvnivdeedgroere,ddeaedg.(cI3n),Swtehpic1h.1i,s

we choose equivalent

to choosing variable nodes with the smallest number of dead check

nodes. Some of the dead nodes are survived check nodes of already

npoudnectucr3e.dIfnowdeeschaonodsebeaconmodeedweaidthdmueorteo

puncturing dead check

the new k-SR nodes in Step

1.1, it will make more survived check nodes of previously punctured

nodes dead. Thus, we look for nodes with the largest number of sur-

vived check nodes to maximize the number and reliability of incoming

messages and the smallest number of dead check nodes to minimize

the disturbance caused to the other k-SR nodes. It looks obvious that
k as we choose nodes from G , the node chosen later may have smaller cwmeax, which is intended to minimize performance loss at lower rates.

TABLE I BLOCK LENGTHS OF PUNCTURED LDPC CODES; THE LENGTHS IN PARENTHESES ARE THE NUMBERS OF PUNCTURED SYMBOLS AT THE RATES
First, we implement half rate mother LDPC codes with a regular
structure ((x) = x2 and (x) = x5) at block lengths of 1024 and
4096. We deliberately avoid 4-cycle loops in parity-check matrices of the mother codes to achieve better minimum distance property [12]. Subsequently, we puncture the mother codes to obtain punctured LDPC
codes at rates 0:5; 0:6; 0:7; and 0:8. The block lengths of the punctured
LDPC codes and the numbers of punctured parity bits for the rates are listed in Table I. It should be noticed that the punctured LDPC codes have shorter block lengths at higher rates due to a higher number of punctured parity bits. Although punctured LDPC codes have shorter block lengths, a received LDPC code is decoded on the Tanner graph
of its mother code (1024 or 4096 in our simulations). For fair com-
parisons, dedicated LDPC codes are designed at the block lengths of the corresponding punctured LDPC codes for the given rates. Thus, the dedicated codes are decoded on shorter Tanner graphs as compared to the punctured LDPC codes.
In the case of block length 1024, puncturing distributions are de-
signed with the intentional and random puncturing for the code rates in Table I. The distributions with the random puncturing are implemented three times with different random seeds to see the performance variations due to the different maximum levels of recoverability.
We analyze the group distributions of the selections of punctured parity bits obtained by the proposed grouping algorithm (denoted as Intentional in Table II) and the three different random selections of punctured bits (denoted as Random 1, 2, and 3 in Table II). Since the
 punctured parity bits with the grouping algorithm are in G0 G3,
the distribution with the intentional puncturing requires three iterations to recover all the punctured parity bits. That is, the maximum level of recoverability is 3. However, the distributions obtained by the random puncturing require at least 9 iterations, which results in higher recovery-error probabilities of the symbols in the groups with higher indices.
In Fig. 3, we compare BER performances of the randomly punctured LDPC codes with the three different random seeds at block length
1024, where the ones with the smallest and largest maximum levels of

IV. SIMULATIONS

recoverability (denoted as Random 1 and 3 in Table II, respectively)
show the best and the worst BER performances at rate 0:8, respectively.

A. Simulations With Regular LDPC Codes

Thus, the simulation results justify our design rule which looks for se-

The proposed algorithms in Section III are based on the claim that a puncturing distribution that will be recovered in the smallest number of iterations guarantees better performance. In this section, we verify the claim with computer simulations, where we show that puncturing according to the proposed algorithms yields better performance than conventional random puncturing in terms of bit-error rate (BER)2 and word-error rate (WER). The BER and WER performances are mea-
b sured after observing at least 50 erroneous code words at each E =N0
value to guarantee statistical confidence. The punctured LDPC codes, in this case regular, are also compared with dedicated LDPC codes which are designed at the rates of the punctured LDPC codes.

lections of punctured parity bits with a smaller level of recoverability
for the highest rate, 0:8. However the performances at the intermediate rates (0:6 and 0:7 in our simulations) in Fig. 3 do not seem to depend
on the levels of recoverability since the punctured LDPC code with the puncturing distribution Random 3 has better performance than the one with Random 2. The distributions in Table II describe levels of recoverability of the punctured LDPC codes at the highest rate. Thus, better group distribution of a punctured LDPC code does not guarantee better performance at intermediate rates if we do not carefully choose the order of puncturing. For the intentional puncturing, we apply the sorting algorithm to determine the order of puncturing but in the case of random puncturing, we puncture parities with smaller node indices

2To evaluate BER, we observe only message bits, which are all unpunctured. first. The performances of the randomly punctured LDPC codes at the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:10:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2006

733

TABLE II GROUP DISTRIBUTIONS OF THE INTENTIONAL PUNCTURING AND THE THREE DIFFERENT TRIALS OF THE RANDOM PUNCTURING OF A REGULAR LDPC CODE WITH
(x) = x AND (x) = x AT A BLOCK LENGTH OF 1024; THE LARGEST CODE RATE IS 0:8

Fig. 3. Randomly punctured LDPC codes with three different random seeds; the circles, squares and triangles correspond to BERs of Random 1, 2, and 3 in Table II , respectively, and the BERs of the half rate mother code at block length 1024 are represented with the diamonds.

Fig. 4. Randomly punctured LDPC codes at rate 0:7 with (solid lines)/without (dashed lines) the sorting algorithm; the filled and unfilled circles are performances
of the punctured LDPC codes with the puncturing distributions Random 2 and 3, respectively and the mother code has a block length of 1024.

intermediate rates can also be improved by applying the sorting algo- punctured LDPC code with Random 2 has better performance than that rithm. That is, we can analyze the randomly obtained puncturing dis- of Random 3, which means the punctured LDPC with the smaller level

tributions and give priority to the nodes with a smaller level of recover- of recoverability at the highest rate has better performance.

ability. In Fig. 4, we compare the performances of the punctured LDPC

codes with Random 2 and Random 3 at rate 0:7 with/without the sorting

algorithm. The sorting algorithm the punctured LDPC codes at a

BimEpRroovfe1s 0th0e5Ebby=N 0.05

performances of dB for Random

2 and 0.3 dB for Random 3. After applying the sorting algorithm, the

One more thing to be noticed in Fig. 3 is the BER performance varia-

1ti0o0ns5

with the different seeds. The required Eb=N0 at rate 0:8 has a difference of 2.2 dB between

to achieve a BER the best (Random

of 1)

and worst (Random 3) cases. As mentioned in Section II, random punc-

turing may delete a significant amount of parity bits in a stopping set,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:10:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

734

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2006

Fig. 5. Comparison between the intentional (filled) and random (unfilled) puncturing of an LDPC code at block length 1024; code rates are 0:5; 0:6; 0:7; and 0:8 from the left to the right, the puncturing distributions are from Intentional and Random 2 in Table II and the BERs of the half rate mother code are represented
with the diamonds.

Fig. 6. BERs (filled) and WERs (unfilled) of a dedicated LDPC code, an intentional punctured LDPC code and a randomly punctured LDPC code with rate 0:7 from the left to the right, respectively; the block length of the mother LDPC code is 1024.

which results in a severe performance loss especially at higher rates. cated and the punctured LDPC codes should be equal at each rate to

It is hard to know whether random puncturing results in catastrophic ensure a fair comparison. As mentioned, the punctured LDPC codes

selections of punctured parity bits without time-consuming computer are decoded on the Tanner graph of their mother code whose block

simulations. However, by analyzing the level of recoverability under length is 1024 in this case. However, the block length of the dedicated

the framework of the proposed grouping algorithm, we can predict the LDPC code is only 71% of the mother code and is decoded on the

performance of randomly punctured LDPC codes and rule out the cata- shorter Tanner graph. The differences in block lengths become more

strophic selections. Thus, the proposed idea is also useful for designing significant at higher code rates. Since dedicated LDPC codes can have

randomly punctured LDPC codes.

smaller minimum distances due to shorter block lengths, it is possible

The intentionally punctured LDPC codes are compared with the ran- that dedicated LDPC codes show poorer performances at high Eb=N0

domly punctured ones in Fig. 5. In the comparison, the intentional regions. In Fig. 6, we compare the BER and WER performances of

puncturing outperforms the random puncturing for the rates, where the

performance distinctive at

himigphreorvreamteesn. tAwt ritahteth0e:8paronpdoaseBdEaRlgoofr1it0h0m5b, tehceoimnteesnmtioonre-

ally punctured LDPC code has 3 dB better Eb=N0 performance than

that of the randomly punctured one.

To compare performances of dedicated and the punctured LDPC
codes, we design a regular LDPC code ((x) = x2 and (x) = x9) for rate 0:7 at block length 731. The block length of the dedi-

the dedicated, randomly punctured and intentionally punctured LDPC
codes with code rate 0:7 and block length 731. In the comparisons, the
BER/WER performances are in the order of the dedicated, intentionally
punctured, and the randomly punctured LDPC codes from the best to
the worst. However, at high Eb=N0 regions, there are crossover points
in BER and WER curves of the dedicated and intentionally punctured
LDPC codes due to the smaller block length of the dedicated LDPC
code. Thus, for very low BERs/WER’s, intentionally punctured LDPC

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:10:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2006

735

TABLE III GROUP DISTRIBUTIONS OF THE INTENTIONAL PUNCTURING AND THE THREE DIFFERENT TRIALS OF THE RANDOM PUNCTURING OF A REGULAR LDPC CODE WITH
(x) = x AND (x) = x AT A BLOCK LENGTH OF 4096; THE LARGEST CODE RATE IS 0:8

Fig. 7. Randomly punctured LDPC codes with three different random seeds; the circles, squares and triangles correspond to BERs of Random 1, 2, and 3 in Table III , respectively, and the BERs of the half rate mother code at block length 4096 are represented with the diamonds.

Fig. 8. Histograms of the maximum levels of recoverability; results from 10 000 trials with the regular LDPC codes ((x) = x and (x) = x ) at the block
lengths 1024 (unfilled), 4096 (shaded), and 65536 (filled).

codes provide not only structural advantage of the rate compatibility and a lower complexity of encoders and decoders but also better performances than those of dedicated LDPC codes.

rreaqnudiormedpEunb=ctNur0infogrdaisBtrEibRutoiofn1s0a0re5

noticeably smaller. At has a variation of less

rate 0:8,
than 0.9

the dB

as compared to 2.2 dB in the case of block length 1024. The smaller

The performance variation of random puncturing becomes smaller performance variation can also be predicted by the group distribution

as the block length increases. To see the performance variation with in- in Table III. Thus, locations of punctured parity bits are more important

creasing block lengths, we do the same simulations at a block length of at shorter block lengths.

4096. The group distributions of the intentional and random puncturing To see how the maximum level of recoverability changes with in-

are listed in Table III, where the maximum levels of recoverability are 3 creasing block lengths, we design 10 000 different random puncturing
and at least 11 for intentional and random puncturing, respectively. We distributions for the regular ((x) = x2 and (x) = x5) LDPC evaluate the BER performances of the three randomly punctured LDPC codes at the block lengths of 1024; 4096; and 65536. The levels of

codes in Fig. 7, where the performance variations among the different recoverability are observed by analyzing the group distributions of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:10:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

736

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2006

Fig. 9. Comparison between the intentional (filled) and random (unfilled) puncturing of a regular LDPC code ((x) = x and (x) = x ) at block length 4096; code rates are 0:5; 0:6; 0:7; and 0:8 from the left to the right, and the puncturing distributions are from Intentional and Random 2 in Table III .

Fig. 10. Comparison between the intentional puncturing (filled dots) and random puncturing(unfilled dots); the half rate irregular mother code (leftmost) has a
block length of 1024, and the punctured LDPC codes have rates of 0:6; 0:7; and 0:8 from the left to the right.

the puncturing distributions. Histograms of the maximum levels of
recoverability with the three different block lengths (1024; 4096; and

65536) are compared in Fig. 8, where most of the time, the maximum

level of recoverability is bigger than 10. However, the variations of

the maximum level of recoverability become smaller at the longer

block lengths. In the extreme case when the block length is 65536,

the variation of the maximum level of recoverability is significantly

smaller, where 11 and 12 account for over 99% of the occurrences.

Thus, we confirm that careful selections of punctured bits are more

important at smaller block lengths from a different perspective.

The randomly punctured LDPC codes (Random 2 in Table III)

are compared with Table III) in Fig. 9,

the intentionally
where at rate 0:8

paunndcatuBreEdRoonfes10(0In5t,enthtieoninatlenin-

tionally punctured LDPC code requires 1.6 dB less Eb=N0 than that

of the randomly punctured one.

codes, we design an irregular LDPC mother code with the rate 0.5 whose degree distribution pair is
(x) = 0:28286x + 0:39943x2 + 0:31771x7 and (x) = 0:6x5 + 0:4x6:
A parity-check matrices for the irregular LDPC code at block lengths 1024 and 4096 are designed with Progressive Edge Growth (PEG) algorithm [12] to get a better girth distribution. The mother code is punctured randomly and intentionally based on the proposed algorithms. The group distributions are listed in Table IV, where Random (Intentional) 1024 and 4096 indicate the group distributions of random (intentional) puncturing at block lengths 1024 and 4096, respectively. For fair comparisons, we simulate random puncturing with three different random seeds, then pick the one which has middle performance among them as we did in the regular case. The performances of the randomly and intentionally punctured LDPC codes at block lengths 1024

B. Simulations With Irregular LDPC Codes
The proposed algorithms are also applicable to irregular LDPC codes. To demonstrate the performance of irregular punctured LDPC

and 4096 are evaluated and compared in Figs. 10 and 11, respectively.

Again, the intentionally punctured LDPC codes outperform the ran-

1do0m05ly,

punctured LDPC codes at all the rates. At rate 0:8
the intentionally punctured LDPC codes at block

and a BER of lengths 1024

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:10:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2006

737

Fig. 11. Comparison between the intentional puncturing (filled dots) and random puncturing(unfilled dots); the half rate irregular mother code (leftmost) has a
block length of 4096, and the punctured LDPC codes have rates of 0:6; 0:7; and 0:8 from the left to the right.
TABLE IV GROUP DISTRIBUTIONS OF THE INTENTIONAL PUNCTURING AND THE THREE DIFFERENT TRIALS OF THE RANDOM PUNCTURING OF AN IRREGULAR LDPC CODE
WITH (x) = 0:28286x + 0:39943x + 0:31771x AND (x) = 0:6x + 0:4x AT A BLOCK LENGTH OF 1024

and 4096 have 1.25- and 0.8-dB Eb=N0 improvements over those of poor performance. In the conventional design rule of randomly punc-

the randomly punctured ones, respectively.

tured LDPC codes, the performance variation can be evaluated with

time-consuming computer simulations. However, by analyzing group

V. CONCLUSION

distributions of a random puncturing distributions, we predict their BER performances in a much faster way. The performance variations

We propose the grouping and sorting algorithms to design rate-com-

patible punctured LDPC codes at small block lengths. The algorithms

are based on the claim that a punctured LDPC code with a smaller level

of recoverability has better performance. We mathematically explain

why the proposed algorithms provide us with better punctured LDPC

codes by introducing the concepts of recovery tree and recovery error

probability.

The proposed algorithms are verified by comparing performance of

punctured LDPC codes based on the algorithm (called intentionally

punctured LDPC codes) with randomly punctured LDPC codes. The

intentionally punctured LDPC codes show better BER performances at

relatively small block lengths (1024 and 4096), where the performance

improvement is more distinctive at smaller block lengths. In the caseof

the regular code with block length 1024, the intentionally punctured

pLuDnPcCturheadso3nedBfobr eattBeEr REbo=fN 1000p5eraftocromdaenrcaeteth0a:n8.tFhoatr

of the randomly the longer block

length 4096, the intentionally punctured LDPC code outperforms the

1ra0n0d5o.mTlhyapt iusn,cthtueriemdpLrDovPeCmecnotdbeebcyom1.e6s

dB at rate 0:8 and a BER of smaller but is still significant.

Another important observation is the performance variation of ran-

become smaller at larger block lengths, which is verified by evaluating histograms of the maximum levels of recoverability at three different block lengths, 1024; 4096; and 65536. In the case that we have to use random puncturing, the analysis under the framework of the grouping algorithm gives us a good random puncturing distribution.
We also show that the sorting algorithm can be applied for random puncturing. A random puncturing distribution tells the locations of parities to be punctured but the distribution does not say in which order the parities should be punctured. Although performance at the highest code rate is determined by the maximum level of recoverability, the performances of punctured LDPC codes at intermediate code rates from that of the mother code to the highest code rate depend on the order in which the parities are punctured.
Finally, we apply the proposed algorithm to irregular LDPC codes at block lengths 1024 and 4096. The performance improvements of the intentionally punctured LDPC codes are 1.25 dB for block length
c1o0d2e4saantdc0o.d8edrBatfeor0b:8loacnkdleanBgtEhR40o9f61o0v0e5r.randomly punctured LDPC
REFERENCES

domly punctured LDPC codes. Especially, at small block lengths, the variation becomes unacceptable. In our simulations, we observed 2.2 dB performance difference between the best and the worst randomly punctured LDPC codes. Random puncturing makes it possible to puncture a significant amount of parities in a stopping set, which results in

[1] J. Hagenauer, “Rate-compatible punctured convolutional codes (RCPC codes) and their applications,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 389–400, Apr. 1988.
[2] J. Ha, J. Kim, and S. W. McLaughlin, “Rate-compatible puncturing of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-50, no. 11, pp. 2824–2836, Nov. 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:10:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

738

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2006

[3] J. Li and K. Narayanan, “Rate-compatible low density parity check

codes for capacity-approaching ARQ scheme in packet data communi-

cations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Communications, Internet, and Information

Technology (CIIT), U.S. Virgin Islands, Nov. 2002, pp. 201–206.

[4] J. Ha and S. W. McLaughlin, “Optimal puncturing distributions for rate-

compatible low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Infor-

mation Theory, Yokohama, Japan, Jun./Jul. 2003, p. 233.

[5]

, “Optimal puncturing of irregular low-density parity-check codes,”

in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, Anchorage, AK, May 2003,

pp. 3110–3114.

[6] M. R. Yazdani and A. H. Banihashemi, “On construction of rate-com-

patible low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8,

no. 3, pp. 159–161, Mar. 2004.

[7] C. Di, D. Proietti, I˙. E. Telatar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke,

“Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary

erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579,

Jun. 2002.

[8] T. Tian, C. Jones, and J. D. Villasenor, “Rate-compatible low-density

parity-check codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Information Theory, Chicago,

IL, Jun./Jul. 2004, p. 152.

[9] M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE

Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.

[10] D. Klinc, “Rate-compatible punctured LDPC codes: Design and appli-

cability for the ultra wide-band standard,” Master’s thesis, Technische

Univ. München, München, Germany, Sep. 2004.

[11] S.-Y. Chung, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Analysis of sum-

product decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian

approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 657–670,

Feb. 2001.

[12] X. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Progressive edge-growth

Tanner graphs,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, San Antonio, TX, Nov.

2001, pp. 995–1001.

perfect nonlinear (APN) functions or m-sequences, but has not yet
been comprehensively studied for bent functions. This approach turns out to be very fruitful for several reasons. The only known nonnormal bent functions are monomial bent functions (see [2], [3], [5]), demonstrating that the study of monomial functions leads to new classes of bent functions. Furthermore one result of our considerations is, that for each of the well studied families of bent function, there is a monomial bent function belonging to these classes. Moreover, carefully studying the proofs for the monomial bent functions all these families can quite easily be rediscovered. In this sense most of the variety of (at least known) bent functions can already be discovered by the investigation of monomial functions.
We first recall all the known cases of monomial bent functions. In the case of the Dillon–Dobbertin monomial bent function we sketch an algorithmic approach to study the dual of these bent functions.
As one of our main results in this correspondence we present a new class of monomial bent functions, not corresponding to one of the known monomial bent functions. This class was found with the help of computer experiments by Canteaut, who first conjectured that the concrete examples found belong to the new class (see [1]). This exponent actually leads to functions belonging to the Maiorana– McFarland class of bent functions.

A. Preliminaries

Throughout the correspondence let n = 2k be an even integer.

! Given a Boolean function f :

n 2

2, the function

a2

!7n
2

f W (a) =

0( 1)f (x)+ha;xi

x2

Monomial Bent Functions Nils Gregor Leander

Abstract—In this correspondence, we focus on bent functions of the form

where

Tr( ). The main contribution of this cor-

respondence is, that we prove that for = 4 , odd, the exponent

= (2 + 1) allows the construction of bent functions. This open ques-

tion has been posed by Canteaut based on computer experiments. As a con-

sequence for each of the well understood families of bent functions, we now

know an exponent that yields to bent functions of the given type.

Index Terms—Bent functions, Boolean functions, monomial Boolean functions, power functions, trace expansion.

I. INTRODUCTION
A complete classification of bent functions is elusive and looks hopeless today. As a first step toward a characterization of all bent functions, we focus on traces of power functions, so called monomial Boolean functions. This approach is well known in related areas like almost

Manuscript received June 15, 2005; revised November 5, 2005. The material in this correspondence was presented in part at the Workshop on Coding and Cryptography (WCC 2005), Bergen, Norway, March 2005.
The author is with the Ruhr-University Bochum, D-44780 Bochum, Germany (e-mail: leander@cits.rub.de).
Communicated by T. Johansson, Associate Editor for Complexity and Cryptography.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2005.862121

2 is called the Walsh transform of f . Moreover, the values f W (a), a

n 2

are

called

the

Walsh

coefficients

of

f.

A measure of the linearity of a Boolean function f with respect to

the Walsh transform is defined by

Lin(f ) = max f W (a) :
a2

For n even, f is called bent if Lin(f) = 2n=2, which is the minimal

6 2 value that can occur and we then have f W (a) = 2n=2 for all a

n 2

,

since

f W (a)2 = 22n (Parseval's equation):
a2

Bent functions always occur in pairs. In fact, given a bent function

! f :

n 2

n 2

,

we

define

the

dual

f3

of

f

by

0 f a : ( 1)f (a) 2n=2 = W ( )

In other words, we consider the signs of the Walsh-coefficients of f .
Due to the involution law the Fourier transform is self-inverse. Thus the dual of a bent function is again a bent function, and we have the
rule f 33 = f .
We recall some well know families of bent functions. The class of Maiorana–McFarland consists of bent functions of the form

2 ! f :

k 2

k 2

2

f(x; y) = hx; (y)i + h(y)

! ! where  :

k 2

k 2

is

a

permutation

and

h

:

k 2

2 is an arbitrary

function. A special case of Maiorana–McFarland bent functions are the

quadratic bent functions.

0018-9448/$20.00 © 2006 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:10:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

