226

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 42, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2006

Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) for Iterative
Code Evaluation
Lingyan Sun1, Hongwei Song2, Zak Keirn2, and B. V. K. Vijaya Kumar1
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA Read Channel Group, Agere Systems, Longmont, CO 80503 USA
Iterative codes such as low density parity check (LDPC) codes and turbo product codes (TPC) are of interest for data storage applications. To apply these codes to digital recording systems, two possible schemes are considered in this paper. In the first scheme, a single
LDPC code of column weight 2 is used to replace the Reed–Solomon (RS) code of the conventional channel. In the second scheme,
an iterative code is used as the inner code and is concatenated with an outer RS code. Single parity check TPC code is considered for this scheme. We developed a high-throughput field programmable gate array (FPGA) platform to evaluate the error floor performance
of LDPC codes and the error statistics of TPC codes in partial response (PR) channel with turbo equalization. High rate codes (rate 8 9
for LDPC code and rate 0.935 for TPC code) are evaluated for magnetic recoding application. The bit error rate (BER) performance
of LDPC code down to 10 10 can be reached within 2 h using the FPGA platform. The TPC code error statistics are evaluated using about 1011 bits at different signal-to-noise (SNR) levels. For practical implementation complexity and power consumption, 2 channel
iterations and 2 TPC decoder iterations are employed. The results show that the gain by applying TPC code under 2 channel iterations and 2 TPC decoder iterations is marginal.
Index Terms—Error statistics, FPGA, iterative decoding, LDPC, TPC.

I. INTRODUCTION

I TERATIVE soft decoding using low density parity check codes (LDPC) [1] or turbo product code (TPC) are of

interest for data storage applications [2]. The iterative soft

decoding scheme is suitable for parallel processing leading

to potential high throughput. Coding gain up to 5 dB at bit

error rate (BER) around has been reported in simulations

employing LDPC or TPC in a partial response maximum like-

lihood (PRML) channel compared to uncoded PRML channel.

To apply these codes to data storage systems, two possible

schemes are considered in this paper. In the first scheme, a

single LDPC code of column weight

is used to replace

the Reed–Solomon (RS) code of the conventional channel.

The major concern is that the LDPC code may suffer an unac-

ceptable high error floor. The difficulty in theoretical analysis

of iterative decoding scheme and low speed of C simulations

hinder the performance investigation at the desired very low

BER levels. As a result, the performance of iterative soft de-

coding at very low BERs is still an open question. In the second

scheme, an iterative code is used as inner code in conjunction

with an outer RS code. In this scheme, we are concerned with

the decoding performance at the outer RS code or the error sta-

tistics at the output of the soft decoder. In current data storage

industry, TPC code has attracted great interest because of its

simple encoding and decoding scheme. Compared to LDPC

codes with larger column weights, TPC codes demonstrate

better error distributions and are suitable for the second scheme

we considered. Although computer simulations have shown

that TPC codes exhibit error statistics compatible with outer

RS codes [2], hardware platforms such as FPGA simulator are

needed to verify the coding gain of concatenating TPC codes

with RS code in recording systems.

Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2005.861744

To investigate the performance of iterative codes for

recording channels, the conventional approach is via C simula-

tions. For enough confidence in BER estimates at

, about

bits need to be evaluated. For bits to be simulated,

it usually takes months to finish the simulation with optimized

C code on a 2 GHz computer. The main operations are in the

soft channel detector and LDPC encoding and decoding. The

number of operations required for channel detector is propor-

tional to the number of states and trace back depth. We assume

that the soft channel detector has 16 states with trace back depth

of 25 and 2 channel iterations are applied. We also assume 3

operations per state at each trace back step and 3 clock cycles

for each operation (considering the memory read/write). Thus

clock cycles are needed for one bit

calculation. Even with full bandwidth of 2 GHz, we need more

than one month to finish the calculation for bits without

considering other operations in LDPC encoding and decoding.

Because of the slowness of C simulations, other platforms are

investigated. Application specific integrated circuits (ASICs)

provide the highest speed. However, the high cost of ASIC de-

sign makes this approach prohibitive. The other problem associ-

ated with ASIC approach is the long design period and that it is

not reconfigurable. As a compromise between C and ASIC, field

programmable gate arrays (FPGA) provide a good balance. Be-

cause of its ability to offer full parallelism, lower cost than ASIC

and programmability, FPGA is selected for our task. Compared

to C simulations, the main challenge associated with the FPGA

design is to make the design as flexible in parameters as pos-

sible, small enough to meet the resource constraints with opti-

mization in speed.

In this paper, we will describe our FPGA platform for perfor-

mance evaluation of both iterative coding schemes and provide

the evaluation results.

We describe the FPGA platform and its major components in

Section II. In Section III, we present the error floor evaluation

0018-9464/$20.00 © 2006 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:11:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SUN et al.: FIELD PROGRAMMABLE GATE ARRAY (FPGA) FOR ITERATIVE CODE EVALUATION

227

Fig. 1. Block diagram of the FPGA simulator.

Fig. 3. Encoder for the TPC code.

After the encoder, a first-in-first-out (FIFO) buffer is used to

store the binary sequence for the next block. The advantage of

using a FIFO is high throughput as we do not need to wait for

the next block to finish encoding. A random interleaver takes the

output from the FIFO, interleaves the data sequence and sends

them to the precorder block. Proper precoding combined with

random interleaving can improve the code distance spectrum

for TPC code and good performance has been demonstrated

Fig. 2. Basic element for the DDS-LDPC encoder.

[2]. In this simulation, an ideal EPR4 channel with additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) is assumed. The AWGN gener-

results for several LDPC codes using the FPGA simulator. In Section IV, we show the TPC code error statistic evaluation. We conclude the paper in Section V.

ator operates based on the Box-Muller Transform. The EPR4 channel is basically a convolution operation between the binary data and the ideal PR target. The synthesizing speed for the AWGN generation is 100 MHz with throughput of 100 M

II. FPGA SIMULATOR

samples per second. The output of the channel is sent to a soft channel detector.

The FPGA simulator used Xilinx Vertex II 6000 as the sim- There are different algorithms for soft channel detector and

ulation platform and a PC as the user interface with Matlab 6.5 they offer different tradeoffs between complexity and perfor-

and C programs for sending and receiving data from the FPGA. mance. The optimum detector is the BCJR algorithm [3], but it

The communication between the PC and the FPGA is through suffers from high complexity. Simpler algorithms are the Max-

the PCI interface with a clock speed of 33.33 MHz. Commands Log-Map [4] and the Log-Map algorithm [5]. In [6], the soft

are sent from the PC through the PCI to the FPGA to start the output Viterbi algorithm (SOVA) that outputs soft information

simulation, stop the simulation and set the simulation conditions is presented. There are different ways to implement the SOVA

such as the SNR level, number of errors to collect or number of algorithm. The original SOVA algorithm in [6] has high com-

blocks to simulate. The FPGA simulator architecture is shown plexity. In [7] the SOVA algorithm is simplified to the two-step

in Fig. 1.

SOVA by first finding the maximum likelihood path and then

The first block in the simulator is a random sequence gener- tracing back along the maximum likelihood path. In [8], a bidi-

ator (RDG). Pseudorandom data sequence is generated in this rectional SOVA algorithm is described to improve the perfor-

block with period of

(approximately ), which is mance of SOVA. The hard decision performances of difference

sufficient as the maximum number of bits we want to run using detectors are very similar. For the soft information comparison,

the simulator is about .

the detectors are connected with an LDPC decoder. The hard

The output of RDG is sent to an error correction code en- decisions from LDPC decoder at 10th iteration are compared in

coder (ENC). The output of ENC is the codeword of the LDPC Fig. 4. From Fig. 4, we can see that for the soft decision per-

or TPC code under simulation. The encoder of LDPC or TPC formance, the MAP and Log-Map exhibit the best performance

code is easier to design compared to the decoder. Code specific and next best are the bidirectional SOVA and the Max-Log-Map.

encoders are used in the simulator. As an example, Fig. 2 shows The difference between the two-step SOVA and the MAP is

the basic element for the systematic encoder for disjoint differ- about 0.2 dB at a BER of 10 . As bidirectional SOVA offers

ence set (DDS) LDPC code with odd bit node degree. For DDS better performance compared to the two-step SOVA with lower

code with odd row weight, the generator matrix can be put in complexity than the Max-Log-Map, we implemented the bi-di-

the quasicyclic format. Simple shifter register and XOR trees rectional SOVA on the FPGA. The parameters including the bit

can be used to perform the encoding. For real time operation, width, the PR target, and the path memory length are all re-

parallelism can be applied to build the final encoder circuit. The configurable for performance evaluation. The main problem in

TPC encoder structure is shown in Fig. 3. It also uses the shift the implementation of trellis-based soft channel detectors is the

registers and the XOR arrays.

throughput bottleneck. It can be reduced by using unfolding and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:11:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

228

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 42, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2006

TABLE I LOGIC CONSUMPTION

LDPC structures, a parameterized interconnection unit helps to

change the design to different implementation structure. The

Fig. 4. Soft channel detector performance comparisons.

decoder is suitable for any LDPC codes whose H matrix can be partitioned into small submatrices of regular structure (same

row weight, and same column weight within the submatrix). The

decoder also contains a syndrome calculation unit and the de-

coding stops (to increase the throughput) when the syndrome

check is satisfied.

The LDPC decoder can work at very high speed because of

the parallelism employed. For example, for array based LDPC

code with block length 4617, rate , column weight 3, the

decoder can provide a throughput of 2.7 Gbps/iteration.

Fig. 5. LDPC decoder architecture.

The extrinsic LLR from the LDPC decoder is fed back to the SOVA detector for the next channel iteration and hard decisions

retiming techniques [9]. The SOVA implementation for EPR4 channel can deliver a throughput of 200 Mbps.
The most challenging part of the simulator is the LDPC decoder. For general iterative code evaluation, a good FPGA based decoder design should exhibit the following.

from the LDPC decoder are passed to the error location and error distribution units for error analysis. In the error location units, the location of the error is determined and saved. In the error distribution unit, the number of symbol errors (10 bits/symbol) is determined and saved in the memory. At the end of the simulation, the error locations, error distributions and the bit error

• Fully parameterized design for evaluation of different numbers are all sent to the PC through the PCI interface.

codes. • High throughput to reach low BER region. • Small size to fit in a single chip. • Low power consumption for high speed and long running
time. Design and implementation of various types of LDPC decoders have been reported in the literature [10]–[13]. However, their code specific designs make them difficult for reconfiguration and not suitable for general purpose. For our evaluation, a generalized decoder with reconfigurable structure is required.

The entire simulator is written in VHDL, simulated using the NCSIM. The synthesis, mapping, placement and routing are performed using Xilinx ISE 6.0.
In Table I, we show the logic consumption for the simulator for one configuration set: EPR4 channel, 7 bits for SOVA with depth 32, 6 bits for the decoder, TPC code with 30 rows and 32 columns and random interleaver with length 960. As we reuse the same piece of the hardware for different iterations, the iteration number has no influence on the resource consumption.

The decoder is general in the sense that a broad class of structured LDPC codes can fit in the decoder. The whole design is parameterized in terms of the codeword length, block size, bit width, H matrix structure, etc. in a configuration file. In this paper, six bits are used for the messages passed between bit nodes and check nodes as well as the initial soft information from channel detector with format of 4:2. The CAD tools take the parameterized design, compile, synthesize and map to a netlist file for a specific LDPC code. The decoder architecture is shown in Fig. 5. It includes a memory block to save the initial log-likelihood ratio (LLR), a bit node calculation unit (Bn-

III. LDPC CODE ERROR FLOOR
Using the simulator developed, we evaluated different types of LDPC codes such as DDS LDPC codes and array codes with different column weights.
The evaluation procedure is as follows. First, the LDPC code parameters such as column weight, row weight, code structure and code length are determined and passed as the input to a C program. The program uses those parameters to generate the configuration file for the simulator. The simulation parameters are set in one configuration file of the simulator. The CAD tools

odes), a check node calculation unit (Cnodes), an edge memory then generate the configuration files for the FPGA chip. The file

(Edges) and the corresponding address controller. For different is downloaded to the FPGA chip and the Matlab program sends

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:11:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SUN et al.: FIELD PROGRAMMABLE GATE ARRAY (FPGA) FOR ITERATIVE CODE EVALUATION

229

Fig. 6. DDS j = 3; 4 and 5 code in AWGN.

Fig. 8. Array j = 3; 4 and 5 code in AWGN.

Fig. 9. Array j = 3 code in EPR4.

Fig. 7. DDS j = 5 code in EPR4.

we show the FPGA results for array code with

, block

length 4671 and rate 8/9 (in EPR4 channel with 2 channel itera-

the command to start the simulation. By pooling the status flag

of the simulation, the end of the simulation flag is sensed at the

PC side. Once the simulation is finished, the needed results can

be logged out from the FPGA.

Fig. 6 shows the FPGA performance results for DDS LDPC

codes with column weights

and , block length 4923,

tions and 25 LDPC decoder iterations. As before, we compared the EPR4 result with the AWGN channel results.
Though we only show the performance for DDS LDPC codes and array codes, the FPGA simulator is developed to evaluate a general class of LDPC codes with parity check matrix described in Section II.

code rate in AWGN channel. The decoder runs up to 50 iterations, though only the BER (in solid lines) and block error

IV. TPC CODE ERROR STATISTICS

rate (BLER) (in dash lines) for the last iteration are plotted. As TPC codes have been of great interest to the data storage in-

we can see, increasing the column weight can lower the error dustry. As shown in Fig. 3, only shift registers and XORs are

floor but degrade the performance in the waterfall region. In required for TPC encoder.

Fig. 7, we show the FPGA for DDS

, block length 4923, One sector in a hard disk drive typically contains about 5000

code rate LDPC code for ideal EPR4 channel with 2 channel bits. We create a TPC code that maps 899 user bits (29 rows

iterations and 25 LDPC decoder iterations. The error floor down and 31 columns) to 960 bits (30 rows and 32 columns, rate

to

is shown. The difference between AWGN channel and 0.935), and group 5 codewords together to form a sector with

PR channel performance for the same LDPC code is about 2 dB. 4800 bits. The interleaving is done within each codeword from

In Fig. 8, we present the FPGA performance results for array practical consideration and a random interleaver is used. The

codes with column weights

and , and rate in symbol error distribution for each sector is logged after the sim-

AWGN after 50 LDPC iterations. We plot the BER and block ulation. To see the performance gain, the error statistics after the

error rate (BLER). The BER down to

is shown. In Fig. 9, SOVA in the first channel iteration are also logged and compared

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:11:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

230

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 42, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2006

Fig. 10. BER for the TPC coded ideal EPR4 channel.

Fig. 12. Symbol error distribution for TPC coded ideal EPR4 channel with and without 1=(1 + D ) precoder at 7 dB.

of sectors that contain that number of symbol errors (sectors

containing that number of symbol error/total sectors). For each

curve in all the following graphs, bit are evaluated. The ob-

servations are made after SOVA and after TPC decoder at each

channel iteration to show the symbol error distribution improve-

ment over channel iterations. At symbol error level 20, the gap

between the SOVA and the last TPC decoder output is about 10.

One fair comparison between TPC coded EPR4 system and un-

coded system is to keep the overall redundancy same. Given that

TPC codes have 305 total parity bits for each sector, the RS code

for uncoded system has 305 more parity bits than the RS code

for TPC coded channel (assuming the RS codes exist for the

ease of comparison). It can be seen from Fig. 11 that the coding

gain provided by the TPC code is not adequate to compensate

the redundancy loss for its RS code. Therefore, the concatenated Fig. 11. Symbol error distribution for TPC coded ideal EPR4 channel at 7 dB. coding scheme does not provide coding gain for the ideal EPR4

channel.

with the TPC decoder output. Considering the practical system The effect of precoding is also simulated with the FPGA

throughput or resource constraint, only 2 channel iterations are simulator. We group 5 TPC codewords together and collect

used. In all the simulations that follow, ideal EPR4 channel is the symbol error locations for each sector with 4800 bits. In

used.

simulation,

precoding does not improve the BER

In Fig. 10, we show the BER after TPC decoder with 2 while

precoding gives better performance for EPR4

channel iterations and 2 TPC iterations. Random intereleaver channel. Here we show the

precoder influence on

is used without precoding. The results are after the first SOVA the performance of TPC code in EPR4 channel.

iteration, after the TPC decoding, after second SOVA iteration In Fig. 12, we show the symbol error distribution of the TPC

and after second TPC iteration. More than 2 dB gain over code after applying precoding at 7 dB. The three curves are the

SOVA detector at BER of 10 is observed when applying SOVA-only case and TPC with and without precoding. As we

TPC decoding and turbo equalization.

can see, by adding the precoder to the simulator, the symbol

Compared to the LDPC code with larger column weights, error distribution is more amenable for TPC code to be con-

TPC codes exhibit high error floor and therefore are not suit- catenated with RS code. The gap between SOVA and the TPC

able to replace the RS code. However, as shown in [2], TPC decoding output increases to about 15 at symbol error level 20.

codes demonstrate better symbol error distribution, which sug- However, as we need to left adjust SOVA by 15 symbols to ac-

gest concatenation with an outer RS code. Knowing the bit error count for the 305 TPC parity bits, there is no gain in this case too.

or byte error rate is not adequate to evaluate the post-RS code In Fig. 13, we show the result after precoding at SNR from 7 dB

performance. Symbol error locations directly affects the overall to 9 dB. Again, the SOVA only case is shown for performance

system performance. In Fig. 11, we show the symbol error dis- comparison with TPC with precoding after 2 channel iterations

tribution after 2 TPC iterations and 2 channel iterations with and 2 TPC iterations. As we observed, even with the precoding,

SNR at 7 dB. The axis denotes the number of symbol in error there is no gain or the gain is marginal by applying the TPC code

per sector and the y axis represents the occurring probability after SOVA at SNR 7 9 dB.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:11:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SUN et al.: FIELD PROGRAMMABLE GATE ARRAY (FPGA) FOR ITERATIVE CODE EVALUATION

231

REFERENCES

Fig. 13. Symbol error distribution for TPC coded ideal EPR4 channel with 1=(1 + D ) precoder.
V. CONCLUSION
An FPGA platform has been developed to evaluate the performance of iterative codes for partial response channels. With the FPGA simulator, we are able to demonstrate error floor of LDPC codes at BER around 10 within 2 h [14]. Performance of an inner TPC code concatenated with an outer RS code for EPR4 channel with and without precoding is also evaluated using the byte error distribution simulated with the FPGA platform. Though iterative decoding of TPC code shows significant BER improvement over uncoded EPR4 channel, concatenation of TPC code with a RS code does not provide coding gain over a single RS code with the same overall redundancy for the ideal EPR4 channel.

[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] H. Song, “Iterative soft detection and decoding for data storage channels,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. ECE, Carnegie Mellon Univ., Pittsburgh, PA, Dec. 2002.
[3] L. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-20, no. 2, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[4] W. Koch and A. Baier, “Optimum and sub-optimum detection of coded data disturbed by time-varying inter-symbol interference,” in IEEE Globecom, Dec. 1990, pp. 1679–1684.
[5] P. Robertson, E. Villebrun, and P. Hoeher, “A comparison of optimal and sub-optimal MAP decoding algorithms operating in the log domain,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Communications, Jun. 1995, pp. 1009–1013.
[6] J. Hagenauer and P. Hoeher, “A Viterbi algorithm with soft-decision outputsand its applications,” in Proc. Global Communications, 1989, pp. 1680–1686.
[7] C. Berrou, P. Adde, E. Angui, and S. Faudeil, “A low complexity softoutputviterbi decoder architecture,” in IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, vol. 2, May 1993, pp. 737–740.
[8] B. Vucetic and J. Yuan, Tubo Codes: Principles and Applications. Norwell, MA: Kluwer, 2000, pp. 126–137. ISBN0 792 378 687.
[9] K. K. Parhi, VLSI Digital Signal Processing Systems: Design and Implementation. New York: Wiley, Dec. 1998. ISBN: 0-471-24186-5.
[10] C. Howland and A. Blanksby, “Parallel decoding architectures for low density parity check codes,” in 2001 IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits and Systems, vol. 4, pp. 742–745.
[11] , “690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412A, Mar. 2002.
[12] T. Zhang and K. K. Parhi, “A 54 Mbps (3, 6)-regular FPGA LDPC decoder,” in IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems, Oct. 2002, pp. 127–132.
[13] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “Low-power VLSI decoder architectures for LDPC codes,” in Proc. 2002 Int. Symp. Low Power Electronics and Design, 2002, pp. 284–289.
[14] W. Tan and J. R. Cruz, “Array codes for erasure correction in magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 2579–2581, Sep. 2003.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The research performed at the Data Storage Systems Center (DSSC), Carnegie Mellon University was supported in part by Imation and by StorageTek.

Manuscript received June 9, 2005 (e-mail: lsun@ece.cmu.edu).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:11:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

