208

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 42, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2006

Structured LDPC Codes for High-Density Recording:
Large Girth and Low Error Floor
J. Lu and J. M. F. Moura
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA 15213–3890 USA
High-rate low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are the focus of intense research in magnetic recording because, when decoded by the iterative sum-product algorithm, they show decoding performance close to the Shannon capacity. However, cycles, especially short cycles, are harmful to LDPC codes. The paper describes the partition-and-shift LDPC (PS-LDPC) codes, a new class of regular, structured LDPC codes that can be designed with large girth and arbitrary large minimum distance. Large girth leads to more efficient iterative decoding and codes with better error-floor properties than random LDPC codes. PS-LDPC codes can be designed for any desired column weight and with flexible code rates. The paper details the girth and distance properties of the codes and their systematic construction and presents analytical and simulation performance results that show that, in the high signal-to-noise ratio region, PS-LDPC codes outperform random codes, alleviating the error floor phenomenon.
Index Terms—Girth, LDPC code.

I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK (LDPC) codes [1] can be described by their corresponding Tanner graphs [2]. The length of the shortest cycle in a Tanner graph is referred to as girth of the graph. Tanner graphs with large girth are particularly desirable due to the following two reasons. In LDPC decoding, the sum-product algorithm yields its optimal a posteriori probability solution only for the first iterations [1]. In successive iterations, short cycles in the Tanner graph tax the computing effort of the decoding algorithm and prevent it from converging to the optimal decoding result [3]. Hence, the larger the girth , the more the optimal decoding iterations. A second reason for designing LDPC codes with large girth relates to the minimum distance of the code. Tanner [2] derives a lower bound on the minimum distance ; this lower bound increases exponentially with the girth of the code. Therefore, LDPC codes with large girth imply good codes.
Among different types of LDPC codes, cyclic and quasi-cyclic LDPC codes are promising in applications since they have low-complexity encoding and decoding algorithms and simplify hardware implementation. Typical work includes finite-geometry codes [4], BIBD codes [5], algebraic construction [6], Fossorier’s work [7], etc. For more literature on cyclic and quasi-cyclic codes, refer to [8], [9]. However, Fossorier [7] proved that the girth of cyclic and quasi-cyclic codes whose parity-check matrix has no zero blocks is at most 12. Hence, the girth of such codes will not follow the log relationship
, [1], where is the column weight, is the row weight, and is the code block length. By the above analysis, cyclic and quasi-cyclic codes perform poorly at very long code block lengths. Their small girths limit their applications when very long codes are desired.
As far as we know, designing regular structured LDPC codes with arbitrary large girth and flexible code rates is still an interesting problem not yet solved. We solve this problem
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2005.861748

by proposing a novel type of structured LDPC codes—partition-and-shift LDPC (PS-LDPC) codes that facilitates the systematic design of LDPC codes with arbitrary large girth, arbitrary column weight, and flexible code rates.

II. LDPC CODES: PARTITION-AND-SHIFT DESIGNS

We construct an LDPC code from its Tanner graph. Let be

the set containing all check nodes and the set containing

all bit nodes. Partition into disjoint subsets of the same

size provided that

. Similarly, partition

into disjoint subsets of the same size provided that

. We require that

and

where and

are the degrees of the bit nodes and check nodes, respectively.

Elements in each subset are indexed from 0 to

. We also

index the subsets in from 1 to and the subsets in from 1

to . We name the parameter the cardinality of each subset.

We say a check node subset is connected to a bit node

subset if:

1) each of the check nodes in is connected to a bit node in ;
2) different check nodes in are connected to different bit nodes in .
Hence, the connection between two subsets sets up a one to one relationship between nodes of the two subsets. To construct a regular LDPC code with uniform check node degree and bit node degree , we let each check node subset connect to bit node subsets and each bit node subset connect to check node subsets. We further enforce the following constraint: Every check node, indexed by in the th check node subset is connected to the bit node indexed by in the th bit node subset,

where

where

and rep-

resents modulo- addition. We call LDPC codes defined in this

way partition-and-shift LDPC (PS-LDPC) codes. Fig. 1 shows

the Tanner graph for a PS-LDPC code. There are six subsets of

bit nodes that a check node can be connected to but each check

node is connected to only three of them.

The parameters

, in

the above definition are called shifts. Check nodes in the same

subset of check nodes are connected to bit nodes in the same

0018-9464/$20.00 © 2006 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:08:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LU AND MOURA: STRUCTURED LDPC CODES FOR HIGH-DENSITY RECORDING

209

Fig. 1. Tanner graph for a PS-LDPC code.

subset of bit nodes by using the same shift . We collect

all the shifts in an

matrix called the shift ma-

trix

. The th row of stores those shifts associ-

ated with the th subset of check nodes; the th column of

stores those shifts associated with the th subset of bit nodes.

Hence, the entry in row and column in is the shift

that determines how to connect the th check node subset to the

th bit node subset. If there is no connection between the th

check node subset and the th bit node subset, we represent the

corresponding entry by “ ” on the shift matrix . Since each

check node subset is only connected to bit node subsets and

there are totally check node subsets, there exist only

non-“ ” shifts. For example, (1) shows the shift matrix that

corresponds to the Tanner graph shown in Fig. 1:

Fig. 2. Top: Closed path in S. Bottom: A 6-cycle in the Tanner graph.

If a -cycle exists in the Tanner graph, it can be represented

by a vertex sequence

where the first and

the last vertices are the same. Without loss of generality, as-

sume is a check node with index . Then, by this choice,

, are check nodes and

,

are bit nodes.

Let

represent the index for the vertex

. By our code construction, there exists shift

and

such that

(2)

(1)

(3)

Particularly, we have

Code rate By the above construction, there are no limitations on

the column weight and row weight of a PS-LDPC code. We

can design PS-LDPC codes with arbitrary column weight and

row weight . For a regular code, the code rate

if

we omit a few linearly dependent parity-check equations. There-

fore, we can generate PS-LDPC codes with any desired code

rate by tuning the values of and . for example, if a

and column-weight-3 PS-LDPC code is desired, set

and

.

(4) Summing the above equations and cancelling the terms that appear on both sides of the equation, we have
(5) hence
(6)

III. PS-LDPC CODES: CYCLES AND SHIFTS

Since our goal is to eliminate short cycles that are harmful to

LDPC decoding, we first relate cycles in the Tanner graphs of

PS-LDPC codes to closed paths in the shift matrix .

Theorem 1 (2t-CYCLE): The Tanner graph for a PS-LDPC

code does NOT contain -cycles if and only if any

closed path of length in the shift matrix with

corners

violates the Cycle Condition

In addition, we observe that the shifts

associated with the -cycle are actually consecutive corners

of a closed path of length in the shift matrix . For ex-

ample, Fig. 2 on the bottom shows a 6-cycle. Its six associated

shifts

, , and are the six corners of

a closed path of length 6 (bold line) in , as shown on the top

in Fig. 2. According to the above observation and (6), we con-

clude that there must exist a closed path in whose corners

satisfy the Cycle Condition in the

( represents modulo- subtraction).
Proof: if: We prove an equivalent proposition of the if part:

Theorem. only if The only if part can be similarly proved. The details
are omitted here. This completes the proof.

If there exists a -cycle in the Tanner graph, there must exist a closed path in the corresponding shift matrix whose corners

IV. GIRTH BOUND

satisfy the Cycle Condition in the Theorem 1 presents the Cycle Condition to prevent -cycles.

Theorem.

However, Theorem 1 does not tell us whether or not we can

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:08:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

210

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 42, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2006

actually find a shift matrix where all closed paths of length Summing inequalities (8) and (9) together, we have violate the Cycle Condition. The answer to the above question is addressed in this section in Theorems 2 and 3.

A. Upper Bound on Girth

Theorem 2: Every PS-LDPC code constructed from a shift

matrix has girth

where and are any two arbitrary closed paths in and

.

Proof: Let

and

,

be two closed paths in that share cor-

ners

. Consider the closed path

represented by the following corner sequence

where the corner

sequences

and We compute the summation

, . The length of is
.

(7)

for all the corners of . We notice that each distinct shift

appears exactly twice in (7) with different plus and minus signs.

For example,

is contained both in and . When

is even, the

contained by is with the minus sign

in (7) and the

contained by is with the plus sign

in (7). Hence, the summation (7) is always zero regardless of the

choice of the shifts in , which means the Cycle Condition in

Theorem 1 is satisfied for any possible choice of the shifts in .

By Theorem 1, we derive that there must exist a cycle of length

in the Tanner graph. Therefore, the girth of the Tanner

graph is less than or equal to

. This completes the proof.

B. Achieving the Girth Bound

We will show next that the upper bound on girth in

Theorem 2 is achievable.

Theorem 3: We can construct PS-LDPC codes with any girth

based on a

shift matrix where and denote two arbitrary closed

paths in and

.

Proof: The proof is given in Appendix A.

By Theorem 3, we derive the following Corollary.

Corollary 1: We can construct PS-LDPC codes with any de-

sired girth

from a small PS-LDPC code with girth .

Proof: Represent the parity-check matrix of the girth

PS-LDPC code by . Let be the incidence matrix of the shift

matrix . Since has girth , then every closed path in has

length at least . Let and be two closed paths in and

. We have

(10)

By Theorem 3 and inequality (10), we can construct a PS-LDPC

code with any girth

. This completes the proof.

V. PS-LDPC CODES: ARBITRARY GIRTH

By Corollary 1, we can translate a difficult problem of de-

signing PS-LDPC codes with girth into a much easier task

of designing PS-LDPC codes with girth . If PS-LDPC codes

with girth is still difficult to construct, we can further reduce

the girth requirement to

. Keep decreasing the girth re-

quirement in this way, we will eventually come to the problem

of designing PS-LDPC codes with girth

, By Corollary 1,

PS-LDPC codes with column weight , row weight , and girth

can be designed according to a

all “1” matrix.

We use Corollary 1 to describe an algorithm that finds a

PS-LDPC code with girth

based on a PS-LDPC code

with girth . Algorithm 1 is as follows:

and

(8)

The way we search for shifts in Algorithm 1 is similar to the

We also notice that path in when

. Hence

composes a closed progressive edge growth (PEG) method [10]. We then propose our main algorithm to construct PS-LDPC
codes with arbitrary girth based on Algorithm 1. Algorithm 2

(9) is as follows:

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:08:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LU AND MOURA: STRUCTURED LDPC CODES FOR HIGH-DENSITY RECORDING

211

H Fig. 3. Left: Parity-check matrix with girth 6. Right: Parity-check matrix H for a (12140, 3, 4) PS-LDPC code with girth 14.

VI. MINIMUM DISTANCE ANALYSIS
By Corollary 1, large PS-LDPC codes with large girth can be constructed iteratively from smaller codes with small girth. In this way, we can construct PS-LDPC codes with arbitrary large girth .
In addition, Tanner [2] proved the following lower bound on in terms of girth and bit node degree
is even (11)

Fig. 4. A PS-LDPC code with girth 8 versus random LDPC code with the same code parameters.

is odd (12)
Combining Corollary 1 and inequalities (11) and (12) together, we see that PS-LDPC codes can be designed to have arbitrary large minimum distance .

VII. PS-LDPC CODES: PERFORMANCE STUDY

As an illustration, we apply Algorithms 1 and 2 to construct

a PS-LDPC code with column weight , row weight ,

and girth 14. By Algorithm 2, we need to construct a 3 4

matrix that avoids 4-cycles first. Using Algorithm 1, we choose

the cardinality

and construct the following 3 4 shift

matrix that avoids cycles with length 4

Fig. 5. BER performance comparison I in EPR4 channels.
(13)

the user bit energy and

is the two-sided power spectral

Based on , we then construct a 15 20 parity-check matrix

density.

with girth 6, as shown on the left in Fig. 3.

The plot in Fig. 4 shows the BER performance for a column

Next, according to , we build a PS-LDPC code with

weight

PS-LDPC code with girth 8 (solid line) in an

, cardinality

, and girth 14 by Algorithm 1. AWGN channel. For comparison, we also show the BER per-

The above process results in a

formance of a randomly constructed LDPC code (no 4-cycles)

PS-LDPC code with girth 14 and whose structure is described (dashed line). Both codes have the same block length 4536 and

by the 9105 12 140 matrix shown on the right in Fig. 3. the same code rate . In the high SNR, the PS-LDPC code

We evaluate by simulation the bit error rate (BER) of the outperforms the random LDPC code by

dB at

PS-LDPC codes. The codes are decoded with the sum-product

where the performance of the random code

algorithm [3], and we adopt the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) has bottomed while the PS-LDPC code has not yet reached the

defined in [11]:

where denotes error floor at this BER.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:08:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

212

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 42, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2006

APPENDIX A PROOF OF THEOREM 3

Define unacceptable values for an entry of the shift ma-

trix as follows: is unacceptable if it leads to a cycle of

length

or smaller. We prove the Theorem by arguing that

the number of candidate values for can be made greater

than the number of unacceptable values for .

By Theorem 1, we first count the number of closed paths with

length that start and end at . Let the closed path start

with a vertical line at . There are at most

entries

where this first vertical line can terminate, as there are only

non-“ ” entries in the column of and the vertical line can

not end at the starting corner . Any horizontal line from

any one of these

non-“ ” entries can terminate at most

at

entries of , namely the

non-“ ” entries in

Fig. 6. BER performance comparison II in EPR4 channels.

the corresponding row other than the entry where the horizontal

line starts. Hence, there are

paths of length 2 that

We also carry on simulations in more realistic chan-

nels—EPR4 channels. The BCJR algorithm is used in the

channel detector and the reliability information is exchanged

between the LDPC decoder and the soft-in-soft-output channel

detector to increase the coding gain. The plot in Fig. 5 shows the

BER performance for a

PS-LDPC

code with girth 8 in an EPR4 channel. For comparison, we also

show the BER performance of a same size random LDPC code

(no 4-cycles) and a type-II 3-D finite geometry LDPC code

[4] with code length 4599 and code rate 0.92. In the high SNR

start with a vertical line at . Similarly, we derive that there

are

paths of length

that start with a

vertical line at . Recall that we need to construct a closed

path of length ending at . Hence, the

th line must

terminate at the th row of and the th line must terminate

at the entry . Thus, there are

closed

paths of length that start with a vertical line at .

Let

be the total number of closed paths with length

, that pass through the entry . Thus,

is bounded by

region, the PS-LDPC code outperforms the random code. More

importantly, the slope of the BER curve for the random LDPC

code tends to be flat in the high SNR region, implying that for

this code the error floor will occur soon, which is not the case

for the PS-LDPC code with girth 8. The finite geometry LDPC

(14)

code shows no error floor as our PS-LDPC code. The plot in Fig. 6 compares the BER performance for a
PS-LDPC code with column weight 4, code rate , code length 32760, and girth 8 in an EPR4 channel. We also show the BERs of a (32760, 4, 36) random LDPC code (no 4-cycles) and an extended type-I 2-D finite geometry LDPC code [4] with code length 32 760 and code rate 0.875. The slope of the BER curve for the PS-LDPC code decreases faster with SNR than that of random LDPC code; PS-LDPC code and the finite geometry LDPC code have similar BER performance.

By Theorem 1, each of the closed paths with length

, is associated with a Cycle Condition

, which determines an unacceptable value for . Therefore,

the total number of unacceptable values for is the same as

.

By our code construction, the entry

can take values from 0 to

. If we let

by

inequality (14), the number of unacceptable values for is

less than the number of candidate values for . Thus, there

VIII. CONCLUSION

exist at least one candidate value for

that is allowable.

Hence, we can construct a shift matrix that avoids cycles up

The paper proposes a new type of regular structured LDPC to the length . This completes the proof.

codes—partition-and-shift LDPC codes. It presents methods to

construct PS-LDPC codes with arbitrarily specified girth and arbitrarily specified degrees and for the check nodes and bit nodes, and hence to design flexible code rate PS-LDPC codes. In addition, their parity-check matrix is obtained from a much

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported by the Data Storage Systems Center (DSSC) at Carnegie Mellon University.

smaller matrix—the shift matrix , which reduces their storage memory requirements; they also exhibit good BER performance

REFERENCES

as shown by simulations—a low error floor. All these characteristics make PS-LDPC codes particularly attractive in high-density magnetic recording.

[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:08:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LU AND MOURA: STRUCTURED LDPC CODES FOR HIGH-DENSITY RECORDING

213

[3] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H. A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[4] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[5] B. Vasic, “Structured iteratively decodable codes based on Steiner systems and their application in magnetic recording,” Proc. IEEE Globecom 2001, vol. 5, pp. 2954–2960, Nov. 2001.
[6] H. Tang, J. Xu, Y. Kou, S. Lin, and K. A. S. Abdel-Ghaffar, “On algebraic construction of Gallager and circulant low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1269–1279, Jun. 2004.
[7] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.

[8] B. Vasic and O. Milenkovic, “Combinatorial constructions of low-density parity-check codes for iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1156–1176, Jun. 2004.
[9] J. M. F. Moura, J. Lu, and H. Zhang, “Structured LDPC codes with large girth,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 42–55, Jan. 2004.
[10] X. Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, submitted for publication.
[11] D. J. C. Mackay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
Manuscript received July 1, 2005 (e-mail: tianjin0129@yahoo.com).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:08:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

