2021 6th International Conference on Integrated Circuits and Microsystems (ICICM) | 978-1-6654-5886-3/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICICM54364.2021.9660282

2021 The 6th International Conference on Integrated Circuits and Microsystems
An Efficient Refresh Strategy of Flash Memory via High Delay Blocks in LDPC

Peixuan Li1,2,3,4, Yaofang Zhang1,2,3,4, Deli Yin5, Ping Xie1,2,3,4* 1.College of Computer of Qinghai Normal University, Xining 810016, P. R. China 2.The State Key Laboratory of Tibetan Intelligent Information Processing and Application, Xining 810016, P. R. China 3.The Key Laboratory of Internet of Things of Qinghai Province, Xining 810016, P. R. China
4.Academy of Plateau Science and Sustainability, Xining 810016, P. R. China 5.Chuzhou Polytechnic, Chuzhou, 239000, P. R. China *Corresponding author: xieping@qhnu.edu.cn

Abstract—With the development of flash memory, its storage density is gradually increased. A single flash memory cell can store more bits. But this makes it much less reliability. LDPC (i.e., Low Density Parity Check Code) has powerful error correction ability, which can help flash to solve this problem. However, there is a key problem with LDPC as an error-correcting code. It will make flash storage devices with low reliability suffer from high error correction delay. In this case, flash storage devices have greatly increased read latency, which affects device performance. In this work, we define high latency blocks according to LDPC latency of blocks, and propose a self-adaptive refresh scheme to reduce the read latency of flash storage devices. The basic idea is to refresh high latency blocks whenever it is detected to optimize read performance. In a periodic refresh mode, we test the performance of the refresh scheme in the case of wide workloads with different read and write ratios. The scheme reduces the average response time of flash storage devices by 6%-40% against baseline refresh schemes.
Keywords—LDPC, refresh, NAND flash
I. INTRODUCTION
Flash memory, as a kind of non-volatile memory, has the advantages of fast reading speed, small size and light weight. In the past, it was used as a cache between DRAM and main memory to improve I/O transmission speed. NAND flash stores only one bit per cell, called SLC. Now, high density flash memory has been developed, such as multi-level cell flash memory (MLC) [1], trinary-level cell flash memory (TLC) [2], and 3D NAND flash memory [3]. The cost and price of flash memory gradually decreased, and the capacity gradually increased. High performance flash memory is also accepted by enterprises, widely used in mobile storage devices and notebook computers [4], which causes many problems. The higher storage density, the more precise read voltage control capability required to read a single bit, and the lower reliability of flash storage devices. The traditional error correcting ability of BCH code is not suitable for high density flash memory storage devices. Therefore, higher error correcting codes, such as low-density parity codes (LDPC), are required to ensure the reliability of flash storage devices. In recent years, the design of LDPC in flash memory has been applied in practice [5].

LDPC codes provide powerful reliability for flash storage devices. When the reliability of flash storage devices is low, LDPC will read data for many times to obtain more decoding information to accurately complete the data error correction work. However, doing so will cause a lot of LDPC decoding delay when reading data [6]. Currently ， two methods are mainly used to solve the problem of high decoding delay. The first is to optimize LDPC decoding mode: through LDPC predecoding [7], caching LDPC decoding information [8] [9], and providing extra bit decision information [10] to complete the decoding work of low reliability equipment with the least time. The second is to reduce the bit error rate of flash storage devices (improve device reliability): through data interleaving [11], bit flipping [12] and data refresh. Through these methods, the bit error rate of flash memory is always kept at a low state. In this way, LDPC can also complete error correction of data with low delay. For the refresh method, CAI et al. proposed to use FCR to refresh the data close to ECC error correction capability [13]. Lv et al. proposed to refresh data before the data required a long error correction delay [14]. In addition, hot and cold data can also have an impact on refresh [15][16].
In this work, a self-adaptive refresh framework is proposed to reduce the decoding delay of LDPC and improve the response time of flash storage devices. The basic idea is to refresh blocks whenever high latency blocks are detected in a periodic refresh mode. To achieve this goal, we need to define high latency blocks. According to previous studies, the reading level of LDPC is 1 to 7[9]. The higher the reading level is, the higher the decoding accuracy will be and the larger delay will be. We find that when the reading level of LDPC is higher than a certain threshold, its decoding delay increases significantly. When a certain number of pages with high read levels in blocks reaches a certain number, blocks will appear to be slow to read. We define such blocks as high latency blocks. The refresh operation improves the reliability of flash memory, but it will also affect the lifetime of flash memory. Therefore, in the early and late stages of flash memory, we adopted different standards for the determination of high delay blocks. The purpose of this is to reduce refresh operations and the negative impact on the lifetime of flash during the late flash period. The above scheme is implemented in a well-configured flash memory simulator. Experiments with several real workloads

978-1-6654-5886-3/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE

299

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:38:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

show that the refresh framework can improve the average response time of devices while ensuring the lifetime of flash memory.
II. BACKGROUND
A. Introduction to Nand Flash Memory A flash memory particle consists of many memory cells.
Each flash memory cell can store a large of electrons to help us store data. Nand flash memory cells are made from floating gate transistors. In the flash cell array, as shown in Figure 1 a control grid is connected in the direction of the word line. The bit line is connected to the drain of the MOS tube. When accessing flash data, a corresponding high voltage is applied in the direction of the word line to change the state of flash. The bit line reads or writes the state stored in each flash cell.
Bit line
SGD

to ensure that the unselected MOS transistor is turned on. Multiple increases in voltage may cause excess electrons to be drawn into the floating gate, causing the threshold voltage to shift to the right. We call it a read error [18]. When a page is programmed, a high voltage is applied to its word lines, other pages that do not require programming also require a small increase in voltage. Other flash memory cells will also be slightly programmed. We call it a write error [19]. If the threshold voltage moves too far to the right, then the flash read may read the wrong data on the right (“11” to “10”, “10” to “01”, “01” to “00”).
The threshold voltage shifts to the left: Because the floating gate does not retain all the electrons, some of the electrons will leak out over time. If the threshold voltage moves too far to the left, crossing the boundary value of an adjacent state, then flash may read data with the wrong left state. This is a retention error [20]. For massive storage, data needs to be stored in flash memory for a long time. As a result, retention errors are more likely to occur than programming or reading errors.

Word line

SGD

Fig. 1. Flash cell array.
Ref1 ΘΘ

Ref2

Ref3

ΘΘΘΘ

ΘΘΘΘΘΘ

III. MOTIVATION
When a read request is executed, the flash controller always performs LDPC decoding of the data before returning the error-correcting data to host. The decoding of LDPC always starts with the hard decision decoding. In the early life of flash memory, there are fewer errors, LDPC hard decoding can complete the work of error correction. But the disadvantage of hard decision decoding is its poor error correction ability [21]. After a large number of P/E cycles in flash memory, the hardware wears away and errors increase greatly. In addition to，the impact of flash programming error, read error and retention error on flash data is also increasing. When the hard decoding fails, the LDPC performs the soft decoding. Soft decoding has strong error correction ability, but the computation is large [22].

11

10

01

00

Vth Fig. 2. Threshold voltage distribution of 2-bit MLC flash.
There are many types of NAND flash memory, In the construction of MLC, a cell can store two bits of information. MLC can use four non-overlapping threshold voltage intervals to represent two bits of data in four different states, as shown in Figure 2. Each state stores different electrons [17], “11”, “10”, “01”, “00” respectively. The initial state is the unprogrammed state of the flash memory (11). There are no electrons in the floating gate. By injecting a certain number of electrons into the floating gate transistor, the flash memory can be converted to the corresponding programming state (10,01,00). The voltage change of the flash memory cell will cause the flash memory error to appear.
Threshold voltage shifts to the right: When reading a page in flash memory, the control pole of the unread page in the current block will also be increased by a corresponding voltage

TABLE I.

SOFT DECODE EACH STEP DELAY

LDPC soft decoding steps First read
One extra read Data transfer of first read Data transfer of one extra read
Perform a soft decode

Read latency 50us 14us 20us 10us 15us

In fact, soft decoding is an iterative decoding process, the LDPC continues to read data until decoding is successful. Based on this, we specify the read level of LDPC. Generally, LDPC has a total of seven reading levels. The higher the reading level, the higher the success rate of decoding, as shown in Table 1. There are fewer errors in the early storage process of flash memory device, and data error correction can be completed with one read level. A high percentage of errors will occur in the middle and late stages of flash storage devices, and LDPC will decode with high read levels.

300
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:38:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 3. Average response time for each read level.
Using the data in the table, we did an experiment to show the average access latency, as shown in Figure 3. We test the average access latency of flash storage devices at different LDPC read levels with different read/write ratios, on a scale of level 1 to level 7. With the increase of LDPC read level, the average response delay of the device gradually increases. Different loads show different characteristics. For example, the average response latency of Financial2 increased by 45% and Hm0 increased by 31% from level 1 to level 3. The average response latency of Financial2 increased by 46% and Hm0 increased by 33% from level 3 to level 5. The average response latency of Financial2 increased by 39% and Hm0 increased by 32% from level 5 to level 7. Although the average response time increase of each workload is different, However, the results show that the average response time of devices increases obviously when the reading level of LDPC is level 3 and level 5, indicating that more LDPC decoding delay is generated. Therefore, we propose a refresh scheme based on high LDPC delay blocks.
IV. REFRESH SCHEME BASED ON HIGH LDPC DELAY
A. Flash Refresh Framework
Host

Controller

ECC Address mapping

Refresh Framework
High latency LDPC based refresh
Cyclic Refresh

NAND Flash Memories
Fig. 4. Refresh the framework.
In order to improve the performance of flash memory storage, the flash memory controller has a variety of functions, including address mapping, wear leveling, garbage collection, and ECC error correction, etc. Figure 4 shows the refresh

framework built in the controller for this work. The address mapping module saves the correspondence between a logical block address and a physical block address for the system. The refresh framework can obtain information of blocks. Nowadays, most flash memory stores choose LDPC as the error correction code of the ECC module. When the data error correction is successful, the ECC module transmits the LDPC read level information to the refresh frame. The refresh strategy proposed in this work is based on the number of LDPC read levels in a block to determine whether to refresh.
Retention errors will occur during flash storage, and the error rate of data will gradually increase. Therefore, this work adopts the method of periodic refresh. All data blocks that meet the refresh conditions are refreshed at intervals to ensure data reliability. This scheme is discussed in detail in the next section.
B. Refresh Based on High LDPC Delay
Figure 5 shows the flow of the refresh scheme based on high LDPC delay blocks. The refresh framework calculates the number of LDPC read levels in each block and obtains the number of P/E cycles for each block. The refresh strategy adopts an adaptive refresh method. First, the number of P/E cycles of a block needs to be determined. If the number of P/E cycles is less than half of the life of the block, the block is defined as an early block of flash memory storage. Conversely, we define it as the late block of flash memory storage.
Number of P/E cycle：C

C>lifetime/2?

N

Number of LDPC Level 3 error correction accuracy：N1

Y
Number of LDPC Level 5 error correction accuracy：N2 N

N2>page per block/2
Y

N END

Refresh

N1>page per block/2
Y

Fig. 5. The process based on the high LDPC delay block refresh policy.
In chapter 2, through workload experiments, we know that the delay increases more when the LDPC reading level is at Level 3 and level 5. Therefore, if the refresh framework wants to determine whether a block is a high LDPC delay, it should search the number of level 3 and level 5 LDPC read levels in the block. Early flash storage has lower bit error rate. When reading data, the lower LDPC reading level can be used to complete the error correction of flash data. So, in the early days of flash storage, we set the refresh framework to determine the number of level 3 LDPC read levels of the block, N1. If the value of N1 of a block exceeds a certain threshold, then the block has a high LDPC delay, and its data will be refreshed immediately to reduce the LDPC delay of reading the block next time. If a block is in the later stage of flash memory, it needs a high LDPC read level to correct errors. In the later

301
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:38:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

stage of flash memory, the refresh framework needs to determine the number of level 5 LDPC read levels, N2. When the number of N2 exceeds a certain threshold, refresh is performed.
For the refresh operation, many problems need to be considered to ensure a good refresh effect.
1) Determine the LDPC read levels: Before the flash block P/E cycle reaches 104 (early flash storage), bit error rate of flash data is generally between 10-6 and 10-3, even in the worst case, LDPC read levels below level 5 can be solved. This case, reading levels of LDPC above level 3 will result in high decoding delay. We choose to determine whether a refresh is needed by judging the number of LDPC read levels above level 3 in the block. However, after the flash block P/E cycle reaches 104 (late flash storage), the bit error rate of flash data increases rapidly, between 10-3 and 10-2, error correction of data can only be completed with the LDPC reading level above 5. So, we choose to determine whether a refresh is needed by judging the number of LDPC read levels above level 5 in the block.
2) Determining the threshold N is important for performance improvement. If N is set to a small number, most data blocks can be read with high reliability after the refresh, which greatly improves the read performance. But the disadvantage is that the flash memory blocks are easy to reach the refresh condition and will be refreshed at a high frequency. Frequent refreshes not only cause additional read/write operations on the device, but also reduce the life of the flash blocks and further reduce reliability. If N is set to a large number. Only a few blocks can meet the refresh condition and many data blocks with high latency cannot be refreshed, which significantly affects the read performance. For the threshold N, it can be set to half the number of pages per block. In the early stage of flash storage, when more than half of the pages in a block are high LDPC latency of pages (LDPC read level greater than 3), then we can consider the block to be a block with high LDPC latency. In this way, the read performance of the flash storage device can be significantly improved and the lifetime of the flash memory can not be worn too much.
C. Periodic Refresh
The periodic refresh is designed to detect flash blocks with high LDPC latency and refresh them on demand. During the refresh, the refresh framework needs to check all the flash blocks. It will read the LDPC read level of each flash page and perform statistics, which consumes very high computing costs in a short time. If there are no flash blocks with high LDPC error correction latency during the refresh judgment, there is no performance optimization for the SSD and only the query cost is consumed. To solve this problem, we design a hash table to hold the block information, as shown in the figure 6.
The hash table has keys from 1 to n, where n is the number of pages contained in a block. We set a marker for the block to update the number of pages that LDPC reads at level 3 and above and level 5 in real time. This tag is read when the hash

table is built. If the quantity is 1, the block information is saved in Table1; if it is 2, the block information is saved in Table2. This hash table solves two problems.

Table 1

Block 1

Block 2

Table 2

Block 1

Block 2

Block 3

Table 3

Block 1

Block 2

Table n

Block 1

Block 2

Block 3

Block 4

Fig. 6. The hash table is designed to refresh each delay.

1) First, the problem of determining which blocks to refresh is solved. For example, the value stored in Table3 is a block with three pages of LDPC read level above 3 level. If a block contains 64 pages, the data blocks that need to be updated are stored in Table 32 to Table 64. which reduce real-time query and calculation overhead.
2) Second, the exact refresh problem is solved. The block location information is stored in a hash table. When refreshing, the address information of the block is retrieved from the hash table one by one, and then all pages of the block are refreshed, and the status and markup information of the block is updated. Complete accurate refresh.
V. EXPERIMENTTAL ANALYSIS
In this chapter, we introduce the experimental setup and the basic configuration of the flash storage device. Through load experiments, the effect of the refresh strategy is given, and the impact of the refresh strategy on the average response time and life of the flash storage device is analyzed.

TABLE II.

WORKLOAD INFORMATION

Workload Financial1
Mds0 Prxy0 Hm0 Rsrch2 Financial2 Proj0 Websearch3

Read 1235633 143973 383524 1417748 136364 3046112 13006718 16410267

Write 4099353 1067061 12135444 2575568
71223 653082 1907336 26772

Read ratio 23% 12% 3% 37% 65% 82% 87% 98%

A. The Experimental Device
We added Microsoft's SSD module to DiskSim [23]to simulate flash storage devices. The storage device is configured with 8 channels, each channel has 8 chips, each chip has 4 planes, each plane has 2048 blocks, each block has 64 8KB pages and the LDPC software decode read level is set to 1-7. In terms of workload, eight workloads with different read/write ratios were used to test the effect of the refresh

302
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:38:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

strategy based on high LDPC delay blocks. We listed the information for each load, as shown in Table 2.
During the experiment, we evaluated four strategies:
1) The original strategy: The flash storage device does not have the refresh capability and only relies on the device's garbage collection module and wear balance module to ensure the reliability of data.
2) Traditional refresh strategy: Datas are refreshed only when the data error rate reaches the threshold that cannot be corrected by the ECC module.
3) The HLDB strategy: The HLDB scheme is the high LDPC delayed refresh scheme. when the number of LDPC read levels 3 and above in a block reaches over 32, we consider the block to be a high LDPC latency block. During periodic refresh, all high latency blocks are refreshed.
4) Self-adaptive HLDB strategy: In the early life of flash memory storage device, we judge high LDPC delay blocks by the LDPC read level of 3. In the later stage of flash storage device, we judge high LDPC delay blocks by the LDPC read level of 5.
B. Experimental Results and Analysis
In the experimental analysis stage, we analyze the optimization efficiency of HLDB refresh strategy to the average response time of flash storage. At the same time, the influence of the adaptive scheme on the optimization efficiency and the life of the flash storage device is analyzed.

scheme mainly optimizes the reading of high LDPC delay blocks of the workload. The higher the read ratio of the workload, the more the average response time is optimized. Finally, Figure 8 shows the impact of HLDB schemes on normalized read response times in the early and late stages of flash. As we mentioned earlier, in the early days of flash, LDPC only uses a low level read level (under level 5) to complete the error correction of data with a low bit error rate, and the delay generated by the storage device is also relatively low. In this way, not only the high LDPC delay block is less, but also the LDPC read level is reduced less after refresh, it reduces latency by up to 5 levels. On the contrary, in the late flash, Due to the serious wear and tear of the equipment and the LDPC reading level of many data pages are above level 5. So, after refreshing, it will reduce a lot of read latency. As we analyzed, HLDB refresh strategies reduce latency at the end of flash life by several times as much as at the early end of flash life. The average performance improvement was 3 times. Therefore, applying HLDB refresh strategy in the late life of flash memory can bring more benefits.

Fig. 8. Optimization of HLDB refresh scheme for early and late average response time of flash memory life.

Fig. 7. Normalized average response time.
Average response delay optimization: Figure 8 shows the average response latency under three scenarios for each of the eight selected workloads in the early of flash storage. The HLDB scheme can significantly improve the average response delay under certain circumstances. First, compared with the original scheme, the proposed HLDB scheme improves by 4%47%. It also offers 2%-36% over traditional refresh schemes. Second, we found that the results were quite different for different workloads. The read ratios of Financial1, Mds0, Prxy0 and Hm0 are 23%, 12%, 3% and 37% respectively, which are lower than other loads. They are also less optimized by the HLDB refresh scheme, the average response time optimization rate of Prxy0 is only 4%. Rsrch2, Financial2, Proj0, And Websearch3 have read rates of 65%, 82%, 87%, and 98%, the HLDB strategy optimizes their average response time by 31% to 47%. Because the Websearch3 workload has many reads with long access delays, it optimizes up to 47%. Through the experimental results, it is known that the HLDB

Fig. 9. Number of flash refreshes late in life.
Self-adaptive HLDB refresh scheme evaluation: The refresh operation improves flash read/write performance, but at the same time it has a negative impact on the flash device. Too many refreshes will wear out the hardware faster. The more the flash is worn, the more retention errors are generated, and LDPC will correct the errors with higher read levels. Figure 9 shows the number of refreshes late in flash storage. The selfadaptive HLDB refresh strategy has less damage to flash memory. It is 41% lower on average and 70% lower on peak than ordinary HLDB refresh policies. The optimization degree of self-adaptive HLDB refresh strategy is obvious. This has the better protection to the flash memory device, prolongs the flash memory service life.

303
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:38:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VI. CONCLUSION
With the advance of memory technology and the increase of the density of flash devices, reliability of flash is decreasing. Flash read performance is further reduced. To solve this problem, we propose to improve the read performance of flash memory devices by refreshing. The higher the level, the higher the delay. We reduce the error rate of flash data by refreshing the high LDPC delay block. In this way, read level of LDPC is reduced and the error correction burden is reduced. This paper evaluates the HLDB refresh scheme and compares it with the original and traditional refresh schemes. The experimental results show that the average response time of flash storage devices is reduced. In order to solve the problem that the reliability of flash memory decreases greatly in the late life period, we propose a self-adaptive HLDB refresh scheme. On the basis of the original performance optimization, it reduces the refresh operation and prolonging its life.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTT
This work is supported by The National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No.61762075. It is also supported by The Provincial Nature Science Foundation of Qinghai under Grant No.2020-ZJ-926. Ping Xie is the corresponding author of this paper.
REFERENCES
[1] Cernea, R. A., Pham, L., Moogat, F., Chan, S., Le, B., Li, Y., ... & Quader, K. (2008). A 34 MB/s MLC write throughput 16 Gb NAND with all bit line architecture on 56 nm technology. IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, 44(1), 186-194.
[2] Tokutomi, T., Tanakamaru, S., Iwasaki, T. O., & Takeuchi, K. (2014, May). Advanced error prediction LDPC for high-speed reliable TLC nand-based SSDs. In 2014 IEEE 6th International Memory Workshop (IMW) (pp. 1-4). IEEE.
[3] Choi, E. S., & Park, S. K. (2012, December). Device considerations for high density and highly reliable 3D NAND flash cell in near future. In 2012 International Electron Devices Meeting (pp. 9-4). IEEE.
[4] Rizvi, S. S., & Chung, T. S. (2010, April). Flash SSD vs HDD: High performance oriented modern embedded and multimedia storage systems. In 2010 2nd International Conference on Computer Engineering and Technology (Vol. 7, pp. V7-297). IEEE.
[5] Tanakamaru, S., Yanagihara, Y., & Takeuchi, K. (2013, January). Highly reliable solid-state drives (SSDs) with error-prediction LDPC (EP-LDPC) architecture and error-recovery scheme. In 2013 18th Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference (ASP-DAC) (pp. 8384). IEEE.
[6] Zhao, W., Dong, G., Sun, H., Zhang, T., & Zheng, N. (2014). Hybrid hard-/soft-decision LDPC decoding strategy for NAND flash memory. Chinese science bulletin, 59(28), 3554-3561.
[7] Zhao, K., Zhao, W., Sun, H., Zhang, X., Zheng, N., & Zhang, T. (2013). LDPC-in-SSD: Making advanced error correction codes work effectively in solid state drives. In 11th {USENIX} Conference on File and Storage Technologies ({FAST} 13) (pp. 243-256).
[8] Liu, R. S., Chuang, M. Y., Yang, C. L., Li, C. H., Ho, K. C., & Li, H. P. (2014, June). EC-Cache: Exploiting error locality to optimize LDPC in

NAND flash-based SSDs. In 2014 51st ACM/EDAC/IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC) (pp. 1-6). IEEE.
[9] Du, Y., Zou, D., Li, Q., Shi, L., Jin, H., & Xue, C. J. (2017, May). Laldpc: Latency-aware ldpc for read performance improvement of solid state drives. In Proc. MSST (pp. 1-11).
[10] Zhang, M., Wu, F., He, X., Huang, P., Wang, S., & Xie, C. (2016, May). REAL: A retention error aware LDPC decoding scheme to improve NAND flash read performance. In 2016 32nd Symposium on Mass Storage Systems and Technologies (MSST) (pp. 1-13). IEEE.
[11] Zhao, W., Sun, H., Lv, M., Dong, G., Zheng, N., & Zhang, T. (2014, June). Improving min-sum LDPC decoding throughput by exploiting intra-cell bit error characteristic in MLC NAND flash memory. In 2014 30th Symposium on Mass Storage Systems and Technologies (MSST) (pp. 1-6). IEEE.
[12] Jung, J., & Park, I. C. (2017). Multi-bit flipping decoding of LDPC codes for NAND storage systems. IEEE Communications Letters, 21(5), 979-982.
[13] Cai, Y., Yalcin, G., Mutlu, O., Haratsch, E. F., Cristal, A., Unsal, O. S., & Mai, K. (2012, September). Flash correct-and-refresh: Retentionaware error management for increased flash memory lifetime. In 2012 IEEE 30th International Conference on Computer Design (ICCD) (pp. 94-101). IEEE.
[14] Lv, Y., Shi, L., Li, Q., Gao, C., Xue, C. J., & Sha, E. (2019, August). Optimizing Tail Latency of LDPC based Flash Memory Storage Systems Via Smart Refresh. In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Networking, Architecture and Storage (NAS) (pp. 1-8). IEEE.
[15] Du, Y., Li, Q., Shi, L., Zou, D., Jin, H., & Xue, C. J. (2017, June). Reducing LDPC soft sensing latency by lightweight data refresh for flash read performance improvement. In 2017 54th ACM/EDAC/IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC) (pp. 1-6). IEEE.
[16] Luo, Y., Cai, Y., Ghose, S., Choi, J., & Mutlu, O. (2015, May). WARM: Improving NAND flash memory lifetime with write-hotness aware retention management. In 2015 31st Symposium on Mass Storage Systems and Technologies (MSST) (pp. 1-14). IEEE.
[17] Wang, W., Xie, T., & Zhou, D. (2014, June). Understanding the impact of threshold voltage on mlc flash memory performance and reliability. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM international conference on Supercomputing (pp. 201-210).
[18] Cai, Y., Luo, Y., Ghose, S., & Mutlu, O. (2015, June). Read disturb errors in MLC NAND flash memory: Characterization, mitigation, and recovery. In 2015 45th Annual IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks (pp. 438-449). IEEE.
[19] Cai, Y., Mutlu, O., Haratsch, E. F., & Mai, K. (2013, October). Program interference in MLC NAND flash memory: Characterization, modeling, and mitigation. In 2013 IEEE 31st International Conference on Computer Design (ICCD) (pp. 123-130). IEEE.
[20] Cai, Y., Haratsch, E. F., Mutlu, O., & Mai, K. (2012, March). Error patterns in MLC NAND flash memory: Measurement, characterization, and analysis. In 2012 Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE) (pp. 521-526). IEEE.
[21] Jose, R., & Pe, A. (2015, June). Analysis of hard decision and soft decision decoding algorithms of LDPC codes in AWGN. In 2015 IEEE International Advance Computing Conference (IACC) (pp. 430-435). IEEE.
[22] Wang, J., Courtade, T., Shankar, H., & Wesel, R. D. (2011, December). Soft information for LDPC decoding in flash: Mutual-information optimized quantization. In 2011 IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference-GLOBECOM 2011 (pp. 1-6). IEEE.
[23] Bucy, J. S., & Ganger, G. R. (2003). The DiskSim simulation environment version 3.0 reference manual. School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University.

304
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:38:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

