2021 IEEE 21st International Conference on Communication Technology
Design of Nested QC-LDPC Codes for Compute-Forward Multiple Access

Shenzuo He State Key Laboratory of ISN
Xidian University Xi’an, China
hesz@stu.xidian.edu.cn

Yifei Zhang State Key Laboratory of ISN
Xidian University Xi’an, China
yfzhang 2@stu.xidian.edu.cn

Ying Li State Key Laboratory of ISN
Xidian University Xi’an, China
yli@mail.xidian.edu.cn

2021 IEEE 21st International Conference on Communication Technology (ICCT) | 978-1-6654-3206-1/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICCT52962.2021.9658053

Abstract—Compute-forward multiple access (CFMA) is a newtype multiple-access technique in recent years, whose most significant advantage is that it can achieve the whole capacity region of the multiple-access channel (MAC) without time sharing or rate splitting. In this work, we propose a modified protograph-based extrinsic information transfer (P-EXIT) technique to analyse and optimize the iterative decoding performances of quasi-cyclic low density parity check (QC-LDPC) codes in CFMA. In addition, a kind of extending technique is designed to construct nested QC-LDPC codes for CFMA. The simulation results show that the nested QC-LDPC codes constructed by our method work efficiently in CFMA system and have a gap of 1.186dB from Shannon Bound at bit error rate of 10−6.
Index Terms—compute-forward multiple access, protographbased extrinsic information transfer technique, quasi-cyclic low density parity check codes, log-likelihood ratio
I. INTRODUCTION
Traditionally, the whole capacity region of the multipleaccess channel (MAC) can be achieved by successive interference cancellation [1] and time sharing or rate-splitting [2] at the cost of increasing system complexity and communication delay. A new-type multiple-access scheme namely computeforward multiple access (CFMA) was proposed in [3], which is inspired by the compute-forward strategy of relay channels [4]. The most significant advantage of CFMA is that it can achieve the whole capacity region of MAC without time sharing or rate splitting. It is realized by decoding a linear combination of multi-user codewords, which is used as side information in later decoding stages [3]. Based on the result of [3], the authors of [5] further apply low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes to the CFMA system, and design an efficient decoding scheme to achieve capacity-approaching performance.
For CFMA systems with LDPC codes, the codes employed by different users should have nested relationship. For two linear block codes, the codes are nested if the solution space of one parity-check matrix is a subspace of another. In [5], nested codes are obtained by merging some rows of the parity-check matrix of an original LDPC code. There are some limitations in this technique. For instance, some variable nodes (VNs) can be left isolated after two check nodes (CNs) are merged. In addition, there is no guarantee that the merged code has a good performance because the merging procedure is executed randomly. Last but not least, merging technique is designed

Fig. 1. System model of the two-user Gaussian CFMA

for random codes which are not of benefit to the hardware implement of encoder and decoder. Considering that quasicyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) codes having superior performances and low hardware complexities [6], we aim to design nested QC-LDPC codes for CFMA in this paper. It is expected that the designed codes have good waterfall performances and low error floors. To analyse the iterative decoding thresholds of QC-LDPC codes in CFMA, a modified protograph-based extrinsic information transfer (P-EXIT) technique is proposed. Based on the P-EXIT functions, a kind of extending technique is designed to construct nested QC-LDPC codes.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section II, the system model of two-user Gaussian CFMA is introduced. In section III, we present a modified P-EXIT technique. The procedure of constructing nested QC-LDPC codes is discussed in section IV, followed by the simulations in section V.
Throughout this paper, we denote vectors and matrices as lowercase and uppercase bold letters, such as a and A respectively. The lowercase letter with superscript represents one component of corresponding vector, such as aj.

II. SYSTEM MODEL

The system model of two-user Gaussian CFMA system is

shown in Fig. 1 and the notations used in this section are

given in tabel 1. The message sequence of the k-th user

mk is encoded into a codeword uk = {u1k, ..., ujk, ..., uNk }

based on a LDPC code Ck, k ∈ {1, 2}. Denote the code

rate

of

the k-th user

as

Rk

=

Mk N

,

where

Mk

represents

the length of message sequence of user k and N represents

the code length. The encoded sequence uk is modulated into transmitted symbol sequence xk = {xk1, .., xkj , ..., xkN } with average power constraint xk 2 ≤ N P . In this paper, we

only consider binary phase shift keying (BPSK) modulation,

978-1-6654-3206-1/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE

161

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:36:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE I NOTATIONS OF SYSTEM MODEL

variable vector

notations
Ck Rk Mk N
hk P
mk uk s
xk y
n

description code of the k-th user code rate the k-th user length of message sequence the k-th user
code length constant channel gain
average power message sequence the k-th user codeword sequence the k-th user
linear codeword combination transmitted symbol sequence the k-th user
received symbol sequence additive white Gaussian noise

but extensions to other modulation system are straightforward. The channel output can be formulated as

y = h1x1 + h2x2 + n

(1)

where h1, h2 ∈ R are the constant channel gains of the two users and n represents additive white Gaussian noise, following the distribution of n ∼ N (0, 1).
At the receiver, a two-stage decoding scheme is employed to recover the message of the two users. In the first stage, the linear codeword combination u1 ⊕ u2 is decoded, where the ’⊕’ is the binary addition. We denote the decoding result as sˆ. In the next stage, sˆ is exploited as side information to decode u1 and the estimation is denoted as uˆ1. Finally, the estimation uˆ2 is obtained by combining the output of the previous two decoding stages. Generally, the codeword with larger channel gain should be decoded in the second stage, because the larger one can attain more reliable channel a priori information.
Supposing that the message sequence m1 and m2 are independent and drawn uniformly at random, the average error probability of the two-user Gaussian CFMA system can be defined as

1 Pe = 2N (R1+R2)

Pr (uˆ1j , uˆj2) = (u1j , u2j )

(2)

j

A rate pair (R1, R2) is said to be achievable if the average error probability Pe reduces to zero as N increases to infinity.

decoding. Let sj = u1j ⊕ u2j , the initial input LLR of sj can be expressed as

LLR(sj) = log

p yj|sj = 0 p (yj|sj = 1)

 cosh

√ yj (h1 + h2) P



(3)

= −2h1h2P + log 

√

cosh yj (h1 − h2) P

where cosh(·) is the hyperbolic cosine function. The conditional probability density function (pdf) of yj can
be written as

p(yj|xjk = ±1) =

√

2

1 P √ exp −
2π  2

yj − hkxjk
k

 

(4)

where the transmitted symbols xjk, k ∈ {1, 2} are independent of each other and uniformly distributed on set {−1, 1}.
If the LLR follows the Gaussian distribution and the con-
sistency condition is satisfied, the variance of LLR is twice
as larger as the mathematical expectation [6]. Supposing that LLR(sj) follows the Gaussian distribution, we firstly calculate the expectation of LLR(sj) as

E LLR(sj) = −2h1h2P



 cosh

√ yj(h1 + h2) P



(5)

+ E log 

√ 

cosh yj(h1 − h2) P

From the definition, the second term of Eq. (5) can be

formulated as



 cosh

√ yj(h1 + h2) P



E log 

√ 

cosh yj(h1 − h2) P



√

+∞

cosh l(h1 + h2) P

=

log 

√

(6)

−∞

cosh l(h1 − h2) P

√ 1 P · √ exp − 2π  2

2

l−

hk xjk

 dl

k



III. A MODIFIED P-EXIT TECHNIQUE
In this section, we firstly analyse the statistical characteristics of initial input log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) of the first decoding stage in CFMA. Subsequently, a modified P-EXIT technique is given, which is exploited to analyse the iterative decoding performance of QC-LDPC codes in CFMA.
A. Statistical Characteristics of Initial Input LLR for First Decoding Stage

The infinite integral in Eq. (6) can be solved by polynomial

approximation method. However, a simpler one is Monte Carlo

[6], i.e.



 cosh

√ yj(h1 + h2) P



E log 

√ 

cosh yj(h1 − h2) P

1M

 cosh

√ yj(m)(h1 + h2) P



(7)

≈

log 

M
m=1

cosh

√ yj(m)(h1 − h2) P



In CFMA systems with LDPC codes, the belief propagation where M is a positive integer which is sufficiently large and (BP) algorithm can be utilized directly to realize multi-user {yj(m) : m = 1, 2, ..., M } is the sample set of yj. On the

162
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:36:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

assumption that the consistency condition is satisfied, the rootmean-square of initial input LLR can be calculated by

σcjh = 2 · E [LLR(sj)]



 cosh

√ yj(h1 + h2) P



≈ −4h1h2P + 2 · E log 

√ 

cosh yj(h1 − h2) P

(8)

Based on the root-mean-square, we propose a modified P-

EXIT technique to analyze the convergence of the iterative

decoding of QC-LDPC codes in CFMA. This technique can

also be used to design suitable QC-LDPC codes for CFMA

systems.

B. A Modified P-EXIT Technique for CFMA
Traditional P-EXIT technique is proposed in [9] to analyze the iterative decoding performance of protograph-based LDPC codes. This technique is a multidimensional numerical computation technique based on Gaussian Approximation and extrinsic mutual information (EMI). In the CFMA system, the first-stage decoding needs to recover the linear codeword combination. A modified P-EXIT technique is proposed to analyse the iterative decoding performance of this decoding stage.
Consider a base matrix Hb(ρ, γ) of a QC-LDPC code with size of ρ × γ. The notations employed in this subsection are defined as follows:
σcjh - the root-mean-square of the j-th component of initial input LLR.
bi,j - the element of i-th row and j-th column of base matrix Hb(ρ, γ).
IE,V (i, j) - the EMI between code bit and the output LLR of the j-th VN associated with the i-th CN.
IE,C (i, j) - the EMI between code bit and the output LLR of the i-th CN associated with the j-th VN.
IAP P (j) - the posterior probability LLR evaluated by the j-th VN.
The whole process of the modified P-EXIT technique is shown in algorithm 1.

IV. DESIGN OF NESTED QC-LDPC CODES

Algorithm 1 The P-EXIT Technique for CFMA
Input: Select the average power P and compute the rootmean-square of initial input LLR by Monte Carlo. Initialize the vector σch = (σc0h, ..., σcjh, ...σcγh−1) according to Eq. (8). Output:
while true do for j = 0, ..., γ − 1 and i = 0, ..., ρ − 1 do if bi,j = 0 then

IE,V (i, j) =

J(

(bv,j − ev,j )[J −1(IE,V (v, j))]2 + (σcjh)2),

v

where ev,j = 1 when v = i and ev,j = 0 when

v = i.

else

IE,V (i, j) = 0.

end if

end for

for i = 0, ..., ρ − 1 and j = 0, ..., γ − 1 do

if bi,j = 0 then

IE,C (i, j) =

1 − J(

(bi,v − ci,v)[J −1(1 − IE,V (i, v))]2),

v

where ci,v = 1 when v = j and ci,v = 0 when

v = j.

else

IE,C (i, j) = 0.

end if

end for

for j = 0, ..., γ − 1 do

IAP P (j) = J (

bv,j [J −1(IE,C (v, j))]2 + (σcjh)2).

v

end for

if IApp(j) = 1 for ∀j then

break

else

Increase P and compute the root-mean-square.

end if

end while

return the iterative decoding threshold P .

Masking, initially proposed in [8], is a kind of powerful technique to design irregular QC-LDPC codes. In this section, we introduce the masking technique roughly, and then employ the modified P-EXIT technique to design the degree distribution of masking matrix, which is used to optimize the QC-LPDC code for the CFMA system.
A. Masking Technique
Masking can be modeled mathematically as element-level matrix multiplication [8]. Specifically, let W(ζ, λ) be a masking matrix of size ζ × λ over GF (2) and H(ζ, λ) be a matrix

of the same size over GF (q), where q is a power of a prime. The masking operation can be defined as

M(ζ, λ) = W(ζ, λ) ⊗ H(ζ, λ)

 ω0,0h0,0

ω0,1h0,1

...

ω0,λ−1h0,λ−1 

=

 



ω1,0h1,0 ...

ω1,1h1,1

...

ω1,λ−1h1,λ−1 

...

...

...

 

ωζ−1,0hζ−1,0 ωζ−1,1hζ−1,1 . . . ωζ−1,λ−1hζ−1,λ−1 (9)

If ωi,j = 1, ωi,j hi,j = hi,j and if ωi,j = 0, ωi,j hi,j = 0. It is clear that the element of the H(ζ, λ) become zero when

163
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:36:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the corresponding element in W(ζ, λ) is zero, and we say this element is masked. After H(ζ, λ) is masked, its degree distribution is the same as that of W(ζ, λ). If H(ζ, λ) is the base matrix of a regular QC-LDPC code and the masking matrix W(ζ, λ) has a irregular degree distribution, the masked matrix M(ζ, λ) will become a base matrix of an irregular QCLDPC code. Moreover, masking operation can produce a more sparse matrix, which will probably eliminate some short loops. As long as H(ζ, λ) satisfies the row-column constraint [6], M(ζ, λ) will also satisfy. It can be proved that, if the girth of the Tanner graph of W(ζ, λ) is g > 6, the girth of M(ζ, λ) is at least g.
B. Construct Nested QC-LDPC Codes
In [5], a new code with higher code rate is constructed by merging two linearly independent rows of a original paritycheck matrix. The advantage of the merging technique is that it can construct random codes with high code rate. In our work, we aim at constructing nested QC-LDPC codes, in which case the merging technique is no longer suitable. We adopt another technique named extending, where new linearly independent rows are added at the tail of the base matrix of a original code to obtain a new code.
In this paper, we use the method based on the Galois field to construct two regular QC-LDPC codes [7]. In order to obtain irregular codes, we construct a irregular masking matrix firstly, whose degree distribution is designed by the modified P-EXIT technique. This masking matrix is exploited to modify the mother code, whose code rate is higher in the two regular QC-LDPC codes. Subsequently, another masking matrix can be attained by using the extending technique to add new rows at the tail of masking matrix of mother code.
We give an example to illustrate how to construct nested QC-LDPC codes. The whole process can be summarized as following four steps.
a) Step 1: A base matrix Hb(127, 127) is constructed by a general parity-check matrix for a family of ReedSolomon (RS) codes over GF (128). We take a 4×40 subarray H1(4, 40) and a 5 × 40 subarray H2(5, 40) at the upper-left corner of Hb(127, 127). These two subarrays are two base matrices of regular QC-LDPC codes whose code rates are R1 = 0.900 and R2 = 0.875 respectively.
b) Step 2: The modified P-EXIT technique is applied to design the degree distribution of masking matrix W1(4, 40) for H1(4, 40). Denote the masked base matrix as M1(4, 40). The obtained degree distribution is λ(X) = 0.097X + 0.581X2 + 0.322X3 and ρ(X) = X30. Subsequently, we use the improved progressive-edge-growth (PEG) algorithm [10] to construct the masking matrix which satisfies the degree distribution approximately.
c) Step 3: A modified PEG algorithm is adopted to extend W1(4, 40) by adding new rows at the tail of itself. The weights of the new row are equal to the average row weights of W1(4, 40). Non-zero elements are added to the matrix in a certain proportion and the modified PEG algorithm is used to select the column indexes of non-zero elements. We denote

the new masking matrix as W2(5, 40) and use it to mask H2(5, 40). The masked base matrix is denoted as M2(5, 40).
d) Step 4: The parity-check matrices of QC-LDPC codes can be obtained by extending the base matrices M1(4, 40) and M2(5, 40) with circulant permutation matrix (CPM) of size 127 × 127. The constructed two codes with the same code length of N = 5080 are nested because the two masking matrices W1(4, 40) and W2(5, 40) are nested.
It should be point out although we obtain nested QC-LDPC codes here by constructing nested masking matrices, there are other ways to fulfill our goal. For instance, we can also obtain nested QC-LDPC codes by constructing nested base matrices for protograph-based LDPC codes.
V. SIMULATION RESULT In this section, we illustrate the performance of two-user Gaussian CFMA systems with the designed QC-LDPC codes. Throughout our simulations, we use the BP algorithm with 100 iterations as the decoding algorithm. The two users have the same average po√wer, and the constant channel gains h1 and h2 are set to be 3 and 1 respectively.
Fig. 2. EXIT-chart along with simulated trajectories of codes without masking
In P-EXIT technique, the EMI is updated among multiple pairs of VNs and CNs. If the algorithm converges successfully, the EMI of any pair of VN and CN can also converge. As a consequence, we can chase the variation of EMI of one pair of VN and CN to obtain the EXIT-chart which can illustrate the iterative decoding threshold.
Base matrices H1(4, 40) and H2(5, 40) are all-ones matrices with size of 4 × 40 and 5 × 40 respectively, so they are nested naturally. The EXIT-chart along with simulated trajectories of the codes without masking is shown in Fig. 2. The CFMA system with the codes without masking has a iterative decoding threshold of 6.250dB.
The masked base matrices M1(4, 40) and M2(5, 40) are also nested because of the nested relationship of the two masking matrices. The EXIT-chart along with simulated trajectories of them is illustrated in Fig. 3. We can obtain that

164
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:36:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the decoding threshold of the CFMA system with these two codes is 6.170dB, which is slightly lower.

a threshold gain of 0.08dB. There are two reasons why the threshold gain is tiny. Firstly, since the size of base matrix is small, the optional degree distribution is limited. In addition, the masking matrices with larger threshold gain are more sparse in our experiment. To obtain the degree distribution with larger threshold gain, the proportion of degree-2 VNs must be increased, which might lead to a higher error floor. Therefore, in order to strike a balance between waterfall performance and error floor, we chose the current degree distribution.

VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a modified P-EXIT technique to analyse the iterative decoding performances of QC-LDPC codes in CFMA. We also present a kind of extending technique to construct nested QC-LDPC codes in our work. Simulation results show that the nested QC-LDPC codes constructed by our method work efficiently in CFMA system and have a gap of 1.186dB from Shannon Bound at BER of 10−6.

Fig. 3. EXIT-chart along with simulated trajectories of masked codes
The QC-LDPC codes obtained by expanding H1(4, 40) and H2(5, 40) with CPM are used in a two-user Gaussian CFMA system and the bit error rate (BER) performance is shown in Fig. 4. It can be observed that the BER curves of the two users overlap. The reason is that the estimation of the codeword of the second user is the binary sum of the two-stage decoding results and the linear codeword combination s has no bit errors after 7dB.
The BER performance of a two-user Gaussian CFMA system with the QC-LDPC codes obtained by expanding M1(4, 40) and M2(5, 40) with CPM is also given in Fig. 4. From Fig. 4, we can see that the masked QC-LDPC codes has a good BER performance. In addition, the codes have a gap of 1.186dB from the Shannon Bound at BER of 10−6.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported by the grant of national science
foundation of China(NSFC, No.61971333).
REFERENCES
[1] Joy A. Thomas and Thomas M. Cover, “Elements of Information Theory,” John Wiley and Sons, Inc., second edition, 2006.
[2] Rimoldi B and Urbanke R, “A rate-splitting approach to the Gaussian multiple-access channel,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 364-375, 1996.
[3] Zhu J and Gastpar M, “Multiple Access via Compute-and-Forward,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 63, no. 5, pp. 26782695, 2017.
[4] Nazer B and Gastpar M, “Compute-and-Forward: Harnessing Interference with Structured Codes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 6463-6486, 2011.
[5] Sula E, Zhu J, Pastore A and et al. “Compute–Forward Multiple Access (CFMA): Practical Implementations,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 67, no. 2, pp. 1133-1147, 2018.
[6] William E Ryan and S. Lin, “Channel codes: classical and modern,” Cambridge Uninversity Press, New York, 2009.
[7] L. Lan, L. Zeng, Y. Y. Tai, L. Chen, S. Lin and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Construction of Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes for AWGN and Binary Erasure Channels: A Finite Field Approach,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 2429-2458, Jul. 2007.
[8] Xu J, Chen L, Djurdjevic I and et al, “Construction of Regular and Irregular LDPC Codes: Geometry Decomposition and Masking,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 121-134, 2006.
[9] Liva G and Chiani M, “Protograph LDPC Codes Design Based on EXIT Analysis,” in IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, 2007, pp. 3250-3254.
[10] Hua X and Banihashemi A H, “Improved progressive-edge-growth (PEG) construction of irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 715-717, 2004.

Fig. 4. bit error rate of the two-user Gaussian CFMA
Compared the performance of CFMA system with masked and unmasked QC-LDPC codes, it can be seen that there is
165
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:36:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

