Optimized Construction of Short and High Rate Protograph QC-LDPC Codes
Jianrong Bao, Xiaorong Xu, Chao Liu, Jun Wu and Bin Jiang School of Communication Engineering, Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou 310018, China
E-mail: {baojr, xuxr, liuchao, wuj, jiangbin}@hdu.edu.cn

2021 13th International Conference on Wireless Communications and Signal Processing (WCSP) | 978-1-6654-0785-4/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/WCSP52459.2021.9613550

Abstract—To obtain efficient and pragmatic channel codes high signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs), an optimized construction of short and high rate protograph quasi-cyclic (QC) low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes is presented. Based on an optimized protograph template, the code framework is firstly produced by the extensions of the variable nodes. By enlarging the dimension of the sub-matrices related to the protograph framework, the base quasi-cyclic (QC) matrix is generated with required code rate and length. Then, the elements in the base matrix are split with even smaller square sub-matrices of the same row and column weights. In this procedure, a progressive edge growth (PEG) algorithm is employed to find the optimized positions of the QC submatrices, which brings larger girth for better code performance. Also the circulant offsets in all QC sub-matrices are optimally searched by a QC improved approximated cycle extrinsic message degree (QCI-ACE) algorithm, which improves the relationship of the unavoidable loops in the code’s Tanner graph and thus it improves the error floor. Simulation results show that the codes produced by the proposed method demonstrate quite good bit error rate (BER) performance. In addition, they exhibit good properties of high spectrum efficiency by the high code rate, as well as the low complexity by the short code length. Therefore, the proposed code construction can be efficiently applied in the design of short and high rate protograph QC-LDPC codes with high rate and rational complexity.
Index Terms—low-density parity-check codes, protograph, Quasi-cyclic, QC-LDPC, QCI-ACE
I. INTRODUCTION
LDPC codes have good property of approaching Shannon capacity and easily parallel decoding [1]. They were firstly constructed with random check matrices, as LDPC codes, which had dense generator matrices of high encoding complexity in proportion to the square of code length. Random LDPC codes, with carefully chosen degree profiles, could achieve Shannon capacity at a close rate, when decoded by the belief propagation (BP) algorithm [2]. However, they still employed irregular and complex encoders, which hindered their practice. So it was necessary to construct structured LDPC codes, e.g., quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes [3], for efficient encoding and good error floor. High rate LDPC codes can be applied in digital wireless communications with especially high spectrum efficiency. But short high-rate QC LDPC codes
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant U1809201, in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Provincial Universities of Zhejiang under Grant GK209907299001003 and Grant GK209907299001-023, in part by the Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant LY19F010011 and Grant LY20F010010.

are still hard to be constructed with both low floors and good thresholds [4]. So it is necessary to investigate high-rate short QC-LDPC codes with easily encodable structure for high spectrum efficiency in variable wireless channels.
LDPC codes can be depicted by Tanner graphs [1]. The variable/check nodes in a Tanner graph reflect the paritycheck relationships. Recently, a low rate structured LDPC code as accumulate-repeat-accumulate (ARA) code was presented with low floor and good threshold [5]. It was produced by a protograph [6]. But it can’t be easily adjusted to the variable channels. So encodable QC based generalized LDPC codes were suggested [4]. But the codes can’t adequately utilize QC encoding structure and thus increase encoding complexity. So we propose an efficient method to generate the codes based on [4] by splitting the base template matrices with the progressive edge growth (PEG) algorithm [1] and eliminating one minimum QC sub-matrix in the code matrix to solve the rank deficiency. By extending the approximate cycle extrinsic message degree (ACE) algorithm [7] in the QC-LDPC codes to find the circulant offsets in QC sub-matrixes, the QC-LDPC codes are designed to obtain better performance than those of same rate. Besides, they have lower complexity and less latency in decoding. Due to QC structures, they also possess low linear encoding complexity in proportion to code length.
The paper is organized as follows. In section II, protograph QC-LDPC codes are briefly introduced. In section III, the framework of high-rate short QC-LDPC codes is proposed, where a typical code graph is generated by an extension of a seed ARA protograph with variable node extension. The template matrix derived from the base Tanner graph is further divided and thus optimized by the PEG algorithm. In addition, the circulant offsets in the QC permutable sub-matrices are also searched by the QCI-ACE algorithm. In Section IV, the numerical simulations and the analyses on additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels are given to verify good performance and the complexity is also quantitatively analyzed. Finally, the summary is drawn in section V.
II. PROTOGRAPH QC-LDPC CODES
A. LDPC codes with their check matrices and Tanner graphs
An LDPC code can be represented by an m×n low-density parity-check matrix H with rate (n − m)/n, where n, k and m = n − k is the code length, number of information and parity check bits per codeword, respectively. So in the Tanner

978-1-6654-0785-4/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:35:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

graph of the code, there are m check nodes, one for each row of H, and n variable nodes, one for each column of H. For the general case where H has irregular row and column

weight, the Tanner graph can be characterized by the degree assignment sets {dv(i)}in=1 and {dc(j)}jm=1 , where dv(i) is the degree of the i-th variable node and dc(j) is the degree
of the j-th check node [4]. For an LDPC code, the variable

and check degree profile, i.e., λ(x), ρ(x), which influences the

code performance, are depicted as

λ(x) = dv λixi−1, ρ(x) = dc ρixi−1,

(1)

i=2

i=2

where dv and dc are the maximum variable and check node de-

grees. The degree profile is the number of the edges connected

to the variable or check nodes, respectively, where λi is the fraction of edges connected to variable nodes of degree i, while

ρi is related to check nodes of degree i. The degree profiles determine the theoretic decoding threshold of the codes, which

can be searched by the density evolution technique [1]. So the

optimal Tanner graphs of the codes can be designed under the

constraints of the degree profiles.

Since a bipartite graph gives a complete description of an

LDPC code, the specifications of the component (linear) block

are also required. Using the same terminologies in [4], we define V = {Vj }nj=−01 and C = {Ci}im=−01 be the set of n variable nodes (VNs) and the set of m check nodes (CNs)

in the bipartite graph of a QC-LDPC code, respectively. The

connection between the CNs and VNs are summarized in a

m × n base matrix T. Then, T is extended and structured

as an adjacency matrix Π with quasi-cyclic structure, where

each “1” and “0” in T being replaced with a cyclic sub-

matrix Π[e(i, j)] (short for Πi,j) and a zero matrix of the same dimension, respectively. And the cyclic sub-matrix is

usually derived from circulant shift of an identity matrix. So

the relationship between the adjacency matrix Π and the parity

check matrix H for a QC LDPC code is determined, once each

cyclic sub-matrix Πi,j is confirmed. In this case, Π is an array of m × n circulant permutation matrices in the form of

 Π0,0

 Π1,0

Γ=  

...

Π0,1 · · · Π0,n−1 

Π1,1 · · · Π1,n−1 

...

...

...

 , (2)  

Πm−1,0 Πm−1,1 · · · Πm−1,n−1

where each Πi,j is either a q × q circulant permutation matrix or a q × q full zero matrix. So Π is just constructed by

substituting circulant permutation matrices for the 1’s in the

base matrix. The 0’s in Π are replaced by all-zero q × q

matrices. By this mean, short cycles can be avoided with

circulant permutation expansion. So, the final check matrix

H is an optimized permutation case of the binary matrix Π,

with size of mq ×nq, which is enlarged for q times of the base

matrix in the dimension of both rows and cows. In summary,

the check matrix H of a generalized QC-LDPC code can

be obtained by expansion of a base matrix T in the form

of adjacent matrix Π with determined circulant permutation

matrices for large cycles in their Tanner graphs.

B. Multi-edge protographs with extensions
A protograph is similar to the Tanner graph with a relatively small number of nodes, except that it can possess parallel edges, i.e., two nodes can be connected by more than one edge. It is then extended to a larger graph by a “copy-andpermute” procedure. It includes firstly chosing N copies of the protograph, and then permuting the nodes of each edge among N variable and check nodes linked to the set of N edges copied from the same edge in the protograph.
During the “copy-and-permute” procedure, the connection relationship between the same sequence of the variable and constraint nodes must be maintained among different copies of the original protograph. The derived graph is related to a code N times of the original code protograph, with the same rate and profile of variable and check degrees. Decoding thresholds for infinite block size can be calculated using density evolution or EXIT techniques on the protograph [1]. Given number of variable and check nodes in a protograph, all possible combinations between them can be searched over to obtain a protograph with lowest threshold. Some protographs of capacity approaching codes have been searched with good decoding threshold by extensive computer searching. Compared with repeated-accumulate (RA) codes, the performance improvement of the ARA code is mainly decided by the precoding of the RA code with a series of differential encoders. So the performance can be improved by replacing the differential encoder with a more powerful Hamming one. Then they are extended from the basic protograph code to a more powerful hybrid code. The codes can be implemented with the QC structure, which further reduces coding complexity. So the extensions obtain great flexibility to construct codes with better encoding, good thresholds and low floors.
III. CONSTRUCTION OF PROTOGRAPH QC-LDPC CODES
A. The AR4JA seed protographs with variable extensions
To construct a protograph code with good threshold and low floor, the optimized design of the seed protograph, as well as the edge connections is crucial. Among all LDPC codes with the protographs, the protographs of ARA codes can be the proper template for code extensions. They are characterized by good threshold and simple representations. So we mainly discuss the protograph ARA-like QC-LDPC codes with simple edge modification to generate the high rate codes (R > 1/2).
For this protograph QC-LDPC code, the edges in the optimized ARA protograph (as the seed protograph) are modified under the prediction of an EXIT chart for better threshold than that of the original protograph. We mainly modify this seed protograph by increasing or eliminating several connections in the graph to form a much closed relationship of message propagation, thus even increasing the randomness of the codes. The base protograph here is chosen from the famous AR4JA code family in CCSDS standard [9]. Some possible tentative edge changes are made as in Fig. 1. The original protograph is given with the seed protograph of a rate-1/2 AR4JA code [9]. Other being the same, the modification mainly lies in the seed

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:35:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

^t-th t
group

([WHQGHG t JURXS

t

Ă

YDULDEOH

QRGHV

^
VW JURXS



6HHGSURWRJUDSKRID UDWHò$5-$FRGH
 3XQFWXUHGQRGH

5DWH tt tt t Ă

6HHGSURWRJUDSKRID UDWHò$5-$FRGH 

t 

1RGHtatDUH 3XQFWXUHGQRGH

FKHFNQRGHVZLWK1RGH

tLVSXQFWXUHGˈ

DQGRWKHUVDUH





t



t

LQIRUPDWLRQQRGHV

EPRGLILHG$5-$VHHGSURWRJUDSK G$FRGH

t 

6HHGSURWRJUDSKRID UDWHò$5-$FRGH  3XQFWXUHGQRGH

t 





t



t

D2ULJLQDO$5-$SURWRJUDSK





t



t

FPRGLILHG$5-$VHHGSURWRJUDSK G%FRGH

Fig. 1. Protograph QC-LDPC codes with simple edge modification.




 6HHGSURWRJUDSKRID UDWHò$5-$FRGH 
3XQFWXUHGQRGH

&RGH5DWH R tt
tt  when t 
 











Fig. 2. Typical rate 3/4 protograph QC-LDPC code G(A) with t = 2.

protograph. From Fig. 1(b) and Fig. 1(c), edges are modified as two main type codes as G(A) and G(B) codes, respectively. Some of the modified edges are displayed in dashed lines pointed out in the seed protographs, where they are tentatively reversed and testified by the EXIT charts for good threshold. In practices, the code performances are affected by the code length, and cycles in the Tanner graph and so on. So the pragmatic codes can be designed with all factors considered.

B. Optimized base QC matrix from the protograph
Take the G(A) code of rate 2/3 (i.e., t = 1) in Fig. 1(b) for example, the new generated protograph can be obtained as shown in Fig. 2. The variable nodes from node-1 to node-6 are the information bit nodes, and those of node-8 and node9 are the check bit nodes, while the node-7 is the punctured node. The base matrix is then obtained in (3) according to the relationship of protograph and parity-check matrix mentioned in sub-section A of Section II.

1 1 0 0 0 0 2 0 0

 0 1 2 1 2 1 1 2 2 .

(3)

021212002

The extended base code matrix T is then generated from (3) as (4), where all “1” and “2” are replaced with square circulant sub-matrix as I1, I2, shifted from first row of weight-1 and weight-2, respectively, and all “0” with square zero matrix.

 I1 I1 0 0 0 0 I2 0 0  T =  0 I1 I2 I1 I2 I1 I1 I2 I2  . (4)
0 I2 I1 I2 I1 I2 0 0 I2
In the code design, the extended code matrix T has to be further divided to improve the randomness of the matrix and thus enhance the code performance. In other words, the circular square sub-matrix I1 and I2 is needed to split and randomize the distribution of ‘1’ in the final check matrix. For instance, each square circulant matrix I1 or I2 in the base protograph is divided into a 4 × 4 square circulant matrix in (4), as long as it guarantees row and column weight in the original matrix T.

 I1 0 0 0 





I1,1 0 I1,3 0

I1

=

 



0 0

0 I3

I2 0

0 0



 

,

I2

=

 



0 0



I2,2

0

I2,4

 .

I3,2 I3,3

0 

0 0 0 I4

I4,1 0 0 I4,4

(5)

In (5), {Ii, Ii,j} are the embedded sub-matrices after the split of {I1, I2}. The PEG algorithm [1] is then used to
locate the optimal distribution of {Ii, Ii,j} in the sub-matrix I1, I2 of T. By the PEG algorithm, the optimal distribution

of {Ii, Ii,j} in the sub-matrix {I1, I2} of T is confirmed. In addition, the sub-matrix {I1, I2} can also be divided in a
higher dimensional matrix with 8 × 8 or 16 × 16, and so on, to

further improve the code randomness for better performance.

However, it increases the number of the circulant vectors and

thus also increases the storage of their positions too. So the

performance and the complexity should be compromised for

overall performance. Then a typical LDPC code with code

length 1024 (Due to the puncture, the appearance code length

is 1280.) and rate 3/4 is designed by an 4 × 4 division of each

128 × 128 square circulant matrices in T. Finally, a 4 × 4 split

sample matrix, i.e., the base matrix for the final check matrix

H, is shown in (6).





 ··· 0 0 0 0 







 ···

...

...

...

...

I1,1 0 I1,3 0
0 I2,2 0 I2,4
0 I3,2 I3,3 0
I4,1 0 0 I4,4 ...





··· 

 

.







···

(6)

The circulant matrices are allocated randomly only if the

entire QC matrix has full rank. However, the code designed

in [4] cannot be implemented in simple QC form, since it

easily falls in to rank deficiency problem in the matrix derived

from the protograph, where the module-2 addition of all rows

in first two block row of T together are zero vectors. So

an equivalent technique of truncation is used as in Turbo

decoding, by eliminating a smallest circulant submatrix in first

two block row of matrix T to achieve full rank. In practice,

a smallest circulant sub-sub-matrix in the position T(3,2) of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:35:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(4) is eliminated. So the code matrix are generated with full rank, which simplifies the encoding, since the full rank QC matrix is more regular and easily implemented. In addition, the circulant offsets in the sub-matrices are found optimally in next subsection with a QC improved ACE (QCI-ACE) algorithm to obtain better decoding threshold and lower error floor.
C. Optimal circulant offsets by the QCI-ACE algorithm
To obtain good QC-LDPC codes, the code with large girth, i.e., the smallest cycle length, need to be noticed. Since they can’t avoid all cycles, the relationships of the cycles are also crucial [7]. Then the optimal code can be found by the ACE algorithm under the degree profiles and the QC framework. Or the circulant offsets in the QC sub-matrixes are searched by the modified ACE algorithm. It is described as follows.
1) Some notations and parameters [7]. EMD: An extrinsic constraint node of a variable node set is a constraint node singly connected to the set. The EMD of a variable node set is the number of extrinsic constraint nodes. Approximate Cycle EMD (ACE): The ACE of a length 2d cycle is i (di − 2) , where di is the degree of the i-th variable node in the cycle. The ACE of a degree-d variable node is (d − 2), and the ACE of any constraint node is 0. Other parameters: m × n sub-matrixes of the circulant offset are searched. For all variable and check nodes, p(µt) is the ACE between the nodeµt and the root node v0 in the tree search. When µt is a variable node, ACE(µt) is the degree of µt − 2. Otherwise ACE(µt) is 0. 2) The QCI-ACE algorithm for the QC adjacent matrix. The QCI-ACE algorithm is proposed in Tab. I. The optimal circulant offsets of the non-zero sub-matrix Πi,j are found and (dACE, ηACE) is searched by multiple tentative experiments in the proposed QCI-ACE algorithm. Finally, the possible combinations can be tentatively found and (dACE, ηACE) is chosen as (6, 3) by multiple trials and they are optimized for short and high rate codes by the ACE principle.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS AND ANALYSES
To verify the performance of the protograph QC-LDPC codes by the proposed method, the BER of them are simulated and compared with those of the CCSDS AR4JA codes [9] and the existing well designed QC-LDPC codes, respectively. The decoding complexity is also analyzed in practice.
A. BER simulations and comparison of the proposed codes
1) Comparison with the AR4JA codes. Short high rate G(A)&G(B) QC-LDPC codes with information bit length and rate (1024, 2/3), (1024,4/5) are designed by the above method. In contrast schemes, the CCSDS AR4JA codes [9] with same code length and rate are adopted. With the above parameters, the BER for all codes are shown in Fig. 3. The proposed QC-LDPC code obtains a little better performance over the contrast AR4JA codes by 0.03-0.05 dB at BER of 10−5 on an AWGN channel. Our codes still have a slightly performance gains, though the AR4JA codes have been optimally constructed with the similar base protograph.

TABLE I THE FLOW DIAGRAM OF THE QCI-ACE ALGORITHM.

Initializations: m × n sub-matrixes for searching the QC offsets are

required. For all variable and check nodes, p(µt) is the ACE between

any node µt and the root node v0 in the tree search of the code.

When µt is a variable node, ACE(µt) is the degree of µt minus 2.

Otherwise, ACE(µt) is 0.

Main Procedure

1:for (i =n-1;i≤ 0; i- -)

2: begin

3: for (j=0; j ≤ m-1; j++)

4: begin

5: redo:

6: Randomly generate vi according to the non-zero offset position-

ing in the first row of the QC sub-matrix where it is not ‘0’ in the

protograph matrix.

7: ACE detection of vi:

p(µt) ← ∞ for all variable and check nodes.

p(vi) ← ACE(vi) for all variable and check nodes. Find possible loops in current code structure.

Loops are searched by tree spreading of the code Tanner graph.

Given one variable node as a root, track the connected edges from it

to any possible nodes by the wellknown Depth-First-Search algorithms

in graph theory and record the node sets with loops.

8: for (k =1; k ≤ dACE ; k++) 9: begin

10: for any active node ws in level (k − 1).

11:

begin

12:

Find its children set Ch(ws).

13:

for every child µt ∈ Ch(ws).

14:

begin

15:

ptemp ← p(ws) + ACE(µt).

16:

stemp = ptemp + p(µt) − ACE(vi) − ACE(µt).

17:

if (stemp < ηACE )

18:

Exit with failure.

19:

else if (ptemp ≥ p(µt))

20:

Deactivate µt in level-k with current parent ws.

21:

else

22:

p(µt) ← ptemp

23:

end

24:

end

25:

end

26:

Exit with success.

27:

if (ACE < ηACE for a cycle of length 2dACE or less)

28:

goto redo.

29:

end

30: end

31: end

32: end

At low SNRs, the G(A) code outperforms the G(B) code, because G(A) code have high variable weight at the node 2t+5 at the right top of Fig. 1(b). But it also brings a little poor error floor for the code. So at high SNRs, the performance degrades.
2) Comparison with existing high rate QC-LDPC codes. G(A) and G(B) codes, with code length and rate (1000, 4/5), (2000, 4/5) are designed with the proposed scheme. The contrast E1 and E2 QC-LDPC codes [11] with the same parameters are adopted. With above parameters, the BER for these codes are shown in Fig. 4. The proposed QC-LDPC code obtains a little better performance over the contrast QCLDPC codes by 0.1-0.05 dB at BER of 10−6 on an AWGN channel. The designs of the contrast codes just concentrate the girth of the code, which neglects the relationships among the loops. So the ACE properties have not been improved for better threshold and floor, thus it still loss some performance,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:35:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Protograph QC−LDPC codes, Maximum Iterations = 100 10−1 10−2

TABLE II DECODING COMPLEXITY OF THE PROPOSED CODE.

Additions

Module-2 Look Table

(2Lwc − wc + L)N + LM (wr − 1) LM (wr − 1) LM wr

Bit−Error−Rate (BER)

10−3

10−4

10−5

G(A)(1024,2/3)

G(B)(1024,2/3)

10−6

AR4JA(1024,2/3) G(A)(1024,4/5)

G(B)(1024,4/5)

AR4JA(1024,4/5)

10−7

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

Eb/N0 [dB]

Fig. 3. BER of the proposed G(A)&G(B) codes v.s. AR4JA codes.

Protograph QC−LDPC codes, Maximum Iterations = 100 10−1

G(A)(1000,4/5)

10−2

G(B)(1000,4/5) QC−LDPC E1(1000,4/5)

G(A)(2000,4/5)

G(B)(2000,4/5)

10−3

QC−LDPC E2(2000,4/5)

10−4

10−5

10−6

10−7

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

E /N [dB]
b0

Fig. 4. BER of the proposed codes v.s. current QC-LDPC codes.

Bit−Error−Rate (BER)

when compared with those by our code construction method.
B. Complexity analyses of the proposed codes
Practical LDPC codes mainly influnced by high encoding complexity in proportion to the square of code length. However, by the QC form, they have just linear encoding complexity in proportion to code length. They employ a linear feedback shift register to compactly store the generator matrix, which is easily implemented with resource limited hardware. Parallel BP algorithm can be used in LDPC decoding. The QC structure also simplifies the decoding, since the addressing, i.e., acquring the location of variable/check nodes in hardware memory, is efficient to save much memory resources. Given appearance code length N , information bit length K, and

check bit length M (i.e., N − K), average row and column weight as wr and wc, iteration number L, the complexity of BP decoding are listed in Table II .
In practice, LDPC decoding can be implemented partial parallel under limited resources. Therefore, the proposed method is flexible and easily adjusted to generate other high rate codes efficiently by selecting a proper seed protograph and some variable nodes for rate extensions.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper mainly presents an optimized construction of efficient protograph QC-LDPC codes with short length and high rate. A Tanner graph is generated by the extension of a protograph with variable extensions. Meanwhile, the PEG and QCI-ACE algorithms are also given to optimize the specific code characteristic of the systematic construction of the proposed codes for good threshold and low floor. Simulation results show that the generated codes can achieve good performance, when decoded using the iterative BP decoding. In addition, the complexity of both encoding and decoding is suited for practical implementation. Therefore, the proposed code construction method can be efficiently applied in coding practice with good performance and low complexity .
REFERENCES
[1] W. E. Ryan, S. Lin, Channel codes classic and modem, New York: Cambridge University Press, 2009.
[2] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low density parity check codes under message passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-47, no. 2, pp. 599-618, Feb. 2001.
[3] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: a rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[4] G. Liva, W. E. Ryan and M. Chiani, “Quasi-cyclic generalized LDPC codes with low error floors,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no. 12, pp. 49-57, Jan. 2008.
[5] A. Abbasfar, K. Yao and D. Disvalar, “Accumulate repeat accumulate codes,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom, pp. 509-513, Nov. 2004.
[6] J. Thorpe, “Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from protographs,” JPL INP, Tech. Rep., pp. 42-154, Aug. 2003.
[7] T. Tian, C. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPC code construction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no.8, Aug. 2004, pp. 1242-1247.
[8] J. Bao,Y. Zhan, J. Wu and J.Lu, “Design of efficient low rate QCARA GLDPC codes,” Int. Commun. Conf. on Wireless Mobile and Computing (IET CCWMC 2009), pp. 213-216, Dec. 2009.
[9] CCSDS, Research and development for space data system standards: low density parity check codes for use in near-earth and deep space applications-experimental specification, CCSDS, Sep. 2007.
[10] Y. Liu, M. Zhang M, J. Fan, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes with high-rate and low error floor based on Euclidean geometries,” Journal of China University of Posts and Telecom, vol.19, no.2, pp. 96-99, 2012.
[11] I. E. Bocharova, F. Hug, R. Johannesson, et. al., “High-rate QC LDPC codes of short and moderate length with good girth profile,” 2012 7th Int’l Symp. on. Turbo Codes and Iterative Information Processing (IEEE ISTC’2012), pp. 150-154, Jan. 2012.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:35:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

