Early Termination Scheme for 5G NR LDPC Code 
 
Nam-Il KIM, and Jin-Up KIM  
Wireless Distributed Communication Research Section 
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institutue (ETRI) 
Daejeon, South Korea 
{namilk, jukim}@etri.re.kr 
Abstract— According to its excellent error recovery capability, 
Low Density Parity Check code has been adopted as a channel 
coding method for 5G NR data channels. This paper proposes a 
novel early termination scheme of the layered quasi-cyclic LDPC 
code decoder for a 5G NR data channel. In terms of early 
termination and error correction performance, the proposed 
scheme shows improved performance compared to the 
conventional scheme. Simulation results show that 18.7% 
reduction with regard to average iteration numbers can be 
achieved compared to the traditional termination schemes, such as 
syndrome check(SDC) and hard decision aid(HDS). Furthermore, 
the proposed scheme shows error correction performance 
improvement of 0.2dB. 
Keywords—5G, NR, LDPC codes, Early Termination 
I. INTRODUCTION  
5G NR mobile communication system applies a Low 
Density Parity Check (LDPC) code for reliable data 
transmission and high performance gain.[2] The base graph 
structure constituting the parity check matrix (PCM) is a 
Quasi-Cyclic (QC) LDPC code having a row configuration of 
a core check part and an extension check part. LDPC code is 
a channel coding code that corrects errors using a parity check 
matrix (PCM) H matrix composed of binary numbers 
including '1's of low density.[2] 
A layered iterative decoding of the Quasi-Cyclic Low 
Density Parity Check(QC-LDPC) code may be performed 
using a message-passing or a belief-propagation algorithm 
(BPA) through exchange of log-likelihood ratio(LLR) 
probability messages between check nodes and variable nodes. 
Well-known iterative decoding algorithms include the sum-
product 
algorithm(SPA), 
min-sum 
algorithm(MSA), 
normalized MSA, offset MSA and so on.[5] 
The early termination scheme of iterative decoding for 
LDPC code is a very interested topic for hardware complexity, 
reduction of decoding delay, and power consumption. There 
are various early termination schemes such as syndrome check 
(SDC) or hard decision aid(HDA). The syndrome check 
method has a disadvantage in that the amount of computation 
is large because it performs operations on all layers, and the 
hard decision aid does not guarantee the accuracy of the 
decoding result, resulting in performance degradation due to 
incorrect termination.[6][7][8][9] 
In this paper, we provide an early termination scheme of 
iterative decoding that applies partial syndrome check and 
sign change determination only to the core part of the PCM H 
matrix. Comparing the proposed method with the existing 
method, it provides faster early termination and improved 
error correction performance. 
In Section II, we have a brief review of layered decoding 
and its conventional early termination for 5G NR LDPC code. 
The now early termination scheme and simulation results are 
described in Section III. And we concludes this paper  in 
section IV. 
II. PRELIMINARY  
In this section, we review the structure of 5G NR LDPC 
codes and describe the iterative decoding procedure and its  
early termination schemes. 
A. 5G NR LDPC CODE 
In Fig.1, we describe the base graph structure of the 5G 
NR QC-LDPC code. The rows are made up core check and 
extension check parts. The columns consist of systematic, core 
parity and extension parity columns. Systematic part of 
submatrix A corresponds to information. And submatrix B is 
a square matrix with a dual-diagonal structure and 
corresponds to the first set of parity bits. Submatrix C 
corresponds to single parity check(SPC) rows. Submatrix O is 
an all-zero matrix and I is an identity matrix. 
The LDPC code is composed of a connection between the 
LDPC code and a low-density generator matrix. The code 
structure starts with the LDPC part, which corresponds to the 
core part of the base graph. The parity check node of the core 
part consists of a small number of mcore = 4, and the variable 
node consists of an information variable node with kb = 22 
(base graph 1) or 10 (base graph 2) and a parity variable node 
with mcore = 4 . 
 
Fig. 1. Base graph structure for the 5G NR LDPC codes 
B. Iterative Decoding  
The iterative decoding works based on a specified number 
of repetitions. Iterative decoding is performed through the 
updating of the check node messages and the variable node 
messages with respect to the LLR value of the demodulated 
symbol, and the hard decision of the coded bit. The N-MSA 
decoding procedure of iterative belief-propagation is as 
follows. 
The procedure starts with the initial LLR of probability 
calculation as shown in the follows. 
𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣=  𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙
𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣(0)
𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣(1)                                                              (1) 
933
978-1-6654-2383-0/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE
ICTC 2021
2021 International Conference on Information and Communication Technology Convergence (ICTC) | 978-1-6654-2383-0/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICTC52510.2021.9621117
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:37:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
The decoder update the check node and variable node 
messages with the initial likelihood ratio. In iteration loop, the 
update of check node messages and variable node messages 
are as follows: 
step1) initialize the variables: 
 𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣= 𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣 , 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣= 0  
step2) iteration loop: 
for all c ∈C  
    for all ν ∈N(c) 𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐= 𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣−𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣                              (2) 
    for all ν ∈N(c)  
       𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣= 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎∙∏
𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠(
ν′∈N(c)\ν
𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣′𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐) ∙
      min
ν′∈N(c)|𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣′𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐|                                                                    (3)   
       𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣= 𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐+ 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣                                                   (4) 
   end of loop 
end of loop 
step3) check termination condition 
C. Early Termination 
Iterative decoding process is used to decode information 
bits in the LDPC code decoder. LDPC code decoding has a 
disadvantage in that an error correction result is determined 
only when the decoding is proceeded up to the predefined 
maximum iterative numbers. Early termination scheme is used 
to determine whether LDPC decoding should be terminated 
before reaching the maximum number of iterations. 
A typical early termination scheme includes a syndrome 
operation and a sign bit check of consecutively iteratively 
decoded data. In the syndrome check early termination 
scheme, the decoder compares a syndrome of the codeword at 
the current iterations. This may be operated when the 
syndrome is non-zero. The decoder stop the iterative decoding 
according to the comparing(𝑦𝑦𝑦𝑦𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣ෝ𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇= 0). The termination of 
iterative decoding is prior to proceeding the maximum 
iteration numbers. In the sign bit checking method, the 
iterative decoding is terminated when there is no sign change 
for all decoded data according to whether or not the signs of 
consecutive iterative decoded data are changed. 
III. PROPOSED EARLY TERMINATION SCHEME  
As shown in Figure 1, the base graph of the 5G NR LDPC 
code consists of core checks and extension checks in the row 
composition. In each row of core checks and extension checks, 
the composition of entries with a value of 1 has relatively less 
distribution of extension checks compared to core checks.  
A. Early termination procedures 
The 
proposed 
technology 
uses 
the 
structural 
characteristics of the base graph, which is composed of a core 
part corresponding to the LDPC code and an extension part 
corresponding to a low-density generator matrix. The layer 
decoding priority in the iterative decoding order is applied to 
obtain gains in decoding performance. In the iterative layer 
decoding process, the layer decoding of the extension checks 
is performed first, and then the layer decoding of the core 
checks is performed. 
The process for early termination is performed through 
layered partial syndrome calculation and layered partial LLR 
data sign change calculation only for core check parts.  
The layered partial syndrome calculation process is 
performed through the syndrome operation on all neighboring 
variable nodes of each layer. And, the layered partial LLR data 
sign change calculation is performed for all connected 
variable nodes of each layer. 
The early termination technique for the iterative layered 
N-MSA is described as the following procedure. 
step1) initialization: 
  𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣= 𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣,
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣= 0  
step2) iteration: 
   
  PartialHDcmp−Acc =  0 
  Partialsyndrom−Acc =  0  
  𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇= 0                                                                         (5)  
  for all c, c is 𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟 count  
     if c ∈𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠, HDacc = 0,Syndromacc = 0(6) 
     for all ν ∈N(c)  
        if c ∈ core checks,   HDold ==   HD(𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣) 
        𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐= 𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣−𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣 
        𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣= 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎∙
ෑ
𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠(
ν′∈N(c)\ν
𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣′𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐)
∙min
ν′∈N(c)|𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣′𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐|                  
         𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣= 𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐+ 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣                                                  
         if  (c ∈core checks) and (𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇== 0)                     (7) 
                HDnew =   Hard Decision of 𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣 
                HDcmp = (HDold ! = HDnew) ?  1 ∶0 
                HDacc = HDacc + HDcmp  
                Syndromacc = Syndromacc + HDnew 
         endif  
      end of loop 
      if ( c ∈core checks) and (𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇== 0)                      (8) 
          PartialHDcmp = ( HD𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐> 0 )? 1 ∶0    (8)  
          Partialsyndrom = (Syndromacc ==  𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠) ? 0 ∶1    
          𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒= (PartialHDcmp == 0 & 
                                         Partialsyndrom == 0) ? 0 ∶1      
       endif 
    end of loop 
step2-1) check termination condition 
    if (𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇== 0) 𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙 (𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠== 𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄)  
           𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄 𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 
    else continue iterative decoding 
end of iteration loop 
 
The detailed operation of the above procedure is as follows. 
First, the accumulation of the hard decision comparison and 
partial syndrome check of  variable node messages are 
initialized. For the layer corresponding to the core checks part, 
the sign change of hard decision and partial syndrome check 
of all variable nodes connected to the check node of the each 
layer are performed. In the early termination condition, if there 
is no change in the partial hard decision comparison value and 
the partial syndrome operation result is '0', the early 
termination condition operation has a value of '0', otherwise it 
has a value of '1'. If the early termination condition obtained 
for the core checks part is ‘0’, iterative decoding is terminated. 
934
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:37:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
B. Simulation Results  
We carried out the simulation of  LDPC code for 5G NR 
in base graph 1 using lift factor 128 and set the maximum 
iteration number to 10. To obtain average values for Block 
Error Rate (BLER) and iteration count comparisons, 
1,000,000 simulations were performed each for N-MSA in the 
Additive White Gaussian Noise(AWGN) channel. The 
encoded data passes through a BPSK modulator and is input 
to the BPSK demodulator through AWGN channel. The 
output signal of the BPSK demodulator is input to a decoder 
of the LDPC code and is used for decoding as an LLR value. 
After each iteration process, a syndrome is checked for the 
hard decision data output from the decoder, and if the 
syndrome result is '0', an early termination is performed. The 
block error rate (BLER) calculates the error rate by comparing 
the transmitted data of the transmitter with the output data of 
the decoder. In addition, the average number of iterative 
decoding was derived by accumulating the number of iterative 
decoding required until the end of the decoder. 
In Figure 2, BLER performances are compared, the 
simulation results of the proposed scheme is better than 
conventional scheme about 0.2dB.  
Figure 3 shows the performance comparison for the 
iteration number. The proposed scheme shows the 
performance of reducing the iteration numbers by 18.7% 
compared to the conventional syndrome check scheme at -3.4 
dB Es/No. 
 
Fig. 2. BLER performance 
 
Fig. 3. Iterative number comparison 
IV. CONCLUSION  
In this study, we propose a new early termination scheme 
to reduce the iterative operation and the amount of 
computation by using only the core check parts of the base 
graph. In the conventional layer decoding method, an 
operation for early termination is performed on all layers of 
the parity code matrix (PCM). The proposed method provides 
the effect of reducing the operation processing and power 
reduction by performing the operation for early termination 
only for the core checks part.  
Finally, it is possible to obtain an effect of reducing the 
number of iterative decoding. The iteration number reflects 
the processing time and latency of the decoder. This result 
allows the improvement of BLER performance and the 
reduction of decoding latency. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the Institute of Information & 
communications Technology Planning & Evaluation(IITP) 
grant funded by the Korea government(MSIT) (No. 2021-0-
00165, Development of 5G+ Intelligent Basestation Software 
Modem) 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Gallager, Low-Density-Parity-Check Codes. J. IRE Transactions on 
Information 
Theory, 
8, 
1 
(Jan. 
1962), 
21-28. 
DOI: 
10.1109/TIT.1962.1057683. 
[2] 3GPP: TS 38.212 NR; Multiplexing and channel coding (Release 15), 
2020. 
[3] H. Li, B. Bai, X. Mu, J. Zhang and H. Xu, "Algebra-Assisted 
Construction of Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes for 5G New Radio," in 
IEEE 
Access, 
vol. 
6, 
pp. 
50229-50244, 
2018, 
doi: 
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2868963. 
[4] M. P. C. Fossorier, "Quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes from 
circulant permutation matrices," in IEEE Transactions on Information 
Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788-1793, Aug. 2004, doi: 
10.1109/TIT.2004.831841. 
[5] Nguyen Thi Dieu Linh, Gang Wang, Min Jia and Georgia Rugumira, 
2012. “Performance Evaluation of Sum Product and Min-sum Stopping 
Node Algorithm for LDPC Decoding,” Information Technology 
Journal, 11: 1298-1303. 
[6] Zhejun Zhang, Guanghui He, Jun Ma, " A New Early Termination 
Strategy for QC-LDPC Codes Based on the Layered Message Passing 
Decoding," in AASRI-WIET 2013, Dec. 2013. 
[7] M. Marinkovic, E. Grass and M. Krstic, "An Early Termination 
Strategy for Irregular LDPC Codes with Layered Decoding - 
Performance Evaluation and Implementation," ISWCS 2013; The 
Tenth International Symposium on Wireless Communication Systems, 
2013, pp. 1-5. 
[8] Y. Lin, Y. Chen, M. Chung and A. Wu, "High-throughput QC-LDPC 
decoder with cost-effective early termination scheme for non-volatile 
memory systems," 2014 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits 
and 
Systems 
(ISCAS), 
2014, 
pp. 
2732-2735, 
doi: 
10.1109/ISCAS.2014.6865738. 
[9] J. Li, G. He, H. Hou, Z. Zhang and J. Ma, "Memory efficient layered 
decoder design with early termination for LDPC codes," 2011 IEEE 
International Symposium of Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), 2011, pp. 
2697-2700, doi: 10.1109/ISCAS.2011.5938161. 
[10] Nam-Il KIM, Seung-Que LEE, Jin-Up KIM. "A Modified Min Sum 
Decoding Algorithm based on Approximation Enhancement for LDPC 
Codes", 2020 International Conference on Information and 
Communication Technology Convergence (ICTC), 2020
 
935
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:37:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
