Asia-Pacific Magnetic Recording Conference 2018 15 – 17 濂濣濪濙濡濖濙濦澠 2018, USST, China
On the Design of DC-Free k-Constrained LDPC Codes
Chi Dinh Nguyen, Kui Cai, Bingrui Wang, and Yan Hong Singapore University of Technology and Design (SUTD), Singapore 487372

Abstract— A novel design of dc-free k-constraint lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) code is proposed in this study. The input user data is first converted into a k-constraint code using a nibble replacement method. After that, a guided scrambling (GS) technique and a (4,6) balance code are deployed together to construct dc-free channel coded sequences. The designed dc-free k constrained code is further combined with the LDPC code such that the modulation constraints are satisfied in both the systematic and parity parts. Simulation results show that the proposed design not only provides an improved bit-error-rate (BER) performance, but also achieves significant dc suppression.
Index Terms - Low-density parity-check (LDPC) code, k-constrained
code, DC-free, balance codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
Recording systems are typically designed based on a concatenation of two separate coding schemes: an errorcorrection coding (ECC) scheme and a modulation code or constrained code [1]. Each coding scheme realizes its own encoding procedure in a manner to improve recording performance. The ECC schemes attempt to correct alreadyoccurred errors, which can be caused by impairments of the channel, whereas the constrained codes impose positive constraints onto the input sequence to match specified channel characteristics, e.g., a certain run-length constraint or a certain spectrum constraint. The dc-free codes, which have spectral nulls at zero frequency (f = 0), and k-constrained codes, which are the maximum number of encoded 0’s between two encoded 1’s, have been employed in many applications of digital transmission and recording systems. The dc-free k-constraint codes are motivated by the need of combining the typical features of both dc-free and k-constraint codes. To achieve an optimized recording system, generally, the following requirements need satisfying, 1) constrained codes with high code-rate, low complexity, 2) ECC scheme with low error floors, 3) non or limited error propagation. Therefore, we propose a new design of a dc-free k-constraint low-density parity-check (LDPC) code to match the requirements for recording systems. The analysis of the proposed design is presented in section II, results and remarkable conclusions are drawn in section III and section IV, respectively.
II. PROPOSED DESIGNS
A. k-constraint Codes based on Nibble Replacement The k-constraint codes based on the nibble replacement
have been reported recently in [2], [3]. There are two steps during the encoding procedure, namely, the nibble replacement and the nibble flipping. For the first step, the (n-1) user bits are

split into a first nibble of (q-1) bits and subsequent (L-1) nibbles of q bits. The first nibble prefixed with an initial pivot bit of “1” is named as pivot nibble. The encoder then carries out scanning for (L-1) subsequent nibbles to find out all-0 nibbles (i.e. inadmissible nibbles), whereby an all-0 nibble means [00…0] nibble. Once an all-0 nibble is found out, the encoder is to 1) replace it by the pivot nibble; 2) set the pivot bit to 0; 3) convert the address and the decimal value of the all-0 nibble into the binary data and store the data using the remaining q-1 bits of the pivot nibble. The encoder continues the scanning to find and replace the inadmissible nibbles in the rest of the data sequence. The nibble flipping is then used in the second step of the encoding process. We denote L nibbles obtained from the first steps as Ui, i = [1, L]. The encoder first checks each of the L nibbles with the last bit of the previous nibble, i.e. check {Ui, Ui-1(q)}. In case of Ui is all-1 nibble, at the same time Ui-1(q) = 1, the encoder flips whole nibble Ui, whereby an all-1 nibble means [11…1] nibble. Otherwise, the encoder outputs the right nibble Ui. During retrieving information, the signal is untied k-constraint through two corresponding steps, a de-flipping process and a recursively de-replacing one [2].
B. DC-free k-constraint LDPC codes
Fig. 1 shows a block diagram of the proposed design. As shown in this figure, dc controlling is carried out separately for the user part and the parity part. For the user part, dc suppression is accomplished using the guided scrambling (GS) method. During the encoding procedure, the user bits are prefixed with p redundant bits. The signal is then scrambled with a polynomial g(x) of the scrambler. After scrambling, the 2p scrambled sequences are encoded by the user-NRE (1023,1024). The encoder then selects the best codeword according to the minimum running digital sum (RDS) criterion. The dc-free k-constraint signal continues to be processed by the LDPC (4428,4920) encoder. The output of the LDPC encoder consists of the systematic user information which is dc-free k-constraint signal and the parity bits which need to be encoded to generate the k-constrained dc-free signal. The parity bits are then handled based on the concatenation of the k-constraint parity-NRE (31,32) and a (4,6) balance modulation code. After converted into the k-constraint sequence by the parity-NRE, the signal continues to be encoded by the (4,6) balance code. The encoding of the balance modulation code is a mapping 1-1 between the 4-bits input into the balanced 6-bit output using a little mapping table. Its decoding procedure is based on the Euclidean distance concept.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:19:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

III. SIMULATION RESULTS
The data sequence encoded using the above-described design is passed through an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. The received signal is decoded using the corresponding decoders during retrieving information. Finally, the signal is untied k-constraint, and then descrambled to recover the original data. We first investigate the spectrum of the proposed design. Fig.2 shows the simulated power spectrum density (PSD) of the proposal with two different redundant-bit lengths p during the user-GS. As shown, the design generates spectrum nulls of more than -50 dB. We also assess the BER performance of the proposed design by comparing to a prior-art suggested scheme [4], named DCRLL5054-LDPC herein. As shown in Fig. 3, the performance of the proposed design is better than that of [4], e.g., a gain of about 0.4 dB can be obtained at BER of 10-4.
IV. CONCLUSION
A new design of concatenating LDPC codes with dc-free kconstraint codes is investigated. The proposed design can not only achieve high code-rate, but also avoid the effect of error propagation, and as a result the BER performance can be improved substantially. We have also shown that the proposal codes can generate spectrum nulls of more than -50 dB at dc with reasonable computational complexity.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported by Singapore Agency of Science and Technology (A*Star) PSF research grant, SUTD-ZJU grant ZJURP1500102, and SUTD SRG grant SRLS15095.
REFERENCES
[1] P. H. Siegel, “Recording codes for digital magnetic storage,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. MAG-21. no. 5, pp. 1344-1349. Sept. 1985.
[2] K. A. S. Immink, “High-rate maximum runlength constrained coding schemes using nibble replacement,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-58, no. 10, pp. 6572–6580, Oct. 2012.
[3] K. Cai, K. A. S. Immink, M. Zhang and R. Zhao, “On the design of spectrum shaping codes for high-density data storage,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 63, no. 4, pp. 477-482, Nov. 2017.
[4] Y. Han and W. E. Ryan, “Concatenating a structured LDPC code and a constrained code to preserve softdecoding, structure, and burst correction,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 2558–2560, Oct. 2006.

Asia-Pacific Magnetic Recording Conference 2018 15 – 17 濂濣濪濙濡濖濙濦澠 2018, USST, China
Fig. 1 Block diagram of the proposed model.
Fig. 2 Simulated PSD of the proposed design according to different redundancies for the GS.
Fig. 3 BER comparisons.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:19:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

