IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 54, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2018

9401205

Reduced Complexity Window Decoding of Spatially Coupled LDPC Codes for Magnetic Recording Systems
Sirawit Khittiwitchayakul , Watid Phakphisut , and Pornchai Supnithi Faculty of Engineering, King Mongkut’s Institute of Technology Ladkrabang, Bangkok 10520, Thailand

Spatially coupled low-density parity-check (SC-LDPC) codes have emerged to possess capacity-approaching performance. The SC-LDPC codes can be decoded by a sliding window, therefore, the decoding latency and complexity of SC-LDPC codes are lower than those of underlying LDPC codes when the codeword length is very large. In this paper, the SC-LDPC decoder with the sliding window is employed in turbo equalization of magnetic recording systems. We examine the bit error rates (BERs) of the output of the sliding window during the iterative decoding, and then observe that the consecutive code blocks have approximately the same BERs. Herein, to reduce decoding complexity of SC-LDPC codes, the consecutive code blocks can be considered as the output of SC-LDPC codes. In addition, the non-uniform schedule update is adopted in the window decoding to avoid unnecessary updates within a window. The simulation results show that the proposed decoding algorithms applied in bit-patterned media magnetic recording systems can achieve a significant reduction in complexity compared to the traditional decoding without any loss in BER performance.
Index Terms— Low-density parity-check (LDPC) code, non-uniform schedules, spatially coupled codes, turbo equalization, window decoding.

I. INTRODUCTION
I N CHANNEL coding theory, the performance of errorcorrecting codes (ECCs) approaching the Shannon limit can be achieved through increasing code lengths. Unfortunately, the decoding complexity of ECCs will be increased as the code length increases. Nowadays, the magnetic recording systems take advantage of powerful low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes by using 4-kB sectors instead of 512-B sectors [1]. To increase error-correcting capability, the sector size must be increased beyond 4 kB; however, the complexity of LDPC codes will be increased exponentially. Among the advanced LDPC codes, the spatially coupled LDPC (SC-LDPC) codes (also known as LDPC convolutional codes [2]) are demonstrated to have lower decoding latency and complexity than those of the underlying LDPC block codes (LDPC-BC). In addition, the iterative decoding threshold of SC-LDPC codes converges to the maximum a posteriori threshold [3], [4].
An advantage of SC-LDPC codes is that the decoder can use a sliding window, whereby the received signals are decoded by the sliding window along the bit sequence. For the uniform window decoding (U-WD) [5], all the variable nodes within a sliding window are updated simultaneously. To reduce the complexity of window decoding, the iterative message passing decoding with serial schedules [6] has been applied, providing only 15% reduction in complexity, as shown in [7]. Therefore, Hassan et al. [7] proposed the non-uniform window decoding (N-WD), which do not update the variable nodes showing no improvement in the bit error rates (BERs). This approach provides about 35%–55% reduction in complexity compared to U-WD. In addition, the counterpart non-uniform decoding
Manuscript received March 9, 2018; revised April 13, 2018; accepted April 22, 2018. Date of publication July 2, 2018; date of current version October 17, 2018. Corresponding author: W. Phakphisut (e-mail: watid.ph@kmitl.ac.th).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2018.2832252

schedule known as non-uniform pragmatic window decoding (NP-WD) schedule [7] is proposed to avoid the BER estimates in the N-WD.
In this paper, we consider the application of SC-LDPC codes in turbo equalization of magnetic recording system, whereby the SC-LDPC decoder cooperates with Bahl–Cocke–Jelinek–Raviv (BCJR) detector to tackle the ISIs. During the iterative decoding of turbo equalization, all variable nodes within the window decoder will be decoded several times. Therefore, we propose the dynamic shifting window decoding (DS-WD) to further reduce the decoding complexity of SC-LDPC codes. The soft BERs of each code block within the window will be estimated. Herein, the multiple code blocks can be the output of window decoder when their estimated BERs are the same. On the contrary, in the UWD [5] and NP-WD [7], the single-code block will be the output of the window decoder. In addition, we modify the NP-WD given in [7] to reinforce the proposed DS-WD and name it “dynamic-shifting NP-WD (DS-NP-WD).” The DSNP-WD can eliminate unnecessary updates within a window. However, due to the multiple blocks shifted from the window decoder, the update schedules of DS-NP-WD will be differ from NP-WD schedules. The simulation results show that the proposed DS-WD and DS-NP-WD algorithms achieve the significant reduction in complexity without any loss in BER performance compared to the U-WD and NP-WD algorithms.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we describe the SC-LDPC codes and their decoding algorithms used throughout this paper. Then the proposed decoding algorithms in turbo equalization are described in Section III. Finally, the simulation results and conclusions are presented in Sections IV and V, respectively.
II. SPATIALLY COUPLED LDPC (SC-LDPC) CODES
A ( J , K )-SC-LDPC code can be constructed from a protograph [8], which is represented as a base matrix B. The matrix B contains J and K non-zero elements in each

0018-9464 © 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:19:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

9401205

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 54, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2018

column and row, respectively. The protograph is copied for N times and the edges of each replica are permuted, then, the derived graph is the corresponding parity-check matrix H. To explain the spatially coupled codes, we first examine the transmitting a sequence of code blocks v = [v1, . . . , vt , . . . , vL]. An essential feature of spatially coupled codes is that the consecutive transmitting blocks have the edge connection [9]. The number of the connected code blocks can be defined as the memory of mcc + 1 of the coupled code. Hence, the matrix B of coupled code can be expressed as

B

=

⎡[B1

B2 B1,1

...

Bt

...

BL]

=

⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢

... Bm cc +1,1

B1,2 ...
Bm cc +1,2

... ...

B1,t ...
Bm cc +1,t

... ...

⎤

B1,L ...

⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥.

Bm cc +1, L

(1)

The edge connection of the consecutive transmitting blocks

can be described by the matrix Bi,t of size nc × nv . However,

the matrix Bi,t must satisfy the condition

m cc +1 i =1

Bi,t

=

Bt

to maintain the check node and variable node degrees of the

base matrix Bt .

A. Uniform Window Decoding (U-WD)
In general, the SC-LDPC codes can be decoded by using
block decoding of which the message passing algorithm is applied to decode the total length of coupled codes. However,
to reduce the latency and complexity of SC-LDPC decoder,
a sliding window decoding has been proposed [5]. Since each code block vt has the memory size of mcc + 1, the decoder with window size of W ≥ mcc + 1 must be used. The sliding window operated at any decoding position t will cover the received code blocks [yt , yt+1, . . . , yt+W −1], where each received block yt contains Nnv bits. In each window decoding position t, the received code blocks [yt , yt+1, . . . , yt+W −1] are decoded by passing the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) values back
and forth between the variable nodes and check nodes within a window. For example, in Fig. 1, the received code blocks [yt , yt+1, yt+2, yt+3] will be passed to the window decoder of (3, 6)-SC-LDPC code with mcc = 2 and W = 4. Let Lv j →ci ,t be the LLR value from the variable node v j to the check node ci at the window decoding position t, and Lci →v j ,t is denoted by the LLR value from the check node ci to the variable node v j at the window decoding position t. The LLR values Lv j →ci ,t and Lci →v j ,t are computed from

Lv j →ci ,t

=

L

ch v j ,t

+

Lci →v j ,t

(2)

i ∈N(v j )\i

Fig. 1. Illustration of sliding window decoding of protograph code with mcc = 2, W = 4, and s = 1.

and

⎛

⎞

Lci →v j ,t = 2 tanh−1 ⎝

tanh Lv j →ci ,t ⎠ (3) 2

j ∈N(ci )\ j

where 1 ≤ j ≤ W Nnv and 1 ≤ i ≤ W Nnc . The N(v j )\i

is the set of check nodes connected to the variable node v j

except the check nodes ci and the N(ci )\ j is the set of variable

nodes connected to check node ci except the variable nodes v j .

The

L

ch v j ,t

value

is

the

LLR

value

obtained

from

the

channel.

The

output

LLR

values

L

out v j ,t

of

the

sliding

window

decoder

can be computed as

L

out v j ,t

=

L

ch v j ,t

+

Lci →v j ,t .

(4)

i∈N(v j )

For SC-LDPC codes with the sliding window decoding, the window decoder is called “U-WD” when all the variable nodes within a sliding window are updated at every decoding iteration. The received code blocks [yt , yt+1, . . . , yt+W −1] will be decoded until the maximum number of decoding iterations ILDPC is reached. Afterward, the window decoder will be shifted to decode the received code blocks [yt+s, yt+s−1, . . . , yt+s+W −1], where s, 1 ≤ s ≤ W , is denoted by the number of code blocks shifted from the decoding position t. Hence, at the decoding position t, the code block [vt , vt+1, . . . , vt+s−1] which is called the target nodes, will be the output of window decoder. Note that s is fixed to 1 for the traditional window decoder [5], [7].

B. Non-Uniform Pragmatic Window Decoding (NP-WD)

Hassan et al. [7] proposed the N-WD schedules, which do not update the variable nodes that stop showing an improvement in the soft BERs. Given that w ∈ {1, 2, . . . , W } be the index of the code block within a window decoder, the soft BER indicator can be computed from [10]

Pˆtl+w−1 =

1 Nnv

wNnv j =(w−1)(Nnv )+1

1

1 + exp

L

out v j ,t

(5)

where l ∈ {1, 2, . . . , ILDPC}. The N-WD will update only the code blocks that show sufficient improvement in the estimated BER. Only the code blocks that satisfy the condition Pˆtl+w−1 ≤ θ Pˆtl+−w1 −1 will be updated at the iteration l + 1. The value θ must be selected as a pre-specified fractional improvement in the estimated BER between the current decoding iteration and the last decoding iteration. Based on the behavior of N-WD, the NP-WD schedule has been proposed in [7]. The NP-WD does not require the estimated soft BER during

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:19:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KHITTIWITCHAYAKUL et al.: REDUCED COMPLEXITY WINDOW DECODING

9401205

explained in Section II-A. After the last code block is decoded

completely,

the

output

LLR

values

L

out v j,0

are

sent

back

to

update their trellis nodes of the BCJR detector. The same

process continues until the maximum number of turbo iteration

ITURBO is reached.

Fig. 2. Read channel model of BPMR systems.

the decoding iterations whereby each code block will be updated according to the update schedules in the subsequent iteration.

III. REDUCED-COMPLEXITY SC-LDPC DECODER IN TURBO EQUALIZATION
A. Turbo Equalization in Magnetic Recording Systems

In this paper, we consider the SC-LDPC codes applied in the bit-patterned media magnetic recording (BPMR) systems [11]. The discrete-time channel model of the BPMR systems is illustrated in Fig. 2. At the transmitter side, the information bits u j,k are encoded by using the SC-LDPC encoder to obtain the codeword bits v j,k. Then the codeword sequences are sent to the 2-D BPMR channel. The readback signal r j,k from the j th magnetic island along the kth track of BPMR channel can be computed from

XY

r j,k =

hx,y · x j −x,k−y + n j,k

(6)

x=−X y=−Y

where x j,k = 2 · v j,k − 1 is the recorded bit, n j,k denotes additive white Gaussian noise samples, and hx,y is the 2-D channel

coefficient obtained from sampling the 2-D Gaussian pulse

response of BPMR systems, which covers 2X + 1 bits and

2Y + 1 tracks. In this paper, we follow [11] by considering the BPMR channel with the areal density approach 2 Tb/in2

whereby the both magnetic island periods and track pitch

are 18 nm. The half pulsewidth (PW50) of the along-track

and across-track pulse responses are 19.4 and 24.8 nm, respec-

tively. Hence, the 2-D channel matrix is

⎡ h−1,−1
H2Tb = ⎣ h−1,0

h0,−1 h0,0

⎤ h1,−1 h1,0 ⎦

⎡ h−1,1

h0,1

h1,1

⎤

0.0213 0.2321 0.0213

= ⎣ 0.0919 1.0000 0.0919 ⎦.

(7)

0.0213 0.2321 0.0213

On the receiver side, the readback sequences are passed

to a 2-D equalizer to handle the ISIs and intertrack interfer-

ences In this paper, we focus on the single-track detection

by considering only the recorded data on the main track

k = 0. The 2-D equalizer coefficients and generalized partial

response (GPR) target are designed by minimizing the mean-

squared error [12] The output signal y j,0 from equalizer is

passed to the turbo equalization, which consists of the BCJR

detector and the SC-LDPC decoder. The BCJR detector will

be performed corresponding to the designed GPR targets.

The

produced

LLR

values

L

ch v j,0

of

BCJR

detector

are

sent

as

the input of SC-LDPC decoder. Then, the decoding process

of SC-LDPC code is performed by sliding the window as

B. Decoding Complexity of SC-LDPC Decoder

For SC-LDPC decoder with sliding window decoding, the variable nodes at position t will be updated multiple times through sliding the window decoder. The complexity of window decoder with window size of W after ILDPC and ITURBO iterations can be evaluated from the average number of variable node updates Uavg required to decode the total length of coupled codes as

Uavg

=

1 L

ITURBO l=1

L
Ul,t
t =1

(8)

where Ul,t denotes the number of times the variable nodes within the code block at position t updated during the lth turbo iterative processing. The performance of SC-LDPC codes will be increased through the window size of W ; however, the Uavg values are also increased. This is due to the fact that the larger W value can increase the number of times the variable nodes is updated. Hence, the decoding complexity and its performance can be controlled by varying the W values. However, with the fixed W values, we can reduce the Uavg through shifting the window in dynamic form as proposed in Sections III-C and III-D.

C. Reduced Complexity via Dynamic-Shifting of Window Decoding (DS-WD)
Since the window size W is fixed, the complexity of SC-LDPC decoder in turbo equalization can be reduced by the number of variable node updated. The N-WD and NP-WD [7] can be applied in this situation; however, the reduction of the number of updated variable nodes does not suffice when the SC-LDPC decoder is applied in turbo equalization. Since the output of SC-LDPC decoder must be sent to the BCJR detector to decode the next turbo iteration, the sliding window still proceeds in the same manner. Herein, we observe that the first code block w = 1 is updated more than those of the other blocks within a window. Therefore, its reliability of the first code block is always the highest. In Fig. 3, we examine the BER performances of each code block w ∈ {1, 2, . . . , W } in BPMR systems. We set the memory mcc = 2 and the window size W = 8. The ILDPC is set to be 15 and the ITURBO is varied from 1 to 3. Fig. 3 shows that the first code block w = 1 will provide the excellent BER performance under different values of SNR and ITURBO. Since each code block is consecutively interconnected as defined from the memory mcc, their BERs performances will be slightly changed.
Besides avoiding update some variable nodes within a window, one possibility to reduce the complexity of window decoding is the shifting multiple code blocks when the estimated soft BERs are the same. Herein, we propose the algorithm called “DS-WD.” In each decoding position t, the number of shifting code blocks will depend on the BERs

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:19:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

9401205

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 54, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2018

Fig. 3. BER performance of each code block within a window.

estimated after iterative decoding. Only the code blocks that

satisfy the condition

PˆtI+LDs−PC1 αs ≤ PˆtI+LDs−PC2

(9)

are shifted at the same time. For example, if the soft BER of code block vt+1 and vt satisfy the condition (PˆtI+LD1PC )α2 ≤ PˆtILDPC , the code block vt+1 and vt will be the output of the window decoder. If the code block vt+2 and vt+1 also satisfy the condition (PˆtI+LD2PC )α3 ≤ PˆtI+LD1PC , the code block vt+2, vt+1, and vt will be the output of the window decoder. Then the window decoder can be shifted to operates the next position
with s = 3. Note that the maximum number of s must be
mcc + 1. The selection of αs will be discussed in detail in Section IV-B.

Fig. 4. Decoding schedules of DS-NP-WD when the windows are shifted with (a) s = 1, (b) s = 2, and (c) s = 3.

D. Dynamic-Shifting Non-Uniform Pragmatic Window Decoding (DS-NP-WD)
To further reduce the complexity of SC-LDPC decoder, the NP-WD schedule [7] can be applied to reinforce the DS-WD and we call “DS-NP-WD.” Herein, all the variable nodes within the window will be updated according to the update schedules. However, due to the multiple code blocks shifted from the window decoder, the update schedules of DS-NP-WD will be differ from NP-WD schedules. Based on our observation, the update schedules at the next decoding position t + s will depend on the number of shifting code block s. In Fig. 4, the marks “×” represent the positions of code blocks within a window updated at each decoding iteration. When the window is shifted with s = 1 (known as the standard shifting), the update schedule for the next decoding position t + 1 is shown in Fig. 4(a). However, if the shifted code block s is 2, the update schedule will be the schedule, as shown in Fig. 4(b). In Fig. 4(c), this schedule reveals that if the number of shifted code blocks is large, the large number of variable nodes updated in the next decoding position will be requested. This result comes from the fact that the shifting window with s brings about the reduction of update accumulated from the previous decoding positions.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, the BER performance and decoding complexity of the proposed decoder are presented. Herein, we use

Fig. 5. BER performances of SC-LDPC with the standard shifting (s = 1).
the (3, 21)-SC-LDPC code to obtain the code rate of 6/7. The memory mcc is set to 2, then the 1×7 all-one matrixes Bi,t , i = 1, . . . , 3 are obtained. In addition, the parity-check matrix H is generated by using the progressive edge growth method [13] with the coupling length L and expansion factor N are 50 and 100, respectively. The window size W is set to 8.
A. Convergent Performance of SC-LDPC Codes in BPMR Systems
In Fig. 5, the BER performances of SC-LDPC code with the standard shifting (s = 1) in BPMR systems are presented. The BER performances are plotted by varying the number of LDPC decoding ILDPC and turbo decoding ITURBO. The simulation results show that the BER performances are improved when the ILDPC and ITURBO are increased. However, the BER performances will stop decreasing when ILDPC and ITURBO are increased above 15 and 2, respectively. Hence, we choose ILDPC = 15 and ITURBO = 2 in the following simulations.
B. Shifting Factor of Dynamic Shifting Window Decoding
Since the complexity and BER performance of the proposed decoding algorithms depend on the shifting factor αs , we will investigate the optimal choices of αs by using the Monte Carlo simulation. Since small αs will cause the dynamic shifting behavior to be similar to the standard shifting (the shifting code block s = 1), we will select the largest αs that still provides the better BER performance. Fig. 6 shows that the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:19:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KHITTIWITCHAYAKUL et al.: REDUCED COMPLEXITY WINDOW DECODING

9401205

of 5.1 dB, the U-WD and NP-WD are shown to haveUavg of 223.84 and 133.34, respectively. Specifically, Uavg of the proposed DS-WD and DS-NP-WD are equal to 85.04 and 71.98, respectively. The DS-WD can achieves about 62% and 36.2% reductions in complexity compared to U-WD and NP-WD, respectively. Moreover, the reductions of complexity are up to 67.9% and 46% when the DS-NP-WD is applied.

Fig. 6. BER performances of DS-WD for different αs at SNR = 4.8 dB.

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, the SC-LDPC codes with window decoding are applied in turbo equalization of BPMR systems. We first propose the DS-WD to reduce the complexity of SC-LDPC decoder. The soft BER indicator is used to determine the number of shifted bits at each decoding position. Moreover, we use the nonuniform schedule to reinforce the DS-WD called the DS-NP-WD. The results show that the proposed DS-WD and DS-NP-WD achieve about 36.2% and 46% reduction in complexity compared to the previous NP-WD.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported in part by the King Mongkut’s Institute of Technology Ladkrabang Research Fund under Grant KREF016104 and in part by the National Science and Technology Development Agency.

Fig. 7. Performance comparisons between the U-WD, NP-WD, DS-WD, and DS-NP-WD in BPMR systems.
Fig. 8. Decoding complexity comparisons between the U-WD, NP-WD, DS-WD, and DS-NP-WD.
value α2 = 1.4 and α3 = 1.7 are the optimal selections. These optimal values will be applied in our proposed DS-WD and DS-NP-WD. Fig. 7 shows the BER performance comparison between previous decoding and the proposed DS-WD and DS-NP-WD. There is no significant BER performance loss of the proposed decoding compared to the previous U-WD and NP-WD decoding. Furthermore, the BER performance of LDPC-BC, which the complexity is comparable to the SC-LDPC code [14], is also shown in Fig. 7. The simulation result shows that the SC-LDPC codes with sliding window decoding achieve about 0.3 dB compared to the LDPC-BC at BER of 3 × 106. C. Complexity Comparisons of the Proposed Algorithms
The complexity of each window decoding algorithm is compared in terms of Uavg, as shown in Fig. 8. At the SNR

REFERENCES
[1] S. Jeon and B. V. K. V. Kumar, “Performance and complexity of 32 k-bit binary LDPC codes for magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 46, no. 6, pp. 2244–2247, Jun. 2010.
[2] A. J. Felstrom and K. S. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181–2191, Sep. 1999.
[3] S. Kudekar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Threshold saturation via spatial coupling: Why convolutional LDPC ensembles perform so well over the BEC,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 803–834, Feb. 2011.
[4] M. Lentmaier, A. Sridharan, D. J. Costello, and K. Sh. Zigangirov, “Iterative decoding threshold analysis for LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 5274–5289, Oct. 2010.
[5] A. R. Iyengar, M. Papaleo, P. H. Siegel, J. K. Wolf, A. Vanelli-Coralli, and G. E. Corazza, “Windowed decoding of protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes over erasure channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 2303–2320, Apr. 2012.
[6] E. Sharon, N. Presman, and S. Litsyn, “Convergence analysis of generalized serial message-passing schedules,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 1013–1024, Aug. 2009.
[7] N. U. Hassan, A. E. Pusane, M. Lentmaier, G. P. Fettweis, and D. J. Costello, “Non-uniform window decoding schedules for spatially coupled LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 65, no. 2, pp. 501–510, Feb. 2017.
[8] J. Thorpe, “Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from protographs,” JPL, Pasadena, CA, USA, IPN Prog. Rep. 42-154, 2003.
[9] D. G. M. Mitchell, M. Lentmaier, and D. J. Costello, “Spatially coupled LDPC codes constructed from protographs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 9, pp. 4866–4889, Sep. 2015.
[10] P. A. Hoeher, I. Land, and U. Sorger, “Log-likelihood values and Monte Carlo simulation-Some fundamental results,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process., 2000, pp. 43–46.
[11] S. Nabavi, B. V. K. V. Kumar, and J. A. Bain, “Two-dimensional pulse response and media noise modeling for bit-patterned media,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 44, no. 11, pp. 3789–3792, Nov. 2008.
[12] S. Nabavi and B. V. K. V. Kumar, “Two-dimensional generalized partial response equalizer for bit-patterned media,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Jun. 2007, pp. 6249–6254.
[13] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[14] A. E. Pusane, A. J. Felstrom, A. Sridharan, M. Lentmaier, K. S. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Implementation aspects of LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 1060–1069, Jul. 2008.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:19:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

