Asia-Pacific Magnetic Recording Conference 2018 15 – 17 濂濣濪濙濡濖濙濦澠 2018, USST, China

Rate-Compatible Protograph LDPC Codes for Spin-Torque Transfer Magnetic Random
Access Memory (STT-MRAM)
Xingwei Zhong1, Kui Cai1, Pingping Chen1,2, and Zhen Mei1
1 Singapore University of Technology and Design (SUTD), Singapore, 487372
2 College of Physics and Information, Fuzhou University, Fujian, 361005, China

Abstract— This paper proposes novel rate-compatible
protograph LDPC (RCP-LDPC) codes to correct memory cell errors and mitigate the raw bit error rate (BER) diversity for spin-torque transfer magnetic random access memory (STTMRAM). Since the STT-MRAM channel is asymmetric, we first apply an independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) channel adapter to force the channel to be symmetric. We then propose to use the protograph extrinsic information transfer (PEXIT) algorithm, the asymptotic weight distribution (AWE) analysis, as well as the actual error rate performance as the combined guideline for designing protograph LDPC codes with short codeword lengths for STT-MRAM. By further applying a code extension approach, we construct novel RCP-LDPC codes that can work with a single encoder/decoder. Simulation results show that our proposed RCP-LDPC codes outperform the well-known rate-compatible AR4JA protograph codes.
Index Terms – 濦pin-torque transfer magnetic random access memory
(STT-MRAM), protograph LDPC codes, rate-compatible codes,
protograph extrinsic information transfer (PEXIT) algorithm.
I. INTRODUCTION
Spin-torque transfer magnetic random access memory (STT-MRAM) is a promising non-volatile memory technology that shows high potential for storage class memories (SCMs) [1]. However, due to process variation and thermal fluctuation, the information data stored in STTMRAM cells is affected by both the write errors and read errors [2]. There also exists a diversity of the raw bit error rate (BER) among different dies of the memory due to process imperfection. In the literature, conventional BCH codes [3] as well as an Euclidean Geometry (EG) low-density parity-check (LDPC) code have been proposed to improve the reliability of STT-MRAM [4]. However, they are all designed for the worst case raw BER, leading to a waste of memory storage density. In this work, we propose novel rate-compatible protograph LDPC (RCP-LDPC) codes, which can effectively correct memory cell errors, and also mitigate the raw BER diversity of STT-MRAM. Hence the proposed codes provide great advantage over the fixed-rate BCH codes and the EG LDPC code. Simulation results also demonstrate that our proposed RCP-LDPC codes outperform the AR4JA protograph codes, which are well known RCP-LDPC codes in the literature for their superior performance over the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels [5].

II. RCP-LDPC CODES FOR STT-MRAM
The protograph extrinsic information transfer (PEXIT) algorithm is a theoretical tool to measure the decoding threshold of the protograph LDPC code, for binary-input symmetric channels. However, the STT-MRAM channel is asymmetric by nature [2]. Therefore, we adopt an independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) channel adapter [6] to force the STT-MRAM channel to be symmetric, based on which we can apply the PEXIT algorithm to the symmetrized channel.
To maintain the fast read access time of STT-MRAM for applications as the SCMs, we adopt high-rate LDPC codes with short codeword lengths, where the PEXIT algorithm for evaluating the decoding threshold, and the asymptotic weight distribution (AWE) analysis for optimizing the error floor performance may not possess the same significance as in the case with long codes. Therefore, in this work, we first generate a list of L codes with the best decoding thresholds and AWEs. Then from among these codes, we choose the code with the best error rate performance in both the waterfall and error floor regions based on computer simulations.
By using the above described method, we can first construct a high-rate protograph LDPC code, such as a rate R = 0.91 code, with an information word length of 520 bits. It serves as the daughter code of our proposed RCP-LDPC codes. We further apply a code extension approach by adding an equal number of variable and check nodes to the daughter code, and hence can generate a family of rate-compatible
codes with rates R= 10 , where n = 1,2,… is the number of 11+n
variable and check nodes that is added to the daughter code. For example, we can construct a rate-0.83 protograph code by adding one variable node and one check node to the rate-0.91 daughter code. The corresponding process is shown by Fig. 1, where B0.91 and B0.83 are base matrices for the rate-0.91
code and rate-0.83 code, respectively, and 0 is the all-zero sub-matrix. By following a similar process, we can construct a protograph code with a code rate of 0.72, as shown by Fig. 2. Therefore, with an information word length of 520 bits, we can construct novel RCP-LDPC codes with code rates of 0.91, 0.83, 0.72, respectively. Since the proposed codes are based on the same parity-check matrix with specific structure, a single protograph encoder/decoder is sufficient to handle all the code rates.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:19:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Asia-Pacific Magnetic Recording Conference 2018 15 – 17 濂濣濪濙濡濖濙濦澠 2018, USST, China
Fig. 1 Construction of the base matrix of a rate-0.83 protograph code from the rate-0.91 daughter code.

Fig. 2 Construction of the base matrix of a rate-0.72 protograph code from the rate-0.91 daughter code.

III. SIMULATION RESULTS
The simulations are based on the STT-MRAM channel model proposed by [2], with a write error rate of 1 × 10-4 , and with different mean normalized resistance spreads V0 / P0 of STT-MRAM to account for the impacts of process variation. A 3-bit capacity-maximizing quantizer is used in all simulations. We also construct rate-compatible AR4JA protograph codes based on [5], which can provide superior error rate performance for the AWGN channels. The constructed rate-compatible AR4JA codes have the same code rates and information word length with our proposed RCPLDPC codes.
Observe from Fig. 3 that the proposed RCP-LDPC codes perform significantly better than the AR4JA codes for all the three different code rates for the STT-MRAM channel. Fig. 4 shows that the proposed RCP-LDPC codes have faster convergence speeds than the AR4JA codes with different code rates as well. This demonstrates the effectiveness of our proposed RCP-LDPC codes for improving the reliability of STT-MRAM.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported by Singapore Agency of Science and Technology (A*Star) PSF research grant, the SUTD-MIT IDC research grant, and SUTD SRG grant SRLS15095.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Marinella, “The future of memory,” in Aerospace Conf. , Big Sky, MT, pp. 1–11, Mar. 2013.
[2] K. Cai and K. A. S. Immink, “Cascaded channel modeling, analysis, and hybrid decoding for spin-torque transfer magnetic random access memory (STT-MRAM),” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 53, no. 11, # 8204311, Nov. 2017.
[3] W. Xu, Y. Chen, X. Wang, and T. Zhang, “Improving STT MRAM storage density through smaller-than-worst-case

Fig. 3 BER comparison between the proposed RCP-LDPC codes and the AR4JA codes, with different code rates of 0.91,
0.83, and 0.72.
Fig. 4 Comparison of average number of iterations between the RCP-LDPC codes and the rate-compatible AR4JA codes,
with different code rates of 0.91, 0.83, and 0.72. transistor sizing,” in 2009 ACM/EDAC/IEEE Des. Autom. Conf., pp. 87–90, Jul. 2009. [4] K. Cai, Z. Qin, and B. Chen, “Channel capacity and softdecision decoding of LDPC codes for spin-torque transfer magnetic random access memory (STT-MRAM),” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput., Netw., Commun. (ICNC), San Diego, CA, USA, pp. 550–554, Jan. 2013. [5] T. V. Nguyen and A. Nosratinia, “Rate-compatible shortlength protograph LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 948–951, May 2013. [6] J. Hou, P. H. Siegel, L. B. Milstein, and H. D. Pfister, “Capacity-approaching bandwidth-efficient coded modulation schemes based on low density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 9, pp. 2141– 2155, Sep. 2003.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:19:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

