Hybrid Decoding of LDPC Codes in Discrete Communication Channels

A. A. Ovchinnikov, Member, IEEE
St.Petersburg State University of Aerospace Instrumentation Saint-Petersburg, Russia mldoc@ieee.org

D. V. Ilina
St.Petersburg State University of Aerospace Instrumentation Saint-Petersburg, Russia idaria@k36.org

Abstract— Decoding of low-density parity-check codes with bit-flip algorithm is considered. The majority-logic decoding is described as bit-flip algorithm with modified decoding threshold. The hybrid decoding combining both algorithms is considered and simulation results in Gaussian channel with hard decision demodulation are given. Described scheme may be effective in high-speed channels with low number of decoding iterations demands together with the requirements of low decoding error probabilities and low error-floors.
Keywords— low-density parity-check codes, bit-flip algorithm, majority-logic decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION Codes with low density of parity checks (LDPC, lowdensity parity-check) were proposed in 1962 by R. Gallagher [1] and later studied in many works [2-4]. These codes have been studied most intensively and are used in many modern and promising telecommunication standards in the last 20 years [5-7]. This is due both to the fact that these codes allow to achieve remarkably low error probabilities during transmission in the channel with noise, and to the fact that their encoding and decoding procedures are computationally efficient.
This leads to the fact that codes with low density of parity checks are used both in wireless communication channels, where the transmission is in the areas of relatively low signal/noise ratio, and in wired optical channels [7-9], where along with the requirements to provide extremely low error probability (not exceeding 10-15 probability of the information bit being in error) it is necessary to use extremely fast encoding and decoding procedures, because the transmission rates in such channels can reach 400 GB/s and higher.
This paper is organized as follows. In section II the main facts about LDPC codes are given, section III is dedicated to description of hard-decision decoders, together with discussion about hybrid decoding scheme. Section IV contains simulation results in Gaussian channel with hard-decision demodulation (so the hard-decision decoders may be applied), and section V comcludes the paper.

II. LDPC CODES The code with low density of parity checks is given by its parity-check matrix H containing a small number of nonzero elements (in the future we will consider only the case of binary codes). Often LDPC codes are given by bipartite Tanner graph for which the matrix H is the incidence matrix. The standard requirement for the construction of low-density codes is the absence in the Tanner graph of cycles of length 4, which would adversely affect the probability of decoding errors.
In this case, the girth of the graph (the length of the minimum cycle) is not less than 6. The standard decoders of LDPC codes are usually described as the bitwise iterative message-passing decoders which exchanges the somehow calculated values of messages along the edges of correspondent Tanner graph. Thus the error-correcting performance of such algorithms is more affected not by the minimal distance of the code, which is usual for errorcorrecting codes, but by different structures within Tanner graph, and the simplest structure which should be avoided to improve the decoding quality is absence of short cycles (thus the messages evaluated by the decoder may be considered as independent, while in practice they are not).
Such decoders provide very low decoding error probabilities, especially in the area of low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), thus in many cases the large number of the errors occurred in the channel may be corrected. At the same time, some error events with small number of errors may not be corrected (though the number of remained uncorrected errors may be relatively small), and with growth of SNR this leads to the effect of error-floor. This is large disadvantage in case when very low error probabilities should be provided. One way to avoid this situation is very time-consuming optimization of the structure of Tanner graph. Another possible option is to apply the another decoding scheme after the traditional one, which can correct remained errors, however, this rises the problem of decoding complexity increasing, in general twice.
The possible way to overcome this problem is to use the hybrid decoding scheme with decoders which may be implemented on the same software or hardware units, with the desired possibility of reducing the number of uncorrected errors.

978-1-5386-7632-5/18/$31.00 ©2018 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:21:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

III. HARD-DECISION DECODING OF LDPC CODE The analysis of LDPC-codes mainly uses asymptotic analysis for probabilistic ensembles of codes, and in the construction of specific codes for finite lengths are actively involved empirical and probabilistic methods, thus, to assess the noise immunity of LDPC-codes is widely used modeling. In the most frequent case, the transmission over the channel with additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) is modeled, for which still in the work of R. Gallagher proposed a trust propagation algorithm (belief propagation) [1], which takes "soft" demodulator solutions as input, usually in the form of a logarithm of the likelihood ratio (LLR, log-likelihood ratio) [10]. Subsequently, many modifications and simplifications of this algorithm were proposed [10], however, when transmitting over extremely high-speed communication channels, such as an optical channel, the computational complexity of these algorithms is unacceptably high. It should be noted that in the hardware implementation of the decoder, the LLR values are quantized, but the number of quantization levels is chosen so as to have little effect on the error probability provided. The need to simplify decoders leads to a decrease in the number of quantization levels, which actually leads to "hard" decoding, which has a small complexity, but leads to some losses in the probability of error.
A. “Hard” decoding Classic "hard" decoding algorithm of LDPC codes has also
been proposed by R. Gallager [1] and is called the bit-flip algorithm. Let r - the word received from the channel, and H - the parity-check matrix of the low-density parity-check code. Then the bit-flip algorithm can be described as follows [10]:
1) Calculate the syndrome S = rHT in the GF(2) field. If S = 0, return r , which is a code word.
2) Calculate f = S H in the ring of integers. 3) Determine the elements of f that is not smaller than
some b – predetermined threshold, and convert the corresponding elements in r (in the simplest case the threshold can be selected as b = max{f}). 4) If the maximum number of iterations is not reached, return to step 1. Otherwise, return r. A feature of this algorithm, as well as almost all other algorithms for decoding low-density codes, is that it makes a decision on each accepted symbol separately, conducting a number of iterations, the number of which does not exceed a predetermined limit. At the same time, despite the fact that the simulation shows extremely low probability of error decoding of low density parity-check codes, there is no evidence that with the help of these decoders any set of errors can be guaranteed to be corrected, especially with a limited (and in some cases quite small) number of iterations.
B. Majority-logic decoding The algorithm of majority-logic decoding of linear codes is
known in the coding theory [11, 12] nearly as many years as

bit-flip algorithm. It can be used to decode Reed-Muller codes as well as codes constructed from finite geometries. For simplicity, we assume that the parity-check matrix of the linear code contains a constant number of ones (in the case of low-density parity-check codes, such codes are called regular LDPC codes). Majority-logic decoding can be applied when any two rows of the parity-check matrix are orthogonal paritychecks equations, i.e. have at most one common nonzero component. Obviously, this is equivalent to the statement that the Tanner graph does not contain cycles of length 4 (has a girth of at least 6).
The work of the majority decoder is as follows. For each
symbol ri of the received word r, the γ rows of the paritycheck matrix containing 1 in the i-th position and the γ
positions of syndrome S corresponding to these rows are determined. Further, if more than half of the syndrome positions found are equal to 1 (i.e., more than half of the parity-checks involving the symbol ri are not satisfied), the symbol ri is considered to be erroneous and is inverted.
Otherwise, the considered symbol is assumed as correct. It is easy to notice that this decoding procedure can be described in terms of bit-flip decoder as follows:
1) Calculate the syndrome S = rHT in the GF(2) field. If S = 0, return r, which is a code word.
2) Calculate f = S H in the ring of integers.
3) Determine the elements of f larger than b = γ / 2 and
convert the corresponding elements in r.
4) Return r.
This algorithm, as well as bit-flip algorithm, can be performed through many iterations, but in the classic version it is one-step. As one can see, its difference from the bit-flip algorithm is only in choosing the threshold for inverting. However, it is proved [11] that under the condition of orthogonality of checks, this algorithm is guaranteed to correct
any combination of no more than t = γ / 2 errors, thus, in
fact, it is a decoding algorithm in the sphere of radius t, although it is able to correct some error vectors beyond this radius.
IV. SIMULATIONS Let's estimate the number of errors corrected by both decoders described in section III. The results are shown in Fig. 1 for a matrix specifying a regular (1000,500) low-density
parity-check code with γ = 11 and girth equal to 6,
constructed using the PEG construction for the case of regular LDPC code [13]. Therefore, the minimum distance of such a
code is d0 ≥ 12 , and the radius of decoding sphere for such a code is t = 5 .
Each decoder is processed with one iteration. Fig. 1 shows the average number of errors remained after one decoding iteration versus the fixed number of errors in the received
word. The line x = y is also shown in the figure - if the point

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:21:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

on the depicted curves is below this line, then after one iteration the output of the decoder on average leads to a decrease in the number of errors comparing to its input, if the point is above – the decoding make the situation worse and lead to an increase in the number of errors (error propagation). As can be seen from the figure, for a given code with the number of errors less than 30, one iteration of the bit-flip algorithm ("BF") always has some error-decoding effect, while the one-step majority-logic decoder ("MAJ") for the number of errors greater than 12 only leads to their increasing. However, when reducing the number of input errors, the majority-logic decoder shows greater efficiency, and when the number of errors does not exceed 5, the majority-logic decoder is guaranteed to correct them.
We will perform a similar experiment for the code (1000,750) using PEG construction for regular weight distribution, see Fig. 2. To achieve a girth of 6, we must
reduce the weight of the columns to γ = 5 . So, for this code the radius of the decoding sphere is t = 2 . As shown in Fig.
2, in this case, the bit-flip algorithm gives effect starting from the number of input errors of about 25, while the majoritylogic decoder shows almost no gain compared to the bit-flip algorithm. This is due to the small radius of the decoding sphere of this code.
Finally, Fig. 3 shows the results of simulation of transmission in the Gaussian channel during demodulation with hard decision-making for the code (1000,500). We consider the probability of decoding error for bit-flip algorithm with 5 and 10 iterations, as well as a hybrid decoding scheme in which the last iteration is carried out by majority-logic decoding. In fact this means only changing the value of threshold b during the last decoding iteration. It may be seen that the hybrid decoder reduces the probability of error, which can also be considered as a way to trade-off between reducing the complexity of decoding by reducing the number of iterations and losses in the probability of error due to such a reduction.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, the hard-decision decoding algorithms (bitflip and majority-logic decoders) are considered for the case of regular-LDPC codes with orthogonal parity-checks (i.e. girth
no less than 6) and column weight γ . In this case, the
majority-logic decoding provide guarantee of correct decoding
in the sphere of decoding radius t = γ / 2 , while for bit-flip
algorithm there is no guarantee to decode in any value of the radius t. From the other hand, bit-flip decoding provides much better convergence, and may decrease the number of input errors even with one iteration for much larger values of the number of input errors. In fact this means that many iterations would be effective for bit-flip algorithm and may lead to significant performance degradation for majority-logic algorithm due to errors propagation. From the other hand, providing the small number of input errors, guaranteed decoding radius of majority-logic decoding may provide decoding gain. This lead to simple idea of combining these decoders in such a way that bit-flip performs several

iterations, reducing the number of initial errors occurred in the channel, then one iteration of majority-logic decoder may lead directly to correct codeword which may not happen in case of bit-flip decoding. In particular, this may lead to decreasing of the error-floor. At the same time the cost of such hybrid scheme is not large, since switching between two algorithms may be performed only by changing the value of inversion threshold.
It seems, that despite the simplicity of hard-decision algorithms, such hybrid scheme may be applied in high-rate communication channels (with strict limitations on decoding speed), in which low error probabilities are required.
An interesting area of further research is the consideration of other decoding thresholds, in addition to the corresponding algorithms of bit flipping and majority-logic decoding.

60

BF

MAJ

50

x=y

Average number of errors after one iteration

40

30

20

10

0

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

Number of errors

Fig. 1. Average number of errors at the decoder output for the code (1000,500).

Average number of errors after one iteration

70

BF

60

MAJ x=y

50

40

30

20

10

0

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Number of errors

Fig. 2. Average number of errors at the decoder output for the code (1000,750).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:21:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Bit error rate (BER)

100

10-1

10-2

10-3

10-4

10-5

BF 5

BF-MAJ 4-1

10-6

BF 10 BF-MAJ 9-1

10-7

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Eb/N0, dB

Fig. 3. Simulation of (100,500) LDPC code in AWGN channel with harddecision demodulation.

Acknowledgment
The reported study was funded by RFBR according to the research project No. 16-01-00716 a.
References

[2] V. V. Zyablov Estimation of the Error-Correction Complexity for Gallager Low-Density Codes, Problems of Information Transmission, 1975, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 23-36.
[3] T. J. Richardson, R. L. Urbanke, The Capacity of Low-Density ParityCheck Codes Under Message-Passing Decoding , IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, Feb. 2001, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599-618.
[4] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, T. J. Richardson, R. Urbanke, On the Design of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes Within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon Limit, IEEE Communications Letters, Feb. 2001, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58 60.
[5] IEEE 802.16e-2005. Part 16: Air interface for fixed and mobile broadband wireless access systems, Feb. 2006.
[6] IEEE 802.11n/d1.0, Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications, Mar. 2006.
[7] ITU-T Recommendation G.975.1. Forward error correction for high bit rate DWDM submarine systems, Feb. 2004.
[8] I. Djordjevic, W. Ryan and B. Vasic, Coding for optical channels, Springer, 2010. 444 p.
[9] N. Sh. Blaunstein, E. A., Krouk, M. B. Sergeev, Optical communication: fiber optic, atmospheric , SPb.:SUAI, 2016. 286 p.
[10] S. Lin, W. Ryan, Channel Codes: Classical and Modern, Cambridge university press, 2009. 710 p.
[11] R. Blahut, Theory and Practice of Error Control Codes , М.:Mir, 1986. 576 p.
[12] G. Kabatiansky, S. Semenov, E. Krouk, Error Correcting Coding And Security For Data Networks: Analysis Of Superchannel Concept, John Wiley & Sons, 2005. 278 p.
[13] H.-Yu Xiao, E. Eleftheriou, D. M. Arnold, Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graphs, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol.51, no.1, pp.386-398, Jan. 2005.

[1] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, 1963. 90 p.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:21:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

