IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 54, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2018

9401505

Spatially-Coupled Codes for Channels with SNR Variation
Homa Esfahanizadeh 1, Ahmed Hareedy 1, Ruiyi Wu1, Rick Galbraith2, and Lara Dolecek 1
1Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA 2Hitachi Global Storage Technologies, Western Digital Company, Rochester, MN 55901 USA

In magnetic recording systems, consecutive sections experience different signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs). To perform error correction over these systems, one approach is to use an individual block code for each section. However, the performance over a section affected by a lower SNR is weaker compared to the performance over a section affected by a higher SNR. Spatially-coupled (SC) codes are a family of graph-based codes with capacity approaching performance and low latency decoding. An SC code is constructed by partitioning an underlying block code to several component matrices, and coupling copies of the component matrices together. The contribution of this paper is threefold. First, we present a new partitioning technique to efficiently construct SC codes with column weights 4 and 6. Second, we present an SC code construction for channels with SNR variation. Our SC code construction provides local error correction for each section by means of the underlying codes that cover one section each, and simultaneously, an added level of error correction by means of coupling among the underlying codes. Third, we introduce a low-complexity interleaving scheme specific to SC codes that further improves their performance over channels with SNR variation. Our simulation results show that our SC codes outperform individual block codes by more than one and two orders of magnitudes in the error floor region compared to the block codes with and without regular interleaving, respectively. This improvement is more pronounced by increasing the memory and column weight.
Index Terms— Error floor, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, magnetic recording (MR), minimum overlap (MO) partitioning, signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) variation, spatially-coupled (SC) codes.

I. INTRODUCTION
M ODERN magnetic recording (MR) systems require error correcting codes (ECCs) with outstanding error floor performance. Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are a primary choice for MR systems because of their error correcting capabilities [1]–[3]. In an MR device, some sections can be more error prone than other sections because of the read/write mechanism and physical properties of the device [4]. A realistic channel model for MR systems must consider the variation of signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) among consecutive sections of a hard disk drive. In this paper, we develop ECCs that address the SNR variation for data storage systems.
For channels with uniform SNR, i.e., channels with a single SNR, the goal is to find a code that achieves a certain level of bit error rate (BER) for that SNR. For channels with SNR variation, conventional ECCs are designed to achieve the target BER for the section with the lowest SNR. For the sections with higher SNRs, this approach results in an additional redundancy which is not required to achieve the target BER.
One solution for handling the non-uniformity of SNR is using interleaving. In this approach, different chunks from all codewords are interleaved such that one chunk from each codeword is passed through one section of the channel. As a result, the average SNR that all codewords are affected by is the same and equal to the average SNR of the channel [4]. One disadvantage of this approach is that the length of each
Manuscript received March 16, 2018; revised June 15, 2018; accepted June 25, 2018. Date of publication August 2, 2018; date of current version October 17, 2018. Corresponding author: H. Esfahanizadeh (e-mail: hesfahanizadeh@ucla.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2018.2853087

codeword is equal to the length of one section of the channel which might be relatively short.
Spatially-coupled (SC) codes are a family of graph-based codes that have attracted significant attention because of their capacity approaching performance and low decoding latency [5], [6]. An SC code is constructed by partitioning the parity-check matrix of an underlying block code into several component matrices and coupling copies of the component matrices together.
In [7]–[9], SC codes over non-uniform channels are studied. In these papers, the asymptotic performance of SC codes over burst erasure channels is considered. In this paper, we present a finite-length analysis and construction of SC codes for channels with SNR variation. We use circulant-based (CB) LDPC codes as the underlying block codes [10] and the minimum overlap (MO) technique for the partitioning [11]. The MO partitioning technique was introduced for partitioning CB block codes and constructing SC codes with column weight 3. The MO technique aims to minimize the population of problematic combinatorial objects inside each component matrix to achieve a good (error floor) performance.
The contribution of this paper is threefold: 1) we extend MO partitioning to construct SC codes with higher column weights; 2) we show that compared to uncoupled block codes, SC codes show a superior performance over channels with SNR variation thanks to their intrinsic structure, and we demonstrate that SC codes with higher memories are more robust against the SNR variation; and 3) we introduce an efficient interleaving scheme specific to SC codes over channels with SNR variation that further improves their performance. The proposed interleaving has a lower complexity compared to the regular interleaving, and it ensures that each check node (CN) in the structure of SC codes is connected to variable nodes (VNs) with different reliabilities.

0018-9464 © 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:21:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

9401505

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 54, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2018

Fig. 1. Parity-check matrix of an SC code with memory m and coupling length L.

II. PRELIMINARIES

A. Circulant-Based LDPC Codes and SC Codes

Regular CB codes are a class of structured (γ , κ) LDPC

codes, where γ is the column weight of the parity-check

matrix and κ is the row weight. CB codes can offer simple

hardware implementation thanks to their structure [10]. Let

H be the parity-check matrix of the underlying CB code. H consists of γ κ circulants. Each circulant is of the form σ fi,j ,

where 0 ≤ i ≤ γ − 1, 0 ≤ j ≤ κ − 1, and σ is the z × z

identity matrix shifted one unit to the left.

An SC code is constructed as follows. First, H is partitioned

into (m + 1) disjoint component matrices (of the same size

as H): H0, . . . , Hm, where m is the memory. Each component

matrix Hy, 0 ≤ y ≤ m, contains some of the circulants in

H and zeros elsewhere such that H =

m y=0

Hy

.

Second,

L

copies of component matrices are pieced together to obtain

the parity-check matrix HSC of the SC code, where L is
the coupling length, see Fig. 1. A replica is a collection of columns of HSC that contains one submatrix [H0T · · · HmT ]T and zero elsewhere. An SC code with coupling length L has

L replicas, {R1, . . . , RL }. The design rate of an SC code with parameters κ, γ , m, and L is rd = 1 − ((L + m)γ /Lκ), which is close to the design rate of its underlying block code,

rd = 1 − (γ /κ), for large values of L. The protograph matrix of a code is obtained by replacing

each non-zero circulant in the parity-check matrix with 1 and each zero circulant with 0, and it is denoted as HSpC (or Hp for the block code). The MO partitioning aims at constructing the

protograph matrix of an SC code with a reduced number of problematic objects. Having the matrix HSpC, the next stage is lifting to construct HSC, where we apply a program introduced
in [12] to optimize the powers of non-zero circulants in

the final matrix. The program is called the circulant power

optimizer (CPO), and it starts with an initial set of circulant

powers and adjusts the powers heuristically to further reduce

the number of problematic objects.

B. Channels With SNR Variation
Our model for a channel with SNR variation is depicted
in Fig. 2(a). It shows a channel with N sections, and each section is considered as an additive white Gaussian noise
(AWGN) channel with SNRs (s is the section index). For the sth section, we state the SNR as (SNRs)dB = (SNRabs)dB + ( SNRs )dB, where SNRabs is the absolute SNR, SNRs is the variation from the absolute SNR for the sth section, and

Fig. 2. (a) Non-uniform channel with N sections. (b) Original and interleaved sequences of encoded data; each color corresponds to one codeword.
XdB = 10 log10 X. We assume all sections have the same length.
C. Interleaving to Mitigate Non-Uniformity The idea of interleaving is illustrated in Fig. 2(b). Interleav-
ing is performed on the sequence of codewords before they pass through the channel, and de-interleaving is performed on the received sequence of data and before decoding. First, a sequence of data is split into N parts. Each part is encoded individually by the same block code to generate N codewords. Next, each codeword is partitioned into N chunks, and different chunks from all codewords are interleaved such that each N consecutive chunks belong to N different codewords. Finally, each N consecutive chunks pass through a separate section of the channel.
III. MINIMUM OVERLAP PARTITIONING FOR HIGHER COLUMN WEIGHTS
The partitioning of the underlying block code can be described by a partitioning matrix PM = [hi, j ] of size κ × γ . Each element hi, j ∈ {0, . . . , m} implies that the corresponding element in Hp (resp., the corresponding circulant in H) is assigned to Hhpi, j (resp., Hhi, j ).
Example 1: A partitioning matrix for an SC code with parameters γ = 3, κ = 7, and m = 1 is shown as follows:
0000111 PM = 1 1 1 0 0 0 1 .
0111010
A systematic partitioning scheme, namely, MO partitioning, was recently introduced in [11] to construct SC codes with a superior performance. The overlap between two rows is defined as the number of columns in which the two rows have non-zero values, simultaneously. Let ty be the maximum overlap between rows (in pairs) of the yth component matrix of the protograph matrix Hp, i.e., Hpy. The technique aims to minimize the overall overlap t = miny∈{0,...,m} ty in a balanced partitioning in order to prevent certain detrimental structures in the graph representation of the code that are intrinsically formed by the overlaps, e.g., cycles, trapping sets, and absorbing sets [13], [14].
The MO technique in [11] is presented only for partitioning the codes with column weight γ = 3. Here, we extend the MO technique for partitioning block codes with column weight γ = 2(m + 1) into component matrices with minimum

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:21:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ESFAHANIZADEH et al.: SPATIALLY-COUPLED CODES FOR CHANNELS

9401505

overlap, such that there are two elements (resp., circulants) in each column of Hp (resp., H) that are assigned to the same
component matrix (balanced partitioning). This extension is helpful to systematically construct SC codes with (γ = 4, m = 1) and (γ = 6, m = 2). Theorem 1 states the minimum overlap value, and it also suggests a partitioning construction
that achieves the minimum overlap value. Theorem 1: Consider an SC code with parameters m, κ, and
γ = 2(m + 1). For a balanced partitioning, where there are exactly two elements in any column of Hp that are assigned
to each component matrix, the minimum overlap is

tmin =

κ
γ

.

(1)

2

Proof: Assume that the κ columns in the protograph

matrix Hp are divided into stripes of size ω columns each.

Then, the number of stripes is κ/ω , and if ω does not

divide κ, the last stripe has a lower size than ω. Since a

stripe is a submatrix in the protograph matrix H, the overlap

parameter is defined for a stripe as well. We denote the overlap

parameter for a stripe as tω. The goal is to make each stripe
have the minimum overlap parameter value. Each column of Hp has γ = 2(m + 1) elements, and there are two elements in

each column that are assigned to the same component matrix.

This implies that the minimum possible value for the overlap

parameter in each stripe is tω = 1, even if the length of the stripe is 1 column. Then, we choose the maximum stripe length

such that tω = 1 still holds. The maximum ω such that tω = 1 holds is

ωmax =

γ, 2

(2)

which is achieved by choosing a different pair of elements in each column in the stripe to be assigned to the same component matrix. Each stripe adds one unit to the final overlap parameter value. Thus,

κ

κ

tmin = ωmax =

γ.
2

(3)

A systematic algorithm to find a partitioning that achieves the

minimum overlap is in the longer version of this paper [15].

Example 2: Let γ = 4, κ = 12, and m = 1. The length of

each stripe is

4 2

= 6, and the number of stripes is κ/ω = 2.

As a result, tmin = 2, and a partitioning matrix that achieves

the minimum overlap is

001011001011

PM =

0 1

1 0

0 0

1 1

0 1

1 0

0 1

1 0

0 0

1 1

0 1

1 0

.

111000111000

The partitioning that achieves the minimum overlap value is not unique. We suggest two methods for choosing the MO partitioning and constructing the final SC code. The first method is searching over all MO partitioning choices and finding the one that results in the minimum number of problematic objects in the lifted graph for a fixed arrangement of the circulant powers [11]. This technique is not practical

Fig. 3. An SC code with memory m constructed for a non-uniform channel. CNi spans (m + 1) consecutive sections.
for high values of the row or column weights because of the dramatic number of partitioning choices that achieve the minimum overlap parameter value. The second method is choosing one MO partitioning and an initial set of circulant powers. Then, we apply the CPO algorithm to reduce the population of problematic objects by adjusting the circulant powers.
IV. SC CODE DESIGN TO ALLEVIATE SNR VARIATION
A. Code Design Machinery Instead of using an individual block code for each section of
the channel in Fig. 2(a), we use an SC code that spans several consecutive sections. By using SC codes, we can make more reliable sections help unreliable ones. Parameters of our code design are illustrated in Fig. 3. The length of the underlying block code is equal to the length of one section of the channel; thus, each replica of an SC code spans one section of the channel. The coupling length L determines how many sections are spanned by one SC codeword. The parameter L must be chosen such that a variety of sections with different reliabilities are included. Here, we assume N = L.
The memory m of an SC code plays a critical role in the performance over channels with SNR variation. The parameter m determines how many different sections the VNs of a check equation span. All CNs of an SC code receive messages from VNs within (m + 1) consecutive sections (see CNi in Fig. 3), except for the first and last group of CNs which receive messages from a fewer number of sections. As a result, if a CN is connected to an unreliable VN, the other more reliable neighboring VNs of that CN can help correcting the VN error. If m is chosen appropriately, each CN receives enough reliable messages to send improved messages to its neighboring VNs in an iterative decoding.
B. Interleaving for SC Codes We introduce a low-cost interleaving scheme specialized for
SC codes in order to further improve the performance. In the code design approach described in Section IV-A, CNs receive messages from (m + 1) different sections. If most of these (m + 1) sections have low SNRs, the decoder may fail to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:21:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

9401505

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 54, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2018

Fig. 4. Original sequence of data (top) represents the worst case scenario in which multiple consecutive replicas are affected by low SNRs. Interleaved sequence of data (middle) for an SC code with m = 2 and L = 12. A darker gray represents a lower SNR.

recover the message correctly. We use interleaving to avoid letting multiple unreliable VNs from consecutive sections participate in one check equation and degrade the performance.
Consider an SC code with the coupling length L (where L = N) and memory m. We assume that (m + 1) divides L. We divide the SC codeword into L groups, and we further divide each group of data into L/(m + 1) chunks. Then, we rearrange them by taking one chunk from each group in order and placing them next to each other, see Fig. 4. This interleaved data is passed through the channel, and the de-interleaving is performed on the received data from the channel and before decoding. Due to interleaving, each CN receives an equal number of messages from all L different levels of reliabilities (except for the first and last groups of CNs).
Claim 1: Let μ be the number of chunks that an SC codeword with parameters m and L is partitioned into for the interleaving step. The smallest value of μ that provides the same average reliability for all CNs, except for the first and last few CNs that have smaller degrees, is μopt = L2/(m + 1).
Proof: We prove Claim 1 by the contradiction. Suppose an SC codeword from this code is partitioned into μ < L2/ (m + 1) chunks. In an iterative decoding of an SC codeword, except for the first and last few CNs, all CNs receive messages from a contiguous (m + 1)/L fraction of all VNs. In other words, they receive messages from ν = μ(m + 1)/L < L consecutive chunks. Suppose that the interleaving is perfect in the sense that all these ν chunks have different SNRs. Then, the number of different SNRs that a CN is affected by, ν, is less than the total number of different SNRs, L. Consequently, some CNs may receive messages from more reliable VNs while others do not, and the average SNR need not be the same for check equations.
Our presented interleaving scheme partitions an SC codeword into μopt = L2/(m + 1) chunks. For example, an SC codeword with m = 2 and L = 12, shown in Fig. 4, is partitioned into μopt = 48 chunks. By using interleaving, we avoid letting multiple unreliable sections dominate the messages received by one CN. We note that using block codes and regular interleaving requires dividing the data with the same length into L2 chunks.
V. SIMULATION RESULTS
Our code parameters are as follows. Block Code 1 is a CB block code with κ = z = 17, γ = 3, and fi, j = i j .

Fig. 5. BER curves for Block Code 1 and SC Codes 1 and 2 over uniform and non-uniform channels with/without interleaving.

Block Code 1 has block length 289 bits and rate rd ≈ 0.824,

and it is the underlying block code for SC Codes 1 and 2.

SC Codes 1 and 2 are constructed by MO partitioning [11],

and they have coupling length L = 30 and block length 8670

bits. The memory and rate for SC Code 1 are m = 1 and

rd ≈ 0.818, and for SC Code 2 are m = 2 and rd ≈ 0.812. SC Code 3 is an SC code with κ = 29, γ = 6, z = 61,

m = 2, and L = 6. SC Code 3 has block length 10614 bits

and rate rd ≈ 0.724. This code is constructed by the extended

MO partitioning, and its circulant powers are optimized using

the CPO algorithm. According to Theorem 1, the length of

each stripe (except for the last stripe) is ωmax =

6 2

= 15, and

the number of stripes is κ/ωmax = 2. As a result, tmin = 2.

The partitioning matrices for SC Codes 1–3 and the set of

circulant power arrangements obtained by the CPO algorithm

for SC Code 3 are in [15].

In a practical channel model, the values of SNRs for

different sections are dependent. We describe the correlation

model among SNRs of different sections as follows. Let a

be an α × 1 vector that describes the correlation coefficients

among α consecutive sections. Then,

( SNRs)dB = aTu, u = [us us−1 . . . us−α+1]T, ui ∼ N (0, σ 2).

N (0, σ 2) defines a Gaussian distribution with mean 0 and variance σ 2. In our simulations, we consider the following parameters for the channel1:

a = [0.78 0.44 0.31 0.23 0.15 0.08 0.09 0.03 0.04 0.02 − 0.04]T, α = 11, σ = 0.15.

Fig. 5 shows the BER curves for Block Code 1 and SC Codes 1 and 2 over uniform and non-uniform channels with the same average SNR. (For the non-uniform channel, the horizontal axis represents SNRabs.) Because of the SNR variation, the performance of the codes over the non-uniform channel is worse than over the uniform channel. According to Fig. 5: 1) well-designed SC codes are more robust against

1On a hard disk drive, under certain environmental and vibration conditions, BER for each of many consecutive sectors around a circular track can be measured. The autocorrelation terms gauge the coupling of SNR between sectors of various spacing. The autocorrelation model used in this paper comes from experimental data provided by a Western Digital Company.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:21:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ESFAHANIZADEH et al.: SPATIALLY-COUPLED CODES FOR CHANNELS

9401505

further improved by increasing the memory and performing the interleaving scheme introduced in this paper.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported in part by a grant from ASTC-IDEMA.

Fig. 6. BER curves for SC Code 3 over uniform and non-uniform channels with/without interleaving.
SNR variation; 2) SC Code 1 shows one and two orders of magnitude performance improvement compared to the uncoupled chain of Block Codes 1 with and without (regular) interleaving, respectively, while it has comparable decoding latency; 3) SC Code 2 secures even further improvement by providing more diversity; and 4) our efficient interleaving for SC Code 1 compensates for the performance loss due to the SNR variation.
Fig. 6 demonstrates the BER curves for SC Code 3. Since well-designed SC codes with γ = 6 have a very low error floor, we could not collect enough errors in the high SNR region. As we see in this figure, SC Code 3 constructed by the extended MO partitioning has a sharp waterfall region, and it achieves BER 10−10 at SNR = 4.1 dB. We also note that there is a notable performance gap between uniform and non-uniform channels for this code which is because of the high SNR variation of the channel and the relatively low coupling length of the SC code (L = 6). However, our efficient interleaving scheme remarkably reduces this performance gap.
Our simulation results demonstrate that the average number of iterations needed for the decoder to converge in the case of the SC code is consistently less than the average number of iterations needed in the case of the uncoupled block codes, see [15].
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduced a new construction method for SC codes with higher column weights. Next, we demonstrated that our well-designed SC codes outperform block codes thanks to the diversity that is provided by the coupling. Finally, we demonstrated that the performance of SC codes can be

REFERENCES
[1] Y. Fang, P. Chen, L. Wang, and F. C. M. Lau, “Design of protograph LDPC codes for partial response channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 10, pp. 2809–2819, Oct. 2012.
[2] Y. Han and W. E. Ryan, “Low-floor detection/decoding of LDPC-coded partial response channels,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 252–260, Feb. 2010.
[3] H. Zhong, T. Zhong, and E. F. Haratsch, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for the magnetic recording channel: Code design and VLSI implementation,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 1118–1123, Mar. 2007.
[4] N. Varnica, G. Burd, and Z. Wu, “Interleaved error correction coding for channels with non-uniform SNRs,” U.S. Patent 8 312 341, Nov. 13, 2012. [Online]. Available: https://www.google.ch/patents/US8312341
[5] A. J. Felstrom and K. S. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181–2191, Sep. 1999.
[6] A. R. Iyengar, P. H. Siegel, R. L. Urbanke, and J. K. Wolf, “Windowed decoding of spatially coupled codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 2277–2292, Apr. 2013.
[7] Z. Zhang and Y. Li, “Asymmetric spatially coupled LDPC codes for multiple-burst erasure channels,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 21, no. 8, pp. 1695–1698, Aug. 2017.
[8] Y. Koganei, M. Yofune, C. Li, T. Hoshida, and Y. Amezawa, “SC-LDPC code with nonuniform degree distribution optimized by using genetic algorithm,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 874–877, May 2016.
[9] C. Häger, A. G. i Amat, A. Alvarado, F. Brännström, and E. Agrell, “Optimized bit mappings for spatially coupled LDPC codes over parallel binary erasure channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Sydney, NSW, Australia, Jun. 2014, pp. 2064–2069.
[10] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984, Dec. 2004.
[11] H. Esfahanizadeh, A. Hareedy, and L. Dolecek, “A novel combinatorial framework to construct spatially-coupled codes: Minimum overlap partitioning,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Aachen, Germany, Jun. 2017, pp. 1693–1697.
[12] H. Esfahanizadeh, A. Hareedy, and L. Dolecek. (2018). “Finite-length construction of high performance spatially-coupled codes via optimized partitioning and lifting.” [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/ abs/1802.06481
[13] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. J. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic, “Analysis of absorbing sets and fully absorbing sets of array-based LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 181–201, Jan. 2010.
[14] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Monticello, IL, USA, Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[15] H. Esfahanizadeh, A. Hareedy, R. Wu, R. Galbraith, and L. Dolecek. (2018). “Coding for channels with SNR variation: Spatial coupling and efficient interleaving.” [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/ 1803.06417

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:21:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

