An Iterative Soft-Decision Decoding Algorithm with Dynamic Saturation for Short Reed-Solomon Codes
Bryan Liu, Yixuan Xie, Lei Yang and Jinhong Yuan University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia Email: {bryan.liu, yixuan.xie, lei.yang3, j.yuan@unsw.edu.au}

Abstract—This paper proposes a new iterative soft-decision decoding algorithm which combines list decoding and adaptive belief propagation (ABP) algorithm for short Reed-Solomon (RS) codes. The proposed algorithm generates a list of codewords by restarting the decoder with log-likelihood ratio saturations to the dynamically selected suspicious bits based on an up-to-date best decoded codeword. The suspicious bits are selected according to a joint evaluation of the decoded codeword and the initial channel information. The damping coefficient used in the ABP decoder is set to be proportional to the channel noise variance to achieve a proper convergence speed for the decoder at different SNRs. The performance of the proposed algorithm for short RS codes is investigated. It shows that the proposed algorithm brings a considerable coding gain for short RS codes over additive white Gaussian noise channels.
I. INTRODUCTION
Invented by Irving S. Reed and Gustave Solomon in 1960, Reed-Solomon (RS) codes have been contributing to critical error control in various digital systems such as HDTV, audio disc and RAID 6 storage system [1]. As a class of linear block codes, RS codes achieve the largest possible minimum distance but are generally decoded with algebraic hard-decision decoding (HDD) algorithms [2]. These decoding algorithms have a low computational complexity but correspondingly, the decoder’s performance is degraded due to the loss of soft information from the channel. Following the intuition of appending decoders with soft information, RS codes draw the attention of researchers to further enhance the decoder’s performance.
Iterative decoding algorithms such as belief propagation (BP) algorithm, which has shown a very close performance to the Shannon limit for low-density parity-check codes, are investigated for decoding RS codes’ binary image expansion. However, due to the large number of short cycles in the parity-check matrix of RS codes, the correlations between the decoding messages are accumulated after a few number of iterations, which affect the decoding performance if traditional BP algorithm is implemented.
Combining the concepts of ordered statistic and BP, in [3], Jiang and Narayanan proposed an adaptive belief propagation (ABP) algorithm which adapts the parity-check matrix in each iteration. The least reliable basis (LRB) is assigned to the systematic part of the parity-check matrix after Gaussian elimination to prevent the propagation of unreliable information to the whole codeword. This helps the bit reliabilities to converge to the a posteriori probability (APP). It has shown

a significant improvement compared to conventional algebraic HDD algorithms. Subsequent researches such as Layered Residual Belief Propagation (LRBP) [4] and Double Pooling Residual Belief Propagation (DP-RBP) [5] have shown further improved performance. However, these algorithms are based on the informed dynamic scheduling which requires additional computations on message residual and real value comparison during each iteration of decoding.
In [3], it is proposed to repeat the ABP decoder a few times, and each time the ABP decoder uses a parity-check matrix with a different grouping of variable nodes of degree one. The repetition of the ABP algorithm generates a list of codewords. This results in a high opportunity for the decoder to find the maximum-likelihood (ML) codeword. However, repeating the ABP decoder with a different grouping might not be able to decode to a distinct codeword. Moreover, in the ABP decoder, to limit the correlation accumulated during each iteration, the extrinsic information update to each bit is scaled down by a relatively small damping coefficient over all the SNR regions. This results in a slow convergence speed of the decoder and the decoder is hard to converge to a valid codeword in a finite number of iterations in a low SNR region.
In this paper, with the objective of approaching ML decoding performance for short RS codes in a smaller number of iterations, we propose a Dynamic Saturation ABP (DS-ABP) soft-decision list decoding algorithm. In the proposed algorithm, we retain the low-complexity flooding schedule decoding and propose to use a damping coefficient that is proportional to the channel noise variance to achieve a fast convergence speed. To further improve the decoder’s performance in a high SNR region, we propose to restart the decoder with log-likelihood ratio (LLR) saturations to the dynamically selected suspicious bits. In particular, the suspicious bits are selected based on a joint evaluation of the channel information and the hard decision of an up-to-date best decoded codeword. Numerical results show that the proposed DS-ABP decoding algorithm achieves a considerable coding gain over the ABP algorithm for short RS codes with a faster convergence speed.
The remaining parts of this paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the background of this paper, then a detailed description about the proposed algorithm is presented in Section III. Section IV investigates the error rate and convergence performance of the proposed algorithm and Section V gives the concluding remarks.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:25:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

II. PRELIMINARIES

A. Notations and Overview of RS codes

Consider a nonprimitive cyclic (N, K, 2t + 1) RS code over GF(2m). Its parity-check matrix can be given by:

1 β β2 . . . βN−1 

1 β2 (β2)2 . . . (β2)N−1 

Hs

=

  

...

...

...

...

...

,  

(1)

1 β2t (β2t)2 . . . (β2t)N−1

where t refers to the number of symbol errors that can be corrected and β is the primitive element in GF(2m). Let n =

mN and k = mK, then the equivalent binary image expansion

Hb of Hs can be derived and this binary parity-check matrix is of size (n − k) × n (see [6] for details).

Suppose the RS code C is used for transmission over

a memoryless channel and the binary codeword g =

[g1, g2, . . . , gn] is modulated into binary phase-shift keying
(BPSK) signals o = [o1, o2, . . . , on] with unit energy where oi = (−1)gi for i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n}. The modulated sequence is

transmitted through an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN)

channel. Then the received sequence r can be represented by r = (−1)g + w where w is the Gaussian noise vector with zero mean and variance σ2 for each element. At the receiver,

each bit’s reliability information can be characterized by the

associated

LLR

which

is

initialized

as

L0(gi)

=

log

P P

(gi =0|ri ) (gi =1|ri )

.

B. Adaptive Belief Propagation
Due to the high density of non-zero elements in Hb, the corresponding bipartite graph contains many short cycles. This would induce a fast growth of correlations between messages if an iterative BP decoding is implemented. To overcome this issue, the ABP algorithm was proposed in [3]. It adapts the parity-check matrix by performing Gaussian elimination according to the accumulated reliability information of each bit in each decoding iteration. More specifically, at the l-th iteration, the LLR sequence for all the coded bits is rearranged in an ascending order of |Ll(g1l )| ≤ |Ll(g2l )| ≤ ... ≤ |Ll(gnl )|, where |Ll(gil)| is the magnitude of the i-th sorted bit’s LLR at the l-th iteration. Then the first n − k least reliable bits are assigned to the systematic part of the parity-check matrix Hb(sys) as illustrated in Fig.1. This method slows down the accumulations of correlations between messages and limits the propagation of unreliable information. Therefore, the ABP decoding algorithm achieves a significant SNR gain over HDD decoding algorithms.
In order to converge to a valid codeword, a gradient descent method is applied to the update of variable nodes (VNs). It is noted that, to reduce the accumulation of correlations between the bits, especially in the dense part, the extrinsic information Lext updates to the variable nodes is scaled down by a damping coefficient α, where 0 < α < 1 [3]. The extrinsic messages from check nodes (CN) to VNs are generated following the BP algorithm. The update rules are

Fig. 1. Parity-check Matrix Hb(sys) for RS codes in systematic form.

summarized as:

n−k

Llext(gi) =

2tanh−1

j=1 Hjl i =1

n
tanh
u=1 u=i,Hjl u =1

Ll(gu) 2

Ll+1(gi) = Ll(gi) + αLel xt(gi).

, (2) (3)

The update rules in Eqs. (2) and (3) infer an accumulation of the APP of VNs. The decoder iterates up to the predetermined maximum number of iterations lmax, unless all the syndromes are zeros. A conventional algebraic HDD algorithm can be appended after each iteration to accelerate the decoder and improve the decoder’s performance. Moreover, to further improve the decoder’s asymptotic performance in a high SNR region, in [3], a Degree-2 random connection algorithm was proposed. The algorithm randomly generates a permutation of numbers ranges from 1 to n − k, i.e., y1, ..., yn−k, and then sequentially add the yi+1-th row to the yi-th row of the paritycheck matrix Hb(sys) from i = 1 to i = n-k-1. This method constructs a new parity-check matrix Hb(sys) where n − k − 1 columns in the systematic part have degree of 2 so that more extrinsic messages can be updated to the least reliable bits.
To obtain more opportunities for the decoder to converge to a codeword of ML decision, in [3], an outer decoding loop was proposed to be implemented on top of the ABP algorithm. The outer loop and inner loop iteration are defined as follows:
• Inner loop decoding process: the ABP iterative decoding process with a maximum of lmax iterations.
• Outer loop decoding process: the repetition of the ABP decoder once a codeword is decoded or the (lmax)-th iteration is reached.
In [3], it was proposed to repeat the ABP decoder but with a different grouping of the less reliable bits. More specifically, once the underlying ABP decoder has decoded a codeword, the LLRs are reset to the initial values from the channel. The bits near to the boundary between the systematic part and the dense part would be swapped to construct a new Hb(sys). A different codeword might be obtained for each outer loop iteration. All the codewords obtained from different Hb(sys) are kept in a list and the one with the minimum Euclidean distance from the received vector r is chosen as the final decoded codeword. This method combines the ideas of list decoding and ABP decoding. However, there is no explicit method or algorithm to select the bits near the boundary for swapping. The decoder might not be able to converge to a different codeword in the next outer loop iteration. Therefore, to fully utilize the benefits of list decoding and increase the opportunities for the decoder

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:25:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

to converge to an ML decision, we propose the following DSABP algorithm.

III. THE PROPOSED DYNAMIC SATURATION ABP
ALGORITHM
A. Influence of the Damping Coefficient
Damping coefficient α in Eq. (3) of the ABP algorithm reduces the accumulation of correlations between the bits within each iteration of LLR updates. The value of α in [3] was carefully chosen to be 0 < α < 1 for all SNRs. In other words, the damping coefficient is not selected based on the LLR distribution under different SNRs.
In the ABP algorithm, the extrinsic information updates to the variable nodes follow the BP algorithm. The BP decoder analysis tool, Gaussian Approximation [7] provides the idea that the convergence of a codeword relates to the recursion of the messages’ mean of the probability distribution. The initial message L0(gi) has a normal probability density function of N (±2/σ2, 4/σ2). This informs that the higher the value of channel SNRs, the larger the mean of extrinsic information to be updated to the variable nodes and the faster the growth of the correlations between the bits. This indicates that a small value of α reduces the accumulations of correlations within each iteration and provides a stable performance of the decoder in a high SNR region. However, if α is small, it is difficult for the decoder to converge to a valid codeword in a finite number of iterations in the low SNR region.
Therefore, to provide a proper value of α for the decoder in different channel conditions, we propose to have a damping coefficient proportional to the noise variance, that is α = zσ2, where the optimal value of z can be varied according to the codes. The value of α is not restricted to be less than 1 and σ2 is the normalized noise variance with a unit symbol energy. Since the noise variance is relatively large at a low SNR, having a large α results in a faster convergence speed for the decoder at a low SNR. That means the decoder has a high opportunity to converge to a valid codeword at a low SNR. Correspondingly, at a high SNR, a small value of noise variance retains a slow convergence speed and reduces the correlations between the bits during the iterations.
To further reduce the accumulations of correlations that can be caused by a large damping coefficient, we adjust Eq. (2) to

n−k

Llext(gi) =

2tanh−1

n

tanh L0(gu) .

2

j=1

u=1

Hjl i =1

u=i,Hjl u =1

(4)

Here, we replace Ll(gu) in (2) with L0(gu). This means that the extrinsic information is generated by using the initial channel LLRs for each inner loop iteration. This reduces the fast growth of the bit’s APP and appears to improve the high SNRs performance of the proposed algorithm.

B. Dynamic LLR Saturation Based on Decoded Codeword
Adapting the parity-check matrix during each inner loop iteration reduces the accumulation of correlations but it does

not eliminate the correlations. It is still possible that the decoder falls into a wrong codeword, which is not the codeword of ML decision. In the sense of reducing this probability, we propose to restart the decoder by dynamically saturating the LLRs to a threshold ±T of the suspicious bits based on a joint evaluation of the up-to-date best decoded codeword and the initial channel information. The saturation of the LLRs directs the convergence of the decoder once we restart the decoder and eventually, it avoids the decoder to be trapped by the wrong codeword. Here we use (l, p) to denote the l-th inner loop iteration of the LLR update and the p-th outer loop repetition of the decoder, respectively.
Define x = [x1, x2, . . . , xn] as the binary decoded codeword from the inner loop, Bx = {i, |xi = b(ri), 1 ≤ i ≤ n} as the set of positions which xi is different from b(ri), where b(ri) denotes the hard decision of the received signal ri. Then a corresponding set containing the absolute values of ri can be defined as Λx = {|ri| : i ∈ Bx}. We use functions max{.}h and min{.}h to find the h-th maximum and minimum element in a set, respectively. Moreover, the discrepancy between the received sequence and the decoded codeword can be derived as:

D(r, x) =

|ri|.

(5)

i∈Bx

The smaller the value of D(r, x), the closer the decoded

codeword is to ML decision. Therefore, before restarting the

decoder, if we selectively saturate the LLRs of the suspicious

bits at positions Bx to a threshold ±T , where the sign agrees with the initial channel information, a different set of Λx can

be generated in the next outer loop iteration.

With the intention of efficiently finding out the ML decision

codeword, it is proposed to iteratively saturate the bits starting

from the element max{Λx}1. Fig. 2 shows the probability comparison between the bit with max{Λx}1 and the bit with min{Λx}1 that is decoded incorrectly in an error frame. For

RS(31,25), if the repetition of the decoder (outer loop) is not

performed, around 90% of the time, the bit with max{Λx}1

is decoded incorrectly out of the total error frames, which is

much higher than the probability of the bit with min{Λx}1.

This directly relates to the fact that for BPSK modulation,

the larger |ri| is, the more reliable of the received bit. More

importantly, this reliability information is obtained from the

channel, without any correlated information introduced by the

decoder due to the large number of short cycles in the parity-

check matrix. Therefore, the smaller the value of h, the less

likely the corresponding bit with reliability max{.}h is an

error bit in the ML decision. Saturating the most reliable bits

in the set Λx provides a higher probability for the decoder to

converge to the ML decision in the later rounds of decoding.

Moreover, the proposed method searches for the ML deci-

sion from an up-to-date best decoded codeword. This means

that the iterative saturation is performed based on a codeword

xˆ which has the minimum discrepancy and xˆ will be updated

during the outer loop of the decoder. This increases the

codeword list and avoids the decoder to be trapped by a high

reliability error bit.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:25:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Algorithm 1 Iterative Decoding Algorithm by DS-ABP

Step

1:

Initialization:

Set

l

=

0, p

=

0,

L0

=

2r σ2

,

d

=

0,

τ (d) = 0 and xˆ = 0.

Step 2: Parity check matrix adaption: Obtain the Degree-
2 adapted parity-check matrix Hlb(sys) based on the ABP algorithm. If l = lmax, store the Hlb(sys). Step 3: Extrinsic information generation:

a) Generate V2C messages according to L0 and Hbl (sys). b) Generate C2V message by applying SPA algorithm.

Step 4: Bit-level reliabilities update: Ll+1 = Ll + αLlext, where α = zσ2.

Step 5: Hard decision: gˆi =

0, Ll+1(gi) > 0 1, Ll+1(gi) < 0

Step 6: Termination criterion for inner loop: Set l ← l + 1.

If all the checks are satisfied, record the decoded codeword

x, and go to Step 7; else, if l = lmax, encode the first k most reliable bits from Glb(sys), record the decoded codeword x, and go to Step 7; otherwise, go to Step 2.

Step 7: Discrepancy comparison: If D(r, x) < D(r, xˆ),

then replace xˆ ← x and create the sets Λxˆ and Bxˆ, let d = 1; otherwise, set d ← d + 1.

Step 8: Termination criterion for outer loop: Set p ← p + 1.

If an optimum codeword is found or p = pmax, output xˆ; otherwise, go to step 9.

Step 9: Outer loop control: Saturate the corresponding

L0(gi(s) )

according

to

τ (d),

L0
gi(s)

=

+T, ri(s) > 0 , −T , ri(s) < 0

set

l = 0, L0

=

2r σ2

for

the

unsaturated

positions

and

go

to

Step 2 for another outer loop iteration.

To implement the concept above, let e be the maximum number of bits that can be saturated and τ = [τ1, τ2, . . . , τe] ∈ F2e be a binary vector of length e. The e-tuple binary representation of integer d is denoted by τ (d), where 1 ≤ d ≤ 2e − 1.
Once the decoder from the inner loop has decoded a codeword, before the repetition of the decoder, τ (d) is set as a saturation selection vector to dynamically saturate the most reliable bits according to Λx. Each element in τ (d) represents the decision of saturation to the corresponding bit of reliability max{Λx}h. For instance, if τ2 = 1, then the decoder finds the bit’s index i(s) of max{Λx}2, and saturates the L0(gi(s) ) to the maximum or minimum threshold ±T , depending on the sign of ri(s) (i.e. L0(gi(s) ) = +T if ri(s) > 0, and −T otherwise). All the other bits are reset to the initial channel LLRs before restarting the decoder.
The value of d for each outer loop iteration is determined according to the discrepancy computed from Eq. (5). Recall that Eq. (5) gives the confidence of the decoded codeword compared to the ML decision. The discrepancy D(r, x) of the decoded codeword x at the p-th iteration is compared with the Dmin, where Dmin represents the minimum discrepancy of codeword xˆ so far, and xˆ is initialized as all-zero codeword before the decoder starts. If at the p-th iteration, D(r, x) <

Fig. 2. RS(31,25), BPSK over AWGN channel, simulated by DS-ABP with lmax = 10, z = 1 and the outer loop repetition is not performed.
Dmin, then replace xˆ with x. The best decoded codeword xˆ with minimum discrepancy is updated for the next outer loop iteration. The value of d is set to be 1, then τ (d) = [τ1 = 1, τ2 = 0, . . . , τe = 0] for (p + 1)-th iteration and the bit with max{Λxˆ}1 will be saturated. On the other hand, if the p-th iteration results in D(r, x) > Dmin, let d = d + 1. For instance, a d with a value of 2 at the p-th iteration will become 3, τ (d) = [τ1 = 1, τ2 = 1, . . . , τe = 0], then the bits with reliabilities max{Λxˆ}1 and max{Λxˆ}2 will be saturated. In case that the cardinality of Λxˆ is smaller than the number of 1’s in τ (d), or the updated d is greater than 2e − 1 when pmax > 2e − 1, the value of d is reset to be 1 if any of the cases is encountered. This indicates that from one decoded codeword, the decoder is able to create a list of maximum 2e − 1 different codewords.
In case that the decoder can not find a valid codeword after lmax iterations, the systematic form of the parity-check matrix Hblm (sayxs) = [In−k PT], which is obtained at the (lmax)-th iteration, is stored by the decoder. Based on the accumulated APP of the bits, a valid codeword can be generated by encoding the most reliable k bits from the corresponding generator matrix Glbm (sayxs) = [P Ik]. This method guarantees a valid codeword can be obtained from the inner loop. Furthermore, a stopping criterion for the outer loop iteration can be set according to [8]. The decoder terminates if there is no codeword which is more likely than the current decoded codeword from the inner loop. The overall algorithm is summarized in Algorithm 1. It is noted that the proposed algorithm can also append algebraic HDD to each inner loop iteration to further improve its asymptotic performance in a high SNR region.
IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS
This section describes the simulation results of DS-ABP algorithm with short RS codes over AWGN channels. The value of z in the proportional relationship between damping coefficient and the channel noise variance is set to be 1 for the following simulations. The threshold T of the LLR is preset to be 20.
In the results, DS-ABP(lmax, pmax, e) indicates the proposed algorithm and ABP(lmax, pmax) indicates the ABP algorithm. The parameters lmax and pmax refer to the numbers of maximum iterations of the inner loop and outer loop,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:25:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(a) RS(15,9), RS(15,11)

(b) RS(31,25)

(c) RS(31,25)

Fig. 3. The simulation results of the DS-ABP algorithm with short RS codes of BPSK over AWGN channel. Fig. 3(a) shows the results of the (15,9) and (15,11) RS codes. Fig. 3(b) and Fig. 3(c) illustrate the results of the (31,25) RS code, where Fig. 3(c) further shows the performance of the DS-ABP algorithm with different numbers of the outer loop iterations while the total number of iterations is maintained.

respectively, and e states the length of vector τ . HDD indicates the supplement of the algebraic HDD (Berlekamp-Massey algorithm [2]) to each inner loop iteration. The simulationbased ML lower bounds are also plotted and the lower bounds are obtained according to the description in [9].
Fig. 3(a) shows the Frame Error Rate (FER) performance for the short length (15,9) and (15,11) RS codes. We compare the proposed algorithm to the ABP algorithm with the same number of inner loop iterations for a fair comparison. The proposed DS-ABP(10,6,2) & HDD has shown a near ML performance and it provides a 0.35 dB gain compared to the ABP(60,1) & HDD at an FER = 10−4 for the (15,9) RS code. Similarly, for the (31,25) RS code as illustrated in Fig. 3(b), the DS-ABP(10,6,2) & HDD also has a near ML performance. The proposed DS-ABP(10,2,1) provides a 1.2 dB gain over Chase-GMD(3) [10] and a 2.2 dB gain over algebraic HDD at an FER = 10−3. It is discovered that a 20 iterations’ DS-ABP algorithm without HDD has shown a 0.25 dB gain over ABP(20,1) & HDD, which does not use the outer loop repetition, at an FER = 10−3 and it has a very close performance to ABP(20,3) & HDD [3], which takes a maximum of 60 iterations with HDD appended. Fig. 3(c) compares the performance of the DS-ABP algorithm with different numbers of the outer loop iteration for the (31,25) RS code, the total iterations’ number is retained as 60. It shows that by increasing the outer loop iterations and the list size of the codewords, a near ML performance can be achieved.
Moreover, for the purpose of comparing the convergence speed between the DS-ABP and ABP algorithm, the (31,25) RS code is chosen. A maximum number of 20 inner loop iterations is set and the accumulated number of inner loop iterations for DS-ABP algorithm is recorded. Fig. 4 shows that the DS-ABP(10,2,1) needs a smaller number of iterations to decode a codeword than the ABP algorithm, especially when Eb/N0 ranges from 3.5dB to 5dB.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a dynamic saturation soft-decision decoding algorithm is proposed for short RS codes. A damping coefficient for each bit’s LLR update is set to be proportional to the channel noise variance to provide a proper convergence speed for the decoder in different channels. The proposed algorithm

Fig. 4. Average number of iterations of decoding RS(31,25)
generates a list of codewords according to the up-to-date
best decoded codeword and the initial channel information.
Besides maintaining a reasonably low decoding complexity,
the proposed algorithm has shown a considerable performance
gain over the ABP algorithm and near ML performance is
achieved for short RS codes. REFERENCES
[1] S. B. Wicker, Reed-Solomon Codes and Their Applications. Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 1994.
[2] E. R. Berlekamp, Algebraic coding theory [by] Elwyn R. Berlekamp. McGraw-Hill New York, 1968.
[3] J. Jiang and K. R. Narayanan, “Iterative soft-input soft-output decoding of reed-solomon codes by adapting the parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 3746–3756, Aug. 2006.
[4] H. C. Lee, G. X. Huang, C. H. Wang, and Y. L. Ueng, “Iterative soft-decision decoding of reed-solomon codes using informed dynamic scheduling,” in 2015 IEEE Int. Symp. on Information Theory (ISIT), June. 2015, pp. 2909–2913.
[5] H. C. Lee, J. H. Wu, C. H. Wang, and Y. L. Ueng, “An iterative softdecision decoding algorithm for reed-solomon codes,” in 2017 IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory (ISIT), June. 2017, pp. 2775–2779.
[6] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Error Control Coding, Second Edition. Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 2004.
[7] S.-Y. Chung, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Analysis of sumproduct decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 657–670, Feb. 2001.
[8] T. Kaneko, T. Nishijima, H. Inazumi, and S. Hirasawa, “An efficient maximum-likelihood-decoding algorithm for linear block codes with algebraic decoder,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 320– 327, Mar. 1994.
[9] R. Lucas, M. Bossert, and M. Breitbach, “On iterative soft-decision decoding of linear binary block codes and product codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 276–296, Feb. 1998.
[10] H. Tang, Y. Liu, M. Fossorier, and S. Lin, “On combining chase-2 and gmd decoding algorithms for nonbinary block codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 209–211, May. 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:25:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

