Layered Offset Min-sum Decoding for Low Density Parity Check Codes

Nejwa EL Maammar Electronics, Instrumentation and
Measurements
Faculty of Sciences and Technologies
Moulay Ismail University Errachidia, Morocco
nejwa.elmaammar@gmail.com

Seddik Bri Materials and Instrumentation
(MIN)
High School of Technology
Moulay Ismail University Meknes,Morocco
briseddik@gmail.com

Jaouad Foshi Electronics, Instrumentation and
Measurements
Faculty of Sciences and Technologies
Moulay Ismail University Errachidia, Morocco
j.foshi@fste.umi.ac.ma

Abstract—Offset Min-Sum Algorithm (OMSA) and Normalized Min-Sum Algorithm (NMSA) are widely used in commercial LDPC decoders due to low complexity and reasonable performance. In this paper we proposes an Adaptive Layered Offset min- sum algorithm for the decoding of LDPC codes, which utilizes an adaptive offset factor to improve the accuracy of the soft information transferred during the iterative decoding process, and it provides good performance accordingly. The performed simulations showed that the layered offset min-sum decoding for LDPC codes can provide significant improvement compared to existing MS based algorithm, OMSA and NMSA.
Keywords—Min-sum, Sum-product, Normalized min-sum, Offset min-sum, AWGN, Rayleigh.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, that were first presented by Gallager [1] in the early 1960s and rediscovered by MacKay and Neal in 1996 [2], has received much attention in wireless communication systems because of its excellent performance in error correction. LDPC codes have been shown to asymptotically give near-capacity performance when the sum-product algorithm (SPA) is used for decoding [3]. Originally, a codeword was decoded by using a standard sum–product (SP) algorithm [4]. However, the high computational complexity of its check node operation results in high hardware overhead in the design of an LDPC decoder [5]. To replace the SP algorithm, a minsum (MS)-based algorithm, was proposed [9]. The Min-Sum algorithm can significantly reduce the hardware complexity of SP at the cost of acceptable performance degradation [6] where complex computations at the check nodes are approximated by using simple comparison and summation operations. The Min-Sum algorithm performs optimal iterative decoding at computational instability, increased complexity and dependence on thermal noise [8]. Sub optimal iterative coding is performed by Min-Sum algorithm with less complex than Sum Product decoding algorithm [7]. In order to recover the performance loss of the Min-Sum decoding several correction methods were proposed in the literatures [10], for instance Normalized min-sum algorithm that was proposed by Chen and Fossorier [12].

The MS algorithm has a performance loss compared to BP algorithm, and it comes from the overestimation of the message at check nodes. Therefore, the decoding performance can be improved by employing normalization or offset operation at check nodes, and these improved algorithms are called as normalized min-sum (NMS) and offset min-sum (OMS) algorithm [13]. These algorithms share the idea that the performance loss can be recovered by reducing the amplitudes of check-node messages, which is desirable as these messages are actually overestimated within the Min-Sum decoding.
Our paper is divided into six subsections. First section deals with introduction and a short summary about LDPC decoding algorithms. Second Section gives the Review of Sum-Product and Min-Sum Algorithms. Section III explains our proposed layered offset Min-sum algorithm. Section IV shows the simulation results, and finally the last section gives a general conclusion.

II. REVIEW OF SUM-PRODUCT AND MIN-SUM ALGORITHMS

In this work we assume an (N, j, k) regular LDPC code of

length N having a small fixed number ’j’ of ones in each

column of the parity check matrix A= [ ] , and a small

fixed number ’k’ of ones in each rows of A with M=N-K

rows and N columns . In a Tanner graph of LDPC code,

denote the elements of the first class that are N variable

nodes corresponding to the encoded symbols and the

elements of the second class are M parity-check nodes

denoted by

corresponding to the parity checks

represented by the rows of the matrix A. We refer the M

rows the checks of A, and the set of checks in which bit n participates as M(n) ={m: = 1}. We denote all the

elements of an LDPC codeword as variables, and the set of variables that participate in check m by N(m) = {n: = 1}. We also denote M(n) the set of check nodes connected

to symbol node (i.e. the positions of ones in the

column of the parity-check matrix A) and let N(m) denotes

the set of symbol nodes that participate in the parity-

check equation (i.e. the positions of ones in the row of

H).

00978-1-5386-7328-7/18/$31.00 ©2018 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:22:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Furthermore, N(m)\n represents the set N(m). We also denote N(m)\n as the set of N(m) with bit n excluded, and similarly, M(n)\n represents the set M(n) with check m
excluded.

x Step 3: Vertical Step A posteriori information:

= +∑ ∈ () →

(4)

Bit node Processing:

→=

+∑ ∈ () →

(5)

x Step 4: Decoding

Fig. 1. Tanner graph representation for LDPC Code (10, 2, 4).
Assume c = [ , , … … . ] the codeword, before
transmission, it is mapped to a signal constellation to
obtain the vector = [ , , … … , ] , where

=2∗ −1

(1)

> 0; = 0

=1

If

== 0 then the algorithm stops and is

considered as a valid decoding result. Otherwise, it goes

to next iteration until the number of iteration reaches its

maximum limit.

Is the transmitted information through an AWGN channel with variance: = 2

= [ , , ……, ]

Where;

=+

(2)

B. Min-Sum Algorithm
The Min-Sum algorithm follows the same steps as the tanhrule SPA. The sum–product algorithm can be modified to reduce the implementation complexity of the decoder. It is composed of the same steps with only single change in the calculation of the horizontal step which can be manipulated to be: This can be done by altering the Horizontal step:

Where, is the Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) with zero mean.
A. Sum Product Algorithm
The sum–product algorithm can be modified to reduce the implementation complexity of the decoder [14]. This can be summarized in the following four steps:
x Step 1: Initialization
A priori information, = − Bit to check message initialization, → =
Where, : a-priori information of bit node, n. : Posteriori information of bit node, n

x Step 2: Horizontal Step Check node Processing:

→ = log

∏ ∈ ( )\ ∏ ∈ ( )\

( →) ) ( →) )

(3)

→ = 2 tan ∏ ∈ ( )\ tanh(
Using the relationship:
2 tan =

→ ) 2)
(6)
(7)

Equation (6) can be further modified as,

→=

2 tan ∏ sgn (
݊ ∈ ܰ(݉)\݊

→ ) ∏ tanh |

→| 2

(8)

݊ ∈ ܰ(݉)\݊

= ∏ sgn (
݊ ∈ ܰ(݉)\݊

→ ) 2 tan ∏ tanh |
݊ ∈ ܰ(݉)\݊

→| 2

The Min-sum algorithm simplifies the calculation of (8) even further by recognizing that the term corresponding to the smallest → dominates the product term and so the product can be approximated by a minimum:

Where;
→ : The LLR sent from check node m to bit node n.
→ ∶ The LLR sent from bit node n to check node m.

→=

sgn ( → )

∈ ( )\ |

→|
(9)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:22:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

C. Offset min-sum Algorithm

Offset Min sum algorithm modifies the min sum algorithm by multiplying a normalizing factor (α < 1) that can be applied to the check node update equation (Horizontal step) in all
(10)

→α

sgn (

݊ ∈ ܰ(݉)\݊

→)

∈ ( )\ | → |

product algorithm. Where, α is the normalization factor

which is usually determined beforehand. A criterion is given

for the conventional normalized min-sum algorithm, in

which makes

() →

and

() →

equal on

average sense, i.e.

x Initialization:
1) For each variable node ∈ calculate the intrinsic information .
2) choose in the ascending order the variable nodes ∈ corresponding to the absolute values of the intrinsic information
3) Group the variable nodes into K ≥ 0 subgroups for ( = 1, … … . . , ).
4) For the first layer , we consider the subset of variable nodes that has a low values of .
5) All check node messages are initialized to 0: → ( , ) = 0 for variable node ∈ Where ∈ M(n) denotes the set of check nodes connected to symbol node .
6) = 1 and l = 1

E

→( ) −α∗

→ ( ) = 0 (11)

III. PROPOSED LAYERED OFFSET MIN-SUM ALGORITHM
Our work is focused on the improvement in error performance of layered offset MS algorithm. To improve the performance of Min-Sum decoding, we consider for the first layer a set of variable nodes that has a low value of the intrinsic information for the bit . This technique increase the security of the decision of the bit . The advantage of the proposed algorithm is that the correction factor reduces the performance loss and the complexity of decoding. In this decoding method, we consider for the first layer a set of variable nodes that has a low value of the intrinsic information of the bit .
For each sub-iteration we calculate the check node and variable node in one layer. The decoding then progresses sequentially.
We take the same notation already mentioned in the second
section: = { , , … … … , } which denote the set of all variable nodes and = { , , … … … , } denotes the
set of all check nodes.

x Iterative Processing:
For each variable node ∈ calculate the variable node updated message to its adjacent check nodes ∈ M(n)

=

+ ∑ ∈ ( ) → (, )−

→( ,)
(12)

Check node update rule: For each check node ∈ M(n), compute the updated message to its adjacent variable nodes
∈.
Check node update rule using offset factor α :1

→ (, )=
Decision rule:

∗ ∏ sgn − − → (, )
C = 0 if > 0 = 1 if < 0

→ (, )

∗(13)

= log(

( (

⁄ ⁄

)
) is the intrinsic information. It

is related to the received value and to the channel

parameters.

= log(

( (

)/ )/

)
) is the extrinsic

information. It is the information improvement obtained by considering that the coded symbols respect the parity check contraints.

is the overall information of the bit .
The layered offset min-sum algorithm using variable nodes is defined as follows:

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
Simulations are conducted to compare the performance of the layered offset Min Sum (OMS) with different decoding algorithms which are with the MS, NMS and SP algorithms. The codes are transmitted on AWGN channel after BPSK modulation. We set the maximum number of iteration to 30. The comparison among Sum Product (SP) algorithm, Minsum (MS) algorithm, Normalized Min-sum (NMS) algorithm, offset Min Sum (OMS) algorithm are shown in the Fig. 2. Simulation results show that the Normalized Minsum (NMS) algorithm obtains much better performance than Min-sum algorithm, comparatively better performance than offset Min Sum (OMS) algorithm

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:22:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 4. depicts the performance of a regular (1024, 512) LDPC codes with code rate 1/2, row weight 10 and column weight 6 are used. The codes are also transmitted over rayleigh fading channel after BPSK modulation and we set the maximum number of iteration to 50.decoding LDPC codes (1024, 512) for SP, MS, OMS, and LOMS algorithms over Rayleigh fading channel
Even though the layered offset Min-sum (LOMS) algorithm obtains better performance than Min-sum algorithm, offset Min Sum (OMS) algorithm; these decoders still cannot provide as good performance as that obtained in the sum-product

Fig. 2. BER performance of LDPC codes (1024, 512) for SP, MS, NMS, and OMS algorithms with offset factor 0.2 and 0.8
Fig. 3 present a regular (1024, 512) LDPC codes with code rate 1/2, row weight 10 and column weight 6 are used. The codes are also transmitted on AWGN channel after BPSK modulation and we set the maximum number of iteration to 50. The show that the performance of layered offset Minsum (LOMS) algorithm is best than Min-sum algorithm, offset Min Sum (OMS) algorithm and closer to that of Sum Product algorithm. for the BER value, 10−2our algorithm can achieve 0.08dB decoding gain over offset Min Sum algorithm.

Fig. 3. Error performance for iterative decoding LDPC codes (1024, 512) for SP, MS, OMS, and LOMS algorithms over AWGN

Fig. 4. Error performance for iterative decoding LDPC codes (1024, 512) for SP, MS, OMS, and LOMS algorithms over Rayleigh
fading channel
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a layered offset min –sum algorithm, which can improve the offset min-sum algorithm by introducing an adaptive offset factor. We present the approaches to obtain the normalization look-u table by simulations, and finally show that the proposed adaptive algorithm achieves good performances accordingly. This adaptive algorithm is also suitable for Normalized minsum algorithm (NMSA) for LDPC Decoding, and can be used to bridge the error Performance between the conventional max log-MAP and log-MAP decoding algorithms of turbo codes or constellation demapping.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:22:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,” Cambridge,
MA: M.I.T. Press, 1963. [2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance
of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 1645– 1646, Aug. 1996.
[3] Z. Wang, T. Tang, “Design of LDPC Decoder Based On FPGA in Digital Image Watermarking Technology,” TELKOMNIKA, Vol.15,
pp. 457-463, March 2017. [4] Z. Wang, J. Hui, “Non-binary LDPC Decoder Design over Rayleigh
Channel for FPGA Implementation,” TELKOMNIKA, vol.14, pp. 1376-1382, December 2016. [5] L. Fan, C. Pan, K. Peng, and J. Huang, “Adaptive Normalized MinSum Algorithm for LDPC Decoding,” IEEE, pp. 1081-1084, 2013.
[6] J. Zhang, M. Fossorier, D. Gu, and J. Zhang, “Two-Dimensional
Correction for Min-Sum Decoding of Irregular LDPC Codes,” IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, pp. 1-3, June 2006.
[7] M. K. Robert, R. Jayabalan “A Modified Normalized Min - Sum
Decoding Algorithm for Irregular LDPC Codes,” International Journal of Engineering and Technology, vol. 5,pp. 4881-4893,Jan 2014
[8] Y. Jung, Y. Jung, S. Lee, and J. Kim “New Min-sum LDPC
Decoding Algorithm Using SNR-Considered Adaptive Scaling
Factors,” ETRI Journal, Vol 36, pp. 591-596, August 2014.
[9] M. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced Complexity Iterative Decoding of Low-Density Parity Check Codes Based on Belief Propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, May 1999.
[10] V. Savin, C. Leti and, Minatec “Self-Corrected Min-Sum decoding of
LDPC codes,”January 2009. [11] M. R. Islam, D. S. Shafiullah, M. M. A. Faisal and I. Rahman
“Optimized Min-Sum Decoding Algorithm for Low Density Parity
Check Codes,” International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications, vol. 2, pp. 168-174, 2011.
[12] J. Chen, M. P. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation
based decoding of low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. on Comm., vol. 3, pp. 406–414, 2002. [13] J. Zhang, M. Fossorier, D. Gu and J. Zhang, “Combined Normalized and Offset Min-Sum Decoding Algorithm for Irregular LDPC Codes,” International Journal of Electrical Electronics & Computer Science Engineering, , pp. 30–33, NEWS 2016 [14] X. Wu, Y. Song, M.Jiang, and C. Zhao, “Adaptive-Normalized/Offset Min-Sum Algorithm,” IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, vol. 14, pp. 667–669, July 2010.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:22:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

