2018 Engineering and Telecommunication (EnT-MIPT)

Short Length LDPC Code-Candidate for Satellite Control Channel

Luiza R. Medova Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology Institute for Information Transmission Problems Russian Academy of Science
Moscow, Russia Email: luiza.medova@phystech.edu

Pavel S. Rybin Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology Institute for Information Transmission Problems Russian Academy of Science
Moscow, Russia Email: prybin@iitp.ru

Ivan V. Filatov Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology
Moscow, Russia Email: ivfilatov@mail.ru

Abstract—In this paper we consider the experimental specification for “Short Block Length LDPC codes for TC Synchronization and Channel Coding” by the Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS 231.1-O-1). We consider the methods of constructing LDPC codes and propose the new construction of LDPC code. Numerical results show that proposed construction of LDPC code significantly outperforms one from considered specification under the same decoding algorithm.
I. INTRODUCTION
Nowadays small nano-class satellites with masses from 1 to 10 kg are becoming increasingly popular. Low cost and a small mass of such satellites open the possibility of launching several dozens and even hundreds of the same type of spacecrafts by a single cargo. At the same time spacecraft and their communications protocols continue to become more complex, so there is a corresponding demand for more sophisticated uplink coding capabilities.
Traditionally, uplink communication has been used primarily for telecommand, where short command sequences were transmitted to unmanned spacecraft a few times per day to a few times per month. Current and future spacecraft use uplink communication for a much wider variety of uses. While telecommand continues to be an essential application, both in normal and emergency situations, there is increasing demand for transmitting larger volumes of data to spacecraft. Flight equipment can be reprogrammed, both with software for microprocessors and logicware for Field Programmable Gate Arrays. Manned missions benefit from live uplink video and Internet access.
Despite these changes, some facts hold constant: distances in deep space are immense, and received signal power is correspondingly miniscule. Power efficiency remains a dominant priority. When a spacecraft emergency affects the telecommunications system, delivering any information at all can be difficult, and there must be a method to deliver short commands at an extremely low data rate when necessary.
One of the first attempt to construct codes with high energy efficient for space data communication was done by the Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems in

the Experimental Specification for Short Block Length LowDensity Parity-Check (LDPC) Code for TC Synchronization and Channel Coding (CCSDS 231.1-O-1, “Orange Book”, [1]). This paper is devoted to the construction of LDPC codes with higher energy efficient than one proposed in mentioned specification. The paper is organized as follows. At first we give brief description of LDPC code constructions. After that we describe the methods for constructing LDPC codes. Then we represent the parity-check matrix obtained by these methods and compare it to the one from specification. At the end of the paper we provide numerical results that allow us conclude that proposed LDPC code significantly outperforms the LDPC code from specification CCSDS 231.1-O-1.
II. LDPC CODE CONSTRUCTION
A low density parity check (LDPC) code [2] is a linear block code that has a very sparse parity check matrix. A Tanner graph of an LDPC code is a bipartite graph [3]. That means that the nodes of the graph are separated into two distinctive sets and edges are only connecting nodes of two different types. The two types of nodes in a Tanner graph are called variable nodes and check nodes. Each edge of a Tanner graph corresponds to a non-zero entry in the parity check matrix. The decoding algorithms for LDPC codes are called message passing algorithms, and are iterative algorithms [4]. The reason for their name is that at each round of the algorithms messages are passed from variable nodes to check nodes, and from check nodes back to variable nodes. These algorithms use the structure of the Tanner graph. Thus, the performance of the decoding algorithms depend on properties of the Tanner graph.
In this paper we will consider LDPC codes constructed from protographs [5]. A protograph is a Tanner graph with a relatively small number of nodes. The protograph is used for constructing LDPC codes of arbitrary size whose performance can be predicted by analyzing the protograph.
Let G = (V, C, E) be a protograph, where V is a set of variable nodes, C is a set of check nodes and E is a set of edges. Each edge e ∈ E connects a variable node ve ∈

978-1-7281-0432-4/18/$31.00 ©2018 IEEE

163

DOI 10.1109/EnT-MIPT.2018.00044

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:24:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

V to a check node ce ∈ C. Let T be any positive integer and, for each e ∈ E and let πe be an arbitrary permutation of {1, 2, . . . , T }. The derived graph G = (V , C, E), where V = V × {1, 2, . . . , T }, C = C × {1, 2, . . . , T }, E = E × {1, 2, . . . , T }, and an edge (e, t) ∈ E connects the variable node (ve, t) ∈ V to the check node (ce, πe(t)) ∈ C. An LDPC code is constructed from a protograph by making T copies of the protograph, and then permuting the endpoints of each edge among the T variable and T check nodes connected to the set of T edges copied from the same edge in the protograph.
III. METHODS OF CONSTRUCTING LDPC CODES
A. PEXIT-method
One of the methods that are used to understand the process of decoding and constructing an LDPC-code is based on the mutual information measure (EXIT- analysis) [6]. The main idea of the EXIT-analysis is tracking the change of mutual information between the decoder output and the transmitted bits. But since the usual EXIT analysis cannot be applied to the study of protograph-based [5] LDPC codes we will use a modified EXIT analysis for protograph-based LDPC codes (PEXIT) [7]. One of the problem that prevent the usage of conventional EXIT analysis for protograph-based codes is the observation that LDPC codes constructed from protographs with same degree distributions can have different correction properties. However, the standard EXIT analysis can not distinguish the difference between such LDPC codes since it does not take into account the structures of the protographs. Therefore, a PEXIT analysis, proposed in [7], considers the structure of the protograph by calculation the mutual information for each variable node and check node.
To describe the PEXIT-analysis, we define the following log-likelihood ratios(LLR):
• Lav(i, j) denotes the input a-priori LLR of a variable node vj flowed from a check node ci;
• La(i, j) denotes the input a-priori LLR of a check node ci flowed from a variable node vj ;
• Lev(i, j) denotes the output extrinsic LLR sent by a variable node vj to a check node ci;
• Lec(i, j) denotes the output extrinsic LLR sent by a check node ci to a variable node vj.
• Lapp(j) denotes the a-posteriori LLR of a variable node vj .
Further we define the mutual information between the nodes in the graph:
• Iav(i, j) denotes the a-priori mutual information between Lav(i, j) and the corresponding coded bit vj.
• Iac(i, j) denotes the a-priori mutual information between Lac(i, j) and the corresponding coded bit ci.
• Iev(i, j) denotes the extrinsic mutual information between Lev(i, j) and the corresponding coded bit vj.
• Iec(i, j) denotes the extrinsic mutual information between Lec(i, j) and the corresponding coded bit ci.
• Iapp(j) denotes the a-posteriori mutual information between Lapp(j) and the corresponding coded bit vj.

The PEXIT algorithm in a channel with additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) is described as follows:
• Inizationalization:

Iav(i, j) = 0;

• Mutual information sent by a variable node to a check

node:

⎛

⎞

Iev(i, j) = J ⎝

[J −1 (Iav(s, j))]2 + σc2h⎠

s=i

• Iac(i, j) = Iev(i, j);

• Mutual information sent by a check node to a variable

node:

⎛

⎞

Iec(i, j) = 1 − J ⎝

[J −1 (1 − Iac(i, s))]2⎠

s=j

• Iav(i, j) = Iec(i, j);

• A-posteriori mutual information evaluation:

⎛

⎞

Iapp(j) = J ⎝

[J −1 (Iav(s, j))]2 + σc2h⎠

s

The convergence is declared if each Iapp(j) reaches 1 as the iteration number tends to infinity.

B. ACE-method
The effectiveness of the iterative decoding algorithm depends on the cycle length in a Tanner graph. Cycles degrade the performance of LDPC decoders, because they affect the independence of the extrinsic information exchanged in the iterative decoding and short cycles should be avoided in the design of codes. The girth of a Tanner graph is the length of the shortest cycle in the graph and many algorithms have been developed to construct large-girth LDPC codes. However, not only the length, but also the connectivity, of cycles play important roles in error-floor performance. This is noted in [8], and based on this observation the ACE (Selective Avoidance of Cycles) algorithm was introduced. The ACE method allows short cycles this good connectivity.
The idea of the ACE method is that not all cycles of the same length are equally bad. We can classify all cycles of the same length using the metric proposed in [8]. The metric, named Extrinsic Message Degree (EMD) of the cycle, measures the level of connectivity of the cycle with the rest of the graph. We use the notations from [9] to describe the ACE method.
For a given cycle C in the LDPC code graph let V be the set of variable nodes in C and C(Vc) be the set of check node neighbors of V. The set C(Vc) can be divided into three disjoint subsets:
• Ccyc(Vc): the subset of C(Vc), belonging to the cycle C. Each node from Ccyc(Vc) is at least doubly connected to the set V;

164 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:24:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

⎡ IM

⊕

Φ31

Φ15

Φ25

Φ0

0M

Φ20

Φ12

⎤ IM

HC12C8×SD25S6 = ⎢⎢⎣

Φ28 Φ8

IM ⊕ Φ30

Φ29

Φ0

IM ⊕ Φ28

Φ24 Φ1

IM Φ29

0M IM

Φ1 0M

ΦΦ2210⎥⎥⎦

Φ18

Φ30

Φ0

IM ⊕ Φ11 Φ58 Φ3 IM 0M

⎡

⎤

IM IM IM IM IM IM 0M 0M

H128×256

=

⎢⎢⎣

Φ5 IM

IM Φ26 0M Φ29 Φ14 Φ12

Φ8 0M

Φ4 0M

Φ26 Φ11

0M Φ25

⎦⎥⎥

Φ13 Φ22 IM Φ24 Φ29 0M 0M Φ31

• Ccut(Vc): the subset of C(Vc), that are not in the cycle C, but are at least doubly connected to the set V;
• Cext(Vc): the subset of C(Vc) singly connected to the set V.
Similarly, for a given cycle C in the LDPC code graph and the corresponding set V, let E(Vc) be the set of edges incident to Vc, that can also be divided into three disjoint subsets:
• Ecyc(Vc) : the subset of cycle edges in E(Vc) incident to the check nodes in Ccyc(Vc);
• Ecut(Vc): the subset of cut edges in E(Vc) incident to the check nodes in Ccut(Vc);
• Eext(Vc): the subset of extrinsic edges in E(Vc) incident to the check nodes in Cext(Vc).
The Extrinstic Message Degree of a cycle C in the LDPC code is defined as:
EM D = |Eext(Vc)|.
The cycle in the LDPC code graph with low EMD has bad connectivity with the rest of the graph. This limits the information about the values of variable nodes in V. The V is the stopping set, if every check node neighbor of this set is connected to this set at least twice. The EMD of stopping set is zero. In practice it is difficult to calculate EMD of the cycle, since it is necessary to determine if the edge is an extrinsic edge or a cut edge. Therefore, we use the simplified version of the EMD metric called the ACE metric:

ACE = Eext(Vc) + Ecut(Vc) =

(d(v) − 2) .

v∈Vc

We define a cycle C of length l (number of edges in the cycle) and ACE(C) value η : (l, η) cycle. To design LDPC

codes using the ACE algorithm we should set two parameters
(dmax, ηACE) and construct the LDPC code graph, where, by construction, each (l, η) cycle satisfies that if l < 2dmax, than η > ηACE .
Thus, in our work the LDPC code construction consists of

two steps. At first, we use the PEXIT analysis and select the

protogragh with appropriate correction properties. Then we use

the ACE-method to permute the edges between protographs.

IV. LDPC CODE FOR CONTROL CHANNEL
The experimental specification CCSDS 231.1-O-1 proposed the following parity-check matrix HC12C8×SD25S6 for (256, 128) LDPC code with protograph size of 4 × 8, where where IM

and 0M are the 32×32 identity and zero matrices, respectively, and Φ is the first right circular shift of IM , i.e. Φ0 = IM . The operator ⊕ indicates modulo-2 addition.
Using the PEXIT-analysis and ACE-method described above with the greedy algorithm we have obtained the following parity-check matrix H128×256 of LDPC code (256, 128) with protograph of size 4 × 8.
One can see that obtained parity-check matrix has simpler construction than one from specification. As a result the number of ones in proposed parity-check matrix is equal to 768 and the number of ones in parity-check matrix from specification is equal to 1024. It is important to note that number of ones in parity-check matrix is correlated with hardware realization complexity of decoding algorithm. Thus, we can conclude that proposed construction has roughly almost 30% less decoding complexity than one from specification. Moreover, the proposed parity-check matrix in fact has the structure of accumulate-repeat-accumulate (ARA) LDPC codes [10], known to have linear encoding procedure done only with usage of parity-check matrix, unlike the parity-check matrix from specification which requires the construction of separate generating matrix.
V. NUMERICAL RESULTS
Let us now consider the error correction performance of LDPC codes with parity-check matrix from specification CCSDS 231.1-O-1 and with parity-check matrix obtained by us with the methods described above. Error correction performance for these codes has been determined by software simulation, and is shown in fig. 1. These curves were generated using the adjusted min-sum decoding algorithm [11] with 100 iterations maximum. We consider the AWGN channel. Results for (256, 128) LDPC code proposed in specification CCSDS 231.1-O-1 shown in red (they coincide with results represented in specification) and results for (256, 128) LDPC code obtained by us with the methods described above are in blue. The uppermost fan of dashed curves show the CodeWord Error Rate (CWER), and the overlapping fan of solid curves give the Symbol Error Rate (SER) (same as Bit Error Rate).
On can see in the fig. 1 that proposed LDPC construction significantly outperforms the one from specification: for the level of SER at 1e − 6 the energy gain is about 0.4 dB.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper we have proposed new LDPC code with better energy efficiency than one from experimental specification

165 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:24:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 1. Simulation results

CCSDS 231.1-O-1 under the same decoding algorithm. We have shown by means of software simulation in the same condition that proposed LDPC code has energy gain about 0.4 dB comparing to the results of LDPC code from specification at the SER level equal to 1e − 6. Withal we have shown that proposed LDPC code has about 30% less complexity of decoding algorithm hardware realization than one from specification. Moreover, proposed LDPC code has structure of ARA LDPC codes known for their simple liner encoding procedure which requires only parity-check matrix and doesn’t require to construct and store the generator matrix, unlike the LDPC code from specification. Thus, we can conclude that proposed LDPC code is a good code-candidate for the future version of standards for short block length LDPC codes for TC synchronization and channel coding of the Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The reported study was supported by Ministry of Education and Science of the Russian Federation, contract No. 03.G25.31.0222 and RFBR, research projects No. 18-0701409 , No. 18-37-00322 and No. 18-37-00319.
REFERENCES
[1] Short Block Length LDPC Codes for TC Synchronization and Channel Coding. Experimental Specification. Issue 1. Recommendation for Space

Data System Standards (Orange Book), CCSDS 231.1-O-1, Washington, D.C.: CCSDS, April 2015. [2] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963. [3] R. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981. [4] A. Shokrollahi, “LDPC codes: An introduction,” Coding, Cryptography and Combinatorics, vol. 23, pp. 85–110, 2004. [5] J. Thorpe, “Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from protographs,” in The Interplanetary Network Progress Report, vol. 42154, Aug. 2003, pp. 1–7. [6] S. ten Brink, “Designing iterative decoding schemes with the extrinsic information chart,” International Journal of Electronics and Communications, vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 498–519, 2000. [7] G. Liva and M. Chiani, “Protograph LDPC codes design based on EXIT analysis,” in IEEE GLOBECOM 2007 - IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, Nov 2007, pp. 3250–3254. [8] T. Tian, C. R. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPC code construction,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1242–1247, Aug 2004. [9] D. Vukobratovic, A. Djurendic, and V. Senk, “Ace spectrum of ldpc codes and generalized ace design,” in 2007 IEEE International Conference on Communications, June 2007, pp. 665–670. [10] A. Abbasfar, D. Divsalar, and K. Yao, “Accumulate-repeat-accumulate codes,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 692– 702, April 2007. [11] K. S. Andrews, D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, J. Hamkins, C. R. Jones, and F. Pollara, “The development of Turbo and LDPC codes for deep-space applications,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 95, no. 11, pp. 2142–2156, Nov 2007.

166 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:24:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

