On Importance Sampling for Iteratively Decoded Linear Block Codes .

Nuo Wang Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Science
University of Science and Technology of China Hefei, Anhui 230027 China
email: nuo-wang@ustc.edu

Rajan Srinivasan Department of Electrical Engineering
University of Twente PO 217, 7500 AE Enschede, Netherlands
email: R.Srinivasan@ei.utwente.nl

Abstruct- We introduce a importance sampling (IS) scheme for fast performance evaluation of the linear block codes with message-passing decoding. This novel schcmc overcomes the existing difficulties i n IS to some extent when code length is large and requires codebook information. Experiments show very high IS gains for iteratively decoded linear block codes such as single parity-check (SPC) codes and block product codes, as well as low density parity-check ( L D P q codes. We also provide a scheme based on our IS method to find the minimum Hamming distance and pick up those codewords which are very useful when calculating asymptotic performance.
I. INTRODUCTION
Recently, the major interest in coding theory has been
focused on iterative decoding of concatenated codes and parity check codes, such as turbo, block product, and LDPC codes. All these codes exhibit excellent empirical performance, but unlike Maximum A Posteriori (MAP) decoding, iterative decoding is a sub-optimal decoding, so no analytical methods are available to evaluate their performance. Error rate on the channel for which it is designed are usually obtained through simulations, which face a variety of challenges: a good code
often has a complex decoder, simulations are slow and require
heavy resources; for very low bit error rates, millions of simulation trials for accurate estimation are needed.
IS is a method for biasing the transmission or the channel simulation in such a way that many more errors are produced. I f the biasing is done properly, the measured results can
be easily "unbiased" and the tnte error rate obtained. When applied successfully,the number of samples needed to estimate an error rate becomes only weakly dependent on Signal-toNoise Ratio (SNK). It is thus possible to evaluate any error probability within a reasonabIe amount of simulation time.
In general, when codebook information is available, a strategy that has been used for simulating an error control code is divide-and-conquer. The computation i s reduced to a series of simple sub-problems according to individual codewords,'and then integrated [I], But this algorithm requires a great deal of knowledge about a code's structure. When code length is large, the codebook size becomes prohibitively huge, so IS has been much more difficult to apply to contemporary Turbo-style codes and LDPC codes, but there has been much progress in recent years [2][3]. Thcse methods have produced some gains

at high SNR, but both of them encounter the "divide-by-n" problem, which makes them less efficient when code length is large.
In this paper, we propose an IS scheme for fast performance evaluation of the linear block codes with messagepassing decoding. The fast simulation methods used here entail adaptive designs of finite or continuous mixture distributions, whether codebook is available or not. It fully utilizes the contribution from each bit, efficiently overcomes the existing difficulties in the IS such as the "divide-by-n" problem and requirement of codebook information. Wc also propose a carefully designed IS scheme to greatly reduce the time to find the minimum Hamming distance and pick up those codewords for LBC which is very useful when calculating the asymptotic performance.
11. SYSTEM MODELAND PROBLEM SETUP
A . Bit Errar Probability of Linear Block Code
Consider a binary Linear block'code represented by an n by k binary matrix GT(tho generator matrix), such that a k-bit binary message s is encoded as the n-bit vector c=, GTs, So there are M = 2k output codewords in the transmitter, each codeword has fixed length n, denoted by
c = (Cl,Cl,.. ' ,c?,. . I ,&}*
Using binary-PAM antipodal modulation, which is defined as the-mapping:

Y = ~~l,Y2,...,~~,...,~*} = {m(cl),m(c:!),...,m(ci),..(1.) ,m(c,)}

where m(0)= -1, m(1) = 1. In this paper, we consider mainly the Bit ,Error Rate (BER)
of a certain kinds of linear block codes in presence of
- - + Gaussian noise. The vector received after an additive white
Gaussian channel is r = ( T I , r z , . . ,ri, . ,T ~ =} y n, and f
ni N ( O , U 2 ) . The channel transition density is denoted by f(rlc) if c
is transmitted. In case the channel is time-stationary and memoryless; f(rlc) can be reduced to:

n

f(rl4 = Tz.f(GI 4

(2)

i= 1

0-7803-90 15-6/05/$20.00 02005 IEEE.

18

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:08:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

where f(r;IC;) is the single-letter channel transition probabil- But for the most case, the codeword number is prohibitively

ity.

huge, such as Turbo-like codes and LDPC codes, the n is

Thc decoder is to decide which of the M codewords always more than thousands, and A4 is increased exponentially

was transmitted, then returns the message s that maximizes with the code length, so it is impossible to know the codebook.

the posterior probability. But the MAP decoder is oflen not h o t h e r problem is that a large number of separations make

practical to implement; indeed, the general decoding problem the algorithm even less efficient than the traditional MC

is known to be NP-complete [4], so based on parity-check technique.

mabix N which has the property HGT = 0 mod 2, linear To solve these problems, one way is to limit the biasing

block codes are often decoded via message passing algorithm,- centers to those most likely error codewords, the IS estimation

a sub-optimal decoding with low complexity In this paper is still unbiased and can be a good approximation, the only

we mainly study the bit error rate of linear block codes via penalty is the increasing of variance, but unfortunately to find

message passing decoding.

all those most likely error codewords for linear block codes

We denote the decision region corresponding to codeword had been proved to be nondeterministic polynomial time “p)c as D ( c ) , and its complement E ( c ) the error region. Let hard by Vardy [5]. IS can efficiently increase the occurrence

P(c’1c)denote the error probability of c’ being decoded when probability of desired error codewords through biasing the

c is transmitted.

transmission or the channel simulation. Therefore we propose

a carefully designed IS scheme to greatly reduce the time

consuming to pick up all those most likely error codewords.

Another way is to find an IS scheme regardless of the

codebook information and error set, so in this paper, instead

Denote by d ( c ,c’) the Hamming distance between c and c’,

of finding all the bias centers, we use a class of universal distribution that can automatically cover all the error centers,

so the average bit error probability is.

when randomly sampled from this distribution, all errors are

picked up and give a eficient estimation of bit error rate.

Pb (c) is independent of c when a linear code and a symmetric channel are concerned. Hence, we may choose the all-zero codeword, corresponding all -1 as the transmirted modulated codeword, when do the simulation. B. Importance Sampling
When all the M codewords are known, we can easily simulate each P(c’1c)separately through Importance Sampling according to individual codewords, and then get Pb(c) via (4). An unbiased and consistent estimator is described by
where f*(rlc) is an appropriate biased channel density, called
the simulation density, and W(rlc) called weighting function. If the simulation distribution is chosen properly, the number of samples K needed is very smalt, it means the estimator give a lower variance, which can be estimated by

111. BFASINSGTRATEGFYORSIMULATION
A. Mkture Distribution
Mixture distributions have been suggested for IS simulations in [ 6 ] .They were suggested from the largc deviations theory
perspective of maximizing the rate at which IS variance approaches zero in an asymptotic scnse. This approach is based on determining certain dominating points of the large deviations rate function of the error probability. For infinite number of dominating points, continuous mixture distribution have been suggested in [7] and shown to be eflcient. We approach the IS estimation problem for coding here from the point of view of using mixture ‘distributions to directly minimize the IS variances. This is done adaptivefy for each specific code considered.
Here we will give some analytical results, and based on these results, we will propose an effective IS schemes for fast performance evaluation of the linear block codes.
All the modulated, codewords are located on a n-
.dimensional hypersphere with radius equal to fiand centered
at original point, and all modulated codewords with minimum Euclidean distance to all - I modulated codeword are also located on a n-dimensional hypersphere with radius equal to 2 c and centered at all -1 signal point.

and we define the variance ratio between the MC and IS estimators given equal number of simulation runs as IS gain, it can be estimated by:

A
P-

E2

’

1

Gain =

n

1 K C:’i(.)WZ(.) - P2

(7)

where dmin is the minimum Hamming distance to all-0 codeword.
After some algebra, it shows a ( n - 1)-dimensional subhypersphere in n-dimensional space with radius equal to

19
i
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:08:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2Jdmin . (1- d,in/n) and centered at (rl,TZ,* I . ,T,) =
( 2 d m i n / n - 1,2dm,,/n ~ 1, ' . . ,2d,i,/n - 1).

r7+ri+...+ri = n

+ + + - r2 .' T, = 2d,i,

n

(9)

Multi-point Mixture Distribution
When codebook is available and the number of dominating codewords (with lower Hamming distance) is finite, and locations of the mean points between dominating codewords
and all-0 codeword known as {VI,v2, . . .I VL . . . I vm}, the
efficient simulate distribution is given by:

some bounding technique to have a prediction of its value, and then achieve optimal value by adopting the adaptive IS [XI.
For some complicated cases such as multi-dimensional product codes and LDPC codes, we can use the combination of two methods. For these kinds o f codes, at low SNR, the most likely error codewords are always uncountable finite, so hypersphere mixture simulation distribution is useful, but at high SNR, the most likely error codewords are countable finite and can be picked up by our IS method, so multi-point mixture simulation distribution can offer higher simulation gain and better performance.

Cplm
f*(rlc = U E E- 01 =

. f(r - vllc = all - 0)

3. Simulution Samples Generating (10) For multi-point mixture simulation distribution, biasing is

where { p l } is an arbitrary probability vector corresponding to

C;"=, the occurrence of dominating codewords and

pi = 1.

0 Hypersphere Mixture Distribution

carried by shiAing the mean of noise to m points correspond-
ing to dominating codewords, so the samples are obtained by randomly selecting one of the m points according to the occurrence probability of the dominating codewords, then add

When codebook is not available or the number of dominat- to the original noise samples.

ing codewords is uncountable finite, the simulation sequence For hypersphere mixture simulation distribution, biasing

is obtained by the randomly mean-shifting original Gaussian is carried by randomly shifting the mean of naise over the

noise vector over the surface of (n- 1)-dimensional hyper- surface of a hypershere. The samples are obtained by uniform

sphere at the half of origin and the hypersphere defined by randomly generating a point from the surface of that (n- 1)-

(9).

dimensional hypersphere described by (lo), and then add to

Because this (n - 1)-dimensional hypersphere is located the original noise samples.

in n-dimensional space, the n variables in (9) are not independent, for convenience to generate the samples and to

IV. APPLIcAT IONs

'

calculate weighting function, we rotate original Coordinate system into a new coordinate system which makes all variables

A. Picking Up Most Likely Error Codewords The asymptote of the union bound is a useful tool to reveal

TI, in (9) independent by Gram-Schmidt Orthonormalization, as the theoretically asymptotic performance of codes at very low
. {T:, rh, ) . a rb}, so in new coordinate system, the . error probability. It is exclusively dependent on the minimum

original distribution with AWGN channel is:

Hamming distance and its multiplicity which may also suggest

f ( T ; , T ; , . . . CI;.! = all - 0)

error floors for some specific codes. From (9) we know all the minimum Hamming dis-

tance codewords are located on a (n - 1)-dimensional sub-

hypersphere, so we randomly pick up the sampling point from

and the ( n- 1)-dimensional hypersphere is described by:

this hypershere, and then feed to a efficient decoder such as message passing decoder, an error codeword would only occur

{ T;'+T;~+--.+T$ =dmilL.(1-dm,,,/n) r: = (dman/n - 1)fi

if the decoder find an d satisfying Hc' = 0 mod 2 which is (1 2) not equal to the true c, when this occurs, it reveal the distance

Following the appendix of [7], we can easily describe this properties of a code. When the number of samples is large

, simulation distribution with formula:

enough, all the most likely error codewords will be picked up,

so the minimum Hamming distance and its multiplicity will

f*(& T i , a . . , T61i: = all - 0)

also be revealed.

In this method, we should predict the value of dmirt at first

based on some bounding technique, to make it more efficient,

we can perturb the samples by a certain level of noise, so it can

cover the error region more ofien even with a bad prediction

of dmin. Table I shows the estimated minimum Hamming

distance and its multiplicity of the several LDPC codes using

above method.

where a = &(dmrn/n - I), b2 = dmin .(1- d m t n / n ) , Iv(.)

is a modified Bessel function.

B. Single Purity-Check codes

In our simulation distribution there is only one single param- A binary single parity-check code, denoted by SPC(n,n-1)

eter &in th,e minimum Hamming distance of the codewords. is a collection of 2n-1 of n-bit length codewords c =

In fact, we don't need to know the exact value of it, we can use {cl, c2,. . . ,ci,. .. , e,} that satisfy the parity check equation

20

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:08:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE 1
ESTIMATED MINIMUM H A M M I N G DISTANCE A N D ITS MULTIPLICITY OF
S E V E R A L LDPC CODES.

Codes LDPC(96,48) LDPC(204,102) LDPC(SO4.252) LDPC(1008,504)

Hamming distance
6 8 20
34

multiplicity 3 1 2 1

+ c1 $- c2 -I-- & : c, = O(mod2). When SPC code is decoded
via message passing decoding, its performance is equal to the MAF decoder, while the decoding complexity is much less. Because it is a very simple code, we can easily find its minimum Hamming distance and those codewords. We apply both multi-point and hypersphere mixture simulation distributions to SPC codes, both of them show a very high
IS gain. The BER and IS Gain is plotted in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2.
100

simulation runs, which only took several seconds.
C. Multidimensional Product Codes
A multidimensional product code can be constructed by first arranging data to be transmitted in a hypercube of d dimension with the same length k in each dimension, then each dimensiqn is encoded with a component code. Here we only consider the SPC and Hamming code as the component code.
Maximum likelihood (ML) decoding of a product code is computationally infeasible as the length of the component codes and number of dimensions increase. Therefore, we ' employ a simpler suboptimal decoding algorithm, which based on soft input, soft output iterative decoding of the component codes along each dimension via message passing algorithm.
When dimension d is small, the code structure is very simple, the multi-point mixture simulation distribution is always the best choice. We plot the result of 2-dimensional SPC product code and 2-dimensional Hamming product code in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4.

10-5

10''

-3- SPC(4039)Wpmphere IS i - SPC(40.39)Muitipoinl IS

Fig. 1. BER of SPC codes.

Fig. 3. BER of 2-dimensional product codes.
t

Fig. 2. 1s Gain for multi-point and hypersphere mixture simulation distribution to SPC codes.

Fig. 4. IS Gain for 2-dimensional product codes.

It is evident from the figure that both IS estimates are efficient, but the IS gain o f the multi-point mixture distribution increases h e a d y with the reciprocal of the BER, that means we can evaluate any BER of a SPC, code with a constant

When dimension d is high, the block length will increase fast, at low S N R , the IS wilt be too complicated even less effective than MC simulation, but st high SNR, the multipoint mixture simulation distribution is still useful. The BER

21
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:08:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

+ Muiti-point mixture distribution

2

3

4 .5

6

SNR(dB)

Fig. 5. BER of SPC@,7) 5-dimensional product code.

TABLE 11
1s GAINFOR SPC(8.7) 5-DIMENSIONAL PRODUCT CODE AT HlGIi .?NR

USING MULTI-POINT hllXTURE DISTRIBUTION

.

SNR(d3) 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 s.0 5.5

1st iteration
22 2.43 x 103
1.83 x IO5 3.30 x lD5 1.20 x 109 1.25 x loi3

2nd iteration 2.09 x 10' 1.35 x io7 1.63 x 1O1O 1.60 x IO1' 1.25 1015 1.68 x 10"

5th iteration 8.46 x IO3 2.21 x iog 1.52 x 10'O
1.57 X 10l2 1.25 x 1015 1.68 x 10"

1o-'"o 4

6

8

io

iz 14

3

SNR(dB)

Fig. 6 . BER of LDPC(96,4S) code.

.s
d loM-
CO IOiQ.

o f each iteration for SPC(8,7) 5-dimensional product code is plot in Fig. 5 , Table. I1 lists the IS Gain.
The IS simulations for BER of SPC(8,7) 5-dimensional product code up to 5.533 took three days, but it reveals the performance that would never be seen through traditionaI MC simulation.
R. LDPC Codes
LDPC codes is a kind of linear block codes which have sparse parity-check matrices, the message passing algorithm is commonly used for the algorithm applied to the bipartite graph-based decoding of LDPC codes. For the reason that the break-through complexity reduction of LDPC decoding are required to support high data rate in wlireiess communication systems, so a fast evaluating and optimizing techniques for LDPC codes are a prerequisite for research and development.
To verify the efficiency of our IS scheme, we apply it to a MacKay (96,48) rate 1 / 2 regular LDPC code with 5 decoding iterations. In our scheme, at low SNR, we choose
bypersphere mixture simulation distribution; at high SNR, mu1ti-point mixture simulation distribution is applied. We plot the BER and IS Gain separately according to different distributions in Fig. 6 and Fig. 7, from which we can compare and choose the better one to do the simulation.
The IS simulation with hypersphere mixture distribution took about 20 minuets, at 9 d3, white the multi-point mixture

4 I"

6

a

IO

12

14

18

SNR(4B)

Fig. 7. IS Gain for LDPC(96,48) code.

distribution took less than 1 minuet, and remained nearconstant at other SNR.
v. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we have proposed an importance sampling scheme that can be used to evaluate the bit error rate of near-optimal iterative decoders for linear block codes based on message passing algorithms. Experiments based OR our method show very high IS gains for single parity-check codes and Block Product codes, as well as LDPC codes. Both multi-point and hypersphere mixture simulation distributions are used: hypersphere mixture distribution can be applied in all cases; but multi-point mixture distribution can offer higher simulation gain and better performance when partial
information of codebook is available. For some complicated cases, we can use the combination of
two methods: at low S N R and the most likely error codewords are uncountable finite, the hypersphere mixture distribution is preferred; at high SNR, the most likely error codewords are countable finite and can be picked up, multi-point mixture simulation distribution can be used.

22
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:08:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author is supported by Huygens scholarship from the . W F I C in Netherlands for researching at the University of
Twente (2003-2004). The authors would like to thank the kind help from the Telecommunication Engineering Group, University of Twente, Enschede, Netherlands.
REFERENCES
[I] Bellini, S., & Molinari, C. Efficient simulation of multilevel and codedtnnsmission systems. IEE Proceedings-1. Commrm. Speech Es.,140, 5 , 1993,365-371.
[2] Fermi, M.,& Bellini, S.importance sampling simulation of concatenated block codes. IEE froc. Commun.. 147, 5, 2000, 245-251.
131 Xia, B.. & Ryan, W. On importance sampling for linear block codes. IEEE Inl. Cor$ Commlm. 2003, (pp. 2904-2908). Anchorage, AK.
[4] Berlekamp, E. R.. & McEliece, R. J., t van Titborg, H. C. A. On the * intractability of certain coding problems. lEEE Trans. Inform. Theory,
IT-24, 1978, 384-386. [ 5 ] Vardy, A. The intractability o f computing the minimum distance of a
code. IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory. 43, 1997, 1757-1766. (61 Sadowsky, J. S . , & Bucklew, J. A. On large deviations theory and
asymptotically efficient Monte Carlo simulation. IEEE Trans. Inform.' Theory, 36, 1990, 579-588. 171 Bucklew, J~A., & Radeke, R. On the Monte Carlo Simulation o f Digital
Communication Systcnis in Gaussian Noise. lEEE Truns. On Commun.,
51, 2, 2003, 267-274.
[E] Srinivasan, R. Importance Sampling - Applications in Communications
and Detection. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2002.
23
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:08:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

