JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 23, NO. 5, MAY 2005

1939

Generalized Low-Density Parity-Check Codes for Optical Communication Systems
Ivan B. Djordjevic, Member, IEEE, Olgica Milenkovic, Member, IEEE, and Bane Vasic, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper is concerned with investigating the performance of regular and irregular, randomlike and structured generalized low-density parity-check (GLDPC) codes for long-haul transmission. The proposed GLDPC codes outperform currently known turbo and low-density parity-check (LDPC) coding schemes with comparable parameters utilized in optical communication systems. For a GLDPC coding scheme with 23.6% redundancy, the largest so far reported coding gain of at least 11 dB (at 40 Gb/s) is demonstrated.
Index Terms—Forward-error correction (FEC), generalized low-density parity-check codes (GLDPCs), optical communications.
I. INTRODUCTION
F ORWARD-ERROR correction (FEC) [1]–[35] is becoming an increasingly important signal processing scheme for use in modern high-speed long-haul wavelength-division multiplexing (WDM) systems. This is due to the fact that FEC can provide an effective increase of the amplifier spacing, transmission distance, and the systems capacity. As an example, two FEC schemes are currently used in optical networking interface devices: one, consisting of parallel Reed–Solomon (RS) codecs, each operating at 2.5 Gb/s, and another, based on rate 1/2, block-length 1024 low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1], [3]. Practical multipurpose codecs employing proprietary multiedge-type LDPC code and block turbo code (BTC)-based FEC schemes were described for use in wireless and optical communication systems in [4] and [5]. The former scheme exhibits a gap of at most 1.5 dB to capacity, while the latter gives a coding gain of 10.1 dB with 24.6% overhead. The performance of turbo codes can be matched and improved by LDPC codes, which have additionally very small hardware complexity [6], [7]. However, LDPC decoding is based on a sub-optimal message-passing algorithm [8], and therefore one may expect to be able to further improve this coding scheme in terms of its distance to Shannon’s limit. Generalized low-density parity-check (GLDPC) coding provides one possible way
Manuscript received May 27, 2004; revised January 19, 2005. This work is supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grant ITR 0325979 and Grant CCR 0208597.
I. B. Djordjevic is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721 USA, on leave from the Faculty of Computing, Engineering and Mathematical Sciences,University of the West of England, Bristol, U.K. (e-mail: ivan@ece.arizona.edu).
O. Milenkovic is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80303 USA (e-mail: milenkov@ colorado.edu).
B. Vasic is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85718 USA (e-mail: vasic@ece.arizona.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JLT.2005.846892

to achieve this task and improve the overall characteristics

of LDPC codes. These codes were first described by Tanner

[9], and even though they seemed to offer both excellent min-

imum distance and low-complexity decoding, they remained

unexplored until the recent work of Boutros et al. [10] and

Lentmaier and Zigangirov [11].

When properly designed, GLDPC codes have very large min-

imum distance and exhibit performance approaching Shannon’s

limit. GLDPC decoding is based on a combination of simple

and fast soft-input–soft-output (SISO) decoding of short, linear

block codes, such as Hamming codes, BCH or Reed–Muller

codes. To construct a GLDPC code, one has to replace each

single parity-check equation of a global LDPC code by the

parity-check matrix of a simple linear block code, known as the

constituent or local code [10]–[16]. In the setting of Boutros

et al. [10], [12], apart from the parity check matrix of the local

code, several other code parameters have to be memorized,

including the codeword length, the number of supercodes and

a permutation matrix. For local codes of short length and high

rate, trellis based maximum a posteriori probability (MAP)

decoding, known as BCJR (Bahl–Cocke–Jelinek–Raviv)

[17], or its low complexity version Max–Log–MAP [13], are

used. Additionally, for Hamming and Reed–Muller codes one

can utilize a simple MAP algorithm based on the modified

Walsh–Hadamard transform proposed in [18], with complexity

proportional to

, where stands for the number of bits

processed by constituent code and for the overall codeword

length. Time efficient MAP decoding algorithms operating on

local codes provide accurate estimates for the variable nodes in

the global LDPC graph after a very small number of iterations

(usually less than ten). The low complexity of encoding and

especially decoding makes FEC schemes based on GLDPC

codes an attractive option for high-speed optical transmission.

Two classes of generalized LDPC codes are considered in

this paper: randomlike, as well as a novel class of structured

GLDPC codes. Here, the properties refer to the choice of the

parity-check matrix of the global LDPC code. In both cases,

we will investigate GLDPC codes for which the local codes

are Hamming codes or structured, short length LDPC codes

themselves. For the first class of codes, decoding on the local

level is accomplished through the use of an appropriate number

of BCJR decoders operating in parallel; for the second class

of codes, low-complexity decoding based on suboptimal mes-

sage-passing algorithm (MPA) is used instead.

The performance of the proposed codes is assessed in a

realistic simulation environment [6], [19], that includes im-

pairments originating from amplified spontaneous emission

(ASE) noise, pulse distortions due to Kerr nonlinearities

0733-8724/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:04:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1940

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 23, NO. 5, MAY 2005

(self-phase modulation, cross-phase modulation, four-wave mixing) and stimulated-Raman scattering (SRS), chromatic dispersion (group-velocity dispersion (GVD), second-order GVD), crosstalk effects, and intersymbol interference (ISI). For a given code rate of 0.809 (23.6% redundancy) the largest so far reported coding gain for an FEC scheme of the order of at least 11 dB is found, therefore outperforming the turbo coding scheme of larger redundancy (24.6%) described in [5] by more than 1 dB.

in Sections II-B and II-C) that their minimum distance grows linearly with the code length.
The codes proposed by Boutros [10] and Lentmaier and Zigangirov [11], described next, are based on randomlike global LDPC code in which the simple check nodes of the corresponding bipartite graph are replaced by local Hamming codes. We will refer to these codes as the B and LZ GLDPC codes, respectively. Lower bound on minimum distance of such GDLPC codes were described in [11].

II. CODE DESCRIPTION
In this section, we will use the most basic notions regarding LDPC coding and decoding without detailed explanation. For a thorough exposition of this coding technique, the interested reader is referred to [28].
Depending on the structure of the local components, GLDPC codes may be classified as follows:
1) GLDPC codes with algebraic local codes of short length, such as Hamming codes, BCH codes, RS codes or Reed-Muller codes [20];
2) GLDPC codes for which the local codes are high-rate regular or irregular LDPC codes with large minimum distance;
3) Fractal GLDPC codes in which the local code is in fact another GLDPC code.
Each of these three constructions offers specific advantages. For example, in the first scenario, the MAP decoders of the local codes allow for fast propagation of accurate estimates for the LDPC variables. Consequently, the number of global iterations needed to achieve very low BERs over the LDPC graph is small, usually below ten. The second construction is very well suited for longer length codes. Since the local components in this case can have large length and therefore large minimum distance as well, the minimum distance of the resulting GLDPC codes is very high. The third approach is an attractive idea in terms of possible practical partly-parallel very large scale integration (VLSI) implementations [21], since the same code structure can be reused on different levels.
In general, one seeks GLDPC codes for which the local codes have large minimum distance and a rate as high as possible, and for which the global code has very large girth. This is a consequence of the following lower bound on the minimum distance
of a GLDPC code [9], found in (1) at the bottom of the page, where and denote the girth—i.e., length of the shortest cycle of the global code graph —and the column weight of the global code, respectively; in addition, is used to denote the minimum distance of the local code. Obviously, large girth leads to an exponential increase in the minimum distance, while large values of lead to an increase of the basis of this exponential function. GLDPC codes can be designed in such a way (see the references

A. The Construction of B-GLDPC Codes

The parity–check matrix of a GLDPC code proposed by

Boutros et al. [10], [12], is a sparse matrix constructed in

the following manner. The matrix is partitioned into

submatrices

. is a block-diagonal ma-

trix obtained from an identity matrix, with ones on the main

diagonal replaced by the parity-check matrix of a local

code

. Each of the submatrices is derived from

through a random column permutation , as shown

hereafter:

(2)

If the rate of the constituent code

is

, the

designed rate of the GLDPC code is

(3)

with and denoting the dimension and code-length of the

resulting GLDPC code, respectively. Therefore, this type of

GLPDC code, denoted as GLDPC

, is the intersection

of super-codes

whose parity-check ma-

trices are

, respectively. It has been shown [10],

[12]–[15] that

leads to excellent BER performance.

In this paper, we will also consider codes with

and

irregular codes for which the average value of is bounded

from above by two.

Zhang and Parhi proposed both an efficient encoding algo-

rithm [14] and low-complexity decoding [13] based on Max-

Log-MAP version of BCJR for this type of GLDPC codes. Low-

complexity decoding of GLDPC codes is an active research

topic and several improved performance and low-complexity

decoding algorithms were recently proposed in [15], [16].

B-GLDPC codes can effectively be decoded using the fol-

lowing iterative decoding scheme [10], [12], [13]: For each bit

we calculate its reliability from a given sample assuming that it

belongs to the super-code with parity-check matrix .

SISO decoders work in parallel on independent constituent

for odd (1)
for even
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:04:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DJORDJEVIC et al.: GENERALIZED LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

1941

codes of super-code . For every coded bit an a posteriori

probability and an extrinsic probability are computed. The ex-

trinsic probabilities from super-code are fed to

con-

stituent codes of super-code . The procedure is repeated

for every super code: extrinsic probabilities of super-code

are fed to constituent codes of super-code

, while

the extrinsic probabilities of super-code

are fed to

constituent codes of super-code (these steps define one

iteration). The procedure is terminated either when a pre-deter-

mined number of iterations is reached or when a valid code-

word is generated. Notice that for

the GLDPC code

may be considered as the generalization of a turbo decoder in

which two BCJR algorithms are employed for each super-code

[13]. In the case of GLDPC codes, the SISO decoding of upper

or lower super-code is performed by employing identical

low-complexity BCJR decoders (each operating on and dif-

ferent part of a codeword in parallel). The complexity can be fur-

ther decreased by employing simple MAP decoding algorithm

proposed in [18] instead of the original BCJR algorithm [17].

By employing the algorithm for efficient removal of cycles of

length four proposed by the authors in [24] for algebraic codes

with more complicated structure, binary BCH can also be effi-

ciently decoded using a message-passing algorithm instead of a

more complex BCJR algorithm.

Unfortunately, the performance of the described coding

scheme strongly depends on the choice of the permutations ,

as illustrated in Figs. 2 and 3; one may have to use results from

the theory of -random interleaving in order to fully analyze

the bit-error rate (BER) characteristic of the B-GLDPC scheme

[25], [26].

B. The LZ-Construction of GLDPC Codes
Another approach for designing of GLDPC codes is to replace ones within every row of the parity-check matrix of a global LDPC code by different columns from a local Hamming or some other algebraic code [11]. Since decoding is based on the BCJR algorithm applied to the local codes, this construction method is limited to the use of Hamming and possibly Reed–Muller local codes, whose minimum distance or rate is rather small.

Let

be the parity-check matrix of the global code, where

. For such a parity-check matrix structure a result

by Fan [30] can be used to determine possible cycle formations

in the code graph. The results in [30] show that a cycle of

length exists in a code graph with a parity-check matrix

composed of circulant permutation matrices if and

only if one can find a closed path through the matrix for

which the exponent of the matrices ,

, satisfy

, where denotes the

dimension of the permutation matrices.

Example 1: Consider the matrix shown below, with

.

The arrows in indicate a closed path for which the expo-

nents satisfy

. Hence

the path itself corresponds to three different cycles of length six

in the code graph.

Theorem 1: Let ,

,

be elements of the

set constructed according to (4), and with a given parameter

.Then the LDPC code specified by has girth at least

.

Proof: It is straightforward to see that there cannot be any

cycles of length four in any code constructed using the set de-

fined by (4). If

, in order to have a cycle of length

six in the code, there must exist six elements of the set , say

such that without loss of generality

C. Structured Regular and Irregular GLDPC Codes

This is equivalent to the requirement that

The LZ GLDPC scheme can also be used in conjunction with

a structured global code. It is also straightforward to make the global code irregular by erasing a number of predefined nonzero or

entries in the parity-check matrix and therefore increasing the

rate of the code. We propose two possible new code design ap-

proaches below. The first idea is to either retain two block-rows of permutation matrix based codes, and then selectively erase ones from the blocks to achieve a given variable degree distri-

The last equation implies the existence of six different integers , for which it holds that

bution. The second one is to use a modification of Latin square-

based structured LDPC codes, first described in a slightly dif-

ferent form by the authors in [28].

This leads to the conclusion that is a root of an equation of

With this goal in mind, let be a primitive element of a finite degree at most two with coefficients over

, contradicting

field

,

[29]. Define a set of integers by

the starting assumption that is a primitive element of the field

for

. All the other cases (up to the girth value

(4) 12) can be ruled out in a similar manner.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:04:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1942

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 23, NO. 5, MAY 2005

The construction described above allows for designing global made irregular by deleting certain permutation blocks. The two

codes with a very simple structure and large values of girth. But, examples described below illustrate this idea.

as will be demonstrated in the example below, if one desires Example 3: Consider the code described in Theorem 1 for

to achieve a high code rate with such a construction, the code the case that

,

, and that the first twelve blocks

length has to be very large as well.

in the first block-row and the last twelve blocks in the second

Example 2: If ,

, and the local code is chosen to block row are set to zero. Then the average column weight of

be a Hamming [7], [4], [3] code, the underlying GLDPC code the global code is

, leading to a GLDPC code rate

has minimum distance 33, according to (1), with

. The of

. The length of this code is 19

length of the GLPC code is 16800, while its rate is only 1/7. On 656. Despite this seemingly large code length, the complexity

the other hand, if

,

and only fifteen entries of of storing the description of the code and to perform decoding

are retained, the code length is 4320, the code rate is 7/15, while is extremely small. This is due to the fact that the local code

the minimum distance is at least 15.

is a [15], [11], [3] Hamming code and that effectively only 81

Another construction that results in global codes with rela- variables of these codes are exchanging information between

tively short length and girth at least eight is described below. each other.

Theorem 2: Let be a fixed positive integer, and let be Example 4: Consider the code described in Theorem 2 for

a parity check matrix with

block-rows and

the case that

; the code length in this case is 7455. One

block-columns, where each block is of dimension three. If the can delete the last seven submatrices of and set to zero seven

blocks in are specified according to the following two rules: blocks in each of the first 63 rows. This gives rise to a global

1) The first blocks in the first block-row are identity code of length 7371, and average variable degree 1.82. The rate

matrices, and all except the blocks at the main diagonal of the resulting GLDPC in this case is 0.83.

and beneath the first block-row are zeros; the entries Of course, one could use other forms for in order to

at the diagonal itself are basic circulant permutation achieve a trade-off between performance, rate and decoding

matrices ;

complexity. For example, the codes in [28] with girth 20 and

2) All the remaining entries in the matrix are obtained column weight two are a good candidate for this type of con-

by consecutively deleting the last block-column of the struction. Good irregular distributions for GLDPC codes can

submatrix described in the previous step and shifting be found by using EXIT chart analysis, as described in [31].

the rows down in a circular fashion,

then the global code defined by has girth at least eight.

Proof: In order to clarify the method for constructing the

parity-check matrix, we start with an example for

as

follows:

D. Fractal GLDPC Codes
In fractal GLDPC codes, the local codes form several nested layers. More specifically, a fractal GLDPC code is defined as a GLDPC code for which the local code is itself a GLDPC, and where this construction can be extended throughout several

levels.

Since the implementation of several nested layers may result

in code rates unacceptably low for high speed optical transmis-

sion, we restrict our attention only to the class of GLDPC codes

in which both local and global codes are LDPC codes, as il-

lustrated in Fig. 1. As evident from (1), the global code should

The only way to form a six-cycle in a matrix described by to trace through six blocks as follows:

is have the girth as large as possible, while the local code should have a large minimum distance. Since the low-complexity mes-
sage passing algorithm is implemented for both global and local

codes, the usage of local LDPC codes of minimum distance of at

least 10 and global codes of high girth results in excellent BER

performance, as will be shown in Section IV.

For the sake of completeness, we will next outline the em-

ployed decoding algorithm for fractal GLDPC codes.

The sum of the exponents (with alternating sign changes) on this Let

be a codeword, and let

path is , and therefore in violation of Fan’s rule.

be the parity-check matrix of a global code (with and being

The codes described in Theorem 2 have length

, the dimensions of ). Each row of this matrix represents a

row weight , and column weight 2. For

, the code length subcode node and every column a variable (bit) node in cor-

is 6048, and the GLDPC code with a local Hamming code has responding bipartite graph. An edge connecting vertices and

rate 0.81.

exists if

, i.e., if variable participates in subcode .

Regular GLDPC obtained from all the constructions de- A priori information of the bit at position , , is deter-

scribed above usually have the drawback of resulting in a small mined as

or only moderate overall code rate. In order to increase the code

rate, one can use irregular global codes, and in this case in

(5)

(1) is to be replaced by the average variable node degree in the

global graph. The regular codes described above can easily be with denoting the received codeword.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:04:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DJORDJEVIC et al.: GENERALIZED LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

1943

modulator, WDM multiplexed and transmitted over the same fiber. The carrier-suppressed RZ (CSRZ) modulator employed is composed of a laser diode, two MZ intensity modulators (the first serving as modulator, the second as a NRZ to RZ converter), a PRBS generator and an encoder. The optical signal at the receiver side is split into separate channels by using an optical demultiplexer. Erbium-doped fiber amplifiers (EDFA) and dispersion compensating fibers (DCF) are deployed periodically to compensate the loss and accumulated dispersion of the standard single mode fiber (SMF). The direct detection receiver observed is composed of a WDM demultiplexer, a p-i-n photodiode, an electrical filter, and a sampler followed by a decoder. An EDFA is used as a preamplifier.
The propagation of a signal through the transmission media is modeled by a nonlinear Schrödinger equation [6], solved using the split-step Fourier method.
For more details on transmission system model implemented reader is referred to our previous papers [6], [19].
In optical communication systems, it is common practice to use the factor as a figure of merit, rather than the signal-tonoise ratio, and in this paper we will follow this convention.

Fig. 1. Graph structure of GLDPC codes: (a) global code and (b) local code. Subcode node degree (7) in global code is identical with number of variable nodes in local code. Both global and local code were designed using our construction [33].
The messages passed from variable node to subcode node in the bipartite graph, , are initialized to . In the -th iteration, the messages to be passed from subcode node to bit node , , are obtained as the outputs of corresponding specialized low-complexity MAP or BCJR decoder, operating on the local code described by the parity-check matrix . Obviously, the subcode node degree must be identical to the number of columns in . The positions of ones in the -the row of determine the variables passed to the local MPA or BCJR decoder. Messages to be passed from bit node to subcode node , , are updated according to
(6)
The last step in iteration is to compute updated log-likelihood ratios according to
(7)

IV. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS

A WDM system with 40 Gb/s bit-rate per channel and

a channel spacing of 100 GHz is considered. It is assumed

that the observed channel is located at 1552.524 nm (193.1

THz) and that there exists a nonnegligible interaction with six

neighboring channels. The dispersion map is composed of 25

spans of length

48 km, consisting of

km of

fiber followed by km of fiber, with precompensation

of 320 ps nm and corresponding postcompensation. The

factor is additionally decreased by noise loading. The fiber

parameters are as follows; dispersion of 20 ps nm km , dis-

persion slope of 0.06 ps nm km , effective cross-sectional

area equal to 110 m and loss equal to 0.19 dB/km. The

corresponding fiber parameters are 40 ps nm km ,

ps nm km , 50 m and 0.25 dB/km, respectively.

The nonlinear Kerr coefficient is set to 2.6

m W. The

average power per channel is set to be 0 dBm, and a carrier-sup-

pressed RZ signal format is assumed. The influence of optical

and electrical filters is taken into account as well. The channel

characteristics modeled according to our previous papers [6],

[19] are used to create samples fed to iterative decoder. Using

the expression

For each bit the estimation is made according to

Uncoded

(9)

if

(8)

otherwise

Decoding halts when a valid codeword (

) or a

predetermined maximum number of iteration has been reached.

the BER of uncoded signal is converted to factor to make the results comparable with previously reported ones.
Results of simulations for B-GLDPC codes are given in Figs. 2 and 3, for two different constituent codes. The GLDPC

III. SYSTEM MODEL DESCRIPTION

(3969,3213,0.809) code from Fig. 3 (“triangle curve” in Fig. 4) although of slightly smaller redundancy (23.6%) compared to

The system of interest in this paper is a wavelength divi- the best turbo code result proposed so far for optical transmis-

sion multiplexing (WDM) system. The continuous-wave laser sion systems [5], demonstrates a coding gain of about 11.5 dB

signals at different wavelengths are modulated using indepen- (at BERs below

), the best results reported so far. Notice

dently encoded electrical streams and a Mach–Zehnder (MZ) that the results reported in [5] are obtained experimentally, and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:04:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1944

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 23, NO. 5, MAY 2005

Fig. 2. BER performance of GLDPC codes with Hamming (31,26) constituent code at 40 Gb/s (line rate) (ten iterations).

Fig. 3. BER performance of GLDPC codes with Hamming (63,57) constituent code at 40 Gb/s (line rate) (ten iterations).

Fig. 4. BER performance of GLDPC codes for global code being LDPC and local code being either Hamming (diamond and square curves) or LDPC (circle curve) code, at bit rate of 40 Gb/s.

therefore in a similar environment as simulated in this work. more cost-effective solution than the BCJR based solution. By

It also outperforms the best LDPC code proposed so far for employing the modified MPA [24] instead of BCJR we are losing

optical communications, our proposal [6] (in terms of coding about 1.25 dB, but the implementation of Hamming [63,57,3]

gain). As expected, GLPDC decoder with three supercodes- soft decoder using modified MPA is significantly simpler.

GLDPC(3969,2835,0.714) performs better than that with two The [6048,4896,0.809] GLDPC code (“star curve” in Fig. 4),

supercodes-GLDPC(3969,3213,0.809) for the same constituent designed using Theorem 2, performs the best for a given over-

Hamming [63,57,3] code. By reducing the code rate the perfor- head of 23.53% and provides a coding gain of almost 12 dB.

mance can be improved further (Fig. 2), at the price of reducing This result is likely a consequence of the large girth of the

the information rate.

global LDPC code, and the large overall minimum distance of

Results of simulations for GLDPC code for which a LDPC the GLDPC code. Notice that the codes shown in Figs. 2 and 3

code of column-weight 3 is used as a global code are shown in are not directly comparable with codes in Fig. 4, since the bit

Fig. 4 for two different constituent codes: Hamming [63,57,3] rate in the latter case is lower than 40 Gb/s. Choosing a bit rate

with BCJR decoder (diamond curve) or modified MPA decoder of 40 Gb/s for a code of rate 0.677 results into an unacceptably

[24] (square curve) and LDPC (90,100) (designed using the high line rate of 59.08 Gb/s.

codes we proposed in [7]) with MPA in decoding (circle curve). Another interesting observation is that the increase in the

Although the LDPC code of minimum distance of at least 11 line rate introduces more nonlinearities, and consequently, the

is used as a local code and MPA in decoding, the GDLPC code signal is more degraded. In order to keep the same value for the

based on Hamming codes with a BCJR decoding algorithm per- -factor, the optical signal-to-noise ratio has to be increased,

forms better. On the other hand, the MPA based solution is a much resulting in improved BER performance.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:04:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DJORDJEVIC et al.: GENERALIZED LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

1945

Fig. 5. BER performance of GLDPC codes for chi-square and nonstationary colored Gaussian channel models.

The results of simulations for chi-square [32] (in tenth iteration) and nonstationary colored Gaussian channel model [19] at line rate of 40 Gb/s are shown in Fig. 5. The prediction of BER performance of GLDPC code from nonstationary Gaussian channel model is better than chi-square, and can be used as a starting point for initial prediction of the FEC performance.
Based on our previous results [6], [7], as well as the recent results by Koetter [34] and Richardson [35], we believe that the proposed GLDPC codes will not experience the error floor phenomena. However, the existence of a BER floor of LDPC/GLDPC codes is still an open issue, although there has been some progress recently [34], [35].

V. CONCLUSION

We proposed a novel class of FEC for optical transmission

systems, the class of GLDPC codes. GLDPC codes, the gener-

alization of both LDPC and turbo codes, demonstrate largest so

far reported coding gain of almost 12 dB for 23.6% of overhead

(at BER below

).

The excellent BER performance of GLPDC codes in the pres-

ence of ASE noise, fiber nonlinearities, chromatic dispersion,

and inter-symbol interference selects them as a very promising

option for next generation of optical transmission systems and

for network applications.

REFERENCES
[1] K. Azadet et al., “Equalization and FEC techniques for optical transceivers,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 317–327, Mar. 2002.
[2] C. Howland and A. Blanksby, “A 220 mW 1 Gb/s 1024-bit rate-1/2 low density parity check code decoder,” in IEEE Conf. Custom Integrated Circuits, 2001, pp. 293–296.
[3] , “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity-check code encoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2001.
[4] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The renaissance of Gallager’s lowdensity parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 41, no. 8, pp. 126–131, Aug. 2003.
[5] T. Mizouchi et al., “Forward error correction based on block turbo code with 3-bit soft decision for 10 Gb/s optical communication systems,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Quantum Electron., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 376–386, Mar./Apr. 2004.

[6] I. B. Djordjevic, S. Sankaranarayanan, and B. Vasic, “Projective-plane iteratively decodable block codes for WDM high-speed long-haul transmission systems,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 695–702, Mar. 2004.
[7] I. B. Djordjevic and B. Vasic, “MacNeish–Mann theorem based iteratively decodable codes for optical communication systems,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 538–540, Aug. 2004.
[8] W. E. Ryan, “An introduction to LDPC codes,” in CRC Handbook for Coding and Signal Processing for Recording Systems, B. Vasic and E. M. Kurtas, Eds. Boca Raton, FL: CRC, 2005.
[9] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[10] J. Boutros, O. Pothier, and G. Zemor, “Generalized low density (Tanner) codes,” in Proc. 1999 IEEE Int. Conf. Communication (ICC 1999), vol. 1, 1999, pp. 441–445.
[11] M. Lentmaier and K. S. Zigangirov, “On generalized low-density paritycheck codes based on Hamming component codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 3, no. 8, pp. 248–250, Aug. 1999.
[12] O. Pothier, L. Brunel, and J. Boutros, “A low complexity FEC scheme based on the intersection of interleaved block codes,” in Proc. 49th IEEE Vehicular Technol. Conf., vol. 1, 1999, pp. 274–278.
[13] T. Zhang and K. K. Parhi, “High-performance, low-complexity decoding of generalized low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommunications Conf. 2001 (IEEE GLOBECOM), vol. 1, 2001, pp. 181–185.
[14] , “A class of efficient-encoding generalized low-density paritycheck codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoustics, Speech, Signal Processing (ICASSP 2001), vol. 4, 2001, pp. 2477–2480.
[15] T. M. N. Ngatched and F. Takawira, “Efficient decoding of generalized low-density parity-check codes based on long-component codes,” in Proc. Wireless Communication Networking Conf. (WCNC 2003), vol. 1, 2003, pp. 705–710.
[16] S. Hirst and B. Honary, “Application of efficient chase algorithm in decoding of generalized low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 6, no. 9, pp. 385–387, Sep. 2002.
[17] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[18] A. Ashikhmin and S. Litsyn, “Simple MAP decoding of first order Reed–Muller and Hamming codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1812–1818, Aug. 2003.
[19] I. B. Djordjevic and B. Vasic, “An advanced direct detection receiver model,” J. Opt. Commun., vol. 20, pp. 6–9, Feb. 2004.
[20] F. McWilliams and N. Sloane, The Theory of Error Correcting Codes. New York: North Holland, 1977.
[21] V. Nagarajan, N. Jayakumar, S. Khatri, and O. Milenkovic, “Highthroughput VLSI implementations of iterative decoders and related code construction problems,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM 2004, vol. 1, Dec. 2004, pp. 361–365.
[22] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT, 1963.
[23] O. A. Sab and V. Lemarie, “Block turbo code performances for long-haul DWDM optical transmission systems,” in Proc. Optical Fiber Communication Conf. (OFC), vol. 3, 2001, pp. 280–282.
[24] S. Sankaranarayanan and B. Vasic, “Iterative decoding of linear block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, submitted for publication.
[25] S. Dolinar and D. Dilvasar, “Weight Distributions for Turbo Codes using Random and Nonrandom Permutations,” Progr. Rep., JPL TDA, 42-122, 1995.
[26] N. Ehtiati et al., “Improved interleaver design for turbo coded intersymbol interference channels,” in Proc. IEEE 58th Conf. Vehicular Technol. (VTC 2003), Oct. 2003, pp. 327–331.
[27] H. Zhang and J. Moura, “The design of structured regular LDPC codes with large girth,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM 2003, vol. 7, 2003, pp. 4022–4027.
[28] O. Milenkovic and S. Laendner, “Analysis of the cycle-structure of LDPC codes based on Latin squares,” in Proc. 2004 IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, vol. 2, Jun. 2004, pp. 777–781.
[29] R. Lidle and H. Niederreiter, Finite Fields, CA: Academic Press, 1997. [30] J. Fan, “Array codes as LDPC codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo
Codes, 2000, pp. 543–546. [31] A. Ashikhmin, G. Kramer, and S. ten Brink, “Extrinsic information
transfer functions: Model and erasure channel properties,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 2657–2673, Nov. 2004. [32] P. A. Humblet et al., “On the bit error rate of lightwave systems with optical amplifiers,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 1576–1582, Nov. 1991.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:04:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1946

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 23, NO. 5, MAY 2005

[33] I. B. Djordjevic and B. Vasic, “High code rate low-density parity-check codes for optical communication systems,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 1600–1602, Jun. 2004.
[34] R. Koetter, “Iterative coding techniques, pseudocodewords, and their relationship,” presented at the LANL Workshop on Applications of Statistical Physics to Coding Theory, Santa Fe, NM, Jan. 10–12, 2005.
[35] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” presented at the 41st Allerton Conf. Communications, Control and Computing, Allerton, IL, Oct. 2003.

Olgica Milenkovic (M’03) received the M.S. degree in mathematics and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, in 2001 and 2002, respectively.
She is currently an Assistant Professor in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Colorado, Boulder. Her research interests are in the area of error-control coding, constrained coding, probability theory, analysis of algorithms, and genetics.

Ivan B. Djordjevic (M’03) received the Dipl.Ing., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees, all in electrical engineering, from the University of Nish, Nish, Serbia, in 1994, 1997, and 1999, respectively.
From 1994 to 1996, he was with the Faculty of Electronic Engineering, University of Nish, working on modeling and simulation of optical/digital communication systems. From 1996 to 2000, he was with the State Telecommunications Company (Serbia Telecom), District Office for Networks, Nish, Serbia, where he was involved in digital transmission systems commissioning and acceptance, design, maintenance, installation, and connection. From 2000 to 2001, he was with the National Technical University of Athens, Greece, and with TyCom US, Inc. (now TyCo Telecommunications), USA, where he was involved in modeling and simulation of dense-wavelength-division-multiplexing (DWMD) systems. During 2002 and 2003, he was with the University of Arizona, Tucson; the University of Bristol, U.K.; and the University of West of England, Bristol, U.K., working on forward-error correction and iterative decoding for optical transmission, optical CDMA, high-speed transmission, and optical switches. He is now with the University of Arizona, on leave from the University of West of England. He is an author of more than 35 international journal papers and more than 45 international conference papers. His research interests include DWDM fiber-optic communication systems and networks, FEC for optical communications, optical CDMA, optical packet switching, coding theory, coherent optical communications, and statistical communication theory.

Bane Vasic (S’92–M’93–SM’02) received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Nish, Serbia, Yugoslavia, in 1989, 1991, and 1994, respectively.
From 1996 to 1997, he was a Visiting Scientist at the Rochester Institute of Technology and Kodak Research, both in Rochester, NY, where he was involved in research on optical storage channels. From 1998 to 2000, he was with Lucent Technologies, where he was involved in research coding schemes and architectures for high-speed applications. He was also involved in iterative decoding and low-density parity check codes, as well as development of codes and detectors for five generations of Lucent (now Agere) chips. Currently, he is a Faculty Member of the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Arizona, Tucson. He has authored more than 25 journal articles, more than 50 conference papers, and more than six book chapters and one book. His research interests include coding theory, information theory, communication theory, digital communications, and recording. Dr. Vasic is a Member of the Editorial Board of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS. He served as Technical Program Chair of the IEEE Communication Theory Workshop 2003 and as Co-Organizer of the Center for Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science (DIMACS) Workshops on Optical/Magnetic Recording and Optical Transmission and Theoretical Advances in Information Recording, 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:04:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

