A New Random Construction for Low-density Parity-check Codes

Huang Zhanghu’*2
2. Institute of communicationengineering University of Science and Technology PLA
Nanjing, China huangzhonghu@ 126.com,

Shen Lianfeng, Y e Zhihui’
I . National Mobile Communication Research Lab Southeast University Nanjing, China Ifshen@seu.edu.cn yzh@semit.corn.cn

Abstmcl-This paper gives a new random construction for LDPC codes, which uses an iterative algorithm to avoid short cycles in the Tanner graph. The construction method has low complexity and great flcxihle choice in LDPC codes

y p s x pp’matrix with column and row weights 7 and p
respectively. The restriction between size of the paritycheck matrix and the weight the column and row limits the

parameters including codelength, code rate, least girth of the choice of code parameters and applications the LDPC codes.

graph, the weight of column and row in the parity-check matrix. The method can be applied to the irregular LDPC codes and strict regular LDPC codes, Simulations show that the method performs well with iterative dccoding.

In this paper, we give a fast and simple random construction for LDPC codes, which uses an iterative algorithm to avoid short cycles in the Tanner graph. The construction method has low complexity and great flexible

choice in LDPC codes parameter including codelength, code

I. INTRODUCTION

rate, min girth of the graph, the weight of column and row in the parity-check matrix. Compared with conventional

Law-density parity-check(LDPC) codes were random construction method, the method can be applied to

! discovered by Gollager in early 1960s. LDPC codes are the irregular LDPC codes and strict regular LDPC codes.

i codes specified by a matrix containing mostly 0’s and only a Construction for the parity-check matrix of LDPC codes was

small number of 1’s. The code words of LDPC codes are given in the section II .Section I11 gives construction for the

formed by combining a block of binary infirmation digits generate matrix of the LDPC codes, the simulations and

with a block of check digits. Each check digit is modulo 2 conclusions were showed in the section IV and l? .

sum of a prespecified set of information digits. A parity-

check matrix can conveniently represent this formation rules
for the check digits. After being overlooked for almost 35 years, this class of codes has been recently rediscovered and shown to form a class of Shannon limit approaching codes. This class of codes decoded with iterative decoding, such as

11. CONSTRUCTIONFOR THE PARITY-CHECK MATRIX
Tanner graphs of LDPC codes are bipartite graphs with variable nodes on one side and check nodes on the other[lOJ. Each variable node corresponds to a column in

the sum-product algorithm (SPA) [1-41, performs the parity-check matrix, each check node corresponds to

amazingly well. Since their rediscovery, LDPC codes have a row in the parity-check matrix, and each edge in the

become a focal point of research.

Tanner graph corresponds to 1’s in the parity-check

It is known that the sum-product decoding algorithm matrix. Define a set V, in which every variable node

converges to the optimal solution provided that the Tanner corresponds to some elements. If. the degree of the

graph of the code satisfies a structural constraint, namely, that it is free of cycles [5-61. The existence of cycles in the
Tanner graph prevents an exact error-probability analysis of iterative decoding procedures, and the shorter the cycles in the graph, the sooner the analysis breaks down. Various improvements have been made to Gallager’s original random construction method to avoid cycles [7-91. As well, algebraic constructions of LDPC matrices have been proposed to provide regular codes with Tanner graphs free of four-cydes [8-9). But there are many restrictions in the algebraic constructions of LDPC matrices. For example, the paper[9) gives a construction method based on the simpje structure of Reed-Solomon (RS) codes with two information symbols. Consider the parity-check matrix H, K is a

variable node is v, then the variable node corresponds n elements in the set V. The correspondence between the variable nodes and the set V is denoted by$ For example, for a variable node v of degree 3, there exists three different elements al, u2, a3 in the set V, which correspond- to the same variable node v, so
,(a1 ) = f l 0 2 ) = f l 0 3 ) = ~ .
Similarly we make a set C, in which every check node corresponds to some elements. If the degree of the check node is n, then the check node corresponds to n elements in the set C. The correspondence between the check nodes and the set C is denoted by g. For example, for a check node c of degree 3, there exists three different

Supparled by the Natura[ Science Foundation of China (No.60472053)

0-7803-9015:6/05/$20.00 02005 IEEE.

139

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:04:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

eIements 61, ba, 63 in the set C, which correspond to the same check node c, so g(bl)=g(b2)=g(b3)=c.
Let N be the least cycle length of LDPC codes. The construction of the LDPC code is organized as follows:
1) Make the check nodes set C the variable nodes set V, mark all elements unused in the set C.
2) Randomly choose an element al randomly in Y. 3) If there aren’t elements marked unused in C,go
to step 1, else go next.
4) Choose an unused element 61 randomIy in C. If there are any cycles whose girth is less than X, mark bl used and go to step 3, else go next,
5) Mark all elements in C unused, delete the element bl from the set C and delete*theelement
a1 from the set V. Go next.
6) If the set V Is empty, go next, else go to step 2. 7) Construction is ended. In the step 4, we need check all cycle’s length in the bipartite graphs. When the codelength is very large, there are tob many cycles to check all eycle’s length. In the paper, we present a iterative method to check all cycle’s length. Assume that all cycle’s length is greater than N in the step 2. Then the element al in the set V in the step 2
and the element bi in the set C were chosen in step 4. The
edge between at and bl is denoted by ea.,.,., When the

ad

6

ss

a1

aB

d)

a10

all

p2

Fig. 1 Tree of cycle length checking Initialization. Let 01 be chosen in the step 2 and 61 be
chosen in the step 4,we define Po=( a,) and Qo=( bl). Check node processing. Assume a set A and it

subset B, we denote the set A excluded 6 by A B . The

quantity Pi is defined by

f

edge

is put in the bipartite graphs, most cycles in

bipartite graphs aren’t affected by edge, we only need
check the cycles which include the edge e,.,4 .

Variable node processing. The quantity Qi is defined by

Let b be an element in the set C.In the variable node

set V,we define a subset of element U which participates
in the check Ab) by S,(b)=( a:Xu) participates in the *
parity-check g ( b ) ) . Similarly, let a be an element in the V.

In the set C, we define a subset of element b in whichflu)

participate by Sc(a)=(b:flu) participate in the check

m1.-

Since the graph is a bipartite graph, all cycle’s length

1

Let ar be chosen in the step 2 and bl be chosen in the must be even. If there exists a cycle whose length is 2*i,

step 4. In the graph, there are a lot of paths including the there must exist an element cl ,which satisfies that a E 4.

edge ea,,,., Let a1 be the first vertex and the edge ea,,sbe and j ( a ) = f ( a , ) . We define a set

the first edge in paths. AH paths including the edge eo, ,I

f = { f ( a ): aE 4 ) .If f ( a , )E Y , there exists a cycle

i

make up of a tree depicted by Fig.], We define a set ofx by whose length is 2*i, the iterative searching is broken.

1

P, ={x: x is in the path including the edge

and there Otherwise the iteratiye searching continues. If i is greater

are 2*i edge between x and al). Similarly, We define a set
ofy by Q, =bvy: is in the path including the edge and
there are 2*i+l edge between y and a j } . Because the graph
v is bipartite graph, so Q,tc and 4 c . The algorithm
of checking all cycle’s length has two alternating parts, in

than Nl2, the least cycle’s length is greaten than N and the iterative searching is stopped.
After mapping ffom the variable set V to the check set C, we can construct the parity-check matrix from the bipartite graphs. In next section, we’ll construct the generator matrix of LDPC codes from their parity-check matrix.

which quantities P, and Q, are iteratively updated. The

algorithm foIlows as:

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:04:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

111. CONSTRUCTlON OF GENERATOR MATRIX FROM THE
PARITY-CHECK MATRlX

In this section, we shall develop an algorithm €or constructing generator matrix from the parity-check matrix. Although our example is binary, the algorithm applies generally to matrix H whose entries belong to a field F. Assume we are given an m X n parity-check
matrix W over F. By definition, the associated generator matrix G satisfies such that

HG'=O

(1)

Probably the most straightforward way of

constructing the generator matrix is the following. The

parity-check matrix H=[HIIHZ] is composed of two

sparse matrices HI and Hz. If the matrix H2 is an

invertible m X m matrix, the inverse H i 1ofthe matrix in

modulo 2 arithmetic has been computed during Gaussian
elimination that produced the matrix P = €!l;'H, . We

define the generator matrix to be

where It is the k X k identity matrix and k=n-m.
Generally, the matrix Hz isn't invertible and the
proposed algorithm doesn't apply to the parity-check matrix whose rank is less than M. Given the parity-check matrix H with rank r where r is less than nr, there exists the m-order elementary row square matrices PIand the norder elementary column square matrices Q which satisfy such that

Define the m X m square matrix P =P;P2PIand r X nr square matrix A=T~TIU.sing Equ. (8), we get

Dcrfrre

a

n-m

X

n

matrix

G = Q - ' ( I ~ . ~D - ( I ~ . ~D ) A ~ ) where the

mutt-ix D is any n-mXm-r matrix and In.",is n-m identip

matrix. Because the matrix C sarisJes the Equ.(3), the

matrix G is the generator matrix associated with the parity-

check matrix N.

s IV. IMULATION RESULTS

In this section, we present several LDPC codes and their error performances with iterative decoding using SPA. For performance computation, we assume BPSK transmissionover an AWGN channel.
A. The performance under the same codelength, the same least girth and different code rate Fig.2 shows the performance ofJthe codelength-2100, least girth-6 codes of rate 3/4, 2/3 and 112 respectivdy. The rate 3/4 LDPC codes is a (3,12) regular codes, where 3 is the column weight ofthe parity-check matrix and 12 is the row weight of the parity-check matrix. Similarly, the rate 2/3 LDPC codes is a (3,9) regular codes and the rate 1/2 LDPC codes is a (3,6) regular codes. As can be seen, the larger the rate, the worse the BER. It's important tu note that the larger the rate, the smaller the average iterative number.

where T2 is r X r invertible matrix, TI is r X n-r matrix,

T3 is m-rX n-r matrix and T4 ism-rX r matrix.

Since T2 is an invertible square matrix, there exists

w,wz w L ,. - , finite elementary square matrices , 7

, which

satisfy such that

T2 W,W,-.*W,

(4 1

D e t k the matrix Ts w,.w,-,- w, where T5

satisfies such that

Fig.2 BER under different rate

T5T2= I,

(5)

fT,
( Define the m X m square matrix P3=

which satisfies such that

0 \I
JI ~

B. The performance under the same code rate, the same least girth and different codelength. Fig3 compares the performance of the rate-IR, least
~ gir+th4 c~odes~of codelength 100, 500, 1000, 2100 and
3000 respectively. As can be seen, the larger the codelength, the better BER. But as the cadelength increases, the average iterative number increases too.
C, The performance under the same code rate, the same codelenth and different least girth.

141
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:04:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

J

The performance of the rate-1/2, codelength-3000 codes of least girth 6 , 8, 10 is depicted in the Fig.4. The performance of LDPC codes depends on many factors including the least girth, average cycle length, the distribution of the cycle in the graph and so on. As for the codes constructed randomly, the performance depends mostly on the average cycle length and the cycle’s distribution. As can be seen in the Fig.4, the performance is almost same at least girth 6 , 8 and 10. The simdatlon results are reasonable.

---

l_l

_I

I

The paper gives a fast and simple random method for constructing LDPC codes, which performs well with SPA.AII examples in the paper is regular LDPC codes, the method can be used to construct irregular LDPC codes.
REFERENCES
[1 R.G. Gallager, “Lowdensiry parhy-check codes”, IEEE Transacrions on Information Theory, Volume: 8, Issue: I , Jan 1962, Pages:21 - 28 [2] MacKay, D.J.C. “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse
- matrices”. lEEE Transactions ~ f Ilnformation Theory, Volume: 45 ,Issue:
2 , March 1999. Pages399 431 [3] Sae-Young Chung, Richardson, T.J., Urbanke, R.L. “Analysis of sumproduct decoding of [ow-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation”, lEEE Transactions on Informaljon Theory, Volume: 47,Issue: 2 , Feb 2001,Pages:657 - 670 [4] Richardson, T.J.;Urbanke, R.L. “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding”, IEEE Transactions on lnformatiun Theory, Volume: 47, Issue: 2 , Feb 2001, Pages:599 - 618 151 T. EtEion, A. Trachtenberg, and A. Vardy, “Which codes have cydefree Tanner graphs?,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theoly, VOL. 5, Sept. 1999, pp. 2 173-2 t 8 1, [6] R. J. McEliece, D.J. C. MacKay, and J.-F. Cheng, ‘Turbo decoding as an instance o f Pearl‘s “belief propagation” algorithm,” IEEE J. SelectAres Commun., vol. 16, pp. 140-IS2,Feb. 1998.
[7] M. Sipser and D. A. Spielman, “Expander codes,” lEEE T r m .
Infornr.Theory,vol. 42, pp. 1710-1722, Nov. 1996.
181 Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check
codes based on finite gemetries: a rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans.InJorm. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 271 1-2736, NOV2.001. [9] Djurdjevic, I.; l u n Xu; Abdel-Ghaffar, K.; Shu Lin; “A class of lowdensity parity-check codes constructed based on Reed-Solomon codes with iwa information symbols”, lEEE Communications Lerters, Volume: 7,Issue:7,July2003,Pages:317-319 [lo] MacKay, D.J.C.; Wilson, S.T.; Davey, M.C.; “Comparison of constructions of irregular Gallager codes”, I E E E Transactions on Communications, Volume: 4 7 , Issue: 10, Oct. 1999,Pages:1449 - 1454

1 42
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:04:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

