Network-on-Chip-Centric Approach to Interleaving in High Throughput Channel Decoders

Christian Neeb, Michael J. Thul, Norbert Wehn University of Kaiserslautern, Erwin-Schro¨dinger-Straße, 67663 Kaiserslautern, Germany Phone: (+49) 631 205 4435, Fax: (+49) 631 205 4437 E-mail: {thul, neeb, wehn}@eit.uni-kl.de

Abstract— Reliable wireless communication needs efficient channel coding schemes like Turbo- and LDPC-Codes. During decoding, data is exchanged iteratively between component decoders. Between iterations, however, the data blocks are subjected to a permutation (or interleaving). As parallelization of the decoder architectures is mandatory for high throughput, access conflicts can occur. For standard compliant decoders it is impossible to design, or pre-process, the permutation patterns such that conflicts are avoided. Therefore, we employ networks-onchip capable of resolving access conflicts at run-time to support arbitrary interleavers without any pre-processing.
I. INTRODUCTION
Interleaving is scrambling the processing order of data within a block. Traditionally used for burst-error separation in distorted channels, interleaving has gained additional interest in the context of iterative decoding. There, component codes work on the data block in interleaved and non-interleaved versions. Iterative exchange of results between component decoders is essential for the performance of these codes, e.g. Turbo-Codes, LDPC-Codes. As those results must be interleaved / deinterleaved accordingly, high-throughput interleavers are necessary to build high-throughput iterative channel-decoders. Concurrent interleaving, however, requires special attention as we will show in the following sections.
II. CONCURRENT INTERLEAVING
A partial parallel decoder architecture is composed of N identical processing units, where the data block is subdivided in as many subblocks. These subblocks are processed concurrently by the processing units and the resulting data has to be distributed according to the given interleaver scheme. For that, interleaver tables provide the addresses of the destination units where the data is sent to. In general, only one data packet can be received by a processing unit as only single-ported memories are used to store it. When multiple packets arrive simultaneously at the same unit, a write access conflict arises. In this case data has to be queued or the sending unit must be stalled to avoid the loss of data. For arbitrary interleavers these conflicts occur frequently although each unit only receives one data per clock cycle on average.
Several basic approaches exist to handle these access conflicts, see Figure 1. Depending on the chosen solution, it may be necessary to provide component decoders that can be stalled occasionally. Conflict avoidance constrains the interleaver design such that no conflicts occur for a given architecture. This comes with the most design and the least implementation overhead. The interleaver table to use, however, is often

already given, in existing standards for example. Therefore, this approach is suited only for isolated solutions and emerging standards.
For a design-time conflict resolution elaborate memory schemes and excessive pre-processing are needed. An iterative heuristic is used to find an appropriate scheduling of permutation operations which can provide conflict free interleaving. The derived control data, however, must be stored explicitly for each interleaver. Due to the huge amount of data to be stored, this solution is impractical whenever a large number of different interleavers must be supported, for example 5066 in 3GPP Turbo-Codes.
Run-time conflict resolution is the most efficient way to support any given interleaver without pre-processing. In [1] we presented the design of communication networks for run-time conflict resolution. There, however, the future interleavers to be used still needed to be known at design-time. This problem can be solved by employing flow-control to prevent buffer overflow for any interleaver.
III. INTERLEAVING ARCHITECTURE TEMPLATE
The solutions listed in the last section can all be illustrated based on a fundamental four stage interleaving architecture template. In Figure 2 a compositional structure according to [2] is used for illustration. Angular shapes represent active components (agents) which are capable of manipulating data and round shapes represent data locations. The latter ones can be interpreted as memories (large shapes) or channels for elementary communication without storage (small circles). The interleaving architecture template thus is:
1) The first stage provides a permutation network connecting the N sources to N intermediate memories. In Figure 2, the spatial permutation [3] for writing is depicted as the look-up table Sw.
Concurrent Interleaving

Conflict Avoidance

Conflict Resolution

Custom Interleaver

Design-Time

Run-Time

Design

Conflict Resolution Conflict Resolution

With Stalls

Without With Stalls Stalls

Without Stalls

Fig. 1. Illustration of the Design Choices

0-7803-883A4u-t8ho/0riz5e/d$l2ic0e.n0s0ed©us2e0l0im5iteIEd Eto:EY.onsei Univ. Downloaded on1J7un6e623,2026 at 12:10:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Source 0

Source 1

Source 2

Source 3

Spatial Permutation 1

Sw

Write Agent

π0w

Write Agent

πw1

Write Agent

πw2

Write Agent

πw3

Intermediate Intermediate Intermediate Intermediate

Memory 0

Memory 1

Memory 2

Memory 3

Read Agent

π0r

Read Agent

π1r

Read Agent

πr2

Read Agent

π3r

Spatial Permutation 2

Sr

Sink 0

Sink 1

Sink 2

Sink 3

Fig. 2. Interleaving Architecture Template

in mind where presented by Zhang and Parhi [10]. Recently conflict free design was also presented by Kienle and Wehn [11] for linear encodeable class of LDPC-Codes called Irregular Repeat Accumulate (IRA) codes.
In contrast to these conflict avoidance based approaches, the following solutions allow to use any given interleaver or parity check matrix where conflict resolution is carried out at design time.
A. With Stalling
In [12], a scheduling of sub-blocks on individual processing units is derived to minimize potential conflicts. If this is infeasible, the conflicting units are stalled and only one may process its data in this cycle. Each processor is on average stalled 60%–75% of the time. Due to this bad utilization, the approach has not been followed further by the authors. For LDPC-Codes this solution was never attempted.

2) Writing into the intermediate memories realizes the second stage by using a permutation table πiw for addressing. Thus, a scrambling within the individual memories is achieved, also denoted as temporal permutation.
3) Retrieval of data can also be done with scrambling using a permutation table πri . Thus specific addressing upon read is the third stage of the interleaving architecture.
4) The fourth and final stage is comparable to the first one. Time-varying assignments of memories and sinks can be employed when reading out the intermediate memories to provide an additional spatial permutation Sr.
In Figure 2 all the shaded locations with storage represent memories which hold permutation information. In the worst case all of them are necessary to implement the overall permutation of one interleaver Π.
IV. CONFLICT HANDLING
Whenever the interleaver design is still subject to optimization – stand-alone solutions, emerging standards, etc. – a custom design to avoid conflicts is the optimal solution. Along with the low implementation cost, the permutations can achieve excellent communications performance [4]: Good communications performance, a fine granularity in different block lengths, and an algorithm to generate the permutations at run-time rather than storing them. Adding the requirement of conflict free interleaving yields very tight constraints on the design. However, numerous examples prove the applicability for Turbo-Codes and LDPC-Codes.
Spatial permutation is realized either through cross-bar switches or barrel-shifters while several solutions for temporal permutation exist: Using dedicated patterns πri , πwi for each intermediate memory upon read and write [5], using the same πir = πwi for read and write [6], or using the same for all write or read operations respectively πri = πrj, πwi = πwj [7]. For details please see [8].
Conflict free design for LDPC-Codes was introduced by Boutillion et al. in [9] where it is termed decoder first code design. Codes designed with efficient FPGA implementation

B. Without Stalling
A stall-free solution is presented in [13]. All permutation tables found in the architectural template are used and a crossbar employed for spatial permutation. There exists, however, only an iterative heuristic to derive the appropriate patterns Sw, π1w...N , πr1...N , Sr. Thus this computation must be performed off-line at design-time. Moreover, storage of different patterns for each interleaver consumes a considerable amount of memory. Thus this approach is not attractive for implementations which need to support a vast number of different interleavers.
A comparable solution for LDPC-Codes can be found in [14]. The complexity of their solving strategy however, renders it virtually impossible to treat codes of any relevant block length.
V. RUN-TIME CONFLICT RESOLUTION WITH NETWORK-ON-CHIP APPROACH
Whenever the interleaver design can not be influenced and a considerable number of different permutations must be supported, run-time conflict resolution is the most efficient approach. Referring to Figure 2, it can be shown that only the first two stages realizing the spatial permutation Sw and the temporal permutation πiw have to be implemented.
In [15] we presented a straight forward concurrent interleaving architecture based on an output-queued crossbar switch. This solution yields a high wiring effort of N2 and a bad buffer sizing scalability. Thus, for a more efficient implementation with respect to throughput, area, energy and flexibility, a packet switched Network-on-Chip (NoC) is used. Packets are composed of the target unit addresses stored in the header (Sw) and the payload consisting of the memory address for temporal permutation (πiw) and the actual decoder data. The distributed implementation of the routing and control logic yields scalable architectures where performance and implementation costs can be traded-off.
Nevertheless, these networks form the major bottleneck in such decoder architectures, where each processing unit emits up to one data packet per clock cycle making up a 100%

1767 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:10:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

network load during decoding. In case of an interleaving conflict due to contention, the affected packets must be buffered which decreases network throughput and so the overall decoder performance. Thus, topology, routing algorithm, buffer organization and the complexity of the network switching logic are the major architectural concerns for interleaver network design.
In [16] we proposed a ring based NoC which only needs 2N connections and which is capable of incorporating up to eight processing units. This was extended in [17] by featuring a chordal ring (3N) which allows to connect more individual nodes. A general approach to network design using random graphs as basic topologies can be found in [1]. However, all these approaches did not feature any kind of flow-control to prevent buffer overflow. All interleaver patterns needed to be known at design-time to avoid potential data loss through worst case buffer-sizing.
The large buffer sizes and the inability to guarantee loss-less communication for previously unknown interleavers led to the development of solutions with flow-control. This was done by Speziali and Zory [18] for the first time who improved our crossbar based approach by introducing knock-out switching. This technique enables a tremendous reduction of the fifobuffer sizes leading to substantial area savings. The computational complexity of the knock-out switching, however, reduces the achievable clock frequency of the overall decoder architecture for N > 2.
In the following we evaluate standard topologies with deadlock-free routing schemes for interleaving with flowcontrol. According to a classification introduced by [19] we focus on the strictly orthogonal n-dimensional meshes, tori and k-ary n-cubes which can be found in many parallel multiprocessor systems. Examples are given in Figure 3.
It can be shown that the maximum number of nodes per dimension is restricted to three in unidirected tori, four in meshes and eight in bidirectional torus networks to achieve high throughput suited for interleaving. These upper bounds guarantee that sufficient network bandwidth is provided to cope with the high volume of interleaving traffic during decoding and thus decoder throughput is not degraded.
Due to their regular structure and high degree of symmetry packet routing is considerably simplified. The following deadlock-free routing algorithms are investigated: deterministic dimension-order [20], partially adaptive negative-first [21], and planar-adaptive [22] routing, with the latter being only applicable to meshes.
The implementation of the routing algorithms is based on an input-queued (IQ) and an output-queued (OQ) packet switched router architecture. They mainly differ in the way pending packets are internally buffered in the case of contention whereas the appropriate choice does not depend on the algorithm itself. Input-queuing leads to a moderate router throughput keeping implementation costs fairly low whereas output-queuing reaches nearly 100% throughput coming along with high silicon area requirements.

Fig. 3. Examples for Mesh, Torus and k-ary n-Cube Topologies

VI. RESULTS
Figure 4 opposes the implementation complexity of the two router architectures with respect to the routing algorithm and the number of I/O-ports. For this, we assume routing in a mesh network which implies a minimal set of virtual channels and a queue depth to store four packets for comparison. The results were obtained through synthesis based on a standard 0.18µm technology using Synopsys Design Compiler. Obviously, with increasing degree of adaptivity, implementation complexity rapidly grows with the number of I/O-ports, where the queues dominate the overall area. This makes virtual channels and therefore planar-adaptive routing costly. The large number of queues in output-queued networks renders high-dimensional topologies infeasible even if no virtual channels are needed to avoid deadlocks. For that, we did not consider planar-adaptive routing for output-queuing.
To quantify the impact of the routing algorithms on network performance for interleaving, we refer to simulations of a (4,4)-2d mesh network using input-queued routers under uniform traffic. We can show that negative-first routing achieves the lowest throughput (58%) of all for high loads whereas planar-adaptive and dimension-order nearly perform equally (72%). With increasing topology dimension, however, throughput of planar-adaptive routing deteriorates, making deterministic dimension-order routing the best choice. It achieves high throughput and comes at lowest implementation cost.
The suitability of the presented networks is discussed for N = 16 parallel processing units. We compare a (4,4)-2d mesh and a 4-ary-2d bidirectional cube using input- and outputqueued dimension-order routing.
The depth of the router queues Q is an essential parameter for network performance (and the overall decoder performance

Area [1000 µm2] Area [1000 µm2]

a) Input−Queuing 450

400 350

Dimension−Order Negative−First Planar−Adaptive

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

4

6

8

Router I/Os

b) Output−Queuing 450

400

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

4

6

8

Router I/Os

Fig. 4. Router Complexity for n-dimensional Meshes with Q = 4

1768 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:10:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Network 4-ary-2d b-cube (IQ) 4-ary-2d b-cube (OQ) (4,4)-2d mesh (OQ) (4,4)-2d mesh (IQ)

Q [#packets] 5 2 4 6

T hroughput 0.87 0.85 0.82 0.68

Anw[mm2] 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.2

TABLE I QUEUE-DEPTHS FOR OPTIMAL TRADE-OFF OF THROUGHPUT AND AREA

respectively) and its cost. In order to quantify their impact on performance, further simulations are carried out with varying queue-depths under full load where each source sends one packet per cycle. As network throughput increases with deeper queues, we choose the minimal queue-depth where at least 90% of the maximum throughput is achieved for comparison. The total network area and normalized throughput (average number of packets transferred per cycle per sink) is given in Table I with respect to the chosen queue-depth for a clock frequency of 200MHz.
Compared to the results obtained by Speziali and Zory [18] for N = 16, the bidirectional cube network discussed here needs about 29% less logic area at a 35% higher clock frequency in a standard 0.18µm technology. Furthermore, only a fraction of one fourth of the total number of connections are required which directly translate to wires that have to be physically routed on the chip. The regularity and symmetry of the proposed network architectures facilitate efficient layout with a high degree of scalability which clearly approves the proposed NoC approach.
VII. CONCLUSION
High throughput channel decoding heavily relies on the parallel exchange of interleaved (permuted) data between component decoders. We showed that a network-on-chip approach can efficiently be employed to realize concurrent interleaving supporting arbitrary permutation patterns. We investigated deterministic and adaptive packet routing algorithms for mesh, torus and cube networks. In this context, deterministic packet routing proved to be superior to adaptive algorithms in terms of performance and implementation cost. The adoption of network flow-control drastically reduces the sizes of the queue buffers and hence logic area of the whole network. The distributed implementation and the high degree of topological regularity promote good scalability where almost any number of parallel processing units can be incorporated in a channel decoder architecture.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) under Grant We 2442/1-1 within the Schwerpunktprogramm ”Grundlagen und Verfahren verlustarmer Informationsverarbeitung (VIVA)”.
REFERENCES
[1] M. J. Thul, F. Gilbert, and N. Wehn, “Concurrent Interleaving Architectures for High-Throughput Channel Coding,” in Proc. 2003 Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP ’03), Hong Kong, P.R.China, Apr. 2003, pp. 613–616.

[2] Fundamental

Modeling

Concepts

(FMC),

http://fmc.hpi.uni-potsdam.de.

[3] D. Gnaedig, E. Boutillon, M. Je´ze´quel, V. C. Gaudet, and P. G.Gulak,

“On multiple slice turbo codes,” in Proc. 3rd International Symposium

on Turbo Codes & Related Topics, Brest, France, Sept. 2003.

[4] S. Crozier and P. Guinand, “High-Performance Low-Memory Interleaver

Banks for Turbo-Codes,” in Proc. 2001-Fall Vehicular Technology

Conference (VTC Fall 2001), Atlantic City, NJ, USA, Oct. 2001.

[5] J. Kwak and K. Lee, “Design of dividable interleaver for parallel

decoding in turbo codes,” Electronics Letters, vol. 38, no. 22, pp. 1362–

1364, Oct. 2002.

[6] A. Giulietti, L. van der Perre, and M. Strum, “Parallel turbo decoding

interleavers: avoiding collisions in accesses to storage elements,” Elec-

tronics Letters, vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 232–234, Feb. 2002.

[7] A. Nimbalker, K. T. Blankenship, B. Classon, T. E. Fuja, and

D. Costello, Jr., “Inter-Window Shuffle Interleavers for High Throughput

Turbo Decoding,” in Proc. 3nd International Symposium on Turbo Codes

& Related Topics, Brest, France, Sept. 2003, pp. 355–358.

[8] M. J. Thul, “Parallel Interleaving Architectures for High Throughput

Turbo-Decoders,” Ph.D. dissertation, Microelectronic System Design

Reseach Group, Department of Electrical Engineering and Information

Technology, University of Kaiserslautern, 2004, submitted.

[9] E. Boutillon, J. Castura, and F. Kschischang, “Decoder-first code de-

sign,” in Proc. 2nd International Symposium on Turbo Codes & Related

Topics, Brest, France, Sept. 2000, pp. 459–462.

[10] T. Zhang and K. Parhi, “A 54 MBPS (3,6)-Regular FPGA LDPC

Decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems (SiPS

’02), San Diego,USA, Sept. 2002, pp. 127–132.

[11] F. Kienle and N. Wehn, “Design Methodology for IRA Codes,” in Proc.

2004 Asia South Pacific Design Automation Conference (ASP-DAC ’04),

Yokohama, Japan, Jan. 2004, pp. 459–462.

[12] T. Richter and G. Fettweis, “Parallel Interleaving on Parallel DSP

Architectures,” Proc. 2002 Workshop on Signal Processing Systems

(SiPS ’02), pp. 195–200, Oct. 2002.

[13] A. Tarable and S. Benedetto, “Mapping interleaving laws to parallel

turbo decoder architectures,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 8,

no. 3, pp. 162–164, Mar. 2004.

[14] G. Al-Rawi, J. Cioffi, R. Motwani, and M. Horowitz, “Optimizing Iter-

ative Decoding of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes on Programmable

Pipelined Parallel Architectures,” in Proc. 2001 Global Telecommunica-

tions Conference (Globecom ’01), 2001, pp. 3012–3018.

[15] M. J. Thul, N. Wehn, and L. P. Rao, “Enabling High-Speed Turbo-

Decoding Through Concurrent Interleaving,” in Proc. 2002 IEEE In-

ternational Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS ’02), Phoenix,

Arizona, USA, May 2002, pp. 897–900.

[16] M. J. Thul, F. Gilbert, and N. Wehn, “Optimized Concurrent Interleaving

for High-Throughput Turbo-Decoding,” in Proc. 9th IEEE Interna-

tional Conference on Electronics, Circuits and Systems (ICECS ’02),

Dubrovnik, Croatia, Sept. 2002, pp. 1099–1102.

[17] M. J. Thul, F. Gilbert, T. Vogt, G. Kreiselmaier, and N. Wehn, “A

Scalable System Architecture for High-Throughput Turbo-Decoders,”

Journal of VLSI Signal Processing Systems (Special Issue on Signal

Processing for Broadband Communications), vol. 39, no. 1/2, 2005,

kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston – to appear.

[18] F. Speziali and J. Zory, “Scalable and area efficient concurrent interleaver

for high throughput turbo-decoders,” in Euromicro Symposium on Digital

System Design, 2004. DSD 2004, Sept. 2004, pp. 334–341.

[19] J. Duato, S. Yalamanchili, and L. Ni, Interconnection Networks -

An Engineering Approach. San Francisco, USA: Morgan Kaufman

Publishers, 2003.

[20] W. Dally and C. Seitz, “Deadlock-free Message Routing in Multipro-

cessor Interconnection Networks,” in IEEE Transactions on Computers,

1987, pp. 547–553.

[21] C. Glass and L. Ni, “The Turn Model for Adaptive Routing,” in Proc.

19th International Symposium on Computer Architecture, May 1992, pp.

278–287.

[22] A. Chien and J. Kim, “Planar-adaptive Routing: Low-cost Adaptive

Networks for Multiprocessors,” in Proc. 19th International Symposium

on Computer Architecture, May 1992, pp. 268–277.

1769 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:10:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

