818

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 53, NO. 5, MAY 2005

On the Application of Factor Graphs and the Sum–Product Algorithm to ISI Channels
Giulio Colavolpe and Gianpietro Germi

Abstract—In this paper, based on the application of the sum–product (SP) algorithm to factor graphs (FGs) representing the joint a posteriori probability (APP) of the transmitted symbols, we propose new iterative soft-input soft-output (SISO) detection schemes for intersymbol interference (ISI) channels. We have verified by computer simulations that the SP algorithm converges to a good approximation of the exact marginal APPs of the transmitted
symbols if the FG has girth at least 6. For ISI channels whose corresponding FG has girth 4, the application of a stretching technique allows us to obtain an equivalent girth-6 graph.
For sparse ISI channels, the proposed algorithms have advantages in terms of complexity over optimal detection schemes based on the Bahl–Cocke–Jelinek–Raviv (BCJR) algorithm. They also allow a parallel implementation of the receiver and the possibility of a more efficient complexity reduction. The application to joint detection and decoding of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes is also considered and results are shown for some partial-response magnetic channels. Also in these cases, we show that the proposed algorithms have a limited performance loss with respect to that can be obtained when the optimal “serial” BCJR algorithm is used for detection. Therefore, for their parallel implementation, they represent a favorable alternative to the modified “parallel” BCJR algorithm proposed in the literature for the application to magnetic channels.
Index Terms—Factor graphs, intersymbol interference (ISI) channels, iterative detection, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, partial-response channels, sum–product (SP) algorithm.
I. INTRODUCTION
I N recent years, the use of factor graphs (FGs) to represent complicated global functions of many variables and the marginalization of these functions by means of the sum–product (SP) algorithm have attracted the attention of many researchers in the communications area [1]. Originally devised to describe the decoding algorithm for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [2]–[5], this framework has been extended to other probabilistic models [1], [6], [7]. It can be used not only to reinterpret existing results, but also to derive new detection/decoding strategies [8]–[10], or to devise new applications for existing algorithms [11].
In this paper, we consider the application of this framework to detection over a known intersymbol interference (ISI)
Paper approved by P. Hoeher, the Editor for Coding and Communication Theory of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received October 31, 2003; revised May 5, 2004 and November 5, 2004. This paper was presented in part at the 3rd International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, September 2003.
G. Colavolpe is with the Dipartimento di Ingegneria dell’Informazione, Università di Parma, I-43100 Parma, Italy (e-mail: giulio@unipr.it).
G. Germi was with the Dipartimento di Ingegneria dell’Informazione, Università di Parma, I-43100 Italy. He is now with Selta S.p.A., Roveleto di Cadeo, Piacenza, Italy.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2005.847129

channel. By representing on an FG the joint a posteriori prob-

ability (APP) mass function of the transmitted symbols and

applying to this graph the SP algorithm, we derive a simple

soft-input soft-output (SISO) detection algorithm that can be

used for turbo equalization [12]. The same approach and the

resulting detection algorithm is also considered in [13]. How-

ever, from the observation that in general the FG describing

the channel has cycles,1 the authors of [13] conclude that the

derived algorithm is suboptimal and therefore they discard

this approach. On the contrary, we have verified by extensive

computer simulations that when the girth of the graph is at least

, the performance is practically optimal. In addition, in the

case of graphs of girth , we apply the SP algorithm to a new

FG obtained by transforming the original one. The resulting

new algorithm has a negligible performance loss with respect

to optimal detection.

The proposed algorithms have a complexity which depends

on the number of nonzero channel interferers only. As a conse-

quence, with respect to the Bahl–Cocke–Jelinek–Raviv (BCJR)

algorithm [14], whose complexity depends on the channel

memory, the proposed algorithms are more suited for sparse

ISI channels, i.e., channels characterized by a large memory but

a small number of interferers, as may occur in high-frequency

transmissions due to multipath [15]. For these channels, other

algorithms have been proposed based on different approaches,

to obtain the same goal [15], [16].

Another advantage over the BCJR algorithm consists of the

intrinsic parallel structure of the SP algorithm with flooding

schedule [17], allowing very-high-speed detection. This aspect

is very important when an LDPC code is used and turbo equal-

ization is performed. In fact, if detection is performed by using

the proposed algorithms, an overall graph taking into account

both the code and the channel model can be built, allowing com-

bined detection and decoding in a fully parallel manner without

an increase in complexity with respect to separate detection and

decoding. On the contrary, when the BCJR algorithm is used

for detection, combined detection and decoding is not possible

and the serial structure of the BCJR algorithm prevents from the

possibility of a parallel implementation of the receiver.

In the technical literature on magnetic recording, for appli-

cations with LDPC codes, mainly the BCJR algorithm is con-

sidered for detection [18]–[22]. In order to overcome the above

mentioned limitations, several schemes have been proposed in

which the BCJR is run only once or one time each iterations

of the LDPC decoder [20]–[22], although it has been shown that

the best schedule is obtained for

[13]. To allow parallel

1A cycle is a closed path in the graph and its length is defined as the corresponding number of path edges. The length of the smallest cycle is the girth of the graph.

0090-6778/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:07:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

COLAVOLPE AND GERMI: FACTOR GRAPHS AND THE SUM–PRODUCT ALGORITHM IN ISI CHANNELS

819

joint detection and decoding, in [13] a version of the BCJR algorithm with parallel schedule has been proposed. As already mentioned, the proposed detection schemes represent an alternative solution to these problems.
Finally, with respect to the BCJR algorithm, the complexity of these novel detection algorithms can be reduced more efficiently. In fact, we are able to truncate the interfering symbols with lowest weight regardless of their position. On the contrary, when the BCJR algorithm is used, we are constrained by the trellis structure to a truncation of the farthest interfering symbols [23]. Similar considerations hold for other trellis-based reduced-state soft-output schemes [24].
The paper is structured as follows. In the next section, we will describe the proposed algorithms based on FGs and the SP algorithm, discussing their convergence to the performance of the BCJR algorithm as a function of the graph girth. The implementation complexity is also addressed. In Section III, we show how to modify an original girth- graph to obtain an equivalent girth- graph over which the SP algorithm gives very good results. A performance analysis based on the average mutual information (AMI) [25]–[27] is presented in Section IV. Finally, numerical results are shown in Section V and conclusions are drawn in Section VI.

II. FACTOR GRAPH

In the considered transmission system, a sequence of -ary

code symbols

is obtained from the encoding of a

sequence of information bits and a proper mapping on a mul-

tilevel constellation.2 We will assume that the a priori distribu-

tion of the transmitted codewords is uniform and denote by

the code indicator function, equal to if is a valid codeword

and to zero otherwise. The code sequence is transmitted over

an ISI channel which also introduces additive white Gaussian

noise (AWGN). At the output of a whitened matched filter, the

received signal at discrete time can be expressed as [28]

(1)

in which

are complex independent Gaussian random vari-

ables with mean zero and variance per component, is

the channel memory, and

represents the equiva-

lent discrete-time channel impulse response, assumed perfectly

known to the receiver.

The joint APP distribution of the transmitted symbols may be

expressed as

(2)

where denotes proportionality, and

Fig. 1. Factor graph for an ISI channel with L = 4 and f = 0.

small boxes whereas variable nodes, associated with variables

are represented by circles. In general, the code constraint

function can be also represented by means of an FG. This graph

is a portion of the overall graph and is connected with that rep-

resenting the channel behavior.

The application of the SP algorithm to this graph allows the

exact (in the absence of cycles) or approximate computation of

the marginal APPs

necessary to implement max-

imum a posteriori probability (MAP) symbol detection. When

the graph representing the ISI channel has cycles, as in general

occurs, the application of the SP algorithm to this graph leads to

an iterative detection process. The exchange of messages, rep-

resenting the marginal APP mass functions of symbols and

hence assuming values, fulfills the following rules. Denoting

by

the message sent from a variable node to a func-

tion node , where is the set of variables argument of ,

by

the message in the opposite direction, and by

the set of neighbors of a given node , the message computations

performed at variable and factor nodes are, respectively, [1]

(4)

(5)

where

is a summary operator, i.e., a sum over all vari-

ables of

excluding . It may be observed that the mes-

sage sent to an edge does not depend on the message previously

received on the same edge, i.e., only extrinsic information is

exchanged.

The messages in (4) and (5) may be also computed in the

logarithmic domain. Defining

and

, the message computations performed

at variable and factor nodes become

(6)

(3) (7)

For an ISI channel with

and

, the FG corre- The implementation of this latter rule does not require multi-

sponding to the global function given in (2) is shown in Fig. 1. plications but only additions and the evaluation of a nonlinear

Factor nodes, associated with functions , are represented by function. In fact, by using the Jacobian logarithm [29], [30], it

is well known that, if and are real numbers
2An interleaver can be also used to permute the code symbols before trans-

mission.

(8)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:07:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

820

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 53, NO. 5, MAY 2005

and

is a nonlinear function whose evaluation that the presence of a powerful channel code often helps the

can be performed by means of a lookup table. In our case, the convergence even in the presence of cycles of length in the

evaluation of

can be done recursively part of the graph describing the channel behavior.

[30].

Since the most demanding computation is due to the sum-

A message-passing schedule in an FG is the specification mary operations performed at factor nodes (compare the up-

of the order in which messages are updated. In general, the dating rules (6) and (7)), we may define a cost per coded symbol

so-called flooding schedule is adopted [17]: in each iteration, of the considered algorithms as related to the above men-

all variable nodes and subsequently all factor nodes, pass new tioned summary operations. Hence, we may say that for the

messages to their neighbors. As it can be easily understood, proposed algorithm

, where is

this schedule is well suited for a fully parallel implementation the number of iterations performed. In fact, for the computa-

of the detector. Other schedules may be adopted, serial or tion of the values of a message sent on one of the

mixed serial–parallel, according to the specific implementation edges coming out from a factor node, a summary operation (see

requirements.

(7)) involving

terms is needed. Note that the same unit

Since we are interested in focusing on the performance of the can be used to measure the complexity of the BCJR algorithm.

detection scheme, let us consider for the moment the case of In fact, it is well known [1] that this algorithm can be viewed

absence of coding. Hence, symbols can be assumed to be in- as the application of the SP algorithm to the cycle-free Wiberg

dependent and identically distributed and in the graph of Fig. 1, graph [6] of the channel. Hence, functions associated with factor

the lower part representing the code constraints is not present. nodes are of the same form and the complexity comparison

The case of coding will be considered in detail in Section IV is fair. For the BCJR algorithm the cost per coded symbol is

and in the numerical results.

. In fact, for the forward (backward) recur-

As already mentioned, the graph representing an ISI channel sion, the computation of the values of the propagating mes-

may have cycles. Let us introduce another parameter which is sage requires a summary operation involving terms, whereas

relevant for the ISI channel. This parameter is the number of the computation of the values of the marginal APP of the

nonzero interferers. When

, the channel is called sparse. th symbol requires a summary operation involving terms.

Three possible cases can be distinguished.

As may be observed comparing and

, the proposed

a) If there is only one interferer

, the graph is cycle

free.3 In a cycle-free graph, the SP algorithm computes

the marginal probability for each variable exactly, inde-

pendently of the used schedule [31]. The adoption of the

flooding schedule instead of a more natural serial schedule

starting from leaf vertices and with a natural termination

[1] has the advantage of allowing parallel detection at the

expense of an increase in complexity due to the need for

an iterative processing.

algorithm is a valid alternative to the BCJR for sparse ISI channels or when parallel detection is preferred.
The described algorithm is similar to the so-called bit-based message passing developed in [13] for partial-response channels. However, the authors of [13] observed that the graph has cycles and therefore opted for the state-based message passing which is the SP algorithm with a parallel schedule applied to the cycle-free Wiberg graph [6] of the channel, that is a BCJR algorithm with parallel schedule. This algorithm, which will be denoted in the following as p-BCJR, has a cost

b) If the differences between the indexes of the nonzero

.

channel interferers are all different, the graph has girth . The complexity of the proposed algorithm may be reduced

c) If the previous conditions are not verified, the graph has girth .

following a technique similar to that described in [23], [24] for BCJR algorithms or to reduced-state sequence detection (RSSD) used for maximum-likelihood sequence detection

In the cases b) and c), the SP algorithm is approximate. How- [32]–[34]. In fact, by choosing an integer

, the updating

ever, as verified by means of extensive computer simulations, rule (7) at factor nodes modeling the channel can be simplified

not shown for the sake of space limitation, if the girth of the as follows: the summary is performed over the interfering

graph is and the channel is minimum- or maximum-phase, symbols with strongest weights regardless of their position,

after a few iterations, the performance of the algorithm always substituting the remaining interfering symbols with a decision

converges to that of the BCJR algorithm. For mixed-phase made on the basis of the messages on the graph.4 In this way,

channels, we verified that the convergence is obtained when the cost becomes

. Alternatively,

there is only a dominant interferer. Nevertheless, a whitened the same complexity may be obtained by using a different

matched filter producing a minimum-phase channel is usually strategy in which the

symbols with highest reliabilities

employed and, on the other hand, a mixed-phase channel can are hard-quantized. Compared with the Viterbi or the BCJR

always be converted into an equivalent minimum- or max- algorithm, the complexity of graph-based detection algorithms

imum-phase channel by means of a linear filter. For graphs with can be reduced more efficiently since we have no constraints

girth , in general, the proposed algorithm does not converge. imposed by the trellis structure.

However, as shown in the next section, the original girth-

graph may be transformed into an equivalent girth- graph on which the SP algorithm converges. In addition, we will see
L > L L 3In this case, if 1 = , the original graph is composed by indepenL dent subgraphs [16] on which independent instances of the algorithm have to
be run.

III. MODIFIED GRAPH

In [1], an FG transformation, called stretching, is introduced

to obtain a cycle-free graph. Denoting by

the set of vari-

4A partial representation by using set partitioning can be also adopted.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:07:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

COLAVOLPE AND GERMI: FACTOR GRAPHS AND THE SUM–PRODUCT ALGORITHM IN ISI CHANNELS

821

Fig. 2. Part of the FG in Fig. 1 after stretching.

able nodes that can be reached from node through a path of

length , we can replace any node

with a node repre-

senting the pair . In this way, it is possible for an edge (or a

variable node) to become redundant. Hence, it can be removed.

Our goal is to remove a minimum number of edges so that the

girth of the transformed graph becomes instead of and the

complexity of the resulting SP algorithm remains the same. As

a consequence, we adopt the following stretching rule.

• Given an edge connecting a variable node to a factor node , in order to preserve the information lost due to cut-

ting this edge, we choose an arbitrary path

con-

necting and and not involving and stretch the vari-

able node to all variable nodes

.

Obviously, for a given girth- graph, there are different choices

of edges such that their removal can lead to a girth- graph.

However, we verified that the application of the SP algorithm

to the resulting girth- graphs gives a similar performance, al-

though the minimum required number of iterations can be dif-

ferent, depending on the weight of the interfering symbol whose

corresponding edge has been removed.

An example of girth- graph, obtained by transforming the

girth- graph in Fig. 1, is shown in Fig. 2 (considering the rele-

vant part describing only the channel behavior). In order to re-

move the edge connecting the variable node to factor node

, we chose the path

connecting to

and not involving the above mentioned edge, and stretched

to all variable nodes belonging to this path, i.e., to . The SP

algorithm applied to the transformed graph has a cost

where is the number of edges removed per factor node. Hence, the complexity remains of the same order of magnitude.5
A further application of the described stretching rule to obtain a cycle-free graph leads to a graph similar to the Wiberg graph of the channel—the SP algorithm with flooding schedule applied to this graph becomes the state-based message passing described in [13]. We do not further pursue this approach since it gives an unnecessary increase in complexity.
IV. ANALYSIS THROUGH AVERAGE MUTUAL INFORMATION
In [20]–[22], the performance of LDPC codes over binary ISI channels is analyzed by computing the noise tolerance threshold using density evolution [35]. Particular attention is devoted to partial response channels with the aim of designing good LDPC codes for the magnetic channel. Different schedules are consid-

ered in which the number of BCJR steps can be decreased to reduce the overall complexity. A different approach is used in [25]–[27], in which, through the AMI and the so-called extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) charts, an analysis of iterative decoding schemes, including turbo equalization, is described with focus on the convergence behavior. In the case of turbo equalization, the AMI transfer characteristics of the detector for different values of the signal-to-noise ratio and that of the decoder are employed to predict the potential performance improvement through iterative detection/decoding for different channel codes. In particular, in [27], the authors describe a method that can also be used to compute EXIT charts and threshold values in a turbo equalization scheme when the code is an LDPC code and the BCJR algorithm is adopted for detection. In this case, the EXIT curve corresponding to the set of the LDPC check nodes (the so-called check-node decoder (CND)) has to be used jointly with the EXIT curves of the combination of the set of variable nodes (the variable-node decoder (VND)) and the BCJR detector [27].
In this paper, we are first of all interested in the performance of the proposed detection schemes without taking into account the effect of a particular channel code. The term of comparison is represented by the performance of the BCJR algorithm and our aim is to find a computationally nonintensive method to predict if the proposed schemes can reach this limit and the number of necessary iterations. For this reason, we are interested in the AMI, computed by Monte Carlo simulation, at the detector output as a function of the signal-to-noise ratio, in the absence of input AMI since there is no a priori knowledge provided to the detector by the channel decoder as in a turbo equalization scheme. By using this tool, we further confirmed the above mentioned property that if the girth of the graph is and the channel is minimum- or maximum-phase, after a few iterations, the algorithm always converges to the performance of the BCJR algorithm. In addition, when a graph transformation through stretching is necessary to ensure convergence, we are able to determine the best choice of edges to be removed.
In the presence of an LDPC code, the method described in [27] can be used to compute EXIT charts and threshold values when the serial BCJR algorithm is used for detection. These values obviously represent a benchmark to assess the performance of the proposed detection algorithms. For these latter schemes, the computation of the EXIT curves is more difficult. In fact, since these algorithms are iterative, the corresponding EXIT curves change with iteration. Let us consider the exchange of extrinsic information in Fig. 3. The EXIT curve of the outer CND can be easily computed as described in [27]. In fact, assuming that all check nodes have degree ,6 the CND EXIT curve, i.e., the AMI at the output of the CND as a function of the AMI at its input, is
(9) where the function is [27]

5We are neglecting the increase in computational complexity at variable nodes related to the need of a marginalization of the messages associated to the pair of symbols, since this computation is lower than that associated to the factor nodes.

(10)
6A more general irregular check node degree distribution can be taken into account as described in [27]

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:07:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

822

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 53, NO. 5, MAY 2005

Fig. 3. Exchange of extrinsic information.

Considering now the combination of the inner ISI detector

(ISID) and the VND, since the proposed ISID is iterative

and the block ISID + VND retains messages that are used

on successive iterations, the corresponding EXIT curve de-

pends not only on the signal-to-noise ratio

, being

the received signal energy per information bit and the

one-sided noise power spectral density, but also on the number

of iterations performed. Hence this EXIT curve, that

must be computed by Monte Carlo simulations, is a function

(the dependence on the variable node degree distribution is omitted for simplicity). Fig. 4. Performance for a sparse channel.

In the exchange of extrinsic information, the AMI evolves as

follows: at the first iteration, the ISID + VND increases the

and hence they are all different (see condition b)). Un-

AMI to

. After the CND, coded binary phase-shift keying (BPSK) and 8-PSK modula-

the mutual information becomes

. At tions are considered. It can be observed that the performance of

the second iteration, these values will be updated to

and

,

and so on. In this way, it is possible to compute the decoding

trajectory whose convergence toward high values of the AMI

guarantees low bit-error rate (BER) values. Note that with

the aim of finding the threshold values, it is sufficient to

consider, along with the CND EXIT curve, only the curve

(in practice, values

of

are sufficient). In fact, if the tunnel between

this curve and the CND EXIT curve is open, sooner or later the

the SP algorithm applied to the original graph converges in five iterations to the optimal performance of the BCJR for both modulation formats. In addition, the dramatic performance improvement from the first and the third iterations can be noted. Similar considerations also hold for multiamplitude modulation formats such as quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM) schemes.
In Fig. 5, the effect of the application of the complexity reduction techniques to the BCJR and the proposed SP algorithm is analyzed. The considered girth- minimum-phase channel has
and coefficients

AMI will go to one despite the presence of a “bottleneck” for

low values of —the ISI detector will perform “self-iterations”

until a tunnel in the EXIT diagram will be opened. In other words, if the channel noise is slightly below the noise threshold, and the number of ISID iterations is small, then it is possible that the decoding progress will become stuck. However, if is increased, then the bottleneck opens up, and AMI can continue to improve. The results of this analysis will be shown in the next section.

Also in this case, an uncoded BPSK modulation is adopted. A reduced-complexity 16-state BCJR algorithm may be obtained only by defining a reduced state as and computing the branch metrics by recovering the symbol
in the survivor history [23], [24]. Hence, the only possibility we have is the truncation, in the trellis definition, of the farthest symbol. On the contrary, in the case of the proposed SP

algorithm we are not constrained by the trellis definition and

V. NUMERICAL RESULTS

In this section, the performance of the proposed detection

schemes is assessed by computer simulations in terms of BER

versus

. We also provide some examples of the above

mentioned analysis through AMI and EXIT charts. For each

considered channel, the performance of the BCJR algorithm

is given as a benchmark. Although improper, since BCJR and

p-BCJR algorithms are also instances of the SP algorithm, in

therefore we may truncate the interfering symbol with lower

weight, i.e., symbol . In the computation of the messages

at factor nodes, this symbol can be substituted with a decision

made on the basis of the messages on the graph. The advantage

of about 1 dB with respect to the reduced-complexity BCJR is

highlighted by Fig. 5.

We now consider the so-called

magnetic channel, i.e.,

an ISI channel with

,

, and

the following figures the curves corresponding to the proposed

algorithms are labeled “SP.”

In Fig. 4, we consider a sparse ISI channel characterized by and

An uncoded binary pulse amplitude modulation (PAM) with

symbols

is considered. The corresponding graph,

shown in the upper part of Fig. 1, has girth . In this case, the

SP algorithm, if directly applied to this graph, does not converge

(

) whose corresponding FG has girth . In fact, the set to the performance of the BCJR, as shown in Fig. 6, where a loss

of differences between the indexes of the channel interferers is of about 1 dB is observed, even for a large number of iterations.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:07:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

COLAVOLPE AND GERMI: FACTOR GRAPHS AND THE SUM–PRODUCT ALGORITHM IN ISI CHANNELS

823

Fig. 5. Performance in the case of complexity reduction.

Fig. 7. Average mutual information at the detector output in the case of I = 0.

Fig. 6. Performance of the SP algorithm on a modified graph.

Fig. 8. BER in the case of application to LDPC codes. The E PR4 magnetic channel is considered.

Therefore, a graph transformation is necessary. By using the de- case of absence of a priori knowledge on the information sym-

scribed stretching technique, we obtain the graph in Fig. 2. On bols, i.e.,

. The fact that the p-BCJR for five iterations

this graph, the SP algorithm converges in about 10 iterations performs worse than the SP algorithm, on the original and the

to the optimal performance. In Fig. 6, the performance of the modified graph for the same number of iterations, is verified in

p-BCJR algorithm is also shown. We may observe that, although terms of , along with the convergence, for 20 iterations, of

for a sufficiently large number of iterations this algorithm has the p-BCJR and the SP algorithm on the modified graph to the

an optimal performance, at least in the considered BER range, performance of the BCJR.

for five and ten iterations it performs worse than the SP algo- We now consider the case of application to combined detec-

rithm and exhibits an error floor. This floor has been already ob- tion and decoding in the presence of a LDPC code. Due to the

served in [13], and a precoder has been introduced to overcome structure of a LDPC code, an interleaver is not necessary. Two

this problem. Its presence is due to the structure of the FGs. In magnetic channels are considered, namely the

channel

fact, in the graphs of Figs. 1 and 2, the message related to a in Fig. 8, and the EPR4 channel in Fig. 9. This latter channel is

variable node rapidly propagates to other nodes, whereas in the characterized by

,

, and

Wiberg graph this propagation, in the case of parallel schedule,

is slower.

The behavior of the BER curves for the considered algorithms

is related to that of the AMI at the detector output as a function The modulation format is the previously mentioned binary

of the signal-to-noise ratio (see Fig. 7). We are considering an PAM. Two LDPC codes are considered, namely, a regular

uncoded transmission and, therefore, we are interested in the code of rate and codeword length

and an irregular

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:07:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

824

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 53, NO. 5, MAY 2005

TABLE I THRESHOLDS FOR THE CONSIDERED SYSTEMS

Fig. 9. BER in the case of application to LDPC codes. The EPR4 magnetic Fig. 10. EXIT charts with iterative decoding trajectories for the LDPC code

channel is considered.

with rate 0:5 and the E PR 4 channel.

code of rate

and codeword length .7 In the case 3.5 dB is shown. The SP algorithm on the original girth- graph

of the SP algorithm on the original or the modified graph, a is considered. The CND EXIT curve (dotted line) and the ISID

maximum number of 150 iterations is allowed. When detection + VND curves (solid lines) for

iterations are shown

is performed by means of the BCJR algorithm, a BCJR step is (for

the EXIT curves practically coincide). As already

executed each iteration of the LDPC decoder (for a maximum mentioned, although for

there is a bottleneck, the itera-

number of allowed iterations of 150). This choice has been tive process converges since the tunnel is “open” for

.

shown to be optimal in [13]. Figs. 8 and 9, demonstrate that in

the case of a powerful channel code, the proposed SP algorithm has a BER performance very close to the optimal performance

VI. CONCLUSION

even on the original girth- graph. For the rate- LDPC code, the SP algorithm run over the original graph exhibits a performance loss of about 0.5 dB in the case of the E PR4 channel and 0.3 dB in the case of the EPR4 channel, whereas this loss is reduced to about 0.15 and 0.05 dB, respectively, for the SP algorithm working on the modified graph. Hence, side information provided in the iterative detection/decoding process by the decoder of a powerful code helps the detector convergence even in the presence of cycles of length in the part of the graph describing the ISI channel.
These results are confirmed by the threshold values, computed for the codes with the above mentioned degree distributions, by means of the described analysis based on EXIT charts, and shown in Table I: when the code with rate is used, it is not necessary to adopt graph transformations, whereas when the

In this paper, simple detection schemes for ISI channels have been proposed. These algorithms have been derived from the application of the SP algorithm to an FG representing the joint a posteriori distribution of the transmitted symbols or to a modified girth- graph. The complexity of the proposed algorithms depends on the number of nonzero channel interferers only and therefore they are useful in the case of sparse channels. The performance of the proposed algorithms converges to that of the BCJR algorithm when the FG has girth or a powerful channel code is used. If this is not the case, the described simple graph transformation guarantees the performance convergence of the SP algorithm. Hence, it has been shown that in some cases, the application of the proposed schemes can be favorable with respect to the BCJR algorithm.

code with rate is adopted, the SP algorithm on the modified graph has a negligible performance loss with respect to the

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

BCJR algorithm.

The authors wish to thank Prof. G. Caire, Prof.

Finally, in Fig. 10, the EXIT charts and the decoding trajec- A. Anastasopoulos, and M. Franceschini for several useful

tories for the rate- code, the E PR4 channel, and

discussions. The authors also acknowledge the contribution

7For this code, the variable and check degree distributions, defined as in [5], of A. Barbieri for his help in developing part of the computer

are (x) = x and (x) = 0:33x + 0:67x , respectively.

programs.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:07:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

COLAVOLPE AND GERMI: FACTOR GRAPHS AND THE SUM–PRODUCT ALGORITHM IN ISI CHANNELS

825

REFERENCES
[1] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[2] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Feb. 1999.
[4] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, D. Spielman, and V. Stemann, “Practical loss-resilient codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 569–584, Feb. 2001.
[5] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[6] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Linköping Univ., Linköping, Sweden, 1996.
[7] S. M. Aji and R. J. McEliece, “The generalized distributive law,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 325–343, Mar. 2000.
[8] A. P. Worthen and W. E. Stark, “Unified design of iterative receivers using factor graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf.. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 843–849, Feb. 2001.
[9] R. Nuriyev and A. Anastasopoulos, “Pilot-symbol-assisted coded transmission over the block-noncoherent AWGN channel,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 953–963, Jun. 2003.
[10] G. Colavolpe, “LDPC codes over channels with memory,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, Paris, France, Jun. 2004, pp. 757–761.
[11] , “Design and performance of turbo Gallager codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 11, pp. 1901–1908, Nov. 2004.
[12] C. Douillard, M. Jezequel, C. Berrou, A. Picart, P. Didier, and A. Glavieux, “Iterative correction of intersymbol interference: Turbo-equalization,” Europ. Trans. Telecommun., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 507–511, Sep./Oct. 1995.
[13] B. M. Kurkoski, P. H. Siegel, and J. K. Wolf, “Joint message-passing decoding of LDPC codes and partial-response channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1410–1422, Jun. 2002.
[14] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-20, no. 2, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[15] N. Benvenuto and R. Marchesani, “The Viterbi algorithm for sparse channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 287–289, Mar. 1996.
[16] N. C. McGinty, R. A. Kennedy, and P. Hoeher, “Parallel trellis Viterbi algorithm for sparse channels,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 2, no. 5, pp. 143–145, May 1998.
[17] F. R. Kschischang and B. J. Frey, “Iterative decoding of compound codes by probability propagation in graphical models,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 219–231, Feb. 1998.
[18] T. V. Souvignier, M. Öberg, P. H. Siegel, R. E. Swanson, and J. K. Wolf, “Turbo decoding for partial response channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 48, no. 8, pp. 1297–1308, Aug. 2000.
[19] T. Mittelholzer, A. Dholakia, and E. Eleftheriou, “Reduced-complexity decoding of low-density parity check codes for generalized partial response channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 721–728, Mar. 2001.
[20] A. Thangaraj and S. W. McLaughlin, “Thresholds and scheduling for LDPC-coded partial response channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 2307–2309, Sep. 2002.
[21] N. Varnica and A. Kavcˇic´, “Optimized low-density parity-check codes for partial response channels,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 168–170, Apr. 2003.
[22] A. Kavcˇic´, X. Ma, and M. Mitzenmacher, “Binary intersymbol interference channels: Gallager codes, density evolution, and code performance bounds,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 7, pp. 1636–1652, Jul. 2003.
[23] G. Colavolpe, G. Ferrari, and R. Raheli, “Reduced-state BCJR-type algorithms,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 848–859, May 2001.

[24] P. Hoeher, “Kohärenter Empfang Trelliscodierter PSK-Signale auf Frequenzselektiven Mobilfunkkanälen—Entzerrung, Decodierung und Kanalparameterschätzung,” Ph.D. dissertation (in German), University of Kaiserslautern; VDI-Verlag, 1990.
[25] S. ten Brink, “Designing iterative decoding schemes with the extrinsic information transfer chart,” AEU Int. J. Electronic. Commun., vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 389–398, Dec. 2000.
[26] , “Convergence behavior of iteratively decoded parallel concatenated codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 49, no. 10, pp. 1727–1737, Oct. 2001.
[27] S. ten Brink, G. Kramer, and A. Ashikhmin, “Design of low-density parity-check codes for modulation and detection,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 670–678, Apr. 2004.
[28] G. D. Forney, Jr., “Maximum-likelihood sequence estimation of digital sequences in the presence of intersymbol interference,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-18, no. 3, pp. 284–287, May 1972.
[29] W. Koch and A. Baier, “Optimum and sub-optimum detection of coded data disturbed by time-varying intersymbol interference,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., San Diego, CA, Dec. 1990, pp. 807.5.1–5.
[30] P. Roberston, E. Villebrun, and P. Hoeher, “Optimal and sub-optimal maximum a posteriori algorithms suitable for turbo decoding,” Europ. Trans. Telecommun., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 119–125, Mar./Apr. 1997.
[31] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[32] M. V. Eyubog˘lu and S. U. Qureshi, “Reduced-state sequence estimation with set partitioning and decision feedback,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 13–20, Jan. 1988.
[33] A. Duel-Hallen and C. Heegard, “Delayed decision feedback estimation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 428–436, May 1989.
[34] P. R. Chevillat and E. Eleftheriou, “Decoding of trellis-encoded signals in the presence of intersymbol interference and noise,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 36, no. 7, pp. 669–676, Jul. 1989.
[35] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low density parity check codes under message passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
Giulio Colavolpe was born in Cosenza, Italy, in 1969. He received the Dr. Ing. degree in telecommunications engineering (cum laude) from the University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy, in 1994 and the Ph.D. degree in information technology from the University of Parma, Parma, Italy, in 1998.
Since 1997, he has been at the University of Parma, where he is now an Associate Professor of Telecommunications. In 2000, he was a Visiting Scientist at the Institut Eurécom, Valbonne, France. His main research interests include digital transmission theory, channel coding, and signal processing. His research activity has led to more than 70 scientific publications in leading international journals and conference proceedings and a few industrial patents. He is also coauthor of the book Detection Algorithms for Wireless Communications (New York: Wiley, 2004).
Gianpietro Germi was born in Parma, Italy, in 1978. He received the Dr. Ing. degree in telecommunications engineering (cum laude) from the University of Parma, in 2003.
Now he is with Selta S.p.A., Roveleto di Cadeo, Piacenza, Italy.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:07:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

