Gear-shift Decoding for Algorithms with Varying Complexity
Masoud Ardakani, Frank R. Kschischang Edward S. Rogers Sr. Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, CANADA, M5S 3G4 Email: {masoud,frank}@comm.utoronto.ca Telephone: 1 (416) 946–8809

Abstract— We consider an iterative message-passing decoder that can choose its decoding rule among a group of decoding algorithms at each iteration (for example: a software decoder). Each available decoding algorithm may have a different computation time and performance. We first show that with proper choice of algorithm at each iteration, decoding latency can significantly be reduced. We call such a decoder a gear-shift decoder because it changes its decoding rule (shifts gear) in order to guarantee both convergence and minimum decoding-latency. We also prove that the optimum gear-shift decoder (the one with the minimum decoding-latency) has a decoding threshold equal to or better than the best decoding threshold of the available algorithms. We use extrinsic information transfer charts and dynamic programming to find the optimum gear-shift decoder.
I. INTRODUCTION
Codes defined on graphs together with iterative messagepassing algorithms are capable of approaching the capacity of many channel-types, e.g. [1], [2], [3], [4]. There are many different message-passing algorithms with different performance and complexity.
High-complexity decoding algorithms such as sum-product can correct more errors created by the channel noise, so they are very attractive when complexity and computation time is not an issue. Low-complexity decoding algorithms, however, are more attractive when we need fast decoders for delay-sensitive applications or high-throughput systems. Low-complexity decoding rules have two main drawbacks. First, they have a worse threshold of decoding compared to high-complexity algorithms so, to ensure convergence, a lower code rate should be used. Second, due to their relatively poor performance, more iterations of such algorithms are required to achieve a given target bit error rate. Hence, it is not obvious if the overall computations are any less.
Now consider the following scenario: A long-length regular (4,8) low-density parity-check (LDPC) code is used to protect data transmitted over a Gaussian channel whose signal to noise ration (SNR) is 2.50 dB. Four different decoding algorithms — sum-product, min-sum, Algorithm E (erasure in the decoder) [1] and Gallager’s Algorithm B [5], [1]— are implemented in software. Based on these implementations, the computation time of these algorithms are 5.2, 2.8, 0.9 and 0.39 µsecond per bit per iteration (µs/b/iter) respectively. A routine analysis shows that we need 9 iterations of sum-product decoding to achieve a target message error rate of less than 10−7. That is to

say, the decoding time is 46.8 µs/b. Using min-sum decoding, density evolution analysis shows that 20 iterations are required, hence the decoding time will be 56.0 µs/b. It can be easily verified that using Algorithm E or Gallager’s Algorithm B, the decoding will fail. Notice that although min-sum is a lowercomplexity algorithm, its overall decoding time is longer.
Now assume that the decoder is allowed to vary its decoding strategy at each iteration. Using density evolution, one can verify that performing 4 iterations of sum-product, followed by 5 iterations of Algorithm E and followed by 4 iterations of Algorithm B the decoder will achieve the same target error rate in just 26.86µs/b. This is less than 58% of the time required by a sum-product decoder and is more than twice as fast as a min-sum decoder. It also makes use of Algorithms E and B, which are very fast decoding algorithms, but which could not be used on their own at this channel condition.
We call the strategy of switching from one algorithm to another “gear-shift decoding” as the decoder changes gears (its algorithm) in order to speed up the decoding. In this paper, given a set of decoding algorithms and their computation time, we show how to find the optimum combination in the sense of minimizing the decoding time. Gear-shift decoding was introduced in [6], but the problem was studied only in the special case that all the algorithms have equal complexity. Here, we generalize the idea to the case of algorithms with varying complexity and performance.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II we introduce extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) charts as a decoding analysis method which will be used throughout this paper. In Section III we define and solve the gear-shift decoding optimization problem for minimum decoding-latency. Section IV presents some examples and Section V concludes the paper.
II. EXIT CHARTS
Message-passing iterative decoders can be analyzed using density evolution [2], which tracks the evolution of the probability density function (pdf) of extrinsic messages iteration by iteration. This analysis becomes intractable when the constituent codes are complex, e.g., in turbo codes. Another approach for analyzing iterative decoders, including codes with complicated constituent codes, is to use extrinsic information transfer charts [7], [8], [9].

0-7803-8938-7/05/$20.00 (C) 2005 IEEE

500

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:10:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

0.12 0.08

f −1(p )
in Iteration 1

Iteration 2 Iteration 3

f(pin)

Iteration 4

p
out

0.04
Predicted Trajectory Actual Results

0

0

0.04

0.08

0.12

pin

Fig. 1. Shows the concept of EXIT charts and compares the predicted trajectory with the actual results for a regular (3,6) code of length 200,000 at SNR=1.8 dB.

In EXIT chart analysis, the idea is to track the evolution

of a single parameter —a measure of the decoder’s success—

iteration by iteration. For example one can track the SNR of

the extrinsic messages [8], [9], their error rate [10] or the

mutual information between messages and decoded bits [7].

For many applications, EXIT charts are very accurate. For

instance in [7], EXIT charts are used to approximate the

behavior of iterative turbo decoders on a Gaussian channel

very accurately. In [10], using EXIT charts, the threshold of

convergence for LDPC codes is approximated within a few

thousandths of a dB of the actual value. In addition, when the

pdf of messages can truly be described by a single parameter,

e.g. in an erasure channel, EXIT chart analysis is equivalent

to density evolution.

As we will see, using EXIT charts, the gear-shift decoding

problem (to be defined) can be solved as a dynamic program.

Hence, we will work with the EXIT chart of each algorithm.

In addition, we are most interested in EXIT chart based on

message error probability. This approach reflects typical design

goals, as one can request a target message error rate rather than

a target SNR or mutual information. Thus, in the remainder

of this paper, we assume that the EXIT charts are tracking the

extrinsic message error rate. An EXIT chart can be thought as

a function

pout = f (pin, p0),

(1)

where p0 is the intrinsic message error rate, pin is the extrinsic message error rate at the input of the iteration and pout is the extrinsic message error rate at the output of the iteration.
Usually EXIT charts are presented by plotting both f and its inverse f −1 for a fixed p0. This makes the visualization of the decoder’s performance easier (see Fig. 1). Thus EXIT
charts allow one to study how many iterations are required to
achieve a target message error rate.
If the “decoding tunnel” of an EXIT chart is closed, i.e., if for some pin we have pout > pin, convergence does not happen. In such cases we say that the EXIT chart is closed.

The convergence threshold p0∗ is the worst channel condition, for which the tunnel is open, i.e.,
p0∗ = arg sup{f (pin, p0) < pin, for all 0 < pin ≤ p0}.
p0
Fig. 1 shows the EXIT chart for a regular (3,6) LDPC code on a Gaussian channel under sum-product decoding and compares it with the actual results. This comparison shows that such analyses can be highly accurate.

III. GEAR-SHIFT DECODING
Gear-shift decoding, simply put, means allowing the decoder to change its decoding algorithm during the process of decoding. Gear-shift decoding for LDPC codes, interestingly, dates back to Gallager and his original work on LDPC codes [5]. For binary message-passing decoders, Gallager noticed that, by allowing a decision threshold to be changed during the process of decoding, the decoder’s performance and convergence threshold improves significantly. This gear-shifting algorithm of Gallager is referred to as Algorithm B in [1].
The importance of using different decoding algorithms in the case of binary message-passing has inspired other work. In hybrid decoding [11], the variable nodes are partitioned, with nodes in different partitions performing a different algorithm. This results in an average behavior which can be better than the convergence behavior of every single algorithm.
In soft decoding, however, it is well known that sum-product decoding minimizes error probability when the factor graph of the code is cycle free. Thus, gear-shift decoding cannot help to improve the threshold of convergence. However, as we discussed earlier, the complexity of decoding can be reduced by gear-shift decoding.
In this section, assuming that an EXIT chart analysis is accurate, we show how to find the optimum gear-shift decoder.

A. Definitions

Consider a set of N different decoding algorithms numbered

from 1 to N whose EXIT charts are given as fi(pin, p0), for 1 ≤ i ≤ N . The computation time for one iteration of

algorithm i is ti, which is assumed to be independent of pin

and p0. A gear-shift decoder is denoted with a sequence of integers S = (a1, a2, . . . , al(S)), ai ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N }, which means algorithm number a1 is used in the first iteration,

algorithm number a2 is used in the second iteration, etc.

The computation time for such a gear-shift decoder is TS =

l(S) i=1

tai

,

and

the

output

message

error

rate

of

such

a

decoder

is

PS (p0) = fal(S) fal−1(S) . . . fa2 (fa1 (p0, p0), p0), . . . , p0 . (2)
Notice that the initial extrinsic message error rate is p0. For a given target message error rate pt, we say a gear-
shift decoder S is admissible if PS(p0) ≤ pt. The “optimum gear-shift decoder”, corresponds to the sequence S∗ whose computation time is less than all other admissible sequences.
We assume that EXIT charts are increasing functions of pin. This is because, a greater pin, i.e., having more extrinsic

501
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:10:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

message errors at the input of an iteration, usually results in more message errors at the output of the iteration, i.e., a greater pout. We also assume that the output messages of each algorithm are compatible with the input of each algorithm.

B. Equally-complex algorithms

If all the decoding rules have equal computation time, i.e.,

ti is a constant, it is clear that the optimum gear-shift decoder

at each iteration uses the algorithm whose output extrinsic

message error rate is the smallest of all.

Here we prove that the greedy strategy of choosing the

algorithm with the best performance in each iteration results

in the fastest convergence.

Theorem 1: Given a channel condition p0 and a set of

equally complex algorithms, a greedy algorithm achieves the

target error rate in the least time.

Proof: Given a gear-shift decoder S = {a1, a2, . . . , al}, 1 ≤ ai ≤ N , using (2), one can compute PS(p0), i.e., the

message error rate after l iterations.

Now assume that S∗ = {a1∗, a2∗, . . . , a∗l } represents the

sequence associated with the greedy algorithm of the same

length l. If S∗ is not the best sequence for l iterations, we

call the best sequence Sˆ = {aˆ1, aˆ2, . . . , aˆl}. Now change Sˆ as follows. At the first place where Sˆ differs with S∗, say in

iteration and call

it,hsewuitpcdhataˆeidwsiethquae∗in,cleeaSvˆi∗n.gStihneceresSt∗ofisSˆbuanscehdanogneda

greedy decision,

fai∗ (p(oiu−t1), p0) < faˆi (p(oiu−t1), p0),

where p(oiu−t1) shows the output message error probability after

the first i − 1 iterations. Notice that these first i − 1 iterations

are the same in both to both Sˆ and Sˆ∗ at

Sˆ∗ and Sˆ so iteration i.

p(oiu−t1)

is

the

input

error

rate

Since all EXIT charts are assumed to be increasing functions of pin, it is evident that after l iterations Sˆ∗ offers a better pout than Sˆ, which contradicts the assumption that Sˆ is the best decoding sequence. Therefore, S∗ has the minimum message

error rate among all sequences of length l. Since l was chosen arbitrarily, S∗ achieves a better error rate for any l iterations

and hence meets the target error rate in the least number of

iterations.

C. Algorithms with varying complexity
When the computation times of different algorithms are not equal, it is not clear which combination of algorithms will result in the fastest decoding. Choosing the algorithm with the best performance may cost a lot of computation while for the same amount of computation another algorithm could produce better results. In this section we show that, finding the sequence of algorithms with the minimum computational complexity can be cast as a dynamic program. We first define the problem.
We use the general setup of Section III-A. At a fixed p0, for each EXIT function fi(pin, p0), we define a quantized version fˆi(pin) whose domain and range is the set P = {p0, p1, . . . , pn}. Here, p0 is the intrinsic message error rate,

p

0

Algorithm 1

p 1

Algorithm 2

Algorithm 3

p

2

p 3

p 4
p 5

Fig. 2. A simple trellis of decoding performance with P of size 6 and 3 algorithms.

p0 > p1 > · · · > pn and pn is equal to pt the target message error rate. For pin = pm, 0 ≤ m ≤ n we define

fˆi(pin)

p0 pk

if fi(pin, p0) ≥ p0 otherwise

,

where k, k ∈ {0, . . . , n} is the largest integer for which fi(pin, p0) ≤ pk. This way fˆi is a pessimistic approximation of fi, hence an admissible gear-shift decoder based on fˆ’s is guaranteed to achieve pt.
We form a trellis whose states are the elements of P and whose branches are formed by fˆ. From each state we have N branches associated with the N available decoding algorithms. Each branch, associated with algorithm i, connects state pm in time T to state pk in time T + 1 if and only if fˆi(pm) = pk. The weight of such a branch is ti. We refer to this trellis as the “trellis of decoding performance”.
Any path in this trellis which starts at p0 and ends at pn defines an admissible gear-shift decoder whose computation
time is the sum of the weights of branches on that path. The
optimum gear-shift decoder is associated with the path of min-
imum weight, which can be found by dynamic programming.
It should be mentioned that the number of branches in this trellis is proportional to N and n so increasing n, in order to reduce the quantization error, linearly increases the number of
trellis branches. As a result having even thousands of states
can be effectively handled.
Notice that we are interested only in the minimum weight path from p0 to pn, hence we can remove all branches that connect a state pm at time T to a state pk at time T + 1 when pk ≥ pm. This further simplifies the dynamic program. An example trellis of decoding performance is shown in Fig. 2.

D. Convergence threshold of the gear-shift decoder
For equally complex algorithms, it is clear that the convergence threshold of the gear-shift decoder is equal to or better than the best of the available decoders. Note that the decoder chooses the most open EXIT chart at each iteration. The resulting EXIT chart is then the lower hull of all the EXIT charts and hence has an equal or even better threshold.
In the case of algorithms with different complexities, the optimum gear-shift decoder chooses the algorithms based on their complexity and performance. Hence, it might use an algorithm with a worse performance due to its lower complexity. Therefore, it is not obvious how this might affect the threshold of convergence. The following theorem shows

502
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:10:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

that even in this case, the threshold of convergence can only
be improved by gear-shift decoding.
Theorem 2: The convergence threshold of the gear-shift
decoder is better than or equal to the best of the available
decoding algorithms.
Proof: Let us denote the best convergence threshold of available algorithms with p0∗. We need to show that when the channel condition is better than p∗0, the optimum gear-shift decoder can converge successfully.
Since p0∗ is the convergence threshold of at least one algorithm, say algorithm m, at least this algorithm has an open EXIT chart at p∗0 − . In other words, for all pin, pn ≤ pin ≤ p∗0 − we have pout = fm(pin, p∗0 − ) < pin. Therefore, in the trellis of decoding performance, there is a
path between p0 and pn and hence there is a path of minimum weight between them.
Notice that if for some pin, all decoding rules except algorithm m have a closed EXIT chart, they all result in a pout > pin. Therefore, in the trellis of decoding performance, we can remove the branches associated with them at this particular
pin. Hence, the optimum gear-shift decoder chooses the only existing branch, i.e., algorithm m, towards convergence. This
is also true when other decoding rules have a tight EXIT chart.
As we see in some examples, in tight regions the optimum
gear-shift decoder uses more complex decoders.

IV. EXAMPLES

In this section we show the effect of gear-shift decoding on

the decoding latency through some examples. The available

algorithms are assumed to be: sum-product, min-sum, Algo-

rithm E and Algorithm B.

Algorithm E and its update rules can be found in [1], but

the version that we use here has a fixed weight of w = 1 for

the intrinsic message. In this algorithm the message alphabet

is {−1, 0, +1}. A −1 message can be thought as a vote for a

’1’ bit, a +1 message is a vote for a ’0’ bit and a 0 message

is an undecided vote. Assuming that the all-zero codeword is

transmitted, the error rate of this algorithm can be defined as

P r(−1)

+

1 2

P

r(0)

to

be

used

for

plotting

the

EXIT

chart.

Another issue is the compatibility issue. Since the message

alphabet of the above mentioned algorithms are not the same,

when transition from one algorithm to another occurs, we

have to make the output of one algorithm compatible with the

input of the next algorithm. Table I shows how we change

the messages at the output of one algorithm for different

transitions. The “not-compatible” entries refer to transitions

that are not allowed. We avoid transitions from hard algorithms

E and B to soft algorithms because it requires us to use a

new EXIT chart for the soft algorithms as they are now fed

with hard information. The performance of the soft decoder

after such transitions is very sensitive to the mapping used

for messages. In Example 2, we allow such transitions to

investigate their impact on the decoder’s performance.

Example 1: In this example we consider a (3,6) regular LDPC code, used to achieve a message error rate of 10−6

on a Gaussian channel with SNR=1.75 db. This is almost

0.1 0.075

Sum−Product Min−Sum Algorithm E

Pout

0.05

0.025

0

0

0.025

0.05

0.075

0.1

P
in

Fig. 3. Shows the EXIT charts for a (3,6) LDPC code under different decoding algorithms when the channel is Gaussian with SNR=1.75 dB.

0.65 dB and 0.05 dB better than the threshold of this code under sum-product and min-sum decoding respectively. It is also more than 1.3 dB and 3.1 dB worse than the threshold under Algorithms E and B respectively.
Figure 3, shows the EXIT charts of this code under sumproduct, min-sum and Algorithm E decoding. It also shows a decoding trajectory using different decoding algorithms. To avoid confusion, each EXIT chart is plotted only in the regions in which it has an open decoding tunnel. The EXIT chart of Algorithm B is closed everywhere and hence is not plotted. Based on our implementations for a (3,6) code, one iteration of sum-product, min-sum and Algorithm E takes 4.1 µs/b, 1.7 µs/b and 0.5 µs/b respectively. These numbers arrived at using a Pentium IV processor clocked at 1 GHz and are intended as illustrations only. Quantizing pin from p0 = 0.1106 to pt = 10−6 in 4000 points uniformly spaced in a log scale, the optimum gear-shift decoder is: 2 iterations of min-sum followed by 5 iterations of sum-product followed by 10 iterations of min-sum. The whole decoding takes 40.9 µs/b.
Using only sum-product, a routine density-evolution analysis shows that 15 iterations are required to achieve the same message error rate and hence the decoding takes a total of 61.5 µs/b. This is more than 50% longer than the optimum gear-shift decoder. Using only min-sum, we need 31 iterations which takes 52.7 µs/b, which is more than 28% longer than the optimum gear-shift decoder.
Another important benefit of the gear-shift decoder over min-sum decoder is the decoding threshold. If the channel SNR is over estimated by only 0.05 dB, the min-sum decoder would fail to converge, no matter how many iterations of decoding we allow. However, as Fig. 3 suggests, when the decoding tunnel of the min-sum decoder is very tight (or even closed due to over estimation of channel SNR), the gear-shift decoder switches to sum-product. Hence, it is more robust to channel estimation, while its decoding latency is also significantly less.
Example 2: Consider the previous example, but this time

503
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:10:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE I Shows the message mapping at a transition from on algorithm to another.

To → From ↓ Sum-Product or Min-Sum Algorithm E
Algorithm B

Sum-Product or Min-Sum
no change
not compatible
not compatible

Algorithm E {−1, 0, 1}
|m| > 1, m → sign(m) |m| ≤ 1, m → 0
no change m = 0, m → 1 m = 1, m → −1

Algorithm B

{0, 1}

|m| >

0,

m→

1−sign(m) 2

|m| = 0, m → 0, 1 randomly

|m|

=

1,

m

→

1−m 2

|m| = 0, m → 0, 1 randomly

no

change

we resolve the “not compatible” cases. To do so, we map a message m in Algorithm E (Algorithm B) to K · sign(m) (K · (2m − 1)) to be used in sum-product or min-sum algorithms.
Choosing K = 10, the result for the optimum gear-shift decoder is 3 iterations of min-sum followed by 4 iterations of sum-product followed by another 7 iterations of min-sum, followed by 4 iterations of Algorithm E and finally followed by another 3 iterations of min-sum. The decoding time is 40.5 µs/b, which is only 1% better than that of the previous example. Since for variable nodes of degree 3, Algorithm E and B both have poor performance even at low extrinsic message error rates, they did not have an impact on the speed of the gear-shift decoder. Nevertheless, the gear-shift decoding by only sum-product and min-sum is dramatically better than using single-algorithm decoding.
Example 3: Consider the example studied in the introduction section, but allow only sum-product and min-sum decoding. The optimum decoder is one iteration of minsum followed by 4 iterations of sum product followed by another 5 iterations of min-sum, which takes 37.6 µs/b. This is 40% longer than the optimum gear-shift decoder using all 4 algorithms. Comparing with the case of the (3,6) code, it shows that for a (4,8) code the hard decoding rules can have a significant impact on the speed of the optimum gear-shift decoder. This is also true for higher degree variable nodes, since the EXIT chart of Algorithm B for variable nodes of degree 4 and larger approaches zero with a slope of zero [12].
V. CONCLUSION
We introduced gear-shift decoding, a method for reducing the decoding latency of iterative decoders without sacrificing the code rate. In this method, the decoder changes its decoding rule during the process of decoding.
Given a set of decoding rules, we showed that the optimum gear-shift decoder for minimum decoding-latency can be found using dynamic programming. We also proved that the convergence threshold of the optimum gear-shift decoder is better than or equal to the best convergence threshold of the available algorithms. Through some examples we showed that, gear-shift decoding can significantly reduce decoding latency.
The idea of gear-shift decoding is very general and can be used for other iterative decoders. Gallager’s Algorithm B is a good example of gear-shift decoding for irregular LDPC codes [12], [14]. However, when the complexity of different algorithms varies, it is not clear how an (irregular

LDPC code, gear-shift decoder) pair should be specifically
designed for each other. Notice that irregular LDPC codes
are usually highly optimized for a certain decoding algorithm.
It has been noticed in many papers, e.g. [3], [15], that the
EXIT chart of the highly optimized irregular code for a decoding rule is very tight for all pin’s, so the EXIT chart of a code optimized for sum-product decoding, for example,
under any other decoding is closed everywhere, and so gear-
shift decoding is not applicable. Nevertheless, for many codes,
gear-shift decoding has great potential to reduce decoding
complexity.
REFERENCES
[1] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[2] T. J. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[3] A. Shokrollahi, “New sequence of linear time erasure codes approaching the channel capacity,” in Proceedings of the International Symposium on Applied Algebra, Algebraic Algorithms and Error-Correcting Codes, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, no. 1719, pp. 65-67, 1999.
[4] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney Jr., T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Comm. Lett., vol. 5, pp. 58-60, Feb. 2001.
[5] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[6] M. Ardakani and F. R. Kschischang, “Gear-shift decoding,” Proc. 21st Biennial Symp. on Comm., Queen’s Univ., Canada, pp. 86–90, June 2002.
[7] S. Ten Brink, “Convergence behavior of iteratively decoded parallel concatenated codes,” IEEE Trans. Comm., vol. 49, pp. 1727–1737, Oct. 2001.
[8] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar and F. Pollara, “Low complexity turbo-like codes,” Proc. 2nd Internat. Synp. on Turbo Codes, pp. 73–80, Sep. 2000.
[9] H. El Gamal and A. R. Hammons, “Analyzing the turbo decoder using the Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol.47, pp. 671– 686, Feb. 2001.
[10] M. Ardakani and F. R. Kschischang, “A more accurate onedimensional analysis and design of irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Comm., accepted for publication. [online]. Available: http://www.comm.toronto.edu/ masoud/More-accurate.pdf
[11] P. Zarrinkhat and A. H. Banihashemi, “Hybrid decoding of low-density parity-check codes,”Proc. 3rd Intl. Symp. on Turbo Codes., Brest, France, pp.503–506, Sept. 2003.
[12] M. Ardakani and F. R. Kschischang, “On the optimality of Gallager’s decoding algorithm B,” submitted to IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, Oct. 2003.
[13] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhang, “High-throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. VLSI Systems, vol. 11, pp. 976–996, Dec. 2003.
[14] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi and D. A. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 585–598, Feb. 2001.
[15] A. Ashikhmin, G. Kramer and S. ten Brink, “Extrinsic information transfer functions: a model and two properties,” Proc. Conf. Inform. Sciences and Systems, Princeton, USA, March 2002.

504
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:10:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

