ITERATIVE ORDERED-STATISTIC DECODING
FOR LDPC CODED MODULATION SYSTEMS
Huy G. Vu, Ha H. Nguyen and David E. Dodds Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Saskatchewan e-mail: huv169@mail.usask.ca, {ha nguyen, david e dodds}@engr.usask.ca

Abstract
In this paper, an iterative demodulation/decoding scheme is proposed for coded modulation systems based on low density parity check (LDPC) codes of short block lengths. Here, the LDPC code is decoded by a soft-input soft-output ordered-statistic (SISO-OSD) decoder. The soft-output of the SISO-OSD is used as the a priori probabilities of the demodulator for the next iteration. Simulation results show that the error performance of the iterative demodulation/decoding ordered-statistic decoder is superior to that of the iterative demodulation/decoding sum-product decoder. The performance of the proposed system closely approaches the union bound of the maximum likelihood (ML) decoding with Gray mapping.
Keywords— Low-density parity-check codes, ordered-statistic decoding, coded modulation.
1 Introduction

reliability values of coded bits and to find the closest codeword instead of the received signals as used in [7].
2 The Iterative Demodulation/Decoding System
Figure 1 shows the coded modulation system under consideration. In this system, the information sequence is encoded by an LDPC encoder to the codeword c in the code C (N, K, dmin). The K information bits are encoded to N coded bits. The minimum Hamming distance of the code is dmin. Then, every group of q bits in codeword c is mapped by the mapping µ to one signal point in the constellation X to procedure the transmitted signal x. After being transmitted over a fading channel, the received signal during the kth symbol interval can be written as:

Recently, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] have attracted a considerable attention among coding research community. The main reasons are due to their powerful performance and great flexibility in design and implementation. An LDPC code is often decoded by an iterative sum-product (SP) algorithm [1, 2]. The error performance of a sum-product decoder can approach that of a maximum likelihood (ML) decoder if the length of LDPC codes is long enough. In practice, the moderate and short length codes are still used when the systems require a low latency. However, there is a performance gap between SP decoder and ML decoder for medium and short LDPC codes [3].
A reliability-based decoding technique, called orderedstatistic decoding (OSD), was invented in [4]. This decoding algorithm can be applied to linear codes such as LDPC codes. For medium and short length codes, the error performance of an OSD decoder can approach that of an ML decoder with a moderate decoding complexity. Thus, OSD algorithm can be employed to improve the performance of the systems with medium and short length LDPC codes.
When LDPC codes are used in coded modulation systems, the iterative processing between the demodulator and the decoder can improve the error performance of the systems [5, 6]. In iterative processing, the output of the soft-input soft-output (SISO) decoder is used as the a priori probabilities for the demodulator in the next iteration.
In this paper, an LDPC coded modulation scheme with iterative demodulation/decoding is investigated. The iterative receiver is implemented with a SISO-OSD decoder and a demodulator. This SISO-OSD decoder [7] can give a soft-output log likelihood probability ratio (LLR) with the same performance as that of a max-log-MAP algorithm. To use the soft-output LLR of the demodulator in this system, the SISO-OSD module has to be carefully devised. Here, the LLRs are used to compute the

yk = hkxk + wk

(1)

Here, xk = x(k) is the kth complex transmitted symbol when the codeword c is chosen. The term wk is a zero-mean complex Gaussian random variable with variance σ2 per dimension, and yk is the kth component of the received signal vector y. The coefficient hk is a random variable representing the (flat) fading effect. The channel model under consideration is the uncorrelated Rayleigh fading channel. Hence, hk is the set of identically distributed and independent random variables with Rayleigh distribution. When AWGN channel is considered, this coefficient hk is set to one.
The receiver includes a SISO demodulator and a SISO-OSD
decoder. The SISO demodulator computes the soft-decision of
coded bits based on the received signal and the a priori proba-
bilities from the previous iteration. Then, the soft output of the
demodulator is used as the soft input of the SISO-OSD decoder
to obtain the soft-output or the a posteriori probabilities. The ex-
trinsic information is computed by subtracting the a priori prob-
abilities from the a posteriori probabilities for the next iteration.
The detailed description of demodulator and SISO-OSD decoder
are presented in the following subsections.

2.1 The Demodulator

The procedure to implement SISO demodulator proposed in [6] is summarized as follows. Consider the constellation X of size M = 2q. The a posteriori probabilities for coded bits can
be calculated as:

P (cik = b|yk) =

P (xk|yk) =

xk ∈Xbi

xk∈Xbi p(yk|xk)P (xk) p(yk )
(2)

0-7803-8886-0/05/$20.00 ©2005 IEEE

196

CCECE/CCGEI, Saskatoon, May 2005

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:09:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fading AWGN hw

LDPC Encoder

c Mapping x (Modulator)

y Demodulator

SISO-OSD Decoder

Iterative demodulation and decoding

Figure 1: The block diagram of an LDPC coded modulation system based on an ordered-statistic decoder.

where cki is the coded bit of codeword c that is mapped to the ith bit of the kth symbol xk, and b can be two alternative values 0 or 1. The Xbi is the subset of X which contains symbols with the ith bit of the mapping label equals to b.
At the first-iteration demodulation, the a prior probabilities P (xk) of all symbols xk are equal. At the second-iteration demodulation, the a prior probability P (xk) of a particular symbol is a product of the a prior probabilities of coded bits mapped to
this symbol. That is,

q

P (xk) = P (cjk = cj(xk); I)

(3)

j=1

Here, cj(xk) ∈ {0, 1} is the value of the jth bit of the label for xk which is determined by the mapping µ.
The output extrinsic a posteriori probabilities for the second-
iteration of the demodulator can be computed as follows:

P (cik

=

b; O)

=

P (cki = b|yk) P (cki = b; I)

=

xk∈Xbi p(yk|xk)P (xk) P (cki = b; I)p(yk)

=

xk∈Xbi p(yk|xk) j=i P (ckj = cj (xk); I) P (cki = b; I)p(yk)

(4)

For a Rayleigh fading channel, if the receiver knows the channel state information (CSI), p(yk|xk) is computed as follows:

p(yk |xk )

=

1 2πσ2

exp

−

|yk

− hkxk|2 2σ2

(5)

where, recall that, σ2 is variance of the white noise in each dimension. Note that, xk and yk are complex numbers while the fading coefficient hk is a real number (due to the assumption of perfect CSI, the phase is perfectly recovered). For AWGN channel, hk is set to one. The log likelihood probability ratio (LLR) can be computed as:

LLR(cki )

=

log

P (cik P (cik

= =

0; 1;

O) O)

(6)

Thus, the output of the demodulator is calculated by (4), (5) and (6). Note that, p(yk) in (4) will cancel in the caculation of the LLR outputs as in (6).

2.2 The Soft-Input Soft-Output Decoder

The ordered-statistic decoder is a reliability-based decoder

[8]. The hard-output OSD algorithm makes decisions on a set

of codewords devised from the most reliable independent posi-

tions (MRIP) of the received signal and the error patterns added

to these MRIPs. The hard-output OSD algorithm is proposed in

[4] for a BPSK modulation system. The MRIPs are ordered and

the cost function of a codeword is computed based directly on the received signal yk of BPSK modulation. In this paper, the MRIPs are determined and the cost function of a codeword is

calculated based on the output LLRs of the demodulator.

The soft-output OSD decoder [7] is a two-stage decoder. The

first stage is a hard-output OSD decoder. In the second stage,

the soft-output of each position is obtained by a joint estima-

tion between the decided codeword and the closest codeword to

the received signal with an opposite value at this position. This

codeword is found by the OSD stages working on the punctured

codes of the original code. The details of the hard-output OSD

stage and the soft-output reprocessing stage are briefly presented

as follows.

The Hard-Output Ordered-Statistic Decoding Stage

First, the LLR sequence corresponding to a codeword is re-

ordered in decreasing values of reliability. The code corresponding to this ordering is referred to as C˜. The K most reliable in-

dependent positions (MRIP) form an information set called the

most reliable basis (MRB). An initial codeword c0 is constructed

by making hard decisions of K MRIP and re-encoding these K

bits. Then c0 is reprocessed as follows:

1. For 0 ≤ j ≤ i,

K j

candidate codewords are constructed by

adding all possible error patterns of weight j to the K MRIP of

c0 and re-encoding. 2. The decoding cost of each constructed codeword is computed

by a product of bit probabilities or a sum of the corresponding

LLRs.

3. The candidate of the best cost is chosen by the decoder.

The above decoding procedure is called order-i reprocessing of the hard-output OSD-i decoder. The decoding cost of a candidate codeword c can be computed as follows:

N

Lc = (−1)cl LLR(cl)

(7)

l=1

197 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:09:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

If the cost function is calculated based on the cost of the initial codeword c0, the computational complexity can be reduced by a summation of the costs of bits at positions of 1 in the error
patterns only.
The Soft-Output Reprocessing Stage
The soft-output of a coded bit is computed based on joint estimation of two codewords: The most likely codeword cML in the code C and the most likely codeword cj in subset C(j) of codewords that are different to cML at the jth position. Specifically,

Lj = (−1)cML,j [L(cML) − L(cj )]

(8)

The above expression is equivalent to the max-log-MAP algo-
rithm.
To describe steps of the soft-output order-i reprocessing, the following definitions are required. The error pattern e(j) of C˜ is an error pattern that has el(j) = 1 for l = j and el(j) = 0 otherwise for 1 ≤ l ≤ K. The values of el(j)s for K ≤ l ≤ N are determined by the generator matrix of C˜. The punctured code C˜(j) of C˜ is a punctured code at the jth position. The codeword cML(j) of C˜ is a codeword obtained by complementing position-j in cML, i.e., cML(j) = cML ⊕ e(j).
The steps of the soft-output order-i reprocessing can now be
summarized as follows: 1. Find the most likely codeword cML by the hard-output ordered-statistic decoding stage.
2. For each bit-j of MRB (1 ≤ j ≤ K):
• Setup the first soft output values of the least reliable positions
(LRP) in the support of ej based on cML and cML(j). • Find the most likely codeword c(j) in C˜(j) by a hard-output
order-i reprocessing. • Compute Lj based on cML and c(j). • Update the soft output values of LRP in the support of cML⊕
c(j) with Lj. 3. For each bit-j of LRP (K + 1 ≤ j ≤ N ), chose the smallest soft output value associated with each bit-j.
Note that, the generator matrix of C˜(j) should be properly obtained according to the value of the jth bit of cML in order to generate the exact punctured code of C˜. Moreover, the soft-
outputs should be re-ordered again to correspond to the original
positions.

3 Simulation Results
The iterative ordered-statistic decoding scheme is investigated for the regular (3,6) LDPC code of rate 1/2 and length 72. The minimum distance of this code is dmin = 6. The ordered-static decoder with order-3 reprocessing is implemented. The 8-PSK constellation with Gray and semi set partitioning (SSP) mappings [6] is considered. The structure of this system is the same as the structure of the bit interleaved coded modulation (BICM) system using convolutional codes. For BICM schemes with convolutional codes, the error performance with other mappings is superior to that of the system with Gray mapping [6]. This is the reason for investigating this coded modulation system with different mappings.
Simulation results are compared with the error performance of iterative demodulation/decoding sum-product (SP) scheme

100

10−2

10−4

BER

10−6 10−8
2

ML bound, SSP ML bound, Gray SP simul, SSP (1 iter.) SP simul, SSP (2 iter.) SP simul, Gray OSD3 simul, SSP OSD3 simul, Gray

4

6

8

E /N (dB)
b0

10

12

Figure 2. Performance of OSD decoder compared to that of ML and SP decoders: regular (3,6) LDPC code of length 72 and rate 1/2, 8-PSK modulation, AWGN channel.

and the union bound of the maximum likelihood (ML) decoding scheme in Fig. 2. The difference between the iterative demodulation/decoding SP scheme and the proposed iterative demodulation/decoding OSD scheme is only at the decoders. The sum-product algorithm [2] is often used for LDPC codes. Here, the SP decoder is implemented with 20 iterations (inner iterations). The ML decoding is prohibited due to its complexity for this code length. Hence, the performance of OSD decoder is compared with the union bound of the ML scheme. Derivation of this upper bound is presented in [3].
Results show that the error performance of OSD decoder is superior to that of SP decoder by about 3 dB and 2 dB with Gray and SSP mappings, respectively. The performance of OSD decoder is very close to the performance bound of the ML scheme for Gray mapping. However, the performance of OSD decoder with the SSP mapping cannot approach that of ML decoding. Therefore, the performance of OSD and SP schemes with SSP mapping cannot outperform that of the OSD and SP schemes with Gray mapping. Although iterative demodulation/decoding is implemented, the improvement due to iterations is negligible for the system with 8-PSK modulation.
Figure 3 shows the error performances of iterative demodulation/decoding schemes with 16-QAM modulation and Gray mapping. Receiver employs the OSD-1 or OSD-2 decoder. Here, a significant gain of 0.5 dB due to iterative demodulation/decoding is observed at the bit error probability (BER) of 10−5. The performance of OSD-2 system is superior to the performance of OSD-1 system because the codewords are searched in a larger code space. The OSD-3 system was also implemented. However, the performance of this system is almost the same as the performance of OSD-2 system. Therefore, the performance of the OSD-3 system is not presented in the Fig. 3. This observation is consistent with the fact that performance of the OSD scheme will saturate with order of i = dmin/4 [4, 7].

198 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:09:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

100

that of the system based on SP decoder by about 4.5 dB and 4

dB with Gray mapping and SSP mapping, respectively. The per-

10−1

formance of system with Gray mapping closely approaches the

performance of ML scheme. Note that, the upper bound for the

10−2

Rayleigh fading channel, however, is not as tight as the bound

for AWGN channel. Finally, the demodulation/decoding itera-

10−3

tion improves the performance of the system with 8-PSK mod-

ulation and SSP mapping by about 1 dB over Rayleigh fading

10−4

channel.

BER

10−5 ML bound

OSD1 simul (1 iter.)

10−6

OSD1 simul(2 iter.)

OSD2 simul (1 iter.)

10−7

OSD2 simul(2 iter.)

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

E /N (dB)
b0

Figure 3. Performance of iterative demodulation/decoding scheme with OSD-1 and OSD-2 decoders compared to the performance bound of the ML decoder: regular (3,6) LDPC code of length 72 and rate 1/2, 16-QAM modulation, AWGN channel.

Here, this iterative demodulation/decoding scheme is still suboptimum for coded modulation system employing 16-QAM. Compared to ML decoding, a gap of 0.5 dB can be observed from Fig. 3.
100

4 Conclusions
An iterative demodulation/decoding scheme based on a SISOOSD decoder has been proposed in this paper. The error performance of the system is compared with the error performance of the ML scheme and the iterative demodulation/decoding scheme based on the sum-product decoder. Simulation was carried out for different constellations and mappings over both AWGN and Rayleigh fading channels. The results show that iterative OSD is superior to the iterative SP decoding for short block-length LDPC codes. When Gray mapping is employed, the error performance of the iterative OSD is very close to the error performance of the ML scheme. However, the disadvantage of the systems based on OSD decoder is the high computational complexity that makes these schemes become impractical for codes of medium lengths (about 200 bits). The proposed system can be applied to every coded modulation scheme that uses short blocklength codes such as BCH codes or Reed-Solomon codes.
Acknowledgment
This work was supported by the University of Saskatchewan Graduate Scholarship and NSERC Discovery Grants.

10−2

BER

10−4

ML bound, SSP

ML bound, Gray

SP, SSP (1 iter.)

10−6

SP, SSP (2 iter.)

SP, Gray

OSD3, SSP (1 iter.)

OSD3, SSP (2 iter.)

10−8 2

OSD3,Gray

4

6

8

10

12

14

E /N (dB)
b0

Figure 4. Performance of OSD decoder compared to that of ML and SP decoders: regular (3,6) LDPC code of length 72 and rate 1/2, 8-PSK modulation, Rayleigh fading channel.

The iterative ordered-statistic decoding scheme is also investigated for the Rayleigh fading channel. Again, the regular (3,6) LDPC code of rate 1/2 and length 72 is used with 8-PSK constellation and Gray and SSP mappings. Simulation results and performance bound of the OSD, SP and ML systems are shown in Fig. 4. The error performance of the iterative demodulation/decoding system based on the OSD decoder is better than

References
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. MIT Press, 1963.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electronics Letters, vol. 32, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.
[3] H. Vu, H. H. Nguyen, and D. Dodds, “Error performance of coded modulation systems based on ldpc codes,” submitted to IEEE Trans. on Comm., pp. 1–28, 2004.
[4] M. P. C. Fossorier and S. Lin, “Soft-decision decoding of linear block codes based on ordered statistics,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 41, p. 13791396, 1995.
[5] S. ten Brink, J. Speidel, and R. H. Yan, “Iterative demapping for QPSK modulation,” Electronics Letters, vol. 34, pp. 1459–1460, July 1998.
[6] X. Li, A. Chidapol, and J. A. Ritcey, “Bit-interleaved coded modulation with iterative decoding and 8-PSK signaling,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, pp. 1250–1257, Aug. 2002.
[7] M. P. C. Fossorier and S. Lin, “Soft-input soft-output decoding of linear block codes based on ordered statistics,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., pp. 2828–2833,, 1998.
[8] S. Lin and D. Costello, Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications. Prentice-Hall, 2004.

199 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:09:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

