ON THE SIMULATION OF STOCHASTIC ITERATIVE DECODER ARCHITECTURES

Anthony Rapley Dept. of ECE
University of Alberta Edmonton, AB, T6G 2V4 rapley@ece.ualberta.ca

Vincent Gaudet Dept. of ECE University of Alberta Edmonton, AB, T6G 2V4 vgaudet@ece.ualberta.ca

Chris Winstead Dept. of ECE Utah State University Logan, UT, 84322 winstead@engineering.usu.edu

Abstract
The advent of Shannon capacity-approaching error control codes such as Turbo codes and low density parity check (LDPC) codes has been revolutionary, leading to their incorporation into numerous recent digital communications standards. The key to exploiting the power of these codes is the utilization of an iterative decoder. While high error-correcting performance iterative decoder architectures are known, the complexity normally increases commensurately with the performance. Increased area and power consumption, the consequences of great complexity, are undesirable, particularly so in mobile wireless applications.
We have previously proposed a novel architecture to realize a high-performance, low-complexity iterative decoder using stochastic computational elements. Using stochastic computation, it should be possible to construct iterative decoders that feature both high performance and low complexity with little compromise.
In this paper we present a tutorial introduction to stochastic iterative decoding. We then discuss aspects of our new bit-true decoder simulation software, including its flexibility for testing architectural variations, reusability for other projects, and performance results.
Keywords: error control coding, low density parity check (LDPC) codes, iterative decoding, stochastic computation, analog decoding
1. Introduction
Since the introduction of Turbo codes [1] and the rediscovery of low density parity check (LDPC) codes [2], and especially since their introduction into a number of recent digital communications standards [3], much research has been conducted into the development of efficient high speed and low power iterative decoding hardware architectures.
While some of the best codes have the potential to reach near-Shannon capacity transmission rates, this performance cannot be realized in a sub-optimal decoder implementation. An engineering compromise typically has to be made between performance and complexity. Important performance metrics are error performance and data throughput, while the key complexity metrics are size (die area) and power consumption.
One highly successful approach to satisfying these apparently contradictory design goals is to build a decoder in

analog circuitry [4-5]. In such a decoder, internal decoder metrics are represented as continuous-valued analog voltages or currents, and decoding iterations are performed in continuous time. Improvements in speed or power of one to two orders of magnitude are possible for analog decoders compared to their digital counterparts.
In this paper we present a tutorial introduction to our novel approach to the decoder design problem, first proposed in [6], that employs stochastic computational elements to implement the belief propagation decoding algorithm. Using all digital hardware, the stochastic decoder is a complementary technology to the analog decoder concept.
2. Stochastic Computation
2.1. Background
Stochastic computation was first considered in the 1960s [7] as an alternative to conventional digital computers. Digital hardware of the time was bulky, power inefficient, and somewhat unreliable. Stochastic computation was developed as a novel means of implementing complex computations in simple low-precision digital circuits.
Modern integrated circuit processes now facilitate the lowcost production of compact, reliable integrated circuits. Stochastic computation is nonetheless still relevant, finding application in artificial neural networks where the ease of achieving the requisite massive parallelism offsets the decreased precision of the computational elements [8].
2.2. Stochastic Value Representation
The defining characteristic of stochastic computation is the unique value representation that it employs. In a stochastic computer, values are encoded as a Bernoulli sequence of bits. For an unsigned number N in the range [0,Nmax), the probability that any bit {di} in the Bernoulli sequence is a binary ‘1’ is given by

P(di = 1) = N/Nmax

(1)

0-7803-8886-0/05/$20.00 ©2005 IEEE

1868

CCECE/CCGEI, Saskatoon, May 2005

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:09:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

For probability values, Nmax = 1. Thus, the probability of any given bit being a binary ‘1’ in a sequence of stochastic bits is equal to the real number probability value being represented.
Encoding of stochastic bits is probabilistic. That is, there is no fixed mapping between a real number probability value and its representation as a sequence of stochastic bits. Many different stochastic representations are possible for the same value. Figure 1 shows three possible mappings of a value.
Stochastic computation offers the ability to control precision in the time domain. Precision can be increased by increasing the length of a stochastic sequence used to represent a probability value. As the length of the stochastic sequence approaches infinity, the difference between the stochastic value and the real number value approaches zero.
2.3. Stochastic Computational Elements
Stochastic computational elements are implemented with conventional digital gates. Complex arithmetic functions are implemented by passing stochastic sequences through simple combinational logic blocks.
To illustrate the elegant simplicity of stochastic computational elements, consider the stochastic multiplier in Figure 2. Multiplication of two stochastic sequences can be performed with a single two-input AND gate.
3. Stochastic LDPC Decoder Construction
3.1. Factor Graph Representation
Linear block codes, the code family to which LDPC codes belong, are completely defined by a parity check matrix H such that

To facilitate decoding, the parity check matrix can be represented as a factor graph [9]. A factor graph is a bipartite graph consisting of equality nodes and parity check nodes connected by edges. Representing a code structure as a factor graph allows the reduction of the complex global function of decoding into simpler local functions performed in the nodes.
A factor graph is derived from a parity check matrix as follows: For a parity check matrix having i rows and j columns, the corresponding factor graph will have i parity check nodes and j equality nodes. Each occurrence of a ‘1’ in the ith row and jth column of the parity check matrix specifies an edge between the jth equality node and the ith parity check node in the graph.
Figure 3(a) presents the parity check matrix for a (7,4) Hamming code, and Figure 3(b) shows the corresponding factor graph for this code.
3.2. Stochastic Nodes
Decoding on a factor graph can be performed with the belief propagation algorithm [10]. Belief propagation decoding proceeds by passing messages corresponding to a posteriori probabilities along graph edges, and by combining messages on incoming node edges into output messages sent on outgoing edges. Parity check and equality nodes with more than three edges can be converted to sub-graphs containing only parity check and equality nodes each having three edges.
Decoders therefore only need to implement two types of computational units: three-edge parity check nodes and threeedge equality nodes. For every two input edges (A and B) to a parity check node, an output message equal to

P(C) = P(A)(1-P(B)) + (1-P(A))P(B)

(3)

HxT = 0T

(2)

is produced at the third edge output (C).

where x is a valid codeword.
11101011011111111010

0.75

10111110111011101011

1100101 0111001 0010111

10101111010101111101
Fig. 1. Three possible mappings of a value to stochastic representation

Fig. 3(a). Parity check matrix for (7,4) Hamming code

“0.2” ...0100100000...

...0100000000...

...1110010010...

“0.1”

“0.5”

Fig. 2. Multiplication of two stochastic sequences

Fig. 3(b). Factor graph for (7,4) Hamming code. Equality nodes are on the left; parity check nodes are on the right.

1869 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:09:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

For every two input edges (A and B) to an equality node, an output message

P(C) = P(A)P(B) / [P(A)P(B) + (1-P(A))(1-P(B))]

(4)

is produced at the third edge output (C). Consider the two circuits shown in Figures 4 and 5. Assume that circuit inputs are stochastic sequences corresponding to P(A) and P(B). By inspection, the output sequence of Figure 4 has the probability given by Equation (3), and thus the circuit implements a parity-check calculation. Similarly, for the circuit of Figure 5, the output sequence has the probability given by Equation (4), and the circuit implements an equality calculation. The circuits of Figures 4 and 5 can be generalized to N-edge nodes by using (N-1) input XOR and AND gates in the implementations, and transmitting the result to the Nth edge. Node calculations are symmetric, such that an output is produced for each edge based on the other edges. Nodes therefore require multiple instances of the above circuits. Figure 6 depicts a three-edge parity check node with three constituent stochastic parity check circuits.

A

D

Q

C

B

CLK Fig. 4. Stochastic parity check circuit

3.3. Decoder Operation
For each noisy received codeword, the noisy value for each bit position is converted to a probability of being a binary ‘1’. These probability values are converted into stochastic sequences that are driven into the equality nodes. Conversion of real number probability values into stochastic sequences remains an open problem. One implementation could involve the use of modified oversampling A/D converters, where values are sampled only once by the sample-and-hold units but are then converted into as many stochastic bits as required. Another possibility is the use of fixed-point probability values as inputs to the decoder, which are then used to seed a linear feedback shift register to produce a sequence of stochastic bits.
On every clock cycle, a stochastic bit is generated for every information and parity bit input, and each edge in the graph transmits a single-bit message in each direction. Based on the new inputs and stochastic messages, new stochastic messages are computed and are then transmitted on the subsequent clock cycle. Also, every equality node produces a stochastic bit based on all inputs that is sent to the decoder output pins.
Bits output from the decoder are converted to a hard decision (ie. either a binary ‘0’ or ‘1’) by summing the output bits in updown counters. When the decoder iterations are complete for the current codeword, the sign bit from each up-down counter can be used as the hard decision value.
The stopping criterion, the point at which the outputs are converted to a hard decision, also remains an open problem. The simplest and most deterministic solution is to iterate for a fixed number of clock cycles for each codeword.
4. Simulation Architecture

A

J

Q

C

B

K

CLK Fig. 5. Stochastic equality circuit
B

C A
Fig. 6. Three-edge parity check node (dashed line) with constituent parity check circuits

Development is ongoing for a complete simulator framework for performing Monte Carlo simulations of stochastic decoding on LDPC codes of any size. For a given parity check matrix, a factor graph is instantiated at run-time and the decoder performance is evaluated. The simulator framework features considerable flexibility for quickly making modifications to the decoder architecture, and extensibility for code re-use in other projects.
Our simulator includes a modular encoder that encodes actual random codewords as opposed to just the all-zero codeword. The encoder module also has noise generation capabilities to add white Gaussian noise to the codewords and then convert the received channel estimate to log-likelihood ratios for input to the decoder module. This module can be reused in any project where LDPC encoding and subsequent noise generation is required.
Several decoder modules can be instantiated and run in parallel. This is a crucial capability for directly comparing the performance of architectural variants of the stochastic decoder. One decoder module has also been created to implement the ideal belief propagation algorithm. This provides

1870 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:09:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Our simulation framework accelerates the process of optimizing the code structures and decoder hardware architectures to produce the best possible decoding results.
Excluding the ideal belief propagation decoder, each decoder module provides simulation results that are bit-true to the hardware being modeled.
Figure 7 presents the bit-error rate curves for a (7,4) Hamming code resulting from a stochastic decoder and an ideal belief-propagation decoder. The curves were produced for binary phase shift keying (BPSK) signaling on an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. Per codeword, the stochastic decoder was allowed to operate for 500 clock cycles while the ideal belief propagation decoder operated for 8 iterations. A loss of approximately 0.5dB for the stochastic decoder is observed.
5. Conclusions
We have presented a tutorial overview of a novel architecture for the iterative decoding of LDPC codes based on stochastic computational elements. Stochastic iterative decoding is an innovative approach to the problem of building decoders for powerful error control codes without making compromises between performance and complexity. By implementing the belief propagation algorithm with simple stochastic computational elements, it should be possible to achieve near-maximum likelihood error performance without compromising power consumption or die area. Furthermore, the short critical path of the decoder should make possible clock rates up to the GHz range, with correspondingly high data throughput.
Our simulation framework accelerates the exploration of code structures and decoder hardware architectures, leading to physical designs with the greatest possible optimization. Simulation results for smaller codes have demonstrated error correcting performance close to that of the ideal belief propagation algorithm.

Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the generous support of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), the Alberta Informatics Circle of Research Excellence (iCORE), Micronet R&D, and the University of Alberta Faculty of Engineering Startup Fund.
References
[1] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon Limit Error-Correcting Coding and Decoding: Turbo Codes,” IEEE International Conference on Communications, Geneva, pp. 1064-1070, May 1993.
[2] R.G. Gallager, “Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,” IRE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21-28, January 1962.
[3] ---, Interaction Channel for Satellite Distribution Systems, ETSI EN 301 790, V1.2.2, pp. 21-24, December 2000.
[4] C. Winstead, J. Dai, S. Little, C. Myers, C. Schlegel, Y.-B. Kim, and W.J. Kim, “Analog MAP Decoder for (8,4) Hamming Code in Subthreshold CMOS,” IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Washington, p. 330, June 2001.
[5] V.C. Gaudet and P.G. Gulak, “A 13.3 Mbps 0.35µm CMOS Analog Turbo Decoder IC with a Configurable Interleaver,” 2003 IEEE International Sold-State Circuits Conference Digest of Technical Papers, San Francisco, pp. 148-149, 484, February 2003.
[6] V.C. Gaudet and A.C. Rapley, “Iterative Decoding Using Stochastic Computation,” Electronics Letters, vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 299-301, February 2003.

[7] B.R. Gaines, “Stochastic Computing Systems,” Advances in Information Systems Science, J.F. Tou, ed., vol. 2, chapter 2, pp. 37-172, New York, Plenum, 1969.

[8] B.D. Brown and H.C. Card, “Stochastic Neural Computation I: Computational Elements,” IEEE Transactions on Computers, vol. 50, no. 9, pp. 891-905, September 2001.

[9] F.R. Kschischang, B.J. Frey, and H.A. Loeliger, “Factor Graphs and the Sum-Product Algorithm,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498-519, February 2001.

Fig. 7. Simulated BER curves for beliefpropagation and stochastic decoders for a (7,4)
Hamming code

[10] J. Pearl, “Evidential Reasoning Using Stochastic Simulation of Causal Models,” Artificial Intelligence, vol. 32, pp. 245-257, 1987.

1871 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:09:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

