6898

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 71, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023

Partial Spatial Coupling of LDPC Codes: Reducing the Gap to Capacity by Improving the Rate
Inayat Ali , Member, IEEE, and Jeongseok Ha , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— A different approach for constructing protographbased spatially coupled low-density parity-check (SC-LDPC) codes is proposed. Instead of lifting multiple copies of an identical SC-LDPC protograph at the lifting stage of code construction, we divide the copies into fractions α ∈ [0, 1] SC-LDPC protographs and β = 1 − α uncoupled sequence of block LDPC protographs. The permutations in the edge bundles formed by two different protograph structures follow the multi-edge-type framework. The rate loss associated with SC-LDPC codes is reduced, and we obtain code ensembles with flexible rates, by varying β. We call these codes partial spatially coupled (PSC) LDPC codes, and through density evolution, we show that for data transmission over the binary erasure channel, the gap between channel capacity and thresholds of these codes is smaller as compared to SC-LDPC codes. The main bottleneck in the practical implementation of SC-LDPC codes is the rate loss. Conventionally, the rate loss can be reduced by taking large coupling length L, which however increases the decoding complexity. The proposed PSC-LDPC codes mitigate this tradeoff. Furthermore, these codes can also be decoded by the windowed decoder (WD), and through Monte Carlo simulations, we show that the WD performance of PSC-LDPC codes is better than that of SC-LDPC codes.
Index Terms— Spatially coupled LDPC codes, protograph, rate loss reduction, gap to capacity, density evolution, windowed decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
THE sparse graph-based codes are considered as a bridge between near-capacity performance and practical system applicability. Recently in the fifth generation (5G) of mobile communication standards, a class of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes has been selected as a standard for the data channels of enhanced mobile broadband (eMBB) [1]. These codes are sparse graph-based codes and have gained a lot of interest due to various attractive attributes associated with them. Spatially coupled (SC) LDPC codes are another class of
Manuscript received 11 January 2023; revised 24 May 2023 and 3 August 2023; accepted 4 September 2023. Date of publication 14 September 2023; date of current version 19 December 2023. This research was supported by the Institute for Information & Communications Technology Promotion (IITP) grant funded by the Korean government (MSIT) (No. 2021-0-00809, Development of Tbps Optical Communication Technology), in part by the Korean government under IITP Grant 2022-0-00239, and in part by BK21 FOUR. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was E. Rosnes. (Corresponding author: Jeongseok Ha.)
The authors are with the School of Electrical Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon 305-701, South Korea (e-mail: inayat@kaist.ac.kr; jsha@kaist.edu).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at https://doi.org/10.1109/TCOMM.2023.3315311.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2023.3315311

LDPC codes with a convolutional structure and are constructed by coupling a sequence of block LDPC codes together [3], [4]. These codes are proven to achieve channel capacity universally with an iterative decoding algorithm known as the belief propagation (BP) decoder [5]. The property of universality in these codes guarantees that if a capacity-achieving SC-LDPC code is designed for any specific channel, it works equally well for all other channels. The BP decoding thresholds of these codes are optimal, in the sense that they are essentially equal to the maximum a posteriori (MAP) threshold of uncoupled block LDPC codes [6], [7]. This phenomenon of performance improvement of SC-LDPC codes to the optimal decoding threshold is known as ‘threshold saturation’. Another class of low-complexity capacity-achieving code is Polar codes [8], which have been adopted in 5G as a standard for the control channels of the eMBB [9]. Although these codes are proven to achieve the capacity of binary memoryless symmetric (BMS) channels, they are not universal [10].
The key ingredient associated with the excellent performance of SC-LDPC codes lies in the wave-like decoding convergence of error probability. The low-degree check nodes at the boundaries of the convolutional-like structure of SCLDPC codes help in triggering a wave-like convergence and propagation of decoding information to the middle of the graph [5], [7]. The successful decoding of information at the boundary sub-code blocks helps decode the bits at neighboring sub-code blocks, and this process continues until all sub-code blocks are decoded. These low-degree check nodes at the boundaries are the consequence of termination for obtaining a block code with a finite coupling length L ∈ Z+. Meanwhile, the termination incurs rate loss in the SC-LDPC codes due to the introduction of irregularity in the edge connections at the boundaries. Generally, the rate loss reduces as the coupling length L increases, and it vanishes as L → ∞ [4].
Although the capacity-achieving performance of the terminated SC-LDPC codes is appealing for practical realization, the requirement for a large L for mitigating the rate loss becomes a major hindrance in its application to practical systems. The BP decoding of the entire SC-LDPC chain is computationally unfitting for practical considerations since the decoding complexity/latency is very high. Hence, a windowed decoder (WD) was proposed in [12], in which the BP decoding is performed inside a small window covering a portion of the SC-LDPC graph. The size of the window is denoted by ‘W ’. When predetermined sub-code blocks are decoded, the windowed decoder slides down in the chain to perform decoding on the next sub-code blocks [13]. By this procedure,

0090-6778 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:59:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ALI AND HA: PARTIAL SPATIAL COUPLING OF LDPC CODES: REDUCING THE GAP TO CAPACITY

6899

the decoding of the entire SC-LDPC code chain breaks into multiple windowed decoding steps. In [14], it is shown that the WD threshold increases exponentially to the BP threshold, with the increase in the size of the window W . This means that for a long chain of SC-LDPC codes, the decoding is independent of coupling length L and the optimal decoding is possible by message-passing inside a window with constrained dimensions [12], [13], [14], [15], [16]. The performance of WD also varies with the choice of the ensemble and consequently, some ensembles require a smaller window size to achieve the BP threshold [12]. In [16], the tradeoff between WD performance and latency is improved by proposing an early WD termination technique, and refinements of the edge messages inside the window.
A. Main Contributions
In this paper, we propose a different type of protographbased SC-LDPC codes called partial spatially coupled LDPC codes. At the lifting stage of the code construction, we divide the lifted copies into fraction α coupled protographs, whereas, the remaining fraction β = 1 − α copies contain a sequence of L uncoupled or block LDPC protographs. These codes reduce the rate loss due to the finite coupling length L in the conventional terminated SC-LDPC codes. Moreover, we can obtain code ensembles with flexible rates that vary with α. The main contributions of this research are summarized as follows:
• A novel framework for designing a class of SC-LDPC codes with a flexible family of rates is proposed in this paper. These codes are named partial spatially coupled (PSC) LDPC codes since, at the lifting stage, only fraction α copies of protographs are coupled.
• The rate loss due to the termination in SC-LDPC codes is reduced by the proposed code construction method. We show that the rate of PSC-LDPC codes grows linearly and is continuous in β ∈ [0, 1]. Moreover, we derive the growth rate of this linear increase in the code rate associated with the PSC-LDPC codes of any arbitrary L.
• We define a protograph-based density evolution (DE) for general D-dimensional LDPC codes which follows a multi-edge-type setup at D lifting dimensions. Furthermore, we describe the DE for PSC-LDPC codes with 2-dimensional structured connectivity between the coupled and uncoupled protographs.
• The gap between the BP threshold of proposed PSCLDPC codes and the Shannon capacity decreases as the rate increases by increasing the fraction of uncoupled block LDPC codes (i.e., β) in the PSC-LDPC code.
• It will be shown that as L → ∞, the BP threshold converges in β ∈ [0, 1]. We observe that the BP threshold of some ensembles is higher than the MAP threshold of the underlying uncoupled block LDPC code at an optimal βopt. Additionally, we describe the mechanism that explains the improvement in the BP threshold of these ensembles.
• We also analyze these codes using the windowed decoder (WD). The results show that PSC-LDPC codes outperform the SC-LDPC codes in terms of bit erasure rate

(BER). Through simulations, it is shown that the WD performance of PSC-LDPC codes with a small window size W is very close to the performance of SC-LDPC codes decoded by the BP decoder.
B. Previous Works And Comparison With This Paper
In [12], it is shown that although the performance of SCLDPC codes over memoryless channels (e.g., on the BEC) is optimal, the performance over the channels with memory (e.g., on the Gilbert-Elliott channel) is bounded away from the optimal performance1.
To overcome this loss in performance, multi-dimensional (MD) SC-LDPC codes were introduced to improve the error correction performance over the burst erasure channels in [17]. MD-SC-LDPC codes are constructed by connecting/re-routing the edge connections between multiple individual SC-LDPC codes with different edge spreading patterns or code designs [18]. An MD-SC-LDPC ensemble design method is presented in [19] and [20], by connecting multiple different ensembles of SC-LDPC codes to improve the decoding thresholds. In [18], the finite-length performances of MD-SC-LDPC codes are improved by designing codes with fewer short cycles. A construction method of MD-SC-LDPC codes by folding and interlacing a single SC-LDPC code chain was proposed in [21]. Unlike the MD-SC-LDPC codes in [17] and [19], it is shown that these codes are resilient to channels with severe burst erasures while maintaining the code rate of the original ensemble. The design methods introduced in [17], [18], [19], [20], and [21] for designing MD-SC-LDPC codes mainly contributed to improving the performance of these codes. Recently, a new type of SC-LDPC codes are proposed in [22], which provides sub-code block locality for fast access to the coded information in storage devices. The protographs of SC-LDPCL codes (where L denotes locality) are designed to provide flexibility in accessing coded data at the sub-block level, i.e., these codes offer local decoding of sub-blocks in the SC-LDPC chain. Although the motivation for designing SC-LDPCL codes in [22] focuses on improving the local decoding thresholds by constructing protographs with certain check nodes only connected to variable nodes associated with the same time index, the PSC-LDPC codes provide a more subtle approach to designing SC-LDPC codes with a lifting method. In fact, PSC-LDPC codes can also be used for local decoding of a portion of the code which can help reduce the decoding latency.
In [23] and [24], the rate loss in SC-LDPC codes is reduced (to some extent) by introducing VNs with irregular degree distribution at the terminated side of the SC-LDPC chain. The finite-length performance degradation is observed for the VN degree distribution optimized with a simple constraint in [23]. Meanwhile, several design techniques are considered in [24] for defining the optimization constraints that minimize performance degradation. In both [23] and [24], the optimized degree distributions contain a fraction of VNs with a degree
1In erasure channels with memory, the codeword error rate (CER) is lower bounded by that of an (n, k) binary maximum distance separable (MDS) code satisfying the Singleton bound [12].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:59:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6900

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 71, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023

much larger than that of the underlying ensemble, therefore the complexity of decoding these VNs becomes higher. Moreover, during the optimization of the degree distribution of VNs, the target threshold is set at the MAP threshold of the underlying block LDPC code. One of the main contributions of this paper is to introduce a simple method for reducing the rate loss in SC-LDPC codes without increasing the decoding complexity. With a simple design, the PSC-LDPC codes provide better BP decoding thresholds, while reducing the rate loss. The PSC-LDPC codes can be viewed as a class of MD-SC-LDPC codes with dimensions segregated into lifting coupled and uncoupled protographs. In [25], a new class of SC-LDPC codes is proposed which are motivated by the block Markov superposition transmission scheme. The data is first encoded with multiple block LDPC codes at different time instants and then partially superimposed by selecting only a portion of coded bits in each codeword. In this approach, the generator matrices of the block LDPC codes are coupled, since the encoding sequence of these coded data is not disturbed before the partial superposition stage.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section II, an overview of block LDPC codes and SC-LDPC codes is provided. We also define the DE, which is a tool for finding the ensemble average performance and asymptotic analysis of these codes. The proposed PSC-LDPC codes are defined and described in Section III. A modified protograph-based DE for D-dimensional LDPC codes is also defined and derived for the asymptotic analysis of the proposed codes. In Section IV, the analysis results of BP decoding thresholds and the gap to capacity are presented. The BP decoding thresholds of the randomly punctured PSC-LDPC codes are also shown in this section. The BER simulation results of the finite-length codes are shown in Section V. Finally, we conclude the paper in Section VI.
II. PRELIMINARIES
In this section, we summarize and review the fundamental concepts related to block LDPC and SC-LDPC codes. Multiple block LDPC codes are coupled together to make an SCLDPC code, hence we first describe block LDPC codes before discussing the construction of SC-LDPC codes in the sequel. For the asymptotic analysis of these codes, we will describe the DE for protograph-based ensembles. This tool will be used in Section III to obtain the BP thresholds for the proposed PSCLDPC codes. Throughout the paper, we will mostly follow the terminologies and notations defined in [4].
A. (J, K) Block LDPC Codes
A binary (J, K) block LDPC code is characterized by a sparse parity-check matrix (PCM) H, in which the number of ones in each column (resp., row) is represented by J (resp., K) [2], [4]. An M × N matrix H contains a low density of ones that are sparsely positioned, i.e., J ≪ M , and K ≪ N (where, N is the block length of the code, M = N − K˜ is the rank of H and K˜ is the information

length)2. The (J, K) block LDPC codes are also called regular

LDPC codes since the column (resp., row) weight J (resp.,

K) is constant and regular. However, an irregular LDPC code

is represented by the degree distribution pair (λ(x), ρ(x)),

where λ(x) =

Jmax i=1

λixi−1

and

ρ(x)

=

Kmax i=1

ρixi−1

are

polynomials that define the distribution of the column and row

weights in the PCM, respectively, where Jmax (resp., Kmax)

is the largest VN (resp., CN) degree in the distribution [26].

The regular (J, K) block LDPC code is also defined by these

degree distributions as λ(x) = xJ−1 and ρ(x) = xK−1.

As mentioned in Section II, these codes are graph-based in

general and can be represented by a bipartite graph containing

N variable nodes (VNs), M check nodes (CNs), and N J =

M K edges that are used for connecting the VNs with the CNs.

Moreover, these edges have a one-to-one correspondence with

the locations of ones in the H. The construction of H is not

always necessarily full rank, so the code rate of a (J, K) block

LDPC code is given by R ≥ 1 − J/K, where inequality holds

if H is not a full rank matrix [31]. When determining the rate

of an ensemble of codes, it is suitable to determine the design

rate, by assuming that all CNs in the codes impose linearly

independent constraints [6].

B. Ensembles, Protograph and Density Evolution
1) Ensembles: According to the concentration theorem, ensemble average performance can predict the performance of a specific long LDPC code with a high probability [26]. An ensemble of an LDPC code is characterized by three main components: the block length, the degree distribution pair (λ(x), ρ(x)), and the design rate associated with the degree distribution. Each code from an ensemble contains N VNs and M CNs with fractions λi and ρi of degree i, respectively. The edges spread out from these nodes are connected through random permutations having a uniform distribution [32]. More precisely, a random edge interleaver χ will produce distinct codes from the ensemble under different edge permutations as shown in Fig. 1(a). In this paper, we use the DE for finding the asymptotic ensemble average performance (i.e., when N → ∞). We denote an irregular LDPC ensemble by E(λ, ρ) and subsequently, a regular (J, K) block LDPC ensemble by E(J, K).
2) Protograph: Another way of defining an LDPC ensemble by a simple bipartite graph is the protograph-based LDPC ensemble [11]. A protograph is a small typical or preliminary bipartite graph from which we can construct larger LDPC Tanner graphs by a procedure called copy-and-permute [12]. It is represented by an Mp × Np bi-adjacency matrix B, which is called the base matrix of the protograph. Thus, the design rate of a protograph is R = 1 − Mp/Np. The entries Bi,j in B represent the edges in the protograph. We follow three steps in the copy-and-permute procedure, firstly we take Z copies of a protograph (which is also known as the lifting of the protograph, and Z is referred to as the lifting
2We define density ξ as the fraction of entries in H which are 1s. To be more precise, ξ can be expressed as ξ = J/M = K/N . There is no exact detail available about how low ξ must be to characterize the H of LDPC codes. However, ξ ≤ 0.01 can be called low density [31].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:59:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ALI AND HA: PARTIAL SPATIAL COUPLING OF LDPC CODES: REDUCING THE GAP TO CAPACITY

6901

(denoted by πi,j). The base matrix of the protograph shown in Fig. 1(b) is given by

B=

1 1

1 0

1 2

,

(1)

The PCM H of a protograph-based LDPC code with the base matrix B defined in (1) is given by

H=

π1,1 π2,1

π1,2 0

π1,3 π2,3

.

(2)

Fig. 1. (a) The general LDPC ensemble E(λ, ρ), (b) Protograph ensemble Ep(B), and copy-and-permute procedure. (c) An example of H constructed from the copy-and-permute procedure with Z = 500 and B defined in (1).

The entry B2,2 = 0 is replaced by an all-zero Z × Z matrix and B2,3 = 2 is replaced by π2,3 = πˆ1 ⊕ πˆ2, where πˆ1 and πˆ2 are Z × Z permutation matrices, hence the resultant permutation matrix π2,3 is a Z ×Z weight 2 matrix. By lifting the base matrix with permutation matrices, we transform B into an M × N PCM H with M = ZMp and N = ZNp.
Example 1: For illustration, Fig. 1(c) shows a PCM obtained by applying the copy-and-permute procedure with Z = 500 and the base matrix B defined in (1). Dots in the PCM represent ones that are randomly placed according to the permutation matrices.
3) Density Evolution: We consider the transmission of LDPC encoded data over a BEC with an erasure rate ε. The asymptotic iterative decoding performance of an LDPC ensemble is specified by an erasure rate threshold ε∗. For any long LDPC code selected from an ensemble and decoded with the BP decoder, reliable communication is possible with a high probability at any channel erasure rate ε < ε∗. In general, the EXIT chart analysis and density evolution (DE) techniques are used to find the threshold ε∗ [31]. Consequently, the threshold ε∗ is used to find the degree distribution of capacity
approaching LDPC ensembles [27]. In this paper, we considered protograph-based DE for the asymptotic analysis.
For a general LDPC ensemble with degree distribution pair (λ(x), ρ(x)), the DE is numerically defined by the recursive equation

factor [4]), then we label and group the Z nodes and edges in the protographs to form bundles of distinct edges, VNs and CNs which follow the connectivity defined in the original protograph. Lastly, if a VN Vi is connected to a CN Cj by an edge Ek in a protograph, then to obtain a large LDPC Tanner graph, the edges within a bundle are randomly permuted among the Z replicas. We randomly connect VNs from the replica bundle of Vi to the CNs from the replica bundle of Cj by applying random permutation to the edge connectivity within the replica edge bundle of Ek. In this way, the larger LDPC Tanner graph preserves the structure of the original protograph. We denote the protograph-based LDPC ensemble by Ep(B). An example of a copy-and-permute procedure is presented in Fig. 1(b). A code from a general LDPC ensemble E(λ, ρ) and a protograph-based LDPC ensemble Ep(B) can be easily differentiated by arbitrary permutations of edges and permutations restricted within a bundle, respectively.
The copy-and-permute procedure in the base matrix of a protograph is equivalent to replacing the entries Bi,j = 0 by the all-zero Z × Z matrices and Bi,j = c (here, c ∈ Z+) by the summation of c Z × Z permutation matrices

p(l) = ελ 1 − ρ(1 − p(l−1)) ,

(3)

where p(l) is the probability that the message from VN-toCN is an erasure at iteration l. In the limit when N → ∞ and l → ∞, we define the erasure rate threshold ε∗ computed
from (3) as

ε∗ = sup{ε ∈ [0, 1] : p(l) −l−→−∞→ 0}.

(4)

As discussed earlier, the protograph-based LDPC codes are constructed by restricting the edge permutations in a bundle. In this way, a protograph-based ensemble preserves the structure of the original protograph. Therefore, the DE for protograph-based ensembles involves tracking the information exchange within the edges defined in the protograph [7]. Each edge in the protograph is labeled from the node perspective (i.e., VN and CN) [4]. We denote the ath edge emanating from VN vi by e[vi, a] and the bth edge emanating from CN cj by e[cj, b]. By definition, if the same edge in the protograph is specified by e[vi, a] and e[cj, b], then vi and cj are considered connected. At a CN, we can recover an erased VN only if all other VNs connected to the CN are unerased. Therefore, the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:59:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6902

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 71, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023

Fig. 2. (a) Illustration of a (3, 6, 4) SC-LDPC code constructed by edge spreading procedure applied to (3, 6) block LDPC protographs, (b) the H of an SC-LDPC code constructed by copy-and-permute procedure from EA(3, 6, 4) with Z = 500.

probability that the CN-to-VN message is an erasure at the lth iteration is given by

qe(l[)cj ,b] = 1 −

1 − p(el[−cj1,b)′] ,

(5)

b′ ̸=b

where p(el[−cj1,b)′] is the probability that the VN-to-CN message is an erasure from the previous BP decoding iteration (i.e., l − 1). Now at a VN, the VN-to-CN message is an erasure
only if all the incoming messages including the message from
the channel are erasures. Therefore, the probability that the
VN-to-CN message is an erasure is given by

pe(l[)vi,a] = ε

qe(l[)vi,a′].

(6)

a′≠ a

Similar to the definition in (4), the threshold ε∗ for a

protograph-based SC-LDPC ensemble is computed by finding the supremum of ε for which the probability p(el[)vi,a] −l−→−∞→ 0 for all edges e[vi, a] in the protograph.
Remark 1: We can observe that the protograph-based

LDPC ensembles are a special form of multi-edge-type

(MET) LDPC ensembles since every edge in the protograph

characterize the bundle of edges of the same type in the

corresponding PCM [31]. So, we use the analogy of MET to

simplify the definition of DE for D-dimensional protograph-

based codes in Section III.

C. Spatially Coupled LDPC Codes
1) Construction and Ensembles: A (J, K, L) SC-LDPC code is obtained by spatial coupling (i.e., interconnecting) a stream of L consecutive (J, K) block LDPC codes, resulting in a PCM with a convolutional structure [4], [16]. For a protograph-based construction, this transition from a block to a convolutional code is achieved by a procedure called edge spreading [4]. In this procedure, the edges emanating from the VNs of the block LDPC protographs are spread and connected with w CNs of neighboring protographs as shown in Fig. 2(a). The parameter w is called the coupling width.

TABLE I (J, K, L) SC-LDPC ENSEMBLES

We can use different edge spreading patterns for constructing SC-LDPC protographs with any arbitrary w. Lastly, the copyand-permute procedure is applied to the SC-LDPC protograph to get an NSC × MSC = (LNpZ) × ((L + w)MpZ) code (where, NP and MP are the numbers of VNs and CNs in the underlying block LDPC protograph, respectively).
In the base matrix of an SC-LDPC protograph ensemble, the edge spreading is described by the component base matrices Bi, i = 0, 1, . . . , w. We consider identical edge spreading of all L block LDPC protographs, and the corresponding base matrix of SC-LDPC protograph with component base matrices Bi has the form given as

 B0

   

B...1



BSC

=

 

Bw





B0 B...1 Bw

··· ... ... ...

0 ... 






 B0 


B1

 

  

...

...

...

  

. (7)

0 ···

Bw [(L+w)Mp×LNp]

In this paper, a protograph ensemble of an SC-LDPC code is denoted by E(J, K, L) and is specified by the component base matrices Bi’s. For asymptotic ensemble average analyses and evaluations, we specify some E(J, K, L) in Table I.
The subscripts A, B, and C in E(J, K, L) represent different edge spreading patterns. Although there are many different

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:59:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ALI AND HA: PARTIAL SPATIAL COUPLING OF LDPC CODES: REDUCING THE GAP TO CAPACITY

6903

ways of constructing SC-LDPC codes [4], we fix our analysis to protograph-based construction.
Example 2: In Fig. 2(a), an illustration of the construction of SC-LDPC codes from the protograph ensemble EA(3, 6, 4) is given, whereas, H of an SC-LDPC code constructed from the same ensemble and Z = 500 is shown in Fig. 2(b).
2) Rate: The edge spreading procedure introduces structural irregularity at both ends of the convolutional chain [4]. By spreading the edges, we have some overhanging edges emanating from VNs at the boundaries. To preserve the edge spreading structure, these edges are connected to w extra CNs, which incurs rate loss in the SC-LDPC codes. The rate of the (J, K, L) SC-LDPC code is given by

R(L, w) = NSC − MSC = LNp − (L + w)Mp

NSC

LNp

w

= R − (1 − R),

(8)

L

where the first term R is the design rate of the underlying

block LDPC protograph, and the second term describes the

rate loss in the SC-LDPC codes. To reduce the effect of the

rate loss, L is taken large so that the magnitude of the second

term is minimized. Moreover, the effect of the second term

vanishes

at

a

speed

of

1/L

[5].

Note

that

limL→∞

w L

=

0,

so the design rate of the SC-LDPC codes is

The proof of this Lemma is given in Appendix A. As the erasure fraction at the VNs connected to low-degree CNs goes to zero in SC-LDPC codes, we can remove these VNs with the associated CNs by considering the peeling decoder [32]. Now, from the peeling decoder perspective, it is left with the same graph that is shifted and with irregular distribution of CNs at termination. Some observations from the Lemma 1 and the peeling decoder are stated as follows:
(1) The rate of Ea(J, K) is always higher than the rate of Eb(J, ρ(x)), i.e., Ra > Rb [32]. For SC-LDPC codes, the rate loss is associated with the irregularity of CNs at the termination.
(2) The local threshold ε∗l is always equal to the threshold ε∗ of the SC-LDPC code considering a peeling decoder that removes the constituent sub-codes as they are decoded.
III. PARTIAL SPATIALLY COUPLED LDPC CODES
The proposed PSC-LDPC codes are introduced in this section. We begin with the code construction details of the PSC-LDPC codes and then derive the design rate formula for these codes. Since the design rate increases linearly with fraction β, we derive the growth rate of this linear relationship. Lastly, we derive the protograph-based D-dimensional DE for the asymptotic analysis of our proposed codes.

lim R(L, w) = R,

(9)

L→∞

However, this is not a desirable property for the practical

applicability of these codes. The decoding complexity and

latency play a major role in the adoption of any coding scheme

in actual systems or standards [9].

Furthermore, we can note that the design rate of an

SC-LDPC ensemble is a function of L and w, which means

that any SC-LDPC ensembles having the same R, L, and w

will have the same rate. For example, ensemble EC(3, 6, L) and E(4, 8, L) have the same w (i.e., w = 3), and the

underlying block LDPC codes also have the same R (i.e.,

R = 1/2); therefore, these two ensembles will have the same

design rate for same L.

3) Decoding Performance: The SC-LDPC codes are known

for their excellent decoding performance together with a sim-

ple localized chain-like code structure. The DE threshold of an

E(J, K, L) SC-LDPC ensemble is equal to the optimal MAP

threshold of the underlying E(J, K) block LDPC ensemble,

and this phenomenon is called threshold saturation in [6].

During the decoding, the probability of erasure/error evolves

in a wave-like manner as the iterations proceed. To understand

the general mechanism which initiates the decoding wave, let

us consider that the constituent sub-codes at the terminated

sides of the SC-LDPC chain are VN-regular LDPC codes, and

these constituent sub-codes have a local decoding threshold ε∗l . Through Lemma 1, we show that even a slight irregularity in the CNs degree distribution increases the threshold of the

VN-regular LDPC codes.

Lemma 1: For Ea(J, K) and Eb(J, ρ(x)), where ρ(x) =

Kmax i=1

ρixi−1,

let

K

=

Kmax

and

0

<

ρKmax

<

1.

Then

the threshold of ensemble Eb(J, ρ(x)) is always greater than

Ea(J, K), i.e., εb∗ > ε∗a.

A. Construction of PSC-LDPC Codes
A (J, K, L, β) PSC-LDPC code is constructed by copying fraction α SC-LDPC protographs and β = 1 − α uncoupled sequence of block LDPC protographs and then applying permutations to the edge bundles using the MET framework. These codes are a class of MD-SC-LDPC codes in which the dimensions are defined by the lifting of different protograph ensembles. We call these codes partial spatially coupled (PSC) LDPC codes since at the copying stage of the code construction, we take only α × Z copies of the SC-LDPC protograph. In the MD framework, many different ensembles or lifting dimensions can be considered. However, we present a simple yet very effective and practical method of constructing MD-SC-LDPC codes.
The construction procedure of (3, 6, 4, β) PSC-LDPC code is visualized in Fig. 3(a), where the spatial positions are indexed by time t ∈ Z0+, and each edge bundle is characterized as an edge type at every t ∈ [0, L − 1]. We denote Dz as the lifting dimension of the z different protographs ensemble. In the case of the PSC-LDPC codes, we denote the SC-LDPC protograph lifting as D1 and the sequence of block LDPC protographs lifting as D2. In this paper, we build the SC-LDPC protograph using the edge spreading of the block LDPC protographs. Then, we create α copies of the SC-LDPC protograph and β copies of the block LDPC protographs. Afterward, the permutations within the edge type groups are performed based on the time index ‘t’ and the edge type (i.e., if an edge is spread along the SC-LDPC protograph, it can still be permuted with the original edge in the block LDPC protograph).
Nonetheless, it is possible to use different SC-LDPC and block LDPC protographs as a design criterion as mentioned

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:59:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6904

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 71, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023

Fig. 3. (a) Construction of a (3, 6, 4, β) PSC-LDPC code with α × Z copies of SC-LDPC protographs and β × Z copies of block LDPC protographs. The permutation is applied within the edge bundles having the same edge type and time index t. Edge types are specified with different colors at each t, (b) the H of a PSC-LDPC code with α = 0.7, and Z = 500.

earlier. We formulate some parameters to simplify the assigning of different edge types at each spatial position t, which also helps in generalizing the design space by using different structures at different lifting dimensions. Let rLz = [r0z, . . . , rLz −1] denote the number of edge types at spatial positions t ∈ [0, L − 1] and the zth lifting dimension. In addition, let Γtz = [1, . . . , rtz] denote the edge types at t and the zth lifting dimension.
In Fig. 3(a), we have r14 = r24 = [6, 6, 6, 6] and Γ1t = Γt2 = [1, 2, . . . , 6] at each t. Different colors are used for identifying edge types at different spatial positions in Fig. 3(a). The permutation is only restricted to the same edge type bundles in D1 and D2. For example, there are two blue edge bundles at t = 0, one is connected to the VN bundle in D1 and the other is connected to the VN bundle in D2. The random edge permutation is applied to the ⌊α × Z⌋ + ⌈β × Z⌉ edges from the same edge type bundles. Although there are many different ways of designing PSC-LDPC codes by using different permutation structures, we are interested in showing the asymptotic properties of these codes. Throughout the paper,
we use the progressive edge-growth (PEG) algorithm [30], [31] for constructing finite-length codes including the PCMs in Figs. 1(c), 2(b), and 3(b).
Example 3: The PCM of a PSC-LDPC code with α = 0.7 is shown in Fig. 3(b). The code is constructed by keeping the overall lifting factor Z = 500. For α = 1, we know that the constructed code will be an SC-LDPC code as shown in Fig. 2(b) and the number of rows in the PCM is equal to 3000. When α = 0.7 the number of rows in the PCM decreases to 2700.
By decreasing the α, we remove the copies of SC-LDPC protographs from D1 and consequently add block LDPC protographs in D2. As a consequence, the extra rows due to structural irregularity (i.e., due to the edge spreading) in the SC-LDPC codes are decreased. The PSC-LDPC codes

can also be constructed using different construction methods (e.g., syndrome former matrices-based construction). However, we used protograph-based construction in this paper because we want to show a general outlook on the ensemble design and use density evolution for analyzing these ensembles. We also provided a general extension of PSC-LDPC codes to D-dimensional SC-LDPC codes, which is only possible by realizing the protograph-based design and analysis.
In Fig. 4, we present an example for illustrating the stepby-step construction method of PSC-LDPC codes. The PSCLDPC protograph lifting procedure with Z = 6 and β = 0.5 is shown and permutation is applied in the permutation matrices according to the edge types.
Remark 2: Throughout the paper, we use the PEG algorithm with a little modification, to construct the PSCLDPC codes. The code shown in Fig. 3(b) is also constructed from the PEG algorithm. In the original PEG, the addition of the edges in the Tanner graph is done node by node. However, this is not possible in PSC-LDPC codes since the low-degree CNs in D1 will always be incident to the edges connected to the VNs revealed at the early stage of the algorithm. To resolve this problem, we add edges to the graph edge index by edge index. That is, we first sequentially add the first edge of all the nodes and then repeat it for all other edges.
B. Design Rate Analysis of PSC-LDPC Codes
Similar to (8), the design rate R(L, w, β) of the PSC-LDPC ensemble can be derived. In the PSC-LDPC codes, the number of VNs in the final Tanner graph is the addition of the fraction of VNs in D1 and D2, which is αNSC + βNB. Similarly, the number of CNs in the final Tanner graph is αMSC + βMB. Moreover, we know that NSC = NB and α + β = 1, so we have
R(L, w, β) = (αNSC + βNB) − (αMSC + βMB) (αNSC + βNB)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:59:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ALI AND HA: PARTIAL SPATIAL COUPLING OF LDPC CODES: REDUCING THE GAP TO CAPACITY

6905

Fig. 4. Step-by-step illustration of the construction of a (3, 6, 3, 0.5) PSC-LDPC code by copy-and-permute procedure with Z = 6. Entries with 1s in the matrices are colored according to the edge type shown in the protograph.

Fig. 5. (a) Design rate R(L, w, β) of EA(3, 6, L, β) PSC-LDPC ensembles plotted for β ∈ [0, 1], (b) Growth rate λ of the PSC-LDPC ensembles plotted for different values of L.

= LNp − α(L + w)Mp − βLMp LNp
w = R − (1 − R)(1 − β).
L

The second term in the design rate of the SC-LDPC ensemble in (8) is multiplied by a linear factor α = 1 − β. (10) The rate loss associated with the second term in (10) can

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:59:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6906

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 71, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023

be now adjusted by this linear factor. For every value of L, we can vary (1−β) to get ensembles of varying rates. Fig. 5(a) describes the relationship between the design rate R(L, w, β) and β for EA(3, 6, L, β) ensembles with different L. Note that the design rate of the PSC-LDPC codes increases linearly with β. However, as L becomes larger, the slope of the linear curve gradually decreases. We call this slope the growth rate of R(L, w, β) and denote it by λ. To derive the growth rate λ, we write R(L, w, β) in the slope-intercept form, which is given by

w

R − L (1 − R)(1 − β) = λβ + R(L, w),

(11)

With the help of simple arithmetic, λ is derived as

w

λ

=

(1 L

−

R)

=

R − R(L, w).

(12)

The relationship between the growth rate λ and L for

ensembles with different w is shown in Fig. 5(b). The λ is

highest for the smaller L, which is a key desirable property

of these codes. The SC-LDPC codes with small L have a

very high rate loss and PSC-LDPC codes reduce it with this

property. In Fig. 5(b), note that as L → ∞, the design rate of

PSC-LDPC codes approaches the rate of block LDPC codes

(i.e., R(L, w, β) = R), which is also the consequence of the

fact

that

limL→∞

λ

=

limL→∞

w L

(1−R)

=

0.

For

PSC-LDPC

codes, the growth rate λ is higher for the larger w. The point

of interest here is that the EB(3, 6, L) ensemble already has

less rate loss, and it can be further improved by varying the

β > 0.

C. Density Evolution Analysis of PSC-LDPC Codes

Now, we will describe the DE of protograph-based D-dimensional LDPC codes, which will be used for the
ensemble average analysis of PSC-LDPC codes in the next section. The lifting fraction is denoted by Ωz, and it follows that z Ωz = 1, where z is the index of the lifting dimensions. We start our discussion with the DE equation of (λ(x), ρ(x))
LDPC ensemble in (3) to describe the relationship between the edge distribution pair (λ, ρ) and the lifting fraction Ωz. We denote the average probability of the CN-to-VN message at the lth iteration as q(l) and rewrite it as

q(l) = 1 − ρi(1 − p(l−1))i−1,

(13)

i

where summation i ρi(·)i−1 describes the averaging of the messages from the CNs with different edge degree distributions. In Fig. 1(a), we can see that edges emanating from CNs or VNs with different degrees are permuted together without any constraint on connections, and this permutation

generally defines the ensemble. Recall that the averaging of the messages in the protograph-based DE is constrained by the structure imposed by the protograph through edge connections. Whereas, D-dimensional protograph-based LDPC codes can be viewed as multiple protographs with different connections that share the permutation between the same edge types defined by the lifting fraction Ωz. We can view these codes as the structured version of the irregular LDPC codes. In the DE of these codes, the averaging is applied over the messages

of the same edge types. Therefore, for D-dimensional LDPC
codes the average probability that the CN-to-VN message is an erasure at the lth iteration is given by

qe(l[)cm j ,Γm] = 1 −

Ωz

1

−

p(l−1)
e[czj ,Γz′

]

,

z

Γz′ ̸=Γz

(14)

where z Ωz(·) describes the averaging of the messages of the same edge type in all Dz. Now, the probability that the VN-to-CN message is an erasure at the lth iteration is given by

pe(l[)vin,Γn] = ε

Ωz

q(l)
e[viz ,Γz′ ]

.

z

Γz′ ≠ Γz

(15)

It is important to mention that the DE follows a parallel

schedule for finding the messages of the same edge type.

The probabilities computed in (14) and (15) are passed in the

protograph iteratively, and the threshold ε∗ is the supremum of

the for

aclhlaendngeelseera[vsizu,reΓzra]tienεthfeorpwrohtoicghrapp(ehl[)vsizi,ΓnzD] czodnivmeergnessiotnoszaenrdo

is defined as

ε∗ = sup{ε ∈ [0, 1] : pe(l[)viz,Γz] −l−→−∞→ 0, ∀ viz, Γz}. (16)

In the DE of the D-dimensional protograph-based LDPC ensembles, the messages are edge type-dependent and they are averaged over the same edge types in all dimensions. PSC-LDPC codes have two lifting dimensions D1 and D2, so Ω1 = α and Ω2 = β. However, the DE defined above for Ddimensional LDPC codes can be used for the selection, design, and optimization of different structures in MD-LDPC codes. Note that if z = 1 (so that, Ω1 = 1.0), then the DE is equal to the one for general protograph-based LDPC ensembles.

IV. DECODING THRESHOLDS AND GAP TO CAPACITY ANALYSIS
A. BP Decoding Thresholds of PSC-LDPC Codes
The DE analysis of SC-LDPC codes shows that the BP thresholds of ensembles with sufficiently large L converge to a constant value that is equal to the MAP threshold of the underlying block LDPC codes [4]. Although the BP thresholds of ensembles with small L are much higher, the rate of these ensembles is very low which makes them infeasible for implementation. Our main motivation for proposing the PSC-LDPC codes is to make the SC-LDPC ensembles with small L suitable for practical consideration. In Fig. 6, the BP decoding thresholds ε∗ are plotted for different values of β ∈ [0, 1] for EA(3, 6, L, β) ensembles with different L. We can note that for small values of L, the threshold ε∗ decreases monotonically with decreasing β. However, when L is sufficiently large, ε∗ does not decrease monotonically. Note that as L → ∞, ε∗ starts from the MAP threshold of block LDPC codes (i.e., 0.4881 for EA(3, 6, L)), and then it increases with β until it reaches some optimal value denoted by βopt (i.e., ε = 0.492 at βopt = 0.545). The threshold starts to decay by further increasing the β > βopt until it is equal to the BP decoding threshold of the (3, 6) block LDPC ensemble (i.e., 0.4294 at β = 1.0). Furthermore, we observe that as L → ∞, the thresholds converge with β in the range [0, 1], which is highlighted in Fig. 6 by a thick red line. The

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:59:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ALI AND HA: PARTIAL SPATIAL COUPLING OF LDPC CODES: REDUCING THE GAP TO CAPACITY

6907

Fig. 6. BEC BP decoder thresholds ε∗ of EA(3, 6, L, β) PSC-LDPC ensembles plotted for β ∈ [0, 1].
following theorem state the decoding threshold characteristic of the proposed PSC-LDPC codes.
Theorem 1: When L → ∞, and for β ∈ [0, 1], let ε∗PSC(β) and εS∗C denote the BP decoding thresholds of PSCLDPC and SC-LDPC ensembles, respectively. Then, we have εP∗ SC(βopt) ≥ ε∗SC, where the value of βopt ∈ [0, 1) depends on the termination sequence of the SC-LDPC code and the degree pair (J, K) of block LDPC codes.
Proof: During the code construction, we divide the VNs into two sets, i.e., the set containing VNs of lifted SC-LDPC and block LDPC protographs denoted by VSC = {vS1 C , vS2 C , . . . , vSαC×Z } and Vblk = {vb1lk, vb2lk, . . . , vbβl×k Z }, respectively. Whereas, the CNs are pooled into a single large set (i.e., the CNs in the block and SC-LDPC protographs are included in a single set). Assume that during the permutation of edges, VSC and Vblk are isolated. The operational meaning of this is that the VNs in each set does not have the knowledge about which CN type it is going to connect with during permutation. We consider two observers that are in isolation from each other and are observing the degree distribution of CNs from the VSC and Vblk perspectives, respectively.
Case 1 (Degree Distribution of CNs from Vblk perspective): For any α > 0, the VNs will observe connections with lower degree CNs (i.e., the CNs from SC-LDPC protographs). From VNs perspective, the CNs have an irregular degree distribution with the largest degree being K. Now from Lemma 1, we know that as α increases the internal messages at block LDPC sections will get better.
Before going into the case of VNs in the VSC , we state the property of SC-LDPC codes about maintaining the optimal thresholds even with the introduction of higher degree CNs at the termination, the proof is provided in Appendix B.
Proposition 1: For a circular SC-LDPC ensemble [28] with L → ∞, we can achieve threshold ε∗ = εMAP by shortening VNs inside a window of size T ≥ w +1, and with a shortening fraction κ, such that κ ≤ κ′ < 1 and κ′ ∈ [0, 1).
Case 2 (Degree Distribution of CNs from VSC perspective): For any β > 0, the VNs will observe connections with higher degree CNs (i.e., the CNs from block LDPC protographs).

From Proposition 1, we already know that until some fraction β′, the threshold of the SC-LDPC ensemble can be

maintained.

□

Generally, a circular SC-LDPC ensemble considered in

Preposition 1 has no termination. This means that the degree of

CNs at all spatial positions is the same as that of a block LDPC

code. Now, if we choose κ = 1 inside the shortening window

(i.e., κ = 1 means all VNs are shortened), we know from Preposition 1 that we can achieve a threshold ε∗ = εMAP .

If we consider a peeling decoder, the shortening of a VN

means removing it with the associated edges from the tanner

graph. Therefore, in the residual graph, the fraction (1 − κ)

VNs (which are not removed/shortened) will make the fraction

of CNs in the shortening window have a higher edge degree

than that of fully terminated SC-LDPC codes. Now, if we

compare this with the statement in case 2, the observer will

observe that fraction β CNs have a higher edge degree. The

proof of this theorem provides an insight into the mechanism

which improves the decoding thresholds of these codes.

In Fig. 7(a), we consider PSC-LDPC ensembles with dif-

ferent edge spreading. As compared to EA(3, 6, 100, β), the
ensemble EC(3, 6, 100, β) has a higher BP decoding threshold at a higher value of βopt (i.e., ε∗ = 0.4945 at βopt = 0.65).
It is desirable to have a high βopt, which will ensure an

increasing design rate in conjunction with the improvement in

BP decoding thresholds. In the case of PSC-LDPC ensemble

E(4, 8, 100, β), we can note that the BP decoding thresholds

do not decay monotonically. However, the highest threshold

is at β = 0. We can optimize the edge spreading to design

PSC-LDPC ensembles with high BP decoding thresholds, non-

monotonic decay in thresholds over β, and a high value of

βopt. To extend the range of the achievable design rates, we can partially couple lower or higher rate block LDPC

codes similar to SC-LDPC codes [4]. In Fig. 7(b), we show

the BP decoding thresholds for E(3, 9, L, β) and E(3, 12, L, β)

ensembles. The BP decoding thresholds are plotted for the

range of design rate achieved by these ensembles. Note that the

BP thresholds and design rates of the ensembles E(3, 9, L, β)

and E(3, 12, L, β) show a similar behavior to the results in

Fig. 5(a), 6, and 7(a).

B. Gap to Capacity Analysis of PSC-LDPC Codes
Now, we analyze the gap between the BP decoding threshold and the channel capacity, in the sequel we call it the gap to capacity. As we already noted in Section IV-A that the design rate of the PSC-LDPC codes linearly increases with β ∈ [0, 1] and the threshold decay is not monotonic or sharp for the perfectly designed ensembles. In Fig. 8(a), the gap to capacity is plotted for different values of β for the PSC-LDPC ensemble EA(3, 6, L, β). For a small value of L, it is worth noting that the gap to capacity for SC-LDPC ensemble EA(3, 6, L) is larger than the gap to the capacity of the underlying block LDPC codes. Furthermore, the gap to capacity passes the thick black vertical dashed line (which represents the gap to the capacity of the underlying block LDPC ensemble) when L > 17. However, as the value of β is gradually decreased, we can observe improvement in the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:59:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6908

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 71, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023

Fig. 7. (a) BEC BP decoder thresholds ε∗ of different PSC-LDPC ensembles with L = 100 plotted for β ∈ [0, 1], (b) Rate vs. ε∗ for E(3, 9, L, β) and E(3, 12, L, β) PSC-LDPC ensembles with L = 5 to 20 plotted for β = 0 and β = 0.4.

Fig. 8. (a) Gap to capacity values plotted for comparison with β ∈ [0, 1] for EA(3, 6, L, β) PSC-LDPC ensembles, (b) Gap to capacity values plotted for comparison with different coupling length L for EA(3, 6, L, β) ensembles.

gap to capacity and even pass the dashed line representing the gap to the capacity of the underlying block LDPC ensemble.
From these results, we observe that the SC-LDPC ensembles have the worst gap to capacity for small L, even though the thresholds of these ensembles are very high. While the rate deficiency is the main reason for this worst gap to capacity, the partial spatial coupling strategy can be utilized to increase the rate by reducing the impact of the structural irregularity at the two ends of the SC-LDPC chain. For L ≥ 17, the gap to capacity curve is concave-like continuous over β for the EA(3, 6, L, β) PSC-LDPC ensembles. Again, there is a βopt value at which the gap to capacity is minimized for an ensemble with a specific L. Similar to the observation in the analysis of ε∗, the gap to capacity converges as L → ∞ (highlighted by the thick red line in Fig. 8(a)). The comparison

between the gap to capacity and coupling length L of the EA(3, 6, L, β) PSC-LDPC ensembles are shown in Fig. 8(b), where each curve is plotted for a different value of β. The thick red line in Fig. 8(b) is the gap to the capacity of the underlying block LDPC ensemble E(3, 6) (i.e., gap to the capacity = 0.07056 at β = 1.0). Even by slightly decreasing β, we can see that the gap to the capacity decreases significantly and is a constant with increasing L. For example, the gap to the capacity decreases from 0.07056 to 0.04074 by decreasing β from 1.0 to 0.8, whereas the design rate is R(20, 2, 0.8) = 0.49 for L = 20. Furthermore, we can observe that almost all curves pass the gap to the capacity of the underlying E(3, 6) block LDPC ensemble. As L increases, we observe that the gap to capacity reduces and converges to a constant value. Similar observations are made for different PSC-LDPC

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:59:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ALI AND HA: PARTIAL SPATIAL COUPLING OF LDPC CODES: REDUCING THE GAP TO CAPACITY

6909

Fig. 9. BEC BP decoder thresholds ε∗ of the randomly punctured EA(3, 6, L, β) PSC-LDPC ensembles for (a) L = 10, and (b) L = 20 plotted with different puncturing fractions γ.
TABLE II BP DECODER THRESHOLDS AND GAP TO CAPACITY AT R(γ) = 0.5 FOR EA(3, 6, L, β) PSC-LDPC ENSEMBLES

ensembles constructed from different edge spreading designs. Previously, the SC-LDPC codes provided a degree of freedom in selecting L for getting a family of codes with varying rates. However, the partial spatial coupling strategy adds an extra dimension in obtaining codes with varying rates for a specific value of L.

C. Randomly Punctured PSC-LDPC Codes

Puncture is one of the well-known code-modifying tech-

niques used to increase the code rate. It allows a coding

scheme to adapt to the time-varying channel conditions, which

is also known as rate compatibility [29]. To analyze the rate

compatibility of the proposed PSC-LDPC codes, we consider

that the entire codeword is randomly and uniformly punctured.

We compute the BP decoder thresholds of the randomly punc-

tured PSC-LDPC ensembles by using the technique defined

in [29]. Let p be the number of bits punctured from the

codeword, then γ = p/N is the puncturing fraction (where

γ ∈ [0, 1)). The design rate of the PSC-LDPC ensemble

after puncturing with puncturing fraction γ is determined as

R(γ)

=

R(L,w,β) 1−γ

.

In Fig. 9, we compare the rate R(γ) of the randomly punctured EA(3, 6, L, β) PSC-LDPC ensembles with the BP decoding thresholds for (a) L = 10, and (b) L = 20. After puncturing, we observe improvements in BP decoding thresholds of the PSC-LDPC codes for different values of β. Whereas, the BP decoding thresholds of a general SC-LDPC ensemble EA(3, 6, 10) (i.e., with β = 0 in Fig. 9(a)) at R(γ) = 0.5 is lower than the threshold of the underlying block LDPC code. In [29], it is shown that the coupling length L of SC-LDPC codes must be sufficiently large in order to get thresholds higher than that of the underlying block LDPC code. On the other hand, the BP decoding thresholds of the PSC-LDPC ensembles get better than the threshold of the underlying block LDPC ensemble for different values of β. For a more in-depth outlook and analysis of randomly punctured PSC-LDPC ensembles with L = 10, 20, 30, and 50, the BP decoding thresholds and gap to capacity at R(γ) = 0.5 (i.e., the rate of underlying block LDPC code) are shown in Table II. The largest BP decoding thresholds (correspondingly smallest gap to capacity) at β ∈ [0, 1] are highlighted in red. We observe that for L = 50 and β = 0.5, the BP threshold of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:59:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6910

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 71, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023

Fig. 10. (a) BER simulation results of BP plotted for different values of β for codes from EA(3, 6, 16, β) and EC (3, 6, 16, β), (b) Fractional gap to capacity calculated by ε∗ and ε10−4 found through DE and finite-length simulations, respectively.

the PSC-LDPC ensemble is very close to the Shannon channel capacity.
V. FINITE-LENGTH CODES SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, we examine the performance of the PSC-LDPC codes over BEC by computer-based Monte Carlo simulations. To observe the finite-length decoding performances of the PSC-LDPC codes, we consider PCMs constructed for different values of β from EA(3, 6, 16, β), and E(4, 8, 20, β) ensembles. The codes are constructed by the PEG algorithm [30] with a slight modification to incorporate the MET structure of the PSC-LDPC codes (see Remark 2 for detail). Using the PEG algorithm, we construct unstructured codes by randomly selecting edges from the set of edges in the same bundle type for the connectivity between CNs and VNs. For codes from ensembles EA(3, 6, 16, β) and EC (3, 6, 16, β), we considered lifting factor Z = 3000, so that the block length of the codes is N = 96000. Similarly, for codes from ensemble E(4, 8, 20, β), we consider Z = 2000 and the corresponding block length is N = 80000. During the code construction, the minimum length of the cycle (i.e., girth) is fixed as 8. The maximum number of iterations of the BP and WD is fixed as 200 and 100, respectively.
Fig. 10(a) shows the bit error rate (BER) results of the BP decoding of PSC-LDPC codes from ensemble EA(3, 6, 16, β) and EC(3, 6, 16, β). When β = 1, the code consists of a sequence of (3, 6) block LDPC codes, and we observe that the performance curve for it is equal to that of a single (3, 6) block LDPC code. As we gradually decrease the value of β, the BER improves with it as predicted from the DE thresholds in Fig. 6. We can also observe that the codes from EC(3, 6, 16, β) have better BER performance than the codes from EA(3, 6, 16, β). However, we can observe that the best performance for the codes from both ensembles is at β = 0. The thresholds calculated from DE assume infinite code length and BP iterations [32], whereas, for the BER results in

Fig. 10(a) we fixed the lifting factor Z = 3000, and the maximum number of iterations to 200. During the simulations, we observed no error floor in the BER performances of all the simulated codes3. This suggests that these codes are also asymptotically good in terms of the minimum distance, and further investigation for the minimum distance property is our future research direction.
We investigate the performance of PSC-LDPC codes in terms of the fractional gap to capacity in Fig. 10(b). For performance comparison between the asymptotic thresholds and the BER calculated from finite-length simulations, the fractional gap to capacity is calculated from the DE thresholds and the simulated results, respectively. The required ε for achieving BER of 10−4 is used for the calculation of the simulated fractional gap to capacity. The fractional gap to capacity is calculated as

εsh − Q Q = ε∗, for asymptotic behavior

εsh

Q = ε10−4 , for finite-length behavior (17)

we can note that the fractional gap to capacity curves of the finite-length codes are consistent with the curve derived from the DE thresholds. The finite-length performance of LDPC codes in general is dependent on the size and the number of cycles in the Tanner graph [18], [32]. Therefore, it is obvious to note that the DE and the simulated performance curves have a gap. Nevertheless, the behavior of the simulated curve matches well with asymptotic results. In Fig. 10(b), the fractional gap to capacity is lowest at βopt for all ensembles.
Lastly, the BER simulation results of the sliding window decoder and the comparison with practical 5G NR LDPC codes over additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel are shown in Fig. 11. The WD curves in Fig. 11(a) are simulated for window size W = 5. It is very interesting to observe that the WD performance of PSC-LDPC codes outperforms

3For finding the BER performance curves, Monte-Carlo simulations are run for the error rates down to 10−8.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:59:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ALI AND HA: PARTIAL SPATIAL COUPLING OF LDPC CODES: REDUCING THE GAP TO CAPACITY

6911

Fig. 11. (a) BER simulation results of WD plotted for different values of β for a code from EA(3, 6, 16, β) ensemble (window size W = 5), (b) BER performance comparison of the PSC-LDPC code from EB(3, 6, 6, 0.5) with 5G NR LDPC code.

the BER performance of the SC-LDPC codes, and similar observations are observed when W = 3, 4, and 6 (We did not include it to save space). At β = 0.4 and 0.5, the BER curves are very close to the BER curve of SC-LDPC code decoded with the full BP decoder. To show the practical relevance of PSC-LDPC codes with relatively small L, we compare the BER performance of PSC-LDPC codes with a rate 1/2 5G new radio (NR) LDPC code constructed from the base-graph (BG2) defined in 3GPP standard [1]. The codeword length for the 5G NR LDPC code is set as N = 1920 bits. For the PSC-LDPC codes, we construct codes from ensemble EB(3, 6, 6, 0.5). A more robust protograph design can be considered, but we use this simple protograph design to keep our analysis simple and to show that our proposed PSC-LDPC codes perform well even with a simple design. To bring the code rate at par with the code rate of the 5G NR LDPC code, we apply puncturing over the protograph (i.e., when a protograph VN is punctured, then all the nodes associated with this punctured VN in the lifted graph are also punctured.)
In Fig. 11(b), we note that the SC-LDPC code has poor BER performance as compared to the 5G NR LDPC code. When we puncture 1 VN at the terminated side of the SC-LDPC protograph, we observe some improvement in BER. However, the rate of the SC-LDPC code is 0.4545 even with puncturing. If we puncture more VNs in the SC-LDPC codes, we observed performance degradation. In the case of puncturing 2 VNs in the PSC-LDPC protograph, we observe that the rate is equal to that of the 5G NR LDPC code (i.e., R = 0.5) and we do not observe any drastic BER degradation. At an error rate of 10−6, we observe a 0.34 dB performance gain from the PSCLDPC code compared to the 5G NR LDPC code. For the sake of simplicity, we only compared the results for the PSC-LDPC code with β = 0.5. The performance can be improved further by optimizing the puncturing pattern and the selection of the optimal β value.

VI. CONCLUSION
We proposed a protograph-based design method for constructing MD-SC-LDPC codes called partial spatially coupled (PSC) LDPC codes. At the lifting stage of the code construction, only the fraction α protographs are copied versions of the coupled LDPC protograph, whereas, the other fraction β = 1 − α protographs are from a sequence of uncoupled block LDPC protographs. MET framework is used for the permutations between the resulting edge bundles. We analyzed the design rate of these codes and showed that the rate grows linearly with the parameter β ∈ [0, 1]. Consequently, a family of PSC-LDPC ensembles is obtained with flexible rates. Instead of increasing L (in the case of the SC-LDPC codes), we can increase the rate of the code ensemble by increasing β in the range [0, 1]. Then, we analyzed the ensemble average performance of these codes using the protograph-based DE defined for the D-dimensional LDPC codes. The analysis results show that the gap to capacity for the PSC-LDPC codes reduces with the increasing design rate. SC-LDPC codes with small L have a larger gap to capacity than the underlying block LDPC codes due to high rate loss, however, this shortcoming can be improved by the proposed PSC-LDPC codes. We also show that by randomly puncturing PSC-LDPC codes, the gap to capacity can be further improved with the increase in code rate. Lastly, we analyzed the window decoding performance of the PSC-LDPC codes and showed that their performance is better than the conventional SC-LDPC codes for small window size W .
APPENDIX A PROOF OF LEMMA 1
We will prove the statement given in Lemma 1 by contradiction. Let f (ε, x) = ελ(1 − ρ(1 − x)) be the fixed point equation of DE [32, Theorem 3.59]. Now, assume ε∗b ≤ εa∗,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:59:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6912

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 71, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023

and lets take derivative of fa(ε, x) and fb(ε, x).
∂fa(ε, x) = ε(J − 1)(K − 1)(1 − x)K−2 ∂x × (1 − (1 − x)K−1)J−2,

similarly,

∂fb(ε, x) ∂x

=

ε(J

−

Kmax

1)

ρi(i − 1)(1 − x)i−2

i=1

Kmax

× (1 −

ρi(1 − x)i−1)J−2.

i=1

From the definition of critical point [32, Definition 3.60],

∂

fa

(ε∗a ∂x

,

x)

|x=x∗a

=

∂

fb

(εb∗ ∂x

,

x)

|x=xb∗

=

1,

here, xa∗ and xb∗ are critical points at εa∗ and ε∗b , respectively. Now,

ε∗b ε∗a

=

Kmax

(K − ρi(i−

1)(1− 1)(1−

xa∗)K−2(1 − (1 −x∗a)K−1)J−2

Kmax

x∗b )i−2(1 −

ρi(1− x∗b )i−1)J−2

.

i=1

i=1

Due to monotonicity of f (., .) [32, Lemma 3.53], fb(ε, x) < tfahaec(noεn, εεtxr∗a∗b)ad≤fiocrt1i.oxnB, .εyT∈uhse(i0rne,gf1o]sr.iemI,tpwfloeellcaoolwgnescblturhada,etwxthe∗bact>aεnb∗x∗an>.otIεef∗aεt.hb∗a≤t itε∗ais,

APPENDIX B PROOF OF PROPOSITION 1
For the sake of brevity, let us consider the setup provided in [28]. The circular SC-LDPC ensemble is constructed from (dl, dr, L, w′) ensemble (where w′ = w + 1 is the smoothing parameter defined in [6], and w is the coupling width defined in Section II-C.). Whereas, the same analysis will hold for protograph SC-LDPC ensembles. Let κ ∈ [0, 1] denote the fraction of shortened VNs (i.e., set to known value) inside the shortening window of size T . We set T ≥ w + 1 since for the case when κ = 1 and T = w, we get a terminated SC-LDPC code, and the same is true for T ≥ w + 1. Let us denote η = ε(1 − κ) as the average fraction of VNs erased by the channel with erasure probability ε inside the shortening window, and let η∗ be the threshold fraction of erased VNs inside the shortening window such that the BP decoder can recover all of them when η < η∗. To compute η∗ at ε = εMAP and κ strictly less than 1 (consequently, η > 0), we define η∗ as follows:
η∗ = sup{η ∈ (0, 1] : x(il) −l−→−∞→ 0, ε = εMAP } ∀i ∈ T.
First, we observe that by fixing ε = εMAP , the value of η grows linearly with 1 − κ. Thus, for a given η in the interval (0, η∗], the corresponding value of 1 − κ can satisfy either of these two conditions: (1) (1−κ) ≤ εBP , and (2) (1−κ) > εBP (here, εBP is the threshold of the underlying block LDPC ensemble). To justify these conditions, let us consider a setup that consists of a (dl, dr) block LDPC code4. The decoder is
4A non-terminated circular SC-LDPC ensemble preserves the degree distribution of the underlying block LDPC ensemble.

fed with known bits: 1) by shortening the bits randomly across
the codeword with fraction κ, and 2) from the channel with
fraction δ = 1 − ε of known bits. Now, the fraction of known
bits required for successful decoding by shortening is given by κBP = 1 − εBP − δ. Note that when δ = 0 (i.e., the channel completely erases all the bits), we have κBP = 1 − εBP . For the case 0 < δ < 1 − εBP , we have

1 − εBP − δ < 1 − εBP εBP + δ > εBP

Therefore, this concludes that when 0 < δ < 1 − εBP and κ ∈ [κBP , 1], the erasure fraction in the decoder will go to zero if (1 − κ) ≤ εBP . Whereas, (1 − κ) > εBP holds true when κ ∈ [κBP − δ, κBP ). To find the achievable regions of

(ε, η), we have

• For ε ≤ εBP , if η < εBP for any non-zero value of κ,
then x(il) = xj(l) −l−→−∞→ 0, ∀i ∈ T and j ∈/ T . • For εBP < ε < εMAP , if (1 − κ) ≤ εBP (i.e., con-
dition (1)), then xi(0) = η < xj(0) = ε. Consequently, xi(l) < xj(l), ∀i ∈ T and j ∈/ T according to
[32, Lemma 3.53]. By mathematical induction, the

same is true for iteration l + 1. Now by considering condition (2), η∗ can be bounded as η∗ > εMAP εBP . Notice that η < η∗ (because ε < εMAP ) which means

that the decoder will succeed in decoding the erased bits. Therefore, if xi(l) −l−→−∞→ 0, then x(jl) −l−→−∞→ 0.

• For ε = εMAP , if (1 − κ) > εBP then there exists ν =

η ε

− εBP

fraction

of

VNs

that

must

converge

to

zero

so

that (1 − κ) ≤ εBP and x(il) −l−→−∞→ 0. Since the xi(l)

and xj(l) are computed in parallel across the SC-LDPC

chain, and the densities from the spatial positions are

averaged over w [6], the convergence of densities to zero

for fraction ν depends on w.

REFERENCES
[1] 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), “Study on new radio (NR) access technology (release 16),” Tech. Rep. TR 38.912, Ver. 16.0.0, Jul. 2020.
[2] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[3] A. J. Felstrom and K. S. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181–2191, Sep. 1999.
[4] D. G. M. Mitchell, M. Lentmaier, and D. J. Costello, “Spatially coupled LDPC codes constructed from protographs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 9, pp. 4866–4889, Sep. 2015.
[5] S. Kudekar, T. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Spatially coupled ensembles universally achieve capacity under belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 7761–7813, Dec. 2013.
[6] S. Kudekar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Threshold saturation via spatial coupling: Why convolutional LDPC ensembles perform so well over the BEC,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 803–834, Feb. 2011.
[7] M. Lentmaier, A. Sridharan, D. J. Costello, and K. S. Zigangirov, “Iterative decoding threshold analysis for LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 5274–5289, Oct. 2010, doi: 10.1109/TIT.2010.2059490.
[8] E. Arikan, “Channel polarization: A method for constructing capacityachieving codes for symmetric binary-input memoryless channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 3051–3073, Jul. 2009.
[9] M. Shirvanimoghaddam et al., “Short block-length codes for ultrareliable low latency communications,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 130–137, Feb. 2019.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:59:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ALI AND HA: PARTIAL SPATIAL COUPLING OF LDPC CODES: REDUCING THE GAP TO CAPACITY

6913

[10] S. H. Hassani and R. Urbanke, “Universal polar codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Honolulu, HI, USA, Jun. 2014, pp. 1451–1455.
[11] J. Thorpe, “Low density parity check (LDPC) codes constructed from protographs,” JPL, Pasadena, CA, USA, INP Prog. Rep. 42-154, Aug. 2003.
[12] A. R. Iyengar, M. Papaleo, P. H. Siegel, J. K. Wolf, A. Vanelli-Coralli, and G. E. Corazza, “Windowed decoding of protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes over erasure channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 2303–2320, Apr. 2012.
[13] M. Lentmaier, M. M. Prenda, and G. P. Fettweis, “Efficient message passing scheduling for terminated LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, St. Petersburg, Russia, Jul. 2011, pp. 1826–1830.
[14] A. R. Iyengar, P. H. Siegel, R. L. Urbanke, and J. K. Wolf, “Windowed decoding of spatially coupled codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 2277–2292, Apr. 2013.
[15] N. U. Hassan, A. E. Pusane, M. Lentmaier, G. P. Fettweis, and D. J. Costello, “Non-uniform window decoding schedules for spatially coupled LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 65, no. 2, pp. 501–510, Feb. 2017.
[16] I. Ali, J.-H. Kim, S.-H. Kim, H. Kwak, and J.-S. No, “Improving windowed decoding of SC LDPC codes by effective decoding termination, message reuse, and amplification,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 9336–9346, 2018.
[17] R. Ohashi, K. Kasai, and K. Takeuchi, “Multi-dimensional spatiallycoupled codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Istanbul, Jul. 2013, pp. 2448–2452.
[18] H. Esfahanizadeh, L. Tauz, and L. Dolecek, “Multi-dimensional spatially-coupled code design: Enhancing the cycle properties,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 68, no. 5, pp. 2653–2666, May 2020.
[19] Y. Liu, Y. Li, and Y. Chi, “Spatially coupled LDPC codes constructed by parallelly connecting multiple chains,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 9, pp. 1472–1475, Sep. 2015.
[20] D. Truhachev, D. G. M. Mitchell, M. Lentmaier, D. J. Costello, and A. Karami, “Code design based on connecting spatially coupled graph chains,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 65, no. 9, pp. 5604–5617, Sep. 2019.
[21] I. Ali, H. Lee, A. Hussain, and S.-H. Kim, “Protograph-based folded spatially coupled LDPC codes for burst erasure channels,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 516–519, Apr. 2019.
[22] E. Ram and Y. Cassuto, “Spatially coupled LDPC codes with subblock locality,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 67, no. 5, pp. 2739–2757, May 2021.
[23] M. R. Sanatkar and H. D. Pfister, “Increasing the rate of spatiallycoupled codes via optimized irregular termination,” in Proc. 9th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process. (ISTC), Brest, Sep. 2016, pp. 31–35.
[24] H.-Y. Kwak, D.-Y. Yun, and J.-S. No, “Rate-loss mitigation of SC-LDPC codes without performance degradation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 55–65, Jan. 2020.
[25] Q. Wang, S. Cai, W. Lin, S. Zhao, L. Chen, and X. Ma, “Spatially coupled LDPC codes via partial superposition and their application to HARQ,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 70, no. 4, pp. 3493–3504, Apr. 2021.

[26] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[27] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[28] S. Kudekar, C. Méassony, T. Richardson, and R. Urbankez, “Threshold saturation on BMS channels via spatial coupling,” in Proc. 6th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process., Brest, Sep. 2010, pp. 309–313.
[29] D. G. M. Mitchell, M. Lentmaier, A. E. Pusane, and D. J. Costello, “Randomly punctured LDPC codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 408–421, Feb. 2016.
[30] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[31] W. E. Ryan and S. Lin, Channel Codes: Classical and Modern. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2009.
[32] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2008.
Inayat Ali (Member, IEEE) received the B.E. degree in electronic engineering from PAF-KIET, Karachi, Pakistan, in 2009, the M.E. degree in telecommunication engineering from Hamdard University, Karachi, in 2011, and the Ph.D. degree in electronic and electrical engineering from Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, South Korea, in 2019. He is currently a Post-Doctoral Researcher with the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, South Korea. He also held an assistant professor position with the Balochistan University of Engineering and Technology (BUET), Khuzdar, Pakistan. His research interests include block LDPC codes, SC-LDPC codes, modern coding theory, information theory, digital communication, and blockchain technology.
Jeongseok Ha (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.E. degree in electronics from Kyungpook National University, Daegu, South Korea, in 1992, the M.S. degree in electronic and electrical engineering from the Pohang University of Science and Technology, Pohang, South Korea, in 1994, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering from the Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA, in 2003. He is currently with the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, as a Professor. His research interests include theories and applications of error-control codes and physical layer security. Since 2020, he has been serving as an Associate Editor for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:59:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

