IEEE SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL. 17, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2023

5207

Intelligent Dynamic Scheduling-Based Extended Min-Sum LDPC Decoding Algorithm in Cyber-Physical Systems
Chi Zhang , Xiaoxi Yi, and Guicai Yu

Abstract—With the construction process of smart cities, cyberphysical systems (CPS) are going to become a link to connect all things with intelligence. The low-density parity check (LDPC) code is an import information encryption format in computer networks. In this article, from the perspective of LDPC code decoding algorithm scheduling strategy, we design a dynamic check node scheduling (DCNS) strategy for extended min-sum LDPC decoding in cyber-physical systems. In this strategy, the reliability of the node is checked to determine whether to update. For the un-updated variable node, it is optimized according to the results of real-time scheduling. Compared with the flooding mechanism and LBP scheduling of the usual algorithms, this proposed scheduling strategy improves the error correction performance by selecting some nodes for decoding and performing message optimization, while not significantly increasing the decoding computation. Especially, compared with the LBP, the bit error rate and frame error rate of the proposed algorithm are reduced by 48.3% and 53.2% on average in the finite domain 64F range. Compared with BP, the bit error rate and frame error rate of the proposed algorithm are reduced by 11.3% and 13.2% on average in the finite domain 64F range.
Index Terms—Cyber-physical systems, dynamic schedule, intelligent computing, mobile communication.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-density parity check (LDPC) code is a channel code that has received much attention in recent years. Due to its simple description, excellent performance, and low implementation complexity, it has been adopted by various new communication standards and widely used in the field of mobile communication [1], [2]. In 1962, Gallager proposed the LDPC code for the first time in his Ph.D. thesis, and made a comprehensive presentation of the definition, representation, coding, and decoding methods of the code [3]. However, due to the limited technical conditions during that time, LDPC coding was not given enough attention by the researchers. Until 1996, MacKey
Manuscript received 17 December 2022; revised 4 June 2023; accepted 3 July 2023. Date of publication 27 July 2023; date of current version 12 December 2023. This work was supported in part by the Science and Technology Research Project of Jiangxi Provincial Department of Education under Grant GJJ211611, in part by the Science and Technology Research Project of Jiangxi Provincial Department of Education under Grant GJJ211608, and in part by the National Natural Science Foundation Project under Grant 62261056. (Corresponding author: Chi Zhang.)
The authors are with the Physical Science and Technology College, Yichun University, Yichun 336000, China (e-mail: zhangchi1027@163.com; yixiaxi0316@163.com; yuguicai210002@163.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JSYST.2023.3294612

and Neal studied the performance of LDPC codes based on Tanner diagrams and found that the fault correction performance of LDPC codes approached the Shannon limit when the code length was long enough, which started the research boom of LDPC codes in the coding field. From the research results of the past two decades, the research on LDPC codes mainly includes code word construction, decoding algorithm optimization, performance analysis, and practical application of LDPC codes [4], [5]. At present, LDPC codes have been widely used in different fields, mainly in deep space communication, fiber optic communication, satellite digital audio and video broadcasting, etc. In the field of mobile communication, the medium-length code coding scheme of 5G standard has also been confirmed as LDPC code [6], [7].
However, the decoding complexity of LDPC codes grows in a linear fashion with the code length, which restricts the application to a certain extent [8], [9]. There are two main categories of LDPC decoding algorithms: 1) hard-decision decoding algorithms; and 2) soft-decision decoding algorithms. The hard-decision decoding algorithm is easy to apply on hardware, but the hard-decision decoding process does not make full use of the channel probability information, resulting in poor decoding error correction performance. Therefore, the current research mainly focuses on the soft decision decoding algorithm. Gallager’s confidence propagation decoding algorithm, known as the belief propagation (BP) algorithm, is the basic algorithm of the soft judgment decoding algorithm [10], [11]. On this basis, according to the scheduling rules of message update, soft decision decoding can be divided into the following three categories: 1) parallel message update strategy; 2) serial message update strategy; and 3) dynamic asynchronous message update strategy. Among them, dynamic asynchronous message update strategy has excellent performance in convergence speed and error correction performance, which is ideal for applications requiring high convergence speed and error correction performance.
The schematic diagram of LDPC decoding in cyber-physical system is shown in Fig. 1. In this article, from the perspective of LDPC decoding algorithm scheduling strategy, an intelligent dynamic scheduling strategy for extended minimum and LDPC decoding is designed. In this strategy, whether to update the check node is determined according to the reliability of the check node. At the same time, the messages of some variable nodes are optimized according to the results of

1937-9234 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:03:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5208

IEEE SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL. 17, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2023

Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of LDPC decoding in cyber-physical system.
real-time scheduling. The main contributions of our work are as follows.
1) According to the idea of BP decoding algorithm, the corresponding LOG-BP and EMS algorithms are proposed to check the update of node content on the basis of binary LDPC code decoding.
2) The dynamic check node scheduling (DCNS) for extended min-sum LDPC decoding in cyber-physical systems is proposed. In this strategy, the reliability of the node is checked to determine whether to update. For the unupdated variable node, it is optimized according to the results of real-time scheduling.
3) In the proposed strategy, the confidence value of the correct symbol is added, the optimized message is input into the iteration, and the decoding convergence is accelerated. It helps to quickly correct other uncorrected variable nodes, and also greatly suppresses the impact of trap sets.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. In the next section, the related works will be shown in detail. Section III is devoted to describing the system model. The formulation of the optimization problem and the proposed algorithm are given in Section IV. Section V provides the performance evaluation and discussion and justification of the results. Finally, Section VI concludes the article.
II. RELATED WORK
In order to improve the decoding efficiency, Zamzami et al. [12] discussed the compiled code problem of LDPC codes in detail from two aspects: theory and practical application, and proposed a practical probabilistic iterative BP decoding algorithm. However, the large number of floating-point logarithmic and exponential operations is the problem of the BP decoding algorithm in each iteration, and all the bits and checksum information lines have to be calculated, which leads to the high sophistication of the decoding algorithm. For the purpose of reducing the sophistication of the BP decoding algorithm, shuffled BP algorithm was proposed in the work to speed up the convergence of BP algorithm by using the information of updated nodes as early as possible. An optimized message passing algorithm [13] is proposed, which not only improved the message passing process but also well controlled the number of floating-point logarithmic and exponential operations, solving the problem of many operations. In the work, the performance of BP decoding algorithm is improved by adding a large number

of short cycles [14]. Although the above-mentioned works have improved the decoding of LDPC codes, the decoding algorithm still has a high complexity as all the bits and checksum information are computed in each iteration of these methods, resulting in low decoding efficiency.
LDPC codes can be divided into the following two categories according to the number of bits contained in a single code element: 1) binary codes; and 2) multivariate codes. Binary codes contain only one bit per code element, while multivariate codes can correspond to multiple bits per code element. The earliest research has been conducted mainly on binary codes. In the study of binary LDPC codes, the nonregular LDPC codes were proposed, i.e., the rank-weight of the parity matrix is not a fixed ratio in contrast to regular LDPC codes [15]. The decoding performance of this code is greatly improved compared with that of regular LDPC codes. The density evolution (DE) theory was proposed for the degree distribution of the calibration matrix. The method optimizes the degree distribution of inspection nodes and variable nodes of binary LDPC codes in a targeted manner by setting constraints, and finally obtain codes with the best combination of decoding threshold distributions [16]. In addition, the extrinsic information transfer chart (EXIT) is also a common tool for optimizing LDPC codes [17]. The EXIT plot can be used to predict accurately the rate of convergence and the decoding threshold of LDPC code iterations and analyze the convergence performance of LDPC code decoder, so it is often used to filter the constructed codes. Multivariate LDPC codes provide greater performance improvements than binary LDPC codes. In addition, usually the higher the order of the finite field defined by the multivariate code, the better the decoding error correction performance. A Gaussian approximation (GA)-based density evolution algorithm for multivariate LDPC codes is proposed [18]. The convergence process of iterative decoding of multivariate LDPC codes using EXIT plots is proposed [19]. It assumed that the mutual information passed among variable nodes and check nodes in the multivariate LDPC code translation process obeys a multidimensional Gaussian distribution. Similar design constructions of multivariate LDPC codes using EXIT graphs have been done in other work. The usual idea of constructing multivariate LDPC codes is also to perform nonzero value substitution based on the check matrix of binary LDPC codes. In the study of decoding algorithms for multivariate codes, multivariate LDPC codes as a binary BP-based decoding algorithm are proposed [20]. The BP decoding algorithm for multivariate LDPC codes was proposed on. About performance and computational complexity of multivariate LDPC codes increase as the number of finite field orders increases, and this is especially true for the original BP decoding algorithm without improvement. Therefore, there are numerous studies on improving the BP decoding algorithm to achieve a balance between complexity and performance. Usually, BP decoding algorithms [14] are defined in the probability domain, while the logarithmic domain in multivariate BP decoding algorithms were introduced, which effectively reduces the calculation complexity. However, the multivariate LDPC code decoding algorithm based on BP idea becomes complex as the amount of dimensions is increased. Wang et al. [21] proposed a syndrome channel model and derived its lower and upper bounds on capacity, indicating the feasibility

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:03:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: INTELLIGENT DYNAMIC SCHEDULING-BASED EXTENDED MIN-SUM LDPC DECODING ALGORITHM

5209

of reliable transmission of additional bits. Wang et al. [22] conducted research on implicit partial product low-density parity check codes. It consists of the LDPC code for the row and the Bose Chaudhuri Hockenhem code for the column. The high decoding complexity seriously affects the practical application of multivariate LDPC codes. Decoding algorithm of multivariate LDPC codes undergoes continuous process of adjusting decoding complexity, and the confidence propagation decoding algorithm based on fast fourier transformation (FFT), i.e., the FFT-BP and the logarithmic domain BP decoding algorithm of multivariate LDPC codes have been proposed one after another. The decoding complexity of multivariate LDPC codes is significantly reduced by the EMS algorithm, and at the same time, the decoding computation is no longer a severe problem with the current hardware level.
In the study of EMS algorithm, how to retain its various advantages in decoding computation as much as possible while obtaining better error correction performance becomes more critical, and is one of the key issues for wireless transmission system of monitoring data using LDPC codes as channel coding scheme.

III. METHODOLOGY
A. EMS Decoding Algorithm for Multivariate LDPC Codes
According to the BP decoding algorithm, the corresponding LOG-Bp, EMS algorithm is developed based on the decoding of binary LDPC codes. The algorithm used to check the content update of a node is the EMS algorithm for multivariate LDPC codes, which can be written as

Rm a n =

sign[Qm a n

(cn

)]

·

n

min
∈N (m)/n

(|Qamn

(cn

)|).

n ∈N (m)/n

(1)

EMS is derived from the improved EMS algorithm for mul-

tivariate codes. To reduce the computation, the EMS algorithm

arranges the message vector in descending order during the

iteration, storing only the first nm maximum element of the

original vector, and the message values involved in the compu-

tation during the node update are thus reduced. When there is a

significant difference between nm and q values, the complexity

is significantly reduced.

Before describing the specific algorithm, some symbols are

redefined in order to give a more complete picture of each step

of the algorithm. First, the symbol vp is defined to indicate that

the message flows going through V N to P N , and pv denotes

the process in the opposite direction from this one. Let Vpv (p = 1, . . ., d) be the incoming content vector representing the

variable node v of degree dv and Uvp be the output content vector of the variable node v. And Vvp for the message vector, Uvp[β] denotes the confidence degree with symbol β ∈ GF (q),
then the variable node message vector can be represented as

Uvp = (Uvp[0], Uvp[1], Uvp[q − 1]). Similarly, the check node message vector could be represented. About the check node c of

degree dc. The content vectors Upc and Vcp are defined.

The fundamental elements of the EMS algorithm are as

follows.

1) Initialization: The log-likelihood ratio (LLR) message vec-
tor of the channel output is stored into that variable node content
vector in the graph. The messages are represented in the form
of LLR in iterative decoding of multivariate codes. For a single random variable z on GF (q), L[i] = log(P (z = αi)|P (z = 0)) is the likelihood ratio of z taking the value αi ∈ GF (q), then the corresponding LLR message vector could be represented as L(z) = (L[0], L[1], . . ., L[q − 1]). P (z = αi) is the probability of taking a value of αi ∈ GF (q), which depends on the statistical properties. And the channel output LLR message can also be denoted by the q-dimensional vector Lch.
2) Message Replacement: The Tanner graph is affected by the nonbinary element hvc on each edge, so it is necessary to perform the replacement of the message vector during the decoding, and
this operation step can be expressed as

Upc [β] = Uvp hv−c1β .

(2)

Only most reliable message values are selected for updating the content vector. Thus, some nodes are checked to update its connected variable node. Meanwhile, the messages of some nodes are replaced.
3) Check Node Update: In the EMS algorithm, only nm most reliable message values are selected for updating the content vector passed for each variable node, and the content vector length is truncated by q to nm. In this work [29], the concept of configuration set is introduced to describe truncated node updates. The next step is to define a configuration set

conf (nm) =

β1k1

,

.

.

.,

β kdc −1
dc −1

.

(3)

In the set ki, which donates as the value of the ith incoming content vector confidence size of the check node ordered as kth. Any vector with dc − 1 domain elements β1k1 is a configuration. The conf (1) set is the most dependable output configurations,
also referred to as 0th configurations. Here, the maximum devia-
tion with order 0 configuration is limited to nc, which can reduce the number of configurations when checking for node updates.
The check node updates dc variable node it is connected to, at which point the configuration set corresponding to the output
message is

confβ(nm, nc)

dc −1

= β1k1 ∈ conf (nm, nc) : β +

βpkp = 0 . (4)

p=1

This formula represents the message used to calculate the message corresponding to the value αi ∈ GF (q) of the dth output content vector field. Defining the check node according
to this set, the resulting update equation is as follows:

dc −1

Vcdc

[β]

=

max
βk∈confβ (nm,nc)

p=1

Upc

βpkp

.

(5)

4) Message Inverse Replacement: After the message output of the node is passed to the substitution, by replacing the message vector delivered to the variable node, this step operation can be

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:03:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5210

IEEE SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL. 17, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2023

Fig. 2. Main workflow of the EMS algorithm.

expressed as

Vpv [β] = Vcp [hvcβ].

(6)

5) Variable Node Update: Every variable node v has dv input messages Vpv (p = 1, . . ., dV ). In combination with input messages and channel information from adjacent check nodes, the output message sent by variable node v to its neighboring
replacement node, and outputs the message to the adjacent
replacement node as

dv

Uvp [β] = Lv [β] + Vtv [β].

(7)

t=1

6) Judgment: Each variable node v has an estimated judgment symbol Cv, and the connected check nodes are derived by deducing the input content vector and the channel information corresponding to dv, the following equation is available:

dv

Cv = arg max Lv [β] + Vpv [β] .

(8)

p=1

The iteration ends when the obtained verdict codeword can satisfy the verdict constraint or the decoding achieves the largest number of iterations; else, it returns to step 2) to continue the iteration, as shown in Fig. 2.

B. Node Scheduling Decoding
In message processing, node u has no message received from edge e in the message transmitted from edge e. That is, the independence assumption, the decoding of the iterative BP decoding algorithm, is most advantageous under this condition,

and when the independence assumption does not hold, this will significantly weaken the decoding performance of the decoding algorithm. The idea of the node scheduling algorithm is to stop updating messages when the number of iterations is half of the local perimeter of the variable node, until twice the maximum perimeter, then update all node messages, the node scheduling algorithm makes the number of iterations of independent messages as large as possible [23]. In general, assuming that the maximum perimeter length in the Tanner graph is gmax, the shortest local perimeter length in the Tanner graph is gmin; if the perimeter length of a variable node u is gmin, then the message from u reverts back to its own node when the number of iterations continues to increase to gmin/2; the prerequisite for optimal BP decoding algorithm is that there is no loop in the Tanner graph, and only the absence of loops can make the input message of each node always independent of its original message, thus, ensuring the condition of independence assumption, but when node u retransmits the message back to itself after gmin/2 iterations, so that the input message of node u is associated with its original message, if it continues to transmit, it will cause the superposition of information and destroy the optimal performance of decoding, at the same time, although the nodes whose perimeter length exceeds gmin. At the same time, although the information transmission of nodes with perimeter length over gmin is not affected and they still maintain the best performance, from the global consideration, all nodes with perimeter length gmin destroy the overall best because of their suboptimal information, so that the iterative performance of the algorithm is affected.
The idea of node scheduling of determined decoding algorithm [24] can be formulated as follows.
1) Searching for its perimeter distribution {gy} by checking the Tanner diagram corresponding to the matrix H, set gmin = min{gy}, gmax = max{gy}.
2) For each node v, when the local perimeter gv exceeds the minimum local perimeter gmin and is less than gmax, stops updating the information of v at the gv/2th iteration and does not update the information of all nodes until the start of gmax/2 iterations.
The idea of the node scheduling probabilistic decoding algorithm [25], [26] can be formulated as follows.
1) Searching for its perimeter distribution {gy} by checking the Tanner diagram corresponding to the matrix H, set gmin = mingv, gmax = maxgv, and give each node a probability value pv = gv/gmax, which is used to represent the update probability of node v in each iteration round.
2) In each iteration, each node v, updates its output probability information, and each node gets its information sent once when the number of iterations is gmax/2.
C. Modified Node Scheduling for EMS Decoding Algorithm
The dynamic scheduling policy differs from the traditional nondynamic message update policy in that it is not characterized by a static order of node updates in each iteration. The dynamic scheduling strategy guides the message update process of the decoding process based on predefined conditions, and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:03:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: INTELLIGENT DYNAMIC SCHEDULING-BASED EXTENDED MIN-SUM LDPC DECODING ALGORITHM

5211

Algorithm 1: Dynamic Scheduling Algorithm.
INPUT: the check node state vector Sc; variable node state vector Sv.
Initialization: Set values of Sc. 1: for all check node M do
2: for all variable node N do
3: Calculate all checksum according to (1) 4: If i ≤ k 5: Update Svn=1 according to (4); 6: Update Sv; 7: Else
8: Calculate all checksum according to (1)–(3). 9: Set Scm = 1; 10: Update Sc 11: end if
12: end For
13: end For OUTPUT: State value of check node m, Scm, State value of
the variable node n, Svn

the variables on which these conditions are based generally change continuously during the decoding iterations, and thus, the message update process varies from iteration to iteration and is changing dynamically. The flooding mechanism is usually used in the EMS algorithm of LDPC codes [27]. On the basis of research and analysis at this study, the idea of dynamic scheduling is introduced into the EMS algorithm for the purpose of enhancing the decoding performance advantage and decoding convergence speed capability.
In this article, the scheduling policy is built on the basis of node reliability checks. Let Cu be a verdict codeword of variable node u, where C ∈ G(q) and u ∈ 1, 2, . . ., .U . Let zn(Cu) be the confidence that the verdict codeword of variable n is C, toward the finish of the nth iteration, and zn(Cu) changes as iterations increase. Next, the reliability of the check node is first discussed in terms of the check equation. Next, this article discusses the reliability of check nodes, a problem that starts from the check equations of check nodes. We need to perform a judgment when checking the nodes of the LDPC code first; this allows messages to be spread more effectively on the Tanner map. If the result of the check equation computed by decoding the judgment symbol is not zero, this reflects that those variable nodes are not yet fully converged. Thus, more reliable message variable nodes need to be disseminated to these messages in time. In such cases, these checksum nodes are marked as unreliable. If the checksum of checksum node m is zero, i.e.,

hmnCn = 0.

(9)

n:hmn

At this point, the connected-to-checksum variable node m meets the decoded checksum restriction. However, this does not necessarily indicate that the connected-to-checksum variable nodes have converged. Two possibilities in here: 1) The currently decoded sign is in fact the transferred sign. 2) The decoded symbols cannot be equated with the corresponding transmission,

due to the difference between the variable node v and the check node c, a difference that arises when the corresponding content is sent with the content. If v is larger in the decoded symbol messages, it will make the decoded symbols not to be confused with maximum news symbols in the transmitted messages. In such cases, the entire content distribution of the variable nodes is without much fluctuation, so it is necessary to set a threshold θ, which requires the decoded symbol messages Zu(Cn) of variable nodes n to be greater than θ to exclude this case. θ is an empirical value. Therefore, it is necessary to add the constraint

min {un(Cn)} > θ.

(10)

That is, the minimum element in the confidence of the verdict codeword of variable node n as Cn needs to be greater than the threshold θ. Also, for the variable node n add the constraint

Cni = Cni−1.

(11)

That is, the previous iteration of n has the same judgment symbol as the current one, which can guarantee the reliability of the decoding symbol of variable node n. Check that node m can be marked as reliable when it satisfies both of these constraints. From the above analysis, it can be observed that for multivariate LDPC code node messages with loop length g are passed independently in the first g/2 iterations, and will not be passed back to the original node. When g/2 iterations are reached, the reliable check node screening is performed by the above conditions. The check nodes obtained after filtering are states that have converged and satisfy the decoding detection condition, while each variable node is adjacent to these check nodes and presents reliability. These reliable check nodes can be updated in subsequent iterations without further updates. This node adjacency case, i.e., M (n), is considered reliable; the update message of variablen will not be transmitted and no new check node message will be passed, so variable n can be updated accordingly. The node adjacency case mentioned above, i.e., M (n), are deemed only partially dependable, then since the constraint (4–1) (4–3) is satisfied, i.e., the check equations of the two iterations with the same verdict code word and all the participating check equations with the verdict symbols are satisfied, and for the decoding determination conditions in the calibration equation, n satisfies these conditions, then the variable n is considered to converge correctly, and this case can be chosen not to update. However, these nodes are connected to other variable nodes through partially unreliable check nodes, and the messages of these nodes are still affecting the updates of other nodes in each iteration. To prevent the existence of trap sets that make it difficult for uncorrected nodes to be corrected, this article still updates these variable nodes in each iteration and optimizes the messages sent by them using a correction value α, α > 0. At this point, an optimization equation can be added, as follows:

U i(β) =

U i(β) + α U i(β) − α/(q − 1)

β = Cni−1 β = Cni−1.

(12)

That is, for decodes that have finished converging but still change other nodes to some extent, we use node update messages directly. By the content of the last operation, the confidence value

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:03:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5212

IEEE SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL. 17, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2023

of the corresponding symbol obtained to the current iteration of the code word is determined to be enlarged, while the other confidence values become smaller. Optimizing the weights of the content sent by variable nodes with correct symbols increases the confidence values of the correct symbols, and the optimized messages can be entered into iterations to accelerate the decoding convergence, which helps other variable nodes that have not been corrected to correct quickly, and also greatly suppresses the impact of the existence of trap sets.
Let the check node state vector Sc = [Sc1, Sc2. . .ScM ] where Scm denotes the state value of check node m; variable node state vector Sv = [Sv1, Sv2. . .SvN ], where Svn denotes the state value of the variable node n. The implementation of this dynamic scheduling strategy can be summarized as follows.
1) Initialize the decoding algorithm by setting all the values of Sc to 1.
2) Skip this step before the number of iterations reaches k; after the number of iterations reaches the threshold k, the variable node n(m) adjacent to the check node m

TABLE I COMPUTATION COMPLEXITY FROM VARIABLE NODES TO CHECK NODES
TABLE II COMPUTATION COMPLEXITY FROM CHECK NODES TO VARIABLE NODES

Svn = ORj∈m(n)Scj .

(13)

For checking node m that meets the three constraints above, its state value Scm is set to 0 and the others are 1. For the check node M (n) adjacent to the variable node n, the state value of the variable node n can be obtained. 3) The decoding algorithm is updated iteratively, and only the value of state is updated to 1 when the node is updated. 4) After the number of iterations reaches the threshold k, the optimization is performed for the variable nodes that have converged but are still being updated. 5) Decode the judgment and return to 2) if the end-ofiteration condition is not reached. Since the scheduling strategy decides the set of nodes to be updated in this iteration before each iteration, the whole algorithm process is almost the same as that of the EMS algorithm with flooding mechanism. When the process of operation reaches a certain number of times, the scheduling strategy starts to work, and in one update, all check nodes are updated first, and no more updates are made for nodes that satisfy the state value of 0; then all variable nodes are updated, and no more updates are made for nodes without new messages. This dynamic dispatching strategy based on the reliable detection nodes focuses on the continuous screening of highly reliable detection nodes, for which the closed loop is not updated at iteration, and for the variable nodes at the edge of the closed loop, although they can be considered to have converged, the messages of the variable nodes at the edge are optimized to prevent the trap set from affecting the normal convergence of other nodes, and the optimized messages are passed out. Although these processes increase the computational effort, when the scheduling strategy work,s some of the nodes at each iteration are not updated and the overall strategy does not have much impact on the computational effort of the algorithm. Computational complexity is used to describe an algorithm’s use of computational resources. For the proposed algorithm, the computational complexity is related to the number of the check node and the number of the variable node. Therefore, the computational complexity of the proposed algorithm is O(M XN ),

where M is the number of the check node and N is the number of the variable node.
IV. SIMULATION AND EVALUATION
A. Simulation Setting
In this article, we apply the DCNS strategy to the EMS decoding algorithm, simulate and verify its improvement to the decoding algorithm, and compare the EMS decoding algorithm using flooding mechanism, BP and LBP strategy. The simulation comparison includes both decoding fault detection performance and decoding computation. In this article, BPSK is used for modulation under Gaussian white noise channel conditions, and the multivariate LDPC code used is a 4-element LDPC code with a length of 400 and a distribution of (dc, dv) = (2,4). In this section, the number of operations is set to a maximum of 20. This is the simulation test result based on the convergence speed of the EMS algorithm by using the H-matrix. And the LDPC code eliminates the 4-loop in the construction, i.e., g > 4, to get k > 2, and the threshold k is chosen to be four times in the simulation.
B. Simulation Results and Discussions
The complexities of the flooding algorithm, BP algorithm, LBP algorithm, and DCNS under each operation are, respectively, presented in Tables I and II. It is possible to see that the complexities of flood algorithm and BP algorithm are exactly the same. The increased complexity of the LBP algorithm in comparison with the BP algorithm is the reliability calculation and the sorting operation; compared with the dynamic adjustment of the DCNS algorithm, the complexity of the flood algorithm is the same. The DCNS algorithm increases the reliability calculation part from logarithmic operations to addition operations in comparison with the LBP algorithm, reducing the sorting phase from 0(N 2) to 0(N · logN ).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:03:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: INTELLIGENT DYNAMIC SCHEDULING-BASED EXTENDED MIN-SUM LDPC DECODING ALGORITHM

5213

Fig. 3. Comparison of the error correction performance.

Fig. 5. Comparison of the average update number of check nodes.

Fig. 4. Average number of iterations.

Fig. 6. Comparison of the average update number of variable node.

The comparison of the fault correction performance of EMS algorithm under several scheduling strategies is shown in Fig. 3. Compared with the flooding mechanism and the LBP strategy, the ability of the EMS algorithm to modify errors is significantly improved under the DCNS strategy, and it can already reach full decoding when the signal-to-noise ratio reaches 3.9 dB, when the EMS algorithm under the flooding mechanism has not been able to enter the waterfall area, while the LBP strategy requires 4 dB. From the results, it can be shown that making the reliable nodes is no longer interfered by other nonreliable nodes by not updating, or optimizing themselves, and thus, continuously correcting the nonreliable nodes. The error correction capability of the EMS algorithm has been enhanced.
The average number of operations performed of the EMS algorithm under the scheduling strategies is given in Fig. 4. The average number of operations can reflect the convergence speed of the algorithm, which further will affect the actual decoding computation of the algorithm. As a whole, both the LBP and DCNS strategies have to converge significantly faster due to the flooding mechanism. And in the higher signal-to-noise case, the convergence speed of LBP strategy gradually exceeds that of the DCNS strategy, which is due to the high reliability of

most nodes themselves under high signal-to-noise ratio, and the convergence speed of the LBP strategy is bound to be accelerated by updating the variable nodes several times in one iteration.
Figs. 5 and 6 denote the contrast of the average number of check node changes and variable node updates of the algorithm under the four scheduling strategies given in, respectively. Since the flooding mechanism and the LBP strategy update a fixed number of check nodes, their curves do not change compared to Fig. 4, while the DCNS strategy shifts its curve slightly downward because the number of check nodes will decrease. In Fig. 6, both the flooding mechanism and the DCNS strategy are at a lower level, and the DCNS strategy has the lowest curve because the number of nodes updated with iteration will be further reduced. The LBP strategy, on the other hand, has a much higher curve than the other two strategies because it updates the same variable nodes several times in one iteration; although it brings faster convergence, its actual computation does not have an advantage. Figs. 5 and 6 lead to a common conclusion that although the DCNS strategy adds extra computation when formulating, it has no disadvantage in actual computation

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:03:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5214

IEEE SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL. 17, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2023

Fig. 7. Average decoding iterations of MES.

Fig. 9. BER/FER performance data of algorithms in the finite field 256F.

Fig. 8. BER/FER performance data of algorithms in the finite field 64F.

Fig. 10. Average number of elements in node subset processed in DCNS algorithm iteration under different signal-to-noise ratio.

compared with the other two strategies, while it has a significant improvement in error correction performance.
Fig. 7 gives a comparison of the decoding capabilities of different scheduling algorithms for MES, and from the figure, we can see that the decoding performance of our proposed DCNS is the best in different situations.
In this article, the proposed algorithm is evaluated from the aspect of decoding performance through a large number of simulation tests. For the decoding performance of the algorithm, this article uses the bit error rate (BER) and frame error rate (FER).
Fig. 8 shows the BER and FER of each algorithm in the finite field 64F under different channel SNR environments. It can be seen from the figure that the DCNS algorithm proposed in this article has excellent error correction performance under all SNR conditions. Obviously, compared with the LBP, the BER and FER of the proposed algorithm are reduced by 48.3% and 53.2% on average in the finite domain 64F range. Compared with BP, the BER and FER of the proposed algorithm are reduced by 11.3% and 13.2% on average in the finite domain 64F range. However, Fig. 9 shows the BER and FER of each algorithm in the

finite field 256F under different channel SNR environments. It can be seen from the figure that, compared with the comparison algorithm, the DCNS algorithm proposed in this article does not have excellent error correction performance under all SNR conditions.
The change of the number of check nodes in the node subset of convergence frame and error frame is further analyzed. As shown in Fig. 10, it can be found that there is an obvious difference in the number of elements in the node subset processed during iteration between the representative convergent frame and the nonconvergent frame. For the convergent frame, the number of elements in the node subset under all SNR environments shows a downward trend until it drops to a very low level, which means that the information sequence has converged.
V. CONCLUSION
In the study of LDPC codes, the scheduling strategy is considered to be an important factor affecting the decoding performance of LDPC code confidence propagation because it determines the order of content updates of variable and check nodes during the decoding process. In iterative decoding, the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:03:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: INTELLIGENT DYNAMIC SCHEDULING-BASED EXTENDED MIN-SUM LDPC DECODING ALGORITHM

5215

content of each node are updated and passed in each iteration, [16] X. Liu, L. Zi, D. Yang, and Z. Wang, “Improved decoding algorithms of

and the message passing order will affect the convergence speed of decoding, which in turn, affects decoding complexities and fault correction performance. The EMS algorithm can also be

LDPC codes based on reliability metrics of variable nodes,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 35769–35778, 2019, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2904173. [17] M. K. Roberts, S. S. Mohanram, and N. Shanmugasundaram, “An improved low complex offset min-sum based decoding algorithm for

improved and optimized in this article from the perspective

LDPC codes,” Moble Netw. Appl., vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 1848–1852, 2019,

of scheduling strategy. Dynamic message update strategies are

doi: 10.1007/s11036-019-01392-7. [18] R. Wu, L. Wang, H. Feng, and W. He, “A modified method for general

proposed, referred as DCNS in our research. The simulated

LDPC bit-flipping decoding,” in Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Comput. Commun.

results of the experiment show that the decoding algorithm with dynamic message update strategy, i.e., dynamic scheduling strategy, has faster convergence speed and has some improve-

Manage., 2019, pp. 219–223, doi: 10.1145/3348445.3348460. [19] H. B. Thameur, B. L. Gal, N. Khouja, F. Tlili, and C. Jégo, “A survey
on decoding schedules of LDPC convolutional codes and associated hardware architectures,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput. Commun., Heraklion,

ment in decoding error correction performance. In the future

Greece, 2017, pp. 898–905, doi: 10.1109/ISCC.2017.8024640.

work, the role of different check nodes in mitigating abnormal

[20] S. Cai, S. Zhao, and X. Ma, “Free ride on LDPC coded transmission,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 80–92, Jan. 2022,

stationarity will be studied in depth. At the same time, the

doi: 10.1109/TIT.2021.3122342.

relevant check nodes will be reset purposefully to further reduce [21] Q. Wang, S. Cai, and X. Ma, “Free-ride coding for constructions of coupled

the computational complexity of the algorithm.

LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 71, no. 3, pp. 1259–1270, Mar. 2023.

[22] Y. Wang, Q. Wang, and X. Ma, “Design of implicit partial product-LDPC

codes and low complexity decoding algorithm,” IEEE Commun. Lett.,

REFERENCES

vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 419–423, Feb. 2023. [23] H. N. Dang, H. T. Nguyen, and T. V. Nguyen, “Joint detection and

[1] V. Padmajothi, J. L. M. Iqbal, and V. Ponnusamy, “Load - aware intelligent

decoding of mixed-ADC large-scale MIMO communication systems with

multiprocessor scheduler for time-critical cyber-physical system applica-

protograph LDPC codes,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 101013–101029, 2021,

tions,” Comput. Elect. Eng., vol. 97, 2022, Art. no. 107613.

doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3097444.

[2] M. Woz´niak, J. Siłka, M. Wieczorek, and M. Alrashoud, “Recurrent neural [24] J. Huang and Y. Kim, “MCMC decoding of LDPC codes with BP

network model for IoT and networking malware threat detection,” IEEE

preprocessing,” in Proc. IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf., 2020, pp. 1–5,

Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 5583–5594, Aug. 2021.

doi: 10.1109/GLOBECOM42002.2020.9348002.

[3] L. Zhao, Z. Bi, A. Hawbani, K. Yu, Y. Zhang, and M. Guizani, “ELITE: An [25] I. E. Bocharova, B. D. Kudryashov, V. Skachek, and Y. Yakimenka,

intelligent digital twin-based hierarchical routing scheme for softwarized

“BP-LED decoding algorithm for LDPC codes over AWGN channels,”

vehicular networks,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., to be published,

IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 65, no. 3, pp. 1677–1693, Mar. 2019,

doi: 10.1109/TMC.2022.3179254.

doi: 10.1109/TIT.2018.2866879.

[4] Z. Guo, K. Yu, Z. Lv, K.-K. R. Choo, P. Shi, and J. J. P. C. Rodrigues, “Deep [26] G. Han, Y. L. Guan, and X. Huang, “Check node reliability-

federated learning enhanced secure POI microservices for cyber-physical

based scheduling for BP decoding of non-binary LDPC codes,”

systems,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 22–29, Apr. 2022.

IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 877–885, Mar. 2013,

[5] Q. Zhang et al., “Graph neural network-driven traffic forecasting for the

doi: 10.1109/TCOMM.2013.011613.120249.

connected internet of vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 9, no. 5, [27] S. Yun, B. Y. Kong, and Y. Lee, “Area- and energy-efficient LDPC decoder

pp. 3015–3027, Sep./Oct. 2022.

using mixed-resolution check-node processing,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst.

[6] D. Peng, D. He, Y. Li, and Z. Wang, “Integrating terrestrial and satellite

II Exp. Briefs, vol. 69, no. 3, pp. 999–1003, Mar. 2022, doi: 10.1109/TC-

multibeam systems toward 6G: Techniques and challenges for interference

SII.2021.3110953.

mitigation,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 24–31, Feb. 2022.

[7] D. Garg, S. Rani, N. Herencsar, S. Verma, M. Wozniak, and M. F. Ijaz,

“Hybrid technique for cyber-physical security in cloud-based smart indus-

tries,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 4630–4643, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/22/12/4630 [8] D. Ivanov, B. Sokolov, and E. A. D. Raguinia, “Integrated dynamic scheduling of material flows and distributed information services in collaborative cyber-physical supply networks,” Int. J. Syst. Sci.: Operations Logistics, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 18–26, 2014, doi: 10.1080/00207721.2013.879226. [9] J. Wei et al., “A redactable blockchain framework for secure federated

Chi Zhang received the Ph.D. degree in information and communication engineering from Harbin Engineering University, Harbin, China, in 2010.
He is currently with the Physical Science and Technology College of Yichun University, Yichun, China. His research interests include automation and signal processing.

learning in industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9,

no. 18, pp. 17901–17911, Sep. 2022.

[10] Y. Sun, K. Yu, A. K. Bashir, and X. Liao, “BL-IEA: A bit-level image

encryption algorithm for cognitive services in intelligent transportation systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 1062–1074, Jan. 2023, doi: 10.1109/TITS.2021.3129598. [11] K. Whetzel and M. C. Valenti, “Complexity-aware scheduling for an LDPC encoded C-RAN uplink,” in Proc. 51st Ann. Conf. Inf. Sci. Syst., 2017, pp. 1–6, doi: 10.1109/CISS.2017.7926137. [12] A. A. Zamzami, K. Chao, and S. Lin, “Stopping-set assisted reinforced belief propagation for decoding short LDPC codes,”

Xiaoxi Yi received the M.S. degree in communication engineering from the Beijing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Beijing, China, in 2009.
She is currently with the Physical Science and Technology College of Yichun University, Yichun, China. Her research interests include fuzzy control, automation, and signal processing.

IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 505–508, Mar. 2022,

doi: 10.1109/LCOMM.2021.3137222.

[13] H. Lee, Y. S. Kil, M. Y. Chung, and S. Kim, “Neural network aided

impulsive perturbation decoding for short raptor-like LDPC codes,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 268–272, Feb. 2022, doi: 10.1109/LWC.2021.3125578. [14] J. Qian, S. Hu, and H. Wang, “Joint MIMO detection and LDPC decoding via enhanced belief propagation for 5G-NR,” in Proc. IEEE Wireless Commun. Netw. Conf., Austin, TX, USA, 2022, pp. 1093–1098, doi: 10.1109/WCNC51071.2022.9771941. [15] C. Wang and C. Lin, “Improved normalized probabilistic minimum sum-

Guicai Yu received the Ph.D. degree in information and communication engineering from Nanchang University, Nanchang, China, in 2017.
He is currently with the Physical Science and Technology College of Yichun University, Yichun, China. His research interests include wireless communication and signal processing.

mation algorithm for LDPC decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Con-

sum. Electron., Taoyuan, Taiwan, 2020, pp. 1–2, doi: 10.1109/ICCE-Tai-

wan49838.2020.9258198. Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:03:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

