Performance analysis of Mixed RF/FSO DF relay 
based on Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes 
using deep learning techniques 
 
Ibrahima Gueye 
 Department of Computer 
Science, Polytechnic Institute 
(ESP), Cheikh Anta Diop 
University of Dakar-Senegal  
 E-mail:gueye.ibrahima1@esp.sn 
 
Idy Diop 
 Department of Computer 
Science, Polytechnic Institute 
(ESP), Cheikh Anta Diop 
University of Dakar-Senegal  
 E-mail: idy.diop@esp.sn 
 
 
Ibra Dioum 
 Department of Computer 
Science, Polytechnic Institute 
(ESP), Cheikh Anta Diop 
University of Dakar-Senegal 
 E-mail : ibra.dioum@esp.sn 
 
 
Doudou DIONE 
 Department of Computer 
Science, Polytechnic Institute 
(ESP), Cheikh Anta Diop 
Univerty of Dakar-Senegal  
 E-mail : doudou.dione@esp.sn
         Abstract—This Cooperative optical communication allows a 
free-space optical network to coordinate antenna distribution and 
achieve dramatic performance gains similar to those of 
conventional MIMO systems. It enables significant improvements 
in terms of network capacity and coverage. Cooperative Free 
Space Optics (FSO) communication is one of the most promising 
technologies for the next generation of wireless optical 
communication networks. FSO systems are particularly attractive 
for problem last mile access by bridging fiber optic-based 
backbone connectivity and RF access networks. To address this 
practical deployment scenario, there has been increasing attention 
on so-called hybrid RF-FSO (dual-hop) systems where RF 
transmission is used at one hop followed by FSO transmission at 
the other. . In this article, we study the performance of hybrid 
RF/FSO cooperative systems based on error-correcting codes, 
particularly LDPC codes using an LDPC decoder based on deep 
learning.  
        The use of mixed RF/FSO cooperative systems improves the 
reliability and transmission of the network. The results 
demonstrate improved performance of the LDPC code-based 
RF/FSO DF cooperative relay system using a deep learning-based 
LDPC decoder compared to LDPC code-based RF/FSO systems 
without the use of the deep learning, but also to the DF systems 
proposed in the existing literature.  
Keywords—Cooperative system, hybrid RF/FSO, LDPC, Deep 
Learning.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Due to higher data rates and bandwidth, lower power 
consumption, free spectrum license and ease of deployment, the 
FSO communication system has attracted increasing attention 
[1]. However, some disadvantages still exist in the FSO 
communication system such as atmospheric turbulence and 
pointing errors, susceptibility to obstruction, attenuation and 
misalignment. Compared to FSO communication system, RF 
communication systems have advantages like low power with 
good operating range and provide higher mobility and beside 
these, here direct line of sight (LOS) n is not mandatory for 
communication. Thus, RF links and FSO links have 
complementary characteristics. In this perspective, the 
combination of RF and FSO is considered as a strong candidate 
for reliable communication, at high data rates for wireless 
backhaul networks. We can then note the fact that light rays pass 
through matter poorly, so they are generally confined to their 
environment. This is an advantage that improves information 
security (impossible to intercept data from the outside). 
To improve network reliability and coverage, it is important 
to use relays in both RF and FSO networks. Mixed RF-FSO 
relaying systems have been widely discussed in the literature: In 
[2], the authors consider a mixed RF-FSO system with double-
hop AF relaying in which a partial relay selection scheme was 
used to select the best relay. They also consider the RF channels 
are constrained and Rayleigh share spectrum while the FSO 
channel is assumed to follow the Gamma Gamma distribution. 
In [3] the others have proposed a mixed AF-based RF-FSO 
system, where the RF channel experiences Rayleigh fading and 
the FSO channel is assumed to operate on ℱ fading in the 
presence of pointing errors. 
In order to protect information and improve performance in 
hybrid RF/FSO networks, the others in [4] have proposed a 
hybrid RF/FSO system based on error-correcting codes, in 
particular QC-LDPC and SC- codes. LDPC. In their work they 
considered a hybrid RF/FSO system in which they used RF links 
over long distances, i.e. between the aggregation node to the 
BST antennas, from one BTS antenna to another BST antenna 
and FSO transmission over short distances less than 1 km is from 
the BTS antenna to the destination locations (inside towns) [4].  
Using another variable of LDPC codes called GC-LDPC and 
in order to increase the number of users in mixed RF/FSO 
networks, the authors in [5] proposed a mixed RF and hybrid 
RF/FSO buffered multi-user system based on GC-LDPC codes. 
They evaluated and verified the distribution of the total 
transmission power at the user and relay level. They also 
evaluated the performance of mixed RF and hybrid RF/FSO 
multi-user cooperative communication with buffering. 
One of the major challenges for applying LDPC codes in 5G 
systems is to implement powerful terminal-side decoders. To 
solve the above problem, a decoding structure based on machine 
learning has become popular in recent years. For example, to 
decode convolutional codes or turbo codes [6], a recurrent 
neural network (RNN) architecture has been proposed in [7] to 
706
2023 9th International Conference on Computer and Communications
979-8-3503-1725-1/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE
2023 9th International Conference on Computer and Communications (ICCC) | 979-8-3503-1725-1/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICCC59590.2023.10507665
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:02:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
exploit the correlation between different coded bits. To decode 
polar codes, a scalable deep neural network (DNN)-based 
decoding scheme was proposed in [8], where near maximum a 
posteriori (MAP) performance could be obtained. As far as we 
know, whether a machine learning based decoding structure can 
be applied to support multiple coding schemes is still open. 
Therefore, additional processing is required to control the 
behaviors of neural networks (NNs) to build FSO systems.  
 To the best of the authors' knowledge, research on the 
cooperative communication aspect of hybrid RF/FSO systems 
assisted by a DF relay based on error-correcting codes 
particularly LDPC codes using a learning-based LDPC decoder 
depth has not been analyzed in the literature. The main 
contribution of this article is to propose a cooperative hybrid 
RF/FSO system assisted by a DF relay based on error-correcting 
codes, in particular LDPC codes, using a decoding structure 
based on deep learning. We then optimize the neural network 
configurations by choosing different network classes and other 
related parameters. The corresponding performances are also 
checked under different signal-to-noise ratios (SNR) in order to 
obtain a reliable result. Through some numerical experiments, 
we are able to show that more or less the same decoding 
performance (e.g. SNR deviation less than 0.5 dB) can be 
achieved, compared to traditional detection schemes. 
Fig. 1. Example Architecture of a hybrid RF/FSO cooperative network using 
LDPC codes based on deep learning  
 The rest of this paper is organized like this. Section II 
provides some knowledge previews of LDPC codes and a brief 
introduction to deep learning. The proposed generalized 
network system model is discussed in section III and the 
algorithm for decoding LDPC codes based on deep learning is 
presented in section IV. We provide the numerical experiments 
corresponding to our model system in section V, and finally, in 
conclusion. 
II. CONTEXT 
In this section, we briefly introduce LDPC codes with 
current decoding mechanisms in the first part, and then discuss 
the basic structure of deep learning, which will be used in the 
decoding scheme. 
A. LDPC codes 
1) General principle 
LDPC (Low Density Parity Check) codes were invented by 
Gallager [9] in the early 1960s; in his doctoral thesis, he 
proposed a pseudo-random method which generated good 
LDPC codes. An LPDC code is a code whose parity check 
matrix H is of low density. Thus the number of “1” in the matrix 
is small compared to the number of “0”. It is recalled that the 
parity check relation between a code word and a parity check 
matrix is defined by: 
                                         𝐻𝑥! = 0!                                   (1) 
     The parity check matrix H is of dimension 𝑀 × 𝑁 thus 
defining a code in block where the number of information bits is  
𝐾= 𝑀−𝑁. 
We consider the following parity check matrix of a code with 
a rate of 1⁄2 and producing 4 bits of redundancy: 
  
     The parity equations associated with this matrix and with 
a code word 𝑥= [𝑥", … , 𝑥#] are : 
    𝑥" + 𝑥$ = 0 
                      𝑥% + 𝑥$ + 𝑥& = 0 
                            𝑥' + 𝑥& + 𝑥( = 0 
             𝑥) + 𝑥(  + 𝑥#  = 0 
     An LDPC code can also be represented, in addition to its 
parity check matrix, in graphical form. This representation is 
called Tanner's graph or more generally factorial graph. This 
representation is called Tanner's graph [10], or more generally 
factorial graph. A factorial graph contains two types of nodes, 
nodes of data and functional nodes. Two nodes are connected by 
a branch. 
 
Fig. 2. Factorial graph of an LDPC code. 
B. Deep Learning 
Deep learning is a type of machine learning (ML) and 
artificial intelligence (AI) that mimics the way humans acquire 
certain types of knowledge. Deep learning is an important part 
of data science, which includes statistics and predictive 
modeling. It is extremely useful for scientists responsible for 
collecting, analyzing and interpreting large amounts of data; 
Deep Learning makes this process faster and easier. We consider 
a neural network with several layers, including the input layer, 
the output layer and the hidden layers. 
(3) 
(2) 
707
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:02:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Fig. 3. An illustrative example of the generalized network architecture for 
channel decoding. The observed symbols y and the estimated bits 𝑢" are input 
and output nodes of the neural network. 
 In each layer, a series of neurons are applied to describe the 
linear (via weighted sum plus bias) and nonlinear (via activation 
function) relationships between input and output values. Two 
types of activation functions [11], namely sigmoid and rectified 
linear unit (ReLU), are commonly used in network design and 
the corresponding mathematical expressions are given by, 
𝜎*+,-.+/(𝑧) = 
%
%0 2!" ,            
          (4)   
 𝜎3245(𝑧) = 𝑚𝑎𝑥{0, 𝑧}.          
             (5) 
III.
MODEL SYSTEM AND CHANNEL MODEL
A. System Model
We Based on the model of the cooperative system described
in the article [5], we consider a cooperative double hop system 
using a DF relay. We use the same system [5] modified by 
integrating error correcting codes, in particular LDPC codes. In 
our system to decode the information, we use a deep learning 
based LDPC decoder. 
B. Channel model
Use In the following, each link is characterized in terms of
their respective signal-to-noise ratios. At the level of the RF link: 
This link is established between S and R. the source node, the 
modulated signal is noted 𝑥%
6, where N is the length of the coded 
signal. At the relay node, the signal received from the source and 
the signal retransmitted to the destination are denoted 𝑦%,83
6
 and 
𝑤%
6 respectively. The signal that is received by the R in phase I 
is given by: 
 𝑦%,83
6
=  =𝑃8ℎ%,83
6
𝑥%
6 + 𝑛%,83
6
                  (6) 
Keep Where 𝑥%
6 is the message signal transmitted from the 
source, 𝑃* is the transmit power of the source and 𝑛%,83
6
 is the 
additive white Gaussian noise of the channel (AWGN) S-R 
where 𝜎83
' = 𝑁"%  is a one-sided power spectral density which 
is added at the relay level and ℎ%,83
6
 represents the channel 
parameters between the source and the relay. 
Since the relay has knowledge of the source-relay channel, 
it detects the transmitted symbols. This is then amplified and re-
encoded. Hence, the symbols transmit through the relay to the 
destination is  𝑤%
6. The signal received at the destination is given 
by:  
𝑦%,39
6
=  =𝑃3ℎ%,39
6
𝑤%
6 + 𝑛%,39
6
  
    (7) 
Where 𝑤%
6 is the retransmitted signal from the relay, 𝑃3 is 
the transmit power of the relay and 𝑛%,39
6
 represents the additive 
noise at the receiver which consists of thermal noise, dark noise 
and radiation from bottom and ℎ%,39
6
 represents the parameter of 
the channel between the relay and the destination. 
 We will estimate the information bits 𝑢D%
6 on the receiver 
side based on the observed symbols y. At the destination, it 
detects the information received reçus 𝑦%,39
6
 from the relay to the 
destination and this signal will be demodulated by a PPM 
demodulator. This demodulated signal noted y will be decoded 
by a neural network capable of processing LDPC decoding with 
the use of deep learning to give the information 𝑢D%
6 which is the 
estimated information bits. 
 We propose a second architecture (fig. 5) of a cooperative 
hybrid RF/FSO network using a DF relay. This architecture is 
composed of a source, a relay and a destination. The source, 
relay and destination are equipped with a single antenna. In this 
network we use the same parameters used in the first. 
architecture. The only difference is that in the second 
architecture we use a deep learning based LDPC decoder by 
concatenating a flag section at the relay and at the destination. 
The decoding architecture used based on a deep neural network 
(DNN) makes it possible to decode the information coming from 
the source to the relay and to make the final decoding at the 
destination.  
 Finally to decode the data we proposed to use decoding 
described in the article [12]. In this article the authors proposed 
a unified Polar-LDPC decoding based on deep learning [12]. In 
our work we proposed to remove the Polar part and to integrate 
the LDPC part in our architecture. We also used the same data 
concerning the LDPC part. 
TABLE I. 
AN OVERVIEW OF NETWORK CONFIGURATIONS AND 
PARAMETERS 
708
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:02:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
 
Fig. 4. Hybrid RF/FSO network architecture using deep learning based LDPC decoding algorithm 
 
Fig. 5. Factorial Hybrid RF/FSO network architecture using an LDPC decoding algorithm (at the relay level and at the destination) based on deep learning 
 
 
709
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:02:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
IV. SIMULATION AND RESULTS 
In this section, we present numerical examples to 
demonstrate the exact analytical expressions and use of deep 
learning-based LDPC codes in hybrid RF/FSO communication, 
and also to illustrate the impact of various system and channel 
parameters on the performance of our system. In addition, this 
section verifies the comparison results between LDPC codes 
using deep learning and other LDPC codes like QC-LDPC and 
GC-LDPC in hybrid RF/FSO communication. 
TABLE II.  
SIMULATION PARAMETERS.  
 
Figure 6 presents the results of 2 schemes: hybrid RF/FSO 
transmission using GC-LDPC codes and hybrid RF/FSO 
communication using LDPC codes based on deep learning. 
Figure 7 presents the results of the schemes used for Figure 7 by 
integrating another RF/FSO hybrid system without LDPC 
coding. These two figures show the performance of the 
transmission schemes in terms of BER. 
 
Fig. 6. Performance of a cooperative RF/FSO system based on deep learning 
(Figure 4) compared to a cooperative RF/FSO scheme using GC-LDPC 
codes. 
It can be seen for an SNR of 20 dB, the RF/FSO cooperation 
system using GC/LDPC codes has a larger Binary Error Rate of 
about 3 × 10:), while the hybrid RF system /FSO using deep 
learning based LDPC codes has the lowest bit error rate 
6 × 10:$ . With a BER (bit error rate) of 10:) , the hybrid 
RF/FSO system using LDPC codes based on deep learning made 
it possible to have a gain of 5.5 dB, which allows to conclude 
that RF/FSO cooperation using LDPC codes based on deep 
learning improves performance by reducing BER. 
 
Fig. 7. Performance of a hybrid RF/FSO system based on deep learning 
compared to a system using GC-LDPC codes and an RF/FSO system 
without LDPC codes. 
Figure 7 shows a summary and summary comparative study 
of the scenarios of a RF/FSO scheme using LDPC codes based 
on deep learning, set out above (Figure 4) compared to a 
cooperative RF/FSO scheme using GC-LDPC codes and an 
RF/FSO scheme without using LDPC. It can be seen that, if SNR 
is fixed at 20 dB, the cooperative RF/FSO system with the 
absence of LDPC codes presents a greater Binary Error Rate of 
about 10:%, followed by the system cooperative RF/FSO with 
GC-LDPC which exhibits a BER of 3 × 10:), while the deep 
learning based RF/FSO system exhibits the lowest Binary error 
rate 6 × 10:$. At a BER of 10:%, the channel gain is about 13 
dB with a cooperative RF/FSO system using GC-LDPC codes 
compared to an RF/FSO system without LDPC codes. The 
RF/FSO system with LDPC code based on deep learning 
presents a gain of 5.5 dB compared to a cooperative RF/FSO 
system using LDPC codes. This means that in terms of 
performance, the hybrid RF/FSO DF system (Figure 4) using 
LDPC codes based on deep learning gives better performance 
compared to the systems. 
 Figure 8 is the BER versus SNR, when using a hybrid 
RF/FSO cooperative system based on deep learning (Figure 4) 
compared with two other RF/FSO systems using other codes. In 
addition, to show the impact of using LDPC codes based on deep 
learning, we compared it with other LDPC codes such as QC-
LDPC and GC-LDPC codes. All these systems were simulated 
under strong conditions atmospheric turbulence. 
710
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:02:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Fig. 8. Exampl Performance of deep learning-based LDPC codes compared to 
QC-LDPC and GC-LDPC codes in hybrid RF/FSO systems under high 
turbulence conditions 
 Figure 8 shows that the hybrid RF/FSO systems are more 
advantageous in the case of a mixed RF/FSO cooperative DF 
system using the error correcting codes name the LDPC codes 
based on deep learning compared to a hybrid system RF/FSO 
RF/FSO with the use of QC-LDPC and GC-LDPC codes. Hence 
the importance of using error-correcting codes based on deep 
learning. In addition, we can also see on this graph the 
robustness of LDPC codes based on deep learning, compared to 
other codes such as QC-LDPC and GC-LDPC codes in strong 
turbulence environments. These results show that with an SNR 
of 20 dB, the RF/FSO system in the high turbulence regime 
presents a larger Binary Error Rate of about 3 × 10:% in the 
case where we use QC-LDPC codes and 3 × 10:) in the case of 
the RF/FSO system using GC/LDPC codes, while the RF/FSO 
system in high turbulence regime exhibits the lowest d 'Binary 
error of 6 × 10:$  when using LDPC codes based on deep 
learning. 
 The graph in Figure 10 illustrates the performance 
comparison between a system hybrid RF/FSO using LDPC 
codes based on deep learning with a single neural network 
(figure 4) and hybrid RF/FSO systems using LDPC codes based 
on deep learning with two neural networks (figure 5) (at the 
destination and at the relay) 
Fig. 9. Example Performance of a hybrid RF/FSO system using LDPC codes 
based on deep learning with two neural networks compared with a hybrid 
RF/FSO system with a single neural network. 
As seen in Figure 9, the performance of the RF/FSO system 
improves when uses error correcting codes, in particular LDPC 
codes, with two neural networks (one at the relay and the other 
at the destination). The BER decreases with the use of LDPC 
codes with two neural networks and this allows to obtain a better 
performance in the mixed RF/FSO transmission based on deep 
learning with two neural networks compared to an RF/FSO 
system with one single neural network. The results show a deep 
learning-based RF/FSO gain with two neural networks ranging 
from 2 dB to 4 dB compared to a deep learning-based RF/FSO 
transmission scheme with a single neural network. 
V.
CONCLUSON
This work is devoted to the study of cooperative hybrid 
RF/FSO systems using LDPC error-correcting codes based on 
deep 
learning. 
The 
market 
for 
high-speed 
wireless 
communications is shared between RF transmissions and 
wireless optical transmissions, which are gaining more and more 
market share from wireless telecommunications. In fact, unlike 
radio transmissions, optical transmissions do not require 
authorization and allow access to a much higher speed than that 
of radio transmissions. A cooperative system is an alternative 
technology, in which spatial diversity can be achieved by 
coordinating multiple nodes that are close together to work 
together and form virtual antenna arrays. It has been shown that 
using error-correcting codes named LDPC to protect 
information results in improved system performance. It is also 
shown that a cooperative RF/FSO hybrid system using LDPC 
codes based on deep learning gives a substantial performance 
improvement over a hybrid RF/FSO system using LDPC, QC-
LDPC codes and GC-LDPC without deep learning but also 
compared to a hybrid RF/FSO cooperative system without the 
use of LDPC codes. 
711
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:02:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[1]
Garlinska, M.; Pregowska, A.; Gutowska, I.; Osial, M.; Szczepanski, J.
Experimental Study of the Free Space Optics Communication System
Operating in the 8–12 μm Spectral Range. Electronics 2021, 10, 875.
[Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
[2]
M. Torabi et N. Mohammadi, « Partial Relay Selection with Feedback
Delay in an AF Cooperative Relaying RF-FSO System with Spectrum
Sharing », in 2019 2nd West Asian Colloquium on Optical Wireless
Communications (WACOWC), 2019, p. 26-30.
[3]
Han, X. Liu, Y. Wang, et B. Li, « Performance Analysis of Mixed
Rayleigh and F Distribution RF-FSO Cooperative Systems with AF
Relaying », Electronics, vol. 11, no 15, Art. no 15, janv. 2022, doi:
10.3390/electronics11152299. 
[4]
Ibrahima GUEYE, Ibra DIOUM, Idy DIOP, K. Wane KEITA, Papis
NDIAYE, Moussa DIALLO, Sidi Mohamed FARSSI “Performance of
Hybrid RF/FSO Cooperative Systems Based on Quasicyclic LDPC Codes
and Space-Coupled LDPC Codes”, Wirel. Commun. Mob. Comput., vol.
2020, p. 1 15, déc. 2020, 
[5]
I. Gueye, I. Diop, et I. Dioum, « Performance analysis of multi-user mixed
RF and hybrid RF/FSO cooperative systems with buffers based on GC-
LDPC codes », in 2021 IEEE 2nd International Conference on Signal,
Control and Communication (SCC), déc. 2021, p. 155‑160. doi:
10.1109/SCC53769.2021.9768382. 
[6]
M. Jeanne, J.-C. Carlach, and P. Siohan, “Joint source-channel decoding
of variable-length codes for convolutional codes and turbo codes,” IEEE
transactions on communications, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 10–15, 2005.
[7]
H. Kim, Y. Jiang, R. Rana, S. Kannan, S. Oh, and P. Viswanath,
“Communication algorithms via deep learning,” in The International
Zurich Seminar on Information and Communication (IZS 2018)
Proceedings. ETH Zurich, 2018, pp. 48–50.
[8]
S. Cammerer, T. Gruber, J. Hoydis, and S. t. Brink, “Scaling deep
learning-based decoding of polar codes via partitioning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv: 1702.06901, 2017. 
[9]
R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory,
vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[10] R. Tanner, ✭✭A recursive approach to low complexity codes✭✭. IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 27, sept 1981.
[11] H. Ye and G. Y. Li, “Initial results on deep learning for joint channel
equalization and decoding,” in IEEE 86th Vehicular Technology
Conference (VTC-Fall), 2017, pp. 1–5.
[12] Y. Wang, Z. Zhang, S. Zhang, S. Cao, et S. Xu, « A Unified Deep
Learning Based Polar-LDPC Decoder for 5G Communication Systems »,
in 2018 10th International Conference on Wireless Communications and
Signal 
Processing 
(WCSP), 
oct. 
2018, 
p. 
1‑6. 
doi:
10.1109/WCSP.2018.8555891.
712
REFERENCES 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:02:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
