4706

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023

A Novel Implementation Methodology for Error Correction Codes on a Neuromorphic Architecture
Sahil Hassan , Parker Dattilo , and Ali Akoglu , Member, IEEE

Abstract—The Internet of Things infrastructure connects a massive number of edge devices with an increasing demand for intelligent sensing and inferencing capability. Such data-sensitive functions necessitate energy-efficient and programmable implementations of error correction codes (ECCs) and decoders. The algorithmic flow of ECCs with concurrent accumulation and comparison types of operations are innately exploitable by neuromorphic architectures for energy-efficient execution—an area that is relatively unexplored outside of machine learning applications. For the first time, we propose a methodology to map the hard-decision class of decoder algorithms on a neuromorphic architecture. We present the implementation of the Gallager B (GaB) decoding algorithm on a TrueNorth-inspired architecture that is emulated on the Xilinx Zynq ZCU102 MPSoC. Over this reference implementation, we propose architectural modifications at the neuron block level that result in a reduction of energy consumption by 31% with a negligible increase in resource usage while achieving the same error correction performance.
Index Terms—Error correction, FPGA-based emulation, Gallager B (GaB), neuromorphic computing.
I. INTRODUCTION
B IOLOGICALLY inspired computing has been a growing area of research seeking energy-efficient execution of complex tasks, beyond what is achievable by Von Neumann computers. Neuromorphic computing architectures are a realization of bio-mimicry in computing, with many applications designed to exploit the benefits in energy and parallelism [1], [2], [3], [4], [5]. Due to the event-based execution inherent in a neural network model that is also foundational to neuromorphic architectures, machine learning with neural networks for classification and detection types of problems has been successfully deployed on them. Neuromorphic architecture research has been traditionally driven by improving accuracy for classification and detection types of problems in the trade space of scalability and energy efficiency [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11]. However, parallelism offered by neuromorphic architectures is a less explored area for nontraditional applications or deterministic algorithms [12], [13].
Manuscript received 11 January 2023; revised 14 April 2023; accepted 28 May 2023. Date of publication 12 June 2023; date of current version 22 November 2023. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation (NSF) Research Project under Grant NSF CNS-1624668. This article was recommended by Associate Editor A. Gamatie. (Sahil Hassan and Parker Dattilo are co-first authors.) (Corresponding author: Sahil Hassan.)
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721 USA (e-mail: sahilhassan@arizona.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCAD.2023.3285410

The rapidly growing number of connected IoT devices generates a large amount of multisource, highly heterogeneous data. Therefore, high-throughput and energy-efficient execution has become a key demand by applications of edge computing for distributed data-driven sensing, analysis, and inference. The networks used to connect IoT edge devices are characterized by resultant large streams of incomplete or incorrect data at the receiver due to channel interference and power limitations [14]. This error in data can hamper the inference quality at edge devices and force them to retransmit the data. The retransmission process increases the communication cost and network traffic [15]. Furthermore, repeated communication rapidly depletes the energy available to power-constrained edge devices and may lead to inaccurate inferences. Therefore, in addition to the high-throughput and energy-efficient execution, ensuring data integrity is also needed. The use of error correcting codes (ECCs) has been advocated for application in a power-constrained IoT environment [16].
To the best of our knowledge, neuromorphic architectures have not been explored for their potential on energy-efficient error correction capability to support intelligent sensing operations at the edge. We believe that there is an opportunity for applying error correction algorithms to the neuromorphic domain due to two overlapping features: 1) computational model and 2) execution flow. Among several classes of ECC, the low-density parity check (LDPC) codes are highly popular due to their channel capacity approaching performance [17]. The key computations in an LDPC decoder algorithm such as accumulation and comparison are inherently supported by the neuron model [18] in spiking neural networks (SNNs) on modern neuromorphic architectures, and with slight modifications, can easily support modulo two addition. The iterative decoding process eventually terminates when a certain threshold has been reached for a set of parameters. This threshold-based operation is also naturally supported by the neuron model as it generates a spike only when a certain threshold has been reached. The execution flow of LDPC decoders offers concurrency and has already been the main target for parallelization [19], [20], [21]. Such a parallel execution model is also innately supported by the axon–neuron connections of neuromorphic architectures.
In this study, we discuss mapping strategies to deploy an iterative decoding algorithm on neuromorphic architectures and propose architectural changes driven by the mapping strategies for efficient implementation. We demonstrate our methodology by implementing a representative decoder, with the aim of establishing a basis for extending to other decoders of the same class in the future. For this purpose, we chose the hard-decision Gallager B (GaB) [22] decoding algorithm

1937-4151 c 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:05:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HASSAN et al.: NOVEL IMPLEMENTATION METHODOLOGY FOR ECCs ON A NEUROMORPHIC ARCHITECTURE

4707

because its implementation contains foundational computing steps that are shared among other hard-decision ECCs. We target a hard-decision class of algorithm as other classes of algorithms [19] involve complex arithmetic and floating point intensive operations making them not suitable for SNN-based implementation. Therefore, to this end, the contributions of this article are as follows.
1) Present the first mapping approach of an ECC decoder (GaB) on a neuromorphic architecture that is generalizable to other ECC decoders.
2) Develop novel implementation of majority voting and, most resource efficient and deterministic multi-input XOR implementation on the neuromorphic architecture.
3) Propose an XOR-integrated neuromorphic architecture that enables resource efficient and scalable implementations of relevant applications.
4) Demonstrate throughput and energy benefits of the XOR-integrated ECC decoder implementation.
We conduct our analysis by leveraging reconfigurable architecture for neuromorphic computing (RANC) [23], an opensource highly flexible ecosystem that consists of both software simulator and FPGA-based emulator. RANC supports various neuromorphic architecture configurations through its parameterized design and has been validated for its ability to replicate TrueNorth behaviorally, which we use as a baseline implementation. For clarity of the illustrations, we present our mapping approach for GaB on the XOR-integrated neuromorphic architectures over a short LDPC code that generates 8-bit codeword. We utilize the cycle accurate software simulator to perform functional verification of the two implementations and quantify the cycle count reduction achieved with the XOR-integrated architecture over a test dataset. We emulate the baseline and XOR-integrated architectures on the Zynq UltraScale+ ZCU102 platform and execute GaB over the two emulations using the same test dataset. We show that our mapping approach on the XOR-integrated architecture reduces the cycle count to process a codeword by a factor of 1.48× with negligible increase of 1.29% and 1.74% in resource usage and power consumption, respectively. We show that this negligible increase remains consistent by performing a scalability analysis where we compare resource usage and power consumption trends across designs with 15 and 25 neuromorphic cores. Finally, we conduct a sweeping experiment where we vary the number of codewords tested and GaB simulation parameters and observe that the XOR-integrated architecture saves up to 31% energy over the baseline architecture. These results show that the proposed neuron block architecture offers execution time and energy benefits without sacrificing power efficiency for neuromorphic applications that rely on performing XOR operations.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. Section II provides background on the GaB algorithm. Section III describes the components and execution flow of the neuromorphic architecture. The neuromorphic mapping approach for fundamental functions frequently used in hard-decision decoders is presented in Section IV. Section V describes the mapping approach of the GaB decoder. We present the experimental setup and implementation results in Sections VI and VII, respectively. Finally, Section VIII concludes the findings of this article.

Fig. 1. Running example H-matrix and corresponding tanner graph.

II. BACKGROUND: GALLAGER B DECODING ALGORITHM
GaB algorithm is representative of contemporary harddecision class of error correction algorithms with its bipartite graph architecture, accumulation operations, and iterative decoding process [19], [20]. Therefore, as an entry point, implementing the GaB decoder on a neuromorphic computing architecture paves the way for establishing a methodology to implement sophisticated bit flipping algorithms and realize low-power event-driven error correction [24] on the edge. In the following sections, we introduce key terminology and present an algorithmic overview of GaB decoding.

A. Notations
LDPC codes are commonly described by a sparse matrix
H called parity-check matrix. The H matrix dimensions are denoted as (M, N), where N > M. According to this code, a message m = (m1, m2, . . . , mK) ∈ {0, 1}K (where, K = N − M) is encoded to generate a codeword x = (x1, x2, . . . , xN) ∈ {0, 1}N with length N, which satisfies the condition HxT = 0. The decoder is designed as a bipartite
Tanner graph, as depicted on the right of Fig. 1, with N vari-
able node units (VNUs) vn and M check node units (CNUs) cm (1 ≤ n ≤ N, 1 ≤ m ≤ M), interconnected by edges according to the nonzero entries in the H matrix. The num-
ber of edges connected to each node is called the degree of
connection. The degree of VNU and CNU are denoted as dvn and dcm , respectively. In this article, we consider the regular LDPC code [22], which consists of all the VNUs having the
same degree dv and all the CNUs having the same degree dc. The set of CNUs connected with vn is expressed as S(vn), and S(cm) denotes the set of all VNUs connected with cm. vncm indicates message passed from VNU vn to CNU cm and cmvn indicates suggestions passed from CNU cm to VNU vn.

B. Gallager B Algorithm

The GaB decoder is constructed as a bipartite Tanner graph

according to the H matrix. Fig. 1 shows an example of H

matrix and its corresponding Tanner graph. The circular nodes

represent the VNUs and the square nodes represent the CNUs.

At the beginning of the decoding process, each VNU receives

a bit of r, the message from the channel. The VNUs, therefore,

broadcast these bits to their respective connected CNUs. The

CNUs check for the parity condition between the bits received

from connected VNUs, and send suggestions for corrections

back to the VNUs, according to

⎛

⎞

cmvn = ⎝

vtcm⎠ mod 2

(1)

t∈S (cm )\vn

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:05:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4708

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023

Algorithm 1: GaB Decoding Algorithm

Input: r, H, maxIter

1 vncm = rn where n ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N} and m ∈ {1, 2, . . . , M};

2 for i ← 1 to maxIter do

3

Compute all cmvn using Equation 1;

4

Compute all vncm using Equation 2;

5

Compute x using Equation 3;

6

if Equation 4 holds true then

7

break;

Output: x

Fig. 3. Logical representation of a neuromorphic core.

Fig. 2. GaB decoder architecture 8-bit codeword.

⎧

⎪⎪⎨ 0, if

t∈S(vn)\cm ctvn + rn < b

vncm

=

⎩⎪⎪

1, rn,

if

t∈S (vn )\cm

otherwise.

ct vn

+ rn > b

(2)

Upon receiving the suggestions from the connected CNUs,

each VNU applies a majority voting function on the CNU

suggestions and received r bit to calculate: 1) new esti-

mated VNU-to-CNU signals according to (2) and 2) the

estimated codeword bit according to (3). As illustrated with

Algorithm 1, a single decoding iteration involves computations

based on (1)–(3), which is repeated for a predefined number

of iterations (maxIter) ⎧ ⎪⎪⎨ 0, if

t∈S(vn) ctvn + rn < b

xn

=

⎪⎩⎪

1, rn,

if

t∈S (vn )

otherwise

ct vn

+ rn > b

(3)

Hx T mod 2 = 0.

(4)

At the end of each iteration, the estimated codeword x is checked against the H-matrix to verify that it fulfills the parity conditions as captured by (4). If x satisfies (4) within the specified maximum number of iterations, then the codeword has been corrected successfully (x = x ). Despite reaching the maximum specified iteration, if (4) is not satisfied, it is considered as a “failed-to-decode” scenario.

C. Architecture for 8-Bit Codeword
In order to demonstrate mapping of a GaB decoder on the neuromorphic architecture, we consider an 8-bit LDPC code, and its decoder shown in Fig. 1 as a running example. The decoder parameters are N = 8, M = 4, dv = 2, and dc = 4. Fig. 2 shows the fully unrolled architecture for this decoder, where each VNUn receives 2-bit cmvn inputs from its connected CNUs and 1-bit of codeword form the channel (rn). A VNU generates 2-bit vncm and 1-bit xncm based

Fig. 4. Neuron block structure of the baseline architecture.
on (2) and (3), which is broadcasted to its two connected CNUs, respectively. A CNUm receives 4-bit vncm and 4-bit codeword estimations xncm from the connected VNUs. Each CNU applies XOR operations as per (1) on the vncm signals to produce 4-bit cmvn outputs. Furthermore, each CNU calculates a partial vector–matrix multiplication (VMM) of (4) (using XOR operations) for a given row of H, as pm. Compute Syndrome unit receives the 4-bit pm signals generated by four CNUs and checks fulfillment of (4).
III. NEUROMORPHIC MODEL
Fig. 3 shows the reference architecture composed of neuromorphic cores interconnected with a mesh network. The logical representation of a core is shown in Fig. 3 (right). The core consists of a set of M axons (ai) and N neurons (nj), which, respectively, receive the input data to the core and produce the output data from the core. The unit of these input–output data is called a spike ({0, 1} bit), that can be modeled in a time series as a Dirac delta function. The axons and neurons of a core are interconnected using crossbar connections called synaptic crossbar. The axon–neuron connection crosspoints on the synaptic crossbar can be configured to connect any desired set of axons to a given set of neurons. These connections are called synaptic connections and are illustrated by a solid black circle at the connected crosspoints. Existence of a synaptic connection between an axon–neuron pair suggests that any spike received at the axon will be sent to the neuron. The intercore activities at the design level are synchronized by a global signal called a tick. At each tick, a series of intracore processing of input data received by axons takes place at neurons before moving on to the next tick.
Fig. 4 illustrates the neuron block with architecture parameter definitions shown in Table I. A given neuron nj (where j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N}) has an array of four weight values associated with it (wj[0] through wj[3]). Similarly, each axon ai (where i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , M}) has a specific type τi assigned to it

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:05:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HASSAN et al.: NOVEL IMPLEMENTATION METHODOLOGY FOR ECCs ON A NEUROMORPHIC ARCHITECTURE
TABLE I AXON AND NEURON PARAMETERS

4709

Algorithm 2: Neuron nj Operation

Input: wj, vj+, v−j , lj, rj+, rj−, maxTicks

1 t = 0;

2 vj(0) = 0;

3 for t ← 1 to maxTicks do

4

for j ← 1 to N do

5

sj(t) = 0;

6

vj(t) = vj(t − 1);

7

for ai in Connected axons & ai Spiking do

8

vj(t)+ = wj[τi];

9

vj(t) += lj;

10

if vj(t) ≥ v+j then

11

sj(t) = 1;

12

vj(t) = rj+;

13

if vj(t) ≤ vj− then

14

vj(t) = rj−;

15

Send sj(t) to destination core;

out of four possible types (τi ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3}) that index into the weight array for each connected neuron. All of the neurons in each core follow the leaky integrate and fire (LIF) neuron model. Algorithm 2 shows the overall execution of a neuron and this process is repeated during each tick concurrently by all N neurons of a core, before moving on to the next tick.
The operation of the neuron nj starts by observing the first axon on the core. If there is a synaptic connection and a spike is present on the axon ai, the process_spike signal will select the weight value wi,j based on the type τi of the axon. This weight value in the neuron block is labeled as operand A in Fig. 4. In the case that either no synaptic connection exists or a spike is not received on a connected axon, the process_spike signal will select 0 as operand A. The second operand B is obtained by loading the remaining neuron potential from the previous tick vj(t − 1) when the neuron block starts processing for nj neuron (new_neuron = 1). Accumulation of A over the previous tick potential (B) produces C, which gets stored as neuron potential through NP register. The feedback loop is used to keep accumulating the neuron potential for the remaining axons (new_neuron = 0). Upon completing the processing of all axons, the leak lj is accumulated with D, and resulting neuron potential is compared against vj+ and v−j . If neuron potential is greater than equal to the positive threshold vj+, a spike is produced as sj(t), and the neuron potential vj(t) is set to rj+. Otherwise, the comparator outputs no spike, and the current value of neuron potential is assigned to vj(t).
IV. FUNCTION MAPPING ON RANC
In this section, we identify the functions that are frequently found in the execution of the GaB decoding algorithm and

Fig. 5. XOR-integrated neuron block architecture.
present our approach for mapping them on the neuromorphic platform. Based on Algorithm 1 and (1)–(4), the architecture needs to support register or buffer, majority, AND, OR, NOR, and XOR functions. The XOR function is a special case due to its linearly inseparable nature, therefore, we start with mapping the 4-input XOR that is utilized in the CNU block.
A. XOR
XOR is a key operation used frequently in application domains, such as ECC and cryptography. Equations (1) and (4) of the GaB decoding algorithm presented in Section II show the use of XOR in the form of modulo 2 additions. Due to the extensive use of this function, there have been several efforts in literature to mimic XOR behavior using neural networks [25]. These works acknowledge that the XOR is a linearly inseparable problem, and unsolvable using a single real-valued neuron. Therefore, the existing mapping of the 2 input XOR function on neuromorphic platforms [18] show that XOR implementation requires three LIF neurons, which is much higher compared to the remaining logical operations (AND, NAND, OR, NOR, and NOT) which require only one neuron. Furthermore, these three neurons operate over two ticks to produce the output of a single 2-input XOR operation, which leads to increased execution time and routing activity.
Motivated by the higher neuron requirement of the XOR implementation posing as a resource scarcity issue, we modify the neuron block architecture in RANC as shown in Fig. 5, such that a single neuron can perform an XOR operation only on the least significant bit of the two inputs A and B, and sets all the upper bits to 0. The neuron block has an additional single-bit static parameter for operation selection (op_select), that chooses between LIF and XOR behavior. This op_select bit is used as the select input to the multiplexer Mop, that picks between the outputs from the adder and the XOR module, to forward as the output of the neuron block. With this neuron block modification, each XOR operation can be implemented with only one neuron in a single tick. For the rest of this article, we refer to this XOR-based modified neuron block design as XOR-integrated architecture, and the LIF-based unmodified neuron block design from Fig. 4 as baseline architecture.
To demonstrate the resource efficiency benefit of the presented modified neuron block architecture, we establish a baseline comparison point with a 4-input XOR implementation in Fig. 6, along with its corresponding truth table in Table II. This implementation requires two layers of neurons, operating over two ticks. The first layer in Fig. 6 (left) counts the number of spikes (1’s) present in the input signal received

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:05:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4710

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023

Fig. 6. Implementation of 4-input XOR function on baseline architecture.
TABLE II FOUR-INPUT XOR MAPPING (a0 − a3 REPRESENTED
IN HEXADECIMAL FORM)

Fig. 7. Required neurons to map XOR operations with respect to N and dc on baseline and XOR-integrated architectures on RANC.

=

N 2

×

dc2 + dc + 1

(5)

NMod−Neurons = (M × dc × 1) + (M × 1)

=

M

×

(dc

+

1)

=

N 2

×

(dc

+

1).

(6)

in any order. For example, if three spikes are received at a1a4, the neurons p1, p2 and p3 produce a spike. This behavior is achieved by using a fully connected core with a single type of axons indexing to a weight value of 1. Each neuron of the core performs weight accumulation with a positive threshold of 1, a hard-reset that sets the potential back to 0 after a spike, or if the potential is below 0, and a leak value that starts with 0 for p1 neuron, and keeps increasing by 1 for the remaining neurons (leak values 1, 2, and 3 for p2, p3, and p4, respectively). The spikes produced by the first layer neurons are sent to the second layer illustrated in Fig. 6 (right). The second layer has only one neuron that is fully connected with all the axons. The axons are of two types that index into two weight values: {1, −1}. The paodd axons index to a weight of 1, and paeven axons index to a weight of −1. The O neuron performs accumulation with a positive threshold of 1, and a leak value of 0. The design of the second core/layer implies that neuron O will only spike when an odd number of 1s is propagated through the previous core. The truth table for the presented XOR mapping is illustrated in Table II. With this presented mapping methodology, an n-input XOR operation would require n+1 neurons, n neurons in the first layer, and 1 in the second layer. Therefore, for a 2-input XOR operation, 3 neurons are required, which is in line with the presented neuron requirement in [18]. There are several existing 2-input XOR implementations in the literature using SNNs [25], [26], [27], [28], [29], [30]. These works are limited due to their lack of consideration of multi-input XOR operations. Furthermore, the presented approaches in [25], [26], [28], and [29] require more number of neurons compared to the presented baseline approach. There are additional complexities of a training process of the SNNs [25], [28], [29], [30], and requirement of maintaining specific temporal sequence between arrival of specific signals [26]. To the best of our knowledge, the presented baseline XOR approach is the most resource efficient, and deterministic implementation of multi-input XOR operation using the LIF neuron model
NNeurons = (M × dc × dc) + (M × (dc + 1)) = M × dc2 + dc + 1

In order to quantitatively analyze the benefit of the XOR-integrated neuron block implementation in a real-world application, let us consider a GaB decoder implementation described by N, M, dv, and dc (given M = (N/2). This design consists of M CNUs, each performing dc number of (dc − 1)input XORs and one dc-input XOR. Equation (5) expresses the number of required LIF neurons for XOR operations (NNeurons) and (6) presents the number of XOR-integrated neurons (NMod−Neurons) required for XOR operations in the same decoder. Therefore, the 8-bit decoder presented in Section II-C requires 84 LIF neurons, while only 20 XORintegrated neurons are required for the same decoder. Both (5) and (6) show that the number of required neurons for XOR is directly proportional to dc and N values.
In practical implementations of LDPC codes, dc varies from 2 to 8, and N can grow to 64 800 bits in Digital Video Broadcasting-S2 [19], [24]. Fig. 7 shows how the number of required neurons scales when mapping XOR operations with respect to N and dc values for the baseline and XORintegrated architectures using (5) and (6). The horizontal line marks the number of available neurons on the TrueNorth chip. The four solid and dashed line plots correspond to LIF neurons and XOR modified neurons, respectively, over four dc values, {2, 4, 6, 8}. As N approaches 64 800, the XOR operations alone occupy more than half of the available neurons on the TrueNorth chip when dc is 4. For dc values of 6 and 8, the XOR operations occupy all the neurons when N reaches 48 770 and 28 728 bits, respectively. Note, the largest mappable N is significantly lower than these two values, as the underlying decoder functions besides XORs, require resources as well. Therefore, for dc values of 6 and 8, decoders with only smaller-sized LDPC codes are realizable on the neuromorphic platforms using baseline LIF neurons. In contrast, the number of required neurons with the XOR-integrated neuron block is well within the neurons present on the platform. For the largest dc and N values of 8 and 64 800, respectively, the XOR operations of GaB would require only 291 600 neurons, which is 27.8% of the total available neurons. In Section V, we present the detailed GaB decoder design on the neuromorphic core with the XOR-integrated neuron block. Then, in Section VII, we discuss power and energy differences between the GaB

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:05:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HASSAN et al.: NOVEL IMPLEMENTATION METHODOLOGY FOR ECCs ON A NEUROMORPHIC ARCHITECTURE

4711

Fig. 8.

Function mapping for: (a) register/buffer, (b) 3-input

majority, (c) 4-input majority, (d) 2-input AND and OR, and (e) 2-input NOR.

decoder design utilizing the XOR-integrated neuron versus the design utilizing the baseline LIF neuron.

B. Register or Buffer
We design a 1-bit register/buffer as shown in Fig. 8(a) where D and Q are the input and output bits, respectively. The Q neuron has a positive threshold of 1, and the D axon indexes into a weight value of 1 for the Q neuron. Through this configuration, any spike received on D generates a spike on Q neuron. We introduce a feedback loop to preserve a received spike as a memory on Q, so that it keeps spiking until the register is reset. Through the axon F and neuron D feedback loop, when D axon receives a spike, D also spikes where D indexes into weight of 1 for D neuron, which has a positive threshold of 1. D feeds the spike back to the F axon in the next tick, creating a feedback loop. F having a synaptic connection with the Q neuron, will cause the Q neuron to spike. Hence, for the subsequent ticks, even if there are no spikes received on D, the feedback loop with F axon and D neuron helps preserve the spike on Q neuron.
We introduce the Reset axon to set the register value to 0, where Reset has synaptic connections with D and Q neurons, and it indexes into a negative weight value of -2. This negative weight should be large enough in magnitude to drive the neuron potential of D and Q to ≤ 0, so that they do not spike anymore in subsequent ticks, which is equivalent to preserving a value of 0. We use the proposed model for a 1-bit register to implement an n-bit register/buffer by cascading each register sequentially, scaling up to a 256-bit register within a single core using a single Reset signal. An example multibit register/buffer will be shown in Section V-A.

C. Majority Voting
We implement two versions of a majority voting function as shown in Fig. 8(b) and (c). This design mimics/emulates the function described by (2). There are three possible states that the majority function applied over the received multibit inputs. These states are majority of ones, majority of zeros, and tie between the two. The design choices for mapping majority voting for odd and even numbers of inputs vary as illustrated with the implementations shown in Fig. 8(b) and (c), respectively. Both designs have a single output neuron M, which has synaptic connection with all the input axons. In case of the odd input count design, all the axons index into the same weight of 1. As there can only be a majority case and no tie case, all the axons are weighted equally. If more than half of the axons {T, A, B} (any 2 or 3) spike, M should also spike. Hence, a neuron potential of ≥ 2 before applying leak and threshold should cause M to spike in this case. We realize this

by setting the positive threshold v+ = 1 and leak l = −1 for the M neuron. Leak is used, here, to ensure no remainder potential from the current tick moves on to the next tick.
In case of the even input count design with 4 axons ({T, A, B, C}), a tie case is also possible besides the majority cases. The occurrence of a tie should cause the M neuron to take the value according to the T axon only. This axon is the tie input of the function. Hence, axon T is weighted higher at weight value of 2, and remaining axons index into weight value of 1. This one higher weight assignment helps break the tie based on value at T axon. This function would achieve a majority case, if at least 3 out of 4 axons have the same value, which corresponds to a neuron potential of ≥ 3. Hence, a positive threshold v+ = 1 and leak l = −2 is chosen for M neuron. In tie cases, where only two out of four axons receive spike, the neuron potential can only reach 3 when T is one of the spiking axons. Hence, M neuron would only spike if T axon has a spike on it.
D. Boolean Operations
GaB utilizes AND, OR, and NOR operations to check conditions for terminating the decoding process and generating the output codeword when all of the CNUs have their parity conditions fulfilled (4). We implement 2-input AND and OR operations as illustrated in Fig. 8(d), where both A and B input axons are connected with Out neuron, and index to a weight of 1. In case of AND operation, Out should only generate a spike when spikes are received on both A and B, driving the neuron potential in Out to 2, before applying any leak or threshold. Hence, we choose v+ = 1 and l = −1. In case of OR, however, reaching neuron potential of 1 before applying leak is sufficient to capture the condition and generate a spike, hence, v+ = 1 and l = 0 is chosen for the Out neuron.
We implement 2-input NOR operation as illustrated in Fig. 8(e). This mapping has an additional S axon besides the A and B axons carrying input operands. The S axon is defaulted to receive a spike. Presence of spike in either of the two input axons (A and B) should stop Out neuron from spiking. Hence, we associate a negative weight of -1 with A and B axons to penalize the neuron potential when A or B has a spike. S axon indexes into a positive weight of 1. As a result, the neuron potential of Out can reach to 1 (without applying leak or threshold), only when both A and B axons do not spike. Therefore, we set positive threshold v+ = 1 and leak l = 0, with reset value r+ = 0 for Out neuron.
Note that all of the above-mentioned Boolean function mapping approaches provide competitive resource utilization with [18], where only one neuron has been used to map AND, OR and NAND operations.
V. MAPPING METHODOLOGY: GAB ON RANC
Fig. 9 shows the hardware implementation of GaB that utilizes the functions listed in Table III and the XOR-integrated neuron block. In the following sections, we present our detailed mapping approach for each of the 8 cores and discuss their functionality through tick-by-tick execution of a single GaB iteration based on our running example with the selected input r = 10001100 that is corrected to 10001101.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:05:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4712

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023
TABLE IV AXON AND NEURON CONFIGURATIONS OF Input Core

Fig. 9. Overview of GaB algorithm on a neuromorphic architecture using the proposed XOR-integrated neuron block.
TABLE III LIST OF CORES AND ASSOCIATED FUNCTIONS

TABLE V Input Core NEURON ACTIVITY FOR 10001100 INPUT
WORD OVER TWO TICKS

feedback neurons. They also connect to the VNU neurons, sending the data to the VNU Core every tick. Connected to the enable axon en are initialization neurons initit and initv. These neurons signal the Iteration Counter Core and VNU Core, respectively, to initialize their execution. The reset axon rstin has a negative weight for all neurons that stop the feedback loop, except neurons rstit and rstv, which forward the reset signal to the Iteration Counter Core and VNU Core. We send a signal on the reset axon to put the neurons back to their initial state before decoding another input word.

Fig. 10. Input core.
A. Input Core
The Input Core shown in Fig. 10 receives 8-bits of frame data r through input axons r0–r7, where axons are indexed from top to bottom. The feedback loop retains r through axons r0−r7. The en axon is used to provide spike for initiating the decoding process. The axons of this core are of the same type with the weight w ∈ {1}. The neurons of this core have a threshold value (vj+) of 1 and reset value (rj+) of 0 as shown in Table IV. In the layout shown in Fig. 10, neurons are indexed from left to right in increasing order. This core utilizes 20 neurons where, 8 neurons r0fb −r7fb function as an 8-bit register for the input frame from axons r0 −r7 and provide feedback to retain r, 8 neurons r0v −r7v forward data to the VNU Core and the remaining 4 neurons initit, rstit, initv, and rstv are control signals for initializing and resetting the Iteration Counter and VNU Cores, respectively.
Following our example input of 10001100, Table V shows the execution for neurons in the Input Core that receive spikes (input value of 1). In the first tick, we see the arrival of the input word on axons r0, r4, and r5. These spikes trigger the feedback neurons (r0fb , r4fb , and r5fb ) and the VNU neurons (r0v , r4v , and r5v ) to spike in this tick. On the next tick and subsequent ticks, the feedback axons (r0, r4, and r5) fire, creating a feedback loop by sending the input spikes back to the

B. VNU Core
The VNU Core implements 2 and 3-input majority voting function (2) and (3) shown in steps 4 and 5 of Algorithm 1. The VNU Core realizes a fully parallel implementation of eight VNUs. This core acts as a register in the first iteration corresponding to step 1 of Algorithm 1, and during the subsequent iterations, it implements 2-input majority voting function (2) shown in step 4. Since each VNU generates three vncm output signals, a total of 24 such vncm signals are forwarded to the CNU Core. This core forwards a cross-core synchronization signal env to the CNU Core via neuron enc and the Parity Core via neuron enp. This core is illustrated in Fig. 11 with 27 axons. These axons as per the figure from top to bottom are: reset axon rstv, env enable axon, 16 cmvn axons that receive signals from the CNU Core, along with an initv axon and 8 r0–r7 axons that receive signals from the Input Core. The 16 cmvn axons and 8 r0–r7 axons are categorized by eight colors, where each color represents connections to one VNU. Therefore, axons of a single color are incoming signals from a single VNU.
This core has 26 neurons, consisting of two enable enc and enp neurons that forward the enable signal on axon en to the CNU Core and the Parity Core, 16 vncm neurons, all of which send signals to the CNU Core, and 8 x0–x7 neurons that represent the output decision word. The vncm neurons are arranged from left to right as per their destination CNUs c0–c3 and are grouped by colors such that neurons of the same color represent VNU connections to a single CNU. Details on the neuron configurations are listed in Table VI. The synaptic connections of the VNU Core are arranged according to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:05:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HASSAN et al.: NOVEL IMPLEMENTATION METHODOLOGY FOR ECCs ON A NEUROMORPHIC ARCHITECTURE

4713

Fig. 12. (a) CNU core. (b) Iteration counter core.
TABLE VIII AXON AND NEURON CONFIGURATIONS OF CNU Core

Fig. 11. VNU core.
TABLE VI AXON AND NEURON CONFIGURATIONS OF VNU Core

TABLE VII VNU Core NEURON ACTIVITY, ASSUMING INPUT WORD 10001100

from the CNU Core, so there is no relevant activity on the VNU Core for this tick, however, spikes still arrive from the Input Core with the original input word. Therefore, the neuron leak values and enable neurons, enc and enp, both ensure that any axon signals during this tick do not impact the execution. During tick 4, the CNU suggestions are fed into the relevant VNU axons for computing the VNU suggestions of the next GaB iteration, and computing the decision word on neurons x0–x7. In Table VII, we only show the values for the decision neurons as to highlight a single GaB iteration. Subsequent GaB iterations occur as described in tick 2, with the difference being that there is no init signal, so spikes only occur based on CNU suggestions and initial ri values. The decision word after the first iteration is on neurons x0–x7 as shown in the table, which is the corrected codeword 10001101 that will be passed to the Parity Core and subsequent cores for verification.

the Tanner graph shown in Fig. 1. Without loss of generality,
VNU v0 in the Tanner graph is connected with CNUs c1 and c3 through v0c1 and v0c3 edges, respectively. Correspondingly, the core-level design of VNU v0 is represented by the pink colored axons in Fig. 11, and is split across two neurons, v0c1 and v0c3. Each of these neurons also has synaptic connections with r0. Furthermore, r0 and c3v0 are included in the synaptic connection of neuron v0c1 to calculate v0c1 signal.
The tick-by-tick neuron execution of this core following our
example input is shown in Table VII. All neurons receive a
spike via the initv axon on tick 2, so we only list the neurons that spike in this tick for brevity. In tick 2, the input word is forwarded to the Parity Core by neurons x0, x4, x5 before any GaB correction begins to check if the input word needs correc-
tion. In parallel, the first iteration of VNU suggestions is sent to the CNU Core via neurons v0c1, v0c3, v4c0, v4c3, v5c1, v5c2. During tick 3 the VNU Core is waiting for the suggestions

C. CNU Core
The CNU Core realizes a fully parallel implementation of four CNUs as illustrated in Fig. 12(a). Each CNU calculates suggestions for its four connected VNUs, as per the Tanner graph in Fig. 1, through a 3-input XOR function as shown in (1) corresponding to step 3 of Algorithm 1. The CNU Core sends its suggestions to the VNU Core for iterative execution of steps 4 and 5 of Algorithm 1. The 16 vncm signals received in this core from the VNU Core are represented as the axons, color coded and grouped by CNU. Including the enc synchronization signal, the CNU Core receives a total of 17 signals from the VNU Core. All of the neurons of this core have a threshold of 1 and reset value of 0 as shown in Table VIII. The table also highlights the neurons implementing the XOR operation with the Op Type field. The CNU Core sends the 17 neuron outputs back to the VNU Core to execute step 5 of Algorithm 1. The execution of the CNU Core following the example input word 10001100 is shown in Table IX. Suggestions from the VNU Core during tick 2 arrive

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:05:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4714

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023

TABLE IX CNU Core NEURON ACTIVITY, FOLLOWING INPUT WORD 10001100. THE
ONLY RELEVANT EXECUTION FOR THE FIRST GAB ITERATION IS DURING TICK 3 AS SHOWN

TABLE XI Iteration Counter Core NEURON ACTIVITY FOR 100 GAB ITERATIONS

TABLE X AXON AND NEURON CONFIGURATIONS OF Iteration Counter Core

on the axons of this core at tick 3. The 3-input XOR operation is calculated across all the connected axons for each of the cmvn neurons in a single tick due to the modified neuron block. Neurons whose XOR result yields a value of 1 fire, sending CNU suggestion back to the respective VNU axons for computing the decision value on tick 4 as described in Section V-B.

Fig. 13. (a) Parity core. (b) Syndrome core.
TABLE XII AXON AND NEURON CONFIGURATIONS OF Parity Core

D. Iteration Counter Core

The Iteration Counter Core, shown in Fig. 12(b), executes step 2 of Algorithm 1, by keeping track of the number of GaB iterations, and producing a spike if the iteration count reaches maxIter. Axon i receives its signal as part of a feedback loop and the i0 axon receives its signal from the Input Core to start the iteration count. The rstit axon is used to reset the core, with negative weights selected on the neurons large enough to set their potential back to 0 without spiking as shown in Table X. The feedback neuron ifb serves as a register, incrementing the potential of imax by one every tick. The neuron imax functions as a counter and a comparator, with a positive threshold set to the total number of ticks required to achieve the maximum GaB iteration count maxIter. The expression to determine the positive threshold v+j for neuron imax is shown in

((maxIter − 1) × 2) + 4.

(7)

The decision process during each iteration involves VNU suggestions followed by CNU suggestions. Therefore, a total of 2 ticks are required per iteration, resulting in the factor of 2 in (7). After the last GaB iteration, there is a 2 core offset until the decision reaches the OR core, which is when we want the spike to arrive from the Iteration Counter Core. Therefore, for maxIter − 1 iterations, only 2 ticks are required, but the last GaB iteration requires 2 ticks plus a 2 tick offset.
Following our running example in Table XI, the core receives its initial spike to start counting from the Input Core on axon initit at tick 2. This axon signal starts the feedback loop with neuron ifb and begins the count for imax. In subsequent ticks, neuron ifb will continue to spike and send its signal

onto axon i where the potential in neuron imax will increment until it reaches the positive threshold set. After this threshold is reached, the neuron will spike to the OR Core indicating that the maximum GaB iteration count was reached. The count will then start over unless a signal is sent to rstit.
E. Parity and Syndrome Cores
Based on step 6 (4) of Algorithm 1, the Parity Core executes the mod 2 VMM and the Syndrome Core checks if the generated product is an all-zero vector by implementing a 4-input NOR operation. The Parity Core shown in Fig. 13(a) has nine axons, among which the eight axons marked by x0–x7 are used to receive the decision word estimation from the VNU Core, and the enp axon is used to receive spike for synchronization. This core has 13 neurons: the ens neuron, 4 s0–s3 neurons and 8 x0–x7 neurons. The s0–s3 neurons perform mod 2 addition operation by implementing the 4-input XOR function. The x0–x7 neurons forward the decision word to the Output Core. All of the neurons have a threshold of 1 and reset to 0 after spiking, as shown in Table XII. The synaptic connections of this core reflect the H matrix from Fig. 1. Table XIII shows the execution of the Parity Core. In tick 3, the received input results in nonzero s0 and s2, indicating incorrect estimation. In tick 5, s0–s3 are all-zero, meaning the input is correct codeword. There is a 2-tick spike delay at the neurons of this core, to wait for the Syndrome Core operation to be complete.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:05:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HASSAN et al.: NOVEL IMPLEMENTATION METHODOLOGY FOR ECCs ON A NEUROMORPHIC ARCHITECTURE

4715

TABLE XIII Parity Core NEURON ACTIVITY, ASSUMING INPUT WORD 10001100. GAB ITERATIONS 0 (TICK 3) AND 1 (TICK 5) ARE SHOWN FOR COMPARISON

Fig. 14. (a) OR core. (b) Output core.
TABLE XVI AXON AND NEURON CONFIGURATIONS OF OR Core

TABLE XIV AXON AND NEURON CONFIGURATIONS OF Syndrome Core

TABLE XVII OR Core NEURON ACTIVITY, ASSUMING INPUT WORD 10001100. GAB ITERATIONS 0 (TICK 5) AND 1 (TICK 7) ARE SHOWN FOR COMPARISON

TABLE XV Syndrome Core NEURON ACTIVITY, ASSUMING INPUT WORD 10001100.
GAB ITERATIONS 0 (TICK 4) AND 1 (TICK 6) ARE SHOWN FOR COMPARISON
The Syndrome Core shown in Fig. 13(b) has one ens axon and four s0–s3 axons from the Parity Core. This core implements a 4-input NOR operation among s0–s3, as well as an AND with the ens axon, such that the single neuron labeled zero in the core only spikes when the ens axon receives a spike and the remaining axons receive 0. The axon and neuron configuration for this core is shown in Table XIV. Since a negative neuron potential produces no spike, we assign negative weight values to the axons connected to the s0–s3 parity check neurons, such that one or more of them receiving an input signal is enough to counteract the positive signal from the ens axon. Table XV shows that, on tick 4, s0 and s2 axons receive spike, hence, zero neuron does not spike. On tick 6, s0–s3 being all-zero, a spike is produced.
F. OR Core The OR Core presented in Fig. 14(a) implements a logical
OR operation between two received signals from the Iteration Counter Core and Syndrome Core. This operation checks if the maximum iteration count has been reached, or the input word has been corrected. The result of the OR operation indicated by the done neuron is sent to the Output Core. Additionally, the zero neuron forwards the value from the zero axon arriving from the Syndrome Core to indicate whether the presented output is a valid codeword or not. The axon and neuron configurations are listed in Table XVI along with the tick-level execution in Table XVII.

G. Output Core
The Output Core [Fig. 14(b)] is responsible for sending the decoded codeword to the off-chip host upon completion of the decoding process, along with two flags indicating the status of the result. There are ten axons, among which eight axons x0–x7 are used to receive estimated codeword from the Parity Core. This core has 8 neurons marked as x0–x7, that send the estimated word to the off-chip host via an AND operation between the x0–x7 input and the done signal. The zero neuron forwards the result from the zero axon, indicating the correctness of the output word.
VI. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
In this study for our experimental evaluations, we utilize RANC [23], a RANC ecosystem through software-based simulation and FPGA-based emulation. RANC is an open-source, configurable emulation environment that allows for rapid prototyping of novel neuromorphic architectures for researchers to explore neuromorphic designs before committing to silicon, and without imposing the limitations and expense of prefabricated ASIC chips. RANC has been verified to be cycleby-cycle accurate when emulating the TrueNorth chip [31], ensuring that the spiking functionality of the neuromorphic cores in the emulation environment matches what would be expected on neuromorphic hardware. RANC supports the key operations of neuromorphic architectures and is highly parameterized with configurable components allowing application engineers and hardware architects to experiment with application mapping and hardware tuning concurrently.
One of the key features that differentiate RANC from other neuromorphic simulation-oriented works is by providing an end-to-end ecosystem that tightly couples software simulation and hardware emulation. As such, we can combine simulation

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:05:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4716

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023

and FPGA-based analysis to progressively move from testing new ideas in the software environment to implementing equivalent changes in hardware. This allows rapid validation of the application through software and enables evaluating further impacts on performance metrics such as power and resource utilization through hardware. Neuromorphic simulation platforms, such as PyCARL [32], NeMo [33], and SpykeTorch [34] are suitable for simulating the GaB application, however, those platforms do not offer FPGA-based hardware emulation.
We select a dataset of 288 words, based on the 32 words supported by our H-matrix described in Section II-C plus 1-bit noise combinations of those words. The H-Matrix defines the implementation of the decoder design for a neuromorphic platform as presented in Section V, as well as the serial Python GaB implementation used for verification. Once the neuromorphic mapping is complete, the configuration files are passed to the RANC environment to execute. Finally, the output spikes are collected and compared with the expected output from the serial implementation. We found when implementing our GaB design that there was a direct input–output match between the serial implementation and the software/hardware environments over our dataset. Additionally, there was a tick-by-tick match between both the software and hardware-based executions of the algorithm. The following subsections will describe in more detail the execution of the software simulation environment and the hardware emulation environment given the configuration parameters.
A. Software Simulation Environment
The RANC software simulator is a tick-accurate simulation of the RANC architecture. There are two configuration files that we provide to the simulator based on the decoder design presented in Section V. The first file is a configuration file that specifies global parameters for the simulation such as the dimensions of the RANC NoC or flags for enabling or disabling debug logging. The second file specifies the remainder of the configuration required for proper simulator execution. This includes the input spikes that will be sent into the RANC NoC, representative of our input words, as well as the threshold, connection, and reset mode parameters for each neuron. We run the RANC simulator on an Intel Core i7-8700 3.20-GHz CPU. After launching the simulator, a trace is collected containing all spikes sent to the Output Core, which can then be analyzed for tick-count and functional verification.
B. FPGA Emulation Environment
To utilize the FPGA emulation environment, RANC provides an FPGA IP wizard that allows for specifying a set of memory files to configure each of the cores present in a given design. After this, the design is synthesized that contains all information about the connections between neurons, as well as their threshold and spiking behaviors. The IP core can then be deployed into a broader design, utilizing AXI4 communication to route spikes and collect results from the Output Core. RANC models the components of a neuromorphic architecture independently, allowing for easy modification of internal component behavior. We leverage this to make our proposed

modification to the neuron block, leaving the remaining neuromorphic component functionalities unchanged. Output from the FPGA emulation can be directly compared tick-by-tick against the output from the simulation environment and the serial GaB implementation. The FPGA emulation environment also allows for gathering of performance metrics such as power, energy, and resource utilization. We primarily use these estimates as a point of comparison for our proposed XORintegrated design, as we know that the actual estimated values are not a reflection of the expected values for deployment on real neuromorphic hardware. We collect resource utilization percentage from the LUTs, LUTRAMs, Flip-Flops, and BRAMs targeting the Zynq UltraScale+ MPSoC ZCU102. We also perform power estimation with the Vivado Power Analysis tool by providing switching activity files (SAIF files) gathered from running a subset of the dataset through the baseline and XOR emulated designs. We chose to perform this analysis on a subset of our overall dataset due to the prohibitive timescale of gathering switching activity for every input in our emulation environment. We considered two factors when determining the values of this subset: the convergence of the input and the binary makeup of the input. Both of these factors would have an impact on the results produced, so our general approach was to have an even distribution of both converging and nonconverging inputs, as well as an even distribution of 1 s and 0s in each input word. The size of the subset was determined to be the smallest number of pairs of converging and nonconverging input words that produced representative power and resource utilization results. A subset is considered representative in our analysis when increasing the size of the subset does not include noticeable variations to the results, which we found to occur six data points. We measure total power to evaluate the impact of the XOR modification as we scale the design to support larger datasets, which require a larger neuromorphic grid of cores to compute. We further measure the average power per core to analyze the impact the XOR modification has on individual cores as we scale the design. Using the power estimates, the tick count, and tick frequency, we also calculate energy estimates for the deployment of the designs onto the ZCU102. To evaluate the same impacts from the power analysis with regard to energy, we show both total energy and average energy per core for each design at different grid dimensions. Additionally, we define two parameters (the total number of words to decode, and the number of GaB iterations per word) that are innate to scaling toward larger datasets and have an impact on the execution time of the decoder. We run a sweeping experiment to evaluate how the energy estimates scale with the increased execution time defined by those parameters for realistically larger datasets.
VII. RESULTS
We analyze our GaB design for two neuromorphic implementations, the first is using the baseline LIF neuron block presented in Section III with Fig. 4. The second is using the XOR modified neuron block shown in Fig. 5 following the mapping approach presented in Section V. We discuss the difference between the designs in terms of execution time (tick count), resource utilization, power estimation, and energy estimation on the ZCU102 evaluation board.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:05:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HASSAN et al.: NOVEL IMPLEMENTATION METHODOLOGY FOR ECCs ON A NEUROMORPHIC ARCHITECTURE

4717

A. Execution Time
We determine execution time in the simulation environment in terms of simulation steps or ticks required to complete the decoding process for all inputs. The baseline and XORintegrated designs require 87 556 ticks and 59 042 ticks, respectively, to process the 288 word dataset sequentially, resulting in a total tick reduction of 32.57%. To determine the tick frequency on the emulation environment, we first have to allow for each synapse calculation to be executed on the core’s neuron block. For the baseline 256×256 axon neuron dimensions on a core, there are 65 536 synaptic calculations to complete, each of which requires a single clock cycle. Running at a board frequency of 100 MHz, all of the calculations for a tick of this core size can be completed at a frequency of 1.5 kHz. We chose 100-MHz frequency in order to achieve a reasonable simulation time, as well as maintain a similar tick frequency to that of TrueNorth [31] In emulation, the execution times are 39.36 and 58.37 s, while in software-based simulation, execution time is much longer taking around 53 and 80 min for the XOR-integrated and baseline designs, respectively. The FPGA-based emulation reduces the timescale of the simulations by up to a factor of 82×. In order to see the scalability of both designs beyond our dataset and configuration, we determined a general equation to calculate the total tick requirement for the baseline design (8) and XOR-integrated design (9) based on the number of GaB iterations per word (maxIter) and the number of words in the dataset (wc) for each implementation

tb = wc ∗ (3 ∗ maxIter + 4) + 4

(8)

tx = wc ∗ (2 ∗ maxIter + 5) + 2.

(9)

We determine the coefficients on maxIter for each design by the number of cores required to compute the VNU-CNU suggestions. The baseline implementation has an additional core required for the XOR calculation. The value added to this product is determined by the number of ticks needed in between words. One additional tick is needed for the XOR implementation to avoid interference of the last GaB iteration of the previous word with the first iteration of the next word. This expression represents the setup and overlapping execution for each word wc, and finally, the remaining constant is determined by the remaining execution of the final word. These equations hold true for other H-Matrices as well, so long as the total core count does not change. We are now able to compute execution time on the ZCU102 with a given tick frequency for a sweeping range of wc and maxIter, which we use to estimate energy consumption as the design scales after we obtain power estimates.

B. Resource Utilization and Power Analysis
The addition of the XOR and multiplexer in the neuron block along with control signals incurs a computational overhead, which we quantify in terms of resource utilization and power estimation on the ZCU102. When gathering resource utilization and power estimates, we observe that the total length of execution is not a factor in these estimates. Thus, we use a subset of our initial dataset to gather these results.
Fig. 15 shows resource utilization ratio for each resource type on the FPGA with respect to the number of cores

Fig. 15. Resource utilization (%) of the baseline and XOR-integrated architectures with respect to grid size labeled as LUT, BRAM, FF, and LUTRAM in RANC emulated on the ZCU102 evaluation board. The average difference for the XOR-architecture with respect to the baseline architecture across 24 grid dimensions are shown in parenthesis below the label.
TABLE XVIII BASELINE AND XOR POWER ESTIMATIONS, ALONG WITH % INCREASE IN POWER BY XOR OVER BASELINE ARCHITECTURE, ON THE ZCU102
EVALUATION BOARD
across 24 configurations. We observe that increasing the core count shows a trend where the XOR-integrated design is at or slightly above the baseline by 0.62% on average across the sweeping range in terms of LUT usage. For the other types (LUTRAM, FF, and BRAM), the resource usage across all configurations shows negligible difference between the two designs. Table XVIII shows the power estimation of the baseline and XOR-integrated designs on 5×3 and 5×5 grid dimensions. Similarly, the gap between the designs increases with the grid size (1.74% on 5×5 and 1.20% on 5×3).
Similar to the resource utilization, power estimates show for both grid sizes that the XOR-integrated design incurs a minor increase in power consumption over the baseline design. The 5×5 grid uses approximately 68% more total power than the 5×3 grid for each design, however, there is only 0.5% more power consumed per core. The increase in total power is expected, as the FPGA is still allocating resources and running computations for each core, regardless of its participation in the GaB decoding algorithm, but individually, the cores are consuming negligibly more power for a given design when the grid size increases. This is important when considering the scaling of a design to support larger GaB decoders, since more cores will be needed to distribute computation for VNUs and CNUs. Additionally, we see that the difference in power and resource utilization between both designs does not scale when we increase the grid dimensions. The % increase in both resource utilization and power between the designs remains largely consistent across grid dimensions. This suggests that if we scale the grid dimensions further to support larger decoders, we do not expect a larger % increase in resource utilization or power in the FPGA environment. Further, we note from Fig. 7 in Section IV-A that the number of neurons for the baseline design increases quadratically

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:05:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4718

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023

Fig. 16. Energy consumption of the (a) XOR-integrated and (b) baseline designs; (c) energy consumption reduction percentage by XOR-integrated design over the Baseline, on a 5×5 grid size with respect to the number of words and the number of iterations per word.

TABLE XIX BASELINE AND XOR-INTEGRATED ENERGY ESTIMATES ON THE 288
WORD DATASET USING ZCU102 FPGA
as the CNU degree increases, instead of linearly as with the XOR-integrated design. Assuming there is a physical limit to the number of neurons in a core, this means that the grid sizes for the baseline design will also scale faster than the grid sizes for the XOR-integrated design. This will result in a worse overall power and resource utilization for the baseline design over the XOR-integrated design, as we have already shown that the grid dimensions have a larger impact than the neuron block design alone. Although the XOR-integrated design requires more power and resources over the baseline implementation, as we scale to larger decoders, the grid dimensions do not scale at the same rate for each design, showing favorable results for the XOR-integrated design. This also has implications for energy as we discuss in the next section.
C. RANC Energy Analysis In this section, we analyze the energy consumption of the
RANC environment running GaB, including emulation overhead, on the ZCU102. To estimate energy, we combine the execution time of the 288 word dataset with the power estimates for each design on the ZCU102 as shown in Table XIX. Overall, we observe that reduction in tick count with the XOR-integrated design is heavily reflected in the energy benefits of the design, and is negligibly compromised by the minor increase in resource usage and power consumption. We show an estimated energy reduction with the XOR-integrated design over the baseline design using our dataset of 31.4% on the 5×5 grid size, and 31.76% on the 5×3 grid size. These energy reduction values closely reflect the 32.57% tick reduction presented earlier, however, are slightly lower because of the minor power increase in the XOR-integrated design.
To show that this energy reduction is consistent for realistically larger datasets, we perform sweeps for each implemented design over the number of words, and the number of GaB iterations per word. This is computed based on the execution time following (8) and (9), and the overall design power. We present Fig. 16 and Fig. 16(c), which show total energy and energy reduction, respectively, over different word counts and GaB

iterations per word. Fig. 16 compares how scaling the word count and the number of GaB iterations per word impacts the energy consumption of all cores in the XOR-integrated [Fig. 16(a)] and baseline [Fig. 16(b)] designs. We observe that the number of GaB iterations per word has the largest impact on energy consumption. Increasing the number of GaB iterations increases the tick count for each word, affecting the total tick count by a factor of the GaB iteration increase. However, increasing the number of words only increases the number of ticks by a constant amount. Similarly, in Fig. 16(c), we observe that the number of GaB iterations per word has more impact on energy reduction than the number of words decoded. Overall, it shows that our energy savings saturate around 65 GaB iterations per word to a 31% reduction with the XOR GaB design over baseline. We also point out that the number of GaB iterations is also a factor when determining the desired error correction capability for a design. Therefore, we can achieve the same error correction capability with less energy by using the XOR modified design when considering realistic datasets. Overall, when we consider scaling our presented GaB mapping technique to a larger H-matrix and longer codewords, the XOR-based neuron block would maintain a similar 31% reduction in energy consumption over a baseline LIF neuron block.
D. Limitations and Further Energy Analysis on Neuromorphic Implementation
In this work our focus is on understanding the limitations of neuromorphic architectures; exposing the performance bottlenecks and quantifying the benefits of XOR-integrated architecture. In order to hone in on architectural features, we limited our investigation to a problem size that was practical (8-bit codeword length) to explain and discuss through tick-by-tick execution scenarios. While we benefit from the flexibility offered by the FPGA-based emulation (presilicon) of neuromorphic devices to perform architecture trade analysis, the RANC ecosystem does not offer an event-driven execution for direct comparison with ASIC designs. Additionally, the considered 8-bit decoder design is not readily scalable to the conventional decoder sizes in the literature. In the current state of design, it is not feasible to accurately extrapolate the expected (post-silicon) hardware performance on the physical neuromorphic device. Therefore, a conventional synthesis approach based on RANC is not applicable to fairly evaluate the energy efficiency of the XOR-integrated architecture with respect to the ASIC/FPGA implementations from the literature. However, to bridge the gap between pre- and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:05:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HASSAN et al.: NOVEL IMPLEMENTATION METHODOLOGY FOR ECCs ON A NEUROMORPHIC ARCHITECTURE

4719

TABLE XX SPIKE COUNT-BASED ENERGY COMPARISON OVER
THE 288 WORD DATASET
TABLE XXI FPGA (ZCU102) RESOURCE UTILIZATION COMPARISON WHEN IMPLEMENTING GAB WITH CODEWORD LENGTH OF 1296 BITS, PARITY
BITS OF 648 (CODE RATE OF 0.5) ON 8×8, AND 16×16 CORE CONFIGURATIONS OF XOR-INTEGRATED AND BASELINE ARCHITECTURES, RESPECTIVELY
post-silicon evaluation, “spike count” and “energy-per-spike” data have been utilized in simulation and emulation-based studies [35], [36]. This has been integrated into tools such as KerasSpiking developed by Nengo [37], which generates energy estimates of Loihi [7] and SpiNNaker [9] architectures. Following the same model, we executed GaB implementation through the RANC software simulation tool over the baseline and XOR-integrated architectures and collected the total number of spikes emitted across the cores using the same set of codewords discussed in our experimental setup. The core dimensionality for this experiment is irrelevant since only cores relevant to the computation generate spikes. Based on the reported 109-pJ energy per spike for TrueNorth [38], we are able to compare the energy efficiency of the XOR-integrated architecture with respect to the baseline architecture.
Table XX shows that, when executing GaB on RANC over the full 8-bit codeword dataset, the XOR-integrated architecture would consume 10.90 mJ of energy, achieving an energy reduction factor over baseline of 2.8×. Following the scalability analysis presented in Fig. 15, we estimate that to implement GaB for a regular codeword of size 1296 and code rate of 0.5 [19], the XOR-integrated architecture would require 63 cores, with 256 axons and neurons per core. The 8×8 configuration (last data point in Fig. 15), reaches LUT utilization of around 60% (165K LUTs) on the ZCU102 FPGA. On the other hand, the baseline architecture would require 243 cores, which is not feasible to implement on the same FPGA. Table XXI shows the resource usage for XOR-integrated architecture collected after placement and routing, whereas for the baseline architecture, the values (marked by *) are based on synthesis of the nearest square array of 16×16 cores before place and route on the FPGA. Therefore, we conclude that for resourceconstrained environments, the XOR-integrated architecture is more favorable.
VIII. CONCLUSION In this study, we present a novel mapping methodology for hard-decision iterative decoding algorithms on a neuromorphic architecture. We further enhance the processing capability of this mapped architecture by introducing XOR-based execution in neuron blocks, which is a fundamental operation for the hard-decision bit-flipping class of error correction algorithms. We demonstrate the efficiency of the proposed implementation in terms of tick count and energy estimation.

As future work, we aim to build tools to automate the architectural mapping process for a given arbitrary H-matrix and maximum iteration count. We believe that such automation will allow rapid decoder implementation for standards, such as WiFi and 5G. This automation paired with flexible neuromorphic development environments, such as RANC, will enable exploration of novel neuromorphic computing architectures and implementation methodologies for a broader range of hard-decision decoders in the trade space of error correction performance, energy efficiency, and resource utilization. Furthermore, the proposed neuromorphic implementations of majority voting, XOR, AND, OR, and, NOR operators facilitate implementation of applications from domains such as cryptography and bioinformatics. In conclusion, our mapping methodology and XOR-integrated neuron block pave the way for further research into architectural modifications to make complex and accurate hard-decision decoders, as well as other XOR-based applications, practical for power-constrained systems through neuromorphic computing.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the AMD Xilinx University Program for the continuous support through hardware development board donations.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Schmitt et al., “Neuromorphic hardware in the loop: Training a deep spiking network on the BrainScaleS wafer-scale system,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw. (IJCNN), 2017, pp. 2227–2234.
[2] S. K. Esser et al., “Convolutional networks for fast, energy-efficient neuromorphic computing,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., vol. 113, no. 41, pp. 11441–11446, 2016.
[3] P. U. Diehl et al., “TrueHappiness: Neuromorphic emotion recognition on TrueNorth,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw. (IJCNN), 2016, pp. 4278–4285.
[4] B. Rajendran, A. Sebastian, M. Schmuker, N. Srinivasa, and E. Eleftheriou, “Low-power neuromorphic hardware for signal processing applications: A review of architectural and system-level design approaches,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 97–110, Nov. 2019.
[5] A. M. George, R. Sharma, and S. Rao, “IEEE 754 floating-point addition for neuromorphic architecture,” Neurocomputing, vol. 366, pp. 74–85, Nov. 2019.
[6] P. A. Merolla et al., “A million spiking-neuron integrated circuit with a scalable communication network and interface,” Science, vol. 345, no. 6197, pp. 668–673, 2014.
[7] M. Davies et al., “Loihi: A neuromorphic manycore processor with onchip learning,” IEEE Micro, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 82–99, Jan./Feb. 2018.
[8] B. V. Benjamin et al., “Neurogrid: A mixed-analog-digital multichip system for large-scale neural simulations,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 102, no. 5, pp. 699–716, May 2014.
[9] E. Painkras et al., “SpiNNaker: A multi-core system-on-chip for massively-parallel neural net simulation,” in Proc. IEEE Custom Integr. Circuits Conf., 2012, pp. 1–4.
[10] S. Moradi, N. Qiao, F. Stefanini, and G. Indiveri, “A scalable multicore architecture with heterogeneous memory structures for dynamic neuromorphic asynchronous processors (DYNAPs),” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 106–122, Feb. 2018.
[11] O. Moreira et al., “NeuronFlow: A hybrid neuromorphic—Dataflow processor architecture for AI workloads,” in Proc. 2nd IEEE Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Circuits Syst. (AICAS), 2020, pp. 1–5.
[12] J. B. Aimone et al., “A review of non-cognitive applications for neuromorphic computing,” Neuromorphic Comput. Eng., vol. 2, no. 3, 2022, Art. no. 32003.
[13] D. V. Christensen et al., “2022 roadmap on neuromorphic computing and engineering,” Neuromorphic Comput. Eng., vol. 2, no. 2, 2022, Art. no. 22501.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:05:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4720

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023

[14] R. Herrero and D. Hernandez, “Forward error correction in real-time Internet of Things CoAP-based wireless sensor networks,” IET Wireless Sens. Syst., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 42–47, 2019.
[15] K. Matsui and H. Nishi, “Error correction method considering fog and edge computing environment,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Ind. Cyber Phys. Syst. (ICPS), 2019, pp. 517–521.
[16] S. A. Alabady, M. F. M. Salleh, and F. Al-Turjman, “LCPC error correction code for IoT applications,” Sustain. Cities Soc., vol. 42, pp. 663–673, Oct. 2018.
[17] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645–1646, 1996.
[18] A. S. Cassidy et al., “Cognitive computing building block: A versatile and efficient digital neuron model for neurosynaptic cores,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw. (IJCNN), 2013, pp. 1–10.
[19] B. Unal, A. Akoglu, F. Ghaffari, and B. Vasic´, “Hardware implementation and performance analysis of resource efficient probabilistic hard decision LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 65, no. 9, pp. 3074–3084, Sep. 2018.
[20] B. Unal, M. S. Hassan, J. Mack, N. Kumbhare, and A. Akoglu, “Design of high throughput FPGA-based testbed for accelerating error characterization of LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Conf. ReConFigurable Comput. FPGAs (ReConFig), 2019, pp. 1–8.
[21] S. Grönroos, K. Nybom, and J. Björkqvist, “Efficient GPU and CPUbased LDPC decoders for long codewords,” Analog Integr. Circuits Signal Process., vol. 73, no. 2, pp. 583–595, 2012.
[22] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[23] J. Mack et al., “RANC: Reconfigurable architecture for neuromorphic computing,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 40, no. 11, pp. 2265–2278, Nov. 2021.
[24] F. Ghaffari, A. Akoglu, B. Vasic, and D. Declercq, “Multi-mode lowlatency software-defined error correction for data centers,” in Proc. 26th Int. Conf. Comput. Commun. Netw. (ICCCN), 2017, pp. 1–8.
[25] M. Reljan-Delaney and J. Wall, “Solving the linearly inseparable XOR problem with spiking neural networks,” in Proc. Comput. Conf., 2017, pp. 701–705.
[26] B. P. Zeigler and A. Muzy, “Temporal modeling of neural net input/output behaviors: The case of XOR,” Systems, vol. 5, no. 1, p. 7, 2017.
[27] A. Cyr, F. Thériault, and S. Chartier, “Revisiting the XOR problem: A neurorobotic implementation,” Neural Comput. Appl., vol. 32, no. 14, pp. 9965–9973, 2020.
[28] K. Matsumoto, H. Torikai, and H. Sekiya, “XOR learning by spiking neural network with infrared communications,” in Proc. Asia–Pac. Signal Inf. Process. Assoc. Annu. Summit Conf. (APSIPA ASC), 2018, pp. 1289–1292.
[29] L. Mo and M. Wang, “LogicSNN: A unified spiking neural networks logical operation paradigm,” Electronics, vol. 10, no. 17, p. 2123, 2021.
[30] J. Enriquez-Gaytan, F. Gomez-Castaneda, J. A. Moreno-Cadenas, and L. M. Flores-Nava, “Experimental spiking neural network: Solving the XOR paradigm with metaheuristics,” in Proc. 15th Int. Conf. Elect. Eng. Comput. Sci. Automat. Control (CCE), 2018, pp. 1–5.
[31] F. Akopyan et al., “TrueNorth: Design and tool flow of a 65 mW 1 million neuron programmable neurosynaptic chip,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 34, no. 10, pp. 1537–1557, Oct. 2015.
[32] A. Balaji et al., “PyCARL: A PyNN interface for hardware-software cosimulation of spiking neural network,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw. (IJCNN), 2020, pp. 1–10.
[33] M. Plagge, C. D. Carothers, E. Gonsiorowski, N. Mcglohon, “NeMo: A massively parallel discrete-event simulation model for neuromorphic architectures,” ACM Trans. Model. Comput. Simul., vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 1–25, 2018.
[34] M. Mozafari, M. Ganjtabesh, A. Nowzari-Dalini, and T. Masquelier, “SpykeTorch: Efficient simulation of convolutional spiking neural networks with at most one spike per neuron,” Front. Neurosci., vol. 13, p. 625, Jul. 2019.

[35] C. Frenkel, J.-D. Legat, and D. Bol, “MorphIC: A 65-nm 738ksynapse/mm2 quad-core binary-weight digital neuromorphic processor with stochastic spike-driven online learning,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 999–1010, Oct. 2019.
[36] E. Martin et al., “EqSpike: Spike-driven equilibrium propagation for neuromorphic implementations,” Iscience, vol. 24, no. 3, 2021, Art. no. 102222.
[37] T. Bekolay et al., “Nengo: A python tool for building large-scale functional brain models,” Front. Neuroinf., vol. 7, p. 48, Jan. 2014.
[38] D. Martí, M. Rigotti, M. Seok, and S. Fusi, “Energy-efficient neuromorphic classifiers,” Neural Comput., vol. 28, no. 10, pp. 2011–2044, Oct. 2016. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1162/NECO_a_00882
Sahil Hassan received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in electrical and electronic engineering from the University of Dhaka, Dhaka, Bangladesh, in 2016 and 2018, respectively. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Electrical and Computer Engineering Program, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA.
His research interests involve design of neuromorphic computing architectures, reconfigurable and heterogeneous computing systems, and adaptive hardware architectures.
Parker Dattilo received the B.S. degree in electrical and computer engineering from the University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA, in 2022, where he is currently pursuing the M.S. degree with the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department.
His research interests are design, architectural exploration, and hardware emulation of neuromorphic and reconfigurable computing systems.
Ali Akoglu (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in computer science from Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA, in 2005.
He is a Professor with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and the BIO5 Institute, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA. He is the Site-Director of the NSF Industry– University Cooperative Research Center on Cloud and Autonomic Computing. His research focus is on high-performance computing and nontraditional computing architectures.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:05:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

