IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023

4597

Retention-Aware Read Acceleration Strategy for LDPC-Based NAND Flash Memory
Tse-Yuan Wang , Che-Wei Tsao, Student Member, IEEE, Yuan-Hao Chang , Fellow, IEEE, and Tei-Wei Kuo , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—With the strong demand for stable and great quality of service in many network and multimedia services, flash-memory storage systems have been widely adopted in the storage I/O stack in servers and data centers to provide greater access performance. In these services, a huge-size storage system is essential. However, the huge-size flash storage system is very expensive. Flash storage vendors gradually adopt the high-density, low-reliability, and cost-efficient multiple-level cell (MLC) NAND flash memory chip as the major storage medium. Unfortunately, MLC NAND flash memory also brings about the critical issue of the high raw bit error rate. To resolve this issue, vendors adopt the more complex error correction code [such as low-density parity-check (LDPC)]. However, LDPC also results in significant read performance degradation due to its multiple read-retry sensing and decoding steps. To resolve this issue, we proposed a retention-aware read acceleration design (referred to as RRA) for the LDPC-based flash storage system to maintain stable and great read performance without significantly affecting the lifetime. Without significantly modifying the existing flash translation layer (FTL) design, we proposed a retention-aware management module to the existing FTL design. This module can efficiently identify and predict the data access characteristics and precisely allocate the suitable blocks for different data. The proposed design was evaluated with a series of experiments. The experiment results demonstrate that it could effectively reduce average read response time without significantly increasing the number of total live-page copying compared to the typical wear-leveling strategy.
Index Terms—Data allocation, low-density parity-check (LDPC) soft sensing, NAND flash memory, nonvolatile memory, read performance, retention time.
I. INTRODUCTION
I N RECENT years, multimedia and network services are popular in daily life. To provide the stable and good quality of services, servers and data centers gradually adopt flash storage systems to boost the access performance of I/O
Manuscript received 21 September 2022; revised 27 January 2023 and 19 April 2023; accepted 1 June 2023. Date of publication 26 June 2023; date of current version 22 November 2023. This work was supported in part by the National Science and Technology Council under Grant 112-2223-E001-001, Grant 111-2221-E-001-013-MY3, Grant 111-2923-E-002-014-MY3, Grant 112-2927-I-001-508, Grant 11-2221-E-002-152-MY3, and Grant 1122221-E-002-160-MY3; and in part by the Academia Sinica under Grant ASIA-111-M01. This article was recommended by Associate Editor M. Mutyam. (Corresponding author: Yuan-Hao Chang.)
Tse-Yuan Wang, Che-Wei Tsao, and Yuan-Hao Chang are with the Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taipei 11529, Taiwan (e-mail: tseyuan20@iis.sinica.edu.tw; bearman.sky@iis.sinica.edu.tw; johnson@iis.sinica.edu.tw).
Tei-Wei Kuo is with the College of Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, and also with the Department of Computer Secience and Information Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan (e-mail: ktw@csie.ntu.edu.tw).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCAD.2023.3289328

stack. However, the huge storage capacity is essential in these services, but huge-size flash memory will result in the high hardware cost. Therefore, flash storage system vendors gradually adopt the high-density, low-reliability, and cost-efficient multiple-level cell (MLC) flash memory chip as the major storage medium. However, low reliability will result in that flash storage system should adopt the more complex error correction codes (such as low-density parity-check (LDPC) code [11], [17], [22]) to resolve the reliability issue, but LDPC code should adopt the multiple read-retry steps to decode, and this will significantly affect the read performance when the raw bit error rate of the flash cell is high. Therefore, how to keep the low raw bit error rate is a very important issue. On the other hand, different data have different access features and behaviors. With the write-once–read-multiple applications, such as Facebook live and YouTube become more popular, frequent read (read-hot) data would dominate the storage access performance. If the read-hot data is placed into the unsuitable block in flash storage, the access performance will be significantly affected. Therefore, how to efficiently identify the access feature and behavior of data is also a very important issue.
Flash memory chip usually contains many blocks, which is the basic unit of the erase operation. Flash block consists of a fixed number of pages, which is the basic unit for the read and write operation. A page only can be rewritten after the residing block is erased, and this is called “write-once property.” However, the erase count of the block is limited, and the latency of erase operation is very long compared to the read/write operation, so it usually adopts “out-place updating” to update data. In this way, the relationship between logical address and physical address (inside flash memory) is not fixed, and it needs the mapping table to record all mapping information. However, the fine-granularity (such as page-level) mapping takes a lot of RAM space to record the mapping table. Therefore, in the past decades, many research works have proposed many management designs with different mapping granularity for flash-memory storage systems. The well-known examples are coarse-granularity mapping design (e.g., BAST) [14], multigranularity mapping design (e.g., FAST) [15], and on-demand loading of mapping information design (e.g., CMS and DFTL) [7], [12]. On the other hand, the erase times of the block is limited. In past decades, many research works were proposed to balance the erased times of blocks. Wear leveling can be simply classified into static and dynamic based on the type of blocks involved in wear leveling. Dynamic wear leveling is only aiming for

1937-4151 c 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:00:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4598

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023

the incoming write request, and it will allocate the free block with lower erase counts to serve. Static wear leveling [6], [18], [19] will actively move cold data from the young block to the older block. Then, the young block will serve the incoming write request.
In recent years, to achieve higher access performance, flashmemory storage systems are equipped with multiple channels and multiple flash chips, and this brings about a serious scheduling issue on handling the read/write requests from the host. To address this issue, some research work proposed to reschedule the order of requests to improve the access throughput by accessing flash chips in parallel [13]. Some other research work proposed to focus on the I/O request scheduling at the operating system level to improve the access performance by considering the flash-memory storage system as a black box [20]. On the other hand, the reliability of flash memory becomes weaker with higher density, and this will significantly affect the read latency of the flash memory storage system. Therefore, more and more research works pay attention to the LDPC soft sensing issue. For example, some research work [9], [16] proposed to refresh read-hot data with soft sensing, so as to avoid long read latency. Some research work [10] proposed to store the last read levels applied in LDPC for all pages, so as to avoid unnecessary read retries.
In this work, we proposed a retention-aware read acceleration strategy for the LDPC-based flash storage system to keep the stable read performance without significantly affecting the lifetime. Without significantly modifying the existing flash translation layer (FTL) design, we designed a retentionaware management module into the existing FTL design. This design is different from the existing strategy, and it not only considers the health status of blocks but also cares for the access feature/behavior of data. Moreover, this design can precisely identify and predict the data access characteristics and efficiently allocate suitable blocks according to data types. Therefore, it can maintain a stable read performance of the flash-memory storage system without significantly damaging the endurance. This design was evaluated with a series of experiments, and the experiment results prove that it can efficiently reduce average read response time without significantly affecting the lifetime compared to the typical wear-leveling strategy.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. Section II presents the motivation for this work. In Section III, we present the proposed retention-aware read acceleration strategy. Section IV shows the experimental results and Section V is the conclusion.
II. BACKGROUND AND RESEARCH MOTIVATION
A. Background
Due to the rapid development of gaming and multimedia applications, the strong demand for huge storage capacity and high performance in the storage system is a trend. Hence, the storage vendors gradually adopt the high-density and highperformance NAND flash-memory chips to build up the storage system. In a NAND flash-memory chip, the smallest data storage unit is the cell, and which is made of a floating-gate

TABLE I CHARACTERISTICS OF SLC/MLC FLASH MEMORY
Fig. 1. Typical architecture of flash-memory storage systems.
MOSFET transistor. The amount of stored electrons in the floating gate is used to indicate the different states. In typical, the NAND flash-memory cell can be simply classified into two types: 1) single-level cell (SLC) and 2) MLC. Each cell in SLC has two states, so only one bit of data can store in a cell. MLC cells can store over one-bit information, so it provides higher data density and lower cost, but it also brings about longer access latency, weaker endurance, and higher bit error rate. The physical characteristics of SLC and MLC are shown in Table I. The basic access unit of the flash-memory chip is page, and which is composed of many cells. The block consists of a fixed number of pages, and it is the erase operation unit. The page only can be written after the corresponding block is erased, and this is called “write-once property.”
The typical architecture of the flash-memory storage system is shown in Fig. 1. The access control of the flash memory chip is different from the traditional hard disk, so FTL is proposed and designed to simulate the flash-memory chip like the traditional hard disk, and applications and file systems can transparently access the flash-memory storage system like accessing a traditional hard disk. However, the flash memory has write-one property, and the erased times of the block is limited, so data will be written to other free pages when the original page already has data, and this is called “outplace updating.” Therefore, the relationship between logical address and physical address typically is not fixed. To provide the dynamic address mapping, the allocator is designed to dynamically allocate physical space in flash memory for logical location, and it also should record the mapping information

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:00:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: RETENTION-AWARE READ ACCELERATION STRATEGY FOR LDPC-BASED NAND FLASH MEMORY

4599

Fig. 2. Relationship of bit error rate under different data retention time and P/E cycles.

Fig. 3. Read process of existing LDPC.

between logical location and physical location. Due to outplace updating, the data might have many versions on different pages. The page with the newest version data is called the live/valid page, and the remaining pages with old version data are called dead/invalid pages. With long-term use, more and more dead/invalid pages might be produced in the flashmemory storage system, and if no sufficient free space can serve the incoming write requests, then the storage system should reclaim the space of invalid pages. Hence, the garbage collector is designed for this goal [21]. It should select a suitable victim block (with most invalid pages) to erase, and the live pages in this victim block should be copied to other free space before this victim block is erased. However, the erased times of the block is limited, so the storage system also should balance the erased times among blocks, and this is called wear-leveling. Wear leveler is designed for this goal. On the other hand, the MLC cell is easier to be interfered compared to the SLC cell, so the storage system usually adopts the error correction code with higher error correction capacity, such as LDPC code to correct data. The flash-memory chips by different manufacturing vendors have different access characteristics, such as timing, commands, etc. memory technology device (MTD) layer provides the unified interface for FTL to transparently access the flash-memory chip by different manufacturing vendors.
B. Motivation
Due to the physical characteristics of the floating-gate MOSFET transistor, the number of stored electrons in a cell will gradually lose over time. When there is no new write operation on the cell for a long time, this condition becomes more serious when the block already endures many erase operations [5], and it is shown in Fig. 2. In there, the xaxis is the endured erase times, and the y-axis indicates the raw bit error rate of cells. We can observe that the raw bit error rate will gradually rise over time. How long data are safely saved to flash cells until the raw bit error rate of the cell is higher than the capability of error correction code, this is usually called “data retention time.” Therefore, to keep the data reliability, the current flash-memory storage system usually adopts the more complex and greater error correction hardware to correct the bit error. However, these complex error correction hardware also bring about serious

performance degradation on sensing page operation. In the past decade, the well-known and mature linear error correction code adopted in the flash-memory storage system is LDPC code, and the detail error correction procedure is as shown in Fig. 3. In there, LDPC code adopts a multiple-step read strategy to sensing flash page. In the first step, it adopts hard sensing (hard-decision decoding), and which has short sensing latency but weak error correction capability. If hard sensing is failed, then it will adopt soft sensing (soft-decision decoding), and which has strong error correction capability but much longer sensing latency (depending on the number of high-precision soft-decision sensing). Therefore, the sensing latency of the LDPC code will be seriously affected when the bit error rate of the flash cell is very high. On the other hand, more and more network services such as Facebook, Youtube, and Instagram are the write-once and read-multiple applications, and in these applications, the read performance of the flash-memory storage system might significantly affect the quality of service. Based on the above observations, the raw bit error rate of the cell will seriously affect the read performance, and different types of data have different read and write behavior. How long data are written to storage until the data are changed by the new write request, this is called “data lifetime.” Hence, different data (with different data lifetime) should be placed the suitable places (with different data retention time) in the flash storage system. Otherwise, the read performance will be seriously affected. However, frequent data movement to keep the read performance will damage the lifetime of the flash storage system. Therefore, this work is motivated to keep the stable read performance of the flash-memory storage system without significantly affecting the lifetime, and the technical issue is how to efficiently recognize and predict the access behavior of data, and place different data to the suitable places according to the access behavior of data without significant data movement or write amplification.
III. RETENTION-AWARE READ ACCELERATION STRATEGY FOR LDPC-BASED NAND FLASH-MEMORY DESIGN
A. Overview
Based on the observations from Section II-B, different flash cells might have different data retention time, and different

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:00:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4600

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023

Fig. 5. Read/write bloom filter.

Fig. 4. System architecture.
data might have different data lifetime and access behavior. In this section, a retention-aware read acceleration design is proposed to keep stable read performance for flash storage systems without significantly affecting the lifetime. To slightly modify the existing design in a flash storage system, we add a “Retention-Aware Management” module into the flash translation layer, and it is shown in Fig. 4. This module includes three main components, such as “Access Feature Identification,” “Request-based Allocation,” and “Migration.” The first component Access Feature Identification is designed to efficiently detect and predict the data lifetime and access behavior, and this information can efficiently assist in data allocation and migration to avoid the unnecessary data movement. The second component Request-based Allocation is proposed to allocate the suitable blocks (with different data retention time and affordable erase times) for different data (with different data lifetime and access behavior), and it can efficiently reduce the decoding latency of LDPC and slow down the wear degrees of blocks (which will allocate for incoming write requests). The last component is Migration, and it is designed to lazily balance the wearing level among blocks (which are already stored for data). In there, it is only triggered when certain blocks are close to worn out, so the unnecessary wear-leveling operation can be efficiently avoided.
B. Access Feature Identification by Read/Write Bloom Filter
Different data might have different data lifetimes and access behaviors (such as recency and frequency by the read/write operation). On the other hand, the blocks in the flash storage system also have different endurance (affordable program/erase (P/E) cycle) and data retention time. Data retention time is related to the raw bit error rate of the flash cell, and a high raw bit error rate will strongly affect the read performance due to the multistep decode procedure of LDPC. For write-once and read-multiple applications/services, the read performance is a very important factor because it

will significantly affect the quality of service. On the other hand, the frequent write operations on certain flash blocks will quickly damage the endurance of the block. Based on the above-mentioned reasons, it needs an efficient access-feature identification to accurately detect and predict the access behavior of data. In this section, we will present an Access Feature Identification strategy and its design concepts. In an ultrascale storage system, most access operations might be on a smallportion location, and most storage space is rarely accessed. Hence, maintaining the access behavior information for the entire storage space does not make sense. So, this strategy will only maintain the access behavior information of the recently and frequently accessed data. In there, the hash-like strategy is the most suitable one because it provides the constant searching cost and low RAM/memory space overhead compared to least recently used (LRU) list. For improving the RAM/memory space utilization, a bloom filter can more efficiently utilize the RAM space compare to the pure hash table, but it will slightly affect the accuracy when the hash collision occurs. Bloom filter usually adopts multiple hash functions to reduce the condition of hash collision, and it has been proved that the false positive probability can be efficiently controlled according to the past researches. However, this flash storage system is designed for the imbalanced read and write operations of applications/services. We modified the bloom filter to support identifying read and write access behavior, respectively. This strategy is called “Read/Write Bloom Filter,” as shown in Fig. 5. In there, read and write access behaviors are through different bit arrays to maintain but the same hash functions. The file system or application usually adopt the logical block address (LBA) to access the storage system. Hence, in there, LBA is used as the key of the independent hash functions, the result of the hash function is corresponding to the position of the read/write bit array depending on the read or write operation. When the request is coming, LBA of this request will be as the key of independent hash functions, and the corresponding position of the read/write bit array will be set to “1.” The following is to describe the procedure of access behavior detection. The going to be detected LBA will be as the key of hash functions, and all values of the corresponding position in the read bit array are all “1,” then this data is frequently read (read-hot) data. If not all values are all “1,” then this data is infrequent read (read-cold) data. In the write bit array, it uses the same manner to detect whether this data

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:00:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: RETENTION-AWARE READ ACCELERATION STRATEGY FOR LDPC-BASED NAND FLASH MEMORY

4601

Fig. 6. Analysis of false positive.

Fig. 7. Analysis of read pattern of Proxy0 trace.

is frequently written (write-hot) data or not (write-cold data). With long-term use, most entries of the bit arrays might be already set to “1,” and the access behavior cannot be efficiently detected. Therefore, to avoid this condition, the entries of bit arrays will be periodically decayed. For example, the decay operation will be triggered when every X requests are served.
The major disadvantage of the bloom filter is false positive, and it will affect the accuracy of access behavior detection and prediction. The false positive is mainly due to the hash collision by other requests/LBAs, and the probability of the false positive can be approximately formulated to (1 − e[−NK/M])K, where M is the number of entries in a bit array, N is the number of unique elements, and K is the number of independent hash functions [8]. To clearly analyze the false positive probability by different parameters (such as the number of entries in the bit array and the number of independent hash functions), we adjust parameters to evaluate the false positive probability as shown in Fig. 6. In there, the x-axis is to indicate the number of independent hash functions, the left side of the y-axis is the false positive probability, and the right side of the y-axis is the M/N ratio which is to indicate the storage overhead in RAM/memory. In Fig. 6, we can observe that the false positive probability is quickly decreased when the number of independent hash functions is increased, but more hash functions also result in a higher probability of hash collision. Hence, it needs a higher number of entries in the bit array to reduce the false positive probability, and it will significantly increase the storage overhead in RAM/memory. Therefore, the number of entries in the bit array and the number of independent hash functions should be carefully configured. Otherwise, the false positive probability cannot be efficiently controlled. In there, if we want the false positive probability below 2%, then the number of entries in the bit array should be eight times the number of the unique element, and the number of independent hash functions should be six.
To precisely detect the hot degree of access behavior and reduce the false prediction in advance, we consider increasing the number of bits of the entry in the bit array. To clearly observe the read pattern of a real application, we analyze the Proxy0 trace, which is from MSR Cambridge traces in SNIA IOTTA repository. We count the read operations of all LBAs every period of time, and the statistics of the read pattern is shown in Fig. 7. In there, the x-axis is to indicate the nth time interval, and the y-axis is the number of the read operations.

Fig. 8. Analysis of read-cold ratio of traces.
The blue line is to represent the maximum number of read operations among LBAs in a time interval, and the yellow line is to indicate the average number of read operations in all LBAs in a time interval. According to Fig. 7, the average number of read operations of certain LBA in a time interval is less than three times, and only a small portion of all LBA is frequently read. To verify this observation, we further analyze the read behavior of other traces, as shown in Fig. 8, the x-axis is the different traces and the y-axis is the ratio of LBAs with an average number of read operations less than 3 in the time period. Most of the traces have more than 70% of the pages read less than three times. Therefore, if we just want to identify the frequent read data, 3-bits information is large enough to recognize.
According to the above-mentioned observations, 3-bits information is large enough to filter out the real cold (infrequently accessed) data and real hot (frequently accessed) data. With considering simplifying the decay operation design and improving the accuracy of detection and prediction, we use three levels to filter the hotness, and the three-level hotness bloom filter is as shown in Fig. 9. The first level is “Observation,” and it indicates that the access behavior is not stable and uncertain. When new data is coming, the corresponding entry of this level will be set. If the data is accessed again between the two decay operations and the corresponding observation level is already set, then the second level “Recency” will be set. This level indicates that this data is recently accessed, and this data has a high probability to be accessed again recently. In the same rule, if this data is accessed again in a short period of time, then the third level

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:00:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4602

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023

Fig. 11. Request-based free block allocation.

Fig. 9. Access pattern identification by read/write bloom filter.
Fig. 10. Classification of request types.
“Frequency” will be set, and this level indicates that this data is a read hot data. However, data in this level should be carefully allocated to the physical location in a flash storage system. Otherwise, the read performance or the lifetime will be significantly affected. For more precise accuracy of hotness, the decay operation also should be modified to decay the last/highest valid (the corresponding entry is already set) level of each data. According to “Access Feature Identification,” data can be classified into four types: 1) read-hot write-hot; 2) read-hot write-cold; 3) read-cold write-hot; and 4) read-cold write-cold, respectively. The detailed characteristics of these four types are shown in Fig. 10, and the detailed allocation strategy will be presented and discussed in Section III-C.
C. Request-Based Free Block Allocation According to the description of Section III-B, data/requests
can be simply classified into four types. These four types have their own access characteristics. For example, read-hot writehot data are often read and frequently updated, so its data lifetime is also short. This type of data is suitably placed on secondary young (with enduring a few block erase operations) block (which we define as “second partition block”) because which has a higher endurance and lower raw bit error rate, and it also can provide the great read performance. Read-hot writecold data is the most important one in write-one–read-multiple applications/services because the number of this type in all types is the highest. This type of data is very often read and rarely updated, so we choose the primary young or youngest blocks (which we define as “first partition block”) to place this type of data because this type of block usually can provide the greatest read performance and the longest data retention

time. Read-cold write-hot data is rarely read and frequently updated, so this type of data is suitably placed into secondary old (with enduring many block erase operations) block (which we define as “third partition block”) because which still has higher endurance compared to the primary old or the oldest block. The last data type is read-cold write-cold, and it is seldom read and updated. Therefore, the primary old or the oldest block (which we define as “fourth partition block”) is the most suitable one to place this type of data. However, the access behavior of new coming data is not stable and uncertain. According to “Access Feature Identification” policy, all new coming data will initially be regarded as read-cold write-cold data. As a result, the read-cold write-cold data will be preallocated to the first partition for observation. When the P/E cycle of a block reaches the migration threshold, the migration will be triggered and the read-cold write-cold data will be migrated from the first partition to the fourth partition.
Access feature identification with adopting a bloom filterlike strategy has a low probability of false positive, and it will affect the lifetime or read performance of the flash storage system when allocating the nonsuitable blocks for certain data types due to false positive. The conditions of false positive are shown in Fig. 11. In the first condition, when read-cold write-cold data is misjudged to read-hot write-cold, this condition will waste the young block to serve cold data, but it does not seriously affect the read performance. In the second condition, when read-cold write-cold data is misjudged as read-cold write-hot data, this misjudgment will waste the secondary old block to serve read-cold write-cold data, but it does not seriously affect the lifetime. The third condition is to misjudge read-hot write-cold data as read-hot write-hot data, and it will slightly affect the read performance because the secondary young block still has a great read performance, and this type of data has a high probability of being correctly identified during the next decay cycle. In the fourth condition, misjudging read-cold write-hot data to read-hot write-hot, this condition will waste the secondary young block to serve readcold write-hot data, but it does not affect the read performance. To avoid uneven wear that causes the secondary old block premature wear out, “Migration” is proposed to resolve this issue, and the detailed description of it is in Section III-D.
D. Migration
According to the requirements of requests, all blocks are simply divided into four partitions. First, all blocks will be

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:00:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: RETENTION-AWARE READ ACCELERATION STRATEGY FOR LDPC-BASED NAND FLASH MEMORY

4603

Fig. 13. Free block management.

Fig. 12. Data migration flow.
divided into two groups according to the enduring P/E cycle. If the enduring P/E cycle of the block is below half of the maximal endurable P/E cycle, then this block belongs to the first group. Otherwise, this block belongs to the second group. The blocks in the first group usually have a greater read performance, so it is suitable for placing the read-hot data. However, the read performance will be slightly affected after the block is endured a few of block erase operations. Therefore, to provide the greatest read performance for readhot write-cold data, the first group will be divided into two partitions, such as “first partition” and “second partition,” according to the enduring block erase operations. In there, we define a threshold for the read performance degradation, and this threshold is called “read degradation threshold (RD_T).” If the erased times of the block is below the read degradation threshold, then this block belongs to the first partition. Otherwise, this block belongs to the second partition. Besides, the blocks in the second group usually have the lower read performance, thence it is used to place the read-cold data. In there, to avoid certain blocks wearing out prematurely, we define a threshold for distinguishing very old blocks, and this threshold is called “migration threshold (M_T).” In there, we also divide the second group into two partitions, such as “third partition” and “fourth partition.” If the erased times of the block is below the migration threshold, then this block belongs to the third partition. Otherwise, this block belongs to the fourth partition. The divided four partitions are shown in Fig. 12.
However, the design concept of “Migration” is different from the existing traditional wear-level strategies, and it is not aggressive to balance the wear levels among blocks. Migration is to reserve the blocks with higher read performance for readhot data without significantly affecting the lifetime of the flash storage system, so it adopts the lazy migration way to avoid certain blocks wearing out prematurely. The data migration flow and the wear-level distribution of all blocks are shown in Fig. 12. In the initialization, all blocks are in the first partition as shown in the left top subfigure of Fig. 12. When read-hot write-hot data are coming, if the second partition is empty, then the blocks in the first partition will be assigned for these data. On the contrary, the blocks in the second partition will serve

these data. When read-cold write-hot data is coming, it will preferentially assign the blocks in the third partition to serve these data. If the third partition is empty, then it will assign the blocks in the previous partition for these data. However, in this process, only a small portion of blocks is continuing to serve these data, and the wear-leveling/data migration operations are not triggered as shown in the right top subfigure of Fig. 12. The migration only will be triggered when the erased times of certain blocks reach the migration threshold, then these data will be reassigned to other blocks. The block with reaching the migration threshold will be assigned for readcold write-cold data to freeze the wear level as shown in the right bottom subfigure of Fig. 12. In this data migration flow, the migration is lazily triggered to avoid certain blocks wearing out prematurely. Therefore, unnecessary wear-leveling and migration operations are efficiently reduced.
On the other hand, finding a suitable block is very time consuming. To efficiently resolve this issue, we divide blocks into different partitions, and the blocks with the same access characteristics will be grouped into the same partition. To achieve this goal, the free block management strategy adopts the fuzzy way to group blocks into partitions according to the endured P/E cycle without the heavy sorting overhead on wear levels among blocks. As shown in Fig. 13, all blocks are divided into four partitions. The blocks with the same wear-level range will be grouped in the same partition, and it does not carefully sort the blocks in the partition according to the wear level of blocks. When the request is coming, it can quickly allocate the block from the corresponding partition according to the access feature of the request.
IV. EXPERIMENT
A. Evaluation Metrics and Experiment Setup
In this section, the performance of the proposed retentionaware read acceleration design (RRA) was evaluated compared to the typical wear-leveling approach (Baseline). We implemented a trace-driven flash storage system simulator to evaluate the performance of different strategies. In there, our design and the typical wear-leveling strategy both adopt the same FTL design, such as page-level FTL to compare, and the garbage collection method of all strategies is the greedy algorithm (which selects the block with most invalid pages as victim block). Adopting the greedy algorithm might result in that certain blocks will be frequently erased, and these blocks might be worn out prematurely. Therefore, in the typical wearleveling strategy, if the erased times of the victim block in the garbage collection is too high, then it will select other blocks

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:00:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4604

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023
TABLE II INVESTIGATED FLASH STORAGE DEVICE

Fig. 15. Normalized number of total live-page copying.

Fig. 14. Normalized average read response time.
with the less erased times as victim block. To evaluate the performance of different strategies in various applications, we adopt the many block I/O request traces obtained from MSR Cambridge Traces in SNIA IOTTA Repository [1]. In experiments, we simulate a 64 GB MLC flash storage device, and the detailed specification is shown in Table II. To comprehensively evaluate the various performance of different strategies, the average read response time was used to evaluate the read performance, and the number of total live-page copying was to evaluate the overhead of different strategies.
B. Experiment Results
1) Access Performance (Average Read Response Time): The average read response time of different strategies is shown in Fig. 14. In there, we can observe that our proposed design can efficiently reduce the average read response time in all traces compared to the typical wear-leveling strategy, and it reduces the average read response time by at least about 32% compared to the typical wear-leveling strategy. The significant improvement is created by the accurate access feature identification and the suitable space allocation for read-hot data.
2) Overhead (Total Live-Page Copying Count): Total livepage copying count is commonly used to evaluate the overhead of management strategy. For example, to avoid frequent erase operations on certain blocks in garbage collection, other blocks with more valid pages might be selected as victim blocks, and increasing the number of total live-page copying cannot be avoided. The total live-page copying count of different strategies is shown in Fig. 15. In there, we can observe that our proposed design also can efficiently reduce the number of

total live-page copying compared to the typical wear-leveling strategy, because our proposed design adopts the lazy way (migration operation is only triggered when the endured erased times of the block is close to maximal endurable erased times) to balance the wear level among blocks, and it can efficiently avoid the unnecessary wear-leveling or migration operations. In all traces, our proposed design can reduce the number of total live-page copying by at least about 11% compared to the typical wear-leveling strategy.
V. CONCLUSION
This article proposed a retention-aware read acceleration design to improve the read performance without significantly affecting the lifetime of LDPC-based flash storage systems. This design can efficiently identify and predict data access characteristics and precisely allocate suitable blocks for different data. The proposed design was evaluated with a series of experiments, and the experiment results prove that the proposed design can efficiently reduce the average read response time, and even also efficiently reduce the number of total live-page copying compared to the typical wear-leveling strategy.
REFERENCES
[1] “SNIA IOTTA repository.” MSR Cambridge Traces, 2007. [Online]. Available: http://iotta.snia.org/traces/block-io/388
[2] MT29F64G08CBAB MLC Nand Flash Memory Feature, Micron, Boise, ID, USA, 2010.
[3] MT29F64G08EBAA TLC NAND Flash Memory Features, Micron, Boise, ID, USA, 2010.
[4] MT29F8G08ABACA SLC NAND Flash Memory Features, Micron, Boise, ID, USA, 2010.
[5] Y. Cai et al., “Flash correct-and-refresh: Retention-aware error management for increased flash memory lifetime,” in Proc. IEEE 30th Int. Conf. Comput. Design (ICCD), 2012, pp. 94–101.
[6] Y.-H. Chang, J.-W. Hsieh, and T.-W. Kuo, “Improving flash wearleveling by proactively moving static data,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 53–65, Jan. 2010.
[7] Y.-H. Chang and T.-W. Kuo, “A commitment-based management strategy for the performance and reliability enhancement of flash-memory storage systems,” in Proc. 46th ACM/IEEE Design Autom. Conf. (DAC), 2009, pp. 858–863.
[8] S. Dharmapurikar, P. Krishnamurthy, and D. E. Taylor, “Longest prefix matching using bloom filters,” in Proc. Conf. Appl., Technol., Archit., Protocols Comput. Commun., 2003, pp. 201–212.
[9] Y. Du, Q. Li, L. Shi, D. Zou, H. Jin, and C. J. Xue, “Reducing LDPC soft sensing latency by lightweight data refresh for flash read performance improvement,” in Proc. 54th Annu. Design Autom. Conf., 2017, pp. 1–6.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:00:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: RETENTION-AWARE READ ACCELERATION STRATEGY FOR LDPC-BASED NAND FLASH MEMORY

4605

[10] Y. Du, D. Zou, Q. Li, L. Shi, H. Jin, and C. J. Xue, “LaLDPC: Latencyaware LDPC for read performance improvement of solid state drives,” in Proc. MSST, 2017, pp. 1–11.
[11] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[12] A. Gupta, Y. Kim, and B. Urgaonkar, “DFTL: A flash translation layer employing demand-based selective caching of page-level address mappings,” ACM SIGPLAN Notices, vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 229–240, 2009.
[13] M. Jung, E. H. Wilson, III, and M. Kandemir, “Physically addressed queueing (PAQ): Improving parallelism in solid state disks,” ACM SIGARCH Comput. Archit. News, vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 404–415, 2012.
[14] J. Kim, J. M. Kim, S. H. Noh, S. L. Min, and Y. Cho, “A space-efficient flash translation layer for compactflash systems,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 48, no. 2, pp. 366–375, May 2002.
[15] S.-W. Lee, D.-J. Park, T.-S. Chung, D.-H. Lee, S. Park, and H.-J. Song, “A log buffer-based flash translation layer using fully-associative sector translation,” ACM Trans. Embedded Comput. Syst., vol. 6, no. 3, p. 18, Jul. 2007.
[16] Y. Lv, L. Shi, Q. Li, C. Gao, C. J. Xue, and E. Sha. “Optimizing tail latency of ldpc based flash memory storage systems via smart refresh,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Netw. Archit. Storage (NAS), 2019, pp. 1–8.
[17] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[18] M.-C. Yang, Y.-H. Chang, C.-W. Tsao, and P.-C. Huang, “New era: New efficient reliability-aware wear leveling for endurance enhancement of flash storage devices,” in Proc. 50th ACM/EDAC/IEEE Design Autom. Conf. (DAC), 2013, pp. 1–6.
[19] M. Murugan and D. H.-C. Du, “Rejuvenator: A static wear leveling algorithm for NAND flash memory with minimized overhead,” in Proc. MSST, 2011, pp. 1–12.
[20] S. Park and K. Shen, “FIOS: A fair, efficient flash I/O scheduler,” in Proc. FAST, 2012, pp. 1–13.
[21] M.-C. Yang, Y.-M. Chang, C.-W. Tsao, P.-C. Huang, Y.-H. Chang, and T.-W. Kuo, “Garbage collection and wear leveling for flash memory: Past and future,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Smart Comput., 2014, pp. 66–73.
[22] E. Yeo, “An LDPC-enabled flash controller in 40nm CMOS,” in Proc. Flash Memory Summit, 2012, pp. 12–15.
Tse-Yuan Wang received the M.S. degree from the Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, in 2016, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering.
He is currently a Research Assistant with the Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taipei. His research interests include storage systems, memory systems, operating systems, and embedded systems.

Che-Wei Tsao (Student Member, IEEE) iscurrently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Graduate Institute of Networking and Multimedia, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
He is currently a Research Assistant with the Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taipei. His current research interests include storage systems, operating systems, embedded systems, and memory systems.
Yuan-Hao Chang (Fellow, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree from the Department of Networking and Multimedia of Computer Science and Information Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, in 2009.
He is currently a Research Fellow with the Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taipei. His research interests include storage systems, embedded systems, and computer system architecture.
Tei-Wei Kuo (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S. degree in computer science from the National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, in 1986, and the Ph.D. degree in computer science from the University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA, in 1994.
He is currently the Dean of the College of Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, and a Distinguished Professor with the Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering, National Taiwan University, where he served as the Department Chairman from August 2005 to July 2008. He served as a Distinguished Research Fellow and the Director of the Research Center for Information Technology Innovation, Academia Sinica, Taipei, from 20 January 2015 to 31 July 2016. His expertise is embedded systems, nonvolatile memory system and software, and realtime systems. Dr. Kuo is an ACM Fellow.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:00:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

