IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023

4643

Access Characteristic Guided Partition for NAND Flash-Based High-Density SSDs
Yina Lv , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Liang Shi , Member, IEEE, Yunpeng Song , and Chun Jason Xue , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—NAND flash-based solid-state drives (SSDs) are a kind of widely adopted storage. However, state-of-the-art works presented that the SSD always suffers from significant read performance degradation. One of the most critical reasons is access interference between read and write operations. This is because the read and write latency gaps are more pronounced for the latest NAND flash in SSDs. In this article, an interference reduction scheme is proposed to improve performance. This is motivated by the observation from several server workloads, where read and write operations can be easily separated based on access characteristics. Considering that SSDs are always organized with many parallel units (PUs), the basic idea of this work is to partition the PUs of the SSD into different areas and place data in the corresponding area according to access characteristics. Then, the interference can be optimized by issuing read and write requests to the different areas. To realize the above design, several approaches are proposed: first, an access characteristicbased data placement and migration method is proposed for read and write request separation. Second, to further adapt the parallel requirement for different workloads, a workload-based partitioning scheme is proposed to determine the number of PUs for read and write areas. Finally, based on partitioned SSD, a hotdata driven wear-leveling method is further proposed to balance the wearing of PUs in read and write areas. Experimental results show that partitioned SSD can significantly improve the read performance and wear leveling of partitioned SSD can guarantee performance and lifetime.
Index Terms—NAND flash memory, parallelism, performance, read–write interference, storage system.
I. INTRODUCTION
N AND flash-based solid-state drives (SSDs) have been widely deployed as secondary storage, from personal laptops, and enterprise servers to high-performance data centers, to alleviate the performance bottlenecks caused by hard disk drives (HDDs) [1], [2], [3], [4]. That is, modern SSDs are used to serve application-intensive scenarios to handle excessive data accesses and sudden workload situations. The above
Manuscript received 31 January 2023; revised 17 April 2023; accepted 26 May 2023. Date of publication 1 June 2023; date of current version 22 November 2023. This work was supported in part by NSFC under Grant 62141213 and Grant 62072177; in part by the Shanghai Science and Technology Project under Grant 20ZR1417200 and Grant 22QA1403300; and in part by the Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China, under Project CityU 11218720. This article was recommended by Associate Editor A. Aminifar. (Corresponding author: Liang Shi.)
Yina Lv, Liang Shi, and Yunpeng Song are with the Software/Hardware Co-Design Engineering Research Center, Ministry of Education and School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200062, China (e-mail: lshi@cs.ecnu.edu.cn).
Chun Jason Xue is with the College of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCAD.2023.3282175

applications benefit from the development of the 3-D NAND technology. During the last decade, 3-D NAND chips have achieved higher density by stacking layers from the early 24 to the state-of-the-art 300+ [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], and packing more bits per cell from single-level cell (SLC) to quad-level cell (QLC). According to our investigation, more layers stacked in the block and more bits per cell technique are still on the roadmap of flash manufacturers. For example, 5-bit-per-cell (PLC) and 6-bit-per-cell (HLC) have been announced [10], [11].
However, with the development of high-density flash technology and complex application scenarios, modern SSDs are facing a trend of declining read performance. Some reasons can be listed. First, the flash reliability is declining, potentially introducing long read latency or even latency spikes [12], [13]. Many works are proposed to solve the reliability issue by adopting stronger error correction codes (ECCs), such as low-density parity-check code (LDPC) [13]. Second, the latency variation between read and write operations has been expanded by 10× to 30×, which causes serious access interference [14], [15]. That is, when a write operation is being processed, subsequent read operations will be blocked for a long time. This is called read–write interference. Third, high-density flash often adopts a full-sequence program (FSP) to program multiple bits at the same time for cellto-cell interference consideration [16], [17], [18]. However, the programming latency for FSP operations becomes longer, which will further worsen access interference. Recently, as SSDs are deployed in I/O intensive systems, the application’s complex and changeable access behaviors result in a large number of requests queuing, thereby further deteriorating read performance. To this end, apart from optimizing access performance and error correction, avoiding access interference is also critical to reducing the read latency when modern SSDs are exposed to I/O intensive systems.
To handle the aforementioned read performance degradation issue caused by access interference under I/O intensive systems, three possible solutions have been proposed. First, for read performance consideration, the processing of read requests can be set with a higher priority. That is, if there are both read requests and write requests in the current I/O queue, the I/O scheduler will dispatch read requests first [19]. Further, to take advantage of the rich parallelism within the SSD, the number of read requests handled by each parallel unit (PU) is relatively balanced [20]. Second, with the hardware support of NAND flash chips, the write suspend function can be implemented inside the SSD [14]. If read requests are

1937-4151 c 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:04:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4644

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023

waiting to be served during the processing of write requests, such a technique can interrupt the current write request and service read requests immediately. Third, we can also avoid the read–write interference through redundancy [15], [21], [22], [23]. The basic idea is to maintain multiple copies of read data or RAID parity redundancy at different chips. When interference happens in one PU, data in other PUs can be accessed instead or data can be reconstructed through parity redundancy. However, these schemes not only introduced additional storage overhead but also additional write operations, which may introduce further access interference. More importantly, these schemes are not suitable for high-density NAND flash due to their limited lifetime and larger performance gap between read and write.
Different from the above solutions, this article exploits the access characteristics of I/O intensive workloads and proposes an access characteristic guided partitioning scheme to minimize access interference for performance optimization. We first analyzed several real-world server workloads, and found that read and write requests can be separated based on their access characteristics. Then, we propose a PUs partitioning scheme to minimize read–write interference. In summary, this article makes the following key contributions.
1) Detailed analysis on the access interference is presented to motivate the design of the partitioned SSD. The analysis found that read performance degradation is highly correlated with access interference in state-of-the-art SSDs.
2) An access characteristic guided SSD partition scheme is presented to separate the read requests from write requests to improve the read performance. The basic idea is to partition the PUs of the SSD into a read area and a write area, and place the data in the corresponding area based on their access characteristics. The designs are twofold: the first one is a data placement and migration method to place frequently read data on the read area and frequently write data on the write area. The second one is a workload-based partitioning scheme to achieve tradeoffs among parallelism impact, data placement, and interference of different workloads.
3) To avoid the flash lifetime reduction caused by the unbalanced wear rate of PUs under the partitioned SSD, we propose a hot-data driven wear-leveling method that only performs backup migration of the hot read data during background wear leveling.
4) Experimental results show that our proposal can reduce access interference and improve the read performance of high-density flash memory. In addition, our partitioned SSD architecture also guarantees flash lifetime.
II. BACKGROUND
A. SSD Organization
SSD is mainly organized with the NAND flash array and the SSD controller [2]. The NAND flash array [24] is composed of multiple channels, and each channel is organized by several NAND flash chips. These chips are organized hierarchically and serve as the primary storage medium for high-density

Fig. 1. SSD overview (Section II-A). (a) SSD organization. (b) Flash chip.
flash memory. Specifically, each flash chip is composed of some dies, and each die is composed of several planes, and each plane contains thousands of flash blocks and several register/page buffers. Fig. 1 shows an example of the SSD organization with four channels, two chips per channel, two dies per chip, and 4-plane architecture per die. These four levels can be accessed in parallel, which is critical to improving the SSD bandwidth.
The relationship between these four-level parallelism has been well studied in previous work [20], [25]. In this work, these four levels of parallelism are called PUs. During the design, we did not specify the PUs for the four levels since the design does not depend on the type of parallel level. In the following, we use PU as the basic PU to easily understand the design.
In the SSD controller, flash translation layer (FTL) is designed to manage the flash memory array. FTL includes many components, including address mapping, DRAM buffering, I/O scheduling, wear leveling (WL), and garbage collection (GC). Among them, address mapping is designed for the out-of-place updates feature of flash, which maintains a mapping table for the logical address to the physical address. When data is updated, the new address mapping information is recorded for future access. The address mapping includes static address mapping and dynamic address mapping, which is highly correlated with the access interference of host requests. I/O scheduling is designed to issue requests to the flash memory array. Generally, the priority of the read request is higher than the write request. WL is designed to balance the wearing of all-flash blocks because of its limited P/E, which can extend its lifetime [1], [2]. GC is designed to collect the invalid pages during updating since the updated data are written to the new locations [1]. To this end, the above-mentioned SSD organization can effectively improve device-level parallelism, thereby increasing the total I/O bandwidth.
B. Access Interference
Access interference means that one request is blocked by another request due to accessing the same PU [20]. This happens in the SSD since requests issued to the same PU are common. For example, if a request is processed on a PU, and another request is issued to the same PU, it must

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:04:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LV et al.: ACCESS CHARACTERISTIC GUIDED PARTITION FOR NAND FLASH-BASED HIGH-DENSITY SSDs

4645

Fig. 2. Example of the WIR (Section II-B).
wait for the finished current requests. Based on the types of requests enrolled in access interference, access interference can be classified into four types: 1) read-interference-write (RIW); 2) read-interference-read (RIR); 3) write-interferenceread (WIR); and 4) write-interference-write (WIW). Among them, WIR takes in the most serious impact on performance. Assume that the read and write latency gap is L times. The latency degradation for the above four types of interference can be up to 1/L, 1, L and 1 times. Clearly, when WIR happens, read performance will be significantly impacted. Concerning the data dependencies, they should be solved in the host systems. Once requests on the same data are issued to the controller, they should be merged. For example, if a page of data is read, and a write operation happens on the data, the read operation should return the written data, and then the data are written. Otherwise, the write operation cannot be issued from the host system.
Fig. 2 shows an example of WIR at different levels of parallelism. There are two queues: 1) a read queue and 2) a write queue, that service waiting I/O requests. Four data have been stored in different chips and some requests are issued to access them in time series. At time t1, there is a read request to be processed on chip 1 to read data A and a write request to be processed on chip 5 to update data C. Since these two chips share the same channel, channel-level WIR may happen during the processing of these two requests. At time t4, data B is read and data D at the same chip is updated, then chip-level WIR may happen. For programming a 16-KB flash page, the write latency is around 1–3 ms, while the read latency on a 16-KB page is much faster, around 100 us, as presented in state-ofthe-art works [16], [17], [26]. Such a latency gap is up to 30×, which causes severe WIR and makes read performance degradation. In summary, the WIR of high-density flash is a key issue that needs to be resolved in future SSD deployments.
III. MOTIVATION
As mentioned in Section II, due to the large latency gap between read and write operations, once a read operation is blocked by a write operation, the read request will be significantly delayed. To demonstrate this performance degradation, we first construct the experiment to collect the average read performance and latency distribution due to WIR. Then, we study the access characteristics of several real-world workloads to motivate the design of this work. The experimental

setup parameters are listed in Section VII, which refers to the state-of-the-art works [18]. 14 server workloads from Microsoft Research (MSR) Cambridge [27] and 2 workloads from YCSB workload on RocksDB [28], [29] are selected, which are read or write intensive.
First, to show the performance impact of WIR, two cases are evaluated, including with WIR and without WIR. Note that to construct without WIR, the latency of write requests is set to zero. Fig. 3(a) shows the normalized average read latency to that of WIR. The results show that WIR has a significant impact to read performance, by 57% on average, and up to 98%. Therefore, avoiding interference is critical to the access performance of SSD. Furthermore, to understand the characteristics of latency spikes due to WIR, the read latency is collected following running time. Fig. 3(b) shows the collected results for the workload rsrch as an example. The results show that with WIR, the read latency spike can be seen in the range of milliseconds, which is sensitive to users. From the above studies, we believe that optimizing WIR is critical to high-density NAND flash-based SSD.
To motivate the design of this work, we further analyze the access characteristics of these workloads. Fig. 3 shows the access characteristics of evaluated workloads from the view of read-mostly requests, write-mostly requests, and interleaved requests. Note that the data read (written) by read (write)mostly requests are called read (write)-mostly data. The read (write)-mostly data are defined as follows: if almost all the accesses (≥95%) to a data page are read (write) requests, we characterize this data page as read (write)-mostly. Similar to previous work [15], [30], [31], we have the similar observation that most read requests happen on read-mostly data and most write requests happen on write-mostly data. The results show that most requests can be well identified, which is critical for WIR minimization.
Based on these observations, we propose to optimize read performance by partitioning the SSD and separating read/write requests into different areas for WIR reduction.
IV. OVERVIEW OF THE PARTITIONED SSD
Modern SSDs face severe WIR when deployed in I/Ointensive scenarios due to the increased latency gap between read and write operations on high-density NAND flash. To address the degraded read performance, we propose an access characteristics guided SSD partitioning scheme. Different from traditional SSD architectures that distribute all data across all PUs, our proposed partitioned SSD divides the SSD into a read area and a write area in units of PUs, and places read data and write data to these two areas, respectively, based on their access characteristics. During data accesses, if reads are serviced by the read area and writes are serviced by the write area separately, WIR can be avoided, and eventually the read performance is improved. However, there are several challenges: first, as presented in Section III, other than readmostly and write-mostly requests, some requests are accessed interleaving. These data should be carefully placed to avoid performance impact. Second, the partitioning scheme will reduce the number of PUs in each area. If the workload is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:04:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4646

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023

Fig. 3. Performance comparison. (a) Normalized read performance impact from WIR. (b) Latency spikes (Section III).

of different workloads; Third, hot-data driven wear-leveling scheme is designed to balance the block wear of the PUs in the read and write areas.

Fig. 4. Workload characteristics: the request distributions of read requests on read-mostly data, write requests on write-mostly data, and the other requests on data with interleaving accesses (Section III).
Fig. 5. Overview of the partitioned SSD (Section IV).
sensitive to parallelism, the benefit will be discounted. Third, compared with the flash blocks in the read area, the blocks in the write area will be worn out more severely. Most of the existing wear leveling schemes only work inside the PU. Thus, wear leveling in the partitioned SSD architecture should be revisited to avoid the flash lifetime issue.
To tame the above challenges, several schemes are proposed. Fig. 5 shows an overview of the proposed partitioning scheme. The flash memory array is first partitioned based on PUs, where N PUs are allocated for the read area and M PUs for the write area. In the controller, three components are implemented, including data placement and migration, workloadbased partitioning, and hot-data driven wear leveling. First, the data placement and migration scheme is designed to dynamically place the data based on their access characteristics; second, a workload-based partitioning scheme is designed to partition the SSD based on the specific characteristics

V. ACCESS CHARACTERISTICS GUIDED SSD PARTITIONING
A. Data Placement and Migration
1) Read and Write Data Placement: Since SSD is partitioned into read and write areas, we can place data into the corresponding area according to their access characteristics. Based on the latest historical information, the data type is termed read mostly or write mostly. Read-mostly data is accessed through intensive read operations, which is recommended to place in the read area. Write-mostly data is updated by intensive write operations and should be placed in the write area. If data are read most recently and the current operation is read, they are placed in the read area. If data are written most recently, and the current operation is a write operation, they are placed in the write area. The above scheme requires the recent access history of data. Considering that the first data access characteristics are unknown, it is recommended to put them into the read area for the first time. For the data updates, requests are issued to the write area and the written data are stored in the write area. Fig. 6(a) shows an example of data placement. There are two queues in the SSD controller to receive read and write requests from the host, respectively. Data A and B are read-mostly, which are placed at the read area and data C and D are write-mostly, which are placed at the write area. Then, read requests are issued to the read area while write requests are issued to the write area.
2) Read and Write Data Migration: As described in Section III, even though many reads and writes are classified as requests for read-mostly or write-mostly data, some requests occur when accessing interleaved data. For these requests, the above scheme is not effective. For example, if data are accessed with a few reads, and then written many times, the data should be migrated to the write area and vice versa. In this section, a data migration scheme is proposed.
The basic idea is to determine the area to which the data belongs. There are two migration directions.
1) Read-to-Write Migration: Data are placed in the read area based on the placement scheme, and they receive many write operations, they should be migrated to the write area to avoid interference.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:04:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LV et al.: ACCESS CHARACTERISTIC GUIDED PARTITION FOR NAND FLASH-BASED HIGH-DENSITY SSDs

4647

Fig. 6. Data placement between partitions (Section V). (a) Data placement. (b) Data migration. (c) Workload-based partitioning.

2) Write-to-Read Migration: Data are placed in the write area but receive many read operations, which should be migrated to the read area.
However, several challenges should be solved. 1) How to identify the migrated data in both areas? 2) When to execute the migration? 3) How to deal with data migration with changing access characteristics? To solve the first challenge, data access characteristics of
read and write areas are considered. For read-to-write migration, it has no cost but if it is incorrect, more reads will happen in the write area. For write-to-read migration, it introduces additional write costs and if it is incorrect, writes will happen in the read area. To identify misplaced data, two thresholds for the migration are studied, Tr and Tw, with considerations of costs and benefits. The data migration will be triggered once data are read consecutively by Tr times at the write area or once data are written consecutively by Tw times at the read area. Fig. 6(b) shows an example, where the readmostly data A changes to write-mostly data, they are migrated, and write-mostly data C changes to read-mostly data, they are also migrated. In this case, performance is further optimized to accommodate changes in access characteristics of interleaved data. In the experiment, Tr and Tw will be carefully studied to show the effects on performance.
The second challenge is the timeliness of migration. That is, the cost-benefit of data migration should be considered. The benefit refers to performance optimization due to reduced interference, while the cost refers to performance impacted by the conflicts between host I/O requests and migration-induced background operations. There are two design options as follows. On the one hand, the data migration can be delayed until the SSD is idle, then the migration-induced background operations will not conflict with host I/O requests. However, interference is not solved before data migration. On the other hand, we can perform the migration operation promptly. Then, data can be stored in the appropriate area immediately, thus, avoiding possible interference in the following accesses. The problem is that migration operations may conflict with host operations when data is migrated from the write area to the read area. In this article, we use timely migration. Since the unit of migration is a flash page, the impact is small compared to that of the large volume of data migration. Furthermore,

with the careful choice of the above two migration thresholds, the migration cost can be controlled.
The third challenge is that data migration cannot obtain benefits when the data access characteristics are variable. This is because frequent data migration causes high costs, which in turn affects user performance and SSD lifetime. Considering an extreme scenario, the data in the write area is identified as read mostly and migrated to the read area, but after the migration, the data is not read but many updates occur. This means that the last migration operation did not bring any benefits but only incurred migration overhead. For such data, we suggest conservatively migrating them. For example, we can record if the data is read after migrating from the write area to the read area, or record if the data is updated after migrating from the read area to the write area. If the record is zero, we recommend not migrating them further until there is interference in accessing this data in the current area. However, this situation is not common based on the motivation results and recent work [30], [32]. Our proposed method mainly targets scenarios with obvious read and write characteristics.
B. Workload-Based Partitioning
1) Parallelism Impact: With data placement and migration, most WIR can be well avoided. However, another concern not considered above is the partition. With partitioning, PUs used to serve read or write requests are reduced. For example, assume that the partition is 50% PUs for the read area and another 50% for the write area. Then, parallelism is reduced by 50% for most read and write requests. If the workload is sensitive to parallelism, the performance impact due to the parallelism reduction will be significant. Therefore, PUs should be carefully partitioned based on workload characteristics. If too many PUs are allocated to the read area, the write requests may be accumulated in the request queue. Otherwise, read requests will be accumulated. To tame the above issue, a workloadbased partitioning scheme is proposed to determine the number of PUs in read and write areas. The basic scheme is to partition the SSD based on the workload access characteristics. If the workload is sensitive to read parallelism, we should allocate more PUs to the read area for parallel relaxation. Otherwise, the write area is enlarged.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:04:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4648

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023

TABLE I PARTITIONING ADJUSTMENT
2) Partitioning Adjustment Process: To determine the number of PUs for read and write areas, our basic idea is based on the number of requests and the size of requests in the queue. The reason is that if the requests are not well processed, they will be accumulated in the queue. Also, larger requests may be processed more slowly. The partition should be allocated with more PUs to release blocked requests. To quantify the adjustment, some symbols are defined. nREAD is the number of read requests in the read queue, and nWRITE is the number of write requests in the write queue. rSIZE is the average size of read requests in the read queue, and wSIZE is the average size of write requests in the write queue. rPU and wPU are the numbers of PUs for these two areas, respectively. The partition adjustment policy is based on read volume (RV) and write volume (WV). Among them, RV can be calculated by nREAD × rSIZE while WV is nWRITE × wSIZE. Note that the larger the values of RV and WV, the more the requests processing are affected by the number of PUs. During runtime, nREAD, rSIZE, nWRITE, and wSIZE are collected. rPU and wPU are recorded.
Intensity Levels and Partition Levels: We first define the workload intensity into three levels for reads and writes, high/middle/low. For a high-intensity level, it means that there are many requests blocked in the I/O queue, which can be released by enlarging the corresponding area. The lower the intensity level is, the fewer PUs is required. Three intensity thresholds I0–I2 are defined to differentiate the intensity of workloads. These thresholds will be discussed. Second, we group the PU partition into seven levels, from L0–L6. Take 32 channels as an example. The seven levels are presented in Table I, where rPU and wPU are set in the unit of 4 PUs. For example, for read-intensive workloads, we can allocate more PU for read areas, from 28 to 20. However, for write-intensive workloads, we can allocate more PU for write areas, from 28 to 20, too. However, if both of them are intensive, the default partition is adopted. As shown in Table I, for workloads with different levels of read or write intensity, the partition level is selected correspondingly. For example, if the workload is high-read intensive, the partition level will be L0.
Intensity Thresholds: Three intensity thresholds (I0–I2) are used to decide which partition ratio should be chosen, where I0>I1>I2. For example, we set I0 to 64 16-KB pages, I1 to 16 16-KB pages, and I2 to 4 16-KB pages. The selection of these three thresholds is discussed in the sensitive study. To determine the partition ratio for the read and write areas during runtime, we compare the value of RV and WV with I0 − I2, periodically (e.g., detect per 10-thousand requests). To judge if the read area needs to be enlarged, we first check the value of WV. If WV is less than the smallest adjustment threshold, I2, it means that the amount of writing to be processed is too

small, and currently allocated PUs can process it smoothly. In this case, we can judge if the read area needs to be enlarged. The value of RV will be compared with I0 to I2, successively. When the condition is satisfied, the write area will be enlarged to the corresponding partition ratio. For the enlargement of the write area, the judgment process is the same as that of read. Ideally, both RV and WV are less than I2, which means that the proportion of allocated partitions can be well adapted to the current process of read and write requests, and the blocked requests in both queues are small. In this case, no adjustment will be triggered. The worst case is that both WV and RV are larger than one of the thresholds (I0–I2), which means that the number of PUs in both areas is not enough to process the burst requests and both areas need to be enlarged. In this case, we just conservatively maintain the current partition ratio to avoid performance fluctuation.
To ensure the normal service of areas, we set a minimum value for the number of PUs per area during adjustment (e.g., 4 in this article). During PU reallocation, if the number of PUs in the area is less than minimum, the current reallocation will be canceled. If all adjustment conditions are satisfied but there is no space due to a large working set, cold data will be migrated to another area, and the PU can be successfully adjusted when there is free space.
3) Challenges of Partition Adjustment: To realize the above partition adjustment process, several challenges should be concerned. First, intensity thresholds, I0–I2, should be carefully designed. If the threshold is large, the performance of the corresponding area will be significantly impacted due to the adjustment is not timely. However, for a small threshold, it may frequently activate area adjustment, which is a high cost. Note that for most workloads, the adjustment should be rare to avoid the cost. Considering the possibility of workload bursts, it may cause requests to accumulate in the queue and, thus, trigger partition adjustments. Partition adjustments due to burst workloads may affect subsequent access performance. Therefore, it is recommended to set a larger value with lazy partition adjustment. If there is a sudden workload, the adjusted threshold can also be easily satisfied, so the adjustment can be made quickly according to the seven partition levels. Second, for write area enlargement, when a PU is selected from the read area and allocated to the write area, read requests may be issued into the write area, thereby affecting the read performance. To this end, we recommend keeping the hot-read data of the selected PU in the read area and this part of the data will be migrated during partition adjustment. Third, unlike write area enlargement, read area cannot make good use of newly allocated PU. This is because the accessed data is still aggregated in the original PUs in the read area. The reallocated PU from the write area has frequently updated data. Therefore, hot-read data should be actively migrated to the newly allocated PU to release the parallel pressure. The amount of data migrated is the total amount of hot read data divided by the number of PUs in the read area.
4) Hot Read Data Identification: In this article, hot read data refers to data that is read frequently. Similar to the data migration method, we reuse the threshold Tr to identify hotread data. There are two reasons. If the threshold is set too

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:04:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LV et al.: ACCESS CHARACTERISTIC GUIDED PARTITION FOR NAND FLASH-BASED HIGH-DENSITY SSDs

4649

Fig. 7. Hot-data driven wear leveling (Section V-C). (a) Two PUs (#2 and #4) are selected and hot-read-data in PU #2 are recorded in HRT. (b) Hot-read-data A is backed up to PU #4 in the write area. (c) Two selected PUs are swapped and the backed up data A is invalid in PU #2.

large and greater than Tr, then the amount of data migrated during partition reallocation decreases. However, more read requests will be introduced into the write area, and during subsequent accesses, a large amount of data will be migrated back to the read area. If the threshold is set too small, such as below Tr, a large number of data migration operations will occur during the partition reallocation process. Therefore, considering the read performance and migration cost, Tr is reasonable as the hot-read data identification threshold.
C. Hot-Data Driven Wear Leveling for Partitioned SSDs
1) Lifetime Degradation for the Partitioned SSD: For the partitioned SSD, the blocks wearing in the write area are much faster than that of the read area. Therefore, when the SSD fails, the blocks wearing in the read area are lower than the nominated endurance. That is, the unbalanced wearing among blocks in the read and write area will reduce the lifetime of SSD. Prior works proposed the interchannel or interdie wearleveling methods [2], which can be applied in the partitioned SSD in this article to solve the lifetime degradation problem. The process is to swap all valid data of the selected PUs during wear leveling, called inter-PU WL. However, the amount of data in the PU is large. If we choose one PU from each area and swap all data during WL, a large number of background operations will affect the processing of requests on the host side, causing severe performance and lifetime degradation.
2) Hot-Data Driven Wear Leveling: To tame the above challenge, a hot-data driven wear-leveling method for the partitioned SSD is proposed. The basic idea is to select one PU that has the minimum wear rate from the read area, and one PU that has the maximum wear rate from the write area, and then swap them. The wear rate of a PU is the average wear rate of blocks erased. During the swap, we only swap the hot-read data in these two selected PUs. While hot-written data can be placed in the corresponding area when updated. Specifically, this process contains three steps. First, we must traverse all data in the selected PU of the read area based on the mapping table. If the data is identified as hot-read-data, the corresponding mapping information should be recorded in another table named hot-read-data for the WL table (HRT). HRT records three entries, logical page number, physical page number in the PU of the read area, and physical page number in the PU of the write area. Second, according to the mapping information, the corresponding data will be migrated from the selected PU of the read area to the PU in the write area. Third, when all the hot-read-data from the selected PU in the read area have been migrated to the write area, we swap the areas where these

two PUs belong to. That is, the selected PU in the read area is added to the write area to serve to write requests, and the selected PU in the write area will be added to the read area to reduce its subsequent wearing. Also, the address information recorded in the HRT should be updated. To realize it, we invalidate the physical page number in the PU of the read area for each logical page number in the HRT and then use the physical page number in the selected PU of the write area to update the mapping information in the mapping table. At this point, one execution process of hot-data driven WL is completed.
Fig. 7 shows an example of the above process. There are four pages of data A-D with different access characteristics. Data A is frequently read and stored in the read area. Data B is frequently updated and stored in the write area. Data C and D are interleaved and stored in the read and write areas, respectively. Before WL, two PUs (PUs #2 and #4) are selected [Fig. 7(a)]. PU #2, which stores data A and C, and PU #4, which stores data B and D, are selected. Then, we collect the mapping information of frequently read data A and record them in the HRT, which is used for backup. Next, data A with frequently read is backed up to PU #4 [Fig. 7(b)]. If data A is read during this process, the corresponding read requests will still be issued to PU #2 based on the mapping information. Finally, the two PUs are swapped [Fig. 7(c)], and data A is invalided according to the mapping information recorded in the HRT. To this end, PU #2 belongs to the write area while PU #4 belongs to the read area. Note that, data B will be updated to PU #2 during the following accesses.
Based on the above processes, we have achieved the WL among PUs. Like traditional inter-PU WL, if the wear rate gap between any two PUs exceeds a predefined limit [2], hot-data driven WL is triggered. The proposed scheme has the following advantages. First, due to the hot-read-data being backed up migration, the host read performance will not be affected by background operations during WL. This is because these hot-read data can be accessed in the read area during the entire process of WL. Second, the proportion of frequently read data is very small according to observations (Section III), then the flash wearing during wear leveling is also limited. In summary, hot-data driven WL only migrates frequently read data when executing cross PU WL to enhance flash lifetime.
VI. IMPLEMENTATION AND ANALYSIS
A. Limitations and Overhead
1) Limitation Discussions: The proposed partitioning scheme is to partition the SSD and separate requests into different areas to solve the WIR. The benefits are correlated

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:04:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4650

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023

with many factors: the first one is the effects on the request separation. The motivation section shows that for most requests, the separation is obvious, but for some workloads, there are still many interleaved access requests, which are hard to separate. Read requests serviced by the write area will receive more interference, introducing a lousy performance. The second one is the workload parallelism sensitiveness. If the workload is highly sensitive to parallelism, the partition may not be a good choice. This is because the interference minimization-induced performance benefit may be smaller than the parallelism reduction-induced performance impact. The third one is the degree of interference. For some workloads, the interference is not significant because they are read intensive or write friendly, such as sequential writes. Due to their parallelism sacrifices, the partitioning scheme will show little or even worse performance. Based on the above discussions, the proposed partitioning scheme should work efficiently when the separation is good, sensitiveness on parallelism is weak, or the interference is significant.
There are also several limitations. First, there are some read requests in the write area, which receive more interference. In this case, it may introduce tail latency for the read requests in the write area. In the experiment, tail latency is evaluated. Second, for unbalanced block wearing in different areas, the frequency of triggering WL will be higher than the traditional SSD architecture, which may lead to background operations and affect host requests. In the experiment, we evaluate the performance and lifetime reduction during wear leveling.
2) Implementation Overhead: There are two types of overhead in this design: 1) firmware and 2) storage overheads. First, the firmware overhead mainly comes from the comparison between thresholds and the acquired access count, which is a simple compare operation with negligible computation overhead. Second, the storage overhead includes three aspects. The latest accessed operation types are used to record the operation type accessed in the most recent period. The area markers used for the partitioned SSD to record which area the data is stored. The access counter is used during hot data identification to record the access frequency, which guides the data placement and migration process. For implementation, there is one bit for the area marker, two bits for the accessed operation type, and two bits for the access counter maintained in the mapping entry. The storage overhead of HRT is much smaller than the FTL mapping table. This is because HRT only records the hot read data in one PU and its size is set to 10 MB in this article. Therefore, the storage overhead is negligible by extending the mapping entry with five bits.
B. Comparative Analysis and Discussion
To better understand the performance improvement brought by the partitioned SSD, we construct models to analyze and discuss the three methods proposed above, including the data placement method, the data migration method, and the workload-based partitioning method. For performance comparison, we have defined the following symbols.
1) All requests can be divided into two types according to two scenarios. Rw/ represents a read request with

WIR. Rw/o represents a read request without WIR. Based on our proposal, we can define the following symbols. Rplacement represents the number of read requests to avoid interference using our Placement method, which is determined by the number of read-mostly and write-mostly requests. Rmigration represents the number of read requests to avoid interference using our Migration method, which is determined by the number of interleaved requests. Rpartition represents the number of read requests to avoid interference using our Partition method, which is determined by the number of PUs in the read area. 2) The latency impact factor can be expressed in two scenarios:
a) α is the read latency impact factor under the WIR. The value of α reflects the severity of the current WIR. The larger the value is, the more serious the WIR is.
b) β represents read latency unaffected by WIR. α is larger than β.
In addition, γ is another latency impact factor, which is highly correlated with the number of PUs. We assume that the value of γ is 1 in the baseline method. If the number of PUs decreases, the value of γ will be increased. For the partitioned SSD, the number of write requests in the read area is small and the number of read requests is large, so the read performance is less affected by WIR and relatively greatly affected by parallelism. In the write area, the number of read requests is small but the write request is relatively large, so the read performance is less affected by parallelism and relatively greatly affected by WIR. Thus, to qualify the read performance, we mainly explore the parallel impact on the read area and WIR in the write area. Then, the read performance of baseline without the partitioned SSD can be expressed as (1), including the latency of requests with WIR and the latency of requests without WIR

baseline = α ∗ Rw/ + β ∗ Rw/o.

(1)

Data Placement Based the Partitioned SSD: Observing that there are many read-mostly data and write-mostly data. This method mainly separates the read request and write request according to the access characteristics of data. Therefore, we can define the benefit of this method by (2). As we can see, the benefit of this method is highly correlated to the number of read-mostly and write-mostly requests. The more read-mostly and write-mostly requests that can be identified and corresponding data can be stored in the suitable area, the greater the benefit to the read performance optimization. However, if the access mode of the data is interleaved with reads and writes, there is still no improvement for them

benefit1 = α ∗ Rw/ − Rplacement

+ γ ∗ β ∗ Rw/o + Rplacement .

(2)

Data Migration Based the Partitioned SSD: To solve the above issue, a data migration scheme is designed to dynamically migrate the interleaved data between these two partitions

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:04:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LV et al.: ACCESS CHARACTERISTIC GUIDED PARTITION FOR NAND FLASH-BASED HIGH-DENSITY SSDs
TABLE II SSD CONFIGURATION AND WORKLOAD CHARACTERISTICS

4651

based on the historical data access pattern. Two migration thresholds are defined, Tr and Tw, which have been discussed in the Section V-A2. Once the data is continuously read Tr times in the write area, migration is performed. Once the data is continuously written Tw times in the read area, migration is performed. Equation (3) is the benefit after adding the data migration mechanism under the above data placement method. After applying this method, some read requests (Rmigration) can be further released from the interference
benefit2 = α ∗ Rw/ − Rplacement − Rmigration + γ ∗ β ∗ Rw/o + Rplacement + Rmigration . (3)
Compared to (2), the data migration scheme has more benefits, especially, when Rmigration is larger. However, if the SSD is applied to a read-intensive scenario, the parallelism degradation for the read area will affect performance.
Workload-Based Partitioning: If the workload is readintensive, the PUs in the read area will be enlarged. Otherwise, the write area will be allocated to more PUs. Compared with the above migration method, the workload-based partitioning method can increase the value of γ . Then, the benefit is further increased. The ideal situation where read performance is not affected by parallelism degradation is for a value of γ close to 1, similar to the baseline method.
VII. EXPERIMENT AND ANALYSIS
A. Experimental Setup
Considering firmware modification in the SSD controller to employ our proposal, we adopt a widely used simulator SSDsim [25] with the SSD extensions. Table II(a) presents the configuration of the simulated high-density and low-cost SSD with a four-bit-per-cell QLC flash [18]. It has 32 channels, with four chips per channel. Each chip has 256 blocks, and each block has 1024 16-KB pages. The total capacity is 512 GB. The depth of the request queue is set to 32. The thresholds used in this article are listed in Table II(a). In the SSD controller, default page mapping-based FTL and GC are implemented. The access latency for read and write operations are set to 110 Us and 2 ms, respectively, [18]. The erase time of a block is set to 3.5 ms [5], [18].

Since our proposal is effective for workloads with high WIR, thereby, the top 12 workloads from Fig. 3 based on the performance impact from interference are selected for evaluation. The former ten workloads come from MSR [27], which are heavily used in similar flash-based research that performs various read performance optimizations [14], [33]. For MSR workloads, we compressed the timing to adapt to the state-of-the-art SSDs [33], [34]. The latter two ssdtraces are from YCSB Workload on RocksDB [28], [29], which are termed trace-0 and trace-1. Additionally, we constructed mixed workloads with read-dominant and write-dominant periods to evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed methods in scenarios with variable workload characteristics. Among them, mix-0 is a workload that combines the write-dominant workload hm_0 and the read-dominant workload prn_1. mix-1 is a workload that combines the write-dominant workload prn_0 and the read-dominant workload prn_1. mix-2 is a workload that combines the write-dominant workload proj_1 and the read-dominant workload prxy_0. Table II(b) quantifies the workload characteristics, including read/write footprint (RF/WF), read/write request size (RS/WS), the number of reads and writes, read ratio, read performance impact from interference, the ideal partition ratio, and the detected partition ratio. The number in the ideal partition represents the PUs count in each area, which is collected through offline workload characterization evaluation. The number in the detected partition is the most frequent partition ratio of each workload, which is detected by the online workload-based partitioning method. The footprint represents the space size for data access.
One of the most essential impact factors is SSD parallelism. It affects not only the parallelism of read requests in the read area but also the write requests in the write area. Fig. 8 plots the performance impact by varying the number of PUs, including read latency, write latency, WIR impact, and bandwidth. First, Fig. 8(a) shows the read latency impact by varying the number of PUs from 4 to 32. For example, we evaluate the parallelism at the channel level. From the results, with the number of PUs increasing to improve parallelism, the read performance is improved but the room for performance optimization is gradually reduced. Then, when the number of PUs is greater than 12, the parallelism of most workloads is satisfied, where the latency gap between 12 and 32 PU is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:04:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4652

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023

Fig. 8. Performance impact by varying the number of PUs. (a) Read latency. (b) Write latency. (c) WIR impact. (d) Bandwidth.

Fig. 9. Performance comparison for partitioning. (a) Normalized read performance. (b) Normalized write performance.

only 5%–26%. Therefore, to reduce WIR, we can use these parallelisms to separate the SSD into read and write areas to minimize interference. That is, although the performance will be degraded when the number of PUs in each area is reduced, read performance optimization brought by the partitioned SSD may be larger than performance loss due to decreased parallelism. Second, we also evaluated the write latency, as shown in Fig. 8(b). For the write performance impact, it can also be concluded that the space for write performance optimization is gradually reduced. When the number of PUs in the write area is greater than 20, the write performance gap is about 1.01x-2.21x compared with 32 PUs. Considering the impact of parallel performance on read and write performance, the number of PUs in the read and write areas needs to be reasonably allocated. Third, to evaluate the WIR impact with increased parallelism, we collected the read latency with/without WIR by varying the number of PUs from 4 to 32. WIR impact is defined as read latency without WIR divided by read latency with WIR, as shown in Fig. 8(c). From the results, we can find that increasing the number of PUs can mitigate the impact of the WIR effect, and the degree of improvement decreases gradually. Additionally, the WIR impact of some workloads reduces significantly as PU increases. However, there is still room for improvement. That is, the effect of WIR cannot be completely mitigated by increasing the number of PUs, especially, for some burst workloads (e.g., trace-0). Finally, Fig. 8(d) shows the variation trend of bandwidth as the number of PUs increases. The bandwidth increases as the number of PUs increases, but when the number of PUs increases to a certain value, the bandwidth stops rising. In the following experiments, we propose partitioning the SSD into two areas, where the number of PUs for both areas is allocated 50% of the total PU (16:16) to minimize the performance impact of parallelism by default. For the offline partitioning method, we found

that the partition ratio of 12:20 showed good performance under most workloads, so we set the partitioning ratio to 12:20 to study the offline partitioning method. For online partitioning, the number of PUs in the two areas will be dynamically adjusted, and the default is 16:16.
B. Experimental Results
To evaluate the advantages of the partitioned SSD, five schemes are evaluated. Baseline is the baseline SSD without partitioning. Placement is the proposed scheme with read and write data placement to separate read-mostly and write-mostly data. Migration is placement plus the proposed data migration scheme. Partition is migration plus the partition ratio for offline studies, which is set the number of PU to 12:20 for read and write areas. Proposed is our integral proposal for the partitioned SSD, which is Migration plus the proposed workload-based partitioning scheme.
Performance: Fig. 9(a) gives the read performance comparison of our proposal and the baseline SSD. From the results, the partitioned SSD can achieve a better read performance than the baseline scheme. On average, the partitioned SSD can improve the read performance by 45%. Comparing our proposed methods step by step, we can find a good match between these methods. Placement can reduce the read latency by 45% on average while Migration can further reduce it by 17%. For example, the read performance of rsrch is improved by 76% with Placement and further optimized by 5% with Migration. For trace-0 and trace-1, the read performance optimization of Placement and Migration is extremely large, about 94%–96%. This is because these workloads have serious WIR and clear data access characteristics. Note that the read latency of Migration is higher than Placement, such as proj_1. This is because Migration adopts a conservative data

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:04:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LV et al.: ACCESS CHARACTERISTIC GUIDED PARTITION FOR NAND FLASH-BASED HIGH-DENSITY SSDs

4653

Fig. 10. Performance comparison during wear leveling. (a) Normalized read performance. (b) Normalized write performance.

migration based on the threshold. For these workloads, there is just a small percentage of write requests and a slight WIR. Therefore, the PUs of the write area are often idle. Then, the read performance is better when Tw is set smaller for this workload to migrate data from the read area to the write area more aggressively like the Placement method. Data will be updated to the write area in the Placement method. In addition, Partition and Proposed methods can further improve the read performance by considering the read and write characteristics of different workloads. For the offline partition, the results show that Partition improves the read performance up to 96% and 62% on average. For the online partition, the results show that Proposed improves the read performance up to 86% and 45% on average. Compared with Partition, the read performance of Proposed is degraded due to that we consider the write performance as well. Note that the purpose of our partitioned SSD is to optimize read performance due to the separation of read and write requests without significantly compromising write performance due to reduced parallelism.
To evaluate the write performance for the partitioned SSD, we have collected the normalized results shown in Fig. 9(b). From the results, Placement degrades the write performance by 53%, and Migration degrades the write performance by 40% on average. These two methods do not consider workload characteristics. If the workload is write-dominated, the bursts of intensive write requests will suffer write performance loss due to reduced parallelism in the write area. For the Partition method, the write performance penalty is released and almost similar to the baseline method in most workloads. For the Proposed method with online partition adjustment, the write performance is further reduced in some workloads (e.g., src1_2). From the results, different workloads exhibit different read and write performance optimization. Four cases can be classified based on the workload characteristics, as shown in Fig. 8.
1) For workloads (e.g., hm_0) with high RIW but low-write parallel impact, the write performance of Partition and Proposed will be improved due to that we use read priority scheduling; when read requests are separated into the read area, thereby reducing the waiting time in the queue when write requests are processed.
2) For workloads with high RIW but high-write parallel impact, the write performance of Partition and Proposed may be reduced.

Fig. 11. Tail latency distribution.
3) For workloads (e.g., proj_1) with low RIW but low-write parallel impact, the write performance of Partition and Proposed is not significantly degraded.
4) For workloads (e.g., src1_2) with low RIW but highwrite parallel impact, the write performance will be severely affected.
From the results, the write performance for most evaluated workloads is maintained with little impact. We believe that the proposed method is effective in improving read performance with little impact to write performance.
To further evaluate the performance during the WL, we collect the read and write performance when executing the WL. Fig. 10(a) and (b) shows the read and write performance comparison during WL, respectively. The results show that our proposed WL can reduce the read latency by 39% on average compared with baseline inter-PU WL. This is because our WL method only migrates hot read data during WL, which reduces conflicts between host I/O requests and background WL operations. Similar to the read performance, the write performance during WL is reduced by 22% on average.
Tail Latency: One concern is that the proposed scheme may introduce tail latency since the read requests in the write area will receive significant WIR. Fig. 11 shows the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of read latency at 99th to 99.99th percentiles for the evaluated workloads. The results show that the tail latency is not impacted but significantly improved on average. The reason is that our proposal can

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:04:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4654

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023

Fig. 12. Overhead analysis. (a) Overhead for migration. (b) Overhead for wear leveling.

Fig. 13. Sensitive studies on Tr and Tw.
reduce interference for most read requests, and only a small number of read requests have interfered.
Overhead: To evaluate the impact on flash lifetime, we first collected the migration overhead during migration and partition processes, and then collected the overhead of additional writes during wear leveling. Fig. 12(a) plots the migration cost, which is normalized to the total number of write operations. During data access using our proposal, frequently read/written data in the write/read area will be moved to the read/write area for future accesses. The migration cost is determined by the migration threshold. From the results, total migration overhead is about 1.6% on average. Then, we use the write amplification factor (WAF) to reflect the valid data migration overhead during wear leveling, as shown in Fig. 12(b). WAF is calculated as total writes divided by host writes, indicating the multiple of the actual writes to the host writes. Compared with inter-PU WL, our proposed hot-data driven WL can significantly reduce the WAF to 1.2 on average. This is because only hot read data are migrated when executing the PU swapping during wear leveling. Note that, most workloads have significant skew from previous work [31], [35], [36]. However, if the skewness of workloads is small, the readhot data-based WL will be similar to that of inter-PU based WL.
Sensitive Study: There are two important parameters used in the migration scheme to determine the migration timing of read and write data in different areas. Fig. 13 shows the normalized read performance by varying Tr and Tw from 1 to 3. In this work, we set Tr to 1 and Tw to 3 for cost concern. Actually, the migration threshold can be adjusted according to the severity of WIR. For example, if the WIR is small, then we suggest a conservative threshold set up and the value should be set to larger for cost consideration. Otherwise, the migration should be aggressive and the threshold should be set to smaller for performance requirements.

Fig. 14. Sensitive studies on I0 − I2. (a) Normalized read performance. (b) Normalized write performance.
Then, we studied the three intensity thresholds, I0 − I2. For simplicity, we studied the value of I0, which is varied from 1×, 2×, and 4× of the request queue depth, to ensure that the requests in the queue can be released with a sufficient number of PUs. That is, the values of RV and WV are compared with 32, 64, and 128. For the values of I1 and I2, we decrease proportionally. For example, I1 is set to 25% of that of I0, and I2 is set to 25% of that of I1. To this end, three groups of thresholds were studied: 32/8/2, 64/16/4, and 128/32/8, for I0 to I2, respectively. As shown in Fig. 14, the second group with 64/16/4 is best, which is used in this article.
VIII. RELATED WORK
I/O Scheduling: The basic idea is to prioritize the process of read requests [19], [37], [38]. Once read requests are added to the I/O scheduler, they are processed when the accessed chip is ready. For example, Kim et al. [38] proposed a fair I/O scheduler at the host level to delay the write dispatch to obtain both proper read and write bandwidth. These schemes are efficient when write requests can be suspended. For example, Wu and He [14] proposed to suspend the write operation when read requests are waiting. However, this method will bring additional context switch overhead and influence the write performance further. The second group is to use redundancy for read–write interference reduction [15], [21], [22], [23]. They proposed to maintain multiple copies of intensive read data in different chips. If one chip has interfered, other idle chips can be accessed. Wu et al. [15], and He et al. [22] proposed to maintain multiple copies of hot read data for interference minimization. Yan et al. [23] proposed to use parity code to recover the accessed data if the accessed data have interfered. For enterprise SSDs that employ internal RAID between flash PUs to prevent data loss, our proposal can be

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:04:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LV et al.: ACCESS CHARACTERISTIC GUIDED PARTITION FOR NAND FLASH-BASED HIGH-DENSITY SSDs

4655

combined with RAID due to PU failures and read errors uncorrectable by ECC. The difference is that the RAID stripe is constructed in the read and write areas separately. That is, read data forms their stripe and is stored in the read area, and written data form their stripe and is placed in the write area. If there is data in a stripe with variable access characteristics, the data needs to be migrated and invalidated from the stripe, and the valid data is migrated to the appropriate area and written in stripes. The management of stripes and the reading of data is the same as that of the existing RAID method. This type of RAID has been studied in previous work [39]. Different from these works, our work is the first to study the data access characteristics of various workloads and designs to physically separate the total flash array into a read area and a write area. The I/O request scheduling is based on the data access characteristics and is issued to the corresponding area for interference minimization.
SSD Isolation: The basic idea is to place different types of workloads into different partitions to avoid interference [2], [3], [40], [41]. For example, if a read-intensive workload is placed with a write-intensive workload, the readintensive workload will be significantly interfered [2], [3]. Other isolation schemes are designed for server level objects (SLOs) among multitenants. Kim et al. [41] proposed to partition the over-provision space (OPS) for multitenants. Huang and Chang [40] proposed to exploit the rich parallelism of SSD by partitioning them for read, write, and GC for multivirtual machines. There are also some works about read and write requests separation. Skourtis et al. [42] recommend using two SSDs to service read and write requests, respectively. Tavakkol et al. [43] proposed a scheduling method to mitigate interference due to access patterns of concurrently running streams. Different from these works, our work can reduce interference even in the same tenants. This is because our proposal focuses on the data access characteristics to separate the read and write requests. Importantly, the proposed scheme does not introduce any extra hardware overhead.
Wear Leveling: Wear leveling is used to even out wear among blocks to optimize flash lifetime [44], [45], which selects a block with the smallest P/E and a block with the largest P/E and swaps their data. There are several works proposed to solve wear leveling under SSD partitioning. For example, Huang et al. [2] proposed to exchange the partitions when the device is idle, and Kim et al. [1] proposed to round-robin the write area. Different from previous work, we propose a new wear-leveling method to consider the data characteristics to mitigate the impact of performance and lifetime due to wear leveling. With the proposed method, we have similar wear leveling effects to that of existing work. However, migration costs between areas will be reduced.
IX. CONCLUSION
This work proposed an access characteristics guided partition method to address the read performance degradation induced by read–write interference in the high-density and

low-cost SSD. We first studied several server workload characteristics, including access interference and request distributions. Based on the studies, a set of schemes is proposed to reduce the interference by separating requests into different areas, including a data placement scheme, a data migration scheme, and a workload-based partitioning scheme. We further proposed a novel wear-leveling scheme for the partitioned SSD to ensure the flash lifetime. Experimental results show that our proposal can significantly improve read performance and the lifetime for the partitioned SSD is also guaranteed.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Kim, K. Lim, Y. Jung, S. Lee, C. Min, and S. H. Noh, “Alleviating garbage collection interference through spatial separation in all flash arrays,” in Proc. USENIX Annu. Tech. Conf. (ATC), 2019, pp. 799–812.
[2] J. Huang, A. Badam, and L. E. A. Caulfield, “FlashBlox: Achieving both performance isolation and uniform lifetime for virtualized SSDs,” in Proc. 15th USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol. (FAST), 2017, pp. 375–390.
[3] B. S. Kim, “Utilitarian performance isolation in shared SSDs,” in Proc. 10th USENIX Workshop Hot Topics Storage File Syst. (HotStorage), 2018, pp. 1–8.
[4] L. Shi, K. Wu, M. Zhao, C. J. Xue, D. Liu, and E. H.-M. Sha, “Retention trimming for lifetime improvement of flash memory storage systems,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 58–71, Jan. 2016.
[5] S. Lee et al., “A 1Tb 4b/cell 64-stacked-WL 3D NAND flash memory with 12MB/s program throughput,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC), 2018, pp. 340–342.
[6] T. Higuchi et al., “A 1Tb 3b/cell 3D-flash memory in a 170+ word-linelayer technology,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC), 2021, pp. 428–430.
[7] J.-W. Park et al., “A 176-stacked 512Gb 3b/cell 3D-NAND flash with 10.8 gb/mm2 density with a peripheral circuit under cell array architecture,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC), vol. 64, 2021, pp. 1–9.
[8] M. Kim et al., “A 1Tb 3b/cell 8th-generation 3D-NAND flash memory with 164MB/s write throughput and a 2.4Gb/s interface,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC), 2022, pp. 136–137.
[9] B. Kim et al., “A high-performance 1Tb 3b/cell 3D-NAND flash with a 194MB/s write throughput on over 300 layers i,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC), 2023, pp. 402–403.
[10] K. Ishimaru, “Future of non-volatile memory -from storage to computing,” in Proc. 65th Annu. IEEE Int. Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM), 2019, pp. 1–6.
[11] Y. Aiba et al., “Cryogenic operation of 3D flash memory for new applications and bit cost scaling with 6-bit per cell (HLC) and beyond,” in Proc. IEEE Electron Devices Technol. Manuf. Conf. (EDTM), 2021, pp. 1–8.
[12] Y. Du, Q. Li, L. Shi, D. Zou, H. Jin, and C. J. Xue, “Reducing LDPC soft sensing latency by lightweight data refresh for flash read performance improvement,” in Proc. 54th ACM/EDAC/IEEE Design Autom. Conf. (DAC), 2017, pp. 1–6.
[13] K. Zhao, W. Zhao, H. Sun, T. Zhang, X. Zhang, and N. Zheng, “LDPCin-SSD: Making advanced error correction codes work effectively in solid state drives,” in Proc. 11th USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol. (FAST), 2013, pp. 243–256.
[14] G. Wu and X. He, “Reducing SSD read latency via NAND flash program and erase suspension,” in Proc. 10th USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol. (FAST), 2012, pp. 1–10.
[15] S. Wu, W. Zhang, B. Mao, and H. Jiang, “HotR: Alleviating read/write interference with hot read data replication for flash storage,” in Proc. Design Autom. Test Europe Conf. Exhibit. (DATE), 2019, pp. 1367–1372.
[16] A. Khakifirooz et al., “A 1Tb 4b/cell 144-tier floating-gate 3D-NAND flash memory with 40MB/s program throughput and 13.8 gb/mm 2 bit density,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC), 2021, pp. 1–7.
[17] H. Huh et al., “A 1Tb 4b/cell 96-stacked-WL 3D NAND flash memory with 30MB/s program throughput using peripheral circuit under memory cell array technique,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC), 2020, pp. 220–221.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:04:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4656

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023

[18] D.-H. Kim et al., “A 1Tb 4b/cell NAND flash memory with tPROG=2ms, tR=110 μs and 1.2Gb/s high-speed IO rate,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC), 2020, pp. 1–8.
[19] D. T. Nguyen et al., “Reducing smartphone application delay through read/write isolation,” in Proc. Annu. Int. Conf. Mobile Syst. (MobiSys), 2015, pp. 287–300.
[20] C. Gao, L. Shi, M. Zhao, C. J. Xue, K. Wu, and E. H.-M. Sha, “Exploiting parallelism in i/O scheduling for access conflict minimization in flash-based solid-state drives,” in Proc. IEEE 30th Symp. Mass Storage Syst. Technol. (MSST), 2014, pp. 1–11.
[21] N. Elyasi, M. Arjomand, A. Sivasubramaniam, M. T. Kandemir, and C. R. Das, “Content popularity-based selective replication for read redirection in ssds,” in Proc. 26th Int. Symp. Model. Anal. Simulat. Comput. Telecommun. Syst. (MASCOTS), 2018, pp. 1–15.
[22] B. He, J. X. Yu, and A. C. Zhou, “Improving update-intensive workloads on flash disks through exploiting multi-chip parallelism,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 152–162, Jan. 2015.
[23] S. Yan et al., “Tiny-tail flash: Near-perfect elimination of garbage collection tail latencies in NAND SSDs,” ACM Trans. Storage, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 1–22, 2017.
[24] Y. Cai, S. Ghose, E. F. Haratsch, Y. Luo, and O. Mutlu, “Error characterization, mitigation, and recovery in flash-memory-based solid-state drives,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 105, no. 9, pp. 1666–1704, Sep. 2017.
[25] Y. Hu, H. Jiang, D. Feng, L. Tian, H. Luo, and C. Ren, “Exploring and exploiting the multilevel parallelism inside SSDs for improved performance and endurance,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 62, no. 6, pp. 1141–1155, Jun. 2013.
[26] N. Shibata et al., “A 1.33-tb 4-bit/cell 3-D flash memory on a 96-word-line-layer technology,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 178–188, Jan. 2020.
[27] D. Narayanan, E. Thereska, A. Donnelly, S. Elnikety, and A. Rowstronm, “Migrating server storage to SSDs: Analysis of tradeoffs,” in Proc. 4th ACM Eur. Conf. Comput. Syst. (EuroSys), 2009, pp. 145–158.
[28] G. Yadgar, M. Gabel, S. Jaffer, and B. Schroeder, “SSD-based workload characteristics and their performance implications,” ACM Trans. Storage, vol. 17, pp. 1–26, Jan. 2021.
[29] G. Yadgar et al. “YCSB RocksDB SSD traces (SNIA IOTTA trace 28571).” 2018. [Online]. Available: http://iotta.snia.org/traces/block-io/ 28568?only=28571
[30] Q. Li, L. Shi, C. Gao, Y. Di, and C. J. Xue, “Access characteristic guided read and write regulation on flash based storage systems,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 67, no. 12, pp. 1663–1676, Dec. 2018.
[31] Q. Li et al., “Access characteristic guided read and write cost regulation for performance improvement on flash memory,” in Proc. 14th USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol. (FAST), 2016, pp. 125–132.
[32] J. Li, Q. Wang, P. P. C. Lee, and C. Shi, “An in-depth analysis of cloud block storage workloads in large-scale production,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Workload Characterization (IISWC), 2020, pp. 37–47.
[33] C.-Y. Liu, J. B. Kotra, and M. E. A. Jung, “SOML read: Rethinking the read operation granularity of 3D NAND SSDs,” in Proc. 24th Int. Conf. Archit. Support Program. Lang. Oper. Syst. (ASPLOS), 2019, pp. 955–969.
[34] C.-Y. Liu, J. Kotra, M. Jung, and M. Kandemir, “PEN: Design and evaluation of partial-erase for 3D NAND-based high density SSDs,” in Proc. USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol. (FAST), 2018, pp. 67–82.
[35] J. Li, Q. Wang, P. P. C. Lee, and C. Shi, “An in-depth comparative analysis of cloud block storage workloads: Findings and implications,” ACM Trans. Storage, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1–32, 2023.
[36] Y. Lv, L. Shi, C. J. Xue, Q. Zhuge, and E. H.-M. Sha, “Latency variation aware read performance optimization on 3D high density NAND flash memory,” in Proc. 30th ACM Great Lakes Symp. VLSI (GLSVLSI), 2020, pp. 411–414.
[37] S. Park and K. Shen, “FIOS: A fair, efficient flash i/O scheduler,” in Proc. 10th USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol. (FAST), 2012, pp. 1–13.
[38] J. Kim, D. Kim, and Y. Won, “Fair i/O scheduler for alleviating read/write interference by forced unit access in flash memory,” in Proc. 14th ACM Workshop Hot Topics Storage File Syst. (HotStorage), 2022, pp. 86–92.
[39] J. Kim, E. Lee, J. Choi, D. Lee, and S. H. Noh, “Chip-level RAID with flexible stripe size and parity placement for enhanced SSD reliability,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 65, no. 4, pp. 1116–1130, Apr. 2016.
[40] S.-M. Huang and L.-P. Chang, “Providing SLO compliance on NVMe SSDs through parallelism reservation,” ACM Trans. Design Autom. Electron. Syst., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 1–28, 2018.
[41] J. Kim, D. Lee, and S. H. Noh, “Towards SLO complying SSDs through OPS isolation,” in Proc. 13th USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol. (FAST), 2015, pp. 183–189.

[42] D. Skourtis, D. Achlioptas, N. Watkins, C. Maltzahn, and S. A. Brandt, “Flash on rails: Consistent flash performance through redundancy,” in Proc. USENIX Annu. Tech. Conf. (ATC), 2014, pp. 463–474.
[43] A. Tavakkol et al., “FLIN: Enabling fairness and enhancing performance in modern NVMe solid state drives,” in Proc. ACM/IEEE 45th Annu. Int. Symp. Comput. Archit. (ISCA), 2018, pp. 397–410.
[44] M. Murugan and D. H.-C. Du, “Rejuvenator: A static wear leveling algorithm for NAND flash memory with minimized overhead,” in Proc. IEEE 27th Symp. Mass Storage Syst. Technol. (MSST), 2011, pp. 1–12.
[45] X. Jimenez, D. Novo, and P. Ienne, “Wear unleveling: Improving NAND flash lifetime by balancing page endurance,” in Proc. 12th USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol. (FAST), 2014, pp. 47–59.
Yina Lv (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree in computer science from Ningbo University, Zhejiang, China, in July 2018, and the Ph.D. degree in computer software and theory from East China Normal University, Shanghai, China, in June 2023.
Her research interests include NAND flash memory and computer architecture.
Liang Shi (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree in computer science from the Xi’an University of Post and Telecommunication, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China, in July 2008, the Ph.D. degree from the University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China, in June 2013.
Since 2013, he has been an Associate Professor with the College of Computer Science, Chongqing University, Chongqing, China. Since 2018, he has been a Full Professor with the School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China. His research interests include flash memory, embedded systems, and emerging nonvolatile memory technology.
Yunpeng Song received the B.S. degree in computer science from Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua, China, in June 2020. He is currently pursuing the M.S. degree in computer science and technology with East China Normal University, Shanghai, China.
His research interests include NAND flash memory and software/hardware co-design.
Chun Jason Xue (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree in computer science and engineering from The University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX, USA, in 1997, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in computer science from The University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, TX, USA, in 2002 and 2007, respectively.
He is currently an Associate Professor with the Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong. His current research interests include memory and parallelism optimization for embedded systems, software/hardware co-design, real-time systems, and computer security.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:04:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

