2023 3rd International Conference on Mobile Networks and Wireless Communications (ICMNWC) | 979-8-3503-1702-2/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICMNWC60182.2023.10435853

2023 3rd International Conference on Mobile Networks and Wireless Communications (ICMNWC)
Intelligent Hybrid Channel Coding Schemes in 5G Device Centric Mobile Communication System

1st Madhavsingh Indoonundon Department of Electrical and
Electronic Engineering University of Mauritius
Reduit, Mauritius madhavsingh.indoonundon1@umail.uo
m.ac.mu

2nd Tulsi Pawan Fowdur Department of Electrical and
Electronic Engineering University of Mauritius
Reduit, Mauritius p.fowdur@uom.ac.mu

3rd Dragorad A. Milovanovic University of Belgrade Serbia dragoam@gmail.com

Abstract—The performance of 5G NR relies heavily on the channel codes used. Since Release 15 of 5G NR, Low-Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes and polar codes have been incorporated in the physical layer for error correction in the data channel and control channel respectively. The integration of machine learning (ML) with channel codes shows promise in improving error correction capabilities and overall system performance in 5G NR communications. This paper gives a review of state-of-the-art ML-based channel decoding algorithms which aim at improving the error performance of LDPC and polar codes. The Eb/N0 gains of these ML-based techniques are compared against each other to identify the most effective ones. Gaps in these research were also identified and used to propose two hybrid intelligent channel coding schemes as future works.
Keywords—5G, Channel Coding, LDPC, Polar, Machine Learning
I. INTRODUCTION
The field of mobile communications is rapidly evolving and innovating. The scope of mobile networks extends to a wide range of use cases, technological standards and possible deployment models. 5G NR allows for a much higher density of connected Internet of Things (IoT) devices, faster download speeds and lower network latency. When compared to earlier iterations, the network's overall performance and storage capacity have increased dramatically. Latency, spectral efficiency and dependability are the major performance measures [1].
One of the most promising technologies, device-to-device (D2D) communications can be utilized to further decrease link latency, expand coverage and network throughput and enhance spectrum and energy efficiency. D2D has the potential to expand our communication options and make them more stable and accessible. D2D also has the ability to enhance local traffic unloading and quality of service, opening the door to many near-field applications such as video streaming, machine-to-machine (M2M) communication, data and voice multicasting, cognitive and cooperative communication and IoT. D2D communication, fueled by artificial intelligence (AI) techniques, will also rise to prominence as a crucial component of 6G networks [2].
5G NR networks rely heavily on device-centric architecture [3][4]. D2D communication enables UEs to bypass or only partially utilize network infrastructure, such as mobile access points or mobile base stations, in order to connect with one another. Improving system performance, facilitating a high data rate for local services and decreasing latency for end-to-end communication are all possible due to direct D2D connection without data flow travelling through

any infrastructure node. D2D communication also reduces the burden of data transmission on the base station [5][6][7].
Several difficulties arise from enabling direct communication between mobile UEs. D2D communications enable two UEs to have one-to-one conversations via a novel air interface called the sidelink (SL). If the devices involved are close enough together, the connection throughput can be increased by employing a more efficient modulation and coding scheme, as the prevailing propagation conditions will be superior to those encountered while sending a signal toward the base station. Interference from UEs is a major factor hindering D2D communication. To make the signal more resilient against noise and less susceptible to interference, sophisticated coding and modulation techniques are used [8][9][10].
This paper presents comparative performance improvements, identifies gaps and proposes hybrid schemes for intelligent channel codes in the physical layer of the 5G NR communications system. LDPC coding scheme is attractive from an implementation perspective. However, it is important to choose the decoding algorithms carefully because they all have various error performances, computational complexities and decoding latencies. Recent research has proposed LDPC decoding schemes using machine learning (ML) to further enhance the error performance. Polar linear error-correcting block codes have been the subject of much research and have found practical applications in the control channel in 5G NR. The paper provides an in-depth analysis of some modern polar decoding schemes with machine learning improvements to further enhance the error performance.
II. INTELLIGENT CHANNEL CODES FOR DEVICE-TO-DEVICE COMMUNICATION IN 5G
The performance of the 5G NR communications system largely relies on the channel codes used at the physical layer. The 5G NR standard currently incorporates LDPC codes and polar codes for the data channel and control channels respectively, to support eMBB services [11]. There are stringent requirements for the channel codes used in 5G NR, including a high decoding throughput of at least 20 Gbps, low decoding latency, good error correction capabilities, adaptability to different data payloads and low complexity [12].
ML is a technique that relies on a machine that has learned a process by automatically identifying meaningful patterns in data to solve problems of high complexity. As powerful computers have become more widely available, ML has been a great asset to researchers in a variety of sectors, allowing them to tackle previously intractable problems and gain

979-8-3503-1702-2/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:03:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

valuable insights from large datasets. Additionally, academics have merged ML with channel codes during the past decade to improve design and performance. State-of-the-art channel decoders, for instance, make use of neural networks to learn and execute tasks to decrease computational complexity. Some ML-based schemes also help to determine the ideal decoder parameters like scaling factors and normalization factors to improve performance.
A. Intelligent LDPC Codes
The 5G NR eMBB services data channel uses protographbased Quasi-Cyclic (QC) LDPC codes which can build parity check matrices with a specified lifting size [13]. Transmission of large blocks of up to 8448 bits in size at high coderates of up to 8/9 is optimized in the first base graph while the second base graph is typically employed for the transmission of blocks as short as 3840 bits in size, at coding rates as low as 1/5 [14].
Belief Propagation (BP), Layered Belief Propagation, normalized min-sum (MS) and offset MS are the LDPC decoding algorithms that 5G NR supports. It is important to choose the decoding algorithms carefully depending on the service being given because they all have various error performances, computational complexities and decoding latencies. Recent research has proposed ML-based LDPC decoding schemes, such as the Neural MS Decoder [15] and the ML-based Early Termination [16], to provide error performance boosts. Three such machine learning schemes employed have been selected for further analysis in this paper.
1) Deep learning-based Unified Polar-LDPC Decoder: Researchers have proposed a deep learning-based unified polar-LDPC decoder to reduce installation costs [17]. In this decoder, the received symbols are concatenated with an indicator section that is used to identify the channel coding type and this sequence constitutes the input to the neural network. The decoding function (polar or LDPC codes) and ReLU activation functions are selected in the hidden layers. The sigmoid activation function is used in the output layer to estimate the message bits and then output those estimates. The simulation system model used by the researchers is illustrated in Fig 1.

BER

The BER performance of the proposed DNN-based unified polar-LDPC decoder is shown in Fig 2. It offers roughly the same performance as the conventional BP polar decoder. However, for LDPC decoding, the suggested decoder can greatly outperform the conventional BP LDPC decoder. The proposed decoder improves upon the conventional decoder by 0.8 dB in Eb/N0 gain at a BER of 10-2. The proposed decoder offers a throughput improvement of six orders of magnitude over the standard BP decoder. In addition, the proposed decoder utilizes 0.3% less overhead than the conventional counterpart [17].
Fig. 2. Performance of Deep learning-based Unified Polar-LDPC Decoder [17].
2) Q-Learning-based Node-wise Scheduling: The aim of the Q-learning-based system proposed by Habib, Beemer and Kliewer [18] is to reduce the computational complexity of node-wise scheduling (NS) by applying Q-learning to short LDPC codes. Q-learning is a model-free algorithm for learning the value of an action in a given state. Due to the extensive amount of check nodes inherent in LDPC codes, the authors suggested clustering these nodes to facilitate Qlearning. The clusters are determined such that they have separate state and action spaces and a low dependence on each other.
The proposed technique involves a single messagepassing iteration in which a check node communicates with all the variable nodes to which it is connected. These nodes in turn communicate with their respective check nodes. Then, the process of scheduling check nodes is carried out sequentially until a predefined termination condition is achieved. The scheduling approach used by the decoder, which aims to keep computational complexity to a minimum, is determined by an action-value function. After that a check node is scheduled, the Q-learning agent is updated about both the decoder's status and the resultant reward. In this way, the decoder is optimized because the agent learns to maximize the reward it receives [18]. Based on how they clustered data, the authors placed their Q-learning techniques into distinct variants. They denoted the variants as QR and QO for random and optimized clusters respectively.
All the proposed variants are compared in simulations, primarily against the conventional flooding decoder, the NS decoder and the NS decoder based on Thompson Sampling (NS-TS). Simulations show that the QR variant provides the best error performance. The BER performance of the QR scheme is given in Fig 3. QR also has the lowest messagepassing complexity [18]. Since the suggested method requires less power to decode while still providing high BER performance, it may be a viable choice for mMTC services.

Fig. 1. Simulation system model- Deep learning-based Unified PolarLDPC Decoder [17].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:03:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 3. Performance of Q-Learning-based Node-wise Scheduling Scheme [18].
3) RL-based LDPC Codes Construction: The authors of [19] built an artificial NN using a combination of RL and Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) to find optimal paths for edge growth during LDPC code generation. The MCTS method involves building and optimizing a search tree while performing arbitrary actions at each node until the best solution is reached. Their approach is suitable for 5G NR because of its flexibility in terms of codelength, coderate and degree distribution at a lower complexity than the progressive-edge-growth (PEG) method.
The DNN is trained using codes constructed by the MCTS. The LDPC matrix is built by iteratively inserting 1s at the chosen edges of an initially empty parity check matrix according to the degree distribution known in advance. In this model, the edges represent the possible states and the decision of which edge to move to represents an action [19]. To test their strategy, the authors cose to built QC-LDPC codes because improvements on the latter are easier to observe due to their large size [19].
The construction method was tested using the simulation system model illustrated in Fig 4. The BER performance of the scheme is given in Fig 5. Through the simulations, it was concluded that the suggested construction method is comparable to the PEG method in terms of error performance, with the added benefits of flexibility and lesser complexity for the former [19].
Fig. 4. System Model- RL-based LDPC Codes Construction [19].

Fig. 5. Performance of RL-based LDPC Codes [19].
B. Intelligent Polar Codes
Arikan introduced polar codes in 2009. In contrast to other channel codes, polar codes are proven to achieve capacity. Polar codes utilize the polarization effects of the Kronecker powers of a kernel matrix to produce virtual channels with varying degrees of reliability, each of which can transmit a single bit. Through polar encoding, the most trustworthy channels receive K message bits, while the remaining N-K channels contain frozen bits, often set to 0 [20].
Since its inception, polar codes have been the subject of much research and have found practical applications in the control channel for eMBB services in 5G NR [21]. The CRCAided Successive Cancellation List (CA-SCL) technique is used to decode polar codes in 5G NR. In contrast to the BPA and NMSA LDPC decoding algorithms, the CA-SCL decoding is carried out sequentially in a SISO fashion [22].
The CA-SCL decoding technique uses multiple decoders working in parallel to outperform the simpler Successive Cancellation (SC) decoding algorithm in terms of error performance. CRC is also added to the decoder to ensure that only valid codewords are considered. The CRC-validated decoding path with the least path metric is chosen as the decoded codeword.
Some modern schemes such as the NN-based construction method [23] and the DNC-based Flipping algorithm [24] use ML to further enhance the error performance of polar codes. Three such machine learning schemes employed have been selected for further analysis in this paper.
C. Stacked Denoising Autoencoder
To improve the FER performance of polar codes over Rayleigh fading channels, Li and Cheng developed a Stacked Denoising Autoencoder (SDAE) [25]. Two DNNs were connected and placed in front of the SC decoder in the authors' architecture. The SDAE is used to build the DNNs and the training of the networks occurs automatically without user intervention. Channel symbol estimates are fed into the DNNs which are used to reduce the channel's impact on the symbols. After being processed by the DNNs, the encoded data is decoded using an SC decoder [25].
To evaluate the efficacy of the proposed method, the transmission of polar codewords at coderate 1/2, with lengths of 16 and 32 bits are simulated across a Rayleigh fading channel. Simulations of a conventional polar decoder employing a one-dimensional approach and an SCL decoder were performed for purposes of comparison. The FER performance of the scheme is given in Fig 6. For an FER of 0.001, the proposed method significantly increased Eb/N0 by 1 dB compared to the conventional counterpart. Thereafter, the proposed technique was compared to a standard feedforward neural network (FFNN). The proposed method

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:03:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

outperformed the FFNN method by 0.5 dB at an FER of 0.001 when using a training dataset of the same size [25].
Fig. 6. Performance of SDAE-Enhanced Polar Codes [25].
D. ML-Based Multi-Flips Successive Cancellation Decoding Intending to improve upon the performance and latency of
the dynamic SC flipping (DSCF) decoding algorithm, a group of researchers developed an ML-based multi-flips successive cancellation (MSCF) decoding system [26]. The proposed scheme involved first attempting to decode the data with a successive cancellation (SC) decoder and if that failed, feeding the LLR sequence and syndromes into an LSTM network. The LSTM network produces a list of flipped bits. If the decoded codeword is not error-free, the output of the LSTM network and the syndrome are input into a Q-table that generates a new flip-list using a flip-SC (SCF) decoder. The flip operation is continuously performed until the CRC succeeds or a maximum number of flips is achieved. Fig 7 shows an overview of the proposed decoding process.
SC decoding using BPSK modulation over an AWGN channel is simulated in Monte Carlo and the resulting training data is used. The LLR sequence and syndrome were the network's input and one-hot encoding was used to specify the first incorrect bit location in each data sample. An index list of the bit flips is provided as the LSTM's output. The reward function is made dependent on the number of bit errors connected by the network [26].

Fig. 7. ML-Based Multi-Flips Successive Cancellation decoding process [26].
Simulations are performed to evaluate the performance of the proposed decoder. The FER performance of the simulated system is given in Fig 8. The proposed ML-MSCF decoder outperforms the successive cancellation flip (SCF) and the dynamic SCF (DSCF) decoders in simulations, at least for Eb/N0 values above 2.5 dB. Gains in FER over DSCF are approximately 0.2 to 0.3 dB. This efficiency boost is due to the algorithm's ability to fix more than just the initial bit of incorrect data. The suggested decoder has the same processing delay as the DSCF because it does not use exponential or logarithmic functions. In this way, the suggested approach is more suitable than SCF and DSCF for use in wireless technologies like 5G NR [26].
100

10-1

FER

10-2

10-3

10-4

1

2

3

4

Eb/N0

Fig. 8. Performance of ML-Based Multi-Flips Successive Cancellation Decoder [26].

E. RL-aided Belief Propagation Algorithm Decoding
According to Doan, Hashemi and Gross, the CRC-aided BP (CABP) decoder's selection of factor-graph permutations for polar codes is a multi-armed bandit problem [27]. They developed an RL-based CABP (RL-CABP) decoder which is capable of online learning. This means that the agent picks up the knowledge necessary to execute the permutations selection task as it decodes. To solve the multi-armed bandit problem, the authors employ the ε-greedy, upper confidence bound (UCB) and Thompson sampling (TS) methods. The TS algorithm predicts the distribution of reward values associated with each action, while the ε-greedy and UCB algorithms predict the reward value. These algorithms are run in parallel with the initial attempt to decode using CABP, eliminating any latency that may be introduced to meet the needs of 5G ultra-reliable low-latency communications (URLLC) services.
The suggested decoder performs a random selection of factor-graph permutations if the CRC fails during CABP decoding using the original factor-graph permutations. When the CRC succeeds with the chosen factor-graph permutation, the decoder receives a reward of 1 and when it fails, the decoder receives no reward. In other words, the learning agent optimizes its performance in terms of the reward it receives [27].
The RL-CABP decoder is tested with 5G NR's eMBB polar codes with a codelength of 128 bits. The conventional CABP, cyclically-shifted permutations CABP (CP-CABP), random factor-graph permutations CABP (RP-CABP) and the CA-SCL decoder are compared to the proposed decoder.
The FER performance of the proposed scheme is given in Fig 9. It is observed that at a FER of 10-4, the proposed RL-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:03:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CABP decoder delivers an Eb/N0 gain of 0.62 dB over the conventional CABP decoder and of at least 0.125 dB over CPCABP and RP-CABP. At the same FER, the suggested decoder provides a 0.92 dB Eb/N0 gain over the BP decoding algorithm. In contrast to CA-SCL decoders, the suggested decoder only improves performance by 0.12 dB at list size 2 and even falls short of CA-SCL at list size 4 [27].

was designed, provides negligible performance gains over its conventional counterpart. However, the scheme provides the flexibility of code construction using a wide range of parameters.
The ML-based Polar Coding schemes discussed in section II.B are compared against each other based on the maximum Eb/N0 gain they provide over their conventional counterpart. These Eb/N0 gains are given in the form of a bar chart in Fig 11.
The schemes are denoted as follows for ease of comparison:
Scheme 1 - SDAE-Enhanced Polar Codes
Scheme 2- ML-Based Multi-Flips Successive Cancellation Decoding
Scheme 3- RL-aided Belief Propagation Algorithm Decoding

Fig. 9. Performance of RL-aided Belief Propagation Algorithm Decoder [27].
III. COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS The ML-based LDPC Coding schemes discussed in section II.A are compared against each other based on the maximum SNR or Eb/N0 gain they provide over their conventional counterpart. The schemes are denoted as follows for ease of comparison: Scheme 1- Deep learning-based Unified Polar-LDPC Decoder Scheme 2- Q-Learning-based Node-wise Scheduling Scheme 3- RL-based LDPC Codes Construction The gains that schemes 1, 2 and 3 provide over their conventional counterparts are compared in Fig 10.
Fig. 10. Comparison of ML-based LDPC Coding schemes.
Among these schemes, Scheme 2 is found to be the most effective in enhancing the error performance with a peak Eb/N0 gain of 2 dB over its conventional counterpart. The significant gain is mainly due to the effort of the authors to experiment with several Q-learning variants for addressing the decoding problem so that the optimal one could be identified. Scheme 2 is also capable of reducing the message-passing complexity through an optimization of the LDPC code’s cluster structure. The hybrid approach of Scheme 1 for decoding 5G LDPC and polar codes using a DNN is capable of both reducing implementation resources and providing significant Eb/N0 gains of up to 0.8 dB. On the other hand, Scheme 3, in which a novel LDPC codes construction method

Fig. 11. Comparison of ML-based Polar Coding schemes.

Fig 11 shows that schemes 1 and 3 are both capable of delivering significant maximum Eb/N0 gains of 1 dB over their respective conventional counterparts using their different approaches. Scheme 2 provides the smallest gain and also provides a slight improvement in decoding latency. However, it is noted that none of these schemes provides computational complexity improvement.
IV. DISCUSSION
The main gaps identified in the reviewed intelligent LDPC and polar codes schemes are given in Table I and Table II respectively.

TABLE I. Machine Learning Algorithm
Neural Network
DNN
DNN

GAPS IN INTELLIGENT LDPC CODES SCHEMES.

Scheme

Gaps

Neural

Min-Sum

Decoder [15]

The scheme is outperformed by the conventional counterpart for medium and long codes.

ML-based

Early

Termination [16]

Deep learning-based Unified Polar-LDPC Decoder [17]

The scheme provides no error performance gain.

The new indicator

section

increases

overhead size which

may result in increased

latency.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:03:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Q-Learning
Reinforcement Learning

Q-Learning-based Node-wise Scheduling [18]
RL-based LDPC Codes Construction [19]

The impact on throughput and latency was not investigated. The scheme provides very low error performance gain.

TABLE II.

GAPS IN INTELLIGENT POLAR CODES SCHEMES.

Machine Learning Algorithm Neural networks
DNC
Autoencoder
LSTM
Reinforcement Learning

Scheme

Polar

Codes

Construction based on

FER Prediction [23]

DNC-based Flipping

Algorithm Decoding

[24]

Stacked Denoising

Autoencoder (SDAE)-

enhanced Polar Codes

[25]

ML-Based Multi-Flips

Successive

Cancellation Decoding

[26]

RL-aided

Belief

Propagation [27]

Gaps
The scheme cannot provide error performance gain for short codes.
The scheme was not tested with short codes.
The reduction of the scheme’s high complexity was not addressed.
The scheme’s complexity and latency were not evaluated against its conventional counterpart. The scheme’s complexity is higher than the conventional counterpart.

Two hybrid schemes that can be developed based on the reviewed papers are as follows:
i. DL-based Unified Polar-LDPC decoding with MLbased Early Termination
Low-complexity channel decoders have lower computational requirements, which translate to lower power consumption, lower latency and higher throughput. This makes them more suitable for practical implementation in many communication systems, particularly in mobile and battery-powered devices. The DL-based Unified Polar-LDPC decoder from [17] is based on the high-complexity BP algorithm for LDPC decoding. However, it is known that the MS algorithm has a lower complexity than the former as it computes messages using simple addition and thresholding operations, which are much simpler than the multiplication and normalization operations used in BP. As an attempt to minimize the complexity and decrease the latency of the system, the scheme from [17] can be modified such that it is trained based on the LDPC MS decoding algorithm alongside the polar BP decoding algorithm.
Furthermore, a DNN such as the one in [16] can be included to provide Early Termination capabilities to the whole unified Polar-LDPC decoding process. The DNN should provide CRC predictions based on which it can instruct the proposed channel decoder about when it should cease iterating and perform an actual CRC. This process should further decrease the latency of the decoder.
On the transmitter side, the RL-based LDPC codes construction technique proposed in [19] can be implemented to further reduce the computational complexity and latency of the system. The overall structure of the proposed hybrid system model is illustrated in Fig 12.

Fig. 12. DL-based Unified Polar-LDPC decoder with ML-based Early Termination.
ii. SDAE-enhanced Polar Codes with ML-Based MultiFlips Successive Cancellation Decoding
An essential aspect of 5G URLLC is its high reliability requirements. This can be achieved by increasing the codewords’ size to include more redundant bits for error correction but this leads to an increase in latency which is not desired for URLLC. Another method to achieve this is to improve the error correction capabilities of the system itself. For this purpose, the ML-Based Multi-Flips Successive Cancellation algorithm from [26] can be coupled with the SDAE-based decoder introduced in [25] to achieve a higherperformance decoder.
By feeding the data to the high-performance SDAE-based decoder, the number of erroneous bits at its output can be minimized. This eases the task of the bit-flipping algorithm from [26] to correct these remaining erroneous bits. By reducing the number of bits to be flipped, the latency of the overall system can also be minimized.
Moreover, instead of using a conventional polar encoder, an encoder utilizing optimized polar codes obtained by the method proposed in [23] can be used to further improve the error-correction performance of the proposed hybrid decoder and hence improve its reliability. This proposed hybrid system model is illustrated in Fig 13.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:03:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 13. SDAE-enhanced Polar Codes with ML-Based Multi-Flips Successive Cancellation Decoding.
The two proposed hybrid schemes aim at improving both the error performance and latency of the communication system to adapt it for URLLC.
V. CONCLUSION
5G NR supports three service classes (eMBB, mMTC and URLLC) which need to meet strict performance requirements. Channel codes are one of the most important components of a communication system that can help it meet these strict requirements, so it is important to choose the most appropriate channel codes for the system. Progress in channel coding due to the advancement of machine learning and its application has been encouraging so far. For both LDPC and polar codes, they can improve performance in terms of error correction, computational complexity and delay. Novel ML-based channel coding schemes reviewed in this paper demonstrated that both the channel encoding and decoding mechanisms may be learned by an ML algorithm and then improved through extensive training. While there are schemes that have proven useful for a certain service type, more research needs to be conducted to develop channel encoders and decoders that incorporate ML techniques to meet all the requirements of 5G NR and beyond.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors are thankful to the University of Mauritius, the Higher Education Commission of Mauritius and the University of Belgrade for having supported this work financially.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Shaf et al., “5G: A tutorial overview of standards, trials, challenges, deployment, and practice,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol.35, no.6, pp.1201-1221, June 2017.

[2] S. Zhang, J. Liu, H. Guo, M. Qi, and N. Kato, “Envisioning device-todevice communications in 6G,” IEEE Network, vol.34, no.3, pp.86-91, June 2020.

[3] M.S.M. Gismalla et al., “Survey on device-to-device (D2D) communication for 5GB/6G networks: Concept, applications, challenges, and future directions.,” IEEE Access, vol.10, pp.3079230821, 2022.

[4] Z. Li et al., “Device-to-device (D2D) communications,” Chapter 5 in 5G Mobile and Wireless Communications Technology (Eds. A. Osseiran, J. F. Monserrat, and P. Marsch), Cambridge University Press 2016, pp.107-136

[5] A. Asadi, Q. Wang, and V. Mancuso, “A survey on device-to-device communication in cellular networks,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol.16, no.4, pp. 1801-1819, 2014.

[6] D. Feng, L. Lu, Y. Yuan-Wu, G.Y. Li, S. Li, and G. Feng, “Device-todevice communications in cellular networks,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol.52, no.4, pp.49–55, April 2014.

[7] U.N.Kar, S.D.Kumar, “An overview of device-to-device communication in cellular networks,” Elsevier ICT Express, vol.4, no.4, pp.203-208, 2018.

[8] M.N. Tehrani, M. Uysal, and H. Yanikomeroglu. “Device-to-device communication in 5G cellular networks: challenges, solutions, and future directions,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol.52, no.5, pp.86–92, 2014.

[9] R.I. Ansari et al., “5G D2D networks: Techniques, challenges and future prospects,” IEEE Systems Journal, vol.12, no.4, Dec. 2018.

[10] C. Chakraborty and J.J.C.P. Rodrigues, “A comprehensive review on device-to-device communication paradigm: Trends, challenges and applications,” Springer Wireless Personal Communications, vol.114, no.1, pp.185-207, Sep. 2020.

[11] H. Zhu, L. Pu, H. Xu, and B. Zhang, “Construction of Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes Based on Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic,” Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing, vol. 2018, pp. 1–9, 2018, doi: 10.1155/2018/5264724.

[12] M. Indoonundon and T. Pawan Fowdur, “Overview of the challenges and solutions for 5G channel coding schemes,” Journal of Information and Telecommunication, pp. 1–24, Jul. 2021, doi: 10.1080/24751839.2021.1954752.

[13] Session Chairman (Nokia), “Chairman’s Notes of Agenda Item 7.1.5 Channel coding and modulation,” 2016, 3GPP TSG RAN WG1 Meeting 87, R1-1613710.

[14] 3GPP, “TS 38.212: Multiplexing and channel coding. 3rd Generation Partnership Project; Technical Specification Group Radio Access Network,” 2019.

[15] J. Dai et al., “Learning to Decode Protograph LDPC Codes,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 39, no. 7, pp. 1983– 1999, Jul. 2021, doi: 10.1109/jsac.2021.3078488.

[16] A. Gunturu, A. Agrawal, A. K. R. Chavva, and S. Pedamalli, “Machine Learning Based Early Termination for Turbo and LDPC Decoders,” 2021 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC), Mar. 2021, doi: 10.1109/wcnc49053.2021.9417420.

[17] Y. Wang, Z. Zhang, S. Zhang, S. Cao, and S. Xu, “A Unified Deep Learning Based Polar-LDPC Decoder for 5G Communication Systems,” 2018 10th International Conference on Wireless Communications and Signal Processing (WCSP), Oct. 2018, doi: 10.1109/wcsp.2018.8555891.

[18] S. Habib, A. Beemer, and J. Kliewer, “Belief Propagation Decoding of Short Graph-Based Channel Codes via Reinforcement Learning,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Information Theory, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 627–640, Jun. 2021, doi: 10.1109/jsait.2021.3073834.

[19] M. Zhang, Q. Huang, S. Wang, and Z. Wang, “Construction of LDPC Codes Based on Deep Reinforcement Learning,” 2018 10th International Conference on Wireless Communications and Signal Processing (WCSP), Oct. 2018, doi: 10.1109/wcsp.2018.8555714.

[20] C. Pillet, V. Bioglio, and C. Condo, “On List Decoding of 5G-NR Polar

Codes,” 2020 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking

Conference

(WCNC),

May

2020,

doi:

10.1109/wcnc45663.2020.9120686.

[21] J. H. Bae, A. Abotabl, H.-P. Lin, K.-B. Song, and J. Lee, “An overview of channel coding for 5G NR cellular communications,” APSIPA Transactions on Signal and Information Processing, vol. 8, 2019, doi: 10.1017/atsip.2019.10.

[22] E. Arikan, “Channel Polarization: A Method for Constructing Capacity-Achieving Codes for Symmetric Binary-Input Memoryless

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:03:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Channels,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 3051–3073, Jul. 2009, doi: 10.1109/TIT.2009.2021379.

[23] M. Leonardon and V. Gripon, “Using Deep Neural Networks to Predict and Improve the Performance of Polar Codes,” 2021 11th International Symposium on Topics in Coding (ISTC), Aug. 2021, doi: 10.1109/istc49272.2021.9594059.

[24] Y. Tao and Z. Zhang, “DNC-Aided SCL-Flip Decoding of Polar

Codes,” 2021 IEEE Global Communications Conference

(GLOBECOM),

Dec.

2021,

doi:

10.1109/globecom46510.2021.9685277.

[25] J. Li and W. Cheng, “Stacked Denoising Autoencoder Enhanced Polar Codes Over Rayleigh Fading Channels,” IEEE Wireless Communications Letters, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 354–357, Mar. 2020, doi: 10.1109/lwc.2019.2954907.

[26] B. He, S. Wu, Y. Deng, H. Yin, J. Jiao, and Q. Zhang, “A Machine Learning Based Multi-flips Successive Cancellation Decoding Scheme of Polar Codes,” 2020 IEEE 91st Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC2020-Spring), May 2020, doi: 10.1109/vtc2020spring48590.2020.9128875.

[27] N. Doan, S. A. Hashemi, and W. J. Gross, “Decoding Polar Codes with

Reinforcement Learning,” GLOBECOM 2020 - 2020 IEEE Global

Communications

Conference,

Dec.

2020,

doi:

10.1109/globecom42002.2020.9348007.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:03:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

