268

IEEE WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 11, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2022

Neural Network Aided Impulsive Perturbation Decoding for Short Raptor-Like LDPC Codes
Hyunjae Lee , Yong-Sung Kil , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Min Young Chung , Member, IEEE, and Sang-Hyo Kim , Member, IEEE

Abstract—As short packet communications become more important, multi-round belief propagation decoding with impulsive perturbation (MBPD-IP) was proposed to improve the decoding of short low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. To operate the MBPD-IP effectively, it is crucial to select proper symbols to be perturbed in as few trials as possible. Unfortunately, existing perturbation symbol selection criteria are heuristic and not effective for special codes such as raptor-like (RL) LDPC codes. In this letter, a neural network (NN) based perturbation symbol selection scheme for MBPD-IP is proposed where the symbols to be perturbed are selected from a pre-trained NN. It is shown that the proposed scheme performs significantly better than existing schemes for the RL LDPC code of 5G new radio and still works well for plain code structures.
Index Terms—Low density parity check codes, perturbation decoding, deep learning, neural network, short packet communication.
I. INTRODUCTION
A S ULTRA reliable and low latency communication (URLLC) services emerge, short packet communications has drawn more attention [1], [2]. Because the capacity is limited in communication in finite block length [3] and the latency requirement is tight, short codes were studied in a wider spectrum [4] and the demand on maximum-likelihood-like (ML-like) decoding algorithm is increasing.
In 1995, a soft decision decoding based on ordered statistics for linear block codes [5] that can approach ML performance was proposed. However, the complexity increases quickly as the search space grows. A linear programming based decoding was proposed for linear codes [6] and the alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) was used for linear programming decoding of low density parity check (LDPC) codes [7].
To approach the ML performance in low complexity or to overcome the intrinsic weaknesses of decoding algorithms, learning aided decoding have been proposed [8]–[15]. An end to end supervised learning was used to train a neural-network (NN) decoder [8], although training was effective only for very
Manuscript received August 24, 2021; revised October 24, 2021; accepted October 27, 2021. Date of publication November 4, 2021; date of current version February 17, 2022. This work was supported by Samsung Research, Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was J. Hu. (Corresponding author: Sang-Hyo Kim.)
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, South Korea (e-mail: iamshkim@skku.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LWC.2021.3125578

short codes. A deep learning-aided ADMM penalized decoding was applied to LDPC codes [10]. Also, hard decision based bit-flipping decoding was enhanced by reinforcement learning for the decoding of linear codes [11]. A weighted belief propagation (BP) decoding was optimized by a deep learning technique, where variable and check nodes are used as neurons that form the corresponding NN [12], [13].
Another approach toward ML performance is based on repetitive post processing. To overcome the finite length problems of short LDPC codes, multi-round BP decoding with perturbation (MBPD-P) has been proposed [16]–[20]. Perturbation is a process of making a small intentional change in the received signal, and the MBPD-P schemes conduct the conventional BP decoding iteratively with such input perturbation until a valid codeword is found. According to the reported performance for the CCSDS (128, 64) LDPC code, the MBPD-P’s performance is better than or on par with the deep learning-aided ADMM penalized decoder [10] and the pruned neural BP decoder [15]. Therefore, improving MBPD-P in terms of performance and complexity is meaningful. In [21], Lee et al. proposed the multi-round BP decoding with impulsive perturbation (MBPD-IP) which is based on the special perturbation that applies to only a few symbols. The MBPD-IP outperforms conventional MBPD-P schemes under the constraint on the number of perturbation rounds.
While the performance of the MBPD-P is improved as the number of perturbation rounds increases, the overall decoding complexity and maximum decoding latency increase. Hence, it is desired to minimize the number of perturbation rounds by effectively selecting symbols to be perturbed. However, as the decoding result is dependent on the specific realization of code construction and the channel noise realization, it is hard to find optimal criteria for perturbation symbol selection. Thus, the existing selection criteria have been heuristically designed in all MBPD-P algorithms [16]–[21].
As an example, the number of sign mismatches of variable nodes (nSMV) was proposed for the perturbation symbol selection criterion in [21]. The nSMV keeps the signs of variable node messages during BP decoding to assess the symbol reliability. It was shown that among the existing reliability measures, the nSMV shows the best decoding performance for ordinary regular and irregular LDPC codes [21]. However, for some special code structures, such as Raptor-like (RL) LDPC codes of 5G new radio [22], some codeword symbols with low reliability cannot be effectively detected by the nSMV criterion. The RL LDPC codes have degree 1 variable nodes for good low rate performance and rate compatibility. Since the messages of the degree 1 variable nodes do not update during

2162-2345 c 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:03:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEE et al.: NEURAL NETWORK AIDED IMPULSIVE PERTURBATION DECODING FOR SHORT RAPTOR-LIKE LDPC CODES

269

the BP decoding process, and consequently, the reliability of such nodes cannot be measured by nSMV. In order to effectively operate the MBPD-IP regardless of the code structure, a more general reliability measure is required.
In this letter, we propose a new perturbation symbol selection scheme aided by an NN which is adaptive to the code structure and specially effective to RL LDPC codes. Owing to the simple implementation and good performance, we only consider the impulsive perturbation (IP). The NN learns through the symbol indices with successful IP decoding. In addition, several perturbation symbol patterns are effectively learned by applying the weighted loss. We compare the error performance and average number of perturbation rounds of the proposed scheme with conventional schemes [21]. Numerical results show that the performance of the proposed symbol selection is better than the existing criteria for the short RL LDPC codes. Moreover, the average decoding complexity is lower for the proposed scheme.
The remainder of this letter is organized as follows. In Section II, we briefly introduce the MBPD-IP schemes. Then the proposed perturbation symbol selection scheme is presented in Section III. The performance and complexity of the proposed scheme are evaluated in Section IV. Section V concludes this letter.
II. MULTI-ROUND BELIEF PROPAGATION DECODING WITH IMPULSIVE PERTURBATION
In this section, we introduce the basic system model and the MBPD-IP which is a good low-complexity MBPD-P.
A. System Model
The system model is depicted in Fig. 1. Let C = {c|cHT = 0} be an (N, K) binary LDPC code where H is a sparse (N − K) × N parity check matrix and c = (c0, . . . , cN −1) ∈ {0, 1}N is a codeword. The LDPC code is concatenated with cyclic redundancy check (CRC) code for error detection. We consider the binary phase shift keying (BPSK) modulated signal x = (x0, . . . , xN −1), and xi = (−1)ci corresponding to the codeword. We assume an additive white Gaussian channel (AWGN) such that r = (r0, . . . , rN −1) = x + z where z = (z0, . . . , zN −1) and zi ’s are independent Gaussian random variables with zero mean and variance σ2. Let l = (l0, . . . , lN −1) be a vector of the intrinsic log-likelihood ratio (LLR) of c for the observation r. If CRC check is satisfied, the decoder outputs a codeword estimate ˆc = (cˆ0, . . . , cˆN −1). Otherwise, the received signal is perturbed and the decoding process is performed until a CRC-pass or the number of perturbation rounds reaches the maximum value, T.
B. MBPD-IP
Perturbation is a process of making a small intentional change in the received signal, and the MBPD-P schemes conduct the conventional BP decoding iteratively with such input perturbation until a valid codeword is found [21]. While performing the MBPD-P, in order to decrease the decoding complexity, it is desired to find a successful perturbation pattern early. To achieve this goal, a concentration of perturbation

Fig. 1. Block diagram of MBPD-IP.

to one or a few symbols was proposed in pair with an efficient perturbation symbol selection criterion [21]. The proposed scheme is referred to as the MBPD-IP where IP is a modification of the received signal by adding impulsive noise of opposite sign on one or a few symbols. As a result, decoding performance and complexity were improved. Also, the proposed scheme in [21] supports a parallel implementation of MBPD-IP.
The process of MBPD-IP is discussed in more detail. The first step of perturbation is to select the space of perturbation from the received signal. The perturbation space R = {π(0), . . . , π(τ − 1)} is the set of the indices of codeword symbols with low reliability, where τ is the perturbation space size and π(i ) ∈ {0, . . . , N − 1} is the index permutation. In [21], nSMV was proposed for the perturbation symbol selection criterion. The nSMV is defined by the number of mismatches between the extrinsic LLR and the posterior LLR over the initial BP decoding, which is regarded as a measure of symbol reliability.
Let lEi (j ) be the extrinsic LLR and l i (j ) be the posterior LLR of the j-th variable node at the i-th iteration of component BP decoding. Then the nSMV for the j-th variable node is defined as

mj = {i |lEi (j )l i (j ) < 0, 1 ≤ i ≤ Imax} ,

where Imax is the maximum number of BP decoding iterations. Symbols with larger nSMV are considered less reliable.
If there are more than one variable node with the maximum
nSMV, then the magnitude of intrinsic LLR is used as the
secondary rule. After that, a set of T perturbation patterns, P =
{p0, . . . , pT −1}, is generated from the selected perturbation symbol, where P is an ordered set of binary τ -tuples, pt = (p0t , . . . , pτt −1) ∈ {0, 1}τ . The IP applies to the received signal corresponding to the perturbation pattern as

rπ(i) =

−sgn(rπ(i))A, if pit = 1,

rπ(i ) ,

if pit = 0,

where 0 ≤ i ≤ τ − 1, A is a large value, and π(i ) is the index

order of symbol reliability of r.

When we apply the perturbation patterns, p’s with lower

weight are chosen first. Among p’s of the same weight, a lex-

icographical ordering is applied. The final step of perturbation

is to input the perturbed signal r = (r0, . . . , rN −1) to the BP

decoder. The LLRs of perturbed signal the following BP decoding is set as l

l = (l0, . . = 2r /σ2.

. , lN The

−1) for pertur-

bation operations are repeated up to T rounds until a valid

codeword is founded.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:03:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

270

IEEE WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 11, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2022

III. NN-AIDED IMPULSIVE PERTURBATION SYMBOL SELECTION
It was observed that the existing perturbation symbol selection criteria, such as nSMV, are not effective to the special structure of RL LDPC codes having many degree 1 nodes. In this section, we propose an NN-aided perturbation symbol search algorithm which can reflect the symbol reliability more adaptively to the code structure.
A. Framework of NN-Aided MBPD-IP
In this section, we propose a perturbation space selection method based on an NN for effective MBPD-IP. First, the NN-based MBPD-IP framework is briefly introduced. For each received vector r, an NN is used to predict the perturbation patterns that are most likely to lead to a decoding success. For simple and effective search, only one-bit perturbation is considered. Multi-bit perturbation may be considered in a future study. The NN takes in the received vector, r as the input and outputs bˆ = (bˆ0, . . . , bˆN −1), where bˆi is the estimated probability that decoding will succeed if perturbation applies to the received symbol ri . The decoder proceeds the impulsive perturbation to one-bit at a time and the one-bit perturbation is chosen by the order of decreasing chance of successful decoding with respect to bˆ. The number of one-bit perturbation patterns that are likely to lead to a successful decoding depends on r.
More specifically, the NN is used to produce R of the MBPD-IP in the previous section. Let π(i ) be the permutation that indicates the index of the i-th highest element of the NN output b. The indices of T highest values are selected as the perturbation symbols for one-bit IP;
R = {π(i )|0 ≤ i ≤ T − 1},
where bˆπ(i) ≥ bˆπ(i+1). Finally, MBPD with one-bit IP is performed up to T times where the perturbation pattern is given as a weight one binary vector with a single one at the π(i )-th entry for π(i ) ∈ R.
To train the NN, data can be obtained from the simulation results of running MBPD-IP with full IP pattern search. All one-bit perturbations are tested and the binary vector b that indicates the successful one-bit perturbations by setting ones at the bit locations becomes the label. Thus, the Hamming weight of b is the number of successful IPs.
B. Training Data Generation
In this subsection, the data generation method for the NNaided perturbation symbol selector is explained. The training data set is a set of data points, each of which consists of an input and its label pair, denoted by
D = rj , bj |0 ≤ j ≤ M − 1 .
In the proposed method, the label and the binary vector of which ones indicate the positions of the successful one-bit perturbation, respectively. The training data generation method is described in Algorithm 1. The algorithm runs until we get M data points, i.e., |D| = M where |·| denotes the set cardinality. For every outer iteration, a received signal r is generated with randomly generated codeword and channel noise

Algorithm 1 Data Generation

Input: M , Eb/N0, N , Pone, Imax, D ← ∅ 1: while |D| < M do

2: Generate a received signal r at given Eb/N0, b ← 0N

3: for t = 0 : N − 1 do

4:

Perform one-bit IP r with pt

5: Calculate the LLRs of r and perform a BP decoding

with the maximum iteration of Imax

6: if LDPC syndrome and CRC check are satisfied then

7:

bt ← 1

8:

end if

9: end for

10: if wH(b) ≥ 1 then

11:

D ← D ∪ {(r, b)}

12: end if

13: end while

at given Eb/N0, and all elements of the temporal label is initialized as zero, where 0N is the zero vector of length N. Then for every inner iteration, the received signal is perturbed with a one-bit perturbation pattern pt and the BP decoding
is performed with maximally Imax iterations. Here, the set of all one-bit perturbation patterns is Pone = {p0, . . . , pN −1}, where pi = (p0i , . . . , pNi −1) ∈ {0, 1}N and

pji =

1, if j = i , 0, if j = i .

Decoding succeeds if both LDPC syndrome check and CRC check are satisfied. Then, the elements of label corresponding to the successful one-bit perturbation pattern is replaced by 1. For example, let us assume a received signal of N = 10 for which the generic BP decoding fails. If the IP decoding succeeds in the 4th, 5th, and 8th symbol perturbation, respectively, the label of this signal is b = (0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0). If at least a one-bit perturbation pattern has lead to successful decoding, then the Hamming weight of the label, wH(b) is nonzero. For the successful case, the received signal and label pair, (r, b) is added to the temporary data set, D.

C. Training of MLP
The goal of training is an optimization of the weights and biases for minimum loss between output bˆ and label b. In this letter, we utilized an MLP, which is a fully-connected feedforward NN model. The input and output layers has N nodes where r is taken as the input. There are two hidden layers of size 2N and N nodes, respectively. Each output node is corresponding to the variable node of the same index in the LDPC graph. The rectified linear unit and a linear function is used as the activation function in the hidden layers and the output layer, respectively.
For the training of the IP space selector, we train the NN with the data generated by Algorithm 1. The NN is optimized via supervised learning. Let MLPθ(r, b) be an MLP model with parameter set θ. As the desired function of MLPθ(r, b) is the perturbation symbol selector, the output bˆ of the MLP indicates the likelihood of each element for one-bit IP success.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:03:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEE et al.: NEURAL NETWORK AIDED IMPULSIVE PERTURBATION DECODING FOR SHORT RAPTOR-LIKE LDPC CODES

271

TABLE I

100

HYPER-PARAMETERS FOR NN TRAINING

10 1

10 2

10 3

BLER

The number of ones in the label indicates the number of
successful one-bit perturbation patterns. Thus, the Hamming weight of the label, wH(b), is an indicator showing perturbation decodability, or diversity of the corresponding input pair. If wH(b) is large, there is higher probability of decoding success. The reason is that if only one among wH(b) symbols is included in the set of indices of T highest NN symbol
outputs, then the decoding will be successful. Thus, we get a diversity of wH(b). From the NN’s perspective, the case of small decoding diversity is a challenging task whereas the case
of large decoding diversity is a rather easy task with respect
to successful decoding. Therefore, we intend to balance the
difficulty of the tasks of different diversity. To promote the
learning of such a data point with low decoding diversity, we apply a weighted loss function depending on wH(b).
The weighted loss, which is one of the solutions to the
class imbalance problem [23], is applied the predetermined
label b associated with r. The scaling factor is given as w = wH(b)−1, where w is dependent on the received signal r. The modified mean squared error (MSE) is defined as

L

=

w N

N −1
(bi

− bˆi )2,

(1)

i =0

where bi and bˆi are symbols of the label and the output, respectively. The cross entropy was tested for loss func-

tion, however the MSE performed better when the maximum

number of perturbation rounds is more than a few.

The NNs are trained by data sequentially taken from the
training data, which is generated from a high Eb/N0 to a low Eb/N0. Since the NN is pre-trained and used in the perturbation decoding without further training, the complexity of such

offline training is not crucial and a sufficiently large number of epochs can be used until the performance saturates.

IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS
In this section, we numerically evaluate proposed criterion for MBPD-IP. The effectiveness of the proposed criterion are shown and compared with the existing perturbation symbol selection criteria, which are the nSMV combined with intrinsic LLR as the secondary rule and the intrinsic LLR alone [21].
The decoding error performance and computational complexity of MBPD-P algorithms are of interest. For the simulation, a short RL LDPC code is used. We consider (104, 20) RL LDPC code concatenated with the CRC-8 code of a generator g(x ) = x 8 + x 4 + x 3 + x 2 + 1 [22]. For the BP decoder, the normalized min-sum (NMS) decoder is considered with Imax = 20 and a scaling factor of 0.8. The maximum number of perturbation rounds T is set to 10 and 40, respectively.

10 4

NMS decoding Proposed (T=10)

Proposed (T=40)

10 5

Intrinsic LLR (T=10)

Intrinsic LLR (T=40)

10 6

nSMV, LLR (T=10)

nSMV, LLR (T=40)

Full search (T=104)

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

5.5

E /N [dB]
b0

Fig. 2. Performance of MBPD-IP with the proposed NN based criterion and conventional criteria (nSMV combined with intrinsic LLR, intrinsic LLR) for the (104, 20) LDPC code with CRC-8.

Fig. 3. Average number of perturbation rounds of MBPD-IP with the proposed scheme and conventional criteria (nSMV combined with intrinsic LLR, intrinsic LLR) for the (104, 20) LDPC code with CRC-8.
The hyper-parameters regarding the NN-model is given in Table I. The training data is generated for Eb/N0 = 1, 2, 3, 4 dB and the number of training data for each Eb/N0 is 2.5×105. For training, the mini-batch size, dropout rate and learning rate are set to 1000, 0.05, and 0.0001, respectively. The number of epochs is 500. The weighted loss function in (1) is used for the loss function and the stochastic gradient descent method with ADAM optimizer [24] is used.
Fig. 2 shows the block error rate (BLER) performance of different criteria for the IP decoding. The proposed method achieves a performance gain of 0.35 dB for T = 10, and 0.45 dB for T = 40 at a BLER of 10−3 over the nSMV criterion combined with intrinsic LLR. The performance gain over intrinsic LLR is 0.1 dB for T = 10 and 0.25 dB for T = 40. We can confirm that the proposed scheme has better performance than the nSMV with intrinsic LLR or the intrinsic LLR.
Fig. 3 compares the average number of perturbation rounds. The proposed scheme shows 19%, and 43% reduction in average number of perturbation rounds as compared to the intrinsic LLR, and nSMV combined with intrinsic LLR for T = 40 at Eb/N0 = 3 dB. Therefore, the proposed NN-aided perturbation symbol selection scheme performs better than the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:03:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

272

IEEE WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 11, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2022

Fig. 4. Performance of MBPD-IP with the proposed NN based symbol selection and conventional criteria (nSMV combined with intrinsic LLR) for the CCSDS (128, 64) LDPC code with CRC-8.
existing schemes for both the error correcting performance and computational complexity.
Although the proposed NN-aided scheme is developed for the special structure of RL LDPC codes, this scheme adapts well to non-RL codes as the proposed scheme performs as well as the nSMV combined with intrinsic LLR for ordinary regular and irregular LDPC codes according to simulation results.
In Fig. 4, the performance of the proposed scheme is compared with the nSMV combined with intrinsic LLR for a (128, 64) CCSDS LDPC code [25]. The code is a non-Raptorlike and plain irregular LDPC code with variable node degrees of three and five and a regular CN degree of eight. The decoding methods are compared for T = 10 and 30. It is seen that the proposed NN-aided scheme performs robustly for such an ordinary structure of LDPC codes, although a slight performance degradation, 0.05dB at BLER 10−3 for T = 30, is observed.
It is worth noting that the degradation can be overcome by an input processing for non-Raptor-like structures. In Fig. 4, the performance of the NN-aided symbol selection with additional input processing [26] is also shown. For the NN, soft-syndrome [14] is concatenated to the input r. The NN is trained by supervised learning as in this letter. The performance is even better by 0.03dB at BLER 10−3.
V. CONCLUSION
In this letter, we proposed an NN-aided perturbation symbol selection method for MBPD-IP of short LDPC codes. In the proposed method, the NN is trained with a received signal and perturbation pattern pair. We devised weighted loss function for effective training of the NN with the training data with low perturbation decodability. Compared with existing criteria, the proposed scheme provides a better performance for RL LDPC codes which have a special structure. Also, the proposed scheme is valid for non-RL structures. As we only considered one-bit perturbation in this work, NN-aided multi-bit perturbation pattern search can be studied for a future work.

REFERENCES
[1] G. Durisi, T. Koch, and P. Popovski, “Toward massive, ultrareliable, and low-latency wireless communication with short packets,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 104, no. 9, pp. 1711–1726, Sep. 2016.
[2] H. Ji, S. Park, J. Yeo, Y. Kim, J. Lee, and B. Shim, “Ultra-reliable and low-latency communications in 5G downlink: Physical layer aspects,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 124–130, Jun. 2018.
[3] Y. Polyanskiy, H. V. Poor, and S. Verdu, “Channel coding rate in the finite blocklength regime,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 2307–2359, May 2010.
[4] M. Shirvanimoghaddam et al., “Short block-length codes for ultrareliable low latency communications,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 130–137, Feb. 2019.
[5] M. P. C. Fossorier and S. Lin, “Soft-decision decoding of linear block codes based on ordered statistics,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 41, no. 5, pp. 1379–1396, Sep. 1995.
[6] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. R. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 954–972, Mar. 2005.
[7] H. Wei and A. H. Banihashemi, “An iterative check polytope projection algorithm for ADMM-based LP decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 29–32, Jan. 2018.
[8] T. Gruber, S. Cammerer, J. Hoydis, and S. T. Brink, “On deep learningbased channel decoding,” in Proc. IEEE CISS, Baltimore, MD, USA, Mar. 2017, pp. 1–6.
[9] A. Bennatan, Y. Choukroun, and P. Kisilev, “Deep learning for decoding of linear codes—A syndrome-based approach,” in Proc. IEEE ISIT, Vail, CO, USA, Jun. 2018, pp. 1595–1599.
[10] Y. Wei, M.-M. Zhao, M.-J. Zhao, and M. Lei, “ADMM-based decoder for binary linear codes aided by deep learning,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 1028–1032, May 2020.
[11] F. Carpi, C. Häger, M. Martalò, R. Raheli, and H. D. Pfister, “Reinforcement learning for channel coding: Learned bit-flipping decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Alleton, Monticello, IL, USA, Sep. 2019, pp. 922–929.
[12] E. Nachmani, Y. Be’ery, and D. Burshtein, “Learning to decode linear codes using deep learning,” in Proc. IEEE Alleton, Monticello, IL, USA, Sep. 2016, pp. 341–346.
[13] J. Dai et al., “Learning to decode protograph LDPC codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 39, no. 7, pp. 1983–1999, May 2021.
[14] L. Lugosch and W. J. Gross. “Learning from the syndrome,” in Proc. ACSSC, Pacific Grove, CA, USA, 2018, pp. 594–598.
[15] A. Buchberger, C. Häger, H. D. Pfister, L. Schmalen, and A. G. Amat, “Pruning neural belief propagation decoders,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Los Angeles, CA, USA, 2020, pp. 338–342.
[16] D. Xiao, J. Lu, C. Lin, and B. Jiao, “A perturbation method for decoding LDPC concatenated with CRC,” in Proc. IEEE WCNC, Hong Kong, Sep. 2007, pp. 668–672.
[17] E. C. Beak, H. J. Lee, and S.-H. Kim, “Decoding LDPC codes with binary perturbation,” in Proc. IEEE ICTC, Jeju, South Korea, Oct. 2016, pp. 694–696.
[18] S. Scholl, P. Schläfer, and N. Wehn, “Saturated min-sum decoding: An ‘afterburner’ for LDPC decoder hardware,” in Proc. IEEE DATE, Dresden, Germany, Mar. 2016, pp. 1219–1224.
[19] N. Varnica, M. P. C. Fossorier, and A. Kavci, “Augmented belief propagation decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 1308–1317, Jul. 2007.
[20] P. Kang, Y. Xie, L. Yang, C. Zheng, J. Yuan, and Y. Wei, “Enhanced quasi-maximum likelihood decoding of short LDPC codes based on saturation,” in Proc. IEEE ITW, Visby, Sweden, Aug. 2018, pp. 1219–1224.
[21] H. Lee, Y.-S. Kil, M. Jang, S.-H. Kim, O.-S. Park, and G. Park, “Multi-round belief propagation decoding with impulsive perturbation for Short LDPC codes,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 9, pp. 1491–1494, Sep. 2020.
[22] NR Multiplexing and Channel Coding (Release 16), 3GPP Standard TS 38.212 v16.4.0, Jan. 2021.
[23] J. M. Johnson and T. M. Khoshgoftaar, “Survey on deep learning with class imbalance,” J. Big Data, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 27, Mar. 2019.
[24] D. P. Kingma and J. L. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” 2014, arXiv:1412.6980.
[25] M. Helmling et al., “Database of Channel Codes and ML Simulation Results.” 2017. [Online]. Available: http://www.uni-kl.de/channel-codes
[26] H. Lee, “Decoding with perturbation of short LDPC codes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elect. Comput. Eng., Sungkyunkwan Univ., Suwon-si, South Korea, 2020.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:03:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

