Performance Analysis of Mixed MIMO RF/FSO DF 
Relaying Based on Globally Coupled Low Density 
Parity Check (GC-LDPC) Codes 
 
Ibrahima GUEYE, Idy DIOP, Ibra DIOUM, K Wane KEITA, Papis NDIAYE, Moussa DIALLO, Sidi Mohamed 
FARSSI 
*Department of Computer Science, Polytechnic Institute (ESP), Universite Cheikh Anta Diop ́ 
Dakar, Senegal 
 
 
Abstract— In this work, we analyze the performance of the use 
of error correcting codes in particular the LDPC codes with 
global coupling (GC-LDPC) in a double-hop relay system 
composed of links with multiple inputs and multiple outputs at 
radio frequency / free space optics (MIMO-RF/FSO). A multi-
antenna listener listens to the information by decoding the 
signals received from the source node. In addition, to decode 
the signals we use two-phase local-global decoding. To 
eliminate interference in the first hop we use the interference 
alignment technique (IA) we also assume that the source-relay 
link undergoes Rayleigh fading, and that the relay-destination 
link is affected by the degradations of the channel optics, 
including path loss, atmospheric turbulence, and pointing 
errors. Using DF relay technology, mixed MIMO-RF/FSO 
systems 
combine 
the 
advantages 
of 
RF 
and 
FSO 
communication technologies. The use of mixed MIMO-RF/FSO 
cooperative transmission systems can improve network 
reliability and transmission. Results demonstrate improved 
performance of MIMO-RF/FSO DF cooperative relay system 
based on GC-LDPC codes with multiple antennas compared to 
MIMO-RF/FSO systems without the use of GC-LDPC codes, 
but also to systems SISO (Single-Input Single-Output) RF-FSO 
DF proposed in the existing literature. 
 
Keywords— Free Space Optics (FSO), Multiple Input 
Multiple Output (MIMO), atmospheric turbulence, Bit Error 
Rate (BER), Pointing errors, Radio frequency (RF), globally 
coupled low density parity check codes (GC-LDPC), Gamma-
Gamma Fading, Rayleigh fading . 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Radio frequency (RF) communication systems have 
advantages like low power with good operating range and 
besides these here the line of sight (LOS) is not mandatory 
for communication. However, the problem is a lack of 
licensed spectrum with insufficient and also expensive data 
throughput. The ever increasing demand for bandwidth 
given the advent of innovative services which are having 
high bandwidth constraints has forced the search for 
alternative solutions to ensure the transport of information. 
Advances in fiber research have increased its performance 
and made it stand out from copper cables. These 
performances now make fiber the leading medium in terms 
of capacity and also in terms of range if we were limited to 
terrestrial transmission. In addition to their high bandwidth, 
optical free space communications (FSO) have many other 
advantages over radio frequencies (RF). Some of these 
benefits are: they are license-free spectrum communications, 
quick and easy to deploy, safer and less demanding in terms 
of 
power 
consumption, 
mass 
requirements 
and 
electromagnetic interference isolation. For these reasons, 
FSO has been implemented in many applications such as: 
radio astronomy, remote sensing, last mile access, back-haul 
for cellular networks, and many others [1], [2]. Because of 
these distinctive features of SFO communication, much 
research has been carried out recently in this area; see [1], [2] 
and references therein. A major challenge in FSO 
communications is rain, fog, dust, snow, turbulence and 
misalignment [3]. Nevertheless, an effective method to 
overcome this challenge is to use the RF/FSO combination 
relay networks. In these networks, the (sources) transmit 
their information to a base transceiver station (relay) by RF 
link in the first hop, while in the second hop this relay 
transmits the information to the backbone network 
(destination by FSO connection Another advantage of this 
mixed relay scheme is that it saves economic resources. This 
is achieved by avoiding unnecessary expensive fiber optic 
implementations, for example in suburbs and city centers, 
and simultaneously conserving the RF spectrum while 
supporting high information rates using FSO transmission, 
so mixed RF/FSO relay networks have received a great deal 
of research attention. 
On the other hand, the cooperative relay has received a 
lot of attention due to its ability to reduce power, extend 
coverage and improve throughput. Thus, it is interesting and 
promising to use these advantages for the security of the 
physical layer. More precisely, In I GUEYE et al [4] 
proposed two cooperative schemes of decoding and 
transmitting (DF) based error correcting codes particularly 
the LDPC codes, namely the case I, which involves 
choosing parallel relays, the sending node transmits the data 
to the receiving node and to a relay node which in turn 
transmits the date to the destination node. This form of 
transmission acts as a distributed antenna network and is 
14
International Conference on Advanced Communications Technology(ICACT)
ISBN 979-11-88428-06-9
ICACT2021 February 07 ~ 10, 2021
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:03:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
considered a cooperative approach in diversity; Case II, 
Multi-hop relay is for extending the range of a transmission 
with limited transmission range. In this approach, the signal 
passes from one relay node to another in series. . Their 
results show that, compared to the traditional mode of 
transmission, their cooperative FSO systems not only 
attenuate fading induced by atmospheric turbulence but also 
protect information.  
To improve network reliability and improve coverage, it 
is important to use relays in both RF and FSO networks. 
Mixed systems relaying RF-FSO have been discussed 
extensively in the literature: In the literature there has been 
increasing interest in how FSOs and RF links can be used in 
a double-hop configuration to support the link. uplink [5] 
and downlink transmissions [6]. In [7] the authors consider a 
mixed RF-FSO system with double-hop AF relaying in 
which a partial relay selection scheme was used to select the 
best relay. The have also considered the RF channels to be 
the Rayleigh distribution while the FSO channel is assumed 
to be Gamma-Gamma distribution. In [8], a mixed RF-FSO 
based DF system is considered with a single multiple input-
output (SIMO) RF source-relay links and a single-mono-
input-output (SISO) FSO relay to destination link. In [9], the 
authors analyzed the performance of an FSO/RF-based 
hybrid switching transmission in a DH scenario with a 
combination selection (SC) . The symbol error rate (SER) 
also was studied for mixed Rician shaded / GG fixed gain 
AF without pointing error in [10]. A relay system similar to 
that in [10] has been studied in terms of cutoff probability in 
[11], but for mixed Rayleigh/MÆlaga (M) fading with 
pointing error. The authors [12] provided a state of the art in 
which they discussed the different types of cooperative 
systems in wireless optical communication in indoor, 
terrestrial, space and underwater environments. 
 In particular, an analysis of failure performance has been 
presented in [13] for mixed MIMO-RF/FSO DF relay 
systems with Cognitive Radio Scenarios sublayer taking 
into account Space-Time Block Orthogonal Coding 
(OSTBC) and transmitting antenna selection (TAS). In [14], 
the performance of a double-hop multi-user RF/FSO DF 
relay was analyzed using the V-BLAST strategy, and 
assuming that the IMDD channel passed out by GG with a 
pointing error. Alternatively, the work of [15] studied the 
performances of the DF relay for a faded RF/GG faded FSO 
η - µ mixed with pointing errors. in [16] where the 
performance of the DF relay has been analyzed for mixed 
Nakagami-m/M fading with pointing errors and considering 
HD and IMDD in a unified manner, in which the best 
known capacity results for the FSO channel IMDD [17] 
were used. 
Motivated by the applications of RF/FSO, MIMO RF-
FSO systems and taking into account the limitations of the 
existing literature, we study the performance of cooperative 
RF/FSO and MIMO RF/FSO systems assisted by DF relay 
based on error correcting codes particularly the globally 
linked LDPC codes (GC-LDPC). The main contribution of 
this article is to propose a cooperative MIMO RF/FSO 
scheme assisted by a DF relay based on error correcting 
codes including globally coupled LDPC codes (GC-LDPC). 
We focus on the use of cooperative systems and error 
correcting codes particularly quasi-cyclic LDPC codes with 
the combination of two-phase local-global decoding at the 
relay level. We also used PPM to modulate the data, we 
assume that FSO links follow the Gamma-Gamma 
distribution, while MIMO-RF links follow Rayleigh fading. 
We will also compare the use of GC-LDPC in mixed 
MIMO-RF/FSO communication versus SC-LDPC and QC-
LDPC codes. 
 
Figure 1. Schematic diagram of a mixed MOMI-RF / FSO DF cooperative 
relay network. 
The rest of the article is organized as follows. Section II, the 
preliminaries, the system model and the study model are 
introduced. The two-phase local-global decoding procedure 
is presented in section III. Analysis of the simulation results 
is provided in IV. Finally, conclusions are drawn in section 
V. 
II. MODEL SYSTEM AND CHANNEL MODEL 
A. System Model 
1) Ratings 
In the following, we use letters, such as H, to denote a 
single parity matrix. We use B is the base matrix.  
 
2) Les codes GC-LDPC 
 
The globally coupled low density parity check codes 
(GC-LDPC) were first introduced in 2016 [18]. A GC-
LDPC code is made up of several LDPC codes that are 
smaller blocks. The highly structural code construction 
facilitates efficient implementation while maintaining 
compelling error correction capabilities of large block 
length codes. A GC-LDPC code is an LDPC code made up 
of several LDPC codes of shorter block length, called local 
codes. The 
 parity check matrix can have the format: 
 
 The t sub-matrices 
, 
,. . . and 
, placed 
along the main diagonal in the upper part of 
 correspond 
to t local cascading codes. The 
 at the bottom forms 
a global connection part and connects these local codes so 
that the local decoders can work together. The global 
connection part provides high connectivity between the 
virtual networks, so that each virtual network is able to 
acquire more information from other virtual networks. It is 
(1) 
15
International Conference on Advanced Communications Technology(ICACT)
ISBN 979-11-88428-06-9
ICACT2021 February 07 ~ 10, 2021
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:03:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
stated in [18] that connectivity is an important characteristic 
for iterative decoders to converge faster. It is perceived that 
the t-subgraphs of the local codes are disjoint, which implies 
that the local codes can be decoded simultaneously. 
Algebraic GC-LDPC code construction methods have 
been introduced in [18] - [19]. These codes are QC-LDPC 
codes and the base matrices may have the format: 
 
 The first GC-LDPC code proposed in [18] was 
constructed by a Latin square with the superposition 
technique [20]. By defining a matrix 
 on a prime field 
, 
 
 where α is a primitive element of 
 [21], a subset of 
 is selected to form the base matrix 
 in (2) and the 
CPM size is 
. To construct a GC-LDPC code of t local 
codes, it is necessary that t divides 
. Assuming that 
, 
 can be represented by an array 
 of sub-
matrices 
, which is 
 
 Subsequently, the basic BGC matrix is obtained by the 
following steps: 
1) Select 
 rows in 
 and these row indexes form 
a set of row indexes 
 
2) Select the columns 
 in the sub-matrix obtained in 
1) and the column indexes form a set of column indexes 
. The result is glocal (1) in (2) and 
its size is 
. 
3) Repeat 1) and 2) to differentiate
, 
 for 
 
and 
. 
4) The unselected rows of 
 form a complementary 
set 
 
    5) Select the 
indices in 
 to form a set of global 
row indices
. The 
 
submatrix 
can 
be 
obtained 
by 
. Where 
 
denotes the 
-th entry of 
;  
, 
. Note that the 
 
submatrix has 
 rows and 
 columns. 
 The construction of the GC-LDPC codes is not limited to 
the approach mentioned above. 
 can have other forms 
[18]. 
 
3) Study model 
 
     Consider a mixed MIMO-RF / FSO DF cooperative relay 
network. -Relais is better than that of the Source-Destination 
channel (𝑆𝑁𝑅𝑆−𝑅 > 𝑆𝑁𝑅𝑠−𝐷)) in which the source is 
equipped with several 
 antennas communicate with the 
destination via a node an intermediate relay in the presence 
of a receiver equipped with several 
 antennas as shown in 
Fig. 1. The communication channel between the source node 
and the relay node is a Rayleigh fading MIMO RF link, with 
the source and relay nodes equipped respectively with 
transmit 
 and receive 
 antennas. Unlike the AF 
protocol [22], [23], the relay first decodes the symbols 
transmitted during the first phase using the error correcting 
codes particularly the GC-LDPC codes and retransmits them 
to the destination via an FSO link in the next phase. To 
allow point-to-point FSO communication, the relay and the 
destination are assumed to be equipped with a single photo-
opening transmitter and a single photo-detector, respectively. 
 
B. Channel model 
 
1) THE MIMO RF HOP 
 
The communication process begins with the transmission 
of the symbol vector 
 where 
 
denotes the 
 transmission vector in a frame of length  
and 
 is a column vector of real numbers with 
 rows. 
The signal received at  at 
instant of time, 
, 
where 
 is a column vector of complex numbers with 
 rows, is given as 
                 
                  (5) 
Where 
 is the signal encoded with GC-LDPC codes, 
modulated with PPM modulation and then transmitted from 
the source, 
 is the transmit power of the source and 
 
is the additive white Gaussian noise of the channel (AWGN) 
S-R where 
 is a one-sided power spectral density 
which is added at the relay level and 
 represents the 
parameters of the channel between the source and the relay. 
The 
instantaneous 
SNR 
at 
the 
relay 
will 
be: 
 
where 
 is the average power of 
 and 
 is the noise 
power in the S-R link. The S-R link is modeled by the 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
16
International Conference on Advanced Communications Technology(ICACT)
ISBN 979-11-88428-06-9
ICACT2021 February 07 ~ 10, 2021
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:03:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Rayleigh distribution and is used for a small-scale fading 
signal under no line-of-sight (NLOS) conditions. The PDF 
of 
 is given by: 
                     
                (6) 
 In this first hop interference elimination is possible by 
projecting the total received signal, using an interference 
elimination combination matrix, onto the desired signal 
subspace (zero forcing interference). Interference 
Alignment (IA) technique is used in MIMO RF hopping 
to eliminate interference, and therefore this associated 
with GC-LDPC codes results in improving the 
multiplexing gain in this hopping, and consequently the 
Overall system performance is improved. The design of 
the IA precoding matrix and the reception interference 
elimination matrix is performed using an orthogonalized 
minimum leakage (OR-ML) algorithm. 
The design of the 
 user precoding matrix 
 and of 
the interference suppression matrix 
 associated with 
its corresponding 
 relay is carried out by adapting the 
orthogonalized minimum leak algorithm (OR-ML). In 
this algorithm, the interference 
 at each 
 relay is 
minimized in the forward direction, where the 
interference is written: 
                       
                              (7) 
Where 
 is the interference covariance matrix for this 
 BTS (relay), and it is modeled as 
         
                        (8) 
 To minimize the interferences in this direction, 
 is 
composed of the eigenvectors associated with the 
smallest eigenvalues of 
. In the opposite direction, the 
interference  for the user 
 is minimized where 
                          
                            (9) 
 and the inverse interference covariance matrix is 
          
                        (10) 
where 
 ; 
 et 
 
 To minimize the interferences in the opposite direction, 
 (ie 
) is composed of the eigenvectors associated 
with the smallest eigenvalues of . 
 
Algorithm 1 Orthogonalized Minimum Leakage (OR-ML) 
Algorithm 
1: Start with arbitrary 
 precoding matrices 
 with 
. 
2: Repeat 
3: 
Calculate 
the 
interference 
covariance 
matrices 
 according to (9). 
4: Compute the interference suppression vector 
 for the 
 
data 
stream 
at 
 BTS 
(relay) 
where 
, where 
 is the eigenvector 
of 
the 
 smallest 
eigenvalue 
of 
. 
5: Combine the interference suppression vectors 
 to form the 
interference suppression matrix 
. 
6: Reverse the direction and set the reverse precoding matrix as the 
interference suppression matrix  
. 
7: Calculate the reverse interference covariance matrices 
  according to (11). 
8: Compute the reverse interference suppression vector 
 for the 
 data stream at 
 user where 
. 
9: Combine the interference suppression vectors 
 to form the 
reverse interference suppression matrix 
. 
10: Reverse the direction and set the precoding matrix as the 
reverse interference suppression matrix 
. 
11: Until a pre-defined number of iterations. 
12: Output 
 and 
. 
 
2) THE FSO HOP 
 
After receiving the signal, the relay (BTS) transmits a 
decoded version of it to the destination in the second phase 
of transmission. Since the relay has knowledge of the 
source-relay channel, the received signals are combined 
using a combiner and the decision is made by choosing the 
best received signal.  
At the relay after converting the signal from the MIMO-
RF link into an electrical signal, the latter will be 
demodulated using BPSK demodulation and then decoded 
using two-phase local-global decoding. The decoding 
principle will be described in the following section. 
After these decoding operations, the relay estimates the 
vectors of the resulting symbols and the latter is then 
amplified by a factor 
. The amplified signal is then re-
encoded using GC-LDPC codes, modulated by a PPM 
modulator. This electrical signal is converted into optical 
and transmitted to the 2nd time slot by the relay towards the 
destination. This optical channel for the FSO link between 
the relay and the destination at  
 instant can be modeled 
as 
, where 
 represents the path loss [24], 
 represents the atmospheric turbulence induced fading 
modeled at using the Gamma-Gamma distribution, and 
 
represents the fading of the misalignment (pointing errors). 
Thus, the signal received at the destination for the case of 
IMDD can be, expressed by: 
                            
           (11) 
where 
 is the signal retransmitted from the relay. 
 is the transmission power of the relay. Η is the optical-
electrical conversion coefficient. 
 denotes the additive 
noise at the receiver which consists of thermal noise, dark 
noise and background radiation. This signal will be 
demoded with a PPM demodulator and then decoded with a 
GC-LDPC decoder to give the estimated information. 
The corresponding PDF of the optical channel is given 
as  
 (12) 
Where 
 is the loss on the path, 
 is the fraction of the 
power collected at 
,  being the radial displacement 
due to pointing errors. 
 
17
International Conference on Advanced Communications Technology(ICACT)
ISBN 979-11-88428-06-9
ICACT2021 February 07 ~ 10, 2021
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:03:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
 
 
Figure 2. Functional diagram of GC-LDPC coded MIMO-RF/FSO 
communication system 
 
The quantity  is defined as 
, where 
 is the 
equivalent beamwidth radius and 
 is the standard 
deviation of the pointing error displacement at the receiver. 
Moreover, 
 is the Meijer function ,  
and 
 are the parameters of large and small scale 
scintillation, respectively which depend on the Rytov 
variance 
, where , 
 and  denote 
the wave optical number, refractive index structure constant 
and bond distance respectively. 
For a coherent optical receiver with heterodyne detection 
[26] at the destination, the instantaneous SNR of the relay 
link is given: 
                             
                              (13) 
Where 
 is the reactivity of the photodetector,  is the 
area of the photodetector,  is the electronic charge, and 
 
denotes the bandwidth equivalent to the noise of the receiver. 
On the other hand, the instantaneous SNR of the destination-
relay FSO link with intensity modulation/direct detection 
(IM/DD) is given as: 
                  
          (14) 
 Where 
 is the background light irradiance, 
 is 
Boltzmann's constant, 
 is the temperature in Kelvin,  is a 
factor used to avoid over-modulation, 
 represents a 
thermal noise improvement factor due to noise from the 
amplifier and 
 is the load resistance. 
The CDF of 
 is given by: 
              
               (15) 
Where  defines the type of detection technique used at 
the destination, ie 
 represents heterodyne detection 
and 
 represents IM / DD, and 
 is the average 
electrical SNR [26]. In addition, the different sizes are 
defined 
 
 , 
 , 
 
includes 
θ 
terms, 
and
 
includes 3θ terms 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The destination receives the signal 
 from the FSO 
link. This signal will be decoded with a GC-LDPC decoder 
then demoded with a PPM demodulator. 
III.  THE LOCAL-GLOBAL DECODING 
PROCEDURE IN TWO PHASES 
To take advantage of the locally disjoint and globally 
coupled parity check matrix structure, the decoding can be 
organized in a two-phase local-global hierarchical fashion. 
The local phase and the global phase are associated with the 
local codes and the global connection part, respectively. In 
the local decoding phase, all local codes are decoded 
independently. Several iterations of local decoding are 
performed and the updating of the message is confined 
between the local 
 and the local 
. Information from  
other local nodes can only be obtained by global decoding. 
The decoding switches between the local phase and the 
global phase until the convergence conditions are met. The 
concept of two-phase local-global decoding was first 
mentioned in [23] with various use cases. Two-phase 
decoding is very flexible in controlling the decoding flow by 
configuring the number of iterations of the local and global 
phases. In some latency sensitive applications, decoding 
may be completed as soon as all local code parity check 
equations are satisfied. Figure 3 illustrates a possible two-
phase decoding procedure. 
  and 
 are the number of 
iterations 
of 
local 
decoding 
and 
global 
decoding, 
respectively. I is the iteration number of the complete 
decoding. The predefined maximum number of decoding 
iterations for the local and global phases is 
 and 
 
respectively. In layer decoding, this two-phase decoding 
stream can be achieved by forcing the control nodes to be 
updated in different iterations of decoding. A maximum of  
 iterations can be performed. For each 
 iteration, only local control nodes are updated in 
the first 
 iterations, and global control nodes are updated 
only in subsequent 
 iterations. In addition, if the bit error 
rate is not uniform among these local codes, local codes 
corresponding to lower raw bit error rates will converge 
faster and may help other local codes to converge by the 
information exchanged in the global phase. 
The two-phase local-global decoding mentioned above 
can be simplified in a direct-acting approach. Similar to the 
two-level decoding introduced in [27], all local decoders 
first perform independent decoding. 
 
 
18
International Conference on Advanced Communications Technology(ICACT)
ISBN 979-11-88428-06-9
ICACT2021 February 07 ~ 10, 2021
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:03:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
 
Figure 3. Local / global two-phase decoding flow 
 
 
Figure 4. Two-level decoding flow. 
It is only when one of the local decoders fails to correct 
the errors that the decoding is switched to the second level: 
a full decoding based on 
. Figure 4 illustrates the two-
level decoding flow. The maximum iterations allowed for 
these local decodings are 
 and 
 = 3, 6, 10 are compared. 
Then the decoder performs decoding based on the full parity 
check matrix 
, which is called second level or level 2 
decoding. The maximum number of iterations for level 2 
decoding, 
, is 10 in our simulation. The two-level 
decoding strategy, the number of iterations required is very 
close to the upper limit 
, the maximum local decoding 
iterations allowed. This implies that the decoding ends in 1 
or 2 iterations after entering the level 2 decoding. For two-
phase decoding, Each iteration includes at most 
 and 
 local and global iterations. The converged iterations 
around 2 imply that the global connection part in 
 can 
effectively provide secondary information for local decoders. 
Most of the time, decoding can be done with in 4 times after 
the global message exchange. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
In this section, we present numerical examples to 
demonstrate the exact analytical expressions and use of GC-
LDPC 
codes 
in 
mixed 
RF/FSO, 
MIMO-RF/FSO 
communication and also to illustrate the impact of various 
system parameters and channel on the performance of our 
system. In addition, this section checks the comparison 
results between GC-LDPC codes and other codes like SC-
LDPC 
and 
QC-LDPC 
in 
mixed 
MIMO-RF/FSO 
communication. 
The systems described above have been simulated on 
Matlab to explain the different parameters of the system 
considered. All the parameters of the FSO link used here are 
defined as follows: distance 
, the wavelength 
, 
the 
refractive 
structure 
parameter 
, the loss on the path as a function of 
the distance in clear weather 
, the fraction of 
the optical power collected 
, the average power of 
the LOS component 
, the mean power of the 
total scattering components 
, the quantity of  
scattering 
power 
coupled 
to 
the 
LOS 
component 
, and the scintillation parameters 
 and 
. 
19
International Conference on Advanced Communications Technology(ICACT)
ISBN 979-11-88428-06-9
ICACT2021 February 07 ~ 10, 2021
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:03:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
 
Figure 5 is the BER versus the SNR graph, when two 
cooperation schemes are used. As can be seen, the 
performance of the end-to-end system improves when using 
error correcting codes including GC-LDPC codes. In 
addition, to show the impact of using GC-LDPC codes we 
compared it with other LDPC codes such as QC-LDPC and 
SC LDPC codes. Figure 6 shows the comparison between 
the use of GC-LDPC codes with the codes mentioned above. 
All of these codes have been applied in mixed RF-FSO 
transmission. As can be seen, the BER decreases with the 
use of GC-LDPC codes and this results in better 
performance in mixed RF-FSO transmission. It can be seen 
that RF/FSO transmission using 
 
Figure 5. Performances of a mixed RF / FSO DF cooperative system 
for transmission based on GC-LDPC codes. 
 
Figure 6. BER graph versus average SNR for a mixed RF / FSO DF 
link based on GC-LDPC codes compared with other codes. 
error correcting codes including GC-LDPC codes have 
better 
performance 
compared 
to 
mixed 
RF/FSO 
transmission using SC-LDPC and QC-LDPC. As we can see 
from the figure above, GC-LDPC code provides higher 
encoding gain. The performance improves as the length of 
the coupling increases. 
Figure 7 shows the graph of the analytical BER, 
simulated against the mean SNR to show the impact of DF 
MIMO-RF/FSO cooperative systems using GC-LDPC codes 
for conditions of severe atmospheric turbulence. Figure 8 
shows the BER versus mean SNR graph to assess the 
influences of atmospheric turbulence parameters 
 the 
robustness of the GC-LDPC codes for conditions of strong 
and moderate atmospheric turbulence as well as for 
conditions of weak atmospheric turbulence. 
 Figure 7. BER versus average SNR plot for a mixed MIMO-RF / FSO DF 
cooperative system for IM / DD detection with 
  based GC-LDPC code. 
 
Figure 8. Performance of a mixed MIMO-RF / FSO DF cooperative    
system based GC-LDPC codes under all turbulence conditions for IM / DD 
detection with 
. 
      Figure 7 shows that the cooperation is more 
advantageous in the case of a mixed RF/FSO DF 
cooperative system using the error correcting codes called 
GC-LDPC codes compared to an RF/FSO cooperative 
system without the use of GC-LDPC codes. Hence the 
importance of using error correcting codes. This figure also 
shows the advantage of using mixed DF MIMO-RF/FSO 
cooperative systems using GC-LDPC codes. It is clearly 
seen that the performance of MIMO-RF/FSO systems is 
better than that of end-to-end (RF/FSO) systems. In addition, 
one can also see the impact of the number of transmitting 
and receiving antennas on the performance of the MIMO-
RF/FSO system. If we increase the number of antenna 
 
(number of antenna on transmission) and the number of 
antenna 
 (number of antenna on reception) between the 
source node and the relay node (MIMO RF link) with the 
use of parameters (
 ) between 
the relay node and the destination (point-to-point FSO) the 
20
International Conference on Advanced Communications Technology(ICACT)
ISBN 979-11-88428-06-9
ICACT2021 February 07 ~ 10, 2021
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:03:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
performance of the mixed MIMO-RF/FOS DF system 
increases. 
     In figure 8 it can be clearly seen that smaller values 
, 
i.e. lower atmospheric turbulence, give better performance 
compared to schemes with higher values 
,  i.e stronger 
atmospheric 
turbulence. 
Here 
we 
obtained 
BER 
performance that is better for low turbulent revs compared 
to moderate and high turbulence environments. The graph 
shows that the performance of the system deteriorates as the 
force of the turbulence increases. In addition, we can also 
see on this graph the robustness of the GC-LDPC codes 
compared to other codes such as the SC-LDPC and QC-
LDPC codes in environments of strong turbulence. It can be 
seen that the performance of MIMO-RF/FSO links is better 
overall when the channel is weakly turbulent with the use of 
GC-LDPC codes to protect information. 
V.  CONCLUSIONS 
This paper investigated a mixed DF relay scheme 
(MIMO-RF/(FSO) based on globally coupled low density 
parity check codes (GC-LDPC). MIMO-RF links were 
assumed to follow Rayleigh fading, while the link the FSO 
link was a point-to-point distributed Gamma-Gamma link, 
affected by path loss and pointing errors. In MIMO RF 
hopping, the IA technique was used to eliminate 
interference, and hence this leads to improve the gain of 
multiplexing in this hop, and as a result the overall 
performance of the system is improved.It has been shown 
that the use of error correcting codes name GC-LDPC codes 
allow to protect the information results in an improvement 
system performance. It is also shown that a MIMO-RF/FSO 
system using the GC-LDPC error correcting codes gives a 
substantial improvement in performance over a MIMO-
RF/FSO system without them. odes correcting errors but 
also compared to an RF/FSO system using the other codes 
such as the codes SC-LDPC and QC-LDPC. This interesting 
result is due to the fact that error correcting codes play a 
very important role in communication systems. In our future 
research we are interested in the use of MIMO-RF/MIMO-
FSO systems associated with error correcting codes and the 
use 
of 
MIMO 
FSO 
systems 
in 
advanced 
telecommunications i.e. the fifth generation. (5G). 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
S. Arnon, J. Barry, G. Karagiannidis, R. Schober, and M. Uysal, 
Advanced Optical Wireless Communication Systems. Cambridge, 
U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2012. 
[2] 
M. A. Khalighi and M. Uysal, ‘‘Survey on free space optical 
communication: A communication theory perspective,’’ IEEE 
Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 2231–2258, 4th Quart., 
2014 
[3] 
David 1. T. Heatley, David R. Wisely, Ian Neild, and Peter Cochrane, 
“Optical Wireless: The Story so Far”, IEEE Communications 
Magazine, pp. 72-78, Dec. 1998 
[4] 
Ibrahima GUEYE, Ibra DIOUM, K Wane KEITA, Idy DIOP, Papis 
NDIAYE, Moussa DIALLO, Sidi Mohamed FARSSI “ Performance 
of cooperative system based on LDPC codes in wireless optical 
communication”, Future Technologies Conference – FTC, 2019. 
[5] 
N. Varshney, A. K. Jagannatham, and P. K. Varshney, “Cognitive 
MIMO-RF/FSO cooperative relay communication with mobile 
nodes and imperfect channel state information,” IEEE Trans. 
Cognitive Commun. Netw., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 544–555, Sep. 2018. 
[6] 
Z. Jing, Z. Shang-hong, Z. Wei-hu, and C. Ke-fan, “Performance 
analysis for mixed FSO/RF Nakagami-m and exponentiated weibull 
dual-hop airborne systems,” Optics Commun., vol. 392, pp. 294–299, 
June 2017. 
[7] 
M. Torabi et N. Mohammadi, « Partial Relay Selection with 
Feedback Delay in an AF Cooperative Relaying RF-FSO System 
with Spectrum Sharing », in 2019 2nd West Asian Colloquium on 
Optical Wireless Communications (WACOWC), 2019, p. 26-30. 
[8] 
N. Singhal, A. Bansal, and A. Kumar, “Performance evaluation of 
decode-and-forward-based asymmetric SIMO-RF/ FSO system with 
misalignment errors,” IET Commun., vol. 11, no. 14, pp. 2244–2252, 
Sept. 2017. 
[9] 
S. Sharma, A. S. Madhukumar, and S. Ramabadran, “Switching 
based hybri d FSO/RF transmission for DF relaying system,” in 
IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference 
(WCNC), 2018, pp. 1–6. 
[10] M. R. Bhatnagar and M. K. Arti, ‘‘Performance analysis of hybrid 
satelliteterrestrial FSO cooperative system,’’ IEEE Photon. Technol. 
Lett., vol. 25, no. 22, pp. 2197–2200, Nov. 2013. 
[11] H. Samimi and M. Uysal, ‘‘End-to-end performance of mixed 
RF/FSO transmission systems,’’ J. Opt. Commun. Netw., vol. 5, no. 
11, pp. 1139–1144, Nov. 2013. 
[12] I. Gueye, I. Diop, I. Dioum, K. W. Keita, P. Ndiaye, et S. M. Farssi, 
« Cooperative systems in optical wireless communication: a 
survey », . Vol., no 11, p. 19, 2020. 
[13] N. Varshney and A. K. Jagannatham, ‘‘Cognitive decode-and-
forward MIMO-RF/FSO cooperative relay networks,’’ IEEE 
Commun. Lett., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 893–896, Apr. 2017. 
[14] N. I. Miridakis, M. Matthaiou, and G. K. Karagiannidis, ‘‘Multiuser 
relaying over mixed RF/FSO links,’’ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, 
no. 5, pp. 1634–1645, May 2014. 
[15] N. Sharma, P. Garg, and A. Bansal, ‘‘Decode-and-forward relaying 
in mixed η - µ and gamma–gamma dual hop transmission system,’’ 
IET Commun., vol. 10, no. 14, pp. 1769–1776, Sep. 2016. 
[16] O. M. S. Al-Ebraheemy, A. M. Salhab, A. Chaaban, S. A. Zummo, 
and M.-S. Alouini, ‘‘Precise outage analysis of mixed RF/unified-
FSO DF relaying with HD and 2 IM-DD channel models,’’ in Proc. 
13th Int. Wireless Commun. Mobile Comput. Conf. (IWCMC), 
Valencia, Spain, Jun. 2017, pp. 1184–1189. 
[17] A. Chaaban, J. M. Morvan, and M.-S. Alouini, ‘‘Free-space optical 
communications: Capacity bounds, approximations, and a new 
spherepacking perspective,’’ Kaust, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia, Tech. 
Rep., 
Apr. 
2015. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://hdl.handle.net/10754/552096. 
[18] J. Li, S. Lin, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, W. E. Ryan, and D. J. Costello, 
“Globally coupled LDPC codes,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. 
Workshop (ITA), Jan./Feb. 2016, pp. 1–10. 
[19] J. Li, K. Liu, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar., “Reed-Solomon based 
globally coupled quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” in Proc. Inf. Theory 
Appl. Workshop (ITA), Feb. 2017, pp. 1–10. 
[20] L. Zhang, Q. Huang, S. Lin, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, and I. F. Blake, 
“Quasicyclic LDPC codes: An algebraic construction, rank analysis, 
and codes on latin squares,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 11, 
pp. 3126–3139, Nov. 2010. 
[21] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and 
Applications. Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 2004. 
[22] I. S. Ansari, M. M. Abdallah, M.-S. Alouini, and K. A. Qaraqe, 
“Outage performance analysis of underlay cognitive RF and FSO 
wireless channels,” in proc. 2014 3rd IWOW, 2014, pp. 6–10. 
[23] ——, “A performance study of two hop transmission in mixed 
underlay RF and FSO fading channels,” in proc. 2014 IEEE WCNC, 
2014, pp. 388–393. 
[24] A. A. Farid and S. Hranilovic, “Outage capacity optimization for 
freespace optical links with pointing errors,” J. Lightw. Technol, vol. 
25, pp. 1702–1710, Jul. 2007. 
[25] M. Niu, J. Cheng, and J. F. Holzman, “Error rate performance 
comparison of coherent and subcarrier intensity modulated optical 
wireless 
communications,” 
IEEE/OSA 
Journal 
of 
Optical 
Communications and Networking, vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 554–564, June 
2013. 
[26] I. S. Ansari, M.-S. Alouini, and F. Yilmaz, “A unified 
performance 
analysis 
of 
free-space 
optical 
links 
over 
GammaGamma turbulence channels with pointing errors,” 2013, 
[Online] http://hdl.handle.net/10754/305353. 
[27] IEEE Approved Draft Standard for Error Correction Coding 
of Flash Memory Using Low-Density Parity Check Codes, 
IEEE Standard SA-P1890, Sep. 2017. 
 
21
International Conference on Advanced Communications Technology(ICACT)
ISBN 979-11-88428-06-9
ICACT2021 February 07 ~ 10, 2021
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:03:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Ibrahima GUEYE was born in Ndiardiar Makha in the region of Thiès, 
Senegal. He received the degree in Electronics, System and 
Telecommunication master from the Cheikh Anta DIOP University 
of Dakar (Senegal) in 2019. In 2019, He joined the Ecole Supérieure 
Polytechnique form the Cheikh Anta DIOP University in Dakar 
(Senegal) for unique PhD thesis in Electronics, Systems and 
Telecommunication. His current research interests include the 
optical wireless communication, diversity and MIMO techniques, 
channel coding and error correcting codes. 
 
PhD Idy DIOP supported a postgraduate doctorate in image processing in 
2011, then a unique doctorate in multimedia security in 2015 at the 
Ecole Supérieure Polytechnique of the University Cheikh Anta 
DIOP in Dakar (Senegal). Associate professor since July 2020, my 
research work revolves around multimedia security (steganography 
based on codes… ..), support systems for biomedical diagnostics 
(medical imaging, bioinformatics… ..) and corrective codes errors 
(applications in wireless communication, in material security, etc.). 
 
Ibra DIOUM was born in Thies, Senegal. He received the degree in 
Telecommunication and Electronics Engineering from the Gaston 
Berger University of Saint Louis (Senegal) in 2005. In 2007, he 
joined the engineering school of Polytech Dakar in Senegal and 
received the Master in Simulation and modelling of complex 
systems. In 2008, he was employed as an assistant at the Department 
of Computer Science of the Engineering School of Polytech Dakar. 
In October 2009, he joined the Electronics, Antennas and 
Telecommunication Laboratory (CNRS-LEAT) of the University of 
Nice Sophia-Antipolis for a joint PhD thesis and received the Ph.D 
in Electronics in 2013. His current research interests include the 
design and measurement of electrically small antennas, multi-
antenna systems, diversity and MIMO techniques, RFID antennas, 
wireless Power Transfer (WPT) and optical communication and 
channel coding. . Since 2018, he has been an Associate Professor at 
the engineering school of Polytech Dakar and researcher at the LITA 
(Laboratoire d’Informatique, Telecommunications and Applications) 
of the Engineering School of Polytech Dakar, Senegal. 
 
  
 
 
22
International Conference on Advanced Communications Technology(ICACT)
ISBN 979-11-88428-06-9
ICACT2021 February 07 ~ 10, 2021
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:03:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
