350

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 26, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2022

STNet: Low-Complexity Neural Network Decoder With Network Pruning
Zhiyuan Ren , Ling Zhao , Chuanyang Wei , and Zhen Dai

Abstract— In this letter, a novel and compact neural network called Sigmoid-Tanh Network (STNet) is proposed for channel decoding, which is only composed of sigmoid and tanh activation functions. To address the structural redundancy problem in long and short-term memory network (LSTM), the neurons in the STNet are redesigned with the most effective structure in the LSTM cell for decoding. To further reduce the computational complexity, we propose an automatic pruning method based on multiple layer sensitivity, which can effectively remove redundant weights in STNet decoder with slight performance loss. Simulation results show that the proposed STNet decoder achieves near-maximum likelihood (ML) performance with only 17.1% trainable parameters compared to LSTM. Moreover, our pruning method achieves comparable decoding performance when reducing 58.3% Floating-point operations (FLOPs) for STNet.
Index Terms— Deep learning, channel decoding, LSTM, network pruning.
I. INTRODUCTION
I N RECENT years, exploiting deep learning to solve channel decoding problems has attracted significant research interest. Researchers have tried to combine channel decoding with different neural network approaches. The author of [1] found that the neural network decoder (NND) based on feed-forward neural network (FNN) can infer the full codebook from training on a small fraction of codewords. In [2] and [3], creatively designed recurrent neural network (RNN) and convolution neural network (CNN) architectures were proposed to decode sequential codes and linear codes. To find out which type of NND is more suitable for decoding missions, FNN, RNN and CNN were tested in [4]. Numerical results show that LSTM has the best decoding performance at the price of the highest computational overhead.
Due to its excellent decoding performance, LSTM is widely used in channel decoding. [5] implemented the vanilla LSTM for adaptive modulation decoders in various bit-patterned magnetic recording channel designs within a single network. [6] apply the LSTM networks to identify error bits under successive cancellation flip decoding of polar codes. Although the combination of channel decoding and LSTM network has been studied in the above works, two important problems have still not been fully investigated. First, for channel decoding, the structure of LSTM cell has redundant designs, which leads to a large number of network parameters. Second, the
Manuscript received October 6, 2021; revised November 5, 2021; accepted November 8, 2021. Date of publication November 12, 2021; date of current version February 12, 2022. This work was supported by the Beijing Natural Science Foundation (L202003). The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was L. Lampe. (Corresponding author: Ling Zhao.)
The authors are with the School of Electronics and Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China (e-mail: renzhiyuan@buaa.edu.cn; zhaoling@buaa.edu.cn; 15021135@buaa.edu.cn; dai_zhen@buaa.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2021.3128067

LSTM decoder is considered to be computationally expensive compared with other types of NND [4].
A neural network called GatedNet for decoding over impulsive noise channels is proposed in [7], the neurons are redesigned with control gates in LSTM to reduce the impact of the impulsive noise to NND. However, the problem of structural redundancy still exists in GatedNet. Motivated by this, we focus on finding out which part of the LSTM structure is effective for decoding and extract the minimum unit from LSTM cell.
To further alleviate the computational burden, we apply the network pruning to NND. Network pruning is one of the model compression methods for deep neural networks, which reduces the calculation by removing unimportant connections and weights [8]. Many existing methods focus on single layer information and remove redundant weights directly [9], [10], which ignore the fact that different layers in the network have different sensitivity to pruning. Recent work [11] applied network pruning to accelerate the deployment of DL-based algorithms in communications, but how to gradually prune the weights automatically is still an unresolved issue. Therefore, we propose an automatic pruning method based on multiple layer sensitivity to address the limitations mentioned above. Our contributions in this letter can be summarized as follows.
• To optimize the structure of the LSTM cell and reduce the network parameters, we extract the most effective structure for decoding from LSTM and propose a novel and compact NND called Sigmoid-Tanh Network (STNet), which is mainly composed of sigmoid and tanh activation functions. The proposed NND outperforms belief propagation (BP) decoder and achieves near ML performance for short codes both in AWGN channels and impulsive noise channels. With the same network structure, the trainable parameters of our proposed STNet decoder can be reduced 82.8% in comparison to the LSTM decoder.
• To further reduce the computational complexity, an automatic pruning method based on multiple layer sensitivity is proposed, which can gradually prune the redundant weights automatically in NND and calculate pruning rate dynamically during the process. Experimental results demonstrate that our approach still achieves comparable accuracy even when FLOPs for STNet is reduced with 58.3%.
II. PROPOSED LOW-COMPLEXITY NND
A. System Framework
The system model is illustrated in Fig. 1. At the transmitter, information bits m of length K are encoded to a binary codeword x of length N through a low-density parity-check

1558-2558 © 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:04:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

REN et al.: STNet: LOW-COMPLEXITY NEURAL NETWORK DECODER WITH NETWORK PRUNING

351

Fig. 1. The architecture of the system model.

Fig. 3. Simplified LSTM cell without forget gate f and memory cell c.

Fig. 4. The structure of STNet cell.

Fig. 2. Illustration of basic LSTM cell. i, f and o are the input, forget and output gates, respectively. c denotes the memory cell.

(LDPC) encoder. Then x is mapped to the BPSK symbol s

through modulation and s is transmitted over the additive white

Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. At the receiver, a noisy

version of the codeword y is received and can be written as yi = si + ni for i = 1, 2, . . . , N , where ni ∼ f 0, σ2 is the
channel noise. The estimated information bits mˆ are decoded

from y with the aid of the STNet decoder, which consists of

an input layer, three hidden layers, and an output layer.

A number of noisy codewords on different SNR values

are generated as input to the decoder to update the weights

and biases in the STNet with the aim of minimizing the loss

function. We employ the mean square error (MSE) as the loss

function,

which

is

defined

as

LM S E

=

1 K

i (mi − mˆ i)2,

where mi is the ith target information bit and mˆ ∈ [0, 1] is the

soft estimate by STNet. During the testing phase, we generate

noisy codewords on different SNRs as the STNet inputs and

calculate the bit error rate (BER) according to the detection

results to observe the simulation results.

B. STNet
As shown in Fig. 2, LSTM contains three gates, called forget gate, input gate and output gate respectively, to control the information flow, which deal with the exploding and vanishing gradient problems of the RNN [12].
Although LSTM has excellent decoding performance [4], its structure has redundant designs for channel decoding, which

leads to high computational complexity. GatedNet was proposed by deleting the forget gate and hidden states in LSTM units, which can be viewed as a simplification of LSTM [7]. Inspired by this, we decide to figure out why the forget gate and hidden states can be deleted by combining the characteristics of the decoding task. Furthermore, we redesigned the input gate and output gate to solve the remaining structural redundancy problem. Therefore, a novel NND called STNet is proposed for decoding, which significantly reduces the number of network parameters and computational time.
We use LDPC codes to evaluate the performance of the proposed STNet, which is a typical linear block code. The codewords are independent of each other, and there is no time dependency. As such, the loop feedback structure of LSTM is a kind of redundancy for this task, and it is deleted. Deleting the feedback structure means that the memory cell c in LSTM becomes useless. However, the primary function of the forget gate f in LSTM is to determine how much information in the previous memory cell needs to be discarded. Therefore, the forget gate f and memory cell c in LSTM are discarded.
The simplified LSTM structure is shown in Fig. 3. The input gate i and output gate o retained in the simplified LSTM use the same calculation unit, and both are linearly mapped from the input and then passed through the sigmoid activation function. Their functions are similar, and they all determine how much of the information flowing to the neuron from the upper network layer can be passed to the next layer to participate in the calculation. From the perspective of complexity, we extract the most compact and effective structure to constitute the neuron of STNet, which is shown in Fig. 4.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:04:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

352

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 26, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2022

We assume that N and L denote the number of neurons in
a layer and the number of inputs, respectively, and define the following notations:
• Input vector: v ∈ RL • Input weights: Wi, Wc ∈ RN×L • Bias weights: bi, bc ∈ RN
The redesigned neuron can be described by:

i = σ(Wiv + bi),

(1)

z = tanh(Wcv + bc),

(2)

y = i z,

(3)

where σ is the sigmoid function, and the symbol denotes point-wise multiplication of two vectors.
The neuron of STNet has two input branches. The input data of one branch passes through the tanh activation function, which solves the issue that the sigmoid function is not a zero-averaged output, and does not change the zero-centered distribution of the NND received noisy codewords. The sigmoid activation function of the other input branch maps the input value to an output between 0 and 1, which plays the role of gating and controls the transmission of information. The simulation results in section III show that the STNet decoder outperforms the BP decoder both in AWGN channels and impulsive noise channels, and at the price of the much lower computational overhead compared with LSTM.
C. Automatic Pruning Based on Multiple Layer Sensitivity
In this section, we will introduce our pruning method in detail. First, we collect the BERs of each layer under different pruning rates and convert BERs into sensitivity information to generate the pruning sensitivity curve. Then the unimportant weights in each layer are pruned independently, and the adaptive pruning rate is obtained according to the sensitivity curve in the process. Finally, fine-tuning the network to recover the accuracy loss. The whole algorithm can be completed automatically without extra hyper-parameters.
Our pruning strategy is unstructured pruning, and the target is to prune the connections between neurons. Generally speaking, the greater the absolute value of the weight, the more information is transmitted through the connection, which means that the connection is more important. Collecting the sensitivity information is the first step in our approach. The procedure to get the sensitivity curve of ith hidden layer in STNet is as follows:
1) Use the l1-norm to measure the relative importance of the connections in the ith hidden layer. The l1-norm measures the importance of the connection by the absolute value of the weight.
2) Set the pruning rate from 0% to 95% at 5% equal intervals, which is denoted as pi, for i = 1, 2, . . . , 20, and prune the corresponding proportion of weights in ith layer of STNet by pi in turn.
3) Evaluate the pruned STNet decoder over different SNRs ranging from 0 dB to 7 dB, and record BERs.
4) Convert BERs into sensitivity values to generate the pruning sensitivity curve, and this step is detailed described in the following paragraphs.

Fig. 5. Sensitivity curve of each layer in STNet.

Generally speaking, the more we prune, the less decoding accuracy NND will have. However, the BERs increase as the pruning rate increases and are different in magnitude at different pruning rates, which means we cannot directly use BERs to show the sensitivity of NND to pruning and need to convert them to sensitivity values.
Since the network’s decoding accuracy significantly changes with pruning under high SNRs, we select the BER of the ith layer at SNR of 6 dB and 7 dB, denoted as ai and bi, which can more accurately describe the sensitivity change of the decoder to pruning. We transform BERs logarithmically and then use the ML decoding result under the corresponding SNR (marked as u and v) to normalize them. Finally, the normalized results are summed and averaged as:

si

=

1 2

·

( ln ai u

+

ln bi ). v

(4)

In Eq. 4, si is the sensitivity value of the ith layer at the pruning rate pi. We obtain the sensitivity curve of this layer according to the results of the pruning experiment, denoted

as p(x). The sensitivity curves of the remaining layers can be

obtained in the same way. Since the sensitivity curve of STNet

is generated based on the BER, it can more effectively reflect

the change of the decoder’s sensitivity to pruning.

As shown in Fig. 5, compared with the first and third layers

in STNet, the second and third layers are more sensitive to

pruning, which is also reflected in the final pruning rate of each

layer in the pruning experiment results in subsection III-B.

Moreover, with the uniform increase of pruning rate, the

speed of NND performance decline is accelerating. There-

fore, we use the integral of sensitivity value as pruning rate

control function to slow down the accumulation of pruning

rate.

ps =

pim pim−1

p(x)dx

pm 0

p(x)dx

×

pm.

(5)

Assuming pm is the target pruning rate, pm is discretized

in steps of 0.05 to obtain data points, denoted as pim. Then we integrate p(x) from 0 to pm to get ps in Eq. 5, which is

the adaptive pruning rate in the automatic pruning process.

The adaptive pruning rate ps can be dynamically adjusted

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:04:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

REN et al.: STNet: LOW-COMPLEXITY NEURAL NETWORK DECODER WITH NETWORK PRUNING

353

Algorithm 1 Automatic Pruning Based on Multiple Layer

Sensitivity

Parameters: n, the number of layers; m, the number of discrete points of pm; ps, adaptive pruning rate.
Output: Pi, the final pruning rate of ith layer. 1: Pre-training of the network
2: for i = 0; i < n; i + + do

3: Initial ps, Pi 4: set BER threshold for ith layer 5: for epoch = 0; epoch < m; epoch + + do

6: Calculate ps given by (5)

7: Pi ← Pi + ps

8: Prune with Pi in ith layer

9: if Test BER > BER threshold then

10:

Pi ← Pi − ps

11:

break

12: end if

13: end for

14: Retraining to restore accuracy loss

15: end for

16: return P1, P2, . . . , Pn

Fig. 6. BER comparison of STNet decoder, ML decoder, GatedNet decoder and BP decoder for a (16, 8) LDPC code.
TABLE II COMPLEXITY COMPARISON BETWEEN LSTM DECODER, GATEDNET
DECODER AND STNET DECODER

TABLE I SUMMARY OF TRAINING SETTINGS

B. Experiment Results

according to the accuracy loss of the decoder during the fine-tuning process, which can avoid pruning important parameters as much as possible and reduce the accuracy loss. The details of our proposed pruning method are illustratively explained in Alg. 1.
III. EXPERIMENTS
A. Experiment Setup
The proposed model is implemented using the deep learning framework Tensorflow. The proposed neural network decoder targets short codes now because of the exponential training complexity. However, it is of interest for practical applications such as machine-type communication and satellite communication [13]. For performance evaluation, we use a LDPC code with 1/2 rate and set the codeword length N as 16. We use the following notations to define the architecture of adopted neural networks in our experiment. Two variable training settings, the number of neurons in hi layer and the training epoch e, are denoted as {Nh1, Nh2, Nh3; e} together. All the training settings are summarized in Table I.

The STNet decoder is tested in both the AWGN channel and the impulsive noise channel. We use the symmetric alpha-stable (SαS) distribution, which is defined by its characteristic function φ(ω) = e|γω|α, to model impulsive noise [15]. The parameter α ∈ [1, 2] represents the degree of impulsive noise. Medium impulsive noise channel (α = 1.5) is adopted in our experiment. We take different testing SNR Eb/N0 from 0 dB to 8 dB to evaluate the STNet decoder and compare the performance with three decoding methods:
(a) ML decoder with equally likely transmitted codewords. (b) GatedNet decoder with the same training set as the STNet
decoder. (c) BP decoder with the log likelihood ratio (LLR) computed
from the channel observations and we run the BP decoder for 100 iterations to achieve its best performance.
The results in Fig. 6 show that the STNet decoder outperforms the BP decoder in both the AWGN channel and the impulsive noise channel, which also demonstrates the robustness of our proposed STNet. In addition, the STNet can achieve near ML performance with a gap of 0.15dB.
For fair and full comparison, we train the STNet decoder, the GatedNet decoder and the LSTM decoder with the same training setting on an Nvidia GTX 1080 Ti GPU and generate 100000 frame codewords to complete the evaluation on an AM D@3.7GHz CPU with 32GB RAM. The results are summarized in Table II. We find that our proposed STNet decoder takes much less time for both training and decoding than the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:04:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

354

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 26, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2022

IV. CONCLUSION
In this letter, a novel neural network called STNet is proposed for decoding. Leveraging on the characteristics of LDPC codewords, we redesign the neurons in the LSTM cells. In addition, a novel pruning method is proposed to reduce further the computational complexity of NND, which uses multiple level information and adaptive pruning rate to achieve a better pruning decision. The simulation results show that the proposed STNet decoder outperforms LSTM decoder with much lower complexity and the proposed pruning method can significantly reduce FLOPs for STNet with slight performance loss. The exponential training complexity limits the NND to short codes. Therefore, complexity reduction method for long codes decoding algorithms will be our future works.

Fig. 7. Evaluation of our proposed pruning method.
TABLE III PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF STNET, APMS STNET AND SP STNET
LSTM decoder over different channel modes. As shown in Fig. 6, the STNet decoder achieves comparable performance with 49.6% parameters and 50.1% FLOPs in comparison to the GatedNet decoder, which means lower complexity is achieved without performance loss.
Furthermore, we propose an automatic pruning method based on multiple layer sensitivity, abbreviated as APMS, to alleviate the computational burden. SP in the legend in Fig. 7 represents the pruning method depends on l1-norm in single layer, and removes redundant weights in all layers at the same pruning rate. Our proposed pruning method is evaluated on STNet decoder in comparison to the SP method with the same overall pruning rate. The results are summarized in Table. III.
The final pruning rate of each layer in STNet is denoted as {P1, P2, P3, P4} together, and the result of our pruning experiment is {82%, 57%, 45%, 64%}, which is consistent with the conclusion of Fig. 5. As shown in Fig. 7, when our proposed pruning method is conducted on the STNet decoder, the network parameters can be reduced by 57.9% with only approximately 0.1 dB performance loss at BER = 10−5. Furthermore, the experimental results show that the APMS method has an approximately 0.5 dB improvement at BER = 10−5 in the AWGN channel in comparison to the SP method. Similar improvement is also available in the impulsive noise channel. It demonstrates our proposed pruning method harms little to the original model so that retraining can increase the accuracy.

REFERENCES
[1] T. Gruber, S. Cammerer, J. Hoydis, and S. ten Brink, “On deep learningbased channel decoding,” in Proc. CISS, 2017, pp. 1–6.
[2] H. Kim, Y. Jiang, R. Rana, S. Kannan, S. Oh, and P. Viswanath, “Communication algorithms via deep learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), 2018, pp. 1–17.
[3] A. Caciularu and D. Burshtein, “Unsupervised linear and nonlinear channel equalization and decoding using variational autoencoders,” IEEE Trans. Cognit. Commun. Netw., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 1003–1018, Sep. 2020.
[4] W. Lyu, Z. Zhang, C. Jiao, K. Qin, and H. Zhang, “Performance evaluation of channel decoding with deep neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Kansas City, MO, USA, May 2018, pp. 1–6.
[5] T. Chantakit, C. Buajong, and C. Warisarn, “Long-short term memory-based application on adaptive cross-platform decoder for bit patterned magnetic recording,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 155248–155259, 2020.
[6] X. Wang et al., “Learning to flip successive cancellation decoding of polar codes with lstm networks,” in Proc. IEEE 30th Annu. Int. Symp. Pers. Indoor Mobile Radio Commun. (PIMRC), Istanbul, Turkey, Sep. 2019, pp. 1–5.
[7] Y. Hu, L. Zhao, Z. Yan, A. Kaushik, Y. Hou, and J. Thompson, “GatedNet: Neural network decoding for decoding over impulsive noise channels,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 1381–1384, Aug. 2019.
[8] S. Han, J. Pool, J. Tran, and W. J. Dally, “Learning both weights and connections for efficient neural networks,” in Proc. NIPS, 2015, pp. 1135–1143.
[9] M. A. Carreira-Perpinán and Y. Idelbayev, “‘Learning-compression’ algorithms for neural net pruning,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2018, pp. 8532–8541.
[10] Y. He, J. Lin, Z. Liu, H. Wang, L.-J. Li, and S. Han, “AMC: AutoML for model compression and acceleration on mobile devices,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., Sep. 2018, pp. 784–800.
[11] J. Guo, J. Wang, C.-K. Wen, S. Jin, and G. Y. Li, “Compression and acceleration of neural networks for communications,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 110–117, Aug. 2020.
[12] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
[13] T. de Cola, E. Paolini, G. Liva, and G. P. Calzolari, “Reliability options for data communications in the future deep-space missions,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 99, no. 11, pp. 2056–2074, Nov. 2011.
[14] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn Represent. (ICRL), 2014, pp. 1–15.
[15] J. Ilow and D. Hatzinakos, “Analytic alpha-stable noise modeling in a Poisson field of interferers or scatterers,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 46, no. 6, pp. 1601–1611, Jun. 1998.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:04:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

