2008 Congress on Image and Signal Processing

Research of Low-density Parity-Check Decode Algorithms for Digital Subscriber Lines

Xing-Yu Xiang Jun Xie School of Communication and Information Engineering University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Sichuan, China
xiang.xxy2008@gmail.com, jxie71@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
Decoding algorithm complexity influences the application of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. This article investigated the Belief-Propagation and improved decode algorithms for a subclass of binary LDPC that can be encoded linearly. Through the comparison of decoding performance, a low complexity one with good performance is preferred. It is shown that the incorporation of LDPC coding techniques into Digital Subscriber Line (DSL) systems appears to be possible.
1. Introduction
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes can achieve near Shannon limit error performance and represent a very promising prospect for channel error coding [1, 2]. Regular belief propagation (BP) algorithm, or sum-product algorithm [3], can achieve good decode performance by iterative message processing between message and check nodes. But due to its high compute complexity, there come out several simplified decode algorithms such as BP-based algorithm, a posteriori probability (APP) based algorithm [4]. They reduce decode complexity by simplifying the process in either bit nodes or check nodes at the expense of performance degradation. However, after improve the BP-based and App-based algorithm by normalization [5, 6]; it can achieve better error performance while increases little decode complexity.
In current asymmetric DSL specifications [7], coding is achieved by the combination of outer ReedSolomon code and inner trellis code. It is presented that LDPC could be a replacement of the trellis code because of its higher transmission performance [8]. Since decoding complexity is a critical issue to influence the hardware application of LDPC codes, it is important to find a decode algorithm that can strike a

balance between decoding performance and complexity. This paper investigated the performance of LLR-BP and the simplified algorithms for array-code based LDPC—a family of LDPC codes that are wellsuited for DSL transmission [9]. Through the simulation results of different decode algorithms, a low complex one with relative good performance is preferred in hardware realization of decode system.

2. LLR BP Algorithm And Its Simplifications

The codeword is mapped into a transmitted sequence x = {x1 , x2 , , xN } by modulation, the received value yn after demodulation is yn = xn + vn ,
where vn is the additive white Gaussian noise with a random variable with zero mean. BP algorithm achieve decoding by iteration computation messages of check and bit nodes.

2.1. LLR BP Algorithm

When assuming all the messages passing between

bit and check nodes are in the form of log-likelihood ratios (LLR), we get the LLR BP algorithm which

reduce the decode complexity by change the

multiplication into addition operation. This algorithm

can be described as follows:

Initialization: we deprived the LLR message Ln of

each bit node from the received yn , set L(0) (qnm ) = Ln . Iterative processing: it includes three consecutive

steps.

Check nodes processing: update the LLR L(l) (rmni )

by following:

L(l )

(rmni

)

=

2

tanh−1( ∏
n '∈N(m)

\ ni

1 tanh(
2

L(l −1)

(qn'm

)))

(1)

978-0-7695-3119-9/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE

105

DOI 10.1109/CISP.2008.567

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:54:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

The notation N(m) \ n is set of all bit nodes

connected to check node m with bit node n excluded, and (l) indicate it is the lth iteration processing.
Bit nodes processing: update LLR message

L(l) (qnmi ) :

r L(l) (qnmi ) =

Ln

+∑
m'∈M (n)\mi

L(l) (

m'n )

(2)

M (n) \ m is the set of all check nodes connected to

bit node n with check node m excluded. Hard decision and stopping criterion test: update the

posteriori LLR L(l) (qn ) :

r L(l) (qn )

=

Ln

+ ∑ L(l) (
m∈M (n)

mn )

(3)

Then create hard decision vector xˆ such that

xˆn = 1 if L(qn ) >0, and xˆn = 0 if L(qn ) <0, the decoding process ends if H ixˆT = 0 or l exceeds the maximum

iterations number, otherwise the decoding repeats.

2.2. BP-Based Algorithm

The processing in the check nodes for BP algorithm

can be simplified. Equation (1) can be changed into:

L(l )

(rmni

)

=

∏
n '∈N(m)

\ ni

sgn(L(qn'm

))i min
n '∈N( m)

\ ni

(

L(qn ' m

)

)

(4)

In [5], the check nodes processing is:

L(rmni

)

≈

(−1)σm ⊕σmni

min
n '∈N(m)

\ ni

(

L(qn ' m

)

)

(5)

The form is different, but the result is the same as

(4). Replacing (1) with (4) or (5) for the check nodes

processing, we obtain the BP-based algorithm, which

performs additions only. The BP-based algorithm also

reduces the storage requirement, since for each check

node, only the two amplitudes of all L(qn'm ) needed to

be stored for representation of the L(rmni ) .

2.3. APP-Based Algorithm

When simplifying the processing in bit nodes, we

get another simplification of the BP-based algorithm.

In the BP algorithm, the processing in the bit node n

includes two calculations, (i) for each check node

mi connected to it, follow (2), (ii) follow (3), a priori

message Ln is added to all the message from check

nodes M(n) to obtain L(qn ) to make hard decision for

bit n. While in this algorithm, the L(qn ) are not only

used for the hard decision in step 3, but also substituted

for all L(qnmi ) . With this simplification, the storage

size can be reduced since it only needs to compute and

store one value for each bit node.

2.3. Normalized BP-based and App-based algorithm

It has been shown in [4] that for (504,522) and (1008, 504) Gallager code, the performance with the iterative APP algorithm is more than 1.0 dB worse than that of the BP algorithm. The reason lies in the fact that the degree of each bit node in Gallager code is very small, so for every bit node, the correlation between the outgoing and incoming messages of bit nodes is very significant. In Bp algorithm, the outgoing

message from bit node to check node mi is uncorrelated with the incoming message L(rmni ) from check node

mi . Substitute the message L(qnmi ) with L(qn ) will
introduce the correlation between the bidirectional messages along each edge thus lead the performance degradation. Fortunately, this degradation can be reclaimed with the same normalization approach in [5], as considered below.
Denote L1 and L2 as the value L(rmni ) computed
by (1) and (5), respectively. It can be shown that:

Sgn(L1)=Sgn(L2); L2 > L1

(6)

So the BP-based algorithm can be improved by

dividing L2 by a factor α greater than 1 to get much

better approximation of L1 . Since the iterative APP-

based algorithm has the same processing in check

nodes as BP-based algorithm, it can be improved with

the same normalization approach.

We can determine the scaling factors α by forcing

the mean of the normalized magnitude L2 α to equal

the mean of the magnitude L1 :

α = E( L1 ) E( L2 )

(7)

The factor α can be obtained theoretically with the

formulas derived in [5]. For a given LDPC code, we

can set one scaling for all iterations and all SNR values

to avoid increase decode complexity.

3. A class of LDPC that suits the DSL transmission

For DSL transmission, LDPC codes with high code rates are desirable, they involve a smaller amount of parity checks than low-rate codes do, resulting high spectral efficiencies in a bandwidth-constrained transmission situation. It is also desirable that the generation of the parity-check matrix involves a small amount of preprocessing operations to make practical construction of LDPC codes. Furthermore, linear-time encodable LDPC codes are attractive because low implementation complexity can also be achieved at the

106 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:54:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

transmitter. Finally, the ability to specify the LDPC codes via a small number of parameters is important because it minimized the preprocessing during initialization. Besides, codes that can be described by a small number of parameters are also well suited for standardization purpose.
The deterministic parity-check matrix construction presented below meets above objectives. The construction is based on “array codes” [10]. When array codes are viewed as binary codes, the paritycheck matrices exhibit sparseness, which can be exploited for decoding them as LDPC codes using the decode algorithm [9]. Therefore, array codes provide the framework for defining a family of LDPC codes that lend them suitable for DSL systems.
The array-code parity-check matrix is specified by three parameters: a prime number p and two integers k
and j, such that k , j ≤ p .It has dimensions jp×kp and

is given by [10]:

I I I O I α H = O O I   O O

I α j−2 α 2( j−3)

I α j−1 α 2( j−2)

OI

α j−1

I

α k−2

 

α  2(k −3)





α ( j−1)(k− j) 

(8)

Where I is the p×p identity matrix and α is a p×

p permutation matrix representing a single left or right cyclic shift. For example, when p=5,

0 1 0 0 0

0 0 0 0 1

0 0 1 0 0

1 0 0 0 0

α = 0 0 0 1 0 or α = 0 1 0 0 0





0 0 0 0 1





0 0 1 0 0

1 0 0 0 0

0 0 0 1 0

The LDPC code defined by H has code-word length N=kp, number of parity checks M=jp, and information block length K=(k-j)p. An LDPC code with N’<N is easily obtained by discarding the N-N’ rightmost columns of H. The parity check matrix H is determined by p, j, k, and the code length N’.
The encoding process can be finished directly from H without the need to compute the generator matrix of the code. LDPC codes are linear block codes, x is an

LDPC code word if and only if H i xT = 0 . We express

the

vector

x

in

the

form

xT

=

pT 

 

s

T

 

（9）

Where the 1×jp vector p represents the parity part

and the 1×(k-j)p vector s represents the systematic

part of the code word x. We also divide the parity check matrix H into two sub-matrix Hp (jp×jp) and
Hs (jp×(k-j)p). So we get:

HixT = Hp

Hs



ipsTT

  

=

HppT

+ HssT

=

0

（11）

Since we consider the binary code here:

HppT = HssT

（12）

It is easy to see that the parity bits in p can be

obtained in a recursive manner by exploiting the upper-

triangular form of Hp . This encoding process can be

shown to require (N/2)[r(j+3)+(j-3)] XOR operations,

where r is the rate of the code. So the encoding process is time linearly.

4. Implementation complexity

Reference [8] compared the implementation complexity of the LDPC coding scheme with that of trellis-codes modulation (TCM). It compared their encoding, decoding complexity and memory requirements in DMT system. The conclusion is reviewed below: (ⅰ) complexity of LDPC encoding is about three times that of TCM encoding; ( ⅱ) for TCM, a memory size of about 640 words is needed to store the survivor sequences for decoding. While the LDPC code in [8] required memory for sum-product decoding is 9600 words. (ⅲ) Using the same LDPC code parameters, assuming 20 iterations for soft decoding in [11] and a DMT-symbol rate of 4000 Hz, the results of Table I are obtained.

Table 1. Decoding complexity for LDPCcoded Modulation and TCM

Additions/s

Multiplications/s

TCM

47.6 M

1.6 M

Soft demapping +LDPC ecoding

4.8M +6.0M

6.4M +0

The LDPC decoding complexity of Table I is obtained by the LLR BP algorithm in [11], we can further reduce the decode complexity by using the simplified BP algorithm. For the binary (N, K) LDPC code, which has block length N and a parity-check
matrix with dc ones in each column and dr ones in each row, the decoding complexity associated with the LLR BP and BP-based Decoding are summarized in Tables 2, respectively. In this table, all operations associated with modulo-2 arithmetic have been neglected as conventionally done.

107 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:54:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Table 2. Decoding complexity for one iteration

of the LLR-BP and BP-based algorithm

Algorith m

Additions

Tanh(x )

Comparis on

LLR BP 2dc N + dr K (dr + 1)K

-----

BPBased

2dc N

-----

2dr K

According to Table II, BP-Based is more attractive than LLR BP algorithm for hardware implementation, since the Tanh function can be only realized by the looking-up table thus lead large memory requirements. Since the performance of decode algorithm is also a criteria, in the following we investigate the performance the LLR BP and its simplified algorithms and want find a suitable one yield a good performance—complexity tradeoff and can be implemented in DSL systems easily.

5. Simulation results

In the simulation, the decoding is employed with the number of iterations limited to 10. If each DMT sub-channel has sufficiently narrow bandwidth, then each one independently approximates an additive while Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel with a particular signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). It is also showed that better performance will be achieved for multilevel modulation than that of binary transmission [8]. So we mainly investigated the performance of different decoding algorithms for LDPC codes obtained via the construction described in previous section by simulation assuming an AWGN channel and binary transmission. In Table III, we give LDPC codes based on the array construction mentioned above that are appropriate for DSL transmission.

Table 3. Definition of LDPC code parameters

p

j

k

(N, K)

Code Rate K/N

Code 1 23 3

23

(529,460)

0.8696

Code 2 47 4

47

(2209,2021)

0.9149

Code 3 67 5

67

(4489,4154)

0.9254

Code 4 89 6

89

(7921,7387)

0.9332

The results are shown in Fig. 1 to 4 in terms of biterror rate (BER). The figures also indicate the BER for uncoded binary transmission.

Fig. 1 Performance of LDPC code (529,460) with LLR-Bp, normalized BP-based and
normalized APP-based algorithm
Fig 2. Performance of LDPC code (2209, 2021) with LLR-Bp, normalized BP-based and normalized APP-based algorithm

Fig 3. Performance of LDPC code (4489, 4154) with LLR-Bp, normalized BP-based and
normalized APP-based algorithm

108 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:54:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig 4. Performance of LDPC code (7921, 7387) with LLR-Bp, normalized BP-based and normalized APP-based algorithm
Form Figs 1-4, we can see the performance of different simplifications of the original BP algorithm. Clearly, the LLR BP algorithm can achieve the best performance but introduces the tanh function which is not easily to be implemented. The performance of the normalized iterative BP-based algorithm is almost the same as that of the LLR-BP algorithm. It is about 0.3dB better than that of the normalized APP-based algorithm, and only about 0.1 dB worse than that of the LLT-Bp algorithm. Both of which choose the scaling factors α computed based on the analysis of [5] and statistical average. The factor α used for normalized APP-based is larger that that for normalized BP-based algorithm because the correlation introduced by approximating BP with APP is serious due to the small number of check sums.
6. Conclusion
We have summarized different simplifications of the BP algorithm for decoding LDPC codes and presented a family of them to be suitable for DSL transmission. The performance achieved by array code based LDPC is as good as or better than the performance of the randomly constructed LDPC codes of comparable lengths and rates. The simulation results shows that the normalized BP-based can achieve nearly the same performance as that of LLR-Bp algorithm while reducing the decode complexity remarkably. The normalized APP-based algorithm saves more memory space at the expense of degradation in performance. In

[6], it is shown that the LDPC codes with check sums of large weights, the normalized APP-based decoding performs nearly as well as LLR-Bp decoding. But for the high-rate LDPC, the BP-based is more suitable for its hardware implementation since it provides good trade-off between error performance and decoding complexity. It has proved that the LDPC codes can achieve good net coding gains under tight latency constraints and they do not exhibit “error floors” at the low bit-error rate ( 10−7 ) of interest for DSL transmission[8]. LDPC codes can offer unique advantages not only for wireless communications and storage channels, but also for DSL transmission.
7. References
[1] R.G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press, 1963. [2] D.J.C. MacKay and R.M. Neal, “Near Shannon Limit Performance of Low Density Parity Check Codes,” Electronics Letters 32(18), pp. 1645-1646, Aug. 1996 [3] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988. [4] M. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevi´c and H. Imai, “Reduced Complexity Iterative Decoding of Low Density Parity Check Codes Based on Belief Propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, pp. 673-680, May 1999. [5] J. Chen and M. Fossorier, “Near Optimum Universal Belief Propagation Based Decoding of LDPC Codes,” ISIT2001, Washington, DC, June 24-29, 2001 [6] Jinghu Chen and Marc P. C. Fossoriec. “Decoding Lowdensity Parity Check Codes with Normalized APP-based Algorithm.” Glabecom 2001, no.1, Nov 2001: pp. 10261030. [7] “Asymmetric digital subscriber line (ADSL) transceivers,”ITU-T Recommendation G.992.1, June 1999. [8] E. Eleftheriou and S. Ölçer, “Low-density parity-check codes for digital subscriber lines,”[C] in Proc. IEEE Intl. Conf. on Communications ICC’2002, New York, NY, May 2002 [9] J. L. Fan, “Array codes as low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int’l Symposium on Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, pp. 543-546, Sept. 2000. [10] M. Blaum, P. Farrell, and H. van Tilborg, “Array codes,” in Handbook of Coding Theory, V. S. Pless and W. C. Huffman Eds., Elsevier 1998 [11] E. Eleftheriou, T. Mittelholzer, and A. Dholakia, “Reducedcomplexity decoding algorithm for low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 37, no 2, pp. 102104, Jan. 2001.

109 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:54:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

