High-Throughput LDPC Decoding Architecture
Zhixing Yang, Nan Jiang, Kewu Peng, and Jintao Wang State Key Laboratory on Microwave & Digital Communications Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology
Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China Email: yangzhx@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract-A high-throughput decoding architecture for quasicyclic (QC) low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes is developed in this paper. Regular pipelined schemes of the partially parallel decoder, which are adaptable to various decoding requirements, are derived to simplify the design and implementation. Utilizing normalized uniformly most powerful (UMP) belief propagation (DP) algorithm, pipelined partially parallel decoders for (7493, 3048), (7493, 4572) and (7493, 6096) LDPC codes are implemented on FPGA. Synthesis results show that, with 30 decoding iterations, the decoders for these codes archive throughputs of 108, 172 and 237 Mbps at the maximum operating frequencies of 151, 158 and 163 MHz respectively. The proposed architecture increases decoding throughput by more than four times compared with that of the traditional decoder.
I. INTRODUCTION
For communication and broadcasting systems, especially for wireless systems, error correcting codes are essential to overcome channel impairments. With excellent coding performance and feasible decoding complexity, LDPC code [1] is a promising technique for next generation communication systems, which has drawn much research attention in recent years. The Shannon limit was approached by LDPC codes under BP decoding [2], also referred to as message-passing decoding.
In the last few years, several hardware designs have been introduced to exploit better balance of coding performance, decoding throughput, and implementation complexity. Fully parallel implementation of BP algorithm requires immense hardware and routing complexity [3]. Serial decoding architecture alleviates the routing complexity, but costs much more decoding latency [4]. Partially parallel architecture is adjustable to trade off throughput and hardware complexity [5]. In the partially parallel decoder, process units fetch messages stored in memories and carry out portions of BP decoding operations. During decoding, every iteration consists of horizonal process in horizonal process units (HPU) and vertical process in vertical process units (VPU). These two processes are performed alternately and iteratively until a correct codeword is obtained or the maximum number of iterations is reached. However, one set of process units is idle while the other is operating in this scheme. With scheduling
The work reported in this paper is supported in part by Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University (NCET) and by National High Technology Research and Development Program of China (863 Program) under Grant 2007AAOIZ2B6.

concept, decoding architectures are exploited to enhance the throughput performance of LDPC decoder [6], [7].
In the partially parallel decoder for QC-LDPC, the critical path delay lies in HPU which is implemented by combinational logic. Thus, in expectation, pipelined designs for HPU and VPU could considerably enhance the throughput of the partially parallel decoder. Motivated by this observation, novel regular schemes of pipelined process units are derived to break the critical path. Utilizing the pipelined processing units, pipelined partially parallel decoders for 7493-bit codes are implemented on FPGA; implementation results demonstrate that the proposed pipelining approach provides considerable enhancement of LDPC decoding throughput.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In section II, LDPC code and the evolution of BP decoding are briefly introduced, and the existing partially parallel LDPC decoder is investigated for further improvement. Design details and implementation issues of pipelined partially parallel decoder are discussed in section III. Implementation results of proposed decoding architecture are presented in section IV. Finally, conclusions are drawn in section V.
II. LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES
A. De.finition 0.[ LDPC Code
An LOPC code is specified by a parity check matrix H MxN , containing mostly O's and a small number of 1's [1]. Assuming that H is full rank, the length of message word is K = N -M bits, and the code rate is R = KIN = I-MIN. The set of codewords is the null space of H. Namely, the
codewords satisfy M check equations, HxT = o. An LDPC
code can be represented by a Tanner Graph, which consists of N bit nodes, M check nodes, and a certain number of edges. There is an edge between check node m and bit node n if and only if hmn = 1. Thus, the number of edges equals to the weight ofH.
QC-LDPC codes are proposed to facilitate code design and reduce encoding complexity [8]. The parity check matrix of a QC-LDPC is an array of sparse circulants with uniform sizes. The sparsity of circulants could warrant that H is sparse. Three QC-LDPC codes of various code rates are employed in Chinese Digital Television Terrestrial Broadcasting (DTTB) standard [11]. For those codes, the circulants in H are zero
matrix or shifted identity matrix with size b = 127.

978-1-4244-2064-3/08/$25.00 ©2008 IEEE

1240

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:14:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Initialization:
1) Set i== l.For each (m, n) E {(m, n)lhmn == I}, set z~n == Yn.
Recurrence:

2) llor~onal Process For 0 ~ m ~ M - 1, update each L~n (n E N(m)) with

I· II L~n == a·

(zi-l,). Izi-l, sgn mn

min
n' EN(rn)

mn

(1)

n'EN(rn)

n'=l:-n

n'=l:-n

3) Vertical Process

For 0 ~ n ~ N - 1, update

L z~ == Yn +

L~n'

(2)

mEM(n)

and update each z:nn (m E M(n)) with

INPUT: Received Symbols

Address
OUTPUT: Decoded Codeword

(3)

4) Stop Criterion

Create x'L. == .[x~], by hard-decision, x~. == {O1,,

OJ > z~
z n' L . / ~

0.

xi If H T ==== 0 or i ==== IMAX, terminate the decoding.

Otherwise, set i == i + 1 and repeat decoding from Step 2).

Fig. 1. LLR BP Decoding Algorithm

B. Belief Propagation Decoding Algorithms

Fig. 2. Architecture of Partially Parallel Decoder
BP algorithm is utilized in this paper. Normalized UMP BP algorithm is described in Fig. 1. The prespecified maximum
number of iterations is [MAX. N(m) = {nlhmn = 1}
denotes the set of bit nodes connecting to check node m, and M (n) = {ml hmn = 1} denotes the set of check nodes connecting to bit node n.

Soft-decision decoding is to estimate the transmitted codeword c by calculating the a posteriori probability (APP) that each bit in c is 1 or 0 given the received word y = (Yo, Y1, ... , YN -1) with Yn E R, which would have been corrupted by channel impairment: noise and fading. Therefore, the maximum a posteriori probability (MAP) estimation

c = argmaxc':Hc,T=o {Prob(c'ly)}

(4)

is the codeword with minimum Euclidean distance to y. With extrinsic information relaying between check nodes and bit nodes in Tanner Graph, BP decoding algorithm utilizes the bitto-bit dependence required in check-sum equations of LDPC code to adjust the probability of each bit until obtaining a valid codeword.
LLR BP algorithm performs additions instead of multiplications, but still ensues high complexity. UMP BP algorithm is an approximation of LLR BP algorithm, in which calculations
on the non-linear function ¢(x) = 2arctanh(tanh(x/2)) is
approximated by a minimum function. Furthermore, normalizing all LLR's with N o/4, the decoding algorithm becomes independent of the channel noise No [9]. As a result of the approximation, UMP BP algorithm suffers from a performance degradation of a few tenths of a decibel at the bit error rate (BER) of 10-5 [9], compared to BP algorithm. In order to compensate this degradation, normalized UMP BP algorithm scales the soft information with a factor Q during horizonal process [10]. According to channel noise level, the scaling factor Q is chosen to maximize the coding gain. The complexities and performances of LLR BP, UMP BP and normalized UMP BP algorithms are compared in [5]. Requiring simpler computation without loss in performance, normalized UMP

c. Partially Parallel Decoding Architecture
The overall architecture of a partially parallel QC-LDPC decoder is shown in Fig. 2. The HPU performs operations of horizonal process, while the VPU performs those of vertical process. Random access memories pRAMs are used to store quantized symbols Yn that are received from the channel. During decoding, messages L~n 's and z:nn's are stored in rRAMs and qRAMs respectively. Naturally, the parallelism
factor is chosen as S = b, where b is the size of circulants.
Thus, for a code with H containing w nonzero circulants, the decoder consists of M/b HPUs, N/b VPUs, N/b pRAMs, w rRAMs, and w qRAMs. The two sets of messages in each nonzero circulant are respectively stored in an rRAM and a qRAM. Each process unit operates for b times in every iteration. These units perform computations on different input sets synchronized by the controller, which generates the read/write addresses for rRAM/qRAM/pRAM and manages the flow of messages in/out of memories and process units.
According to (1), HPUs update L~n's in rRAMs using z:nn's fetched from qRAMs. Near optimal scaling factor, normalization with Q that can be represented by the binary digits is preferred, for it can be easily handled with shifts and additions. HPUs also check whether the code bits resulting from the previous iteration form a valid codeword. With this strategy, HPUs and VPUs can operate continuously without extra clock cycles for parity check. According to (2) and (3), VPUs update z:nn's in qRAMs using L~n's fetched from rRAMs. The magnitude of sum z~ in (2) is clipped to avoid overflow.
In the traditional partially parallel decoder, there are two deficiencies confining the throughput.

1241

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:14:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

::·~:::t·It·er:I:·:~:It:e:r2:::::::::::~ ~:::~·~

L)._I
:

(a) Standard Decoder

Iter l I t e r 2 • • • • •1..Iter lMA41

Iterl

~

VPU

::::::::::::~::::~J :Vl.;~,:) .": J

HPU

(b) Dual-Word Decoder Fig. 3. Scheduling of Partially Parallel Decoder

1) Scheduling: In the traditional scheme, one set of process units, HPUs or VPUs, is idle, while the other is working. With efficient scheduling, dual-word architecture simultaneously decoding two codewords is capable to improve the throughput [7]. For this approach, all memories are required to be doubled to store the messages of two codewords. With dual-port rRAMs and qRAMs, HPUs and VPUs could operate continuously. The scheduling of standard decoder and dualword decoder is sketched in Fig. 3. The subscripts of "H" and "V" in Fig. 3(b) differentiate the codeword under operations. The decoder performs horizonal process for one word and vertical process for the other without memory access conflict.
2) Process Units: Traditional process units are implemented with combinational logic, introducing long critical path. In section III, regular pipelined schemes of process units are derived to increase decoding throughput.
III. PIPELINED PARTIALLY PARALLEL LDPC DECODER
In the traditional decoder, the critical path lies in HPU, for horizonal process is more complex than vertical process. Generally, horizonal process consists of four phases: calculating absolute values, minimizing, normalizing and signing. For hardware implementation, minimizing in HPU is
a considerable issue. The input set is simplified as To,>. =
{zo, Zl, ... ,Z>.-l}. Minimizing is to find minima of sets excluding one input from LO,>., namely to compute
(5)
from j = 0 to A-1. The set with one input excluded, To,>. \ {Zj }, is hereinafter referred to as the selective set of the total set To,>.. Two schemes of pipelined HPU are derived in this section: cyclic HPU and dimidiate HPU.
A. Cyclic Pipelined HPU
The architecture of a A-input cyclic pipelined HPU is
presented in Fig. 4. There are T = pog2 (A - 1)l +1 pipeline
stages. In each stage, computation results of each clock cycle are registered by reg components. In Fig. 4, abs component computes absolute values, while cmpt,j stands for the jth 2-
input comparator in stage t (t = 2,3, .. " T; j = 0,1, ... ,A-
1), which selects the smaller of the two inputs as its output. As shown in Fig. 4, the first stage consists of A absolute value

Fig. 4. Architecture of Cyclic Pipelined HPU

computers and A registers, while the others consist of A 2-input
comparators and A registers. The pipeline stages are described
as follows.
1) First Stage: t = 1. In the first stage, absolute value of
each input, IZj I, is computed and registered. 2) Intermediate Stage: t = 2,3, .. " T -1. Each of these
stages includes exactly A comparators. Define j * ~ (j mod A). Comparator cmpt,j receives outputs of Cmpt-l,j and
Cmpt-l,(j+2t-2)*, and select the smaller one as its output.
If t = 2, Cmpt-l,j denotes an abs component, actually. The
output of cmpt,j can be expressed uniformly as

min {Izj I, IZ(j+l)* I, ... , IZ(j+2t- 1 -l)* I} .

3) Last Stage: t = T. In the last stage, comparator CmpT,j

receives outputs of cmpT-l,j and cmpT-l,(j+>'-2T-2-1)*, and

yields

min {Izj I, IZ(j+l)* I, ... ,IZ(j+>'-2)* I} ,

namely, S(j-l)* in (5). The last stage is followed by normalizing and signing to
form messages Lj , according to horizonal process (1). Cyclic pipelined HPU increases the size of minimized sets
by degrees to A-I. By cyclic comparing and registering, all information necessary for horizonal process is efficiently
conserved along pipeline stages. For A-input cyclic pipelined
HPU, the number of2-input comparators is C(A) = (T-l)'A, and that of registers is R("\) = T· A.

B. Dimidiate Pipelined HPU
In a dimidiate pipelined HPU, the input set are divided to perform minimizing with 2-input comparator. All the divided sets can be organized in a binary tree, from which the dimidiate HPU is derived.
The process of dividing is described as follows. Generally,
a set with k(k > 1) elements is divided into two sets, one with

1242

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:14:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(a) Binary Tree
Lo LI L2 L3 L4 Ls L6

TABLE I IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS OF CYCLIC AND DIMIDIATE HPUs

#Inputs )..= 7 )..=27

HPU
Combinational Cyclic Dimidiate Combinational Cyclic Dimidiate

#ALUTs
330 295 322 1764 1566 1700

#Registers
0 223 259
0 1131 1309

fmax/MHz
103.52 376.36 398.57 69.69 343.41 346.38

(b) Dimidiate Pipeline
Fig. 5. Dimidiate Pipelined HPU with 7 Inputs
rk/21 elements and the other with lk/2J elements. Concretely,
for a A-input HPU, the input set I is divided into two sets,
{zo, ... ,zr)./21-1} and {zr)'/21"'" Z).-l}. Then, these two
sets are divided in the same way. Recursively, all sets with more than one elements are divided until each contains only one element.
After divided, all the sets can be organized in a binary tree by denoting each set with a node, and connecting each set with its two subsets as children nodes. The binary tree of 7-input HPU is shown in Fig. 5(a). Since the pipeline requires that all inputs should align in the first stage, all nodes in the binary tree are extended to the bottom level, as the two nodes of Z6 in Fig. 5(a).
The dimidiate pipelined HPU with 7 inputs is illustrated in
1 Fig. 5(b). For a A-input HPU, there are T = POg2 A +1 levels
in the binary tree, and each can be implemented as a pipeline stage. Each binary tree node is replaced with combinational logic components (abs or cmp) and registers in the pipeline. In
a node with elements, Tko,k = {Zko'" " Zko+k-l}, minima of
Tko ,k 's k selective sets and minimum of Tko ,k are calculated and registered. Hereinafter, the minimum of selective set is referred to as selective result of the node, and that of total set as total result. Since there are not any parent node for the root node, it is unnecessary to calculate total result of the root node.
The pipeline stages are described as follows. 1) First Stage: t = 1. The first stage corresponds to the bottom level of the binary tree. Each node in the bottom level is replaced with an abs as well as a reg, which compute and register the absolute values, 1Zj I.
2) Intermediate Stage: t= 2,3, ... ,T-l. The nodes in each
intermediate level are replaced with cmp and reg components.

Using the registered outputs of the children nodes, the selective results as well as the total result are calculated. For a node with only one children node, the total result of the children node is directly registered without computation. For a node with two children nodes, the selective results are calculated by comparing each selective result of every children node and the total result of the other children node, while the total result is calculated by comparing the total results of two children nodes.
3) Last Stage: t = T. The last stage corresponds to the
root node of the binary tree. Selective results are calculated by comparing each selective result of every children node and the total result of the other children node. It can be verified that the selective results of the root node are minima required in (5).
Based on 2-input comparators, the dimidiate pipelined HPU is inspired by recursions. In the light of binary-tree structure, comparison of minimizing is distributed to nodes in tree levels. For a A-input dimidiate HPU, it can be derived and validated
that the number of 2-input comparators required is C(A) = AT - 2T - 1 - 2, and that of registers is R(A) = A(T + 1) - 2.
C. Pipelined Partially Parallel Decoder
According to the binary-adding-tree structure, pipelined VPU can be easily implemented by distributing the computations of vertical process in (2) and (3) among pipeline stages. Using pipelined HPUs and VPUs, the writing of qRAMs and rRAMs must be postponed by some clock cycles, determined by the numbers of pipeline stages. According to the practical requirement of the decoding speed, a certain number of the pipeline stages can be combined with cmp components concatenated and reg components between these stages deleted.
The proposed pipelined schemes provide efficient approaches to distribute the decoding computations, which is configurable and adaptable to various LDPC codes and decoding requirements.
IV. RESULTS AND COMPARISON
A. Implementation results of Cyclic and Dimidiate HPUs
According to the analysis in section III, cyclic HPU requires more comparators, while dimidiate HPU requires more registers. However, the routing of cyclic HPU is more interlaced. Implementation results of cyclic and dimidiate HPUs are listed

1243

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:14:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE II IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS OF DECODER FOR QC-LDPC CODES IN DTTB (WITH J-l = 30 ITERATIONS)

Code (7493, 3048) (7493,4572) (7493, 6096)

Decoder
Traditional Proposed Traditional Proposed Traditional Proposed

#ALUTs
22611 22081 25992 26081 28691 28651

#Registers
751 17787
779 20561
849 22012

#MemoryBits
658816 1321008
704512 1414600
700160 1406828

fmax
/MHz 64.35 151.45 58.02 158.15 39.37 163.40

Throughput /Mbps 25.15 109.67 34.01 171.79 30.77 236.66

in Table I, where the hardware complexity is measured in the usage of adaptive look-up tables (ALUT) and registers for Altera's Stratix II FPGA. Due to the effects of the compiler, the combinational HPU occupies slightly more ALUTs than the pipelined HPU, although minimizing analytically requires about 90% as many comparators in the combinational HPU
as in the pipelined one. 1 In Table I, f max is the maximum
clock frequency reported by the compiler. Compared with combinational HPUs, the proposed pipelined schemes increase operating frequency by several times.

B. Implementation Results of Pipelined Decoders
Introducing proposed pipelined process units and dual-word scheduling, partially parallel decoders for QC-LDPC codes in DTTB were implemented with Verilog HDL and verified using ModelSim simulator, whose outputs were validated with a fixed-point C-coded model. The decoders were compiled for Stratix II FPGA using Quartus II compiler.
Implementation results of pipelined partially parallel decoders are listed in Table II, where traditional partially parallel decoders with combinational process units and standard scheduling are also described. It is assumed that the decoding lasts for J.-l iterations, and the decoder operates at the clock
frequency f. For an (N, K) code with circulants of size b, the
throughput of standard-scheduling partially parallel decoder is

r d-
st -

2. J.-l'

(b

K+

·f 8r

+ 8w

)

(6)

and that of dual-word decoder is

f

dw

=

(J.-l

K·f
+ 0.5)· (b + 8r + 8w

+ TH

+ Tv)

(7)

where 8r and 6w are the writing and reading latency cycles of the RAM, while TH and Tv are the maximum numbers of pipeline stages in HPU and VPU.
As shown in synthesis results, pipelining approach for the partially parallel decoder, with extra memory resource,

increases operating frequency to about 3 times. Besides, dualword scheduling also enhances the decoding throughput. Crit-

ical paths of the pipelined decoders lie in the route of address

signals from the controller to RAMs, due to tangled routes that connect the controller and rRAMs/qRAMs. Compared

1Compiled by Quartus II, the pipelined HPU consumes slightly less ALUTs than the combinational one with exactly the same logic functions.

with the decoder for codes with commeasure length [5] [7], the proposed architecture also considerably improves decoding throughput.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, pipelined partially parallel LDPC decoding architecture is proposed. Novel regular pipelined schemes for process units in LDPC decoder are derived, and they are adaptable and configurable to various decoding requirements and LDPC codes. The proposed decoding architecture features a significant improvement of operating clock frequency and throughput. Decoders for QC-LDPC codes in DTTB are implemented on Altera Stratix II FPGA. As shown in implementation results, the proposed architecture increases operating frequency to about 3 times and significantly enhances decoding throughput compared with traditional decoders.
REFERENCES
[1] Robert G. Gallager, "Low-density parity-check codes," IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, IT-18, pp. 21-28, Jan. 1962.
[2] Thomas 1. Richardson and Rudiger L. Urbanke, "The capacity of lowdensity parity check codes under meaasge-passing decoding," IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, Vol. 47, No.2, pp. 599-618, Feb. 2001.
[3] C. Howland and A. Blanksby, "Parallel decoding architecture for low density parity check codes," in Proc. 2001 IEEE Int. Symp. on Circuits and Syst., 6-9 May 2001, Vol. 4, pp. 742-745.
[4] Mauro Cocco, John Dielissen, Marc Heijiligers, Andries Hekstra, and Jos huisken, "A scalable architecture for LOPC decoding," in Proc. 2004 Design, Automation and Test in European Conf. and Exhibition, Vol. 3, pp. 88-93, 16-20 Feb. 2004.
[5] Marjan Karkooti, "Semi-parallel architecture for real-time LDPC coding," M.S. thesis, Rice Univ., Houston, Texas, May 2004.
[6] Yanni Chen, and Keshab K. Parhi, "Overlapped massage passing for quasi-cyclic low-decsity parity check codes," IEEE Trans. Circuit Sys. I, Reg. Papers, Vol. 51, No.6, pp. 1106-1113, June 2004.
[7] Hua Qiao, Wu Guan, Mingke Dong, and Haige Xiang, "Design and implementation of LDPC decoder with high throughput," Acta Scientiarum Naturalium Universitatis Pekinensis on Line, Vol. 2, No.2, Jun. 30 2007.
[8] Lei Chen, Jun Xu, Ivana Djurdjuvic, and Shu Lin, "Near-shannon-limit quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes," IEEE Trans. Commun., Vol. 52, No.7, pp. 1038-1042, Jul. 2004.
[9] Marc P. C. Fossorier, Miodrag Mihaljevic, and Hideki Imai, "Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propogation," IEEE Trans. Commun., Vol. 47, No.5, pp. 673680, May 1999.
[10] Jinghu Chen and Marc P. C. Fossorier, "Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-densityparity check codes," IEEE Trans. Commun., Vol. 50, No.3, pp. 406-414, Mar. 2002.
[11] Framing Structure, Channel Coding and Modulation for Digital Television Terrestrial Broadcasting System(in Chinese), Chinese National Standard GB 20600-2006.

1244
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:14:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

