DYNAMIC-LIST JOINT DETECTION AND DECODING OF LDPC-CODED V-BLAST SYSTEMS
Meng-Ying (Brady) Tsai and Shahram Yousefi
Signal Design and Analysis Laboratory (SDAL), Dept. of Elec. and Comp. Eng. Queen’s University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada K7L 3N6 Email: brady.tsai@ece.queensu.ca, s.yousefi@queensu.ca

ABSTRACT

cancelation as the pre-process. Similar to the non-iterative

Soft iterative detection and decoding techniques have been shown to be able to achieve near-capacity performance in multiple antenna systems. To obtain the optimal soft information by marginalizing over the entire observation space is intractable; and it is not clear what the best way to obtain the suboptimal soft information is. In this talk, an improved scheme is proposed which can be adapted to various list-type detectors and provide superior performance.

MMSE detector, equalization-based detection methods do not provide promising performance although they benefit from low complexity. In [3], a modified sphere decoding, named list sphere decoding (LSD), is proposed to provide a list of candidates for computing soft information. LSD guarantees that the list of candidates is closer to the received codeword than any other candidates among the entire constellation space in terms of Euclidean distance. [4] proposes a new scheme, called Finck-Pohst Maximum-A-Posteriori (FPMAP), based

Index Terms— Bell Labs Layered Space-Time (BLAST), on sphere decoding to estimate soft information. Both LSD

low-density parity check (LDPC) codes, soft-in/soft-out de- and FPMAP outperform soft-equalization methods; neverthe-

tectors, sphere decoder, iterative decoding, joint detection and less, it is not clear which scheme is superior and has a better

decoding.

trade-off between performance and complexity. In this paper,

detailed examination of the two schemes is presented along

1. INTRODUCTION

with simulation results. In addition, an improved scheme with dynamic list size is proposed that can be adapted to LSD or

Today, multiple antenna systems are one of the major research areas in telecommunication as their capability of transmitting data at very high speeds is far beyond the scope of any single antenna system. However, high data transmission rates also come with high cost because more complex detection and decoding methods are required at the receiver to ensure the data

FPMAP to obtain better performance-complexity trade-off. This paper is organized as follows, in Section 2 the system model is described. In Section 3 detailed comparison and simulation results are provided. In Section 4 the improved scheme and the motivation is presented along with simulation results in Section 5.

is accurately received. Therefore, discovering ways to reduce

the complexity of these processes is essential before proposed systems can be launched for commercial usage.

2. SYSTEM MODEL

In practical multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) systems, an outer code is usually present to provide error-correcting

The coded-MIMO system employing nT transmit antennas

capability on top of the space-time code. In traditional re- and nR receive antennas is considered in this paper and shown

ceiver design, detection and decoding are done separately to in Fig. 1. We assume a discrete-time Rayleigh block-fading

simplify the entire procedure for receiving data. Such sim- multiantenna channel model, where the channel information

plification is achieved at a cost of performance degradation in is known to the receiver. Before the input vector b of size l is

the receiver. Iterative joint detection and decoding (IJDD) is a technique to avoid such substantial performance loss. In [1],

transmitted, it is encoded by an outer channel code with rate R = l/m and passed through a random block interleaver of

MMSE detector is modified to output soft information while size in multiples of m. The encoded bits c of size m are mod-

taking a priori information from the channel decoder into con- ulated onto Q-Quadrature Amplitude Modulation (Q-QAM)

sideration. In [2], another soft-input soft-output (SISO) MMSE detector is proposed with the addition of signal interference

constellation and each resulting constellation symbols represents pm = log2 Q bits. V-BLAST is used to modulate the

signals onto the MIMO channel and pmnT encoded bits are

978-1-4244-1643-1/08/$25 c 2008 IEEE

being transmitted in each channel use. The corresponding transmitted signal vector s = [s1, s2, ..., snT ]T is generated

001679
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:41:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 1. Iterative Joint Detection and Decoding System Model

Average MIMO Detector Operation / Codeword

x 109 7.5
7 6.5

@ SNR 11.4 @ SNR 11.6 @ SNR 11.8

6

5.5

5

4.5

4

3.5

3

2.5

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9

1

K

in each block and simultaneously transmitted by nT transmit

antennas. The nR × 1 received signal vector y can be repre-

sented as

y=

ρ nT

Hs

+

n

(1)

where ρ is the expected received SNR. H is the nR × nT known channel matrix and n is the nR × 1 additive noise vector composed of independent, identically distributed complexGaussian entries with mean equal to zero and variance equal to one. The outer channel code of this system can be any error correcting code to be decoded using a SISO decoder.

As the concept of exchanging soft information between two entities is based on turbo decoding, the process of interleaving and deinterleaving is necessary to create independency between each bit or symbol and prevent burst errors. The performance of the system is directly related to the size of the interleaver; the larger the interleaver size, the better the system performance.
On the receiver side, the received signal y and the a-priori probabilities from the channel decoder are processed by the MIMO detector to produce soft estimation of the transmitted signal s in bit level. Assuming that nR×1 received vector y is mapped to corresponding pmnR×1 received bits vector c, the soft information is expressed in the form of a log-likelihood

ratio (LLR) as

L1(ci|y)

=

log

p[ci p[ci

= =

+1|y] −1|y]

(2)

where p[ci = ±1|y], i = 1, 2, ..., pmnT , is the a-posteriori probability of the ith bit of y. In IJDD system, only extrinsic part of the soft information is exchanged. Detailed derivation and calculation of the extrinsic information can be found in [3] and [4].
The bit level soft information is de-interleaved and passed onto the channel decoder. The structure of channel decoder varies depending on the choice of error-correcting code employed. In particular, the LDPC decoder uses a message passing algorithm based on belief propagation. Channel decoder

Fig. 2. Complexity analysis of various choices of radius in nT = nR = 4 LSD iterative joint detection and decoding MIMO system employing WiMAX Code, 16-QAM, and interleaver
size = 6912.

takes in soft estimation L1 from the MIMO detector and produces another set of soft information L2 based on the structure of the error-correcting code. These extrinsic information
are interleaved and fed into the MIMO detector for the next round of estimation. The MIMO detector will again use the same received signal y and the new a-priori information from the channel decoder to change its soft estimation. The term iterative comes from the fact that both MIMO detector and
channel decoder update their estimation several time until a
stopping criterion is met.

3. LSD VS FPMAP

In IJDD systems, optimal detector obtains exact a posteriori probability (APP) on each bit by marginalizing over the entire constellation space; however, the required computational complexity of such process is intractable. Suboptimal detectors, such as LSD and FPMAP, constrain their marginalization in a subset of the entire space. This subset is presented as a candidate list L.
LSD and FPMAP differ from each other in terms of the method to generate and update the list. LSD generates a candidate list L, with fixed cardinality N for each consecutive iterations, that guarantees to minimize

y − Hs 2.

(3)

A larger candidate list will result in a better approximation;

thus, the performance of LSD can be easily adjusted through

different N . According to [4], FPMAP generates L to mini-

mize

nT

y − Hs 2 − log p(sk)

(4)

k=1

001680
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:41:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

where p(sk) is the probability of symbols. Therefore, it is capable of obtaining L with the consideration of the a-priori information from the channel decoder. Unlike in LSD, the size of L is not fixed and new set of L is generated in every iteration. As the iteration proceeds, channel decoder provides apriori information that converges to the actual codeword. By adapting new a-priori information, list, generated by FPMAP, gets smaller and smaller after each consecutive iteration.
The initial choice of radius is a factor that will affect the performance and complexity of the systems utilizing FPMAP. However, radius does not affect the performance of LSD as list size is guaranteed to be fixed. One possible choice of radius is proposed in [3],

r2 = 2σ2KnR − y∗(I − H(H∗H)−1H∗)y

(5)

where 0 < K < 1 is a constant to be chosen by the system designer. In LSD, it makes sense that choosing an unnecessary large K will result in too many lattice points in the sphere and finding the N best s to construct L will increase the detection complexity. On the other hand, choosing a small K will result in not having enough lattice points; the search will have to start all over again with a more appropriate radius until at least N lattice points are in the sphere. This repetitive process results in redundant computation and also increases the detection complexity. Fig 2 shows that for a particular MIMO system utilizing LSD, a good choice of radius can be obtained easily through simple trial and error. In this example, a good choice of K is 0.5 in all SNR values of practical interest. However, in general, a good choice of K varies with system parameters such as number of transmit/receive antennas, type of constellation, and type of error correcting code. For any set of system parameters, simple trial and error is required to obtain satisfactory choice of K during the design process.
To compare LSD and FPMAP under the same MIMO architecture, we consider a multiantenna system employing four transmit and four received antennas. Information sequences are encoded by an LDPC code proposed in IEEE 802.16e-2005 (WiMAX) standard with rate 1/2 and length 2304. For simplicity, we call this particular LDPC code as WiMAX Code in this paper. The coded sequence is interleaved by a random block interleaver of size 6912 and then modulated onto 16-QAM using Gray mapping. When the LDPC decoder receives soft information from the MIMO detector, it performs a maximum of eight iterations of belief propagation algorithm before passing the resulting extrinsic soft information back to the detector. In Fig. 3, three different detectors are tested separately including LSD with N =256, LSD with N =512, and FPMAP with choice of radius according to (5) with K=0.6 (Note that the performance and complexity of the system employing FPMAP depends entirely on the choice of radius; therefore in our simulation K is chosen to make the comparison between FPMAP and LSD easier).
FPMAP performs slightly better than LSD from our sim-

ulation result employing LDPC channel code. Not only it has better BER performance, it also requires less average arithmetic operation per codeword.

4. DYNAMIC-LIST IJDD
In any list-type suboptimal detector, the accuracy of the approximation is directly influenced by the list size. Larger list will has better approximation but it requires higher complexity. Depending on the statistical properties of the channel noise and fading, some codewords can be detected using a small L while some codewords require larger L. In LSD, by setting the list size to a constant for every codeword detection, the system might waste a lot of unnecessary computations. It would be beneficial if the system could dynamically adjust its list size according to the statistical properties of the channel noise and fading (i.e., use larger list size for codewords that are harder to detect and smaller list size for codewords that are easier to detect). However, it is not clear what is the appropriate list sizes required to evaluate the APPs of codewords by observing the channel state information.
In an IJDD system, codeword test is usually performed after each turbo iteration in order to determine if more iterations are needed. Detection error occurs when maximum number of turbo iterations are reached and the codeword is still incorrect. This mechanism provides a solution to determine the degree of difficulty in detecting a codeword. In each detection process, some codewords require more turbo iterations while some codewords can be detected immediately. However, when the receiver first obtains a codeword, the number of turbo iterations required to successfully detect the actual codeword is unknown. If the detector starts off with a smaller list size to evaluate the APPs, the computation process in the first iteration can then be cut short. If the channel decoder does not successfully decode the codeword in one iteration, the list size could be increased to ensure that the detector will provide a more reliable soft information in the next iteration. This motivates an improved scheme in which list size increases as outer iteration proceeds in an IJDD MIMO system. This allows the system to dynamically adjust its computation complexity according to the statistical properties of the noise and fading while maintaining a good overall performance.

4.1. Dynamic List Sphere Decoding

The concept of dynamic list can be easily adapted to LSD by applying the following rule,

Ni < Ni+1 < . . . < Nmax,

(6)

where Ni is the list size for the ith outer iteration. When implementing such a scheme, it is easier to find the L with Nmax in the beginning and sort the L in an ascending order so that the search only need to be done once for detection of
each codeword.

001681
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:41:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4.2. Dynamic Fincke-Pohst MAP
Dynamic FPMAP (DFPMAP) uses the same concept but instead of increasing N , radius is increased to ensure that more lattice points are covered within every FPMAP search after each outer iteration. If the initial radius is evaluated based on (5), adjusting the constant K would be a good choice to vary the radius size. In this case, DFPMAP can be achieved by applying the following rule,

Ki < Ki+1 < . . . < Kmax,

(7)

where Ki is the constant applied to (5) for the ith outer iteration. In almost all cases, the improved scheme will have either performance gain or complexity gain or both over the conventional schemes.

5. SIMULATION RESULTS
Simulations are performed to compare the improved schemes with conventional schemes. For simplicity, we consider the same system discussed in Section 3. Fig. 3 (a) illustrated that DLSD with increasing N in each consecutive iteration outperforms the conventional LSD with N = 512 especially at high SNR. Furthermore, Fig. 3 (b) shows that, although at low SNR, DLSD suffers from higher complexity, in SNR values of practical interest, its complexity drops significantly below the conventional scheme. This example perfectly demonstrates how the improved scheme obtains both performance and complexity improvement at the same time. Another comparison is illustrated between DFPMAP with increasing K and conventional FPMAP with K = 0.6. Although in this scenario, DFPMAP performs similar to the traditional FPMAP, Fig. 3 (b) shows that the complexity of DFPMAP reduces almost by half from FPMAP. Both of these examples demonstrate the advantage of employing the improved scheme over the conventional scheme in either LSD or FPMAP scenarios. It also shows the outstanding performance of the improved scheme in high SNR.

6. CONCLUSION
We have presented the complexity-performance comparison of LSD and FPMAP in an iterative LDPC-coded MIMO system and shown that FPMAP is better than LSD in both aspects. We also presented an improved scheme for list-type decoder that can be adapted in either LSD or FPMAP scenarios. It has the potential to improve performance, or complexity, and possibly both at the same time.

7. REFERENCES
[1] M. Tuchler, A. C. Singer, and R. Koetter, “Minimum mean squared error equalization using a priori informa-

BER

100 10−1 10−2 10−3 10−4 10−5 10−6 10−7
11

11.2

x 109 12 10
8

LSD N=256 LSD N=512 FPMAP K=0.6 DLSD DFPMAP

11.4

11.6

11.8

12

12.2

Eb/No(dB)

(a)

LSD N=256 LSD N=512 FPMAP K=0.6 DLSD DFPMAP

Average MIMO Detector Operation / Codeword

6

4

2

0

11

11.2

11.4

11.6

11.8

12

12.2

Eb/No(dB)

(b)

Fig. 3. (a) BER performance of nT = nR = 4 system employing WiMAX Code with 8 maximum number of decoding iteration and 5 maximum number of turbo iteration, 16-QAM. (b) Complexity Analysis of systems in (a)

tion,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 673–683, Mar. 2002.
[2] X. Wang and H. V. Poor, “Iterative (turbo) soft interference cancellation and decoding for coded CDMA,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 1046–1061, July 1999.
[3] B. M. Hochwald and S. ten Brink, “Achieving nearcapacity on multiple-antenna channel,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 389–399, Mar. 2003.
[4] H. Vikalo, B. Hassibi, and T. Kailath, “Iterative decoding for MIMO channels via modified sphere decoding,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 2299–2309, Nov. 2004.

001682
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:41:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

