1646

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 57, NO. 3, MAY 2008

Lowering the Error Floor of Optimized Short-Block-Length LDPC-Coded OFDM via Spreading
Ali Serener, Balasubramaniam (Bala) Natarajan, and Don M. Gruenbacher

Abstract—In this paper, short-block-length low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes are optimized and introduced, along with Walsh–Hadamard spreading, to orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) systems. Prior research has shown that lowering the threshold associated with LDPC codes results in higher error floors. The error floor becomes more pronounced for short-block-length LDPC codes that have been proposed for many wireless standards. In this paper, we show that the use of spreading along with code optimization and girth conditioning not only improves the performance but also lowers the error floor for shortlength LDPC codes. Density evolution and differential evolution methods are used during the optimization phase of the codes for the frequency-uncorrelated Rayleigh fading channel. Performance results are obtained for extended irregular repeat–accumulate codes and progressive edge-growth algorithm generated codes. Next, the performances of LDPC-coded OFDM and spread OFDM systems in correlated Rayleigh fading channels are presented. A channel statistic, namely the number of faded bits per OFDM symbol, is theoretically derived, and it is demonstrated that the distribution of this channel statistic can be used to determine how close the correlated channel performance is going to be to that of the uncorrelated fading channel.
Index Terms—Frequency-correlated fading channels, lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes, optimal LDPC code design, short-block-length LDPC codes, spread orthogonal frequencydivision multiplexing (OFDM).
I. INTRODUCTION
O RTHOGONAL frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) has emerged as a popular modulation choice for high-data-rate wireless applications. In OFDM, a high-rate data stream is parallelized into a number of low-rate data streams, where each is carried on an orthogonal subcarrier. OFDM systems are able to better deal with multipath and resulting intersymbol interference (ISI) because the subcarriers are narrowband (low rate), and no complex equalization is needed per subcarrier. However, in a slow multipath fading channel, if one of the subcarriers goes into a deep fade, then the information on the subcarrier gets deeply attenuated and cannot be easily recovered at the receiver. To combat this
Manuscript received December 24, 2005; revised March 24, 2007 and May 17, 2007. The review of this paper was coordinated by Dr. M. Valenti.
A. Serener was with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS 66506 USA. He is now with the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Near East University, Nicosia, Cyprus (e-mail: aserener@neu.edu.tr).
B. Natarajan and D. M. Gruenbacher are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS 66506 USA (e-mail: bala@ksu.edu; grue@ksu.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVT.2007.907280

situation, it is necessary and quite common to employ channel coding in OFDM-based systems. One of the oldest types of error-correcting codes that has also been a part of second- and third-generation digital cellular systems is convolutional codes. Convolutional codes in fading channels require the use of interleavers because they do not respond well to error bursts. In contrast, in [1], it was observed that with random construction of the parity-check matrix, there was no need to have a separate channel interleaver for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [2]. Turbo codes [3] are another coding scheme that require the use of interleavers, but they provide coding gains comparable to LDPC codes. A class of turbo codes called duobinary turbo codes has been shown to provide very good performance for short-block-length codes required in wireless standards such as IEEE 802.16e and IEEE 802.22. In this paper, we focus our attention on short-block-length LDPC-coded OFDM systems since IEEE 802.16 and 802.22 standards also specify LDPC-coded OFDM implementation as one of the options.
LDPC code design has drawn considerable attention (e.g., [4]–[6]) for the fact that LDPC codes have high encoding complexity and need to be carefully constructed. Depending on the application, the code is designed to meet certain criteria, including low error floors, efficient encoding and decoding, or near-capacity performance. Tradeoffs exist among them, and it is difficult to design LDPC codes that meet all the criteria. One such tradeoff is the deterioration of the error floor as the performance approaches the Shannon limit [4], [7]. A few methods have been proposed in the literature for lowering the error floors, such as [8] and [9].
Error floors have a higher chance of occurrence when randomly constructed short-block-length codes are used because of their increased likelihood of cycles in the code. Several methods, which are referred to as girth conditioning, exist for improving the performance of short-block-length LDPC codes, particularly at high signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs) [10]–[12]. These methods maximize the girth (shortest cycle length) of the code’s graph so that short cycles in the code will be removed, and the messages arriving at each node will be more independent, which is an assumption made in the message-passing decoding algorithm.
In addition to the girth conditioning methods, techniques have been proposed for designing well-performing LDPC codes for a particular channel. These techniques are based on the fact that the LDPC code performance is bounded by a threshold for many channels. Using this idea, Richardson et al. developed a

0018-9545/$25.00 © 2008 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SERENER et al.: LOWERING THE ERROR FLOOR OF SHORT-BLOCK-LENGTH LDPC-CODED OFDM VIA SPREADING

1647

numerical technique, called density evolution [13], to analyze OFDM systems that use optimized LDPC codes in frequency-

the performance of the LDPC decoding algorithm. This tech- correlated fading channels is provided. A channel statistic,

nique was later combined with another method, called differ- named the number of faded bits per OFDM symbol Kf{OFDM}, ential evolution [14], to design good irregular LDPC codes for is derived, and it is shown that whenever the distribution of

various channels, e.g., additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) Kf{OFDM} in frequency-correlated channels approaches that of

[13] and uncorrelated Rayleigh fading [1].

Kf{OFDM} in an uncorrelated channel, then the performances

LDPC codes have recently been designed using the density in those channels also approach each other. This gives us an

evolution and the differential evolution methods for use in opportunity to predict the performance of the LDPC-coded

time (selective)-correlated Rayleigh fading channels [1], [15]. spread OFDM systems in frequency-correlated fading channels

Although a lot of research has been devoted to long block codes relative to that in an uncorrelated fading channel.

in the literature, particularly in the area of information theory, This paper is organized as follows: Section II gives the details

such codes are unfavorable for practical considerations. Short- of the system model and derives a log-likelihood expression for

length LDPC codes, on the other hand, have been studied by initializing the decoding algorithm for the coded spread OFDM

a few researchers, but their optimization and error floor issues system. Section III describes how LDPC codes are optimized

have not been investigated in the context of OFDM systems. and gives an insight into the heuristic search method for finding

Since most upcoming wireless standards propose the use of good codes. The performance of the optimized LDPC codes in

short-block-length LDPC codes along with OFDM, we believe the uncorrelated fading channel is shown in Section IV. The

that it is important to characterize their performance.

channel statistic is derived in Section V, and its distribution

This paper investigates the optimal design and performance is plotted in various frequency-correlated channel models. The

of short-block-length LDPC codes for the first time in spread performance results of spread OFDM systems using optimized

OFDM [16] systems operating in both frequency-uncorrelated codes in frequency-correlated channels are given in Section VI,

and frequency-correlated Rayleigh fading channels. The well- and the conclusions are given in Section VII.

established methods of density evolution, differential evolu-

tion, and girth conditioning are first applied to create optimal codes for the frequency-uncorrelated channel. While the opti-

II. SYSTEM MODEL

mized LDPC codes reasonably exploit the available frequency The LDPC-coded spread OFDM transmitter and receiver

diversity, we illustrate that their performance still suffers model is shown in Fig. 1. At the transmitter end, the incoming

from an error floor. We demonstrate, for the first time, that binary data stream first enters an LDPC encoder. An LDPC

employing spreading in combination with coding better exploits code has rate R = K/N with K input bits and N output

the frequency diversity, reduces the error floor, and provides bits. LDPC codes are linear block codes defined by a very

performance gains for short-block-length LDPC codes used in sparse parity-check matrix H. Matrix H is required to be full

practice. The effect of spreading is evaluated for both optimized rank, with dimensions M × N , where M = N − K. Typically,

and unoptimized LDPC-coded OFDM systems operating in the row and column weights of the parity-check matrix are

uncorrelated and frequency-correlated channels. Specifically, much smaller than its dimensions, i.e., H has a small number

we consider the performance of optimized extended irregular (density) of ones. To eliminate the performance degrading four

repeat–accumulate (eIRA) codes [17] and codes generated with cycles in the parity-check matrix, no two columns in the H

the progressive edge-growth (PEG) algorithm [11] in both matrix are allowed to overlap in more than one nonzero bit

uncorrelated and correlated Rayleigh fading channels and com- position.

pare the results to those obtained using unoptimized randomly In typical OFDM systems, the output of the LDPC encoder

generated regular LDPC codes. It is demonstrated that in both is modulated (using phase-shift keying (PSK) or quadratic-

OFDM and Walsh–Hadamard (WH) spread OFDM systems, amplitude modulation) and transmitted over N carriers in par-

codes optimized with the PEG algorithm provide the best allel. However, in a spread OFDM system, the modulated data

performance.

symbols are first spread using WH codes. The spread data

Finally, we present a statistical measure to compare the per- symbols are then transmitted over N carriers (implemented

formance of an LDPC-coded OFDM system in both frequency- using an inverse fast Fourier transform (FFT) block followed

uncorrelated and frequency-correlated environments. Density by a digital-to-analog converter). As a result of this spreading,

evolution tracks the error probability at each iteration of the each data symbol resides on all carriers, enabling the system to

decoding algorithm by using the densities of the messages that better exploit the available frequency diversity.

travel in the bipartite graph of an LDPC code. This requires, for The transmitted signal corresponding to a single OFDM

example, the knowledge of the initial densities of the messages block is

resulting from the output of the channel, e.g., AWGN [1] and uncorrelated Rayleigh fading [15]. However, for both timeand frequency-correlated fading channels, these expressions are too complex to solve. A suggested solution for time-correlated

N −1 N −1

s(t) = e

bkcki ej(2πfct+2πi∆ft) g(t) (1)

k=0 i=0

channels is to utilize the codes optimized for the uncorrelated where bk = {±1} is the binary PSK (BPSK) data symbol; fading channels in the correlated fading channels as well [1], cik is the ith chip of the kth spreading code in the WH [15]. This is not optimal and might affect the performance. code set scaled t√o ensure a total energy per bit equal to 1 Here, an analysis tool to determine the performance of the (i.e., cki = {±(1/ N )}); g(t) is a rectangular pulse that time
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1648

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 57, NO. 3, MAY 2008

Fig. 1. Block diagrams of the coded spread OFDM transmitter and receiver.

limits the OFDM transmission to one block period; ∆f is the subcarrier spacing ensuring orthogonality among subcarriers (∆f = 1/Ts, where Ts is the OFDM symbol duration); and fc is the carrier frequency. Practical implementation of OFDM and spread OFDM may permit the use of a cyclic prefix to avoid ISI due to multipath.
The transmitted signal is sent across a slowly varying multipath channel. Multipath propagation in time results in frequency selectivity over the entire bandwidth of transmission [18]. However, each narrowband subcarrier experiences a nonselective fade, and channel fades are correlated among different subcarriers. Assuming Jakes’ channel model, the correlation between the ith subcarrier fade αi and the jth subcarrier fade αj is given by [19]

1

ψi,j = 1+

|i

−

j|

∆f (∆f )c

2

(2)

Here, the first term is the desired information, and the second term is the ISI on the ith carrier (ρikj = cikcij). Next, the ri(j)’s are recombined to arrive at the decision variable R(j), i.e.,

N −1

R(j) = ωiri(j).

(6)

i=0

In this paper, minimum mean-square-error combining (MMSEC) is employed as it has been proven to produce the best performance in terms of probability of error [20]. The MMSEC weights can be easily determined by exploiting the fact that the estimation error must be orthogonal to ri(j) [21], i.e.,

N −1
E bk − ωiri(j) · ri(j) = 0,
i=0

i = 0, . . . , N − 1 (7)

where (∆f )c is the coherence bandwidth of the channel. The received signal corresponds to

r(t) = e

N −1 N −1
αibkcki ej(2πfct+2πi∆f t+φi)
k=0 i=0

g(t) + n(t) (3)

where αi is the Rayleigh fading gain, φi is the phase offset introduced in the ith subcarrier due to the channel, and n(t)
is the AWGN. The received signal r(t) is first projected onto its N orthogo-
nal subcarriers to yield the vector r = (r0, . . . , rN−1)T . This operation can be practically implemented using an N -point FFT. The ith component of r corresponds to

N −1
ri = αi bkcik + ni, i = 0, . . . , N − 1. (4)
k=0

where E{·} denotes the expected value. The solution to
this as obtained from the Weiner filter theory [22] is ωi = C−1A, where C = E{ri(j) · ri(j)|αi} and A = E{bk · ri(j)|αi}. This operation when applied to (5) gives C−1 = 1/σr2i(j) and A = αi/N , where σr2i(j) = (αi2 + σn2 /N ). Therefore, the optimal weight vector ω = (ω0, . . . , ωN−1), which is identical for all data symbols, is given by ωi = (αi/αi2 + σn2 ).
The despreading and linear combining operations can be
combined into a single matrix transformation to reduce com-
plexity. This linear transformation T is given by

 c11ω1 c21ω2 · · · c1N ωN 

T

=



c12ω1 ...

c22ω2 ...

··· ...

cN2

ωN ...



.

(8)

cN1 ω1 c2N ω2 · · · cNN ωN

The N soft decision statistics corresponding to the N data symbols, i.e., R = (R(0), . . . , R(N − 1))T , is obtained from
r via the transformation

Here, ni is the noise per carrier with variance σn2 . Perfect phase tracking and removal have been assumed while writing (4). To

R = T r.

(9)

detect the jth data symbol, r is despread using the jth symbol’s spreading code. This results in r(j) = (r0(j), . . . , rN−1(j))T , where ri(j) is given by

This R vector is then fed into the LDPC decoder. The decoding algorithm for LDPC codes is an iterative
message-passing algorithm and consists of finding the most

ri(j)

=

αibj N

+

αibkρikj + cij ni,

k=j

i, j = 0, . . . , N − 1. (5)

likely vector xˆ such that Hxˆ = 0 by using the a priori information from the channel and exchanging messages (extrinsic probabilities) between neighboring nodes in a graph along the edges until this constraint is satisfied or the maximum allowable

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SERENER et al.: LOWERING THE ERROR FLOOR OF SHORT-BLOCK-LENGTH LDPC-CODED OFDM VIA SPREADING

1649

number of iterations is reached. In this paper, an LDPC decoder to generate the codes. For either technique, girth conditioning is

similar to that in [23] is employed. The log-likelihood ratio used during the code construction process to help reduce error

(LLR) of the data symbols is also updated, taking into account floors.

the characteristics of the channel. The derivation of the LLR The first step of the optimization process employs differential

for the spread OFDM system is detailed in the following evolution in conjunction with density evolution to give the row

discussion.

and column degree distribution polynomials λ(x) and ρ(x) of

The decision statistic for the jth data symbol is

the parity-check matrix H that yield the largest noise threshold

R(j)

=

bj N

N −1
αiωi

N −1
+ ωiαi

N −1

bkρikj +

cij niωi

i=0

i=0

k=j

i=0

(10)

=

bj N

N −1
αiωi

+ µj

(11)

i=0

where µj is the combined interference and noise terms. Assuming a large N and using the central limit theorem, the

interference term [second term in (10)] can be approximated

as a Gaussian random variable. Therefore, R(j), which is

conditioned on αi, is also Gaussian with a probability density function (pdf), i.e.,

p (R(j)) =



1 2πσµ2j

exp  −

R(j)

−

bj N

N −1
αiωi

i=0

2σµ2j

2  .

ρ (ρ is the standard deviation of the noise). Differential evolution is a population-based evolutionary computation algorithm for global optimization [14] and is used to search for the degree distribution pair. During this process, discretized density evolution method [24] tracks the evolution of the message distributions as the probability of error converges to zero. The optimization process ends when a degree distribution pair is found that results in a probability of error close to zero at the highest possible noise threshold.
Density evolution assumes infinite block length and iterations. The general concentration theorem [13] confirms that as the codeword length approaches infinity, the decoder performance will converge to that of a corresponding loop-free graph. For a finite number of iterations, the performance will only slightly deviate from the threshold [13]. However, small loops produced in the graph as a result of using finite block lengths could have more severe effects. Therefore, the formation of any four cycles in the graph should be avoided [13].
Through density evolution and differential evolution, it is

(12) possible to find the degree distribution polynomials that give

Here, σµ2j is the variance of µj and is given by

σµ2j =
k=j

N −1
αiωiρikj
i=0

2

+

σn2 N

N −1
ωi2.

i=0

the largest threshold for a given channel, e.g., erasure [25], AWGN [13], and uncorrelated Rayleigh fading [1]. When the fading present in the channel is correlated, however, the task of initializing the density evolution based on the channel is too (13) complex, and optimizing the codes specifically for that channel becomes unattainable. One way to get around this is to use

codes optimized for uncorrelated fading channels instead. This The LLR for the data symbol bj, given R(j) and the channel, is was done for time-correlated fading channels in [15], and in

LLRSOFDM(j)

=

log

P (bj = 1|R(j), αi) P (bj = −1|R(j), αi)

.

Section V, this analysis is extended to frequency-correlated (14) channels commonly experienced in OFDM and spread OFDM
systems.

Substituting (12) into (14) gives

N −1

2

R(j) N

αiωi

LLRSOFDM(j) =

i=0
σµ2 j

.

(15)

Therefore, assuming perfect channel information, the LLR becomes

Once the optimal degree distribution polynomials are determined, they can be used to construct the parity-check matrix that defines the code. Randomly constructed short-block-length LDPC codes have unpredictable performance [26]. Mao and Banihashemi [10] suggested that the distribution of cycles in a graph, called girth distribution, could be used as part of a heuristic search method to find good short-block-length codes. They generated a girth distribution for 2000 codes and selected

LLRSOFDM(j) =
k=j

N −1

2R(j) N

αiωi

i=0 N −1
αiωiρki j

2

+

σn2 N

.
N −1
ωi2

i=0

i=0

the code with the highest girth average. This code showed
improved performance at high SNRs, eliminating the error (16) floors down to a bit error rate of 10−6 with no degradation in
the waterfall region. The two methods considered here in generating H are the
PEG algorithm [11] and eIRA codes [17]. The PEG algorithm

III. LDPC CODE OPTIMIZATION

is a girth conditioning method and connects the check nodes to the variable nodes in the Tanner graph by adding the edges in a

The optimization of the LDPC codes first involves using manner that maximizes the local girth. The short-block-length

density evolution and differential evolution to find the node LDPC codes designed using this algorithm were shown to

degree distribution polynomials λ(x) and ρ(x) and the noise achieve significant performance improvements when compared

threshold σ. Two different construction methods are then used to randomly constructed codes [11]. The eIRA codes have a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1650

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 57, NO. 3, MAY 2008

Fig. 2. Mean and standard deviation of the girth distribution and the histogram of the girth averages of 6000 eIRA codes optimized for the uncorrelated Rayleigh fading channel.

similar structure to the systematic irregular repeat–accumulate A structured version of the eIRA codes, called SeIRA, has

codes [6] and have been shown to have very low error floors for recently been shown to reduce the error floor associated with

moderate-length high-rate codes [17].

traditional eIRA codes [27]. The performance of SeIRA codes

The mean and standard deviation of the girth distribution is shown to be equivalent to PEG codes in a flat-fading channel

and the histogram of the girth averages of 6000 eIRA codes for block lengths of 2048. However, their performance in a

optimized for the uncorrelated Rayleigh fading channel are correlated fading channel with spread OFDM has yet to be

shown in Fig. 2. It is evident that the performance degrading evaluated for block lengths set in the more recent wireless

four cycles has been successfully eliminated. In this paper, the standards.

mean of the girth averages is 7.59 for eIRA codes and 8.11

for codes generated with the PEG algorithm in the uncorrelated fading channel.
The results in Sections IV and VI show that the eIRA codes

IV. PERFORMANCE IN THE UNCORRELATED FADING CHANNEL

suffer from error floors. The error floors present in the eIRA The performance results of OFDM and spread OFDM sys-

codes are likely the result of the higher girth average and/or the tems using optimized LDPC codes are shown in Figs. 3 and 4.

prevalence of shorter cycles such as six cycles. As discussed in The performance results of the same systems that use regular

[27], high error floors can be the result of low girth averages, random LDPC codes with no optimization are also shown. All

a poor minimum distance, and the cycle properties of the systems have 1024 subcarriers (i.e., block length N = 1024)

code. While eIRA codes are fairly simple to implement, their that are BPSK modulated. The rate of the LDPC code is one

structure may restrict the generation of codes with both good half. The noise threshold σ obtained from the optimization

cycle and girth properties and lead to higher noise floors.

process is 0.7378 or, equivalently, 2.64 dB. This is about 0.8 dB

The performance of the eIRA codes at high SNRs improves away from the capacity of this channel, i.e., 1.83 dB [1]. Table I

with the girth conditioning method, but the error floors cannot shows the resulting degree distribution pair of this code after

be completely eliminated. The random part of the eIRA codes the optimization process.

corresponds to a smaller submatrix, and the stringent weight As expected, coded OFDM and coded spread OFDM per-

constraints of the optimization process do not allow many form better when optimized codes are used. At SNRs less than

variations in the code construction. This can be observed in 5 dB, the eIRA codes and the PEG algorithm constructed codes

Fig. 2, which shows the deviation of the girth distribution for perform about the same, with a gain of about 0.5 dB at a bit the codes analyzed as on the order of 10−4. As a result, the error rate of 10−3 over systems with no code optimization.

improvement with the girth conditioning is small.

At higher SNRs, the eIRA codes suffer from an error floor.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SERENER et al.: LOWERING THE ERROR FLOOR OF SHORT-BLOCK-LENGTH LDPC-CODED OFDM VIA SPREADING

1651

Fig. 3. Performance results of the coded OFDM with and without optimization in the uncorrelated Rayleigh fading channel.

V. ANALYSIS IN THE CORRELATED FADING CHANNEL
As noted earlier, it is not possible to optimize the codes specifically for a correlated fading channel, and the use of the codes optimized for an uncorrelated channel would not be optimal in the correlated channels. In this section, a channel statistic, named the number of faded bits per OFDM symbol, is derived, and its distribution in uncorrelated and frequencycorrelated fading channels is plotted. It is then demonstrated with the results of the next section that this distribution is actually an indication of how the LDPC-coded OFDM and spread OFDM systems are going to perform in a frequencycorrelated fading channel relative to an uncorrelated fading channel. It is shown that as the coherence bandwidth decreases and the distributions in both channels become similar, the performances will be close as well. This development of this statistic parallels closely the derivation of a similar statistic for the time domain shown in [15]. The remainder of this section shows this development and the references required to create a frequency-domain statistic similar to the time-domain statistic discussed in [15].
In the frequency domain, the average bandwidth of fades µf (equivalent to the time-domain average duration of fades [19]) is given by [28]

µf

=

PR(r) NR(r)

=

P (R ≤ r) NR(r)

(17)

where PR(r) is the probability that the fade amplitude R is below a level r, and NR(r) is the level crossing rate. Level r is normalized to the root-mean-square (rms) power to simplify the analysis, resulting in the normalized level ρ = r/ E[α2], where E[α2] = 2σ2 = 1. Fades are Rayleigh distributed;
therefore

Fig. 4. Performance results of the coded spread OFDM with and without optimization in the uncorrelated Rayleigh fading channel.
TABLE I DEGREE DISTRIBUTION PAIRS OF THE RATE-1/2 LDPC CODE OF BLOCK
LENGTHS 512, 640, AND 1024 FOR THE UNCORRELATED RAYLEIGH FADING CHANNEL. THE THRESHOLD σ AND ITS CORRESPONDING
Eb/No ARE ALSO GIVEN

P (R ≤ ρ) = 1 − e−ρ2 .

(18)

The level crossing rate in the frequency domain is given by [29]

NR(ρ)

∼=

√ 2π

ρe−ρ2

τrms

(19)

where τrms is the rms delay spread. Defining the coherence bandwidth (∆f )c as the bandwidth over which fade correlation is above 0.5, it is related to τrms by [30]

1

(∆f )c

≈

. 5τrms

(20)

Substituting (18), (19), and (20) into (17), the average bandwidth of fades is obtained as

µf

=

5(∆f )c√(eρ2 2 πρ

−

1) .

(21)

However, the figures reveal that introducing spreading lowers A time-domain expression for the distribution function of

this error floor, even as it also provides performance gains to deep fades during a fade interval t is given by Rice [31].

the coded OFDM.

Extending this to the frequency domain, when ρ is small,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1652

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 57, NO. 3, MAY 2008

the complementary cumulative distribution function of the fade bandwidth can be approximated by

g(x)

=

2µf x

I1

2µf2 πx2

e−2µf2 /(πx2)

(22)

where I1(·) is the modified Bessel function of the first kind. Therefore, the pdf corresponds to [31]

where ⊗ is the convolution operator. Using the central limit
theorem, when Nf is large, the distribution of Fc becomes Gaussian, with mean µFc and variance σF2c .
Finally, assuming that faded bits occur during a fade band-
width, the mean and variance of the number of faded bits per
OFDM symbol Kf{OFDM} are given by

µKf {OFDM}

=

µFc ∆f

pF

(x)

=

−

d dx

g(x).

(23)

With some algebra, the mean square value of the fades can be obtained as [32]

∞

E[x2] =

x2pF (x)dx =

8 π

µ2f

c

(24)

0

where

∞

c = x−3/2I1(x)e−xdx ≈ 1.064

(25)

0

is obtained in [32] by numerical integration methods. Then, the variance of the fade bandwidth is given by

= N (1 − e−ρ2 )

(32)

σ2
Kf {OFDM}

=

σF2 c (∆f )2

√ = 5 2c − √5
π 2π

× N (∆f )c 1 e−ρ2 (eρ2 − 1)2. (33) ∆f ρ

Figs. 5 and 6 show the distributions of Kf{OFDM} in the uncorrelated Rayleigh fading channel obtained from simulation and in indoor and outdoor correlated Rayleigh fading channels obtained from simulation and the theoretical analysis given in this section. The indoor channel models are channels B and E of the IEEE 802.11a standard [33], and the outdoor channel models are hilly terrain, typical urban, and rural area of the

σf2 = E[x2] − µ2f =

8c−1 π

µf2 .

Global System for Mobile communications (GSM) standard (26) [34]. Both figures indicate that the theoretical analysis of this
section matches the simulation results. Fig. 5 also shows that as

Assuming there are Nf intervals during which fade occurs, the total fade bandwidth Fc is

Nf
Fc = fi
i=1

(27)

the coherence bandwidth decreases, the Kf{OFDM} distribution in a correlated fading channel approaches that in an uncorrelated fading channel. This is not very obvious in Fig. 6, where the coherence bandwidths are relatively high.
It is well known that the main parameter that influences the performance of a block code such as an LDPC code is the number of errors within the block. Therefore, the number

where fi is the ith fade bandwidth. Since fades occur NR(ρ) times in bandwidth BW = N ∆f , then Nf can be shown to be equal to

2√πρe−ρ2

Nf = NR(ρ)BW = NR(ρ)N ∆f =

N ∆f. (28) 5(∆f )c

of erroneous (faded) bits per OFDM symbol can be used to characterize performance. Additionally, in an uncorrelated fading channel, every coded bit within an OFDM symbol undergoes independent fading, resulting in maximum exploitable diversity gain. However, in a correlated fading channel, there is less diversity to exploit, and bit errors may occur in bursts, degrading the overall performance. In either case, the number of

From this definition, the mean, variance, and distribution of Fc can be expressed as

faded bits per OFDM symbol serves as a useful statistic to make qualitative assessments of how the performance is affected by

channel correlation, as will be shown in the next section for

µFc = E[Fc] = Nf µf

indoor and outdoor channels.

= N (1 − e−ρ2 )∆f

σF2c = Nf σf2

√

=

5

2c π

−

√5 2π

(29)

VI. RESULTS

Performance results of optimized coded OFDM and coded spread OFDM in the hilly terrain and rural area outdoor channel models are given in Figs. 7 and 8, respectively. The total bandwidth BW is 5 MHz, whereas the hilly terrain channel

×

(N (∆f )c∆f )

1 e−ρ2 (eρ2 ρ

−

1)2

pFc (x) = ⊗Ni=f1 pF (x)

model has a 39.72-kHz coherence bandwidth, and the rural area (30) model has a 2050-kHz coherence bandwidth. There are 1024
subcarriers (each BPSK modulated), and the rate of the LDPC (31) code is one half.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SERENER et al.: LOWERING THE ERROR FLOOR OF SHORT-BLOCK-LENGTH LDPC-CODED OFDM VIA SPREADING

1653

Fig. 5. Distribution of the number of faded bits per OFDM codeword Kf{OFDM} for the outdoor channel models. ρ = 0.76, N = 1024, and ∆f = 4.88 kHz.

Fig. 6. Distribution of the number of faded bits per OFDM codeword Kf{OFDM} for the indoor channel models. ρ = 0.76, N = 1024, and ∆f = 15.8 kHz. Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1654

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 57, NO. 3, MAY 2008

Fig. 7. Performance results of the coded OFDM and coded spread OFDM in Fig. 9. Performance results of the coded OFDM and coded spread OFDM in

the hilly terrain outdoor channel model with and without optimization.

the channel E indoor channel model with and without optimization.

performance of OFDM and spread OFDM systems in the hilly

terrain channel is closer to the performance in the uncorrelated

Rayleigh fading channel.

Fig. 9 shows the performance results for the same scenarios,

but in the indoor channel model channel E. Now, the system

bandwidth is 16 MHz, with an 800-ns guard interval, and

the coherence bandwidth is 800 kHz. Optimized LDPC codes

generated using the PEG construction again outperforms the

eIRA codes and the random codes with no optimization in

OFDM systems as well as spread OFDM systems. However,

the performance gain between optimized eIRA codes and PEG

constructed codes in spread OFDM systems is negligible. Sim-

ilar to the rural area channel, the importance of spreading is

obvious here as the system using spreading and the codes with

no optimization clearly performs better than that using PEG

generated codes and no spreading.

Fig. 8. Performance results of the coded OFDM and coded spread OFDM in

Optimized eIRA codes in OFDM again suffer from an error

the rural area outdoor channel model with and without optimization.

floor, but this can be lowered with the addition of spreading.

As demonstrated in Fig. 6, the distribution of the number of

Codes optimized with the PEG algorithm perform best in faded bits per OFDM symbol in channel E is not similar to that

both cases, giving a 0.5-dB improvement in spread OFDM in the uncorrelated fading channel. Hence, the performances in

systems over codes with no optimization at a bit error rate of channel E are a lot worse than those in the uncorrelated fading 10−5 in the hilly terrain channel. In the rural area channel, this channels that are shown in Figs. 3 and 4.

improvement is negligible. It is interesting to note that using Figs. 7–9 demonstrate that spreading can be employed in

spreading along with codes with no optimization performs combination with coding to better exploit the frequency diver-

about the same or better than using PEG generated codes and sity. The gain provided by spreading prior to channel decoding

no spreading in both channels. This shows the significant effect is the primary reason for the improved performance and lower-

of spreading on the performance.

ing of the error floor. The actual value of the combined gain is

In OFDM systems, the eIRA codes exhibit an error floor at a function of the degree of diversity as well as the properties of

high SNRs, and they are about the same as the codes with no the LDPC code and spreading transform used.

optimization in low SNRs. However, in OFDM systems with Recent wireless standards are incorporating LDPC codes

spreading, both optimization methods improve the performance with block sizes smaller than 1024 (e.g., see IEEE 802.16,

over codes with no optimization. Spreading also lowers the IEEE 802.11n, and IEEE 802.22). Therefore, additional code

error floors associated with the eIRA codes, much like in an optimizations and simulations were performed for the block

uncorrelated Rayleigh fading channel.

sizes of 512 and 640 for the systems operating in channel E, and

The distribution of the number of faded bits per OFDM the results are shown in Figs. 10 and 11. The degree distribution

symbol in the hilly terrain channel is more similar to that pairs and the thresholds for these smaller block lengths are also

in the uncorrelated Rayleigh fading channel rather than that included in Table I. The results show that the performance of

in the rural area channel, as shown in Fig. 5. Therefore, the OFDM without spreading is similar for block lengths of 512

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SERENER et al.: LOWERING THE ERROR FLOOR OF SHORT-BLOCK-LENGTH LDPC-CODED OFDM VIA SPREADING

1655

Fig. 10. Performance results of the coded OFDM and coded spread OFDM in the channel E indoor channel model. Codes are optimized with the PEG construction and have block lengths of 512, 640, and 1024.

spreading along with code optimization and girth conditioning improves the performance and error floor that typically accompanies short-block-length codes. Two different code construction techniques were applied to the optimized parity-check matrix distributions obtained through density evolution. The PEG algorithm consistently provided better performance than the eIRA codes. In the frequency-correlated fading channel, it was shown that spreading allows the properties of the optimized LDPC code to be fully utilized, whereas systems without spreading exhibited degraded performance that did not vary with block size.
A channel statistic was derived that represents the number of faded bits in the frequency-correlated fading channel. It was shown to be useful for predicting when the performance of the optimized system in a fading channel would approach to the performance of the same system operating in an uncorrelated fading channel.
REFERENCES

Fig. 11. Performance results of the coded OFDM and coded spread OFDM in the channel E indoor channel model. Optimized eIRA codes with block lengths of 512, 640, and 1024 are used.
and 640. The deviation at high SNRs for eIRA codes can be attributed to the previously discussed error floor issue. We also observe that the spread OFDM system outperforms the OFDM systems without spreading. This reaffirms our belief that even while operating in a frequency-correlated fading channel, a short-block-length LDPC-coded OFDM system can achieve very good performance if spreading is employed. It is also noted that increasing the block size in spread OFDM systems improves the overall system performance, as is expected.
VII. CONCLUSION
A technique for optimizing short-block-length LDPC codes for use in both traditional and spread OFDM systems operating under frequency-correlated fading channels was presented. The design and performance analysis of the WH spread OFDM system using optimized LDPC codes in the fading channel was presented for the first time. It was shown that the use of

[1] J. Hou, P. H. Siegel, and L. B. Milstein, “Performance analysis and code optimization of low density parity-check codes on Rayleigh fading channels,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 924–934, May 2001.
[2] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[3] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit errorcorrecting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[4] K. Andrews, S. Dolinar, D. Divsalar, and J. Thorpe, “Design of lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes for deep-space applications,” Jet Propulsion Lab., Pasadena, CA, IPN Progress Rep. 42-159, Nov. 2004.
[5] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 638–656, Feb. 2001.
[6] H. Jin, A. Khandekar, and R. McEliece, “Irregular repeat–accumulate codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Related Topics, Sep. 2000, pp. 1–8.
[7] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The renaissance of Gallager’s lowdensity parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 41, no. 8, pp. 126– 131, Aug. 2003.
[8] T. Tian, C. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Construction of irregular LDPC codes with low error floors,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Commun., May 2003, vol. 5, pp. 3125–3129.
[9] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Improved progressive-edge-growth (PEG) construction of irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 715–717, Dec. 2004.
[10] Y. Mao and A. H. Banihashemi, “A heuristic search for good low-density parity-check codes at short block lengths,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Jun. 2001, vol. 1, pp. 41–44.
[11] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D.-M. Arnold, “Progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecom. Conf., Nov. 2001, vol. 2, pp. 995–1001.
[12] Y.-J. Ko and J.-H. Kim, “Girth conditioning for construction of short block length irregular LDPC codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 187–188, Feb. 2004.
[13] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[14] K. Price and R. Storn, “Differential evolution—A simple and efficient adaptive scheme for global optimization over continuous spaces,” J. Global Optim., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 341–359, 1997.
[15] F. Peng, M. Yang, and W. E. Ryan, “Design and analysis of eIRA codes on correlated fading channels,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecom. Conf., Nov. 2004, vol. 1, pp. 503–508.
[16] M. Debbah, P. Loubaton, and M. de Courville, “Spread OFDM performance with MMSE equalization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech, Signal Process., 2001, vol. 4, pp. 2385–2388.
[17] M. Yang, W. E. Ryan, and Y. Li, “Design of efficiently encodable moderate-length high-rate irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 564–571, Apr. 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1656

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 57, NO. 3, MAY 2008

[18] J. G. Proakis, Digital Communications, 3rd ed. New York: McGrawHill, 1995.
[19] J. W. C. Jakes, Ed., Microwave Mobile Communications. New York: Wiley, 1974.
[20] P. Ramjee and R. van Nee, OFDM for Wireless Multimedia Communications. Boston, MA: Artech House, 2000.
[21] A. Leon-Garcia, Probability and Random Processes for Electrical Engineering, 2nd ed. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, May 1994.
[22] S. Haykin, Adaptive Filter Theory, 2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1991.
[23] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[24] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[25] A. Shokrollahi and R. Storn, “Design of efficient erasure codes with differential evolution,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Sorrento, Italy, Jun. 2000, p. 5.
[26] D. J. C. MacKay, S. T. Wilson, and M. C. Davey, “Comparison of constructions of irregular Gallager codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 10, pp. 1449–1454, Oct. 1999.
[27] Y. Zhang, W. E. Ryan, and F. Peng, “Design of structured eIRA codes with applications to wireless channels,” in Proc. Wireless Commun. Netw. Conf., Apr. 2006, vol. 3, pp. 1390–1395.
[28] K. Witrisal, Y.-H. Kim, and R. Prasad, “A new method to measure parameters of frequency-selective radio channels using power measurements,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 49, no. 10, pp. 1788–1800, Oct. 2001.
[29] K. Witrisal, “On estimating the RMS delay spread from the frequency domain level crossing rate,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 7, pp. 287– 289, Jul. 2001.
[30] T. S. Rappaport, Wireless Communications: Principles and Practice, 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2002.
[31] S. O. Rice, “Distribution of the duration of fades in radio transmission: Gaussian noise model,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 37, pp. 581–635, May 1958.
[32] F. Peng, “Coding and equalization techniques for OFDM fading channels,” M.S. thesis, Univ. Arizona, Tucson, AZ, 2004.
[33] A. Doufexi, S. Armour, M. Butler, A. Nix, D. Bull, J. McGeehan, and P. Karlsson, “A comparison of the HIPERLAN/2 IEEE 802.11a wireless LAN standards,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 40, no. 5, pp. 175–180, May 2002.
[34] COST-207, “Digital land mobile radio communications,” Commission Eur. Community, Brussels, Belgium, Final Rep. of the COST-Project 207, 1989.

Balasubramaniam (Bala) Natarajan received the B.E. degree in electrical engineering from Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani, India, in 1997 and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from Colorado State University, Fort Collins, in 2002.
Since the fall of 2002, he has been a Faculty Member with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Kansas State University, Manhattan, where he is currently heading the Wireless Communication (WiCom) Research Group. He was also involved in telecommunications research at Daimler Benz Research Center, Bangalore, India, in 1997. He has numerous journal and refereed conference publications in the wireless communications arena and has published a book entitled Multi-Carrier Technologies for Wireless Communications (Kluwer, 2002). He has two pending patents in adaptive/customized precoder design for spread spectrum and MIMO systems. His research interests include spread spectrum communications, multicarrier CDMA and OFDM, multiuser detection, statistical signal processing, antenna array processing, and application of evolutionary algorithms in wireless communications.
Don M. Gruenbacher received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from Kansas State University, Manhattan, in 1994.
He is currently an Associate Professor and Head of the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Kansas State University. Prior to joining Kansas State University, he was a member of Senior Staff with the Applied Physics Laboratory, Johns Hopkins University, Laurel, MD. His teaching and research interests include communications, computer networks, and digital design.

Ali Serener received the B.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from The University of Kansas, Lawrence, in 1997 and the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Kansas State University, Manhattan, in 2000 and 2005, respectively.
He is currently an Assistant Professor with the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Near East University, Nicosia, Cyprus. His current research interests are applications of errorcorrecting codes to wireless communications.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

