A Fast and Efficient Encoding Structure for QC-LDPC Codes
Zhixing Yang, Qiuliang Xie, Kewu Peng and Jian Fu
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology (TNList) Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
Email: yangzhx@thu.edu.cnandxqI06@mails.thu.edu.cn

Abstract- Parallel-Input Parallel-Output (PIPO) structure for Quasi-Cyclic Low-Density Parity-Check (QC-LDPC) codes is proposed in this paper to implement a faster and more efficient QC-LDPC encoder than that based on conventional Serial-Input Parallel-Output (SIPO) or Parallel-Input Serial-Output (PISO) structure. An encoding architecture based on the proposed PIPO structure for multi-rate QC-LDPC codes employed by the Chinese Digital Television Terrestrial Broadcasting (DTTB) standard is also presented and discussed.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes have nowadays drawn very much attention due to their excellent performance and efficient parallel decoding structure. Although the cost of LDPC decoding is much less than that of Turbo codes, LDPC encoding is far more complicated [1]. To simplify LDPC encoding, Quasi-Cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) codes are proposed to reduce the logic resources and memory capacity requirement for the encoder implementation, while still provide competitive performance as general LDPC codes [2]. QC-LDPC codes have been employed in many standards [3]. For example, the Chinese Digital Television Terrestrial Broadcasting (DTTB) standard, which is also called Digital Terrestrial/Television Multimedia Broadcasting (DTMB) [4], employs three QC-LDPC codes with the same block length 7493 but different coding rates as its inner codes.
Many structures have been proposed for QC-LDPC encoding (see [3], [5], [6], [7], [8] and the references therein), among which Li et ale [6] introduced a typical QC-LDPC encoding structure, called Shift-register-adder-accumulator (SRAA). Two kinds of SRAA structures are proposed in [6], which are called Serial-Input Parallel-Output (SIPO) and Parallel-Input Serial-Output (PISO) in this paper. As shown in [6], the complexity of SIPO encoder for a QC-LDPC code is in linearly proportional to the number of parity bits, and that of PISO encoder is linearly proportional to the number of information bits. At the same time, the encoding speed, expressed in the number of clock cycles required, is linearly proportional to the length of the information bits in SIPO encoder, and to the length of the parity bits in PISO encoder. However, excellent QC-LDPC codes usually have long information and parity bits. Therefore, lots of clock cycles are required by encoders based on SRAA structure, leading to the problem of tradeoffs between encoding speed and encoding complexity. As a result, to design a fast and efficient QC-LDPC encoder is still

an open problem. To solve this problem, we proposed an encoding structure
called Parallel-Input Parallel-Output (PIPO) in this paper. Comparisons between PIPO structure and SRAA structures are also derived. As an example of applications, a novel encoding architecture based on PIPO structure for multi-rate QC-LDPC codes employed by DTMB is carried out, and is implemented by FPGA.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II gives a brief introduction to QC-LDPC codes, particularly the codes employed by DTMB. Section III gives the principle of PIPO, and compares the complexity and speed of PIPO structure and SRAA structure theoretically and experimentally. Section IV gives a specific encoding architecture based on PIPO structure for multi-rate QC-LDPC codes employed by DTMB, and Section V concludes the paper with some remarks.

II. BRIEF INTRODUCTION TO QC-LDPC CODES
In a Quasi-Cyclic Low-Density Parity-Check (QC-LDPC)
code, the parity-check matrix H qc consists of circulant matri-
ces. It can be written as

AI,1 A I ,2

AI,t

A 2 ,1 A 2 ,2

A 2 ,t

Hqc ==

(1)

Ac,l A c,2

Ac,t

where Ai,j (1 ~ i ~ c, 1 ~ j ~ t) is a b x b circular square matrix or zero matrix. It is easy to find that Ai,j's rows and columns have the same weight, say w, and Ai,j is called to have the weight w for simplicity. If w == 1, then the circulant is a permutation matrix, called a circulant permutation matrix. A
circulant can be fully characterized by its first row (or column),
which is called the generator of the circulant [6]. The weight
of Ai,j is small compared to its size b. In other words, AiJ' as well as H qc, is a sparse matrix.
If all the circulants in H qc have the same weight w, then H qc has constant column weight cw and constant row weight tw, and Cqc is a regular QC-LDPC code. If the weight distribution of A iJ is not the same, generally speaking, Cqc is an irregular QC-LDPC code, but there are some exceptions. For
example, let t == 3, c = 2, and the weights of AI,I, A I ,2, A I ,3
are 1, 2, 3, while the weights of A 2 ,1, A 2 ,2, A 2 ,3 are 3, 2, 1. Then H qc has constant row weight 6 and constant

978-1-4244-2064-3/08/$25.00 ©2008 IEEE 16
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:13:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE I PARAMETERS OF ORIGINAL QC-LDPC CODES EMPLOYED BY DTMB

Rate

Block Length Infonnation Bits b t c

24/59 (0.4)

7493

3048

127 59 35

a

36/59 (0.6)

7493

4572

127 59 23

48/59 (0.8)

7493

6096

127 59 11

column weight 4, thus Cqc is a regular QC-LDPC code in this condition.

Three QC-LDPC codes with the same block length but

different coding rates are employed by DTMB. The first 5

parity check bits of the original codes with length 7493 are

Pj

punctured before constellation mapping. Only original codes

are discussed in this paper.

The parity-check matrix Hqcs of the original QC-LDPC

codes Cqcs employed by DTMB consist of a set of circulant

permutation matrices and zero matrices. The block size of

each sub-matrix is b x b where b == 127. t == 59 for all the

---7

three codes, and e == 35,23,11 for three coding rates. The

a.

1

parameters of these codes are shown in Table I. We call them

P4, P6, and P8 codes in this paper since their coding rates

approximately equal to 0.4, 0.6 and 0.8.

According to the parity-check matrix, generator matrix G qc

in systematic-circulant form can be derived [6], shown as

A b-bit register
Fig. 1. SRAA encoder circuit for SIPO.

G qc ==

GI,1 G 2,1

GI,c I 0 G 2,c 0 I

0
0 (2)

Gt-c,l

Gt-c,c 0 0

I

where Gi ,j(1 :::; i :::; t - e, 1 :::; j :::; e) is a circulant, I is a b x b identity matrix, and 0 is a b x b zero matrix. Unlike
circulants in parity-check matrix, Gi,j dose not have the sparse property. Besides, the parity-check bits are put in front of the information bits in DTMB.

III. PARALLEL-INPUT PARALLEL-OUTPUT (PIPO) ENCODING STRUCTURE
Once the generator matrix G qc of a linear block code is derived, the encoding is very simple given by

Cqc == a x Gqc ,

(3)

where a is the vector of input information bits, and G qc is the generator matrix.

A. Principle of PIPO
Before introducing the principle of PIPO encoding structure, a brief review to SRAA structure is given below. The SIPO or PISO encoding structures consist of a number of encoding circuits. Two kinds of encoding circuits have been proposed in [6], which are called SRAA circuit for SIPO and SRAA circuit for PISO in this paper, as shown in Fig.l and Fig.2, respectively. In the SIPO SRAA encoding circuit, the information bits input in serial, and the parity check bits output in parallel

Fig. 2. SRAA encoder circuit for PISO.
with width b. While in the PISO SRAA encoding circuit, the information bits input in parallel with width b, and the parity check bits output in serial. That is why the structures are called SIPO and PISO in this paper. In an SIPO or PISO encoding structure, if there is only one SRAA encoding circuit, it takes b x (t - e) x e clock cycles to complete the parity check bits computation, which greatly limits the encoding speed. To increase the speed, multiple SRAA encoding circuits can be employed to work together. For example, e SIPO SRAA encoding circuits can work together in an SIPO structure reducing the number of clock cycles to b(t - e), the length of the information bits. t - e PISO SRAA encoding circuits can work together in a PISO structure to reduce the clock cycles to be, the length of the parity check bits. However, these encoding structures get their own drawbacks. Firstly, the structures mentioned above are the fastest structures (SIPO structure with e SIPO SRAA circuits and PISO structure with t - e PISO SRAA circuits) based on SRAA and still takes thousands or more clock cycles when the block length of the LOPC code goes to thousands or larger, which are not

17
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:13:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

suitable for high speed encoding. Secondly, the maximum

clock frequency is limited in FPGA implementation for SRAA

structures due to large bit width.

To increase the encoding speed, the Parallel-Input Parallel-

Output (PIPO) encoding structure is proposed, in which both

the input information bits and output parity check bits are in

paralleL

Let the block length of the code Cqc be t x b, the length of information bits be b(t - c), and the length of

parity check bits be cb. The information bits vector a

are divided into t - c sections, each section with b bits.

a = (aI, a2,'" ,at-c), where ai = (ai,l, ai,2,'" ,ai,b) =
(a(i-I)Xb+b a(i-l)xb+2,' .. ,aixb)(l ~ i ~ t - c).

Similarly, the parity check bits are divided into

c sections. P

(PI,P2,'" ,Pc), where Pi

(P(j-I)Xb+bP(j-I)Xb+2,'" ,pjxb)(l ~ j ~ c). According

to (2) and (3), let

G ch =

GI,1 G 2,1

G I ,2 G 2,2

GI,c G 2,c
(4)

Gt-c,l G t - c,2

Gt-c,c

then

P = a x G ch ,

(5)

thus

Pi = at GI,j + a2 G 2,j + ... + at-cGt-c,j. (6)

According to (6), b parity check bits Pi can be produced in

t - c clock cycles by the following steps. Firstly, b information

bits al and the b-bits generator of GI,j (GI,j's first row

or column) are sent to the encoder in parallel. The result of

al G I J is computed and stored. Secondly, a2 and the b-bits

generator of G 2,j are applied to the encoder in parallel, and

the result of a2 G 2,j is computed which is then added to the

result gotten above and store is obtained. These operations

it again. Thus continues for

al t-

G IJ +
c steps.

aF2inGal2l~.

the parity check bits Pi are produced, stored and ready for

output. The generating process of parity check bits goes on to

compute Pi+l, etc. In this way, all the parity check bits can

be obtained in c x (t - c) clock cycles, which greatly enhances

the encoding speed since usually b is much lager than t and

t - c.

In fact, both the width of the input information-bits and the

output parity-bits need not strictly equal to b, which presents

flexible trade-off between the speed and the complexity for

the encoder.

B. Complexity and Speed of PIPO
To simplify the discussion, let c = t-c = b, under which the
three encoding structures, SIPO with c SRAA circuits, PISO with t - c SRAA circuits and PIPO have the same encoding speed. The resources they require are compared below.
For SIPO, b b-bits registers are required to store the generator of sub-matrices, and b b-bits registers are required to

TABLE II RESOURCES REQUIRED BY THE THREE ENCODING STRUCTURE: SIPO,
PISO, AND PIPO. C = t - C = b WHERE c AND t ARE THE NUMBERS OF
Rows AND COLUMNS OF PARITY-CHECK ARRAY H qc GIVEN BY (1), AND b IS THE SIZE OF ACIRCULANT Ai,j OF H qc

Encoding Structure SIPO PISO PIPO

registers
2b2 b2 b

Two-input AND-gates b2 b2 b2

Two-input XOR-gates b2 b2 - 1 b2

save the computing results. Thus 2b2 registers are needed. Moreover, b2 two-input AND-gates and b2 two-input XORgates are required for computation.
For PISO, b b-bits registers are required to store the generator of sub-matrices. Thus b2 registers are needed. In addition, b2 two-input AND-gates and b2 - 1 two-input XOR-gates are required for computation.
For PIPO, only 1 b-bits register is required to save the computation results, thus b registers are needed. And, b2 twoinput AND-gates and b2 two-input XOR-gates are required for computation. The resource requirements by these structures are listed in Table II.
lt is noteworthy that the 'XOR' logic gates in SIPO structure must be two-input ones, while those in the other two structures are not.
Table II shows that the resources required by PIPO are less than SIPO and PISO with the same encoding speed, especially
for registers. To verify this point, we still let c = t - c = b
for simplicity here, and we have done some experiments on Stratix II EP2S90FI020C5 and Stratix EPIS80Fl508C7 using Altera Quartus II 5.0 synthesizer. The results are shown from Fig.3 to Fig.5 with b = 10,11, ... ,18. The experiment results show that SIPO requires much more resources than the other two, and PIPO requires the least LC combinationals and LC registers. The registers required perfectly match the analysis above, while the LC combinationals required by SIPO far more outweigh those required by PISO or PIPO because the 'XOR' logic gates in it must be two-input ones. Moreover, experiments also show that PIPO gain the maximal clock frequency. When the size of QC-LDPC code goes larger, the advantage of PIPO will be more obvious, as shown in Fig.3, Fig.4 and Fig.5.
IV. ENCODING IMPLEMENTATION: MULTI-RATE QC-LDPC CODES OF DTMB
As mentioned in section II, QC-LDPC codes with the parameters shown in Table I, are employed by DTMB. The PIPO-based encoding architecture is shown in Fig.6. In this encoding architecture, the information bits are input in serial,
and an S/ P converter is used to convert the serial bits into
parallel for PIPO encoder. The parity-check bits are generated by PIPO encoder in parallel and buffered. Finally when
the parity-check bits computation is done, a P/ S converter

18
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:13:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

300
250 !!l
~ 200
.o0,
o
...J 150

-~-SIPO
-,~- PISO -(-PIPO

Buffer for information bits
Fig. 6. An encoding architecture based on PIPO for multi-rate QC-LDPC codes employed by DTMB

50 "--_....1.-_----1..._ _..1----_---1....-_--1._ _- ' - - _ - - - ' - - _ - - - '

10

12

14

16

18

b

Fig. 3. The LC combinationals required on 2890.

700 ,......----r------r---~----r--~--~---r------.
-~-SIPO
600 - " - PISO -(>- PIPO
500
!!l 400 Q) U .~ 300
o
...J

0"--_....1.-_----1..._ _..1----_---1....-_--1._ _- ' - - _ - - - ' - - _ - - - '

10

12

14

16

18

b

Fig. 4. The LC combinationals required on 1880.

700 ,......----r------r------.,.....--~---r----..,.--.,__-_..,
-L-SIPO 600 -'7- PISO
-(>- PIPO
500

"._____v--~
____",7----
100 __1:---~~ --- '1.____'

O"'----~----~-~-----X--....I:..--~----J

10

12

14

16

18

b

Fig. 5. The LC registers required on 1880 and 2890.

converts the parity check bits to serial, and together with the information bits, all the encoded bits are output in serial. In our implementation, all the modules mentioned above work in the same clock.
Since the PIPO encoder is very fast, less RAMs are required. Only one information-bits frame is required to be buffered (in bufferin) for PIPO encoder, two information-bits frames (in the buffer for information bits) for buffering out, and one parity-check-bits frame to buffer (in buffer_out) the bits output by the PIPO encoder. In this architecture, only one generator ROM is employed with size 127x2196 (the width of the rom is 127 and the depth of the rom is 2196). Different generators are chosen by different addresses for the PIPO encoder, and multi-rates are also supported in this way.
Since SIPO is used more widely than PISO, comparisons between SIPO and PIPO are given below. When we consider SIPO encoding structures, 12 SIPO SRAA encoding circuits working together should be a good choice because c = 35, 23, 11 for the different coding rates of P4, P6 and P8.
If 12 SIPO SRAA encoding circuits work together,
f23/121 x 36 x 127 = 9144 clock cycles are needed by
P4 code, while for PIPO, only 840 clock cycles are needed for parity-check-bits computation. The clock cycles required by the two encoding architectures for parity-check bits computation are shown in Table III. Thus, the PIPO encoding architecture has the potential ten times faster than SIPO encoding architecture. However, since the information bits input in serial to the buffer and output in serial, there is another restriction that the output bits can not be overlapped. Thereby, the minimal interval between two information-bits
input frames is 9144-3048 = 6096 clock cycles for P4 code in SIPO architecture, while the minimal interval is 7493-3048 =
4445 clock cycles for P4 code in PIPO architecture. The minimal intervals of codes with different coding rates are shown in Table IV, and the throughput is limited by the minimal interval. Supposing the maximal working frequency to be f max, the bottleneck of the throughput is (3048/ (3048 +
6096)) x fmax = fmax/3 bps for SIPO, and the throughput
is (3048/(3048+4445)) x fmax = 24fmax/59 bps for PIPO. What's more, the fmax in PIPO is larger than that in SIPO as proved by experiments.
Another disadvantage of SIPO architecture is that it requires much more registers and rams. As discussed previously, much more registers are needed by SIPO, and more rams are also

19
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:13:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE III THE CLOCK CYCLES REQUIREMENTS FOR SIPO AND PISO: MULTI-RATE
QC-LDPC CODES EMPLOYED BY DTMB

SIPO (12) PIPO

P4 9144 840

P6 9144 828

P8 6096 528

TABLE IV THE MINIMAL INTERVALS FOR SIPO AND PISO: MULTI-RATE QC-LDPC
CODES EMPLOYED BY DTMB

SIPO (12) PIPO

P4 6096 4445

P6 4572 2921

P8 1397 1397

needed because of the slow encoding speed. Take the fastest encoding of P4 code for an example. When the parity-checkbits computation is done for one encoding frame, another encoding process should be started for the next frame, which requires two information-bits frames to be stored at least, so as the parity-check-bits. Therefore, SIPO needs at least twice the rams required by PIPO.
Although the LC combinationals required by PIPO is more than SIPO, there is only slight difference due to the fact that the 'XOR' logic gates in SIPO must be two-input ones. Moreover, if the information bits input in parallel, while in Fig.6 the information bits are input in serial and a S/ P convertor is used, more advantages of PIPO will be shown that the speed can be ten times faster then SIPO. What's more, the width of the parallel information bits input w need not exactly equal to the size of sub-matrix b. For instance, great
logic complexity can be reduced if we let w == fb/8l. It's interesting that, if w == fb/8l, the parameters in Table IV will
be unchanged, which indicates that the maximal throughput is still 24fmax/59 bps but the logic consumption is much less than SIPO. Relatively, the width of the parity-check bits output need not exactly equal to b either, and the logic complexity can be reduced by the way reducing the output width, too. Another parameter is that different clocks can be applied to the encoder and the serial input and output bits. Since the parameters of PIPO encoding structure are very flexible, very agile tradeoff between encoding speed and encoding complexity can be offered by PIPO encoding structure.

tionals required by SIPO are about 2 to 3 times as much as that PIPO requires (see Fig. 3 and Fig. 4). As an example of the application of the proposed structure, an encoding architecture based on the proposed PIPO structure for multi-rate QC-LDPC codes employed by DTMB is presented and discussed. In this architecture, faster encoding speed will be gained with less logic complexity compared with SIPO architecture if proper paraments are chosen. Experiments show that the maximal clock frequency of PIPO encoder is over 250MHz on Stratix II EP2S90FI020C5, which indicates that the maximal throughput has the potential over 1Gbps. In addition, PIPO can offer more flexible trade-offs between encoding speed and encoding complexity.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported by "Multistandard integrated network convergence for global mobile and broadcast technologies" (MING-T, FP6 STREP Contract Nr.045461).
REFERENCES
[1] D. 1. C. MacKay, "Good error correcting codes based on very sparse matrices," IEEE Trans. on Info. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399-431, Mar. 1999.
[2] M. P. Fossorier, "Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices," IEEE Trans. on Info. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788-1793, Aug. 2004.
[3] Z. Cai, 1. Hao, P. H. Tan, S. Sun, and P. S. Chin, "Efficient encoding of ieee 802.11 n LDPC codes," Electronics Letters, vol. 42, no. 25, Dec. 2006.
[4] 1. Song, Z. Yang, L. Yang, K. Gong, C. Pan, 1. Wang, and Y. Wu, "Technical review on chinese digital terrestrial television broadcasting standard and measurements on some working modes," IEEE Trans. on Broadcasting, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 1-7, Mar. 2007.
[5] S. Myung, K. Yang, and 1. Kim, "Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for fast encoding," IEEE Trans. on Info. Theory, vol. 51, no. 8, pp. 2894-2901, Aug. 2005.
[6] Z. Li, L. Chen, L. Zeng, S. Lin, and W. H.Fong, "Efficient encoding of quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes," IEEE Trans. on Communications, vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 71-81, Jan. 2006.
[7] C. Yoon, J.-E. Oh, M. Cheong, and S. kyu Lee, "A hardware efficient LDPC encoding scheme for exploiting decoder structure and resources," in Vehicular Technology Conjerence,(VTC'07), 2007, pp. 2445-2449.
[8] D.-U. Lee, W. Luk, C. Wang, C. Jones, M. Smith, and 1. Villasenor, "A flexible hardware encoder for low-density parity-check codes," in FieldProgrammable Custom Computing Machines (FCCM04), May 2004.

V. CONCLUSIONS
A novel encoding structure, called PIPO, is proposed in this paper to realize both fast and efficient encoding. Both analytical and experimental results show that the proposed PIPO encoding structure for QC-LDPC codes outperforms the conventional SIPO and PISO structures in terms of speed and complexity. At the same encoding speed, the number of LC registers required by PIPO is linearly proportional to the block size of the submatrix in the generator matrix. While for SIPO and PISO, it is squarely proportional to that. The LC combina-

20
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:13:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

