LDPC Code Construction and Iterative Receiver
Techniques for Channels with Phase Noise
Sridhar Karuppasami∗, William G. Cowley∗ and Steven. S. Pietrobon∗† ∗Institute for Telecommunications Research, University of South Australia, Mawson Lakes, SA 5095, Australia.
Email: Sridhar.Karuppasami@postgrads.unisa.edu.au, Bill.Cowley@unisa.edu.au †Small World Communications, 6 First Avenue, Payneham South, SA 5070, Australia.
Email: steven@sworld.com.au

Abstract—We present a novel LDPC code construction technique and an algorithm that assists phase estimation on subblocks to provide a near-coherent performance on channels with a large phase noise. Sub-blocks are very small observation intervals on the received vector over which phase estimation techniques are applied to provide ambiguous phase estimates. Iterative decoding on LDPC codes are affected by these phase ambiguities on subblocks. In our earlier work, we resolved this sub-block phase ambiguity at the start of the decoding based on a set of check nodes called ‘local check nodes (LCN)’ that are connected locally within the sub-blocks. Due to the poor signal-to-noise ratio at the start of decoding, a large number of LCNs were required to provide a reliable phase ambiguity. In this paper, we show that random LDPC codes can be constructed such that their decoding is not affected by the presence of sub-block phase ambiguities. Because of this, the signal quality is improved due to the code convergence and hence requires significantly less local check nodes to resolve phase ambiguity. We present performance results for a binary LDPC code with BPSK modulation. They show that with little loss, the receiver could tolerate a Wiener phase noise of up to 3o standard deviation per symbol.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check codes [1] perform well under coherent detection at low signal-to-noise ratios (SNR). In general, codes with longer block lengths(> 104), perform much better than codes with smaller block lengths. However, in the presence of phase disturbances such as phase noise, codes suffer increased degradation with longer block length. One of the causes of phase noise is due to the use of lowcost local oscillators at the receiver. Very few works have investigated the performance of LDPC codes or in general, iterative decoding under the presence of phase disturbances. Factor graph approaches provide very good performance [2], [3]. They consider the method of canonical distributions to overcome problems due to the continuous random variables in the factor graph. They rely on pilot symbols and require an increased complexity under large phase noise conditions. In [4], the authors showed that sub-block phase estimation techniques could be combined with iterative decoding to provide a better decoding performance in phase varying channels with very low-complexity. Intuitively we can see that, as the size of the sub-block reduces, larger phase variations can be tackled. However, the variance of the phase estimation error becomes very high with smaller sub-block sizes. Since the phase estimates are phase ambiguous, the sub-blocks are

affected

by

an

ambiguity

of

2π M

radians,

where

M

is

the

number

of phase symmetries in the signal set. To overcome this, the

authors resorted to an inner differential code to work on the

sub-blocks. However, in an LDPC coded system, there is a

performance loss due to the presence of an inner differential

encoder and decoder. In [5], the authors showed that the loss

due to the inner differential code can be avoided by optimizing

the LDPC code degree distributions.

In our earlier works [6], [7], we explored the possibility

of using LDPC codes with sub-block phase estimation tech-

niques. We relied on a blind phase estimator (BPE) to provide

an initial phase estimate over every sub-block of the codeword.

The received symbols in the sub-block are corrected by the

blind phase estimate. For small phase disturbances, we can

safely assume that the phase on the symbols present in a

sub-block is constant. Under this assumption, we showed that

we can resolve sub-block phase ambiguity by using a set of

check nodes called ‘local check nodes’. The LDPC code was

constructed such that the neighbours of a local check node

are from the same sub-block. For a local check node degree

of

dc

and

a

sub-block

size

of

Nb,

Nb dc

local

check

nodes

were

created in the code. They were used to estimate and correct

the phase ambiguity present in the sub-block. The quality of

the phase ambiguity estimates from the local check nodes are

better if there are a large number of local check nodes in a

sub-block and the degree of the local check node is small, say

three. We showed that for QPSK signals, we could tackle a

small range of residual frequency offsets with negligible loss.

To tackle larger phase variations, we need to reduce the size

of the sub-block. However, the minimum size of the sub-block

was primarily limited by two factors. First, the accuracy of

phase estimation is reduced due to smaller sub-blocks, which

could be overcome by using turbo phase estimation (TPE)

techniques [8], [9]. The other factor is the number of local

check nodes per sub-block. By reducing the sub-block size,

the number of local check nodes per sub-block is also reduced.

This affects the quality of the phase ambiguity estimate.

The paper addresses the above problems in the case of

BPSK modulated signals. We show that by properly placing

the edges in the graph we can obtain an LDPC code whose

convergence is not affected by the rotations in the individual

sub-blocks. By doing so, we found that effectively we need

only

one

local

check

node

instead

of

Nb dc

per

sub-block

to

978-1-4244-16A4u5t-h5o/r0iz8e/d$2lic5e.n0s0ed©us2e00lim8itIeEdEtoE: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on 2Ju8n9e224,2026 at 05:12:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

resolve the phase ambiguity. Since one local check node spans only three symbols, the constant phase assumption for the phase ambiguity resolving algorithm is still applicable, even under large phase disturbances.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we discuss the channel model considered for our simulations. In Section III, we briefly review the notation, the code structure and the phase ambiguity resolution algorithm from our previous work. In Section IV, we present an insight into the proposed code construction and show how their convergence is unaffected due to the sub-block phase ambiguities. Also, we present the structure of the proposed binary LDPC code’s parity check matrix. In Section V, we explain the receiver architecture and also detail the steps involved in the decoding of these codes. In Section VI, we show their performance results and conclude in Section VII.

II. CHANNEL MODEL

An information bit sequence is encoded by an (N, K)

binary LDPC code C, where N and K represent the length

and dimension of the code, respectively. The codeword is

BPSK modulated and the transmitted symbols are subjected

to a phase disturbance generated by a Wiener phase noise

model. Complex white Gaussian noise nk with uncorrelated

real and imaginary parts, each having a two sided power

spectral

density

(PSD)

of

N0 2

is

added.

Ideal

timing

and

frame synchronization are assumed and hence-forth, all the

simulations assume one sample per symbol. At the receiver

after matched filtering and ideal sampling, we have

rk = skejθk + nk, k = 0, 1, · · · , Ns − 1 (1)

where sk ∈ {+1, −1} is the k-th transmitted symbol, rk is the k-th received symbol, θk is a random channel phase on the k-th symbol and Ns is the number of transmitted symbols.
The Wiener model can be described as

θk = θk−1 + ∆k

(2)

where ∆k is a white real Gaussian process with a standard deviation of σ∆. θ0 is generated uniformly from the distribution (−π, π).

III. REVIEW OF EARLIER WORK
In this section, we briefly review our earlier work. For further details, we refer the reader to [6], [7].

A. Receiver Architecture and Code Structure

Let us assume that the channel is affected by a phase

disturbance such that the phase variation over a sub-block is

very small. We will relax this condition later in this paper. The

receiver architecture is as shown in Fig. 1.

As in [4], the received symbol vector r of length Ns is

divided into sub-blocks of length Nb symbols, where Nb

is a sub-multiple of Ns. Let ‘B’ be the number of sub-

blocks

(

Ns Nb

).

The

ambiguous phase

BPE works on estimates (φˆ0,

every φˆ1, · ·

sub-block · , φˆB−1)

and that

provides are used

to phase correct each sub-block of received symbols. The

r

Over sub-blocks
~r

~r c LDPC

e jIˆ
Blind Phase estimator

e jDˆ
Phase Ambiguity

Decoder

Resolver

Fig. 1. Previously Used LDPC Receiver Architecture

phase estimate is obtained by applying an inverse tan function

on the ratio of the sum of the imaginary and real parts of

the modulation-stripped symbols. The phase corrected received vector is further adjusted for phase ambiguity (αˆ) over every

sub-block by the phase ambiguity resolver (PAR) based on the

LCN.

Before proceeding with the PAR algorithm based on LCNs,

we briefly show the structure of the parity check matrix used in

our earlier work to illustrate the local check nodes. The parity

check matrix (H) shown below, has four local check nodes

in the upper section. The bottom (dotted) part is connected

according to random construction. In this small example, the

codeword could be split in to say two sub-blocks, with two

local check nodes per sub-block used for the PAR of a given

sub-block.





111000000000

H = 

000111000000 000000111000 000000000111 ... ... ... ... ...



(3)

... ... ... ... ...

Initially, we constructed these codes by swapping columns from the parity check matrices constructed using circulant matrices [10]. We used David Mackay’s software to obtain the generator matrices [11].

B. Phase Ambiguity Resolution Algorithm

Let αl ∈ {0, π}, l = 0, 1, 2, · · · , B − 1, in radians, be the phase ambiguity to be resolved from ˜rl, where ˜rl is the ambiguous phase corrected received signal corresponding to the set of coded bits xl grouped together as in (3), satisfying a local check node cl.
Assuming equiprobable a priori values for αl, the a posteriori probability (APP) LLR of αl is given by

1+ L(αl | ˜rl) = ln
1−

(l+1)dc −1 i=ldc

tanh(L(r˜i

(l+1)dc −1 i=ldc

tanh(L(r˜i

| si)/2) | si)/2)

(4)

where dc is the local check node degree and L(r˜i | si) is the channel log-likelihood ratio (LLR). Since the channel noise is i.i.d, the APP LLR L(α | ˜r) of the sub-block phase ambiguity (α) is obtained by averaging over all αl corresponding to the sub-block. If the polarity of L(α | ˜r) is positive then we decide αˆ = 0, else αˆ = π radians. The presence of the BPE before

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on 2Ju8n9e324,2026 at 05:12:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the PAR is important because it improves the SNR of the

received vector. For example, say the received vector is rotated

by

a

phase

offset

of

around

π 2

radians.

If

the

signal

is

not

corrected by the blind phase estimator, the received SNR will

be too low for the local check nodes to evaluate the phase

ambiguity. The phase ambiguity corrected vector is passed into

the LDPC decoder. Turbo phase estimation may be employed

in the iterative process to tackle residual phase offsets, giving

a small gain for BPSK.

IV. SUB-BLOCK ROTATIONALLY INVARIANT LDPC CODES

In the presence of a noisy sub-block, the unambiguous

phase estimation due to the blind phase estimator and LCN

based phase ambiguity resolution may fail on some sub-blocks.

These wrongly estimated sub-blocks do not allow the LDPC

code to converge. This paper proposes a new LDPC code

structure, which converges irrespective of the sub-block phase

rotations. This code uses just one local check node to resolve

the phase ambiguity in each sub-block.

The parity check matrix HN−K×N is constructed such that

it involves two parts.





Hresolving

H =  ············ 

(5)

Hconverging

The upper (B × N ) part of the matrix, called Hresolving, involves B local check nodes which are used to resolve the phase ambiguity in B sub-blocks. All the neighbours of the local check node are picked from a single sub-block for which it provides PAR. The lower (N − K − B × N ) part of the matrix, called Hconverging, contains N − K − B check nodes whose neighbours are selected such that their convergence is independent of the phase ambiguities in the sub-block. These Global Check Nodes (GCN) are invariant to sub-block phase ambiguities. The convergence of the global check nodes allows us to resolve the phase ambiguity after the convergence of the LDPC code instead of performing it earlier, as shown in Fig. 1. This greatly reduces the number of local check nodes required to provide reliable phase ambiguity for a sub-block.

A. Construction of GCN invariant to sub-block phase ambiguities
Let Hi,j be the elements participating in the ith global check node (GCNi) such that

dc

Hi,jxj = 0 (mod 2)

(6)

j=1

where dc is the degree of the GCNi and xj is the jth symbol participating in the (GCNi). We consider dc to be even. For BPSK modulation, any phase rotation of π radians in the
symbol is equivalent to modulo-2 addition of the symbol with element one i.e., xrj = xj + 1 (mod 2) . If all the symbols participating in a check node are rotated by π radians, the
check is still satisfied as shown below.

dc

dc

Hi,j xrj =

Hi,j (xj + 1)

(7)

j=1

j=1

dc

=

Hi,j xj

j=1
= 0 (mod 2)

The proof uses the fact that Hi,j = 1 and dc is even. Extending the above, if there is a phase rotation of π radians on two symbols, then we add the element one twice in the check equation and hence the check is still satisfied. We use this concept in constructing global check nodes that converge irrespective of a rotation of π radians in the sub-block.
At this point we would like to clarify the usage of the term ‘sub-block’. From the received channel vector perspective, the term ‘sub-block’ represents a group of adjacent symbols while from the code perspective, it represents a group of columns.
To create a global check node (GCNi) immune to sub-block phase rotations of π radians, we randomly pick a multiple of two neighbours from any sub-block. This basically reflects the following additional constraint on the global check nodes.

dc

Hi,j = 0 (mod 2)

(8)

j=1

where dc is the number of edges in the sub-block. We construct the code as per the following procedure.
1) Fix the number of sub-blocks B and the size of the sub-block Nb.
2) Divide the total number of edges present in the global check node part of the code by the number of subblocks. This gives the number of edges present in a sub-block minus the edges due to the local check node of that sub-block.
3) For every sub-block,
a) Construction of Local Check Nodes
i) Assuming the local check node degree is three and corresponding to row i, place ‘1’ in columns Nb(i − 1) + 1, Nb(i − 1) + 2 and Nb(i − 1) + 3.
b) Construction of Global Check Nodes
i) Pick the edges of each column randomly, such that after constructing the last column in the sub-block, the number of edges present in every global check node is a multiple of two.
ii) Also, care should be taken such that there are no short cycles after constructing every column.
The parity check matrix (H) shown below is constructed for four sub-blocks.The first four rows corresponding to the local check nodes (Hresolving) are shown at the top. The two rows below the local check nodes are connected globally and also have two edges per sub-block. This makes them rotationally

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on 2Ju8n9e424,2026 at 05:12:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

invariant to the sub-block phase ambiguities. The dotted part of the matrix are also global check nodes constructed as above.



111000000000000000000000



H

=



000000111000000000000000 000000000000111000000000 000000000000000000111000 ···································· 100100010100010100001010 010100011000001100110000 ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...



(9)

... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...

Even though an even number of edges per sub-block creates rotational invariance, we prefer to have just two edges per sub-block. Intuitively, this provides more chance of global connection to the check nodes. Also, this avoids clustering of edges in any sub-block.

V. RECEIVER ARCHITECTURE AND DECODING SCHEDULE
The receiver architecture to tackle large phase disturbances is shown below in Fig. 2. Since the phase ambiguity is resolved after the decoder, we are able to ignore the blind phase estimator and use turbo phase estimation instead.

Over sub-blocks

e jDˆ

Phase Ambiguity Resolver

Yes

r

~r

~r c LDPC

Are all

Decoder

GCN satisfied?

No
e jIˆ Turbo Phase Estimator Over sub-blocks
Fig. 2. Proposed LDPC Receiver Architecture

The decoding procedure is split in to three phases and is performed as below.
1) Converging Phase - In this phase, the Hconverging part of the code alone is involved in the decoding process to improve the reliability of the symbols.
a) Sum-product algorithm is applied on the Hconverging part of the parity check matrix.
b) Turbo phase estimator (TPE) works on the symbol a posteriori probabilities corresponding to every sub-block and calculates φˆ = arg( k rka∗k), where ak∗ is the complex conjugate of the soft symbol estimate to provide an ambiguous phase estimate for that sub-block.

c) Sub-blocks of the received vector are individually corrected by the phase estimates (φˆ0, φˆ1, · · · , φˆB−1) respectively, obtained from the TPE.
d) These values are fed back to the LDPC decoder for the next iteration.
e) After every iteration, a syndrome check is evaluated on the converging part of the parity check matrix. If all the global check nodes are satisfied proceed to resolving phase, else continue to iterate in the converging phase. In the case of small phase offset and good phase estimates, all the check nodes may converge in this stage itself and the decoding is completed.
2) Resolving Phase - In this phase, the phase ambiguity is resolved on all the sub-blocks.
a) Using the a posteriori probabilities of the symbols involved in the local check nodes, the phase ambiguity of every sub-block is calculated as per (4).
b) The phase ambiguity estimate (αˆ) for each subblock is obtained from the a posteriori LLR of the phase ambiguity reliability of the corresponding sub-block local check nodes.
3) Final Phase - Decoding is done on the whole code.
a) If the phase ambiguity estimate of a sub-block obtained from the resolving phase is π radians, then the sign of the a posteriori LLR’s L(si | r˜i) are inverted.
b) The sum-product algorithm is now continued over the entire code until all the check nodes are satisfied.
We also tested a receiver with blind phase estimation alone, as shown in Fig. 3. This will have a lower complexity in comparison to Fig. 2. The decoding procedure remains the same, except that the phase estimates are obtained before the ‘converging’ phase itself.

r

~r

Blind Phase Estimator

e jIˆ

Over sub-blocks

Over sub-blocks

e jDˆ Phase Ambiguity Resolver Yes

~r c LDPC
Decoder

Are all GCN satisfied?
No

Fig. 3. Proposed LDPC Receiver Architecture with no Turbo Phase Estimation

We would like to emphasis that, even though we construct a code based on ‘B’ sub-blocks, we can also use sub-blocks whose size is a multiple of the basic sub-block size Nb for phase estimation and ambiguity resolution. For instance, if we know that the channel is affected by smaller phase variations

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on 2Ju8n9e524,2026 at 05:12:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BER BER

then we can increase the size of the sub-block in multiples of Nb.

VI. SIMULATION RESULTS

Simulations were performed for a N = 4000, K =

2000, R = 0.5 LDPC code, constructed with sub-block size

of Nb = 100 symbols. This corresponds to B = 40 sub-

blocks over the codeword. We randomly constructed an almost

regular

code

with

a

threshold

Eb N0

=

1.2

dB

obtained

through

Exit charts [12]. The check node and variable node distri-

butions, in terms of node perspective, are ρ(x) = 0.02x3 +

0.98x6 and λ(x) = 0.0315x2 + 0.96775x3 + 0.00125x5,

respectively. Iterations are performed until the codeword con-

verges or to a maximum of 200 iterations. Simulations are

performed until 30 codeword errors are found. For a constant

phase offset, there is a very small degradation of around 0.2 dB from the coherent performance at a BER of 10−5. We

attribute this loss to the degraded performance of the phase

estimator because of the reduced sub-block size. However,

thereafter with a minimal loss, the code is able to tolerate

a large phase noise. We simulated the performance of the

10−1 10−2 10−3

AWGN TPE − σ∆ = 0 TPE − σ∆ = 20
TPE − σ∆ = 30

10−4

10−5

10−6

1.4

1.6

1.8

2

2.2

Eb/N0 (dB)

Fig. 4. Performance of the proposed receiver in Fig. 2 with BPSK and the Wiener phase model

receiver with a blind phase estimator alone as in Fig. 3 for comparison purposes. The results in Fig. 5 show a very small performance loss in comparison to the receiver with a TPE.
We had also verified the performance of our code design for large irregular codes. The performance is similar to the results above, with a different threshold corresponding to the distribution. Since variable nodes with higher degree converge faster, we intuitively felt that larger variable node degrees could be assigned to the symbols participating in the PAR. In the case of the code mentioned above, we constructed H such that all the symbols participating in a LCN have a degree of three or five.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented a novel LDPC code construction and iterative synchronization algorithm which handles large phase disturbances without the need for prior phase recovery

10−1

10−2

10−3

10−4

AWGN TPE − σ∆ = 0

10−5

BPE − σ∆ = 0 TPE − σ∆ = 30

BPE − σ∆ = 30

10−6

1.4

1.6

1.8

2

2.2

Eb/No(dB)

Fig. 5. Performance comparison of receivers in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 with BPSK and the Wiener phase model

and pilot symbols. The new techniques have low overhead in
terms of the decoding complexity. The LDPC code consists of
two parts. The lower portion of H converges irrespective of the
sub-block rotations. The upper part of the code resolves the
phase ambiguity in each sub-block. We also showed that the
code is robust to sub-block phase ambiguities and can tolerate
high phase noisy channels with little loss. We are currently
working on extending these code constructions to higher order
modulations.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, “Low density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 8, pp. 21-28, Jan. 1962.
[2] G. Colavolpe, A. Barbieri and G. Caire, “Algorithms for iterative decoding in the presence of strong phase noise,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun.,vol 23, pp. 1748-1757, Sep. 2005.
[3] A. Barbieri, G. Colavolpe and G. Caire, “Joint iterative detection and decoding in the presence of phase noise and frequency offset,” Int. Conf. Commun., Seoul, Korea, pp. 720-724, May. 2005.
[4] W. G. Cowley and M. S. C. Ho, “Transmission design for Doppler-varying channels,” AusCTW, Perth, Australia, Feb. 2005, pp. 108-111.
[5] M. Franceschini, G. Ferrari, R. Raheli and A. Curtoni, “Serial concatenation of LDPC codes and differential modulations”,IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun.-Special Issue on Differential and Noncoherent Wireless Commun., vol. 23, pp. 1758-1768, Sep. 2005.
[6] S. Karuppasami and W. G. Cowley, “LDPC code-aided phase ambiguity resolution,” Inform, Decision and Control, Adelaide, Australia, pp. 205208, Feb. 2007.
[7] S. Karuppasami and W. Cowley, “LDPC code-aided phase-ambiguity resolution for QPSK signals affected by a frequency offset,” AusCTW, Adelaide, Australia, pp. 47-50, Feb. 2007.
[8] N. Noels, V. Lottici, A. Dejonghe, H. Steendam, M. Moeneclaey, M. Luise and L. Vandendorpe, “A theoretical framework for soft information based synchronization in iterative (turbo) receivers,” EURASIP on Wireless Commun. and Networking, vol. 2005, pp. 117-129, Apr. 2005.
[9] H. Wymeersch and M. Moeneclaey, “Iterative code-aided ML phase estimation and phase ambiguity resolution,” EURASIP on Applied Signal Processing, vol 2005, pp. 981-988, May 2005.
[10] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja and D. J. Costello Jr., “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 50, pp. 2966-2984, Dec. 2004.
[11] D. J. C Mackay, “David Mackay’s Gallager code resources,” http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/Software.html.
[12] S. ten Brink, G. Kramer, and A. Ashikhmin, “Design of low-density parity-check codes for modulation and detection,” IEEE Trans. Commns, vol. 52, pp. 670-678, April 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on 2Ju8n9e624,2026 at 05:12:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

