This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the ICC 2008 proceedings.

Concatenated eIRA Codes for Tamed Frequency Modulation
Jianrong Bao, Yafeng Zhan and Jianhua Lu Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, 100084 Email:{baojr@wmc.ee.tsinghua.edu.cn, zhanyf@tsinghua.edu.cn, lujh@wmc.ee.tsinghua.edu.cn}

Abstract— A new scheme of the extended irregular repeataccumulate (eIRA) coded tamed frequency modulation (TFM) for deep space communications is introduced in this paper. It is mainly based on the optimal concatenation of the eIRA code and the continuous phase encoder (CPE) decomposed from TFM. In order to obtain good performance of the eIRA coded TFM, the main principle of our scheme is to jointly optimize the concatenation by eliminating the short loops in the Tanner graph of the eIRA code and the coding part of TFM and to jointly decode between them. Then our scheme without interleaving and the contrast scheme with interleaving are simulated in an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel which is typical in deep space communications. Simulation results have shown that our scheme can obtain lower complexity and less decoding delay (due to the reduction of interleaving) at the cost of just 0.1-0.15 dB performance loss when compared to the scheme with interleaving given bit-error-ratio (BER) of 10−5. Therefore, our scheme can be used to implement the coded TFM system for deep space communications with good performance and low complexity.
I. INTRODUCTION
Compared with the common wireless and satellite communications, deep space communications present a more rigorous environment for data transmissions, such as very low signalto-noise ratio (SNR) caused by the limited transmission energy of space probe and the huge energy loss by the remote transmission. From [1], coded modulation techniques with high power and bandwidth efficiency are crucial for deep space communication. So we focus on the efficient continuous phase modulation (CPM) technique as TFM and the effective channel code. TFM is a constant envelope modulation with high power and bandwidth efficiency [2] and it is attractive for use in deep space communications which employ inexpensive nonlinear power amplifiers. Simultaneously, it can be considered as a special case of minimum frequency shift (MSK) which belongs to a class of CPM [2]. In order to farther improve the efficiency of the communication systems with these modulations, many schemes of coded TFM or MSK are introduced nowadays. Several constructions of coded TFM systems are given in [4], [5] based on the direct combination of convolutional codes and TFM. Some other constructions of coded TFM systems are given in [10] focusing on the fact that the inner CPE is partitioned into subsets of codes with increased distances and the outer convolutional codes are applied in order to protect this partitioning. In addition, lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) coded MSK systems also appear in [11] to exploit the powerful LDPC codes. In conclusion,

the design, the coding gain and decoding complexity of the coded TFM/MSK are discussed and analyzed literarily.
In this paper, we introduce a new approach of the coded TFM based on the concatenation of the eIRA code [7], [8] and the CPE decomposed from the TFM [3]. In [10], the technique for analyzing and designing optimally convolutional coded TFM scheme is based on evaluating and optimizing the distance spectrum of the overall concatenated code. In our scheme, we also use this principle to design the optimal system by eliminating the short loops in the equivalent Tanner graph of the eIRA code and the coding part of TFM. Meanwhile, jointly decoding between them is also employed to obtain optimally decoding. Therefore, the elimination of the short loops will be helped to remove the correlation of the adjacent codes caused by the CPE to enlarge the code distance. While the jointly decoding will make full use of them as a whole. As description in [10], the general concatenation of convolutional coded TFM scheme has the defect of poor performance due to the convolutional codes. And ordinary LDPC coded MSK scheme will encountered with the limitation of highly encoding complexity because its parity check matrix is generated at random completely with density evolution [11]. Recently, [7] presented a class of eIRA codes which are efficiently encodable LDPC codes with very low error floor and high performance. So we exploit the eIRA code and concatenate it with TFM to actualize the low complex and highly efficient eIRA coded TFM.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, some conceptions of TFM are given and the system model including the transmitter and the receiver structure of the eIRA coded TFM is described. Section III introduces good encoding scheme with outer eIRA codes concatenated to the inner CPE. Also, we describe the procedures of the encoding/modulation and decoding/demodulation in detail. Then the computer simulations of our scheme without interleaving and the contrast scheme with interleaving in an AWGN channel will be given to manifest the good performance of our scheme in Section IV. Finally, the conclusion is contained in Section V.
II. THE EIRA CODED TFM SYSTEM
The structure of TFM is based on a decomposition approach which was introduced for general CPM in [3], and the application of decomposition to a special case of trellis coded TFM can be found in [4]. By the similar ideas, we present a mathematic description of TFM where the TFM modulator

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei9U7n8iv-.1D-4o2w4n4lo-a2d0e7d5o-n9/J0u8ne/$2245,2.00026©a2t 0050:842I:E19EUETC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1886

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the ICC 2008 proceedings.

can be modeled as a finite state machine (FSM) for which we can compute the transfer function. And the transmitted signal of TFM can be described as follows [10].

s(t, c) =

2Es Ts

cos[2πf0t

+

ϕ(t,

c)

+

ϕ0].

(1)

Where the parameters are as follows: c = c1, c2, · · · , cl, · · · , with cl ∈ {0, ±0.5, ±1}, is a sequence produced by a threetap transversal filter based on the equation cl = 0.5(vl−2 + 2vl−1 + vl) − 1, v = v1, v2, · · · , vl, · · · , with vl ∈ {0, 1}, is the binary information sequence, Es is the symbol energy, Ts is the symbol period, f0 = fc − 1/(4Ts) is the modified frequency where fc is the carrier frequency, ϕ(t,c) is the phase to carry information, and ϕ0 is the initial phase.
After discrete treatment, six different phase values of
ΦN (ΦN ≡ [ϕ(t = N Ts, c)]mod 2π) are possible with ΦN ∈ {0, π/4, 3π/4, π, 5π/4, 7π/4}. It was already intro-
duced in [4] that in two cases the phase value is not unique

with respect to the current modulator states. So the phases of

the TFM modulator can be represented by a FSM with eight

states as shown in Fig. 1 [10].

the DTFM encoder is equivalent to the TFM encoder [10]. So the whole TFM/DTFM modulator can be decomposed uniformly as a CPE (a differential encoder concatenated with a FSM) and a memoryless modulator. Then the CPE of the TFM modulator can be combined with other channel codes to form the optimally coded TFM.

TFM Encoder ut

vt

DD

Mod

2

Xt

Xt-1

D

Xt-2

DTFM Encoder

Xt

vt
Mod

ut D

D

Xt-1

D

Xt-2

2
D

Differential

Encoder

Fig. 2. TFM and DTFM encoder.

Initial State
1/1

(0,0,1) π/4

s2
1/0

0/1 0/1

(0,1,1) s4
3π/4 0/1

1/1

0/0

(0,0,0) 0

s1

1/1

s3

(0,1,0) π

(1,0,1) 0

s6

1/0 s8

(1,1,1) π

0/1

1/0

0/0 (1,0,0)

0/0

0/1

1/0

7π/4 s5

(1,1,0) 5π/4

1/0
s7

Fig. 1. State diagram for the FSM of the CPE of TFM.

B. Coherent Demodulation of TFM
From [2], the diagram of the coherent demodulator of TFM can be shown in Fig. 3. Just as the decomposition of the modulator of TFM, the demodulator of it can also be divided into three main parts which are the memoryless demodulator, the part of sampling and decision and the differential decoder. Because the memoryless demodulator and the part of sampling and decision have no memory effect, we only focus on the differential decoder for the joint demodulation and decoding.

In the FSM, the transitions are labeled by the input symbols
vt/ut of the TFM/DTFM modulator, and states are represented by σt and ΦN when t = N Ts. At the discrete time instant t, the state σt can be presented by 3-bit tuples as follows.

Receive from
Channel

σt = (xt−2, xt−1, xt), with xt ∈ {0, 1}. (2)
The 3-bit tuples can be got by processing the input data sequence at the TFM encoder and the required phase at the TFM modulator can be obtained by the FSM.

Memoryless Demodulator
Low Pass Filter
sin(ωc t) cos(ωc t)
Low Pass Filter

Sampling & Decision

Differential Decoder

Delay 2T

Mod 2

(2m)T Clock (2m+1)T

Interleaving Gates

Delay 2T

Mod 2

Data Output

Fig. 3. Coherent demodulation of TFM.

A. Decomposition of TFM
As a special case of CPM modulator, the TFM modulator can be decomposed into a binary CPE with memory effect and a memoryless modulator (or a memoryless mapper) [3]. In that case, the CPE can be used as an inner encoder in the serial concatenation system. And it can be classified as recursive and nonrecursive style [10]. On the top of Fig. 2, a recursive CPE is shown as a possible realization of TFM encoder which connects the input data with the memoryless modulator. And the TFM decomposition can also be realized as the form of nonrecursive CPE. If the input symbols of the TFM modulator are differential encoded, we obtain the nonrecursive differential TFM (DTFM) shown at the bottom of Fig. 2. But

C. Transmitter and Receiver of the eIRA Coded TFM

Since eIRA code is a class of special LDPC code actually,

we first investigate the LDPC coded TFM. And a typical con-

catenation system of the LDPC coded TFM with modulation

and coding can be shown in Fig. 4.

Firstly, at the transmitter, information bits are encoded by

the outer LDPC encoder and the encoded bits are output

for interleaving, modulation and transmission. And the LDPC

code is assumed to be an irregular LDPC code with variable

node degree profile degree profile ρ(x)

λ(x) =

=
dc −1 i=2

dv −1 i=2

λi

ρixi−1,

xi−1 and where dv

check node and dc are

the maximum variable and check node degree. For the LDPC

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:42:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1887

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the ICC 2008 proceedings.

code, the degree profile is assumed as the number of edges connected to the variable or check node respectively: λi is the fraction of edges in the Tanner graph of the LDPC code that are connected to variable nodes of degree i while ρi is related to check nodes of degree i. Then the parity check matrix is constructed at random according to the constraint of these degree profiles and another constraint that prevents loops of small lengths in its Tanner graph, especially the loops of length-4, to obtain good decoding performance [12].

Concatenation of the LDPC Encoder with the CPE of the TFM Modulator

Data Input

LDPC Encoder

Interleaver (Optional)

TFM Modulator
Continuous Phase Encoder

Memoryless Modulator

Send to Channel

Concatenation of the LDPC Decoder with the Differential Decoder of the TFM Demodulator Data

From Channel

Memoryless Demodulator

Differential Decoder

Deinterleaver

LDPC Decoder

Output

TFM Demodulator

Interleaver

(Optional)

Fig. 4. Block diagram of coded TFM system: transmitter and receiver.

data bits and L(oq,e−x1t)(x) is the interleaved extrinsic information obtained from the LDPC decoder in the (q − 1)-th iteration.
Then the decoder of the TFM demodulator produces LLRs for
each bit in the sequence x and it can be given by

L(iq)

=

log

P (xk P (xk

= =

0|R(q)) 1|R(q)) .

(3)

Where xk is the k-th element of r. So the extrinsic information obtained from the decoder of the TFM demodulator can be written as L(i,qe)xt(xk) = L(iq)(xk) − Lo(q,e−x1t)(xk),∀k [11]. At first, the extrinsic information is deinterleaved and then it is input into the outer LDPC decoder for update. After that, it is interleaved and passed back to the inner decoder of the TFM demodulator and the decoding process between the inner and the outer decoder can be seen as a whole iteration. If the interleaving is not selected, the iterative process will be carried out between the LDPC decoder and the decoder of the TFM demodulator. And the extrinsic information will be directly transferred between them too. At the end of each joint iteration, estimates of the data bits are produced and the decisions are made for computing errors with the LDPC parity check matrix. If the parity check constraint is satisfied, the iterative process is stopped. Otherwise, it continues until the maximum iteration times is achieved.

After LDPC encoding, the encoded bits are interleaved and the interleaved bits of each LDPC frame are treated by setting an appropriate tail-bitting to initialize the TFM phase state to the zero phase state for processing each separate LDPC frame. Then the interleaved bits are input into the TFM modulator for modulation and subsequent transmission. Generally, this part of interleaving for the transmitter is not necessary since the LDPC code has been constructed completely at random and it has already had the function of interleaving. But for special case of LDPC code, such as the efficiently encodable eIRA code, the interleaver is still needed because the code can’t sufficiently overcome the correlation of adjacent bits caused by the memory effect of the TFM modulator. And the correlation (introduced to the bits) will cause the deterioration of the code performance. So we just place interleaving here as an optional part for the comparison of the performance.
Secondly, at the receiver, data bits received from channel are demodulated and decoded by the TFM demodulator and the LDPC decoder to obtain the final results. As shown in Fig. 4, the receiver uses a joint message passing the joint decoder which applies the belief-propagation (BP) algorithm for efficient decoding. And the joint decoder can finish the decoding by passing the messages (log-likelihood ratios, LLRs) between the soft output of the inner differential decoder of the TFM demodulator and an outer LDPC decoder in an iterative fashion. In addition, a maximum of Q (e.g. 50) iterations between the TFM demodulator and the LDPC decoder are adopted. Similar to the description in [11] , during the q-th iteration (q ∈ {1, 2, · · · , Q}) in the jointly decoding, the decoder of the TFM demodulator uses R(q) to represent (r, Lo(q,e−x1t)(x)) as the prior condition where r is the demodulated vector of

III. DESIGN OF THE EIRA CODED TFM
In this section, we will undertake the design of the eIRA coded TFM. Generally, there are two schemes to design the concatenated eIRA codes for TFM where one is with interleaving while another is not. Since the principle of the concatenation scheme with interleaving is similar to [9] where the CPE of TFM can be treated as a convolutional encoder, we only investigate the eIRA coded TFM without interleaving. The main schemes are described as follows.
A. The eIRA Code
The eIRA code is derived from the irregular repeataccumulate (IRA) codes [6] and it is systematic LDPC code which has good features of low error floor and efficiently encodable encoding [7]. As shown in Fig. 5, the eIRA code can be expressed as two equivalent encoder structure of the explicit serial turbo-code form (subplot (a,c) in Fig. 5) and the original direct form (subplot (b,d) in Fig. 5). Since the analysis of the serial turbo-code form is a little more complex than that of the original direct form, we just explore the latter for consideration. And a typical k × n parity check matrix H of a eIRA code can be represented as H = [Hu|Hp], where Hu is a k × (n − k) matrix, while Hp is a k × k matrix with k − 1 columns of weight 2 and a column of weight 1. And the special structure greatly reduces the complexity of encoding. Actually the parity bit of index i can be computed with the i-th parity check equation and the parity bit of index i − 1. This encoding algorithm can be implemented in subplot (b) of Fig. 5, where the first block denotes a multiplication of the information vector u by HuT , and the second block denotes an accumulator. In order to increase the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:42:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1888

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the ICC 2008 proceedings.

girth (minimum length of the loops in the Tanner graph) for the code and the concatenation system, we extend Hp to the form of the right part in Fig. 5 where large n will result in large girth. However, the import of Zn will bring n columns with weight-1 in Hp which will impair the performance of the code according to [7], so n should be selected carefully with compromise. Simultaneously, the encoding complexity of the newly introduced eIRA code is nearly equal to that of the original one since they have the similar form of the sparse matrix and the differential encoder.

Hu
(a) u A

1 11
11
u 1p
1D

Hu
(c) u A

1 01
Zn 1 1 Zn 1
1 Zn 1
u 1p
1 Dn

(b) u HuT

u

1 1D

p (d) u HuT

u

1

p

1 Dn

Fig. 5. Typical parity check matrix and the encoder of the eIRA codes. Zn stands for an array of n − 1 (n ≥ 1) zeros. (e.g. Z3={0 0}, Z1=φ)

v1 = u1, v2 = u2, vt = ut−2 ⊕ ut, with t ≥ 3 (4)
With simple transformation of (4), we can get the following result as below.

u1 ⊕ v1 = 0, u2 ⊕ v2 = 0

ut−2 ⊕ ut ⊕ vt = 0, with t ≥ 3

(5)

From (5), we find that the data sequence of {vt} can be seen as the parity check bits for the data sequence of {ut}. So the decoder of TFM can be represented as the form of Tanner graph similar to that of a LDPC code with the similar method introduced in [11]. And the equivalent Tanner graph representation (a rough sketch) of the eIRA coded TFM is shown in Fig. 6. According to Fig. 6, we can design the scheme of the eIRA coded TFM as joint encoding and modulation and joint demodulation and decoding as follows.

Tanner Graph for the eIRA Code
v1

Equivalent Tanner Graph for the Decoder of the TFM Demodulator

r1

u1

c1

v2

r2

u2

Meanwhile, the optimal design of H can use the method in [7]. At first, the optimal variable/check node degree profile of the eIRA code is calculated based on the combination of density evolution and differential evolution optimization. Then the parity check matrix of the eIRA code can be obtained by the computer random search under the constraint of the degree profile of the eIRA code and some other constraints for the eIRA code mentioned above and in [7].
B. Suggested eIRA Coded TFM without Interleaving
Our scheme of the eIRA coded TFM without interleaving is mainly based on the jointly optimal design of the eIRA code and the CPE of TFM. When the recursive CPE of TFM with memory effect is introduced, the optimal eIRA code designed for BPSK with AWGN is not optimal because the correlation constraints (brought by the CPE of TFM) will degrade the code performance of the concatenation system. So the design of the optimal eIRA code for the scheme should put the correlation into consideration. Meanwhile, we can utilize the powerful analysis tool of Tanner graph for the iterative encoding systems to analysis and design the optimal scheme.
Since the straightforward analysis of the CPE of TFM is rather complex and the decoding process of the TFM demodulation in Fig. 3 is actually the reverse process of the encoding of the CPE, we can design the whole eIRA coded TFM system with the decoder of the TFM demodulator and the eIRA decoder. Suppose the data sequence after sampling and decision as {ut} and the output data sequence after the TFM demodulator as {vt} in Fig. 3, the relationship of them can be expressed in (4).

c2

v3

c3

v4

c4

v5

r3

u3

r4

u4

r5

u5

From Memoryless Demodulator of the TFM Demodulator

.

v6

.
.

r6

u6

.

.

. .

.

.

.

.

.

Decision and Output

Fig. 6. Equivalent Tanner graph representation of the eIRA coded TFM.

1) Joint Encoding and Modulation of the eIRA Coded TFM: From the Tanner graph of Fig. 6, we find that the connections between the variable and check nodes of the decoder of the TFM and the eIRA decoder may form a small loop which will affect the decoding effect of the BP algorithm. So the design of eIRA code can avoid the small loops. Therefore, the design of eIRA code can be described as follows. Firstly, given the code rate, the optimal degree profile for variable and check nodes can be calculated by the method of density evolution or differential evolution [7], [13]. According to the degree profile and the constraints brought by the eIRA code, we can use the random allocation method to generate the parity check matrix of the eIRA code. During the design of the eIRA Code, we should treat the eIRA code and the CPE as a whole to avoid the short loops as {c2, v2, r2, u2, r4, v4, c2} in Fig. 6 and to try its best to enlarge the girth of it because these will degrade the effectiveness of decoding for the BP algorithm. So we choose the new eIRA code with Z3 in Fig. 5 and concatenate

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:42:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1889

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the ICC 2008 proceedings.

it with the CPE of TFM which will have a minimum girth12 for Hp of the eIRA code in the concatenation system. By this method, there is less short loop in the Tanner graph and all the random variables passed between any two nodes in the graph are approximately independent. Finally, the detailed denotation of the whole encoding and modulation of the eIRA Coded TFM is shown in Fig. 7.

Data

Input

.

.

.

.

.

FSM

.

si

xi-2

si+1

xi-1

eIRA

+
Mod

xi

Encoder 2 D

+

xi+1

Mod

2

.

.

.

.

.

.

. . .
Look-Up Table of 8-state
Set Mapping to 6 Phases for
FSM
. . .

Memoryless Modulator of the TFM Modulator
Send to Channel

Fig. 7. Joint encoding and modulation of the eIRA coded TFM.

In Fig. 7, the input data is firstly encoded by the eIRA encoder as shown in Fig. 5 with low complexity and the eIRA code is designed according to all constraints mentioned above. Then the outputs of the eIRA encoder are differential encoded and the result of them will be grouped as the overlapped 3bit tuples which are feeded into the look-up-table of the 8state FSM (see Fig. 1) to generate the current phase for the subsequent memoryless modulation of the TFM modulation. Finally, the memoryless modulator of the TFM modulator will send the encoded and modulated data into the channel.
2) Joint Demodulation and Decoding of the eIRA coded TFM: The joint demodulation and decoding of the eIRA coded TFM can be described as follows. Firstly, the demodulated data of the received signals from the channel are obtained by the memoryless demodulator of the TFM demodulator shown in Fig. 3. Then they are input to the concatenation of the decoder of the TFM demodulator and the eIRA decoder for decoding.
Since the outer code is an eIRA code, there are several update procedures that can be used in the message passing decoder which performs iterative decoding jointly. So we can propose a decoder structure which jointly optimizes the decoding of eIRA code and the decoder of the TFM demodulator. Because the eIRA decoder itself is an iterative decoder, we can extend the iterations within the eIRA decoder to the iterations between the eIRA decoder and the decoder of the TFM demodulator. In order to ease the exposition, we will consider an update schedule which includes one iteration within the eIRA decoder followed by one iteration within the decoder of the TFM demodulator and then the overall iterations specify the number of iteration within them together. Finally, the joint demodulation and decoding for this scheme can be described in Fig. 6. In Fig. 6, the received signals is firstly demodulated

by the memoryless demodulator and then it is jointly decoded in the decoder of the TFM demodulator and the eIRA decoder in the manner of iteration.
IV. SIMULATION AND PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
From the qualitative analysis mentioned above, our scheme of the concatenated eRIA codes for TFM may achieve good performance. Now we verify the effectiveness of it by presenting the eIRA coded TFM under an AWGN channel which is typical in deep space communications [1].
The whole system is simulated in an AWGN channel and the prototype of the simulation system is shown in Fig. 3. In the simulations, our scheme is implemented as the form of the eRIA coded TFM in section III. While the scheme with interleaving is just realized as the form of the generally concatenated code [9]. The simulation parameters for the schemes are listed as follows: The simulations use the eIRA coded TFM without interleaving mentioned in section III and the contrast scheme with interleaving. The communication channel is selected as the AWGN channel under different SNR. A moderate and a rather long length of rate-1/2 (16200, 8100) and (64800, 32400) eIRA codes (selected according to DVB-S2 standard [14]) is used in these simulations. Simultaneously, since the corresponding optimal eIRA codes have been specified in the DVB-S2 standard [14], we just adjust some distribution of 1 in the parity check matrices of the codes according to our scheme where Z3 is selected. Generally, the performance of the coded modulation system is often weighed by the BER performance, so simulations will run until either a specified number (i.e.1000) of error frames occur or a total 100000 trials have been run. At the same time, the maximum number of iterations for the eIRA decoding is 50 times for each frame. Meanwhile, in the contrast scheme with interleaving, We have used a pseudo-random interleaver/deinterleaver with depth of 16200 and 64800 respectively according to its code length. By the way, the conventional scheme of the direct concatenation of the eIRA code (designed optimal for BPSK) and TFM is also simulated to see the effectiveness of the suggested scheme. And in this scheme, the demodulation of TFM is independently executed with hard decision and then differential decoding after memoryless demodulating according to [2]. Finally, the curves of BER are shown in Fig. 8.
From Fig. 8, we can see that our scheme obtains rather good performance under the AWGN channel of low bit SNR (or Eb/N0). By eliminating the correlation of the adjacent data caused by the CPE to the best of its ability, our scheme without interleaving has only about 0.1-0.15 dB (BER=10−5) loss compared with the scheme with interleaving but the part of interleaving is reduced. And it should be noted that the eIRA codes outperform the convolutional codes and our scheme has a significant coding gain about more than 3 dB (BER=10−5) in comparison with the generalized concatenated TFM [10] at the same rate-1/2. However, since the poor performance of the conventional scheme of the direct concatenation system where BER of it even exceeds 0.5, we don’t draw it in Fig. 8.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:42:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1890

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the ICC 2008 proceedings.

10−1

10−2

Bit−Error−Ratio (BER)

10−3

10−4

10−5

R=1/2,N=16200,With Interleaving

10−6

R=1/2,N=16200,Proposed Method

R=1/2,N=64800,With Interleaving

R=1/2,N=64800,Proposed Method

10−7

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

E /N (dB)
b0

Fig. 8. BER performance of the concatenated eIRA codes for TFM

Because completely eliminating all loops (including loops of large girth) in the Tanner graph of the system is very difficult, the performance of our scheme has still some disparity when compared with that of the scheme with interleaving. But through careful designing, we can eliminate the length6 short loops to approach the optimal performance of the BP algorithm. Actually, our scheme can achieve lower complexity and less decoding delay due to the reduction of interleaving at the cost of just a little endurable performance loss than the contrast scheme with interleaving. In order to acquire good random disperse effect of interleaving, the contrast scheme need the pseudo-random interleavers with long depth of several thousands. So the scheme will include a lookup-table with volume of several thousands or a concatenation of many small interleavers. Moreover, the corresponding interleaving delay introduced in this scheme will increase decoding delay too. However, our scheme can avoid all these flaws by eliminating the part of interleaving. In addition, for the worst case of the conventional scheme of the direct concatenation system at low SNR, we find that it encounter with the phenomenon of error propagation. The reasons are as follows: The hard decision and then the differential decoding of the TFM demodulator will cause much performance loss. And the actual SNR for the TFM demodulator will be about 3 dB less than Eb/N0 (conversion from the code rate-1/2). So the BER performance will degrade a lot and it will cause the phenomenon of error propagation for the eIRA code. In conclusion, although the suggested algorithm shows a little performance loss compared with the scheme with interleaving, it represents good performance and low complex which will be very important for hardware realization.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have presented a new scheme of the eIRA coded TFM by jointly optimizing the concatenation of the eIRA code and TFM. In our scheme, We have constructed the

optimally concatenated scheme as the form of the inner CPE of the TFM and the outer eIRA code by reducing the memory effect of TFM. And we also deal with jointly decoding of the concatenation system by iterative decoding between the decoder of TFM and the eIRA decoder. Simulation results have shown that our scheme can obtain lower complexity of implementation and less decoding delay (due to the reduction of interleaving) at the cost of only 0.1-0.15 dB performance loss when compared to the scheme with interleaving given BER of 10−5. Furthermore, our scheme has outperformed the conventional scheme with direct concatenation which is not work at all at very low SNR. In addition, our scheme also shows a significant coding gain about more than 3 dB than the generalized concatenated TFM at the same rate-1/2 and at BER of 10−5. Therefore, our scheme can be applied to the deep space communication systems capable of good performance and low complexity.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the National Basic Research Program of China (2007CB310600) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants No. 60532070 and No. 60525107.
REFERENCES
[1] Xiao Song, et.al., “The Key Technologies of Deep Space Communications,” China Communications, Vol. 4, No. 6, pp. 82-94, December 2006.
[2] F. de Jager and C. B. Dekker, “Tamed frequency modulation, A novel method to achieve spectrum economy in digital transmission,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. COM-26, pp. 534-542, May 1978.
[3] B. Rimoldi, “A decomposition approach to CPM,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-34, pp. 260-270, Mar. 1988.
[4] F. Morales-Moreno, W. Holubowicz and S.Pasupathy, “Optimization of trellis coded TFM via matched codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. COM42, pp. 1586-1594, April 1994.
[5] G. Canovai, et.al., “On the design of downlinks for satellite communication system using TFM and convolutinal codes: A simulation approach with TOPSIM III,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. SAC-2, pp. 42-50, Jan. 1984.
[6] H. Jin, A. Khandekar and R. J. McEliece, “Irregular repeat-accumulate codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, pp. 1-8, Sep. 2000.
[7] M. Yang, Y. Li and W. E. Ryan, “Design of efficiently encodable moderate-length high-rate irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. COM-52, pp. 564-571, April 2004.
[8] G. Durisi, L. Dinoi and S. Benedetto, “eIRA Codes for Coded Modulation Systems,” IEEE Int. Conf. on Comm.ICC ’06.,June 2006.
[9] Sergio Benedetto and Guido Montorsi, “Serial concatenation of block and convolutional codes,” Electronics Letters, vol. 32, no. 10, pp. 887-888, May 1996.
[10] M. Bossert, et.al., “Generalized concatenation of encoded tamed frequency modulation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. COM-46, pp. 13371345, Oct. 1998.
[11] K. R. Narayanan, I. Altunbas and R. S. Narayanaswami, “Design of serial concatenated MSK schemes based on density evolution,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. COM-51, pp. 1283-1295, Aug. 2003.
[12] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low density parity check codes under message passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-47, pp. 599-618, Feb. 2001.
[13] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity approaching irregular low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-47, pp. 619-637, Feb. 2001.
[14] ETSI European Standard, “Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Second generation framing structure, channel coding and modulation systems for Broadcasting, Interactive Services, News Gathering and other broadband satellite applications,” ETSI EN 302 307 V1.1.2 (2006-06).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:42:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1891

