IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 7, JULY 2007

2429

Construction of Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes for AWGN and Binary Erasure Channels:
A Finite Field Approach
Lan Lan, Lingqi Zeng, Ying Y. Tai, Member, IEEE, Lei Chen, Shu Lin, Life Fellow, IEEE, and Khaled Abdel-Ghaffar, Member, IEEE

Abstract—In the late 1950s and early 1960s, finite fields were successfully used to construct linear block codes, especially cyclic codes, with large minimum distances for hard-decision algebraic decoding, such as Bose–Chaudhuri–Hocquenghem (BCH) and Reed–Solomon (RS) codes. This paper shows that finite fields can also be successfully used to construct algebraic low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes for iterative soft-decision decoding. Methods of construction are presented. LDPC codes constructed by these methods are quasi-cyclic (QC) and they perform very well over the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN), binary random, and burst erasure channels with iterative decoding in terms of bit-error probability, block-error probability, error-floor, and rate of decoding convergence, collectively. Particularly, they have low error floors. Since the codes are QC, they can be encoded using simple shift registers with linear complexity.
Index Terms—Burst, dispersion, erasure, error floor, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, masking, quasi-cyclic (QC) codes, zero span.
I. INTRODUCTION
THE ever-growing needs for cheaper, faster, and more reliable communication systems have forced many researchers to seek ways to attain ultimate limits of reliable communications. Error control using low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes is currently the most promising coding technique to achieve Shannon capacity [1] for a wide range of channels. Although there is a great amount of research showing this, there is a need for concrete and systematic methods to construct good and efficiently encodable LDPC codes.
LDPC codes, discovered by Gallager in 1962 [2], [3], were rediscovered and shown to form a class of Shannon capacity approaching codes in the late 1990s [4], [5]. Well designed LDPC
Manuscript received November 16, 2005; revised February 20, 2007. This work was supported by National Aeronautics and Space Administration under Grant NNG05GD13G, the National Science Foundation under Grants CCR0117891 and ECS-0121469, and a gift grant from Northrop Grumman Space Technology.
L. Lan is with the Keyeye Communications, Sacramento, CA 95827 USA (e-mail: squashlan@gmail.com).
L. Zeng is with the Link-A-Media Devices Corporation, Santa Clara, CA 95051 USA (e-mail: lzeng@link-a-media.com).
Y. Y. Tai is with Ikanos Communications, Fremont, CA 94538 USA (e-mail: ytai@ikanos.com).
L. Chen is with Legend Silicon Corp., Fremont, CA 94539 USA (e-mail: lei@legendsilicon.com).
S. Lin and K. Abdel-Ghaffar are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Davis, CA 95616 USA (e-mail: shulin@ece.ucdavis.edu; ghaffar@ece.ucdavis.edu).
Communicated by R. J. McEliece, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2007.899516

codes decoded with iterative decoding based on belief propagation [6], such as the sum-product algorithm (SPA) [5], [7]–[12], achieve performance close to the Shannon limit. Ever since their rediscovery, design, construction, decoding, efficient encoding, performance analysis, and applications of these codes in digital communication and storage systems have become focal points of research. Various methods for constructing these codes have been proposed and devised. Based on the methods of construction, LDPC codes can be classified into two general categories: 1) random-like codes [5], [8], generated by computer search based on certain design guidelines and required structural properties of their Tanner graphs [9], such as girth, degree distributions, and stopping sets; and 2) structured codes constructed based on algebraic and combinatorial tools, [12]–[30].
Long random-like LDPC codes in general perform closer to the Shannon limit in the waterfall region than structured LDPC codes of the same parameters. Depending on their degree distributions, both their minimum distances and minimum sizes of their stopping sets may grow linearly with the code lengths [31], [32]. However, well-designed structured LDPC codes of practical lengths can perform just as well as random-like LDPC codes (regular or irregular) in terms of bit-error probability, block-error probability, error floor and decoding convergence rate, collectively, as shown in [15]–[30]. In fact, structured codes in general have a lower error floor which is important in digital communication and storage systems, where very low error rates are required. Structured codes with large minimum distances can be constructed more easily than computer-generated random-like codes. Furthermore, encoding of structured codes, such as cyclic and quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes, can be implemented using simple shift registers with linear complexity [30], [33] in contrast to the quadratic complexity involved in computer-generated random-like LDPC codes [34]. These codes also have advantages in integrated circuits (IC) decoder implementation due to their cyclic symmetry that results in simple regular wiring and modular structure.
In the late 1950s and early 1960s, finite fields were successfully used to construct linear block codes, especially cyclic codes, with large minimum distances for hard-decision algebraic decoding, such as Bose–Chaudhuri–Hocquenghem (BCH) codes, [35], [36], and Reed–Solomon (RS) codes [37]. In this paper, we will show that finite fields can also be used successfully to construct QC-LDPC codes that perform well with iterative decoding over both additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) and binary (random or burst) erasure channels.

0018-9448/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2430

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 7, JULY 2007

QC-LDPC codes can be constructed by methods proposed the most are cycles of length . For codes whose Tanner graphs

by Gallager [3] in the early 1960s. More recently, they have contain these short cycles, messages exchanged in iterative de-

been investigated by various researchers in [12], [13], [16]–[30]. coding become correlated after two iterations, and decoding ei-

Many of the methods are based on constructing parity-check ther does not converge or converges slowly. Therefore, cycles

matrices that are arrays of circulant permutation matrices. The of length must be prevented in code construction. This is the

code designer must be careful in the choice of the circulant per- case in almost every method of constructing LDPC codes that

mutation matrices in order to avoid short cycles in the code’s has been proposed, except for two small classes of QC-LDPC

Tanner graph. In this work, we show that finite fields can be codes constructed in [16], [18] whose Tanner graphs have cy-

used effectively to construct arrays of circulant permutation and cles of length . The RC constraint on the parity-check matrix

zero matrices as parity-check matrices of QC-LDPC codes. The of an LDPC code (regular or irregular) automatically rules out

construction methods give codes without cycles of length four cycles of length in the code’s Tanner graph. Being free of

in their Tanner graphs, which are the most important cycles that cycles of length ensures that the Tanner graph of an LDPC

cause performance degradation. The fact that these cycles are code has a girth of at least . Experimental results show that

naturally eliminated in our constructions allows the code de- for many classes of structured LDPC codes, a girth of is all

signer to concentrate more on improving the performance and that is needed to perform well or close to Shannon limit [16],

lowering the error floor of the constructed codes. Furthermore, [20], [27]–[29], [33], [38], [39] with iterative decoding. In fact,

we show that our codes have good performance, not only over LDPC codes with large girth constructed by computer search do

the AWGN channel, but also over random and burst erasure not necessarily perform well, except maybe for a small range of

channels. The codes are highly structured and the code param- bit-error rate (BER), say to . These codes in general

eters can be easily chosen to guarantee good performance over have small minimum distances that result in high error floor.

all channels. Through extensive simulations of performance, we Experimental results also show that the error floor of an LDPC

compare our codes with other codes reported in the literature. code with iterative decoding very much depends on the min-

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II imum distance of the code and hence it is necessary to keep the

gives a brief review of various types of LDPC codes. Sec- minimum distance of an LDPC code reasonably large. For an ir-

tion III presents special vector representations of elements of regular code with iterative decoding, its error performance also

a finite field. Section IV presents a general method for con- depends on the degree distributions of the variable- and check

structing QC-LDPC codes based on the multiplicative groups nodes of its Tanner graph [7], [8], or the column and row weight

of finite fields. Sections V and VI give two specific methods distributions of its parity-check matrix.

for constructing two classes of QC-LDPC codes based on the multiplicative groups of finite fields. Section VII presents a specific method for constructing QC-LDPC based on the additive groups of prime fields. Section VIII presents a method

III. LOCATION VECTOR REPRESENTATIONS OF THE ELEMENTS OF A FINITE FIELD WITH RESPECT TO ITS MULTIPLICATIVE GROUP

for constructing new classes of regular and irregular QC-LDPC codes based on a masking technique. Sections IX–XI are devoted to QC-LDPC codes for binary random and burst erasure channels. Section XII concludes the paper with some remarks.

Consider the Galois field GF where is a power of a

prime. Let be a primitive element of GF . Then

form all the elements of GF and

. The

nonzero elements of GF form the

II. DEFINITIONS AND BASIC CONCEPTS OF LDPC CODES

multiplicative group of GF under the multiplication oper-

ation. For each nonzero element with

, we

A binary regular LDPC code [2] is defined as the null space form a

-tuple over GF ,

,

of a sparse parity-check matrix over GF with the fol- whose components correspond to the

nonzero elements

lowing structural properties: 1) each row has constant weight ; of GF , where the th component

and all the other

2) each column has constant weight ; and 3) no two rows (or

components are equal to . This

-tuple

two columns) can have more than one position where they both with a single -component is referred to as the location vector

have -components. is said to be -regular and the code of with respect to the multiplicative group of GF . We

given by the null space of is called a

-regular LDPC call

the -location vector of where “ ” stands for

code. Property 3) is referred to as the column–row (RC) con- “multiplicative.” It follows from the definition that the -com-

straint. The RC constraint ensures that: 1) the Tanner graph of ponents of the -location vectors of two different nonzero

the code is free of cycles of length ; and 2) the minimum dis- elements of GF are located at two different positions. The

tance of the code is at least

[12], [30]. An LDPC code location vector of the element of GF is defined as the

is said to be irregular if its parity-check matrix has multiple all-zero

-tuple,

.

column weights and/or multiple row weights. A QC-LDPC code Let be a nonzero element in GF , then the -location

is given by the null space of an array of sparse circulants[12], vector

of is the right cyclic shift (one place to the

[13], [16]–[30].

right) of the -location vector of . Form a

The performance of an LDPC code with iterative decoding

matrix over GF with the -location vectors of

depends on a number of code structural properties besides its

as rows. Then is a circulant permutation

minimum distance. One such structural property is the girth of matrix, i.e., is a permutation matrix but each row of is a

the code which is defined as the length of the shortest cycle in the right cyclic shift of the row above it and the first row is the right

code’s Tanner graph. The cycles that affect code performance cyclic shift of the last row. is called the binary

-fold

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LAN et al.: QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES FOR AWGN AND BINARY ERASURE CHANNELS

2431

matrix dispersion of the field element . Location-vector representations and matrix dispersions of finite-field elements form the backbone of our code constructions.

IV. A GENERAL CONSTRUCTION OF QC-LDPC CODES BASED ON THE MULTIPLICATIVE GROUPS OF FINITE FIELDS

This section presents a general method for constructing

QC-LDPC codes based on the multiplicative groups of finite

fields. The construction begins with a chosen finite field GF .

Let be a primitive element in GF . Form an

matrix

over GF

-location vectors of the

entries of the th column of

,

, as rows. If

, is a

circulant permutation matrix. However, if

, is a

zero matrix. It follows

from the -multiplied row-constraint 1 that there is at most one

zero matrix in . The replacement of entries of

matrix by their -location vectors is referred to as the mul-

tiplicative

-fold horizontal expansion of . is called

the multiplicative

-fold horizontal expansion of .

Form an

array of

submatrices with

arranged in a column

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

(1)

with the following structural properties: 1) for

and

and , and differ in at least

places (i.e., the two -tuples,

and

have at most one

place where they both have the same symbol from GF ); and

2) for ,

, and ,

, , and

differ in at least places. The above two structural properties

of are referred to as the -multiplied row constraints 1 and 2,

respectively. The first -multiplied row-constraint implies that

each row of has at most one -component of GF and the

second -multiplied row constraint implies that any two rows

in differ in at least

places.

For each row of with

, we expand it verti-

cally into a

matrix over GF by multiplying

it with

as follows:

...

...

...

...

...

(2)

It follows from the -multiplied row-constraint 1 on that any

two rows in differ in at least

places. We also note

that for

, if is a nonzero element of GF ,

the

entries in the th column of form all the

nonzero elements of GF . However, if

, the

entries of the th column of are all zeros. It follows from the

-multiplied row-constraint 2 on that any two rows,

and , from two different matrices, and , differ in at

least

places. The above vertical expansion of a row in

into a

matrix over GF is referred to as the

multiplicative

-fold vertical expansion of and is

called the multiplicative

-fold vertical expansion of .

For

, replacing each entry of by its -loca-

tion vector, we obtain a

matrix over GF ,

, which consists of square subma-

trices of size

, where is formed by the

(3)

where each submatrix is either a

circulant

permutation matrix or a

zero matrix. is

basically obtained from matrix by two expansions, the mul-

tiplicative

-fold vertical expansion and the multiplicative

-fold horizontal expansion. This combination of multi-

plicative

-fold vertical and horizontal expansions is re-

ferred to as the multiplicative

-fold dispersion. We call

the multiplicative

-fold dispersion of . With the

multiplicative

-fold dispersion, each entry of is

dispersed into either a

circulant permuta-

tion matrix or a

zero matrix. Array is an

matrix over GF .

Theorem 1: The multiplicative

-fold dispersion of

matrix given by (1) that meets the -multiplied row-con-

straints 1 and 2 satisfies the RC constraint.

Proof: Suppose that does not satisfy the RC constraint.

Then there are four -components at the four corners of a rec-

tangle in . Let , , , and be the four -compo-

nents at the four corners of the above rectangle, where 1)

and are in the same column of and and are in

the same column of ; and 2) and are in the same

row of and and are in the same row of . Since

meets the -multiplied row-constraint 1 and is an array

of circulant permutation matrices, these four -components are

in four different circulant permutation matrices, say , , ,

and , which contain , , , and , respectively. If

we view as an array of circulant permutation matrices, then

1) and are in the same row of , 2) and are in the

same row of , 3) and are in the same column of , and

4) and are in the same column of . It follows from the

multiplicative

-fold dispersion of that

and

imply that there are two rows and in

with

and

for which

and

with

have two positions where they have identical

components. This contradicts the -multiplied constraint 2 on

and proves the theorem.

Since satisfies the RC constraint, its associated Tanner graph is free of cycles of length and hence has a girth of at least . is called an RC-constrained array of circulant permutation matrices.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2432

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 7, JULY 2007

For any pair

of integers with

and

This proves that satisfies the -multiplied row-constraints

, let

be a

subarray of .

is a 1. Next, suppose that there are two different positions and

matrix over GF . Since it is a submatrix of with

where

and

have identical

, it also satisfies the RC constraint. Since

is an array components,

and . For the hypothesis

of

circulant permutation matrices, the null to be true,

(or

) and/or

space of

gives a QC-LDPC code of length

(or

). Then

with rate at least

whose Tanner graph has a girth

of at least . If

does not contain zero matrices, it has

constant column and row weights and , respectively. Then and

is a -regular QC-LDPC code. Since

satisfies

the RC constraint, has a minimum distance at least

[12], [30]. However, since

is an array of permutation

matrices, no odd number of columns can be added to a column

of zeros, and hence, the minimum distance of must be even.

Consequently, the minimum distance of is at least

for

even and

for odd . If

contains zero matrices

and it does not have constant column and/or row weights, then

By equating the product of the left-hand side of the first equation and the right-hand side of the second equation to the product of the right-hand side of the first equation and the left-hand side of the second equation, and dividing the products by , we find that

is an irregular QC-LDPC code.

In Sections V and VI, two specific methods are presented

for constructing matrices ’s over finite fields that satisfy the Since

and

, then

. Hence,

-multiplied row-constraints 1 and 2. Based on these matrices,

implies that . This contradicts

we construct two large classes of QC-LDPC codes whose the assumption that

and proves the theorem.

Tanner graphs have girth at least .

Dispersing with multiplicative

-fold vertical and

V. CONSTRUCTION OF QC-LDPC CODES BASED ON THE MULTIPLICATIVE GROUPS OF FINITE FIELDS: METHOD 1
In this section, we present a specific method for constructing

horizontal expansions as described in the last section, we obtain

the following RC-constrained

array of circulant

permutation and zero matrices of size

:

RC-constrained arrays of circulant permutation matrices based

on the multiplicative groups of finite fields. From these arrays, we construct a class of QC-LDPC codes whose Tanner graphs have girth at least .

...

...

...

...

...

The construction begins with a finite field GF and a prim-

(5)

itive element in the field. Form the following

where

are

matrix over GF :

zero matrices and all the other submatrices ’s are

circulant permutation matrices. Each row (or column)

of has one and only one zero matrix. It follows from the

...

cyclic structure of

that every row of submatrices of

is the left cyclic shift of the row above it and the first row of

submatrices is the left cyclic shift of the last row of submatrices.

is a

matrix over GF with both column

...

...

...

...

(4) and row weights For any pair

. of positive integers with

,

let

be a

subarray of .

is a

The matrix

has the following structural properties: 1) any

two rows (or two columns) differ in all positions; 2) all the en-

tries in a row (or a column) are different elements in GF ; 3)

each row (or column) contains one and only one zero element

and the zero element in the th row is at the

th (modulo

) position for

; and 4) each row is the left

cyclic shift (one place to the left) of the row above it and the first

row is the left cyclic shift of the last row.

matrix over GF which also satisfies

the RC constraint. If

does not contain zero subma-

trices of , it has constant column and row weights and ,

respectively. The null space of

gives a -regular

QC-LDPC code of length

, rate at least

,

and minimum distance at least

for even and

for

odd . If

contains some zero submatrices of ,

then

has two column weights,

and , and

possibly two row weights,

and . In this case, is a

Theorem 2: The matrix given by (4) satisfies the -mul- near-regular QC-LDPC code with minimum distance at least

tiplied row-constraints 1 and 2.

for even and at least

for odd . It should be noted

Proof: Since each row of

contains one and only one that these lower bounds on the minimum distance may not be

zero element, it follows that, for

and

tight. Since

satisfies the RC constraint, the Tanner

and , , and agree in at most one position. graph of has a girth of at least . For any given field GF ,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LAN et al.: QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES FOR AWGN AND BINARY ERASURE CHANNELS

2433

the above construction gives a family of structurally compatible

QC-LDPC codes with various lengths, rates, and minimum dis-

tances for different choices of and .

Even though the QC-LDPC codes presented above are

constructed primarily for soft-input soft-output iterative de-

coding, they can also be decoded with other types of decoding

methods with less decoding complexity, such as one-step

majority-logic (OSMLG) [30], bit-flipping (BF) [2], [3], [12],

[30], and weighted BF decodings [12], [30]. OSMLG and BF

decoding methods are hard-decision decodings that require

only simple logical operations, while weighted BF decoding is

a reliability-based decoding [30] that requires some fixed-point

computations besides logical operations. A

-regular

LDPC code decoded with OSML decoding can correct any

error pattern with

or fewer random errors [30]. There-

fore, for a code to be effective with OSML decoding, must be

relatively large. Also BF and weighted BF decodings give good

error performance only if is relatively large. These various

types of decoding methods for the QC-LDPC codes constructed

above provide various tradeoffs between error performance and

decoding complexity.

In the following, we use two examples to illustrate the above

method of constructing QC-LDPC codes. Codes of various

lengths, rates, and minimum distances are constructed based on

different fields, and their error performances over the AWGN

channel with various decoding methods are computed. We

assume binary phase-shift keying (BPSK) transmission. For

decoding codes with iterative decoding using SPA in these

two and other examples in this paper, we set the maximum

number of decoding iterations to either 50 or 100. Furthermore,

we compare the performances of the constructed QC-LDPC

codes with those of random MacKay codes [5] constructed by

computer search. All the random MacKay codes given in this

paper are constructed by the authors.

Example 1: Let GF be the code construction field. Based

on the multiplicative group of GF , we can construct a

array of

circulant permutation and zero ma-

trices. From this array, we can construct a family of QC-LDPC

codes with various lengths, rates, and minimum distances. Sup-

pose we choose

. Then the array

is

the entire array .

is a

matrix over

GF with both column and row weights . The null space of

gives a

QC-LDPC code with rate

and minimum distance at least , whose Tanner graph has a

girth of at least . The code is a relatively short LDPC code. The

performance and the rate of decoding convergence of this code

over the AWGN channel, decoded with iterative decoding using

SPA, are shown in Fig. 1(a) and (b), respectively. From Fig. 1(a),

we see that at the BER of , the code performs 2.3 dB from

the Shannon limit and achieves a 6.5-dB coding gain over the

uncoded BPSK. Fig. 1(b) shows that decoding converges very

fast. At the BER of , the gap between 5 iterations and 100

iterations is within 0.2 dB. In fact, there is no performance gap

between 50 and 100 iterations. The error floor of the code is es-

timated below the BER of

using the method given in [40]

and the minimum distance of the code. Furthermore, the code is

one-step majority-logic decodable and is capable of correcting

15 or fewer random errors.

For comparison, the performance of a

random

MacKay code [5] constructed by computer search is also

included in Fig. 1(a). The parity-check matrix of this MacKay

code has column weight and average row weight . From

Fig. 1(a), we see that the two codes perform almost the same

above the BER of

or the block-error rate (BLER) of

. However, below the BER of

or BLER of

, the QC-LDPC code outperforms the MacKay code.

The bit-error performance of the MacKay code starts to show

slope change at the BER of

and bends away from the

bit-error performance curve of the QC-LDPC code at the BER

of . The QC-LDPC code has an encoding advantage over

the MacKay code, but the MacKay code has a smaller decoding

computational complexity.

Fig. 1(c) shows the error performances of the

QC-LDPC code with various decoding methods for the AWGN

channel, namely, OSMLG, hard-decision BF, weighted BF and

SPA decoding methods. Hard-decision BF decoding used was

devised by Gallager [2], [3], [30] and weighted BF decoding

used was recently devised by Shan, Zhao, and Jiang, called SZJ

weighted BF decoding [41]. At the BER of , SZJ weighted

BF decoding performs 0.4 dB from SPA decoding. Using

SZJ-weighted BF decoding results in a significant reduction in

decoding complexity compared to SPA decoding with a small

performance degradation.

Suppose we choose

and

. Take an

subarray

from . Then

is a

matrix over GF with row weight and two column

weights, and . The null space of

gives a

QC-LDPC code with rate

and minimum dis-

tance at least . Using the method given in [42], the minimum

distance is estimated to be . The performances of this code

over the AWGN channel with SPA (100 iterations), hard-deci-

sion BF and SZJ-weighted BF decoding methods are shown in

Fig. 1(d). At the BER of , the code with SPA decoding per-

forms 2 dB from the Shannon limit and SZJ decoding performs

0.65 dB from SPA decoding. With SPA decoding, the error floor

of this code is estimated to occur below the BER of

.

The above example demonstrates that we can push the errorfloor of an LDPC down by increasing the column weight of its parity-check matrix but this results in lowering the code rate and increasing the decoding computational complexity.

Example 2: In this example, we use the prime field GF

for code construction. Using this field,

is a power of . Based on the multiplicative group of GF ,

we can construct a

array of

circu-

lant permutation and zero matrices. Each row (or each column)

contains one and only one

zero matrix. For any pair

of integers,

, with

,

, the null space of a

subarray

of gives a QC-LDPC code. If

we choose

with

and various ’s, we can con-

struct a family of QC-LDPC codes of lengths that are powers

of . For example, we choose the following pairs of

’s:

and

. Based on these chosen pairs, we

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2434

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 7, JULY 2007

Fig. 1. (a) Performances of the (961; 721) QC-LDPC code given in Example 1 and a (961; 721) random MacKay code over the AWGN channel with SPA decoding. (BLER stands for block error rate.) (b) Rate of decoding convergence of the (961; 721) QC-LDPC code given in Example 1 over the AWGN channel. (Figure continued on the following page.)

take three subarrays,

,

, and

, error performances of these codes over the AWGN channel are

from , avoiding zero matrices. The null spaces of these shown in Fig. 2. We see that they all perform well. Consider the

three subarrays of

give three regular QC-LDPC codes

code. At the BER of , it performs 1 dB from

which are

and

the Shannon limit. Consider the

code with rate

codes with rates

and

respectively. The

. At the BER of , it performs 0.6 dB from the Shan-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LAN et al.: QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES FOR AWGN AND BINARY ERASURE CHANNELS

2435

Fig. 1. (c) Performances of the (961; 721) QC-LDPC code given in Example 1 over the AWGN channel with SPA, SZJ-weighted BF, hard-decision BF, and OSMLG decodings. (d) Performances of the (961; 765) QC-LDPC code given in Example 1 over the AWGN channel with SPA, SZJ-weighted BF, and harddecision BF decodings.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2436

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 7, JULY 2007

Fig. 2. Performances of the three QC-LDPC codes given in Example 2 and a (8192; 7171) random MacKay code over the AWGN channel.

Shannon limit. For comparison, the performance of a

random MacKay code is also included in Fig. 2.

The parity-check matrix of this random MacKay code satisfies

the RC constraint and has column and average row weights

and

, respectively. We see that the performance curves

of the

QC-LDPC and MacKay codes are on top

of each other down to the BER of

. However, the

QC-LDPC code has an encoding advantage over the Mackay

code.

VI. CONSTRUCTION OF QC-LDPC CODES BASED ON THE MULTIPLICATIVE GROUPS OF FINITE FIELDS: METHOD-2

The parity-check matrices of a subclass of Reed-Solomon

(RS) codes [30], [37] can be dispersed by multiplicative multi-

fold vertical and horizontal expansions to form arrays of circu-

lant permutation matrices that satisfy the RC-constraint. Based

on these RC-constrained arrays, a class of RS-based QC-LDPC

codes can be constructed.

Consider the Galois field GF . Let be the largest prime

factor of and

. Let be a primitive element of

GF and

. Then is an element in GF of order .

The set

forms a cyclic subgroup

of the multiplicative group of GF . For

, form the

following matrix over GF :

where the power of is taken modulo . It can be readily

proved that all the elements in each row of

are dif-

ferent and they form the elements of the cyclic subgroup .

is simply the parity-check matrix of a cyclic

RS code over GF , whose generator polynomial has

as roots [30].

Theorem 3: The matrix given by (6) satisfies the -mul-

tiplied row-constraints 1 and 2.

Proof: Since all the components of a row of

given by (6) are nonzero, it is obvious that

satisfies the

-multiplied row-constraint 1. Next, suppose that there are two

different positions and with

where

and

have identical components

, , and

. Without loss of generality, we may assume

that

and . Then

and

.

From these two equations, we find that

, i.e.,

. Since

, both and

are relatively prime to and

is not divisible by

. Since the order of is ,

. Therefore,

and

cannot have more than one position where they have

identical symbols.

Dispersing with the multiplicative

-fold vertical

and horizontal expansions, we obtain the following

array

of

circulant permutation matrices:

...

... ...

... . . .

...

(6)

...

...

... . . .

...

(7)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LAN et al.: QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES FOR AWGN AND BINARY ERASURE CHANNELS

2437

Fig. 3. Performances of the (5080; 4575) regular QC-LDPC code given in Example 3 and a (5080; 4575) random Mackay code over the AWGN channel.

Since every entry in is a nonzero element in GF ,

with iterative decoding using SPA over the AWGN channel is

does not contain any zero submatrices. is an

shown in Fig. 3. At a BER of , it performs 1.1 dB from

matrix over GF with column and row weight the Shannon limit. Also included in Fig. 3 is the performance of

and , respectively. It follows from Theorems 1 and 3 that

satisfies the RC constraint.

For

and

, let

be a

subarray of . Then

is a

matrix

over GF with column and row weights and , respectively.

Since

is a submatrix of , it also satisfies the RC

a

random MacKay code constructed by computer

search whose parity-check matrix has column weight and av-

erage row weight . We see that the error performance curves

of the

QC-LDPC code constructed above and the

random MacKay code constructed by computer

search are on top of each other.

constraint. The null space of

gives a QC-LDPC code

of length

with rate at least

and minimum

distance at least

for even and

for odd , whose

Tanner graph has a girth of at least . The above construction

gives a class of RS-based QC-LDPC codes.

Example 3: Let GF be the code construction field. The

order

of the multiplicative group of GF

is a prime. Therefore, the largest prime factor of

is

. Set

. Then

given by (6) is an

ma-

trix over GF which is the parity-check matrix of the cyclic

RS code over GF with minimum distance .

By expanding

with the multiplicative 127-fold vertical

and horizontal expansions, we obtain an

array

of

circulant permutation matrices. Choose

and

. Take a

subarray from , say the

subarray at the upper left corner of . It is a

matrix with column and row weights and , respectively.

The null space of this matrix gives a

QC-LDPC

code with rate

. The performance of this code decoded

VII. CONSTRUCTION OF QC-LDPC CODES BASED ON THE ADDITIVE GROUPS OF PRIME FIELDS

This section presents a construction of binary QC-LDPC

codes based on representing the elements of a finite field by

location vectors defined with respect to the additive group of

the field.

Let be a prime. Then the set of integers,

forms a field GF under modulo- addition and multipli-

cation. Such a field is called a prime field. For each element

GF , its location vector with respect to the additive

group of GF is defined as a unit -tuple over GF ,

, whose components correspond to

all the elements of GF (including the element), where

the th component

and all the other components are

zeros. This location vector of element is called the -location

vector of where “ ” stands for “additive.” The -components

of the -location vectors of two different elements in GF

are at two different positions. For any element in GF , the

-location vector

of is the right cyclic shift of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2438

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 7, JULY 2007

location vector of . Hence, the matrix over GF ,

with the -location vectors of

(modulo- ) as rows, is a circulant permutation matrix.

Form the following

base matrix over GF we get

(8) at the bottom of the page, where the multiplication of two

elements, and in GF is carried out with modulo- mul-

tiplication. For

, we expand the th row

vertically into a matrix over GF

by adding the elements

of GF in turn to each

component of as shown in (9), also at the bottom of the page,

where for each entry

, multiplication and addition are

carried out modulo- . Notice that all entries in a column are

distinct. is called the additive -fold vertical expansion of

the th row of . Replacing each entry of

with its

-location vector, we obtain a row of circulant permutation

matrices of size ,

, where the

th circulant permutation matrix is formed by the -loca-

tion vectors of the entries of the th column of . The re-

placement of the entries of

with their -location vectors

is called additive -fold horizontal expansion of . Next we

form a array of circulant permutation matrices over

GF

...

...

...

...

...

(10)

is a

matrix over GF with both column and row

weights . It does not contain any zero submatrices and all the

submatrices in the top row and leftmost column of are

identity matrices. is called the additive -fold dispersion

of .

Theorem 4: The matrix given by (10) satisfies the RC

constraint.

Proof: Suppose that

does not satisfy the RC con-

straint. Then, there are four -components at the four corners

of a rectangle in . Since is an array of circulant per-

mutation matrices, it follows that these four -components be-

long to four different matrices , , , and , where

, , and . In particular, suppose that

the -components appear in the th row of and and the

th row of and . Since the circulant permutation ma-

trices , , , and are obtained by additive -fold

vertical and horizontal expansions of the elements , , ,

and , respectively, it follows that

and

. These equations imply that

.

Since

and , we have . This contradicts

the assumption that

and proves the theorem.

For any pair of integers, and , with

, let

be a

subarray of . Then the null space

of

gives a QC-LDPC code of length , minimum

distance for even and for odd , whose Tanner graph

has a girth of at least . The above construction gives another

class of QC-LDPC codes.

Example 4: Suppose we use the additive group of the prime

field GF for code construction. From (8)–(10) we can con-

struct a

array

of

circulant permuta-

tion matrices. Set

and

. Take a

array

from .

is a

matrix with

constant column weight and constant row weight whose

null space gives a

-regular

QC-LDPC code

of rate

and estimated minimum distance . The error

performance, rate of decoding convergence, and error floor of

this code over the AWGN channel are shown in Fig. 4(a)–(c),

respectively. At the BER of , the code performs 1.3 dB

from the Shannon limit and has no error floor down to the BER

of

. Decoding of this code converges very fast as shown

in Fig. 4(b). The performance gap between 10 and 50 iterations

is very little, about 0.1 dB at the BER of . In fact, the differ-

ences in performance with five, eight, and ten iterations are very

small. The estimated error floor of this code is below the BER

of

(or below

for BLER) as shown in Fig. 4(c).

If we choose

and

, we can construct a

QC-LDPC code with rate

and estimated

minimum distance . The performance of this code over

the AWGN channel is also included in Fig. 4(a). At the BER

of , it performs only 1.1 dB from the Shannon limit.

...

...

...

...

...

...

(8)

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

(9)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LAN et al.: QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES FOR AWGN AND BINARY ERASURE CHANNELS

2439

Fig. 4. (a) Performances of the (5256; 4823) and (5256; 4895) QC-LDPC codes, given in Example 4 and a (5256; 4895) random MacKay code over the AWGN channel. (b) Rate of decoding convergence of the (5256; 4823) QC-LDPC code given in Example 4 over the AWGN channel. (Figure continued on the following page.)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2440

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 7, JULY 2007

Fig. 4. (c) The estimated error-floor of the (5256; 4823) QC-LDPC code over the AWGN channel given in Example 4.

The error floor of this code is estimated below

for BER hard to construct two codes, one with the method given in this

and

for BLER, respectively. For comparison, we also section and one with the BIBD method given in [19], with

constructed a

random MacKay code whose parity- exactly the same length, dimension, and rate for comparison.

check matrix has constant column weight and average row However, in the next example, we give a comparison of a BIBD

weight . The performance of this MacKay code is also in- code with a QC-LDPC code constructed with the method given

cluded in Fig. 4(a).We see that the

QC-LDPC code in this section. Both codes have almost the same rate.

constructed based on the prime field GF performs the MacKay code.

significantly out- Example 5: Consider the prime field GF

. A class-1

type-2 BIBD can be constructed from this prime field as shown

In [19], structured regular LDPC codes were constructed in [19]. The incidence matrix of this BIBD is a

based on three small classes of special balanced incomplete matrix over GF which consists of a row of 21 circulants

block designs (BIBDs). These codes are called BIBD-LDPC

of size

, i.e.,

.

codes. The BIBDs used for code constructions are derived from For

, each circulant has both column and row

prime fields which satisfy certain conditions. These conditions weights , and each column of corresponds to a block in the

limit the size of the class of BIBD-LDPC codes given in [19]. BIBD constructed from GF . The matrix satisfies the RC

The parity-check matrix of a BIBD-LDPC code is constructed constraint. Suppose we take submatrix

based on the incidence vectors of blocks of a BIBD and has from that consists of the first 14 circulants. Then is a

column weight no greater than . The BIBD-LDPC codes

matrix over GF with column and row weights

constructed in [19] are mostly high-rate codes and for prac- and , respectively. Its null space gives a

tical length, they perform well over the AWGN channel with QC-BIBD-LDPC code of rate

. The performance of

iterative decoding. Three subclasses of BIBD-LDPC codes this code over the AWGN channel decoded with SPA (100

given in [19] are quasi-cyclic. In contrast to the construction iterations) is shown in Fig. 5. For comparison, we consider the

of BIBD-LDPC codes given in [19], the construction of LDPC

QC-LDPC code of rate

given in Example

codes given in this section is more general and gives a much 4 that was constructed based on the prime field GF . The

larger class of LDPC codes. Every prime field can be used performance of this

QC-LDPC code is also in-

for code construction and the LDPC codes constructed from cluded in Fig. 5. We see that the two codes perform very close

any prime field are quasi-cyclic. Furthermore, codes of various to each other. However, the

QC-BIBD-LDPC

rates, high or low, can be constructed. Since the construction code is 639 bits longer than the

QC-LDPC code

methods given here and in [19] are quite different, it is very and has a slightly lower rate. Since the rates of the two codes

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LAN et al.: QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES FOR AWGN AND BINARY ERASURE CHANNELS

2441

Fig. 5. Performances of the (5256; 4895) QC-LDPC code, given in Example 4 and the (5894; 5473) QC-BIBD-LDPC code given in Example 5 over the AWGN channel.

are slightly different, their respective Shannon limits are also is masked by the set of -entries in

, We call

slightly different. Nevertheless, at the BER of , both codes the masking matrix,

the base matrix (or array),

perform 1.15 dB from their respective Shannon limits.

and

the masked matrix (or array). The distribution

VIII. CONSTRUCTION OF LDPC CODES BY MASKING

In Sections V–VII, we have presented three algebraic

methods for constructing regular QC-LDPC codes based on

RC-constrained arrays of circulant permutation matrices. Al-

though these arrays are highly structured, their constituent

circulant permutation matrices are densely packed. The density

of an array can be reduced by replacing a set of circulant

permutation matrices by zero matrices. This replacement of

circulant permutation matrices with zero matrices is referred to

as masking [30], [39]. Masking results in a new array whose

Tanner graph has fewer edges and hence has fewer short cycles

and possibly larger girth.

Consider a

array

of circulant per-

mutation matrices constructed based on the Galois field GF

with

and using the construction methods given in

Sections V–VII. The masking operation can be mathematically

formulated as a special matrix product. Let

be

a matrix over GF . Define the following matrix product:

of the circulant permutation matrices in the masked matrix

is identical to the distribution of the -entries in

the masking matrix

. The masked matrix

is

an array of circulant permutation and zero matrices. Since the

base array

satisfies the RC constraint, the masked

array

also satisfies the RC constraint regardless

of the masking matrix

. Hence, the Tanner graph of

has a girth of at least . If the girth of the masking

matrix

is

, the girth of the Tanner graph of the

masked matrix

is at least . If the size of a masking

matrix is not very large, it is quite easy to construct masking

matrices with girth to , either by computer search or by

using the algorithms given in [43], [44].

is a sparser

matrix than the base matrix

.

The null space of the masked matrix

gives a

QC-LDPC code, whose Tanner graph has a girth of at least .

If the masking matrix

is a regular matrix, then the null

space of

gives a regular QC-LDPC code, otherwise

it gives an irregular QC-LDPC code. Masking is very effective

where

for

matrix of the same size as

and ) for

(11)
(a zero . In this product

for constructing long LDPC codes, regular or irregular, low rate or high rate. The performance of an LDPC code constructed by masking depends on the choice of the masking matrix. How to design masking matrices to optimize the performance

operation, a set of circulant permutation matrices in

of codes is a challenging research problem. Regular masking

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2442

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 7, JULY 2007

Fig. 6. Performances of the regular (4032; 2016) QC-LDPC code given in Example 6 and a (4032; 2016) random QC-LDPC code constructed using the method in [21].

matrices can be constructed using algebraic or combinatorial of , the code performs 1.72 dB from the Shannon limit.

methods. An irregular masking matrix can be constructed by For comparison, we also include in Fig. 6 the performance of

computer search based on the variable- and check-node degree a -regular

random QC-LDPC code with rate

distributions of a code graph derived by the evolution of the

provided by Fossorier using the method presented in [21],

probability densities of the messages passed between the two whose Tanner graph has a girth of eight. This random QC-LDPC

types of nodes as proposed in [7], [8].

code is decoded with SPA using 100 iterations. From Fig. 6,

Example 6: In this example, we demonstrate the construction

of QC-LDPC codes using regular masking. Let GF be the

field for code construction. Using the method presented in Sec-

tion V, we construct an RC-constrained

array of

circulant permutation matrices. Choose

and

. Take a

subarray

from as

the base array for masking. Construct a

masking matrix

which consists of two

circulant matrices side

by side in a row, each having both column and row weights three.

The generators, i.e., top rows, of the two circulants in

are given in Table I. Masking

with

, we

obtain a masked array

which is a

matrix over GF with column and row weights three and six,

respectively. The null space of

gives a -reg-

ular

QC-LDPC code of rate , whose Tanner

graph has a girth of six. The error performance of this code with

SPA decoding using 50 iterations is shown in Fig. 6. At the BER

we see that the structured

QC-LDPC with girth

six constructed based on GF and the

random

QC-LDPC code with girth eight perform almost the same above

the BER of . However, the structured QC-LDPC code with

girth six outperforms the random code with girth eight below the

BER of

and furthermore the performance of the random

code starts to have an error floor below the BER of

.

This comparison simply indicates that a code with a larger girth

does not necessarily perform better than a code of the same

length and rate with a smaller girth as long as the girth of the

latter code is at least six.

Example 7: Let GF

be the construction field. Based on

this field and using the method given in Section V, we con-

struct a

array

of

circulant per-

mutation matrices. Choose two pairs of

’s:

and

. Based on these two choices, we take two subarrays,

and

, from

as the base arrays

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LAN et al.: QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES FOR AWGN AND BINARY ERASURE CHANNELS
TABLE I GENERATORS OF CIRCULANTS IN THE MASKING MATRICES OF EXAMPLES 6 AND 7

2443

Fig. 7. Performances of the (16384; 14337) and (32768; 30721) regular QC-LDPC codes given in Example 7 and a (16384; 14337) random MacKay code over the AWGN channel.

for masking. Next we design two regular masking matrices, tively. Their error performances over the AWGN channel with

and

, which are rows of eight and sixteen

SPA decoding using 50 iterations are shown in Fig. 7. At the

circulants, respectively. Each circulant has both column and BER of , they perform 0.80 and 0.65 dB from their respec-

row weights four. The generators of the circulants in

tive Shannon limits. For comparison, we also include the perfor-

and

are given in Table I. Masking the base arrays, mance of a

random MacKay code in Fig. 7. The

and

, with

and

, we parity-check matrix of the MacKay code satisfies the RC con-

obtain two masked arrays,

and

null spaces of these two masked arrays give a

a

-regular QC-LDPC codes which are

and

codes of rates

and

. The -regular and
, respec-

straint and it has constant column and average row weights and , respectively. We see that the performance curves of the QC-LDPC and the random MacKay codes are
on top of each other.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2444

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 7, JULY 2007

An irregular LDPC code is given by the null space of a

sparse matrix with varying column weights and/or varying

row weights. Consequently, its Tanner graph has varying

variable-node degrees and/or varying check-node degrees. The

degree distributions of these two type of nodes are expressed in

terms of two polynomials [7], [8],

and

, where and denote the fractions of

variable and check nodes in with degree , respectively,

and denote the maximum variable- and check-node degrees,

respectively. Since the variable and check nodes of corre-

spond to the columns and rows of the parity-check matrix ,

and

also give the column and row weight distribu-

tions of . It has been shown that the error performance of an

irregular LDPC code depends on the variable- and check-node

degree distributions of its Tanner graph and Shannon limit

approaching codes can be designed by optimizing the two

degree distributions based on density evolution [8]. In code

construction, once the degree distributions

and

have been derived, a code graph is constructed by connecting

the variable and check nodes with edges based on the degree

distributions. Since the selection of edges in the construction

of a code graph is not unique, edge selection is carried out in a

random manner by computer search. During the edge selection

process, effort must be made to ensure that the code graph does

not contain short cycles. Once a code graph is constructed, the

corresponding parity-check matrix is formed based on the

edges that connect the variable and check nodes of . The null

space of gives a random-like irregular LDPC code.

Irregular QC-LDPC codes can be constructed by masking ar-

rays of circulant permutation matrices constructed by methods

given in Sections V–VII. First we design the degree distributions

and

of the variable and check nodes of the Tanner

graph of a code with desired rate based on density evolution.

Then we choose proper , , and GF that give the desired

code length and rate (or close to the desired code length and

rate). The conditions

and

must be met. By

computer search, we construct a masking matrix

with

column and row weight distributions identical (or close) to

and . We construct a base array

of circulant

permutation matrices using one of the methods given in Sec-

tions V–VII. Masking the base array

with

,

we obtain a masked matrix

with column and row

weight distributions identical (or close) to and . Then

the null space of the masked matrix gives a QC-LDPC code

whose Tanner graph has degree distributions identical (or close)

to

and . This masking construction not only gives an

irregular QC-LDPC code that can be efficiently encoded but also

simplifies the code construction significantly. Since the Tanner

graph of the base array is already free of cycles of length ,

the Tanner graph of the resultant code is also free of cycles of

length . However, in random construction, a large random bi-

partite graph based on the degree distributions must first be con-

structed. In the process of constructing a code graph by com-

puter, effort must be made to avoid cycles of length .

In [8], the degree distributions of a code graph that optimize

the code performance over the AWGN channel for a given code

rate are derived based on the assumption of infinite code length,

cycle-free Tanner graph, and infinite number of decoding iterations. These degree distributions are not optimal any more for constructing codes of finite lengths and, in general, result in high error floor [45], mostly due to the large number of low-degree variable nodes, especially of degree- . Whether the error floor occurs at a high error rate or at a low error rate depends on the number of degree- variable nodes. The error floor can be pushed down by either reducing these variable nodes or removing all of them. Converting part (or all) of these variable nodes to nodes of the next higher degree, say degree- , is one approach. Another simple approach is to increase every degree in the degree distribution of variable nodes by 1, i.e., degree- is converted to degree- , degree- is converted to degree- , and so on. Experimental results show that degree 1 adjustment is very effective for pushing the error floor down for high-rate codes. If we adjust the variable-node degree distribution, we must also adjust the check-node degree distribution accordingly in order to keep the sum of check-node degrees the same as the sum of variable-node degrees.
In the following, we use four examples to demonstrate the effectiveness of the masking construction of irregular QC-LDPC codes using RC-constrained arrays of circulant permutation matrices.
Example 8: The following optimal degree distributions of variable and check nodes of a Tanner graph are designed for an irregular QC-LDPC code with rate and infinite length:

and

We see that

contains a large percentage of variable

nodes of degree– . Based on these degree distributions, we

constructed a

QC-LDPC irregular code of rate

by masking a

array

of

circulant permutation matrices constructed based on GF

using the method given in Section V. The performance of this

code over the AWGN channel is shown in Fig. 8(a). We see

that the code performs poorly below the BER of

and the

error floor starts right below the BER of

and flattens out

above the BER of . If we move 882 variable nodes of

degree- to variable nodes of degree- to make the number of

degree- variable nodes smaller than the number of rows of

, we obtain the following variable-node degree

distribution:

With this adjusted variable-node degree redistribution, we

constructed another

irregular QC-LDPC code

by masking the same

base array

. From

Fig. 8(a), we see that has a lower error floor with no per-

formance degradation in the waterfall region compared to the

first code . If we adjust the variable-node degree distribution

by degree 1, we obtain the following variable-node

degree distribution:

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LAN et al.: QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES FOR AWGN AND BINARY ERASURE CHANNELS

2445

Fig. 8. (a) Performances of the three (3969; 3213) irregular QC-LDPC codes given in Example 8 over the AWGN channel. (b) The estimated error-floor of the
(3969; 3213) irregular QC-LDPC code C given in Example 8. (Figure continued on the following page.)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2446

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 7, JULY 2007

Fig. 8. (c) The rate of decoding convergence of the (3969; 3213) irregular QC-LDPC code C given in Example 8. (d) Performance comparison of the (3969; 3213) irregular QC-LDPC code C given in Example 8 and the (5120; 4096) AR4JA code given in [46].
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LAN et al.: QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES FOR AWGN AND BINARY ERASURE CHANNELS

2447

TABLE II COLUMN AND ROW WEIGHT DISTRIBUTIONS OF THE MASKING MATRIX
D (12; 63) OF EXAMPLE 8

TABLE III COLUMN AND ROW WEIGHT DISTRIBUTIONS OF THE MASKING MATRIX
D(63;126) OF EXAMPLE 9

In order to keep the sum of check-node degrees the same as the sum of variable-node degrees, we have to modify the checknode degree distribution . This gives a new check-node degree distribution

Example 9: The following degree distributions of variable and check nodes of a Tanner graph are optimized for an irregular code with rate and infinite length [8]:

Based on the new degree distributions, we constructed a

masking matrix

with column and row weight

distributions given in Table II. Masking the base matrix

with

, we obtain a masked matrix and

whose Tanner graph has degree distributions

close to

and

. The null space of

gives another

irregular QC-LDPC code . The

performance of this code is also included in Fig. 8(a). We see

that at the BER of , performs 1.2 dB from the Shannon

limit and achieves a 6.8-dB coding gain over the uncoded

BPSK. It has no error floor down to the BER of

.

The performance degradation compared to in the waterfall

region is less than 0.15 dB. The estimated minimum distance

of is . The error floor of this code is estimated below

for both BER and BLER as shown in Fig. 8(b). For a

communication system with BER requirement below ,

is obviously the choice. However, the decoding complexity of

is higher than that of . The rate of decoding convergence

of is shown in Fig. 8(c). We see that there is no performance

gap between 50 and 100 iterations and the performance gap

between 20 and 100 iterations is less than 0.1 dB at the BER of

.

To show how good the performance of is, we compare

it with a

accumulate repeat jagged accumulate

(AR4JA) code with rate given in [46] which is considered

to be a very good code. First we note that has a shorter

length (1151 bits shorter) and a slightly higher rate ( higher)

than the

AR4JA code. The error performances of

both codes are shown in Fig. 8(d). The AR4JA code is decoded

We see that there is 44.1% of variable nodes with degree– (or

44.1% of columns of the corresponding parity-check matrix

with weight ). Suppose we construct a code of finite length

based on these degree distributions without degree readjust-

ment. If the length of the code to be constructed is too short, the

given degree distributions would be far from optimal and the

constructed code would perform poorly with high error floor. If

the length of the code to be constructed is relatively long, then

the given degree distributions would become near optimal and

the constructed code would perform very well with low error

floor. To demonstrate that for relatively long block lengths,

masking based on the above degree distributions indeed yields

irregular QC-LDPC codes with good error performances, we

construct three QC-LDPC codes of lengths, 16k, 32k, and

64k, respectively. In constructing these three codes, we use the

same masking matrix

with column and row weight

distributions close to

and . The column and row

weight distributions of

are given in Table III. All

the three base matrices are constructed by using the method

given in Section V. Of course, we can construct these base ma-

trices using the methods given in Sections VI and VII. The first

base matrix

is a

array of

circulant permutation matrices constructed based on the field

with iterative decoding using 200 iterations, while is decoded GF . The second base matrix

is a

with 50 iterations. At the BER of , performs 1.25 dB array of

circulant permutation matrices constructed

from its respective Shannon limit, and the AR4JA code performs based on the field GF . The third base matrix

1.0 dB from its respective Shannon limit. Taking off the gap is a

array of

circulant permutation

between their respective Shannon limits, the AR4JA code has matrices constructed based on the field GF . Masking these

about 0.2 dB coding gain over which is achieved at the ex- three base matrices with the same masking matrix

,

pense of a much longer length and four times the number of de- we obtain three masked matrices with column and row weight

coding iterations. Taking all the factors into account, we could distributions close to

and

. The null spaces of

say that the two codes perform about the same.

these three masked matrices give three rate- irregular

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2448

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 7, JULY 2007

Fig. 9. Performances of the three rate-1=2 irregular QC-LDPC codes given in Example 9, two random irregular codes and a turbo code over the AWGN channel.

QC-LDPC codes, which are

matrices. Construct a

masking matrix

and

codes. Their BER performances with with column and row weight distribution equal to

and

iterative decoding using SPA are shown in Fig. 9. We see that

, respectively. Masking

with

, we

all three codes perform well and close to the Shannon limit

for rate . At the BER of , they perform 0.9, 0.56, and

0.48 dB from their respective Shannon limits.

For comparison, we also constructed two random irregular

and

LDPC codes using the

same degree distributions given above whose Tanner graphs

have no cycles of length . The performances of these two

random codes are shown in Fig. 9. We see that the two irregular

QC-LDPC codes outperform the two corresponding random

irregular codes, respectively, particularly in terms of the error

floor. In Fig. 9, we also compare the BER performances of

the

and

irregular QC-LDPC

codes with a rate- turbo code with an information block

length of 65536 bits (given in [30, Fig. 16.1(b)]). Both irregular

QC-LDPC codes outperform the turbo code whose error floor

starts around the BER of .

Example 10: In this example, we give a relatively

short rate- irregular QC-LDPC code. The code is

designed based on special ad hoc designed degree dis-

tributions,

and

. For code construction, we

choose the field GF and construct a

array

of

circulant permutation and zero matrices using the

method given in Section V. Set

and

. Take

a

subarray

from , avoiding zero

obtain a

masked matrix

with column and

row weights equal to

and . The null space of

gives a rate-

irregular QC-LDPC code. The

performance of this code over the AWGN channel, decoded

with SPA using 50 iterations, is shown in Fig. 10. At the BER

of , the code performs 1.85 dB from the Shannon limit.

For comparison, we also include in Fig. 10 the performance of

a rate-

QC-AR4A code constructed in [47]

decoded with SPA using 50 iterations. The QC-AR4A code is

158 bits longer. From Fig. 10, we see that the QC-AR4A code

performs slightly better than the

QC-LDPC code

down to the BER of

and BLER of . However, the

performance of the QC-AR4A code starts to show error floor at

the BER of

and the BLER of .

Example 11: Consider the RC-constrained

array

of

circulant permutation matrices

constructed based on the field GF

given in Example

2. Take a

subarray

from

as the

base matrix for masking. Construct a

masking ma-

trix over GF based on the following degree distributions:

and

. The

column and row weight distributions are given in Table IV.

Masking

by

, we obtain a

masked array

of circulant permutation and zero

matrices. The null space of

gives a rate-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LAN et al.: QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES FOR AWGN AND BINARY ERASURE CHANNELS

2449

Fig. 10. Performances of the (1890; 945) irregular QC-LDPC code and a (2048; 1024) QC-AR4A code given in [47] over the AWGN channel.

TABLE IV COLUMN AND ROW WEIGHT DISTRIBUTIONS OF THE MASKING MATRIX
D(16; 32) OF EXAMPLE 11

with 200 iterations are reproduced from [46] and there are no performance curves other than for 200 decoding iterations in [46] or other related papers. We see that at the BER of

, the AR4JA code decoded with 200 iterations has about

0.1-dB gain over the

QC-LDPC code decoded

with 100 iterations. This 0.1-dB coding gain is achieved at

the expense of 100 more iterations. However, at the BER of

with 20 iterations, the

QC-LDPC code out-

performs the

AR4JA code by about 0.3 dB (see

[48]). Also at the BER of , the performance gap between

the

QC-LDPC code with 20 iterations and the

QC-LDPC code. The performances of this code decoded using SPA with 20, 50, and 100 iterations are shown in Fig. 11. With 100 iterations, the code performs about 1.2 dB from the Shannon limit at the BER of and a little less than 1.4 dB at the BER of . Decoding of this code converges relatively fast. At the BER of , the gap between 20 and 100 iterations is less than 0.25 dB, while the gap between 50 and 100 iterations is less than 0.05 dB. For an effective tradeoff between performance and decoding complexity, the maximum number of decoding iterations should be set between 20 and 50. In practice, especially in high-speed communication

AR4JA code with 200 iterations is about 0.4 dB,

but the performance gap between 20 and 200 iterations for the

AR4JA code is 0.8 dB (see [48]). AR4JA codes

in general converge slowly, as shown in [48], due to a large

number of variable nodes of degree- which are required for

precoding to improve code performance and simplify encoding.

Notice that the performance curve of the QC-LDPC code is

steeper than that of the AR4JA code and the two curves may

cross each other below the BER of

. In Example 13, it

is shown that the

QC-LDPC code also performs

very well over the binary erasure channel.

systems, no decoder is designed with more than 50 iterations. From the above examples, we see that the masking technique

Recently, a rate-

AR4JA code was reported presented in this section is an effective method for constructing

in [46], [48], which is considered to be very good. For com- both low- and high-rate irregular LDPC codes. However, the

parison, its bit and block error performances decoded with choice of degree distributions that result in good performance

iterative decoding using 200 iterations are also included in in the waterfall region and a low error floor for codes of finite

Fig. 11. The performance curves of this AR4JA code decoded length remains an interesting problem. The degree distributions

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2450

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 7, JULY 2007

Fig. 11. Performances of the (8192; 4096) irregular QC-LDPC code given in Example 11 and the (8192; 4096) AR4JA code given in [46].

should be also chosen to simplify the decoder and encoder Define

. Then is the set of positions

implementations.

in where the transmitted symbols are correctly received. De-

coding involves determining the value of for each

.

IX. QC-LDPC CODES FOR THE BINARY ERASURE CHANNEL The transmitted codeword is recoverable if it can be uniquely

Since the rediscovery of LDPC codes in 1996 [4], a great deal of research effort has been expended in studying and constructing of LDPC codes for the AWGN channel. However, research effort in LDPC codes for the binary erasure channel (BEC) and other types of channels is comparatively little. In Sections V–VIII, we have presented several classes of QC-LDPC codes based on finite fields and shown through examples and experimental results that the constructed codes perform well over the AWGN channel. In this section, we show that these QC-LDPC codes also perform well over the BEC. LDPC codes for the BEC and iterative decoding of these codes

determined, i.e., there is a unique codeword

in the code such that

for all

.

We describe an iterative decoding technique for correcting

erasures, first presented in [49]. In the parity-check matrix ,

let

denote the th row, where

. The received symbol , where

, is

said to be checked by row if

. In this case, if

and all the other received symbols checked by are not era-

sures, then the equation

contains only one unknown, . Consequently, can be deter-

mined from

were first investigated by Luby, Mitzenmacher, Shokrollahi,

and Spielman [49] and later were further studied by Di et al.

(12)

[50].

For transmission over the BEC, a transmitted symbol, or

, is either received correctly or erased, i.e., received as an era- Once the symbol is determined, the index can be deleted

sure and denoted by “?.” Consider an LDPC code of length from the error pattern . The procedure can be repeated to re-

given by the null space of a

sparse matrix . Then a bi- cover all symbols in the transmitted codeword that are erased

nary -tuple

is a codeword in if and by the channel as long as the error pattern does not include a

only if

. Suppose a codeword

subset such that every row , for

, checks

from the code is transmitted and

is no erased symbol with an index in or at least two erased sym-

the corresponding received sequence. Let

bols with indices in . Such a set is called a stopping set [47].

be the set of positions in where the transmitted symbols are Therefore, in constructing codes for correction of random era-

erased, i.e.,

. The set displays the sures with iterative decoding, it is desirable to avoid stopping

pattern of erased symbols in and is called an erasure pattern. sets, and in particular small stopping sets. In [51], it is shown

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LAN et al.: QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES FOR AWGN AND BINARY ERASURE CHANNELS

2451

Fig. 12. Performances of the (961; 721) and (5256; 4823) QC-LDPC codes given in Examples 1 and 4 over the BEC.

that the size of a minimum stopping set for a parity-check ma- Example 12: First we consider the

-regular

trix with column weight is

if the girth of the Tanner

QC-LDPC code of rate

given in Ex-

graph is six and if the girth is eight. Furthermore, a code with ample 1. Since the girth of the code’s Tanner graph is at least

minimum distance

contains a stopping set of size . , the size of a minimal stopping set is . Consequently, any

Therefore, in the construction of a code for erasure correction, erasure pattern with 30 or fewer erasures is recoverable with the

we need to keep its minimum distance large.

For a regular LDPC code whose parity-check matrix has

column weight and satisfies the RC constraint, the size of

a minimal stopping set in the code’s Tanner graph is

.

This means that any erasure pattern with or fewer erasures is

recoverable. The parity-check matrices of all the -regular

QC-LDPC codes presented in Sections V–VIII satisfy the RC

constraint and, hence, the sizes of minimal stopping sets in

their Tanner graphs are

. Choosing relatively large ’s,

codes can be very effective for correcting random erasures with

iterative decoding.

In the following, we show that the codes constructed in the ex-

amples given in Sections V–VIII not only perform well over the

AWGN channel but they also perform well over the BEC with

the iterative decoding algorithm presented above. For each code,

we give its performance and compare it with the Shannon limit

at the unresolved erasure bit rate (UEBR) of . For transmit-

ting information at a rate (information bits per channel usage)

over the BEC, the Shannon limit is

. The implication of

this Shannon limit is that for erasure probability smaller than

, information can be transmitted reliably by using a suffi-

ciently long code with rate and conversely reliable transmis-

sion is not possible if the erasure probability is larger than the

Shannon limit

.

iterative decoding given in this section. The Shannon limit for

rate is

. The error performance of this code

over the BEC is shown in Fig. 12. At the UEBR of , the gap

between the code’s performance and the Shannon limit is 0.12

bits per channel usage. Next, we consider the

-regular

QC-LDPC code of rate

given in Example

4. Its error performance over the BEC is also shown in Fig. 12.

At the UEBR of , the gap between the code performance

and the Shannon limit, 0.0824, is less than 0.03 bit per channel

usage. From Fig. 12, we see that both codes perform smoothly

down to UEBR of

without showing any error floor. Also

included in Fig. 12 is the performance of the

random MacKay code constructed in Example 4 over the BEC.

We see that the

QC-LDPC code performs slightly

better than the

random MacKay code.

Example 13: In this example, we first consider the

-regular

QC-LDPC code with rate

constructed with regular masking given in Example 7.

The error performances of this code, and the

random MacKay code of Example 7, over the BEC are shown

in Fig. 13. The performance curves of the two codes are on top

of each other. At the UEBR of , the codes perform 0.035

bit per channel usage from the Shannon limit, 0.123. Next we

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2452

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 7, JULY 2007

Fig. 13. Performances of a (16384; 14337) MacKay code, the regular (16384; 14337) and the irregular (8192; 4096) QC-LDPC codes given in Examples 7 and 11 over the BEC.

consider the rate- irregular

QC-LDPC code the leading- of and the last (or the rightmost) -component

constructed with irregular masking given in Example 11. Its of is called the trailing- of . If has only one -component,

performance over the BEC is also shown in Fig. 13. At the then the leading- and trailing- of are the same. A zero span

UEBR of , the code performs 0.09 bit per channel usage of is defined as a sequence of consecutive zeros between

from the Shannon limit, 0.5.

two -components. The zeros to the right of the trailing- of

Table V gives a list of QC-LDPC codes constructed in the examples given in Sections V–VIII and shows the gaps between their error performances and their respective Shannon limits at the UEBR of .

together with the zeros to the left of leading- of also form

a zero span, called the end-around-zero span. The number of

zeros in a zero span is called the length of the zero span. A

zero span of zero length is called a null zero span. Consider the

binary -tuple,

. It has three zero

spans with lengths , , and , respectively. The end-around

X. LDPC CODES FOR BURST-ERASURE CHANNELS

zero span, Consider a

, has a length of . -regular LDPC code given by the null

In Section IX, we discussed the BEC over which erasures space of an RC-constrained

parity-check matrix with

occur at random locations. However, there are channels over constant column weight . Label the columns of from to

which erasures cluster in bursts, such as recording, jamming

. For

, there are rows of , each having a “ ”

and some fading channels. Such channels are called burst-era- in the th column of . For each of these rows, we find its

sure channels. An erasure pattern is called an erasure burst of zero-span starting from the

th column to the next -com-

length if the erasures are confined to consecutive locations, ponent and compute its length. If the -component of a row at

the first and last of which are erasures. In this section, we con- position (or in the th column of ) is the trailing- of the

sider designing LDPC codes, particularly QC-LDPC, that are row, we determine its end-around zero span. Among the zero

capable of correcting erasure bursts. LDPC codes for burst-era- spans of the rows with a “ ” in the th column of , a zero

sure channels were investigated earlier by Yang and Ryan [52], span of maximum length is called a zero-covering span of the

[53] and Ha and McLaughlin [54]. This section presents a dif- th column of . Let be the length of the zero-covering span

ferent approach to the design of erasure-burst correction LDPC of the th column of . A column zero-covering span of min-

codes.

imum length is called the zero-covering span of the parity-check

Let

be a nonzero -tuple over matrix . The length of the zero-covering span of is given

GF . The first (or the leftmost) -component of is called by

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LAN et al.: QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES FOR AWGN AND BINARY ERASURE CHANNELS
TABLE V A LIST OF QC-LDPC CODES AND THEIR PERFORMANCES OVER THE BEC

2453

The iterative decoding scheme outlined in Section IX to cor-

rect random erasures caused by an erasure channel can be sim-

plified if the channel is an erasure-burst channel based on the

following observation. If is the starting position of an era-

sure burst of length at most

, then there is a row

in for which the th component

is “ ” and followed by a zero span of length . Since the burst

starts at position and has length at most

, all received

bits checked by other than the th bit are known. Conse-

quently, the value of the transmitted bit at position can be de-

termined from (12). Replacing the erased bit by its value results

in a shorter erasure-burst pattern

. The procedure can be

repeated until all erased bits are determined.

The iterative algorithm for correcting erasure-bursts can be

devised as follows.

1. If there are erasures in the received vector , determine the starting position of the erasure burst in , say position , and go to Step 2. If there is no erasure in , stop decoding.

Proof: The iterative algorithm recovers the transmitted

codeword if, at each iteration, the burst length is at most

,

where is the starting position of the erasure burst. Suppose

that the length of the erasure burst caused by the channel is at

most . Then, from the definition of and the fact that the

erasure-burst lengths are decreasing with iterations, it follows

that all the erasure bursts of length up to can be corrected.

A direct consequence of Theorem 5 is Corollary 1.

Corollary 1: For an LDPC code whose parity-check matrix

has a zero-covering span of length , no

or fewer con-

secutive variable nodes in its Tanner graph form a stopping set

and hence any

consecutive variable nodes form a stop-

ping-set-free zone.

The parameter gives a lower bound on the erasure-burst correction capability of an LDPC code whose parity-check matrix has a zero-covering span of length . The iterative decoder may actually correct erasure bursts of lengths greater than .

2. Determine the length of the erasure burst, say . If , go to Step 3, otherwise stop decoding.

XI. A CLASS OF ASYMPTOTICALLY OPTIMAL QC-LDPC CODES FOR CORRECTING ERASURE BURSTS

3. Determine the value of the erasure at position and go An LDPC code is said to have an erasure-burst correction ca-

to Step 1.

pability if it is capable of correcting any erasure burst of length

The next theorem gives a lower bound on the erasure-burstcorrection capability of an LDPC code, based on this algorithm, in terms of the length of the zero-covering span of its paritycheck matrix.

or shorter with the iterative decoding algorithm presented in

the previous section, but not all the erasure bursts of length .

This erasure-burst capability is lower-bounded by the length of

the zero-covering span of the chosen parity-check matrix of the

code. The erasure-burst-correction capability of an

LDPC

Theorem 5: An LDPC code given by the null space of a code of length and dimension is upper-bounded by

,

parity-check matrix over GF with zero-covering-span the number of parity-check bits of the code. This can be easily

length is capable of correcting any erasure burst of length at proved as follows. Suppose the code is capable of correcting all

least up to

using the iterative algorithm.

the erasure bursts of length

with the iterative decoding

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2454

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 7, JULY 2007

algorithm given in the previous section. Then it must have a

parity-check matrix with a zero-covering span of length

.

This implies that the parity-check matrix of the code has at least

linearly independent rows. Consequently, the rank of

the parity-check matrix is at least

, which contradicts the

fact that the rank of any parity-check matrix of an

linear

block code is . (In fact, is an upper bound on the era-

sure-burst-correction capability of any

linear block code

with any decoding algorithm.) To measure the efficiency of era-

sure-burst correction of an

LDPC code with the iterative

decoding algorithm presented in the previous section, we define

its erasure-burst-correction efficiency

. Clearly,

is upper-bounded by . An LDPC code is said to be optimal

for erasure-burst correction if its erasure-burst-correction effi-

ciency is equal to .

In this section, we present a class of asymptotically optimal

QC-LDPC codes for erasure-burst correction with the iterative

decoding given in the previous section. This class of QC-LDPC

codes is constructed by masking the RC-constrained arrays

presented in Sections V–VII using a special class of masking

matrices.

For

, we form the -tuples,

over GF

where

consists of a single -component at

the first position followed by

consecutive zeros;

consists of a single -component at the first posi-

tion followed by consecutive -components; and the other

-tuples, to , are zero -tuples, i.e.,

. Let

. Then is a -tuple with a

single -component at the left end and one-components at

the right end and has weight . This -tuple has one and only

one zero span of nonzero length which is

.

Form a

circulant matrix with as the first row and

right cyclic shifts of as the other

rows. It follows

from the cyclic structure of that each row (or column) of

has a unique zero span of length

. For

, we form

a

matrix over GF

(13)

which consists of a row of -matrices. This matrix has con-

stant column and row weights and , respectively. It has

the following structural properties: 1) each column is the down-

ward cyclic shift of the column on its left (including the tran-

sition across the boundary of two neighboring -matrices and

the end-around case) and the first column is the downward cyclic

shift of the last column; 2) each row is the right cyclic shift of the

row above it and the first row is the right cyclic shift of the last

row; 3) each column has a unique zero span of length

;

and 4) each row has zero spans, each of length

. It

follows from the above structural properties of

that

the zero-covering-span length of each column of

is

. Consequently, the length of the zero-covering span of

is

.

Take a

subarray

of

circulant permutation matrices from the array

with

or given by (5), (7), or (10) constructed based on the mul-

tiplicative (or additive group) of GF for a proper choice of .

Also, for ,

does not contain any zero matrix

of . Masking

with

, we obtain a

masked array

of

(or

) circulant permutation and zero matrices. In each column

of

(as an array), there is a circulant permutation

matrix in a row followed by

consecutive

zero matrices and ends with a

circulant permu-

tation matrix. Hence,

is a

RC-constrained matrix over GF with a zero-covering span of

length at least

. The column and row weights of

are and , respectively. Its null space gives

a

-regular QC-LDPC code of length

,

rate at least

, and minimum distance at least

or , whose Tanner graph has a girth of at least . The code

is capable of correcting any erasure burst of length at least up to

. For , if

contains zero ma-

trices of , then the rows of

may need to be per-

muted properly to ensure that in each column of

(as an array), there is a circulant permutation matrix in a row

followed by at least

consecutive

zero

matrices. In this case,

may contain two different

column weights, and

, and two row weights, and

, and its the null space gives a near-regular QC-LDPC

code. The erasure-burst correction capability of the code is still

at least

. The number of parity-check bits of

is at most

. The erasure-burst correction efficiency

of the QC-LDPC code constructed above is lower-bounded

by

. We see that the efficiency approaches for long

codes with large .

Example 14: Consider the

array of

circulant permutation matrices constructed based on the addi-

tive group of the prime field GF (see Example 4). Take the

first eight rows of and remove the last nine columns. This

results in an

subarray

of

circulant

permutation matrices. Let

,

, and

. Based

on (13), we construct an

masking matrix

that

consists of a row of eight

-matrices. The length of the

zero-covering span of

is . Masking

with

, we obtain a

masked matrix

with a zero-covering span of length at least . The column

and row weights of

are and , respectively. The

null space of

gives a

QC-LDPC code

with rate

that is capable of correcting any erasure burst

of length up to at least . By computer search, we find the

that code can actually correct any erasure burst of length up to

. Thus, the erasure-burst-correction efficiency of the code

is . The performances of this code with iterative decoding

over the AWGN and binary random erasure channels are shown

in Fig. 14(a) and (b). For the AWGN channel, it performs

1.20 dB from the Shannon limit at the BER of . For the

BEC channel, it performs 0.045 bits per channel usage from

the Shannon limit, 0.1243, at the UEBR of . The code

performs well over all three types of channels. Also included

in Fig. 14(a) and (b) are the performances of a

random MacKay code over the AWGN and random BECs. The

parity-check matrix of the MacKay satisfies the RC constraint

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LAN et al.: QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES FOR AWGN AND BINARY ERASURE CHANNELS

2455

Fig. 14. (a) Performance of the (4672; 4091) QC-LDPC codes given in Example 14 and a (4672; 4091) random MacKay code over the AWGN channel. (b) Performance of the (4672; 4091) QC-LDPC code given in Example 14 and a (4672; 4091) random MacKay code over the BEC.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2456

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 7, JULY 2007

Fig. 15. (a) Performances of the (65536; 57345) QC-LDPC codes given in Example 15 over the AWGN channel. (b) Performance of the (65536; 57345) QC-LDPC code given in Example 15 over the BEC.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LAN et al.: QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES FOR AWGN AND BINARY ERASURE CHANNELS

2457

and has column and average row weights and , respectively. for the binary random and burst erasure channels. A new method

From Fig. 14(a) and (b), we see that the

QC-LDPC has been presented to determine the erasure-burst-correction ca-

code and the

MacKay code perform practically the pability of an LDPC code (or any linear block code) in terms

same. The erasure-burst-correction capability and efficiency of of the zero spans of its parity-check matrix. Based on the con-

the MacKay code are and

, respectively, which are cept of zero spans and using the masking technique with special

slightly smaller than those of the

QC-LDPC code. masking matrices, we have constructed a class of QC-LDPC

The fact that MacKay codes have good erasure-burst-correction codes with high erasure-burst-correction efficiency. For long

capability was first pointed out by Yang and Ryan [52], [53]. codes in this class, the erasure-burst-correction efficiency ap-

proaches . Hence, codes in this class are asymptotically op-

Example 15: Suppose we use the construction method of Sec- timal for erasure-burst correction.

tion V based on the prime field GF . Then, we obtain a Many examples of QC-LDPC codes, regular or irregular,

array of

circulant permutation and have been constructed. Experimental results show that these

zero matrices. Set

,

, and

. We construct a constructed codes perform well over both the AWGN and bi-

masking matrix

. Take a

sub- nary random erasure channels. Long codes perform close to the

array

from . Masking

with Shannon limits for both types of channels. Some constructed

, we obtain a

masked array

of

circulant permutation and zero matrices. The

column weights of

are and , and the row

weights are and . The length of the zero-covering span of

is at least . The null space of

gives a

near-regular QC-LDPC code with rate

. The code is capable of correcting any erasure burst of

length at least up to . Its erasure-burst-correction efficiency

codes have been shown to have very low error floors and their iterative decoding converges very fast. There are many other methods for constructing QC-LDPC codes as given in the references, however, the construction methods presented in this paper are by far the most extensive ones and they give much larger classes of codes than the other proposed constructions. This demonstrates the effectiveness of classical algebraic tools in constructing new iteratively decodable LDPC codes.

is lower-bounded by

. The performances of the code over

the AWGN and binary random erasure channels are shown in Fig. 15(a) and (b). At the BER of , the code performs 0.6 dB from the Shannon limit for the AWGN channel and, at the UEBR of , it performs less than 0.03 bits per channel usage from the Shannon limit for the BEC.
From the above two examples, we see that if the parameters , , , and are properly chosen, QC-LDPC codes constructed using the above special masking method not only are efficient for correcting erasure bursts but also perform well over the AWGN and binary erasure channels. For each code, we use the same parity-check matrix for decoding for all three types of channels.
XII. CONCLUSION AND REMARKS
In this paper, we have presented a wide coverage of algebraic and systematic constructions of efficiently encodable QC-LDPC codes. Methods for constructing RC-constrained arrays of circulant permutation matrices based on the multiplicative and additive groups of finite fields are developed. We also present a masking technique for constructing good regular and irregular QC-LDPC codes based on masking subarrays of the RC-constrained arrays of circulant permutation matrices. Construction of regular QC-LDPC codes with masking is completely algebraic. Construction of irregular QC-LDPC codes is mostly algebraic in nature but based on the degree distributions of the variable and check nodes of the Tanner graphs of codes derived from density evolution. The only random portion in the construction of an irregular code is the computer search of a relatively small masking matrix with column and row distributions identical or close to the degree distributions of variable and check nodes of the code’s Tanner graph. We also have investigated LDPC codes and simple iterative decoding methods

REFERENCES
[1] C. E. Shannon, “A mathematical theory of communication,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 27, pt. I, pp. 379–423, Jul. 1948.
[2] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[3] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[4] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity-check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.
[5] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–432, Mar. 1999.
[6] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[7] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[8] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[9] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[10] N. Wiberg, “Codes and Decoding on General Graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elec. Eng., Univ. Linköping, Linköping, Sweden, 1996.
[11] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[12] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A discovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[13] R. M. Tanner, “Spectral graphs for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Washington, D.C, Jun. 2001, p. 226.
[14] S. J. Johnson and S. R. Weller, “Codes for iterative decoding from partial geometries,” IEEE Trans. Commun, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 236–243, Feb. 2004.
[15] I. Djurdjevic, J. Xu, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, and S. Lin, “A class of lowdensity parity-check codes constructed based on Reed-Solomon codes with two information symbols,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 317–319, Jul. 2003.
[16] L. Chen, J. Xu, I. Djurdjevic, and S. Lin, “Near-Shannon limit quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun, vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 1038–1042, Jul. 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2458

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 7, JULY 2007

[17] B. Vasic and O. Milenkovic, “Combinatorial constructions of low-density parity-check codes for iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1156–1176, Jun. 2004.
[18] H. Tang, J. Xu, Y. Kou, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “On algebraic construction of Gallager and circulant low density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Info. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1269–1279, Jun. 2004.
[19] B. Ammar, B. Honary, Y. Kou, J. Xu, and S. Lin, “Construction of low density parity-check codes based on balanced incomplete block designs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1257–1268, Jun. 2004.
[20] L. Chen, I. Djurdjevic, J. Xu, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Construction of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes based on the minimum weight codewords of Reed-Solomon codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Chicago, IL, Jun. 2004, p. 239.
[21] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.
[22] J. L. Fan, “Array codes as low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 2000, pp. 543–546.
[23] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, and T. Fuja, “A class of group-structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. 6th Int. Symp. Communication Theory and Applications, Ambleside, U.K., Jul. 2001, pp. 365–370.
[24] S. Kim, J.-S. No, H. Chung, and D.-J. Shin, “On the girth of Tanner (3; 5) quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 1729–1744, Apr. 2006.
[25] S. Myung and K. Yang, “A combining method of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes by the chinese remainder theorem,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, pp. 823–825, Sep. 2005.
[26] M. Fujisawa and S. Sakata, “A class of quasi-cyclic regular LDPC codes from cyclic difference families with girth 8,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Adelaide, Australia, Sep. 2005, pp. 2290–2294.
[27] L. Chen, L. Lan, I. Djurdjevic, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “An algebraic method for constructing quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Information Theory and Its Applications (ISITA), Parma, Italy, Oct. 2004, pp. 535–539.
[28] H. Tang, J. Xu, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Codes on finite geometries,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 572–596, Feb. 2005.
[29] J. Xu, L. Chen, L.-Q. Zeng, L. Lan, and S. Lin, “Construction of lowdensity parity-check codes by superposition,” IEEE Trans. Commun, vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 243–251, Feb. 2005.
[30] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Jr, Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications, 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2004.
[31] C. Di, R. Urbanke, and T. Richardson, “Weight distributions: How deviant can you be?,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Washington, DC, Jun. 2001, p. 50.
[32] A. Orlitsky, K. Viswanathan, and J. Zhang, “Stopping set distribution of LDPC code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 929–953, Mar. 2005.
[33] Z.-W. Li, L. Chen, L.-Q. Zeng, S. Lin, and W. H. Fong, “Efficient encoding of quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 71–81, Jan. 2006.
[34] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 638–656, Feb. 2001.
[35] A. Hocquenghem, “Codes correcteurs d’erreurs,” Chiffres, vol. 2, pp. 147–156, 1959.
[36] R. C. Bose and D. K. Ray-Chaudhuri, “On a class of error correcting binary group codes,” Inf. Contr., vol. 3, pp. 68–79, Mar. 1960.

[37] I. S. Reed and G. Solomon, “Polynomial codes over certain finite fields,” J. Soc. Ind. Appl. Math, vol. 8, pp. 300–304, Jun. 1960.
[38] L. Lan, L.-Q. Zeng, Y. Y. Tai, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Constructions of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for AWGN and binary erasure channels based on finite fields and affine mappings,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Adelaide, Australia, Sep. 2005, pp. 2285–2289.
[39] J. Xu, L. Chen, I. Djurdjevic, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Construction of regular and irregular LDPC codes: geometry decomposition and masking,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 121–134, Jan. 2007.
[40] T. J. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. Allerton Conf. Communications, Control and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[41] M. Shan, C. Zhao, and M. Jiang, “Improved weighted bit-flipping algorithm for decoding LDPC codes,” IEE Proc. Commun., vol. 152, no. 6, pp. 919–922, Dec. 2005.
[42] X.-Y. Hu, M. P. C. Fossorier, and E. Eleftheriou, “On the computation of the minimum distance of low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 2004 IEEE Int. Conf. Communications (ICC), Paris, France, Jun. 2004, pp. 767–771.
[43] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[44] L. Lan, Y. Y. Tai, L. Chen, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “A trellisbased method for removing cycles from bipartite graphs and construction of low density parity check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett, vol. 8, pp. 443–445, Jul. 2004.
[45] T. Tian, C. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Construction of irregular LDPC codes with low error floors,” in IEEE Int. Conf. Communications (ICC), Anchorage, AK, May 2003, pp. 3125–3129.
[46] D. Divsalar, C. Jones, S. Dolinar, and J. Thorpe, “Protograph based LDPC codes with minimum distance linearly growing with block size,” in Proc. IEEE GlobeCom, St. Louis, MO, Nov. 2005, pp. 1152–1156.
[47] G. Liva, S. Song, L. Lan, Y. Zhang, W. Ryan, and S. Lin, “Design of LDPC codes: A survey and new results,” J. Comm. Software Syst., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 191–211, Sep. 2006.
[48] K. Andrews, C. Jones, S. Dolinar, and F. Pollara, “LDPC performance vs. number of iterations,” in Proc. The Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS) Meet., Athens, Greece, Apr. 13, 2005, JPL Report.
[49] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Efficient erasure correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 569–584, Feb. 2001.
[50] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. E. Teletar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[51] A. Orlitsky, R. Urbanke, K. Viswanathan, and J. Zhang, “Stopping sets and the girth of Tanner graphs,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, Jun. 2002, p. 2.
[52] M. Yang and W. E. Ryan, “Design of LDPC codes for two-state fading channel models,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Wireless Personal Multimedia Communication, Honolulu, HI, Oct. 2002, vol. 3, pp. 986–990.
[53] M. Yang and W. E. Ryan, “Performance of efficiently encodable lowdensity parity-check codes in noise bursts on the EPR4 channel,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 507–512, Mar. 2004.
[54] J. Ha and S. W. McLaughlin, “Low-density parity-check codes over Gaussian channels with erasures,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 7, pp. 1801–1809, Jul. 2003.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

