1270

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 7, JULY 2007

CASCADE: A Standard Supercell Design Methodology With Congestion-Driven Placement
for Three-Dimensional Interconnect-Heavy Very Large-Scale Integrated Circuits
Lili Zhou, Student Member, IEEE, Cherry Wakayama, Student Member, IEEE, and C.-J. Richard Shi, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper, CASCADE, a standard supercell-based design methodology, its supporting automated design flow, and associated design tools, are presented for 3-D implementations of a class of interconnect-heavy application-specific very large-scale integrated circuits. In CASCADE, a system is first partitioned and synthesized using standard 2-D design tools to a set of supercells with the same height and varying widths. With this, the 3-D design is reduced to 3-D supercell placement and 3-D-via assignment. A congestion-driven simulated-annealing method is used to find a 3-D placement of supercells to minimize the total wire length, the longest wire length, and the number of 3-D vias and routing density. To efficiently estimate the routing density of a 3-D grid space within the optimization loop, a simple probabilistic congestion model with an incremental congestion computation has been developed. Once the supercell placement is fixed, the problem of assigning 3-D vias to accomplish minimal 2-D routing densities and uniform 3-D-via distribution is solved by an efficient min-cost–max-flow method. The proposed methods have been implemented and tested on a set of ISPD98 circuit benchmarks. Experimental results have shown that the proposed congestion-driven 3-D supercell placement and flow-based 3-D-via-assignment tools have yielded satisfactory placement with small-area, low-congestion, short-wire-length, few, and uniformly distributed 3-D vias. Furthermore, an excellent correlation between routing-density estimation by our model and the actual routing performed by a commercial router has been observed. We have applied the proposed 3-D design methodology, tools, and flows to tape out an over 4-million-gate low-density parity-check decoder in a three-tier 0.18-µm fully depleted silicon-on-insulator 3-D CMOS process manufactured by MIT Lincoln Laboratory. The postlayout simulation of this DRC-clean layout design showed an about ten times improvement on the power-delay-area product compared to a 2-D implementation in the same process.
Index Terms—Congestion-driven placement, interconnectheavy integrated circuits, low-density parity-check (LDPC) decoder, three-dimensional integrated circuits (3-D-ICs), 3-D-via assignment.
Manuscript received May 10, 2006; revised August 21, 2006. This work was supported by the U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) 3-D IC Program under Grant N66001-05-1-8918, monitored by Navy SPAWAR Systems Center, San Diego, CA, USA. This paper was recommended by Associate Editor J. Hu.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195 USA (e-mail: llzhou@ee.washington.edu; wakayama@ee.washington.edu; shi@ee.washington.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCAD.2006.888266

Fig. 1. Cross section of three tiers integrated to form a 3-D IC.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HREE-DIMENSIONAL integrated circuits (3-D-ICs) are integrated circuits consisting of active devices not confined to a single planar layer [1]–[5]. Generally, 3-D technology can be described as stacking several integrated circuits vertically with fine-grain 3-D interconnects, called 3-D-vias. Fig. 1 is an illustration of the cross section of three tiers that form a 3-D integrated circuit, where each tier consists of a layer of active devices connected with multilayers of metal layers (as in a conventional 2-D integrated circuit).
The revolution of microfabrication technologies in the past 40 years has lead to a constant reduction of transistor feature sizes over time and provided ever greater densities of transistors and faster clock rates (Moore’s law). It is now reaching to a degree where the spatial domain of signal propagation between clock edges is smaller than the total chip area. This, combined with unmanageable power dissipation, leads to a “scaling wall,” which prohibits further integration of system functionalities to silicon.
For most such very large-scale integrated (VLSI) circuits, more than half of silicon area, power dissipation, and delays are consumed by interconnects rather than devices. Placing and wiring devices in the third dimension, thus promises higher clock rates, less power dissipation, and higher integration density [7]–[9]. Additional benefits of 3-D integration include: 1) easy integration of circuit intellectual properties fabricated with different technologies and 2) better overall system-onchip performance and reduced cost, where analog and radio frequency functionality can be integrated on one tier and logic and memory circuitries on other tiers.

0278-0070/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 25,2026 at 01:51:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHOU et al.: CASCADE: STANDARD SUPERCELL DESIGN METHODOLOGY WITH CONGESTION-DRIVEN PLACEMENT

1271

Despite several theoretical studies of the benefits of 3-D been implemented and integrated with the existing commercial

integration for high-performance application-specific inte- 2-D design-tool sets, leading to a complete 3-D design flow.

grated circuits (ASICs), existing exploration of 3-D integra- With CASCADE, we have successfully designed and taped

tion has been limited to applications with regular structures out a 1024-bit 1/2-rate fully parallel over 4-million-gate LDPC

such as memory, imagers, and field-programmable gate arrays decoder using MIT-LL’s three-tier 0.18-µm FDSOI 3-D CMOS

(FPGAs). This is primarily due to the lack of practical 3-D process.

computer-aided design (CAD) tools and complete design flows This paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the

that allow the design of complex 3-D ASICs.

proposed standard supercell 3-D ASIC layout scheme, design

Research effort has been dedicated to the development of methodology, and design flow. Section III presents the details

3-D IC-design tools. Ababei et al. developed physical tools of the two-phase congestion-driven 3-D supercell-placement

for 3-D FPGA design [10]. Das et al. implemented a 3-D method. Section IV describes the 3-D-via-assignment algo-

standard-cell placement and global-routing tool [11]. Optimal rithm based on the min-cost–max-flow formulation. Experi-

placement was based on recursive min-cut partitioning of a mental results from a set of benchmark circuits are presented

circuit represented as a hypergraph. Intertier via (3-D via) in Section V. Section VI describes the implementation results

minimization was sought by min-cut partitioning for tier assign- of a 1024-bit 1/2-rate fully parallel LDPC decoder using the

ment. During the partitioning phase, the aspect ratio was used proposed design flow and CAD tools. Section VII concludes

to determine the wire-length minimization. Cong et al. pro- this paper.

posed thermal-driven 3-D floorplanning and routing algorithms

[12], [13]. Goplen and Sapatnekar presented thermal-driven force-directed standard-cell placement and thermal-via placement based on finite-element analysis [14], [15].

II. STANDARD SUPERCELL BASED 3-D ASIC DESIGN METHODOLOGY AND DESIGN FLOW

In this paper, we present a standard supercell design method- A 3-D IC is an integrated circuit in which active devices are

ology and supporting CAD tools, referred to as CASCADE, not confined to a single plane [17]. We may consider such a

for 3-D ICs. CASCADE is designed specifically to target at circuit to be a collection of distinct 2-D (conventional) ICs, each

3-D implementation of very large-scale ASICs consisting of of which individually is called a tier or layer of wafers. These

millions of gates with a lot of interconnects among gates. An conventional layers, together with a means of interconnecting

example of such a system is high-throughput Low-Density devices on separate layers, make up a 3-D IC.

Parity-Check (LDPC) code decoders used in wireless commu- The individual wafers in such a 3-D IC are fabricated using

nication and disk-storage applications. Blanksby and Howland conventional means and fused together with interwafer elec-

reported that more than half of the wires are longer than half trical and mechanical interconnects. This technology is called

of the chip diameter and occupy more than half of the silicon “wafer bonding.” Wafer bonding methods differ in terms of

area [16]. Furthermore, even the 2-D implementation of this the bonding material and the order of fabrication operations.

interconnect-heavy system broke down existing 2-D design For instance, the MIT-LL uses parallel-oxide-bonding approach

tools [16]. Our emphasis is thus to explore fine-grain 3-D inter- [17]. The individual wafers are processed before bonding.

connects available in the latest 3-D integration technologies to Formation of interwafer interconnects is the remaining back-

address this massive interconnect challenge. For example, one end step. Interwafer interconnects, referred to as “3-D vias”

3-D via can be placed every 1.8–5 µm in the MIT-Lincoln Lab- in this paper, are etched through the entire metallization stack

oratory’s (MIT-LL) three-tier 0.18-µm fully depleted silicon- on the top of each wafer. The size and density of 3-D vias

on-insulator (FDSOI) 3-D process [6]. It is predicted that the are determined mainly by the alignment requirements and via-

3-D-via density will increase with the progress in 3-D integra- formation process. For MIT-LL’s three-tier 0.18-µm FDSOI

tion technologies.

3-D process, each 3-D via occupies 1.75 × 1.75 µm, and the

Three key techniques have been proposed and implemented minimum distance between any two 3-D vias is from 1.8

in CASCADE to cope with both the complexity of interconnect to 5 µm depending on the 3-D-via density required to meet

and the complexity of functionality (millions of gates). First, a the stringent alignment constraints. Compared to traditional

standard supercell design and layout style has been introduced multichip-module and system-in-package technologies, 3-D IC

so that the number of supercells at the top-level design is in offers much finer grained 3-D interconnects and, thus, offers

the range of thousands, and the complexity of 3-D physical much greater potential for improving system performance and

design can be handled. Second, a congestion-driven 3-D su- integration density.

percell placement and 3-D-via-assignment method has been On the other hand, a 3-D via still uses a much bigger

developed. A two-phase simulated-annealing (SA) algorithm is silicon area than a conventional intermetal via, introduces more

adopted for 3-D supercell placement, which not only allows delays, and causes fabrication and reliability problems. Specific

easy tradeoff of multiple objectives (area, wire length, 3-D 3-D-via placement strategy should be performed not only to sat-

via, and routing density) but also enables easy incorporation of isfy stringent alignment constraints between neighboring tiers

additional design constraints (thermal and reliability). Finally, a but also to reduce the routing density and achieve more uniform

fast probability-based method for estimating the routing density 3-D-via distribution. Furthermore, whenever possible, the num-

during SA-based placement has been implemented and it has ber of 3-D vias used should be reduced.

been verified to correlate well with the routing density obtained With these observations and with the target to implement

from an actual commercial router. All these techniques have interconnect-heavy VLSI circuits, we propose the following

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 25,2026 at 01:51:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1272

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 7, JULY 2007

Fig. 2. Proposed “standard supercell” layout scheme.

Fig. 4. Layout models: (a) 2-D grid model. (b) 3-D grid model.

design tools are used to synthesize supercells with the same

height and varying widths. The supercell height is determined

heuristically with consideration of chip aspect ratio and area

constraints. Next, a 3-D placer finds an optimal 3-D supercell

placement. Once the 3-D placement of supercells is fixed, the

number of 3-D vias to be used is determined. Then, 3-D-via

assignment is performed to assign 3-D vias to the reserved 3-D-

via locations (as shown in Fig. 2) with the objectives to reduce

the 3-D-via distribution density and the routing density on

each tier. After 3-D-via assignments, commercial 2-D detailed-

routing tools are used for routing on each tier. Since supercells

are distributed over several tiers, tools for 3-D buffer insertion

and clock distribution are developed to handle long intercon-

nects across tiers. Finally, 3-D layout-versus-schematic (LVS)

verification is performed to ensure the consistence between the

final physical design and the original circuit netlist.

Fig. 3. Simplified flowchart for the automated design of 2-D and 3-D ASICs. Three-dimensional specific tools that have developed include

“standard supercell”-based layout scheme. As illustrated in Fig. 2, standard supercells are layout macros with the same height and varying widths. Standard supercells are placed in rows. Spaces are reserved between standard supercell rows for 3-D vias and buffers. Using this scheme, the 3-D-via alignment constraint can be easily satisfied and does not affect supercell

a 3-D placer, a 3-D-via assignment tool, a 3-D buffer insertion and clock distribution tool, and finally, a 3-D LVS tool. In CASCADE, we focus on the development of effective 3-D placement and 3-D-via assignment solutions, while 3-D buffer insertion, clock distribution, and LVS are accomplished by scripting existing commercial 2-D tools.

placement. Buffer insertion is also less constrained with respect

to the silicon resource, therefore, both the 2-D long wires and

III. 3-D STANDARD SUPERCELL PLACEMENT

3-D long wires crossing different tiers can be handled easily. To accommodate routing congestion for interconnect-heavy

A. Problem Formulation and 3-D Grid Model

systems and especially for MIT-LL’s three-tier 0.18-µm FDSOI We are given a collection of supercells with the same height

3-D CMOS process where only three metal layers are available and varying widths. Each supercell is a finished 2-D layout

per tier, vertical routing channels are also reserved.

macro with ports (input, output, power supply, and ground

With this proposed 3-D standard supercell layout scheme, pins) on the boundries and is described in the standard Library

3-D design can be accomplished with a flow similar to typical Exchange Format (LEF) format [25]. We are also given a

2-D design, as shown in Fig. 3. For 2-D design, the process colleciton of nets, each specifying a set of supercell ports to

starts with a high-level Very high-speed integrated-circuit Hard- be wired together. The entire 3-D layout space is considered as

ware Description Language (VHDL) or Verilog description of a stack of multiple layers (called tiers) of 2-D layout space. The

the system to be designed typically at the register-transfer level problem of 3-D placement is to find suitable physical locations

(RTL). Then, RTL and logic-synthesis tools are used to generate for each supercell on the entire 3-D layout space to optimize

a gate-level circuit netlist. A floorplan is developed, given the given objective functions (such as area, total wire length, the

netlist and physical parameters for individual logic gates, which number of 3-D vias, etc.) subject to certain constraints. An

are placed in optimum locations on the chip. The resulting example of constraints is the avoidance of supercell overlap.

placement is wired or routed and buffers are inserted to break The output of 3-D supercell placement is in the standard Design

long lines during this procedure. The placed-and-routed circuit Exchange Format (DEF) format [25].

layout is then verified so that it meets the specifications [17].

To describe the entire 3-D layout space, we extend the

For 3-D design, a design is first partitioned into thousands of conventional 2-D grid model to 3-D grid model. Fig. 4(a)

blocks. Then, for each block, traditional 2-D logic and physical- shows the 2-D grid model used for a 2-D (one tier) physical

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 25,2026 at 01:51:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHOU et al.: CASCADE: STANDARD SUPERCELL DESIGN METHODOLOGY WITH CONGESTION-DRIVEN PLACEMENT

1273

design. Fig. 4(b) shows the 3-D grid model. Each supercell is considered to be a point to be placed in a 3-D location denoted by (x, y, z). A 3-D location is a cubic region (also called a bin or a region). The number of supercells that can be placed in a 3-D location legally (without overlap) is called the areadensity (bin-density) capacity. In the grid model, we also refer to a cubic region (bin) as a node, the borders of a region as edges or links. Associated with each boundry of a cubic region is a routing-density capacity, which denotes, respectively, the number of wires that can go in each of the x, y, and z directions. The z direction capacity is the number of 3-D vias that can be allowed, i.e., 3-D-via density capacity.
Similar to 2-D placement, we use the 3-D Manhattan geometry to estimate the wire length required to connect two supercells located on two 3-D locations as the number of girds spanned, and use Steiner trees and minimum-spanning trees (MSTs) for two-terminal and multiple-terminal net wire-length estimation [23].
For the proposed supercell scheme, each row of the supercell placement has the same height and also has reserved area for 3-D-via and buffer placements above or below the supercell row. By limiting each placement region to hold only one supercell row on each tier, the nonoverlap placement in the y- and z-direction can be guaranteed.
If the area-density capacity for each location is one, then the resulting placement is legal, i.e., no supercell overlap, and is final. However, if the area-density capacity for each location exceeds one, 3-D placement will consists of two steps: coarse-global placement and detailed-local placement. Coarse placement is to find a supercell placement to satisfy the areacapacity constraint, and detailed-local placement is performed at each location to obtain the final placement of supercells without any overlap.

The weighting factors Wx and Wy are determined by (3) and (4), respectively, to minimize the total wire length, the number of long wires, and the length of the longest wires

Wx =

1, Xi ≤ Xth a, Xi > Xth

(3)

Wy =

1, Yi ≤ Yth . b, Yi > Yth

(4)

Xth and Yth are user-defined threshold values for x-length and y-length, respectively, where a and b are penalty factors to penalize long wires whose lengths are larger than the threshold values. Penalty values of a and b are selected to make a tradeoff between the area, delay, and the number of 3-D vias.
The second term in the objective function (1) is the 3-D-via cost F3-D-via. The function F3-D-via is given in the following expression:

M

F3-D-via = WviaZi

(5)

i=1

where Wvia is the penalty weight for 3-D vias, Zi is the number of tiers that net i will go between, and M is the total number of nets.
The last term in the objective function (1) is the routingdensity cost Fdensity. The routing-density cost is the weighted sum of the estimated routing densities of all wires. Let K be the total number of supercells, Dx(i), Dy(i), and Dz(i) be x-, y-, and z-direction routing densities associated, respectively, with supercell i. Let Wdx, Wdy, and Wdz be, respectively, the weighting factors for x, y, and z routing densities. Then, we have

B. Objective Function
The objective for 3-D standard supercell placement is to place all the given supercells on 3-D locations with the total wire length, longest wire length, 3-D-via number, and routing density minimized. We use the objective function as follows:

F = Flength + F3-D-via + Fdensity.

(1)

The first term in the objective function (1) is the weighted total wire length Flength. The length cost of each net is the summation of horizontal x-direction span times the horizontal weighting factor and the vertical y-direction span of the net times the vertical weighting factor. The sum of all the nets gives the wire length cost. Let M be the total number of nets, Xi be the span of net i in the x-direction, Yi be the span of net in the y-direction, Wx be the weighting factor for net i in the x-direction, and Wy be the weighting factor for net i in the y-direction. Then, we have

K
Fdensity = (Wdx · Dx(i) + Wdy · Dy(i) + Wdz · Dz(i)) .
i=1
(6)
The weighting factors Wdx, Wdy, and Wdz are determined by (7)–(9), respectively, to minimize routing densities of congested regions, which are defined as regions with routing densities larger than some threshold values. Let the user-defined threshold values for the x-density, y-density, and z-density be Dx,th, Dy,th, and Dz,th, respectively. Then, we have

Wdx =

1, Dx(i) ≤ Dx,th c, Dx(i) > Dx,th

(7)

Wdy =

1, Dy(i) ≤ Dy,th d, Dy(i) > Dy,th

(8)

Wdz =

1, Dz(i) ≤ Dz,th . e, Dz(i) > Dz,th

(9)

M

The penalty values of c, d, and e are determined by balancing

Flength = (Wx · Xi + Wy · Yi).
i=1

(2) the requirements on wire length, 3-D-via usage, and routingdensity minimization.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 25,2026 at 01:51:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1274

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 7, JULY 2007

The values of the weighting factors were assigned to penalize long wires and dense regions. In practice, the threshold values are determined by performing a set of test runs to study the distributions of wire lengths and routing densities. From the test runs, the average and standard-deviation values of wire lengths and routing densities were computed. The threshold value is then set to be the sum of the average value and the standard deviation.
Among the three terms in the objective function (1), Fdensity is most costly to compute. Sections III-C and D will present an efficient routing-density calculation scheme. Section III-E will describe a two-phase congestion-driven optimization strategy.

Fig. 5. Possible routes of the two-pin net AB in routing region R.

C. Probabilistic Congestion Estimation

We adopted a probabilistic model similar to [19] and [20].
However, to include congestion estimation in the placement
stage, a much faster computation method is needed.
The problem of routing-density estimation can be described
as follows: Given a 3-D placement grid G and a set of twoterminal nets Nj, 1 ≤ j ≤ M , where M is the total number of nets, calculate the usage probability P (li) of each link li, 1 ≤ i ≤ K. Multiterminal nets can be decomposed into a set of
two-terminal nets by using MST [19]. For each net, we compute the usage probability PNj (li) of all
the links in the entire region R. PNj (li) is computed as follows:

Fig. 6. Density matrix for the two-pin net AB in Fig. 5.

PNj (li)

=

Number of routes in Total number

R that use the of routes in R

link

li .

(10)

In defining a route, we make the following assumptions.

1) All nets are routed along the links. 2) All nets are routed with the shortest lengths. 3) All possible routes for each net have equal usage prob-
ability, which is independent of the number of direction changes (from a horizontal link to a vertical link and vice versa) that the net makes.
The expected usage or the routing density P (li) for each link li, 1 ≤ i ≤ K, in the 3-D placement grid is obtained by summing the corresponding routing densities contributed by all the nets. It is calculated as

Fig. 7. Route-matrix computation.
in an entry are the horizontal and vertical routing densities corresponding to a vertex in x- and y-directions.
D. Incremental Congestion Computation

M

P (li) = PNj (li).

(11)

j=1

A simple example of a two-pin net AB that starts from A and ends at B on a 2 × 2 2-D grid is illustrated in Fig. 5. There are a total of six possible routes in this region. Consider the lower middle vertical link, which is shaded in the figure. Two out of six possible routes go through this link (labeled as routes 2 and 3, respectively). Therefore, the usage density of the link for net AB is 1/3. Similarly, we can compute the probabilistic usage of all the links on the entire region R for the net. Fig. 6 summarizes the probabilistic routing densities of this net in region R using a 3 × 3 matrix, where the two numbers

Different from [19] and [20], a fast incremental procedure to compute the routing densities has been developed. It consists of three steps.
1) Compute the Route Matrix for Each Net: A route matrix stores the number of possible routes to reach one node from adjacent x, y, and z nodes. It is a 3-D matrix, and each entry corresponds to the route count of the node at (x, y, and z) location. The entries in the route matrix are computed from the destination toward the source. The procedure for a two-tier case is demonstrated in Fig. 7. The arrows represent the directions along which the route matrix is computed. Note that the route count for the destination node is set to one.
2) Compute the 3-D Routing-Density Matrix for Each Net: A routing-density matrix stores x, y, and z densities associated with each node. It is a 3-D matrix, and each entry in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 25,2026 at 01:51:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHOU et al.: CASCADE: STANDARD SUPERCELL DESIGN METHODOLOGY WITH CONGESTION-DRIVEN PLACEMENT

1275

Fig. 8. Density-matrix computation.

the matrix has three subentries corresponding to x-, y-, and then, stamp the routing-density matrix for each net. While a

z-direction routing densities associated with the node at the new placement is obtained due to the movement of specific

(x, y, and z) location. We define the x-density associated supercells, only the routing-density matrix for the related nets

with the node to be the density of the link represented by the will be updated and restamped.

outgoing arrow in the x-direction. The y-density and z-density

are defined similarly. We compute the routing-density matrix

by propagating the routing densities from the source toward the E. Two-Phase Congestion-Driven Optimization Algorithm

destination. This is illustrated in Fig. 8. The arrows indicate the directions along which routing densities are propagated. The x-, y-, and z-direction routing densities associated with each node are computed as follows:

SA techniques [21] are used to solve (1). We chose to use SA since it allows the flexible tradeoff of multiple design objectives, as well as easy incorporation of additional design constraints such as thermal and reliability considerations.

Density[x][y][z]

·

x

=

total

density

×

route[x + 1][y][z] route[x][y][z]

(12)

Furthermore, with the number of supercells in the ranges of thousands, SA is capable of finding high-quality solutions efficiently.

Density[x][y][z]

·

y

=

total

density

×

route[x][y + 1][z] route[x][y][z]

(13)

Density[x][y][z]

·

z

=

total

density

×

route[x][y][z + 1] route[x][y][z]

.

(14)

The description of SA applied to the general placement problem can be found in [21]. Some specific implementation considerations are summarized as follows.
1) Generating New States: The implementation begins with a random initial placement that satisfies all the area-capacity

constraints, the routing-capacity constraints, and the 3-D-via

The total routing density is the summation of the x, y, and z

routing densities entering the node, which is given in (15). Note

that the total entering routing density of the starting node is set

to one. Each routing-density value is equal to PNj (li) in (10)

  density[x − 1][y][z] · x+

total

density(x,

y,

z)

=



density[x][y − density[x][y][z

1][z] − 1]

· ·

y+ z.

(15)

density constraints. A new state or candidate is generated by exchanging the supercells of two locations subject to both the area-capacity constraints (the maximal number of supercells can be placed in one location) and the routing capacity and 3-Dvia capacity associated with each cubic boundary (the maximal number of wires crossing in the x- and y-direction boundaries and the number of 3-D vias in the z-direction boundary).
2) Objective Function: Whenever a new state is generated, wire lengths and routing densities are updated only for the nets

associated with the supercells being moved. Since the routing-

3) Compute the 3-D Global Routing-Density Matrix for All density calculation is costly and the wire length and routing

Nets: The global routing-density matrix stores the total x, density are correlated to the first order, annealing is performed

y, and z densities associated with each node by adding all in a two-phase procedure. In phase 1, the first two terms Flength the corresponding entries in the routing-density matrices for and F3-D-via in the objective function are used. It was observed every net as described in (11). The value of a global routing that minimizing total wire length also reduces the total routing

density represents the estimated routing density of a link for density. However, it may not achieve the balanced routing-

a given placement. Individual routing-density matrices must density distribution. Therefore, in phase 2, the routing-density

be properly stamped onto the global routing-density matrix cost is added to the objective function.

according to the locations of the source and destination.

3) Cooling Schedule: In this implementation, an exponen-

Without incremental computation, the whole routing-density tial cooling schedule (Tk = T0 · βk) is used, where T0 is the

matrix has to be built each time a new placement is assigned. initial temperature, β is a factor by which multiplicative steps

However, with the proposed three-step incremental implemen- the temperature is lowered, and Tk is the kth temperature step. tation, we build the global routing-density matrix one time and, In our implementation, the β value is chosen to be 0.95.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 25,2026 at 01:51:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1276

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 7, JULY 2007

4) Inner Loop Criterion: The inner loop criterion is im-

plemented by specifying the number of new states generated

for each temperature step and by recording the number of

successful moves at each temperature step. The number of new

states is specified as the square of the number of supercells

and the maximum number of successful moves is defined as

10% of the number of new states. The inner loop is escaped

when the number of inner loop iterations reaches the specified

number of new states or when the number of successful moves

is greater than the specified maximum number of successful

moves, whichever comes first.

5) Outer Loop Criterion (Stopping Criterion): The stopping

criterion is implemented by recording the value of the cost

function at the end of each stage of the annealing process

(each temperature step). The program is stopped when the cost-

function value remains unchanged for three consecutive stages Fig. 9. Network-flow graph. or when the predetermined maximum number of temperature

steps is reached.

To solve the 3-D-via assignment problem, we first construct

6) Supercell Overlap Consideration: If the area bound in a network graph. Then, run a min-cost–max-flow algorithm

each placement location is strictly enforced, a placement re- [22], [23]. Fig. 9 shows the network flow graph G = (V, E)

sult can be legalized to an overlap-free detailed placement constructed for the problem.

without moving any supercell out of the placement location In the graph

assigned. However, in practice, we allow certain overflow as

some percentage of the area-capacity constraint. Similar to

V ={S, D} ∪ V3-D ∪ L

2-D placement as in [21], some overlap is allowed in the early steps of SA but a large penalty is enforced at the late

E ={(S, νi)|νi ∈ V3-D} ∪ {(νi, lj)|νi ∈ V3-D, lj ∈ L}

stage. In practice, some relaxation in the horizontal direction

∪ {(lj, D)|lj ∈ L}.

is typically acceptable, and the detailed overlap-free placement can be obtained without significant supercell movement.
IV. 3-D-VIA ASSIGNMENT ALGORITHM

Edge Capacity: U (S, νi) = 1, U (νi, lj) = 1, and U (lj, D) = Kj.
Cost Function: C(νi, lj) = Cij, for other edge e ∈ E, C(e) = 0.

Once the 3-D placement of supercells is obtained, the physi- The graph consists of a source vertex S supplying 3-D vias,

cal positions of supercells are fixed, therefore, the total number of 3-D vias is also determined. However, the exact physical positions of the 3-D vias still need to be determined. The wire to connect two supercells on different tiers can go through all possible reserved 3-D-via locations while both the resulting routing density on each tier and 3-D-via density can be different. Therefore, the second step in our flow after 3-D placement is to assign 3-D vias to proper locations to minimize

a set of n 3-D-via vertices V3-D = {ν1, ν2, . . . , νn}, a set of m location vertices L = {l1, l2, . . . , lm}, and a destination vertex D collecting all the 3-D vias. The edge capacities U (lj, T ) = Kj represent that a corresponding bin j can hold Kj 3-D vias. The cost of assigning a 3-D-via νi to location lj is Cij, where Cij is the resulted change in the routing-density cost when assigning a 3-D-via νi to location lj.
The incremental routing-density calculation method de-

the individual-tier routing density and 3-D-via density. In our scribed in Sections III-C and D can be used here. During the

implementation, once we know where to place the 3-D vias, supercell-placement stage, we estimate the routing density for

we generate separate DEF files for each tier with the physical information about supercells and 3-D-vias, as well as the connectivity information. Then, any commercial 2-D detailed router could be used to complete the final layout for each tier.
The 3-D-via assignment problem can be formulated as follows.
Problem of 3-D-via Assignment: Given a set of n 3-D

each net going from νi to νj by a probabilistic measure. In the current stage, assigning a 3-D-via νi to location lj actually means to cut the original net from νi to νj into two parts: νi to lj and lj to νj. Similarly, we assume that all the nets are routed by shortest paths, i.e., the 3-D-via lj can only locate within the boundary box of net νi to νj. Using network-flow computation on G, we assign 3-D vias to preserved feasible

vias V3-D = {ν1, ν2, . . . , νn} and the corresponding m possible locations L = {l1, l2, . . . , lm}, the problem of 3-D-via assignment is to find a set of n locations P = {p1, p2, . . . , pn}, where P ⊂ L such that pi is the final location for 3-D-via νi. If the cost of assigning νi at lj is cij, (j = 1, 2, . . . , m), which represents the resulted routing-density change, we also would
like to minimize the total cost of assigning the n 3-D vias
i,j:vi∈V3D,lj ∈L cij .

locations that minimize the routing-density cost introduced. The 3-D-via assignment algorithm is summarized as follows.
Algorithm 3-D-via Assignment by Network Flow 1) Construct the network graph G(V, E); 2) Assign the edge capacity for each edge; 3) Calculate the cost for each Cij; and 4) Run min-cost–max-flow algorithm for G(V, E).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 25,2026 at 01:51:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHOU et al.: CASCADE: STANDARD SUPERCELL DESIGN METHODOLOGY WITH CONGESTION-DRIVEN PLACEMENT

1277

TABLE I WIRE-LENGTH, 3-D-VIA-COUNT, AND WIRE-DENSITY STATISTICS OF 3-D PLACEMENTS WITH DIFFERENT OPTIMIZATION OBJECTIVES

Finding a min-cost–max-flow for a network is a classical problem, for which several optimal polynomial-time algorithms are available, such as the flow-augmentation method [22], [23].

TABLE II WIRE-DENSITY STATISTICS AFTER 3-D-VIA ASSIGNMENT

V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

All the proposed algorithms have been implemented in C++

and tested on ISPD98 benchmark circuits. All the experiments

reported here are conducted using a SUN Fire V480 server with

900-MHz UltraSparc-III processors and 16-GB RAM.

in Table I lists the number of global nets of the hMetis partition.

We first test the effectiveness of our algorithms by priori- Then, 8 × 9 × 3, 12 × 14 × 3, and 18 × 19 × 3 grid models

tizing different objectives by varying the penalty weights. We are used, respectively, in 3-D congestion analysis for each case.

performed optimization in three configurations: In the first, These grid sizes are adjusted corresponding to the number of

the total wire length is considered; in the second, both the supercells and the W/L ratio of the chip. It is observed that

wire length and 3-D-via usage is considered; and in the third, optimizing the total wire length alone results in a number of

the wire length, 3-D-via usage, and routing density are jointly longer wires, although the total length is minimized. Compa-

minimized. The best tradeoff is achieved when the wire length, rable wire-length distributions are observed from optimizations

routing densities, and the number of 3-D vias are optimized with and without the routing-density objective. By including

together.

the 3-D-via count in the objective function, the number of

Experimental results are summarized in Table I. In the table, 3-D vias is reduced by 65%–79%. Finally, after the routing-

obj (0), obj (1), obj (2), and obj (3) represent Flength considering the total wire length only and Flength considering both the total wire length and longest wire length, F3-D-via and Fdensity in (1), respectively. For circuits ibm01, ibm05, and ibm18, we first apply the hMetis [18] to partition the circuits

density objective is considered, a 13%–22% reduction in the maximum routing density is achieved while maintaining all other objectives.
After 3-D placement, we further perform 3-D-via assignment to reduce the 3-D-via density and the routing density of each

into, respectively, 200, 500, and 1000 supercells. Column three individual tier. Table II shows the results of example ibm01.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 25,2026 at 01:51:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1278

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 7, JULY 2007
TABLE III ROUTING-DENSITY ESTIMATIONS COMPARED WITH ACTUAL ROUTING

Fig. 10. (a) Density map of routing result by SE for the placement in [16]. (b) Our congestion-driven optimized placement.

routing results from a commercial router, Cadence SE. As

shown in Table III, six cases were tested—three 2-D placements

We can see that the 3-D-via density can be further reduced by and three tiers of the optimized 3-D placement. 2-D placements

about 48%, while achieving almost the same routing density on include initial random placement, wire-length optimized place-

each tier.

ment, and both wire-length and density optimized placement.

Three-dimensional optimized placement is achieved by balanc-

VI. REAL-WORLD DESIGN CASE: 1024-BIT 1/2-RATE LDPC DECODER

ing all the objectives in (1). Each tier of the 3-D structure is treated as a traditional 2-D placement. The routing density is measured by the number of routing tracks used. These results

We have applied the developed tools and proposed design show that our wire-density estimation results are well correlated

flow and methodology to the design of a high-throughput LDPC with the commercial tool actual routing results.

code decoder. With the error-correction capacity approaching Fig. 11 shows the routing-density and wire-length histograms

the Shannon limit, the LDPC has been selected as the core for various optimization objective functions, where obj (1),

of several emerging wireless-communication standards. LDPC obj (2), and obj (3) represent Flength, F3-D-via, and Fdensity also has applications in data storage, optical communication, in (1), respectively. Optimizing the weighted total wire length

and quantum computing. However, VLSI implementation of alone results in a number of long wires. The longest wire

high-throughput LDPC decoders presents a challenge due to length is 32, which is more than double of that with maximum-

the fact that half of the total wires traverse the chip from one length minimization. Comparable wire-length distributions are

side to the other. As reported by a design from Bell Labs [16], observed from optimizations with and without using the

more than half of the silicon area and power consumption are routing-density objective. Using the routing-density objective

used by interconnects.

achieves a 20% reduction in the maximum routing density.

We have implemented the fully parallel architecture of a Table IV shows the CPU-time comparison between using our 512 × 1024 LDPC decoder [16] using a MIT-LL’s three-tier incremental density computation within the Simulated Anneal-

0.18-µm FDSOI 3-D CMOS process. This LDPC decoder is ing (SA) density-driven placement loop and using nonincre-

partitioned into 1536 supercells of two types: check nodes mental method. Our incremental placement method performs

and variable nodes. A check-node supercell is implemented by up to 100 times faster than the nonincremental method.

an average of 812 (509–1121) standard cells, and a variable- Table V summarizes the layout statistics of the 2-D and

node supercell is implemented by 339 standard cells. There are 3-D implementations. The 2-D design is accomplished by

24 576 nets connecting a total of 1536 supercells. The 3-D placing all the devices on one tier using the same technology

floorplan consists of 25 rows and 21 columns on each tier with and the same set of 1536 standard supercells as in the 3-D

100-µm-wide vertical and horizontal routing channels. The implementation. Similar to what is shown in Fig. 2, the 2-D

optimal 3-D/three-tier placement of these 1536 supercells is floorplan consists of 43 rows and 36 columns of supercells with

obtained using the proposed two-phase congestion-driven 3-D 200-µm-wide horizontal routing channels and 300-µm-wide

supercell placement algorithm. Then, 3-D-via assignment is vertical routing channels in between. The optimum placement

optimized to further reduce the routing congestion on each tier. of 2-D supercells was obtained by running our SA program

Routing is performed on each individual tier using Cadence’s with only one-tier option. The wider routing channels were

Silicon Ensemble (SE) [26], followed by 3-D buffer insertion selected to resolve the heavier routing congestion in the 2-D

and LVS using in-house scripts.

implementation. We can see that the 3-D implementation

Fig. 10(a) and (b) shows the two routing-density maps, where achieves a significant advantage over the same 2-D implemen-

Fig. 10(a) is obtained from running Cadence’s SE router on a tation in terms of wire length, area, clock skew, and buffer

placement described in [16] and Fig. 10(b) is obtained from used. The improvement in terms of area-delay-power product the placement obtained using the proposed method. Clearly, is about an order-of-magnitude (2.5 × 1.75 × 2.5 = 10.9). We

the routing congestion obtained by our tool has been reduced note that this significant improvement comes from wiring in

significantly and is more uniform.

the third dimension. Fig. 12 shows the chip wire-length dis-

We further evaluate the quality of our routing-density esti- tributions for the 2-D and 3-D implementations before buffer

mation method by comparing our estimation with the actual insertion.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 25,2026 at 01:51:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHOU et al.: CASCADE: STANDARD SUPERCELL DESIGN METHODOLOGY WITH CONGESTION-DRIVEN PLACEMENT

1279

Fig. 11. 3-D placement routing-density and wire-length comparison histograms using different optimization objectives.

TABLE IV COMPARISON BETWEEN INCREMENTAL AND NONINCREMENTAL
DENSITY COMPUTATION IN THE PLACEMENT LOOP

TABLE V COMPARISON BETWEEN 3-D AND 2-D DESIGNS

The final layout of the three-tier design, connected by the

densely distributed 10 631 3-D vias, is shown in Fig. 13. To

verify the functional correctness and error-correction capability

of the LDPC decoder, the relationships of the block error rate

versus signal to noise ratio (SNR), as well as the decoder- shows a significant power reduction with increasing switching convergence iteration versus SNR, were simulated using activities (required for the low-SNR channel decoding). Cadence’s Verilog-XL simulator. Using an LDPC encoding and

channel-transmission-software package [24], different levels of noise were added into the original code and transmitted

VII. CONCLUSION

through an additive white Gaussian noise channel, the number We have developed a 3-D design methodology and support-

of information bits that are not corrected through our LDPC ing tools and explored the benefits of 3-D technology for very

decoder is counted. The results are shown in Fig. 14.

large-scale interconnect-heavy ASIC design. Our contribution

Fig. 15 plots the power-consumption results of postlayout includes: 1) A congestion-driven SA-based 3-D placement al-

netlist, obtained by running Cadence power analyzer [27]. It gorithm, which allows us to target multiple design objectives;

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 25,2026 at 01:51:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1280

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 7, JULY 2007

Fig. 13. Final layout of 3-D LDPC structure.
Fig. 14. Simulated LDPC decoder performance. Fig. 12. Wire-length distribution before buffer insertion for 2-D and 3-D design, respectively.
2) an efficient and effective 3-D congestion-analysis method and the inclusion of congestion metrics within the 3-D placement; and 3) a supercell-based design methodology and supporting CAD tools that enables the first practical 3-D design flow for tape-out using commercial 2-D design environments. The proposed methodology and design flow enable us to successfully tape out the first-known multimillion gate ASIC in a 3-D process. Postsilicon simulation of this specific 3-D implementation demonstrated an order of magnitude improvement in terms of power-delay-product over the corresponding 2-D implementation.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that a large ASIC has been implemented in silicon using both 2-D and 3-D technologies. The 10× improvement in the Fig. 15. Postlayout power of the LDPC decoder (2-D versus 3-D). power-delay-area product comes from the implementation of interconnect-heavy circuits implemented with fine-grain 3-D integration technologies to provide even finer 3-D interconnects integration (only three tiers in this case). We note the rapid and many more tiers, as for example, reported recently by IBM and exciting progresses in the development of fine-grain 3-D in [5]. The proposed CASCASDE standard supercell design
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 25,2026 at 01:51:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHOU et al.: CASCADE: STANDARD SUPERCELL DESIGN METHODOLOGY WITH CONGESTION-DRIVEN PLACEMENT

1281

methodology provides a way to cope with the complexity of functionality and interconnect in 3-D design, and would enable the further exploration of the potential of fine-grain multitier 3-D-interconnect technologies in extending the life-time of Moore’s law.
A commonly cited roadblock for the wide use of 3-D integration is the thermal issue. This is due to the poor thermal conductivity of the silicon insulation material used between the tiers, as well as the potentially high-power density due to the increase of integration density. However, we believe that the thermal issue can be coped with effectively by innovations in fabrication, CAD-tool development, and design methodologies. There are intensive research efforts directed to the development of various microcooling schemes. The use of thermal vias can help heat dissipation. Some recent work has shown that some thermal problems can be solved by incorporating thermal modeling as part of 3-D physical-design-optimization objectives [12]–[14]. Careful 3-D placement of circuit modules on tiers has been reported to produce a design that yields morethan-10◦ less thermal gradient than an arbitrary placement [28]. Furthermore, a coupled circuit-thermal design verification and optimization flow has been developed and demonstrated with the existing commercial 2-D IC-design tools and standards [28]. Finally, innovation in circuit- and architecture-design methodologies can reduce the thermal stress on the circuit performance and reliability. Some techniques include thermal-averaging for current steering in high-speed ADC design [29] and low-power pipelining and dynamic voltage and frequency scaling develop for 2-D low-power CMOS digital design [30].
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Dr. N. Jangkrajarng for his help in developing the 3-D placer, Dr. B. Hu, Dr. N. Jangkrajarng, and Dr. G. Shi for their help in the 3-D LDPC decoder tape out using the proposed flow. They would like to thank MIT Lincoln Laboratory for 3-D fabrication. They would also like to thank to Dr. D. Radack from DARPA/MTO for his vision and support for this research.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Banerjee, S. Souri, P. Kapur, and K. Saraswat, “3-D ICs: A novel chip design for improving deep-submicro-meter interconnect performance and systems-on-chip integration,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 89, no. 5, pp. 602–633, May 2001.
[2] J. Burns, L. McIlrath, J. Hopwood, C. Keast, D. P. Vu, K. Warner, and P. Wyatt, “An SOI-based three dimensional integrated circuit technology,” in Proc. IEEE Int. SOI Conf., Oct. 2000, pp. 20–21.
[3] K. W. Lee et al., “Three-dimensional shared memory fabricated using wafer stacking technology,” in Proc. IEDM Tech. Dig., 2000, pp. 165–168.
[4] J. Burns et al., “Three-dimensional integrated circuits for low-power, high bandwidth systems on a chip,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf., Feb. 2001, pp. 268–269.
[5] J. U. Knickerbocker, C. S. Patel, P. S. Andry, C. K. Tsang, L. P. Buchwalter, E. J. Sprogis, H. Gan, R. R. Horton, R. J. Polastre, S. L. Wright, and J. M. Cotte, “3-D silicon integration and silicon packaging technology using silicon through-vas,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 41, no. 8, pp. 1718–1725, Aug. 2006.
[6] MIT 3D Design Kits, Version 3D01, Nov. 2004. [7] W. Meleis, M. Leeser, P. Zavracky, and M. Vai, “Architectural design
of a three dimensional FPGA,” in Proc. 17th Conf. ARVLSI, Sep. 1997, pp. 256–268.

[8] J. D. Meindl, J. A. Davis, P. Zarkesh-Ha, C. S. Patel, K. P. Martion, and P. A. Kohl, “Interconnect opportunities for gigascale integration,” IBM J. Res. Develop., vol. 46, no. 2/3, pp. 245–263, Mar.–May 2002.
[9] S. T. Obenaus and T. H. Szymanski, “Gravity: Fast placement for 3-D VLSI,” ACM Trans. Des. Automat. Electron. Syst. (TODAES), vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 298–315, Jul. 2003.
[10] C. Ababei, H. Mogal, and K. Bazargan, “Three-dimensional place and route for FPGAs,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 1132–1140, Jun. 2006.
[11] S. Das, A. Chandrakasan, and R. Reif, “Design tools for 3D integrated circuits,” in Proc. ASP_DAC, Jan. 2003, pp. 53–56.
[12] J. Cong, J. Wei, and Y. Zhang, “A thermal-driven floorplanning algorithm for 3D ICs,” in Proc. ICCAD, Nov. 2004, pp. 306–313.
[13] J. Cong and Y. Zhang, “Thermal-driven multilevel routing for 3-D ICs,” in Proc. ASP-DAC, Jan. 2005, pp. 121–126.
[14] B. Goplen and S. Sapatnekar, “Efficient thermal placement of standard cells in 3D ICs using a force directed approach,” in Proc. ICCAD, Nov. 2003, pp. 86–89.
[15] B. Goplen and S. Sapatnekar, “Thermal via placement in 3D ICs,” in Proc. ACM Int. Symp. Phys. Des., 2005, pp. 167–174.
[16] A. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, Rate 1/2 lowdensity parity-check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.
[17] S. Das, “Design automation and analysis of three-dimensional integrated circuits,” Ph.D. dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, MA, 2002.
[18] G. Karypis, R. Aggarwal, V. Kumar, and S. Shekhar, “Multilevel hypergraph partitioning: Applications in VLSI domain,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 69–79, Mar. 1999.
[19] J. Lou, S. Thakur, S. Krishnamoorthy, and H. S. Sheng, “Estimating routing congestion using probabilistic analysis,” IEEE Trans. Comput.Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 32–41, Jan. 2002.
[20] L. Cheng, W. N. N. Hung, G. Yang, and X. Song, “Congestion estimation for 3-D circuit architectures,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 51, no. 12, pp. 655–659, Dec. 2004.
[21] C. Sechen, VLSI Placement and Global Routing Using Simulated Annealing. Boston, MA: Kluwer, 1988.
[22] R. K. Ahuja, T. L. Magnanti, and J. B. Orlin, Network Flows. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1993.
[23] T. Lengauer, Combinational Algorithms for Integrated Circuit Layout. New York: Wiley, 1990.
[24] R. M. Neal, Software for Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) Codes, Dept. of Statist. and Dept. of Comput. Sci., Univ. Toronto. [Online]. Available: http://www.cs.toronto.edu/~radford/ftp/LDPC-2006-02-08/index.html
[25] Cadence LEF/DEF 5.5 Language Reference Manual, Cadence Design Syst., San Jose, CA, Jun. 2004.
[26] Silicon Ensemble Version 5.4.122, Cadence Design Syst., San Jose, CA, Apr. 10, 2003.
[27] Power Analyzer Version 5.4.122, Cadence Design Syst., San Jose, CA, Apr. 10, 2003.
[28] M. Mar, R. Ward, and C.-J. R. Shi, “Verification and optimization of threedimensional integrated circuits using coupled electrical-thermal modeling and simulation in VHDL-AMS/Verilog-AMS,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., also available as a DARPA tech. rep. from DARPA Micro Technology Office, submitted for publication.
[29] L. Zhou, K. Baek, M.-J. Choe, and C.-J. R. Shi, “Parasitic-aware thermalaware optimization of a 4 Ghz ADC ASIC,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., also available as a DARPA tech. rep. from DARPA Micro Technology Office, submitted for publication.
[30] A. P. Chandrakasan, S. Sheng, and R. W. Brodersen, “Low-power CMOS digital design,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 473–484, Apr. 1992.
Lili Zhou (S’03) received the B.S.E.E. and M.S.E.E. degrees from Fudan University, Shanghai, China, in 1999 and 2002, respectively. She is currently working toward a Ph.D. degree at the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle.
Her research interests include very-large-scaleintegration design and computer-aided design.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 25,2026 at 01:51:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1282

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 7, JULY 2007

Cherry Wakayama (S’01) received the B.S.E.E. degree from the University of Arizona, Tucson, in 2002, and the M.S.E.E. degree from the University of Washington, Seattle, in 2005. She is currently working toward a Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Washington.
Her research interests include stochastic global optimization and its application, stochastic modeling, and optimal control.

C.-J. Richard Shi (M’91–SM’99–F’06) received the Ph.D. degree in computer science from the University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada, in 1994.
He is currently a Professor of electrical engineering with the University of Washington, Seattle. His research interests include several aspects of integrated-circuit design and electronic-design automation.
Dr. Shi has been the recipient of the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada’s Doctoral Prize, a National Science Foundation CAREER award, and several best paper awards. He was elected to a Fellow of IEEE for his contribution to computer-aided design of mixed-signal integrated circuits. He is currently serving as an Associate Editor of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS and IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 25,2026 at 01:51:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

