660

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 22, NO. 4, APRIL 2018

Improving the Decoding Threshold of Tailbiting Spatially Coupled LDPC Codes by Energy Shaping
Thomas Jerkovits , Student Member, IEEE, Gianluigi Liva , Senior Member, IEEE, and Alexandre Graell i Amat , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— We show how the iterative decoding threshold of tailbiting spatially coupled (SC) low-density parity-check (LDPC) code ensembles can be improved over the binary input additive white Gaussian noise channel by allowing the use of different transmission energies for the codeword bits. We refer to the proposed approach as energy shaping. We focus on the special case where the transmission energy of a bit is selected among two values, and where a contiguous portion of the codeword is transmitted with the largest one. Given these constraints, an optimal energy boosting policy is derived by means of a protograph extrinsic information transfer analysis. We show that the threshold of tailbiting SC-LDPC code ensembles can be made close to that of terminated code ensembles while avoiding the rate loss (due to termination). The analysis is complemented by Monte Carlo simulations, which confirm the viability of the approach.
Index Terms— Convolutional LDPC codes, decoding threshold, spatial coupling, tailbiting codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
I T IS known that for terminated (TE) spatially coupled lowdensity parity-check (SC-LDPC) codes [1]–[4] the belief propagation (BP) threshold of the underlying code ensemble approaches the maximum a posteriori (MAP) threshold in the limit of large coupling lengths. When the coupling length is moderate or small, the termination (which is necessary to trigger the decoding wave) entails a non negligible rate loss. The rate loss can be avoided by resorting to tailbiting (TB) SC-LDPC codes [5]–[7] at the cost of a (potentially large) threshold degradation. In fact, the BP threshold of a TB SC-LDPC code ensemble is the same as the one of the underlying uncoupled code ensemble. Approaches to improve the BP decoding threshold of TB SC-LDPC code ensembles were introduced in [5]–[7]. They rely on the possibility of either mapping a specific portion of the codeword to the most reliable bit levels in a bit interleaved coded modulation scheme, or on fixing some of the codeword bits to known values. The latter case, which can be adopted on any binary input channel, still entails a rate loss due to the code shortening. Both approaches aim at triggering the wave-like decoding phenomenon that is at the base of the
Manuscript received December 19, 2017; revised January 22, 2018; accepted January 31, 2018. Date of publication February 5, 2018; date of current version April 7, 2018. The associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was B. Rong. (Corresponding author: Gianluigi Liva.)
T. Jerkovits and G. Liva are with the Institute of Communication and Navigation of the Deutsches Zentrum für Luft-und Raumfahrt (DLR), 82234 Weßling, Germany (e-mail: thomas.jerkovits@ dlr.de; gianluigi.liva@dlr.de).
A. Graell i Amat is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, 41296 Gothenburg, Sweden (e-mail: alexandre.graell@chalmers.se).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2018.2802488

threshold saturation effect. For the case of TE SC-LDPC code ensembles, this is enabled by the stronger protection provided by the termination. In [8], a way to mitigate the rate loss is introduced, which relies on appending variable nodes (VNs) with suitable degree distributions to the SC-LDPC graph.
In this letter, we investigate an alternative approach that enables large improvements of the BP threshold of TB SC-LDPC code ensembles over the binary input additive white Gaussian noise (bi-AWGN) channel. The technique, which preserves the rate of the TB SC-LDPC code ensemble, relies on distributing different energies to the codeword bits. We refer to this approach as energy shaping.1 By doing so, different bit reliabilities are achieved. The ensemble BP threshold is analyzed by means of protograph extrinsic information transfer (P-EXIT) [10] analysis. Thanks to its capability of dealing with VNs associated to channels with different signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) [11], we show how, under the restriction of admitting only two energy values, the boosting level and the length of the boosted portion can be optimized to attain the lowest possible threshold for a given TB SC-LDPC code ensemble.
The idea of improving the BP threshold of protographbased low-density parity-check (LDPC) code ensembles [12] by means of different transmission energies was originally proposed in [13]. The approach in [13] performs a VN-byVN optimization over the protograph, where the optimization of the energy allocated to each protograph VN is performed through a downhill optimization approach. While very general, the approach may become costly for large protographs. In this letter, we focus on the simplified case where the transmission energy of a bit can be chosen among two values, and where the largest one is used for the transmission of a contiguous portion of the codeword. The intuition is that, by localizing the energy boost on a contiguous portion of the codeword bits, the wave-like decoding effect is triggered. With respect to [13], which performs the energy optimization under the assumption that the decoder adopts a parallel message passing schedule, our approach is specifically tailored to operate with the sliding window decoding schedule typically employed in SC-LDPC code decoders to reduce the decoding complexity [2].
II. PRELIMINARIES
We consider transmission over the bi-AWGN channel of a (modulated) codeword x = (x1, . . . , xn), where n is the block length and xi ∈ {−1, +1}. The channel output is denoted by
1The term “shaping” shall not be intended in the sense of signal shaping [9]. As it will be described in Section II, here a time-sharing approach is considered, where the transmission energy is allowed to vary over time.

1558-2558 © 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:03:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JERKOVITS et al.: IMPROVING THE DECODING THRESHOLD OF TAILBITING SC LDPC CODES

661

y = (y1, . . . , yn), where

yi = fi xi + zi

with zi being realizations of independent and identically
distributed Gaussian random variables with zero mean and variance σ 2. Here, fi > 0 is a parameter proportional to the
energy used for the transmission of xi , such that

1n

n

fi = 1.

(1)

i =1

We denote the code rate by R. The average SNR, defined as
the ratio between the average energy per information bit Eb
and the single-sided noise power spectral density N0, is given by γ := 1/ 2Rσ 2 . We focus on the case where two values for fi are allowed. We denote them by fa and fb, with fa > fb. The ratio φ := fa/fb is referred to as boosting factor. We assume next that for the first  channel uses the parameter fi is set to fa, whereas for the remaining n −  channel uses fi = fb. We refer to the parameter  as the boosting length, and by λ := /n as the normalized boosting length. Note that for the first  channel uses the SNR is γa = γ fa while for the remaining n −  channel uses the SNR is γb = γ fb. Also, observe that (1) can now be restated as λfa + (1 − λ)fb = 1. Hence the transmission parameters are fully specified by the
energy shaping parameters (φ, λ). Furthermore, we have that

γ = λγa + (1 − λ)γb

(2)

with γa/γb = φ, which yields

γa

=

λφ

φγ + (1

−

λ)

γb

=

λφ

+

γ (1

−

λ) .

(3)

Note that the parameters (φ, λ) together with the average SNR γ are required to determine the SNRs γa, γb. Consider a bi-AWGN channel with SNR γ , and denote by C(γ ) its capacity. For a given pair (φ, λ), the capacity is

Cφ,λ(γ ) = λC(γa) + (1 − λ)C(γb)

(4)

where the dependency on φ and γ is implicit due to (3).

A. Protograph-Based Spatially Coupled LDPC Codes
Here, we consider protograph-based SC-LDPC codes [4].
In particular, in the following sections we will consider for simplicity a special class of rate-1/2 (dv, dc) regular TB SC-LDPC ensembles, where dv is the VN degree and dc = 2dv is the check node (CN) degree. A protograph P [12] is a small bipartite graph comprising a set of N VNs (also referred to as VN types) {V1, V2, . . . , VN } and a set of M CNs (i.e., CN types) {C1, C2, . . . , CM }. A VN type V j is connected to a CN type Ck by bk, j edges. A protograph can be equivalently represented in matrix form by an M × N matrix B. The j -th column of B is associated to VN type V j and the k-th row of B is associated to CN type Ck . The (k, j ) element of B, bk, j , indicates the number of edges connecting V j and Ck. A larger graph (derived graph) can be obtained from a protograph by applying a copy-and-permute procedure. The
protograph is copied Q times (Q is commonly referred to
as lifting factor), and the edges of the different copies are
permuted preserving the original protograph connectivity: If a

type- j VN is connected to a type-k CN with bk, j edges in the

protograph, in the derived graph each type- j VN is connected

to bk, j distinct type- j CNs (observe that multiple connections

between a VN and a CN are not allowed in the derived graph).

The derived graph is the Tanner graph of an LDPC code with

length n = N Q. A protograph P can be used to define a

code ensemble CPn . For possible derived graphs

a given protograph P, consider with n VNs. The ensemble CPn

all its is the

collection of codes associated to the derived graphs in the set.

In the following, we consider protograph-based TB

SC-LDPC codes with base matrix in the form

⎛

⎞

B0 0 0 · · · B0 B0 · · · B0

B

=

⎜⎜⎜⎝⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜

B0 ...
B0 0 ...
0

B0 ... B0 B0 ... 0

0 ...
B0 B0 ...
0

··· ...
··· ··· ...
···

0 ...
0
0 ...
B0

B0 ... 0
0 ... B0

··· ...
···
··· ...
···

B0 ... 0
0 ... 0

⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎠⎟⎟⎟

0 0 0 · · · B0 B0 · · · B0

with B0 = (1 1) and where the number of sub-matrices B0 per row/column is dv. Here, N equals 2M and it is usually referred to as the number of spatial positions.

III. EXTRINSIC INFORMATION TRANSFER ANALYSIS

A. Analysis Over Parallel Bi-AWGN Channels
The performance of protograph-based LDPC codes over parallel channels can be analyzed by the P-EXIT analysis. Following [11], we consider next the case where the codeword bits corresponding to the N protograph VNs are transmitted over N parallel bi-AWGN channels. We denote by IEV,ji→Ck the mutual information (MI) between the message sent at iteration i by the j -th VN to the k-th CN and the corresponding codeword bit. Similarly, IEC,ki→Vj denotes the MI between the message sent at iteration i by the k-th CN to the j -th VN and the corresponding codeword bit. We further define the SNR vector γ = (γ1, γ2, . . . , γN ) with γ j = γa if j ∈ [1, λN] and γ j = γb otherwise. The evolution of the MI can be tracked by applying the recursion

IEVk,i→C j = fkV, j IEC,→i−V1j , γ , ICE,ki→Vj = fkC, j IEV,→i Ck

(5)

with

IEC,→i Vj := ICE,1i→Vj , IEC,2i→Vj , . . . , IEC,Mi →Vj

and

IEV,→i Ck := IEV1,i→Ck , IEV2,i→Ck , . . . , IEV,Ni →Ck

where by convention we set IEV,ji→Ck = IEC,ki→Vj = 0 if bk, j = 0. In (5) fkV, j and fkC, j are the variable and check extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) functions, whose expression can be found in [11, Sec. IV.A]. We finally introduce IAj PP,i as the MI between the logarithmic a posteriori probability (APP)
ratio at the j -th VN in the i -th iteration and the corresponding
codeword bit.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:03:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

662

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 22, NO. 4, APRIL 2018

Fig. 1. Achievable region for a (5, 10) TB SC-LDPC code ensemble with N = 128 and λ = 1/8.

Fig. 2. BP decoding threshold as a function of λ, compared with the SNR required for rate R = 1/2, according to (4).

B. Achievable Regions for Decoding Convergence

For a (dv, dc) regular TB SC-LDPC ensemble CPn and for a pair (φ, λ) we say that the SNR pair (γa, γb) is achievable under BP decoding if, for a sufficiently large number of

iterations and for large n, a code picked at random from the

CprPnobeanbsielmityb,lei.ee.x,hiifbiItAsj P(Po,ni

average) a converges

vanishing small bit error to 1 for all j ∈ [1, N]

as i → ∞. The region of pairs (γa, γb) for which IAj PP,i

converges to 1 for all j ∈ [1, N], as i → ∞, is referred to as

the achievable region D(dv, dc, λ). Formally,

D(dv, dc, λ) := (γa, γb) IAj PP,i → 1, ∀ j, i → ∞ .

For an arbitrary value of γa, that we denote by γaBP, one may define the minimum value for γb, that we denote by γbBP, such that (γaBP, γbBP) is achievable under BP decoding. Note that each pair (γaBP, γbBP) is unequivocally associated with a specific boosting factor as φ = γaBP/γbBP. The set of pairs (γaBP, γbBP), denoted by B(dv, dc, λ), determines the boundary of the achievable region D(dv, dc, λ).

C. Decoding Thresholds
The BP decoding threshold γλBP of a (dv, dc) regular TB SC-LDPC ensemble when a normalized boosting length λ is considered is given by

γλBP

:=

min
(γaBP ,γbBP )∈

λγaBP + (1 − λ)γbBP

.

(6)

B(dv,dc,λ)

In Fig. 1, a graphical interpretation of (6) is provided. The
figure displays the achievable region D(dv, dc, λ) and its boundary B(dv, dc, λ) for a (5, 10) ensemble with N = 128 and λ = 1/8. For a given λ, one has to find the straight line defined by (2), with minimal γ , intersecting the boundary B(dv, dc, λ). For the example in the figure, the minimum is found at γ ≈ 0.65 dB, which corresponds to γa ≈ 2.89 dB

and γb ≈ 0.21 dB, yielding φ = 1.85. By optimizing over the normalized boosting length λ, we finally find

γ BP

:=

min
λ∈[0,1]

γλBP.

Fig. 2 depicts γλBP as a function of the normalized boosting length for the (5, 10) ensemble with N = 128. On the same chart, the average SNR γ required to achieve a rate equal to 1/2 according to (4) is depicted. The minimum decoding threshold is attained for λ = 1/8 (with φ = 1.85).

IV. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
In the following, results for regular TB SC-LDPC code (ensembles) with energy shaping are presented through EXIT analysis and Monte Carlo simulations. In both cases, windowed decoding [2] has been considered.
We analyze the performance of the proposed scheme by comparing its iterative decoding thresholds with
i. the MAP threshold2 γ MAP of the corresponding (dv, dc) uncoupled ensemble with uniform energy (UE);
ii. the BP threshold γ BL of the corresponding (dv, dc) uncoupled ensemble with UE;
iii. the BP threshold γ TE of the corresponding (dv, dc) terminated ensemble with UE.
The analysis is summarized in Table I for the case of (dv, dc) = (5, 10). The table provides the thresholds for the different ensembles, for N = 128, N = 256, and N → ∞. For large N, the threshold achieved with the proposed approach matches the one of the (5, 10) terminated ensemble with UE, saturating to the MAP threshold of the corresponding (5, 10) uncoupled ensemble with UE. For moderate-tosmall N, the proposed approach achieves a larger threshold with respect to the terminated case. However, while for the
2The estimate of the MAP threshold is obtained by exploiting the threshold saturation effect of SC-LDPC code ensembles [3]. In particular, we estimate the MAP threshold of the uncoupled ensemble by performing an EXIT analysis of the TE SC-LDPC code ensemble for very large N and by setting γ MAP = γ TE.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:03:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JERKOVITS et al.: IMPROVING THE DECODING THRESHOLD OF TAILBITING SC LDPC CODES

663

TABLE I COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT THRESHOLDS FOR THE (5, 10) SC-LDPC
CODE ENSEMBLE AND DIFFERENT N
TABLE II COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT SC-LDPC CODE ENSEMBLES AND THEIR
RESPECTIVE THRESHOLDS FOR N = 128 AND OPTIMAL λ3

block length n = 216. For decoding, we employed windowed decoding with 50 iterations per window position (local iteration), and a window spanning over 16 × Q VNs. The window is shifted by 2 × Q positions at the end of the local iteration steps, circling twice around the tailbiting Tanner graph. The results, in terms of BER and CER, are provided in Fig. 3. A gain close to 1.1 dB at CER = 10−2 over the UE case is achieved.4
V. CONCLUSIONS
We analyzed the convergence behavior of TB SC-LDPC codes over the bi-AWGN channel with different reliabilities assigned to the codeword bits by shaping the transmission energies. By focusing on the case where only two energy levels are allowed, and a contiguous portion of the codeword is transmitted with the largest energy, we showed that large coding gains (e.g., up to 1.1 dB for the (5, 10) ensemble) can be attained with reference to the case where a uniform energy is employed. The results of the asymptotic analysis are confirmed by finite-length simulations. We conjecture that additional coding gains might be achieved by jointly optimizing the protograph ensemble and the shaping parameters.

Fig. 3. BER and CER vs. average SNR for a (5, 10) TB SC-LDPC code with N = 128 and n = 216, with and without energy boosting.
terminated ensemble the actual coding rate is less than 1/2 (it reduces to 0.46875 for N = 128), the proposed scheme keeps the code rate to the nominal rate. The difference in coding gain between the terminated case and the TB SC-LDPC code ensemble with energy shaping is limited to about 0.16 dB for N = 128, and reduces to 0.09 dB for N = 256. The gain with respect to the uncoupled ensemble threshold exceeds 1.3 dB for all cases summarized in Table I. Table II compares the thresholds achieved by various (dv, dc) ensembles for the case of N = 128. Remarkably, for N = 128 energy shaping achieves the smallest threshold for the (4, 8) ensemble, with a gain of almost 1 dB over the corresponding block ensemble. This fact has to be attributed to the moderate number of spatial positions N, whereas for N growing large the decoding threshold shall improve with increasing VN and CN degrees.
We simulated the performance of the (5, 10) TB SC-LDPC code with N = 128, with and without energy boosting. For the case where energy boosting is employed, the boosting parameters have been set to the values minimizing the BP threshold, i.e., λ = 1/8 (with φ = 1.85). The protograph has been expanded with a lifting factor Q = 512, yielding a

REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] M. Lentmaier, A. Sridharan, D. J. Costello, and K. S. Zigangirov, “Iterative decoding threshold analysis for LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 5274–5289, Oct. 2010.
[3] S. Kudekar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Spatially coupled ensembles universally achieve capacity under belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 7761–7813, Dec. 2013.
[4] D. G. M. Mitchell, M. Lentmaier, and D. J. Costello, “Spatially coupled LDPC codes constructed from protographs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 9, pp. 4866–4889, Sep. 2015.
[5] C. Häger, A. Graell i Amat, A. Alvarado, F. Brännström, and E. Agrell, “Optimized bit mappings for spatially coupled LDPC codes over parallel binary erasure channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Sydney, NSW, Australia, Jun. 2014, pp. 2064–2069.
[6] C. Häger, A. Graell i Amat, F. Brännström, A. Alvarado, and E. Agrell, “Terminated and tailbiting spatially coupled codes with optimized bit mappings for spectrally efficient fiber-optical systems,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 33, no. 7, pp. 1275–1285, Apr. 1, 2015.
[7] S. Cammerer, V. Aref, L. Schmalen, and S. ten Brink, “Triggering wavelike convergence of tail-biting spatially coupled LDPC codes,” in Proc. 50th Annu. Conf. Inf. Sci. Syst. (CISS), Princeton, NJ, USA, Mar. 2016, pp. 93–98.
[8] M. R. Sanatkar and H. D. Pfister, “Increasing the rate of spatiallycoupled codes via optimized irregular termination,” in Proc. 9th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process., Brest, France, Sep. 2016, pp. 121–125.
[9] J. G. Forney, R. G. Gallager, G. Lang, F. M. Longstaff, and S. U. Qureshi, “Efficient modulation for band-limited channels,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. SAC-2, no. 5, pp. 632–647, Sep. 1984.
[10] G. Liva and M. Chiani, “Protograph LDPC codes design based on EXIT analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Washington, DC, USA, Nov. 2007, pp. 3250–3254.
[11] P. Pulini, G. Liva, and M. Chiani, “Unequal diversity LDPC codes for relay channels,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 12, no. 11, pp. 5646–5655, Nov. 2013.
[12] J. Thorpe, “Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from protographs,” NASA JPL, Pasadena, CA, USA, IPN Prog. Rep. 42-154, Aug. 2003.
[13] G. Richter and M. Bossert, “Improving the performance of protograph LDPC codes by using different transmission energies,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Nice, France, Jun. 2007, pp. 2251–2255.
4We may observe that the gain at finite block lengths is smaller than the one predicted by the EXIT analysis. In particular, the gain is expected to diminish as the lifting factor Q becomes small.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:03:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

