An Improved Decoding Algorithm of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
Deng Yongqiang Zhu Guangxi Liu Wenming Mo Yijun
Department of Electronics and Information Engineering, Huazhong University of Science & Technology, Wuhan 430074, China E-mail: tsnower@263.net

Abstract—In this paper, the decoding algorithm of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes is analyzed, and a new decoding algorithm based on the belief propagation (BP) algorithm to eliminate the influence of cycles in the factor graph is proposed. In the traditional BP algorithm, the cycles of factor graph will send message back to its source, and this will decrease the decoding performance. The new algorithm records each cycle’s path and length of each node, and cuts off the path by which message is propagated when the message will come back. It can advance the decoding performance by protect the message of good quality be propagated as widely as possible. Our results of simulation show that the performance of new algorithm is not worse than that of traditional BP algorithm in the low SNR channel and the new algorithm significantly outperform traditional BP algorithm in good channel condition.
Keywords- Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, Belief propagation (BP) algorithm, Cycle, Factor graph, Iterative decoding
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes were discovered by Gallager [1] in 1962 and have recently been rediscovered [2]. LDPC codes are designed by specifying a sparse parity check matrix H so that the relationship between code bits and paritycheck sums can be adjusted to optimize the flow of information in the decoding process [3].
Decoding algorithm of channel coding is an important element that deciding the capability and application prospect of coding. The decoding algorithm of LDPC code is mainly the iterative decoding of Belief propagation (BP) algorithm based on the factor graph. In each iterative, all variable nodes delivery the estimated decoding message to the check nodes conjoining it on the factor graph and the check node does the same [4]. The algorithm can get the optimal decoding on the non-cycle factor graph. Belief propagation (BP) algorithm can get better decoding capability on the cycle factor graph, but it cannot compute decoding message exactly because the influence of cycles in the factor graph.
The aim of this paper is to develop an iterative decoding algorithm for LDPC code as an approximation of the standard BP decoding procedure, so that the modified algorithm performs close to the standard BP but with a reduction of complexity in low SNR channel and significantly outperform and reduction of complexity in good channel condition. In

section , a simplified version of the BP algorithm is considered. In section , a new algorithm based on belief propagation algorithm is proposed. Finally the new algorithm is compared with standard BP algorithm in section and concluding remarks are given in section .
II. BELIEF PROPAGATION (BP) ALGORITHM
Factor graph is a bipartite graph expressing the structure of factorization. In the research of LDPC codes, the factor graph is used to show the relation between the variable nodes and check nodes of codeword, and it can describe the process directly of the decoding algorithm.
A. Low-Density Parity Check Codes
LDPC codes are specified by a parity-check matrix containing mostly zeros and only a small number of ones. A binary (N, J, K) LDPC code has block length N and a paritycheck matrix with exactly J ones in each column and K ones in each row, assuming J ≥3 and K >J. In the following, we refer to the elements of an LDPC codeword x={xn} as variable, and the rows of the parity-check matrix H=[hij]M× N, as checks. Accordingly, in a binary LDPC code, every code variable is checked by precisely J parity checks, and every parity check involves precisely K code variable. The typical minimum distance of these codes increases linearly with N for a fixed rate and fixed J. For J >3 and a sufficiently low rate, a simple decoding procedure exists such that the error rate decreases at least exponentially with a root of the block length, assuming a BSC [1].
B. Standard Belief Propagation-Based Decoding
This section summarizes, according to [2] and [3], the iterative decoding of LDPC based on the standard BP algorithm. The decoding problem consists of finding the most likely vector x (represented as a row matrix) such that H⋅xT [mod 2] =0. In the Belief propagation (BP) algorithm, the message relating to decoding transmits between nodes and nodes along the sides of factor graph.
We refer to the elements {zi: i=1,2,⋅⋅⋅,M} corresponding to each row of H as check nodes. We think of the set of variable nodes x and check nodes z as making up a “belief network”, also known as a “Bayesian network”. The network of variable nodes and check nodes form a bipartite graph: variable nodes only connect to check nodes, and vice versa. To illuminate the

This work was supported by the National High Technology Development Program of China under Grant No. 2003AA12331005 and by the National Science Foundation of China under Grant No.60496315.

0-7803-9335-X/05/$20.00 ©2005 IEEE

449

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:26:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BP algorithm, we denote the set of variable nodes xj that participate in check node zi by N (i) ≡ {j: hij=1}. Similarly, we define the set of check nodes zi in which variable node xj participate, M (j) ≡ {i: hij=1}. We denote a set N (i) with variable node xj excluded by N (i)\j. The algorithm has two alternating parts, in which quantities Qij and Rij associated with each nonzero element in the H matrix are iteratively updated. The quantity Qija is meant to be the probability that variable xj of x has the value a, given the information obtained via checks other than check node zi. The quantity Rija is meant to be the probability of check zi being satisfied if variable xj of x is considered fixed at a and the other variable nodes have a separable distribution given by the probabilities { Qij’ : j’∈ N (i)\j }. The algorithm would produce the exact posterior probabilities of all the bits after a fixed number of iterations if the bipartite graph defined by the matrix contained no cycles.
Figure 1 is part of the process of message propagate and update between variable nodes and check nodes. There are 3 mainly steps in the BP algorithm.
• Initialization: Compute initialized information fja and initialize Rija.
• Iterative and message update:
Step 1: Check node zi transmits its estimate message Rija to variable nodes which in the set of N (i)\j. Each variable node updates its message Qija by received Rija and the initialized information fja.
Step 2: Variable node xj transmits its updated message Qija to check nodes in the set of M (j)\i. Each check node recomputed its Rija.
• Tentative decoding: Each variable node and check node compute the decoding probability Rib and Qja, and estimate the value of {x}, if the vector x satisfied H⋅xT=0, then halting decoding successfully, and declaring a failure if some maximum number of iterations (e.g., 60 or 1000) occurs without successful decoding.
Based on the description of BP algorithm, we give the method of compute messages. We refer to x={xj|j=1,2,…N} and y={yj|j=1,2,…N} corresponding the input signals and output signals of channel, a is the value of signal and a∈{0,1} in a binary channel.
{z k : k ≠ i, k ∈ M ( j )} {x k : k ≠ j , k ∈ N (i)}

xj

Qij a

zi

Rij a

Fig.1 Message Propagation of BP Algorithm Initialized information:

f

a j

≡

P( x j

=

a

|

yj)

=α

j

f

(yj

|

xj

=

a)

(1)

Where αj is chosen such that fj1+fj0=1.

Variable node message:

Qiaj ≡ P(x j = a | y j ,{zk : k ∈ M ( j) \ i})

(2)

Check node message:

Riaj ≡ P(zi | x j = a)

(3)

The initialized value of Rija is 1. The formulas to update Qija and Rija are:

Qiaj = P(x j = a | y j ,{zk : k ∈ M ( j) \ i})

∏ = α ij

f

a j

Rkaj

(4)

k∈M ( j )\i

Riaj = P(zi | x j = a)

∑ ∏ = P(zi | x)

Q xk ik

(5)

x:x j =a

k∈N (i )\ j

Where αij is chosen such that Qij0+ Qij1 =1.
We can also compute the decoding probability Qja at the iteration, given by

∏ Q

a j

=α

i

f

a j

Riaj

(6)

i∈M ( j )

Where is α chosen such that Qj0+Qj1=1. These quantities
are used to create a tentative decoding xˆ . Our decoding
procedure is to set xˆ j to 1 if Qj1>0.5 and see if the vector x
satisfied H⋅xT [mod 2] =0, halting decoding when they are.

III. IMPROVED DECODING ALGORITHM
The messages will be sent back to its source node through cycles of factor graph in the iterative decoding of BP algorithm. We refer to these messages as reduplicate information. However reduplicate information is not the same as the message sent out before. The probabilities can be computed based on (4), (5) and (6), and the messages sent back will participate in the compute again. Reduplicate information will disturb the message of good quality.
Accordingly, we proposed an improved decoding algorithm based on BP algorithm. The improved algorithm can decrease the influence of cycles in decoding effectively. The main idea of the new algorithm is cut off the special cycle at appropriate time and connects cycles to update message again when all of cycles have been cut off. The new algorithm can protect the initialized message of good quality be polluted by the reduplicate information. When all of initialized message be transmitted to the variable nodes or check nodes as widely as possible, our new algorithm resumes propagate message through all of the edges in the factor graph till decoding

0-7803-9335-X/05/$20.00 ©2005 IEEE

450

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:26:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

successfully or some maximum number of iterations occurs without successful decoding.
There are 4 steps in the new algorithm:
1. To begin with, we first scan the parity-check matrix to get every cycle start out from each node. To each target node which to be found cycles, we need to know the start point of each cycle and the cycle’s length. Here, we refer to start point of cycle as the node which connects to the target node directly in the factor graph.
2. Begin iterative decoding. Because message is transmitted one step in the factor graph in each iterative compute, each node must compare the iteration times and the length of cycle from which message be propagated. If the length of cycle is smaller than iteration times, it means that the message sent out from this node come back again, so the node reject the message from the cycle and accept those message come from the nodes in which cycles’ length is bigger than iteration times.
3. When all of cycles are cut off, it means that all of initialized message of good quality have been sent to the nodes as widely as possible, then each node renew accepts message come from all of its adjacent nodes in the factor graph and iterative compute again.
4. Each variable node and check node compute the decoding probability Rib and Qja, and estimate the value of {x}, if the vector x satisfied H⋅xT=0, then halting decoding successfully, and declaring a failure if some maximum number of iterations (e.g., 60 or 1000) occurs without successful decoding.
Each node, variable node and check node, participates in the iterative decoding bidirectional. It is not only send out message to its adjacent nodes but also get information from those nodes. So the check nodes are on an equality function with variable nodes in the iterative decoding. We can simplify the algorithm farther by only handle on the check nodes. Because the number of check nodes smaller than the number of variable nodes, the new algorithm will be more simple than before and has the same performance.
We also can tentative decoding in the step 2 and 3 to see if it satisfied H⋅xT=0, then halting decoding successfully when they are.
IV. CODE PERFORMANCE
In simulations, we employed the encoding algorithm of random construction, over AWGN channels, block length N=200, column weight is 3, row weight is 6, decoding maximum iteration number is 60, and we adopted the rateadjusted signal to noise ratio.
Figure 2 compares the bit error rate (EBR) performance of an LDPC code decoding by standard BP algorithm and that of decoding by improved BP algorithm. In the non-long code, the two codes have similar performance in low SNR region. In

high SNR region, the code decoding by improved algorithm significantly outperforms that of the standard BP algorithm.

1.0E+00 1.0E-01

New Algorithm BP Algorithm

BER

1.0E-02

1.0E-03

1.0E-04
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4
SNR(dB)

Fig.2 BER Performance of new algorithm and BP algorithm
We can analyze the superiority of improved algorithm according to the histograms of decoding iteration times and the compare of computing times.

120

120

90

90

60

60

30

30

0 1 9 17 25 35 60

0 1 12 20 29 41 60

(a) BP algorithm

(b) New algorithm

SNR=2.4dB

200

200

150

150

100

100

50

50

0 2 10 18 27 42 60

0 2 12 20 29 40 60

(c) BP algorithm

(d) New algorithm

SNR=2.6dB

Fig.3 Iteration times of new algorithm and BP algorithm

Figure 3 gives the comparison of decoding iteration times of improved algorithm and that of the standard BP algorithm. In the histogram, the horizontal axis means the iteration times in decoding a frame data, and the upright axis means the presentation times of the iteration times. When the SNR of channel was 2.4dB, we calculated respectively 800 frames data using the improved algorithm and the standard BP algorithm. The Figure 4-(a) and 4-(b) give respectively the distribution of

0-7803-9335-X/05/$20.00 ©2005 IEEE

451

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:26:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

iteration times decoding by improved algorithm and standard algorithm. When the SNR of channel was 2.6dB, we calculated 1000 frames data using the two kinds of algorithm, and Figure 4-(c) and 4-(d) give respectively the distribution of iteration times. From the Figure 4, at the same SNR of channel, we can see that the distribution of iteration times of improved algorithm gathered more than that of standard BP algorithm. The distribution of iteration times of the two kinds of algorithm in the histogram trends to gather with the increase of channel SNR, but that of the improved algorithm gathers more evidently. The right upright line in the Figure 4 indicates that the iteration times come to the maximum (60 times). In general, the decoding of the frame data is failure when the maximum iteration times occur in decoding. We noticed that, at the same SNR, the improved algorithm had less times of the maximum iteration times occur than the traditional. Also, the superiority of the improved algorithm was more evident with the improving of channel condition.
From Figure 3, we can see that the general decoding iteration times of improved algorithm were more than that of the standard BP algorithm in the same condition of simulation, and the statistics also proved it. But it’s not always so. Table 1 shows the comparison of average iteration times that decoding needed under condition of varying SNR. When the channel was in worse condition the improved algorithm achieved lesser average iteration times. With the increasing of the channel’s SNR, the iteration times of the two kinds of algorithm reduced, but the traditional algorithm reduced faster. According to the data in Figure 3, the traditional algorithm had lesser iteration times than the improved when the SNR was bigger than 2.4dB. It means that the convergence speed of iteration times of improved algorithm is smaller than that of standard BP algorithm.

TABLE I. STATISTICS OF THE NUMBER OF DECODING ITERATIONS

SNR(dB)

Deng

Mackay

1.6

29.2270

32.6958

2.2

16.3525

17.0357

2.4

15.0938

14.9586

2.6

13.6560

12.0150

2.8

11.6429

10.0932

Under the channel condition of low SNR, the error code of data was serious. So decoding algorithm need many iteration times calculation in order to get the result. Most of iteration times are bigger than the length of cycle in the check matrix. Our new algorithm cut off cycles to protect the initialized information of good quality, so the iteration times of decoding are smaller than that of standard BP algorithm. But when the SNR of channel increasing, it need few iteration times in decoding. Our algorithm slowed the propagation speed of message between variable nodes and check nodes, and then it needs more iteration times to decoding successfully.

But, lesser iteration times does not necessarily mean lesser compute times. Table 2 gives the average compute times by

formula (4) and (5) that each iteration needed of the two decoding algorithm in varying channel condition. In the experiment, the check matrix of LDPC code was 200×150. Here, we refer to get the Qija or Rija as one time compute. By means of cutting off the cycle, the improved algorithm got lesser calculating times than that of the standard BP algorithm in each iteration, and the compute times would be lesser and lesser with the improving of channel condition. The compute times of standard BP algorithm are just relevant to the size of check matrix and its row weight and line weight.

TABLE II. STATISTICS OF THE MEAN NUMBER OF COMPUTE

SNR(dB)

Deng

Mackay

1.6

1179.8

2.2

1170.1

2.4

1145.0

1224

2.6

1132.1

2.8

1116.7

From the comparison of the table 1 and table 2, we can see that the improved algorithm has lower complexity and smaller compute times than that of the standard BP algorithm.

V. CONCLUSIONS
The belief propagation (BP) algorithm is the primary decoding algorithm of LDPC code. The algorithm performed superiority but its limitation all the same. This paper proposed an improved algorithm based on analyzing the decoding influence of cycle in the check matrix. By scanning the check matrix, the improved algorithm found out the cycles with the starting point of itself for all nodes, and cut off the path by which message is propagated in time according to the progress of message propagation. So it can eliminate the influence that the cycle transmitting back message in decoding, protecting the excellent primitive information can be transmitted to the node as possible as it can get to, and at the same tine, improving the performance of LDPC code. Our simulation show that the improved algorithm has lower complexity and smaller compute times than that of the standard BP algorithm, and in the non-long code, the two codes have similar performance in low SNR region. In high SNR region, the code decoding by improved algorithm significantly outperforms that of the standard BP algorithm.

REFERENCES
[1] R.G.Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes, IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, Vol.8, Jan. 1962: 21~28
[2] D.J.C.Mackay and R.M.Neal, Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes, Electronics Letters, Vol.32, Aug. 1996: 1645~1646
[3] D.J.C.Mackay, Good Error-Correcting Codes Based on Very Sparse Matrices, IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, Vol.45, March 1999: 399~431.
[4] F.R.Kaschischang, B.J.Frey, and H-A.Loeliger, Factor Graphs and the Sum-Product Algorithm, IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, Vol.47, Feb. 2001:498~519

0-7803-9335-X/05/$20.00 ©2005 IEEE

452

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:26:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

