Enumerators for Protograph Ensembles of LDPC Codes

S. L. Fogal
Caltech 1200 E. California Blvd Email: sarah@acm.caltech.edu

Robert McEliece
Caltech 1200 E. California Blvd Email: rjm@systems.caltech.edu

Jeremy Thorpe
Caltech 1200 E. California Blvd Email: jeremy@systems.caltech.edu

Abstract— This paper considers the problem of finding average enumerators for the class of protograph ensembles, which are related in a certain way to quasi-cyclic codes. Our methods, which are necessarily different from those used to compute enumerators for classical irregular ensembles, can be applied to both codeword and stopping set weight enumerators. The method divides codewords into types based on their partial weight enumerator. For each type, an exponent can be computed for the average number of codewords of that type. Maximizing over types of fixed average weight gives the average enumerator which we seek. Although this maximization step is in general difficult because of non-unique local maxima, we can compute it for simple cases. We show that certain ensembles exist which have a linearly growing minimum distance with high probability, while others have at most sublinearly growing minimum distance with high probability.
I. INTRODUCTION
LDPC codes are becoming a standard in today’s error correcting systems. However, even as the number of codes investigated by researchers has swelled, it remains difficult to find codes achieving ”near zero” error probability at rates close to Shannon capacity. Instead, codes which are designed to behave well close to the capacity limit typically exhibit an Error floor.
Error floors are generally attributed to small sets of variables such as low-weight codewords, low-weight stopping sets [1], pseudocodewords [2] of small pseudo-weight, or, in the case of quantized decoders, small trapping sets [3]. Often, these sets are discovered only after specific codes have been designed and simulated. However, it is desirable to be able to predict the existence and frequency of such sets for entire ensembles of codes.
Speaking more formally, we are interested in certain asymptotic weight enumerators of LDPC code ensembles. Gallager was able to compute asymptotic codeword weight enumerators for regular LDPC codes at least as early as 1963[4]. Litsyn and Shevelev[5] extended this result to include unstructured irregular ensembles. More recently, Di[6] has computed weight enumerators and stopping set enumerators also for unstructured irregular ensembles (in both average and typical case).
In this paper, we consider the problem of finding average enumerators for the class of protograph ensembles, which are related in a certain way to quasi-cyclic codes. Our methods, which are necessarily different from those used to compute

enumerators for unstructured irregular ensembles, can be ap-
plied to both codeword and stopping set weight enumerators,
based on their simple combinatorial characterizations. In section II, we define the quantity A(Θ, G) which is the
number of vectors of fractional weight Θ having a certain relationship to the graph G (e.g. being a codeword or a stopping set). The expectation of this quantity with respect to an ensemble is AN (Θ). This quantity typically grows exponentially with N and the enumerator exponent E(Θ) is:

1

E(Θ)

=

lim
N →∞

N

ln AN (Θ)

(1)

We show that

E(Θ) = max E(θ)

(2)

θ =Θ

for a certain function E(θ) where θ is a vector fractional weight or partial weight. In section IV, we show how to compute the value of E(θ). In section V, we show that E(θ) is in general not convex, and thus is difficult to optimize. Nonetheless, we apply steepest ascent to solve the maximization, and show that this method gives results that are reasonable.
In section VIII, we outline some future research directions

II. WEIGHT ENUMERATORS DEFINED
Protograph ensembles are defined and characterized by a bipartite graph P = (V, C, E), where V = {v} is a set of variable nodes, C = {c} is a set of check nodes, and E = {e} is a set of edges each adjacent to one element v(e) ∈ V and one element c(e) ∈ C. Formally, a protograph is equivalent to
a Tanner graph, except that multiple edges are allowed. A protograph P is semantically equivalent to an r × n
protomatrix H = (Hc,v) where Hc,v equals the number of edges in E adjacent to c and v.
P can be lifted by a factor of N to generate a graph GA˙ n N -lift of P , which we denote P N = (V N , CN , EN ), is constructed from a set of permutations {πe}e∈E of length N . We let V N = V × [n], CN = C × [n], and EN = E × [n], where (e, i) is adjacent to (c, i) and (v, πe(i)). In the lifted graph, we refer to v as the type of node (v, i), and to i as its index, and use a similar convention for check nodes (c, i) and edges (e, i).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:32:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

We define the probability measure P (·) to be the uniform measure over N -lifts of P , that is where {πe}e∈E are independent and uniform over all length N permutations. We
sometimes refer to this probability measure as an ensemble of
graphs. The codewords x ∈ G are the assignments of (0, 1) to
each vN ∈ V N such that each (c, i) ∈ CN is adjacent an even number of times to variable nodes assigned the value 1. Similarly, the stopping sets s of G are assignments such that each (c, i) ∈ CN is adjacent 0 times or at least 2 times to
variable nodes assigned the value 1. We are now ready to define a set Ω which generalizes the
notions of codeword and stopping set. For each check c ∈ C in the protograph define a set of allowed vectors Ωc ⊂ (0, 1){e : c(e)=c}.
For a particular word x and check node (c, i) ∈ CN , define ω(c,i)(x) to be the vector of variables connected to (c, i):

ω(c,i)(x) = (xv(e))e:c(e)=(c,i)

(3)

Then the set Ω is the set of x such that every vector ω(c,i)(x) is in the corresponding allowed set Ωc, formally:

Ω = x : ω(c,i)(x) ∈ Ωc, c ∈ C, i ∈ [n]

(4)

is a set of words x with a certain combinatorial property. By choosing an appropriate definition of Ωc, it is possible
make Ω the set of codewords or the set of stopping sets. If,
for each c ∈ C, Ωc is the set of vectors of even weight, then Ω is the set of codewords in G. If Ωc is the set of vectors of weight not equal to 1, then Ω is the set of stopping sets.
We are interested in the number of words in Ω of fractional
weight Θ(x), defined to be the number of 1’s in x divided by the word length N · n. For a given graph G the number of such words is denoted A(Θ, G), and the expectation with
respect to the ensemble of graphs of length N is denoted AN (Θ)T˙ his expectation typically grows exponentially with N , and the exponent E(Θ) is defined by equation (1).

III. APPROACH
Our approach to computing E(Θ) is based on the method of types [7]. For a particular word x (not necessarily in Ω), denote its type (or partial weight) by t(x) = (θv)v∈V , where θv denotes the fraction of times that x assigns 1 to variables of type v. The following lemma says that the probability that x ∈ Ω depends only the type θ.

Lemma 1: if x and y are assignments of (0, 1) to each v ∈ V N such that t(x) = t(y) then P (x ∈ Ω) = P (y ∈ Ω)

Proof: θv(x) = θv(y) implies that there exists a vector of permutations (πv)v∈V such that for each v, xv = πv(yv), where xv is the value x assigns to {v, i}.
The permutations (πv)v∈V define a bijection on elements of the ensemble defined by f ((πe)) = (πe · π(v(e))) such that y ∈ Ω(f((πe))) if and only if x ∈ Ω(πe). Since all lifts in the ensemble are equiprobable, the conclusion holds.

Thus the expected number of words of type θ, which we denote AN (θ) is just the number of words of type θ times the probability that any word of that type is in Ω:

AN (θ) = |{x : t(x) = θ}| · P (x ∈ Ω|t(x) = θ) (5)
It is straightforward to see that the number of words of type θ can be approximated as:

|{x : t(x) = θ}| = eN v H(θv)

(6)

Define the indicator function that x satisfies all of the constraints
Definition 1:

fΩc (x, G) =

1, if ω(c,i)(x) ∈ Ωc∀i ∈ [n] 0, otherwise

(7)

The following lemma says that for any x, the probability

of satisfying each type of constraint Ωc is independent over

c ∈ C.

Lemma 2:

P (x ∈ Ω) = P (fΩc (x, G) = 1)

(8)

c∈C

Proof: for a particular x, fΩc (x, G) is a function only of the set of permutations {πe}e:c(e)=c. The permutations {πe} are mutually independent, and thus independent with respect
to the partitioning {πe}e:c(e)=c c∈C . The result follows since functions of independent variables are independent.

We define the asymptotic exponent of the probability that all ω(c,i) ∈ Ωc for all checks of type c:

Φc(θc)

=

lim
N →∞

ln(P

(fΩc (x,

G)

=

1))/N

(9)

For a particular word x, this probability depends only on the vector of weights θc associated with the variables adjacent to check c in the protograph:

θc = (θv(e))e:v(e)

(10)

From a computational point of view, it is unfortunate that independence does not factor further. Although fΩc (x, G)is independent from type to type, ω(c,i)(x) are generally dependent among values of i. Nonetheless, we can apply large deviation
theory and Sanov’s theorem to obtain the following theorem,
which shows in principle how to compute the asymptotic probability exponent Φc(θc).

Theorem 1:

Φc(θc) = max H(p) −
p∈PΩR

H (θv(e) )

(11)

e:c(e)=c

where PΩR is the set of distributions P over satisfying the marginal constrains:

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:32:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ωP (ω) = θc
ω∈[0,1]deg(c)
and having support only on Ωc, thus satisfying

(12)

lim
N →∞

1 N

ln Q(ΩNc |RθNc )

=

max
P ∈PΩR

H(P )

−

H (θc )

(21)

P (ω) = 0, ∀ ω ∈/ Ωc

(13)

Proof: From the definition of the protograph ensemble, the check (c, i) is adjacent to the vector of variables ((v(e), πe(i)))e∈E:c(e)=c. Consider the matrix whose columns are the set of such vectors, namely

Xc = Xec,i , Xec,i = x(v(e), πe(i))

(14)

Because (πe) is a set of independent uniform random

permutations XcN is a random matrix with uniform probability

over all matrices Furthermore, x ∈

with ΩNc

row sums if and only

(N θc). if each

Denote column

tohfisXsicet∈RΩθNcc

. .

Define a uniform probability measure Q over all m × N

[0, 1] matrices. Now

P (XcN ∈ ΩcN ) = Q(ΩcN |RθNc )

(15)

Applying the definition of conditional probability,

Q(ΩcN |RθNc )

=

Q(ΩNc RθNc ) Q(RθNc )

(16)

Since the event ΩNc distribution on columns

oRf θNXc cNde, paennddsQoinslycoolunmthne-weimsepiirnidcea-l

pendent, we can apply Sanov’s theorem [7] directly to obtain

lim
N →∞

1 N

ln Q(ΩNc

RθNc )

=

min
P ∈PΩR

D(P

||Uc)

(17)

where Uc is the uniform distribution over vectors of length deg(c) and PΩR is the set of distributions satisfying both (13) and (12).

min D(P ||Uc) = H(Uc) − max H(P ) (18)

P ∈PΩR

P ∈PΩR

The denominator of the right hand side of (16) can be asymptotically estimated in a similar way

lim
N →∞

1 N

ln Q(RθNc )

=

min
P ∈PR

D(P ||Uc)

(19)

where PR is the set of distributions satisfying (12) It can easily be seen that the P which minimizes D(P ||Uc)
is the component-wise independent distribution with marginals equal to θc, and thus

min D(P ||Uc) = H(Uc) − H(θc)

(20)

P ∈PR

where H(θc) = e:c(e)=c H(θv(e)). Applying the asymptotic expressions in equations (18) and
(20), we obtain

We now apply theorem 1, to computing E(θ). Taking the log of equation (5), and substituting equation (6) and (9), we have:

E(θ) = H(θv) + Φc(θc)

(22)

v∈V

c∈C

In the following section, we show how to numerically compute the value of Φc(θc) and thus how to compute E(θ).

IV. NUMERICAL METHODS FOR COMPUTING E(θ)

In the previous section, we have seen that computing each function Φc(θc) requires solving a constrained entropy maximization problem.
In this section, we describe the computational mathematics used to calculate E(Θ), for a given protograph described by an r × n matrix H.
Let mc be the degree of c. We have seen that Ωc is a set of mc−vectors. We seek Φc(θc) = max H(p)− e H(θv) where p(ω) is the set of all probability mass functions satisfying equation (12)
Applying Euler-Lagrange theory, we will see how this constrained optimization problem can be transformed into a non-linear system of equations. The Lagrangian corresponding to our constrained optimization problem can be written

L(p) = − p(ω)(log(p(ω)) − s · ω)

(23)

ω∈Ω

The constrained optimum must satisfy

∂L ∂p

=

0, and this

condition implies a Boltzmann distribution on ω given by

p∗(s, ω)

=

z

1 (s)

e−s·ω

(24)

The normalizing constant z(s) takes the value that ensures p is a probability distribution, appropriately summing to 1.

z(s) = e−s·ω,

(25)

ω∈Ω

The Helmholtz free energy can be written in terms of Z(s) :

F (s) = − log(Z(s))

(26)

and has the property that its gradient with respect to s is equal to the l.h.s of equation (12).

∇F (s)

=

1 Z (s)

ωe−s·ω

(27)

ω∈Ω

=

ωp(ω).

(28)

ω∈Ω

Thus, if we find s∗ which solves

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:32:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

∇F (s∗) = θc

(29)

then the probability density that leads to the maximum entropy is given by p∗(s∗, ω) and Φc(θc) can be expressed

Φc(θc) = −F (s∗) + s∗ · ∇F (s∗)

(30)

The domain of θc, usually denoted K, is the convex hull of all ω ∈ Ωc. Outside of this domain, no distribution p can satisfy (12). As a side remark, we note that if each Ωc is the set of even weighted vectors, then the feasible region is formally equivalent to the pseudocodeword fundamental polytope.
The domain of s is the entire space Rn of real vectors. It is shown in a concurrently submitted paper by Aji et. al[8] that there is a one-to-one correspondence between these two domains. That result follows from considering the Helmholtz free energy and its Legendre conjugate.
Once we have this non-linear system of equations (29), we can numerically solve for s∗ using either Broyden’s or Newton’s Method. We found Broyden’s Method[9] to be far faster, and thus use it whenever possible. However, since Broyden’s Method uses only an approximation to the Jacobian, it is not always able to find a solution. In practice, this typically happens near the boundary of the feasible set(where calculations of gradients and Jacobians become more difficult by any method). The values of θc on the boundary of K correspond to values of s with infinite norm, and care must be taken to avoid numerical problems in this region.
In the following section, we will show how to optimize the function E(θ) over θ to obtain E(Θ).

Code Word Weight Enumerator 0.3

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

−0.05 0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

Fig. 1. Numerical evaluation of the weight enumerator for a rate 1/3 protograph

Code Word Weight Enumerator

0.01

0.005

0

−0.005

−0.01

−0.015

−0.02

−0.025

−0.03

−0.035

−0.04

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.1

0.12

0.14

0.16

0.18

V. OPTIMIZATION OF E(θ)
Since there are only polynomially many types, each having an exponential number of elements, it is a standard result that the sum is dominated by a single type, as expressed in equation (2).
In general, the function E(θ) is not convex. For protographs with no check nodes of high degree, it may be possible to essentially search the whole space {θ : θ = Θ for the global maximum of (2), but this is impractical for protographs with any large check nodes. A second approach is to use a gradient following method such as steepest descent. Unfortunately, this is not guaranteed to converge to the global minimum. A third approach is to use steepest descent starting from a number of different starting locations. In practice, this approach is sufficient to compute curves that appear continuous for protographs that have been investigated.
Still, it is an artifact of certain protographs that there are critical values of Θ at which the global minimum of E(θ) jumps from one place to another, which is reflected in a discontinuity in the first derivative of E(Θ).
Figure 1 shows our evaluation of the weight enumerator for a rate 1/3 protograph defined by the matrix in equation (31). The zoomed section, shown in figure 2 shows a discontinuity at approximately Θ = 0.13 in which the global maximum of

Fig. 2. This weight enumerator has an elbow

(2) jumps from one value of θ to another. The dashed lines indicate other local maxima.

H=

303 034

(31)

For a given matrix, H, and a value of Θ perhaps only some vectors θ have a solution to the entropy maximization problems for each row of H, as for some problems there are no probability mass functions which satisfy the constraints. A simple algorithm can be used to determine whether a vector θ is feasible. In the steepest ascent code, if we find ourself stepping outside the feasible set, we just take a smaller step size until either we remain in the feasible set or the step size becomes effectively zero.

VI. DOMAIN OF E(θ)
It is important both from an analytical and a computational point of view to know the domain in which E(θ) is welldefined. In this section, we give a general characterization of the domain. We further show that for both stopping set enumerators and weight enumerators, determination of whether a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:32:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

specific vector θ is in the domain can be done by efficient
algorithms. The domain of E(θ) is in general a subset of [0, 1]V , since
by definition the fraction of 1’s of any type v is by definition in [0, 1]. Referring to equation(22), the term H(θv) is well defined in this set and thus does not restrict the domain. However, the term Φc(θc) is defined only where there is at least one distribution satisfying equation (12), which is exactly when θc is in the convex hull of Ωc. If all such constraints are satisfied, then E(θ) is well-defined. Thus, in the general case, the domain of E(θ) can be expressed:

Domain(E(θ)) = {θ : θc ∈ K(Ωc)}

(32)

Computationally this is feasible to test as long as the degree of the check nodes is small. However, a direct application of this criterion implies at least an enumeration of all of the elements of Ωc for each c. For codewords and stopping sets however, the characterization is even simpler.

VII. BEHAVIOR OF E(Θ) NEAR ZERO
An important feature of average weight enumerators is their behavior near Θ = 0. For some protographs, there is a region (0, Θ∗) for which the codeword weight enumerator E(Θ) < 0. For such ensembles, we will see that the majority of the codes have minimum distance growing like N · Θ∗.

A. Types of Zero-crossings
Informally speaking, there are three essential ways in which E(Θ) can behave near zero. We have seen that for stopping set enumerators and codeword enumerators E(0) = 0 for every protograph. Above zero, E(Θ) may become strictly negative. Another way is for E(Θ) to be exactly zero for some finite stretch, and the third is to become immediately positive. In this section, we will formalize these notions, and prove constructively that each case is possible.
For a given enumerator E(Θ), define:

Θ1 = inf E(Θ) ≥ 0
Θ>0
Θ2 = inf E(Θ) > 0
Θ>0

Clearly Θ2 > Θ1 since {Θ : E(Θ) > 0} ⊂ {Θ : E(Θ) ≥

0}. Given this observation, we can divide all protographs into

three possible types:

⎧ ⎨ type 1 if Θ2 = Θ1 = 0

type(G) =

⎩

type type

2 3

if Θ2 > Θ1 = 0 if Θ2 ≥ Θ1 > 0

(33)

From a point of view of performance of the code under ML decoding, the most desirable way is the first, in which E(Θ) becomes strictly negative. In this case it is possible to argue that with high probability the minimum distance of the code grows linearly with N . In the second case, it is impossible to directly argue whether the minimum distance does or does not grow linearly with N .

VIII. DISCUSSION
A primary motivation for computing enumerators has been to use them to design ensembles of codes with low error floors. The general idea is to use a combination of enumerator properties, such as the asymptotic expected minimum weight, and density evolution threshold. Preliminary experiments in which such codes have been designed and simulated have suggested that this approach can be effective.
A. Quasi-Cyclic Ensembles
Quasi-cyclic codes [10] have become a popular choice for many applications for many reasons including a relatively efficient encoding algorithm. It would therefore also be desirable to know something about their average weight enumerators.
Ensembles of quasi-cyclic codes can defined for protograph P by altering the definition so that the permutations {πe}e∈E are chosen among only cyclic permutations. Unfortunately, the approach of this paper cannot easily be extended to compute enumerators for this kind of ensemble. One reason for this is that lemma (2) does not hold for this ensemble.
The conjecture that average weight enumerators of quasicyclic ensembles are the same as those of full ensembles is false. One graph in the quasi-cyclic ensemble is that in which each permutation being the identity permutation. This graph is disconnected into N pieces, each identical to the protograph. As long as each one of these pieces admits at least one non-zero assignment, the whole code has exponentially many codewords of any weight N · Θ, where 0 < Θ < 1.
B. Multi-Edge-Type Ensembles
Multi-Edge-Type ensembles are a superclass of both protograph ensembles and unstructured irregular ensembles. Since the theory for computing enumerators for unstructured ensembles is by now established, we hope to be able to combine our techniques with those techniques in order to find enumerators for this class of ensembles.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Di, D. Proietti, E. Telatar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Finite length analysis of low-density parity-check codes.” Submitted IEEE Trans. on Information Theory, 2001.
[2] B. J. Frey, R. Koetter, and A. Vardy, “Skewness and pseudocodewords in iterative decoding,”
[3] T. Richardson, “Error floors of ldpc codes.” 2004. [4] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes.” [5] S. Litsyn and V. Shevelev, “On ensembles of low-density parity-
check codes: Asymptotic distance distributions.,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 48, no. 4, pp. 887–908, 2002. [6] C. Di, “Asymptotic and finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes,” 2004. [7] T. Cover and J. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory. Wiley Interscience, 1991. [8] S. Aji, S. Fogal, R. McEliece, and B. Wang, “Constrained entropy, free energy, and the legendre transform,” 2005. Submitted to International Symposium on Information Theory. [9] J. Nocedal and S. J. Wright, Numerical Optimization. Springer-Verlag, 1999. [10] R. M. Tanner, “On graph constructions for ldpc codes by quasicyclic extension,” in Information, Coding and Mathematics (M. Blaum, P. Farrell, and H. van Tilborg, eds.), pp. 209–220, Kluwer, June 2002.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:32:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

