Design of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes using Linear Programming for Modulation and
Detection

Yi Yang, Xu Changqing, Zhang Haibin National Communication Research Laboratory
Shanghai Jiao Tong University Shanghai, 200030, China
Email: cindyyi@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract- LDPC-MIMO system provides great capacity increment in wireless communications. Based on the powerful analysis tool of the extrinsic information transfer chart, we are able to design optimal LDPC code via curve fitting. Degree profile of the code can be optimized using linear programming and mutual information transfer function. Via simulation, our profile provides a better curve match and performance in MIMO fading channels. This fact manifests the significance to design good LDPC codes to fit different channels.
Keywords- low-density parity-check codes, linear programming, iterative decoding, mutual information.
I. INTRODUCTION
Wireless communications using multiple input multiple output (MIMO) systems can provide great capacity increment compared to the conventional single antenna systems [1]. In order to achieve the capacity provided by the MIMO system, powerful channel coding becomes an inseparate part of system design and implementation. Taking advantages of the great achievements made recently in turbo [2] and LDPC code [3], it is thus an important topic to design and optimize the LDPC code for MIMO communications systems over fading channels. A lot of work has been done to optimize the LDPC code over AWGN channel [4] [5] [6] [7]. However, these optimal profiles no longer work well when the channel characteristic changes. In this paper, the profile of the LDPC code is modified to fit MIMO fading channels. Due to the fact that the signal received at each receive antenna is a sum of the signal from all the transmit antennas corrupted by AWGN noise, it is no longer a memoryless channel with AWGN noise. Hence it is quite reasonable to view the problem as a combination of space-time (or MIMO) decorrelation and LDPC decoding processes. Motivated by the implementation of serial concatenation of convolutional codes(SCCC) over inter symbol interference(ISI) channels [8], we are going to design a soft-input soft-output(SISO) MIMO decorrelator which provides the log-likelihood ratios (LLR) of the coded bits at first. By concatenating the SISO decorrelator with the LDPC decoder, we can thus form an iterative turbo detection structure with the performance of the iterative detection process which can approach (or a least close to) that of maximum likelihood detection.

Due to the fact that the LLR from the detector is not necessarily Gaussian, Gaussian approximation no longer works well for non-Gaussian channel. Based on the powerful analysis tool of the extrinsic information transfer chart (EXIT chart), we are able to design optimal LDPC code over fast fading channel models via curve fitting. Degree profile of the code can be optimized using linear programming.
In the remainder of this paper, we consider the problem of the degree profile design of LDPC codes using linear programming in MIMO-LDPC system model. In the Section II, we generally described MIMO-LDPC system model we worked with. In the Section III, we deduce our degree profile optimization method and the simulation results and analysis are shown in the section Ⅳ. Finally, we give our conclusions in the section Ⅴ.

II. MIMO-LDPC SYSTEM MODEL

A general MIMO system is shown in Figure 1. The channel

is modeled as fast Rayleigh fading, which is usually

encountered in wireless communication systems, i.e., the

entries of the channel matrix H are i.i.d zero mean, unit

variance, complex Gaussian random variables. For a fast fading

channel, the channel matrix H is ergodic, i.e., the channel is

independent between symbols. In this paper, we assume the

channel is unknown at the transmitter but not at the receiver,

thus we want to optimally design the receiver system with the

information of the channel.

For a MIMO system with M transmit and N receive

antennas, the received signal can be expressed in Equation 1:

y = H *s+n

(1)

Where y is an N*1 received vector, H is an N*M channel matrix and n is an N*1 Gaussian noise vector with zero mean and variance N0/2 for both real and imaginary part. s is the transmitted signal. Note that the energy must be distributed to each transmitted symbol, that is, E[s]=Es/M due to the use of multiple transmit antenna. In this paper, we confine our discussion to the 2 by 2 case, that is, there are 2 transmit antennas and 2 receive antennas.

0-7803-9152-7/05/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE

532

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:36:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Tx1

Rx1

Tx2

Channel

Rx2

Matrix H

TxM

RxN

Figure 1: MIMO model

Though theoretically, MIMO system can great improve the performance, multiple transmit and receive antennas make the channel has memory in practice. Due to the existence of channel memory, the symbol by symbol detection is no longer optimal. The Viterbi Algorithm, though Maximum likelihood, has exponentially increasing complexity as the memory length goes to be large. The idea of iterative demodulation and decoding gives a nice solution. The diagram of our MIMO LDPC demodulation and decoding system is shown in Figure 2.

Binary Source

LDPC Encoder

QPSK Mapper

M Transmit Antennas

Binary Sink

Hard Decision

Check Node Decoder (Parity Check)

Edge Interleaving
∏−1

I E,VND

CND

∏ I A,VND

N Receiver Antennas

Variable Node
⊕ Decoder (repetitionIsE),DET
VND

APP MIMO Detector
DET

⊕
VND

I A,DET

Channel Matrix H

Figure 2: MIMO-LDPC demodulation and decoder system diagram

The iterative process can be described as follows: the detector first takes the LLR from the channel, a posteriori probability (APP) for both detector and decoder are zeros in the first iteration. The detector generates LLR for each coded bit via symbol by symbol detection. Then the soft output is passed to variable nodes, through the edge interleaver, the extrinsic information is gathered at check nodes. Using product-sum method, the extrinsic information is computed and passed back to the variable node, at the variable node all the messages is summed up and the extrinsic for the detector is fed back to the detector as a priori information to do the detection. Again it is passed to the decoder, with the extrinsic information left in the last iteration (i.e. from the check node to the variable node), then there goes another decoder iteration. This process goes until the maximum iteration number is exceeded. All

alternative iteration schemes are to do several iterations in the decoder, then generate the extrinsic information for the detector and again the extrinsic from the detector is fed back to the decoder and so on.

III. DEGREE PROFILE OPTIMIZATION IN MIMO-LDPC SYSTEM MODEL

The optimization of LDPC code is discussed via density

evolution [4]. It is quite computational intensive. An alternative

method, i.e., Gaussian approximation is mentioned in [7]. The

basic idea is to approximate the extrinsic output as Gaussian

random variable, such that the variance of the LLR is just twice

as the mean. So the only thing we should take care of is the

mean. This is a quite good approximation when the code word

length N becomes very large and the rate becomes very high.

However, the Gaussian approximation method does not work

well if we only take care of the mean. The reason is even if the a

priori information from the decoder to detector node can be

approximated to be Gaussian, the output of the detector is far

from Gaussian, as shown in Figure 3. As evident from the

figure, the variance is far greater than twice the mean.

Therefore, if only the mean is taken into account, we will be too

optimistic. Similarly, the SNR does not work well due to the

fact that the real probability density function(PDF) is no longer

Gaussian. Enlightened by [9], the mutual information at the

output is a very robust measure of the quality of soft

information. Using J inverse function, we get equivalent mean

as:

µ = (J −1(I ))2 / 2

(2)

Figure 3: density evolution at the output of the MIMO detector

The analysis of the message passing process of the whole

system using mutual information transfer function is follows:

Assume the a priori information is Gaussian, but instead of

using its mean or SNR, we take advantage of its mutual

information. Equation 3 and Equation 4 give the mutual

information transfer functions as for the variable node and

check node approximation.

IE,VND (I A, dv ,σ ch2 ) = J ( (dv −1)[J −1(I A )]2 + σ ch2 )

(3)

I

A,CND

(I

E

)

≈

1

−

J

(

J

−1

(1 − (dc

I EcND − 1)

)

)

(4)

533
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:36:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Where IE,VND is the extrinsic information at the variable node and σ c h2 is the equivalent variance from the channel, dv and dc are the degree of the variable node and check node
respectively.

Via simulation, we also noticed that the transfer function

for detector is very like a straight line. Thus we just

approximate it using a polynomial as [10] did. So far everything

is in a closed form and the combined detector and variable node

Equation 5. We can do optimization based on these mutual

information transfer functions.

I E,VND (I A,VND , I E,DET , dv ) (5)
= J ( (dv −1)[J −1(I A,VND )]2 + [J −1(IE,DET )]2 )

Via using the equivalent mean, we get the optimization

condition similar to that for AWGN channel case. Note that the

only difference is that the mean from the detector S is no longer

a fixed number, but changes as iteration goes. The value of it

can be obtained using Monte Carlo simulation and the

equivalent mean can be tabulated for density evolution.

There's a more straightforward way to do the optimization,

i.e., to match the EXIT chart curve directly. Recent research

result [11] shows that for Binary Erasure Channel (BEC), the

area under the EXIT chart curve of the detector is exactly the

maximum rate the whole system can achieve; it also turns out to

be a good approximation for other channels. This result gives us

some intuition as how to optimize the degree profile, i.e., to

match the curve of the whole decoder as close as to the curve of

the detector in the EXIT chart as long as the curve of the

detector is still above that of the decoder. Thus we can

maximize the rate given a SNR. However, the curve of the

whole decoder is non-linear with respect to the degree profile.

Therefore, we separate the whole turbo loop to do the

optimization. Variable node transfer curve must match check

node transfer curve. Thus the detector and the variable node are

combined together, the curve is adjusted to match the curve of

the check node. Since the combined detector and variable node

curve is nothing but a linear combination of curves of different

degree as shown in Equation 6:

dv max

∑ IE,VND (I A ) = λi IE,VND (I A , dv )

(6)

i=1

Where λ is the common notation of the left degree profile

from edge perspective. Thus, the curve fitting problem can

readily be solved via linear programming.

Figure4 shows the EXIT chart of combined detector

variable node curve and check node curve for our optimal

profile at SNR=2.0dB. For reference, the regular (3,6) EXIT

curve fit at 3.2dB and that of the profile optimized for AWGN

fit at 3.4dB are also shown in Figure 5 and 6. It is obvious that

our profile provides a better curve match.

Figure 4: EXIT chart of curve for optimal profile
So far the process of MIMO-LDPC system degree profile optimization can be expressed as follows: (1). Simulate the EXIT chart curve of the detector and find the approximate SNR level, under which the area can just satisfy the specified rate. Approximate the detector curve using a polynomial; (2). Combine the variable node and detector together, and we can get a bunch of curves; (3). Optimize right degree regular profile. Optimize the left degree profile using linear programming and try different right degree values. Finally pick up the one gives the highest rate; (4). Fix the optimized left degree profile and do further curve fitting via right degree linear programming; (5). If the specified rate is achieved, stop iteration and output the optimal profile; (6). If the iteration number is great than the maximum value, then increase the SNR a little bit and go to (2); (7). Else optimize the left degree using the optimized right degree and go to (4).

Figure 5: EXIT chart of curve for regular profile

534
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:36:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 6: EXIT chart of curve for AWGN optimal profile
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
Figure 7 shows simulation results of our MIMO 2 by 2 systems, QPSK modulation format, LDPC code rate R = 1/ 2 word length n=105, random edge interleaver, 100 iterations. The results are as expected: the EXIT chart optimized profile gives the best performance, the water fall at about 2.2dB, 0.2dB from the curve fitting point 2.0dB. The error probability of the (3, 6) regular code drops at about 3.2 dB, which is about 1dB worse than the optimized profile. Besides, it is quite interesting to note that the optimal profile over AWGN channel actually works very bad under this condition, even about 0.3dB worse than the (3,6) regular case.
As evident from the figure, more irregularity not necessarily leads to better code if they are not designed for the specific system. That's why the very sophisticated code optimal over AWGN works even worse than the regular (3,6) code.
From the view of EXIT chart, the optimization process is nothing but a curve fitting problem. This gives us some insight into the LDPC code design. If the two curve matching methods are equivalent and the EXIT chart theory is a good enough approximation, our linear programming fitting method provide a pretty nice way to optimize the profile, especially for non Gaussian channel, when Gaussian approximation method doesn't work well.

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we modified the profile of the LDPC code to fit MIMO fading channels via linear programming. A coding and modulation technique is studied where the coded bits of an irregular LDPC code are passed directly to a modulator. At the receiver, the variable nodes of the LDPC decoder graph are connected detector nodes and iterative decoding is accomplished by viewing the variable and detector nodes as one decoder. The code is optimized by performing a curve fitting on EXIT chart. Design examples are given for AWGN channels, as well as MIMO fading channels where the receiver, but not the transmitter, knows the channel. From the simulation result we know that the irregularity not necessarily improves the performance and the motivation to introduce irregularity is to match the transfer curves. Optimization for one specific channel does not necessarily promise good performance when the channel model is changed. This fact manifests the significance to design good LDPC codes to fit different channels.
REFERENCES
[1] G. J. Foschini and M. J. Gans, "On limits of wireless communications in a fading environment when using multiple antennas," Wireless Personal Communications, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 311 335. Mar. 1998
[2] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, "Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding," ICC'1993, Geneva, Switzerland, vol. 2, no. 23-26, pp. 1064 1070, May. 1993.
[3] R. G. Gallager, "Low-Density Parity-Check Codes," Cambridge USA, Sept. 1960.
[4] Richardson, T.J.; Shokrollahi, M.A.; Urbanke, R.L., "Design of capacity approaching irregular low-density parity check codes," Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on, vol 47, pp. 619 637, Feb 2001.
[5] Richardson, T.J.; Shokrollahi, M.A.; Urbanke, R.L.,”The capacity of low-density parity-check node under massage-passing decoding,” Information Therory, IEEE Transactions on, vol, 47, pp.5999-618, Feb 2001
[6] Sae-Young Chung; Forney, G.D., Jr.; Urbanke, R., “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045dB of the Shannon limit,” Information Theory, IEEE Transaction on, vol.47, pp.599-618, Feb 2001.
[7] Sae-Young Chung; Richardson, T.J.; Urbanke, R.L., “Analysis of sum-product decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation” IEEE Comminication Letters, vol,. 5, pp. 58-60, Feb 2001
[8] K. R. Narayanan, U. Dasgupta, and B. Lu, "Low complexity turbo equalization binary precoding," ICC'20OO, vol. 1, pp. 1-5, June. 2000.
[9] Stephan ten Brink, Gerhard Kramer, and Alexe, Ashikhnfin, "Convergence behavior of iteratively decoded parallel concatenated codes,” ieee trans, cornmun, vol. 49 pp. 1727-1737, June 2000.
[10] Stephan ten Brink, Gerhard Kramer, and Alexei Ashikhmin, "Design of Low DensityParity Check Codes for Multi Antenna Modulation and Detecton,' ieee trans, commun, submitted. Jnne 2002.
[11] A. Ashikhnfin, G.Kramer, S. ten. Brink, "Extrinsic information transfer functions: model and two properties,," ,36th Ann. Conf on Inf. Sci and Syst., Mar, 2002.

Figure 7: Simulation results for different edge profile
535
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:36:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

