Cycle Elimination Method to Construct VLSI Oriented LDPC Codes

Lei Yang, Hiu Liu and C.-J. Richard Shi
Dept. of Electrical Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195 {yanglei, hliu, cjshi}@ee.washington.edu

Abstract—Recently VLSI implementation oriented LDPC codes have been invented and drawn more and more attention. The main feature of the type of code is that its H matrix is made of a set of square permutation L×L matrices. Each permutation matrix is an identity matrix whose rows have been cyclically shifted by a set of amount. This paper presents a cycle elimination algorithm to improve the girth performance of such codes. In particular, the new approach tries to find all the short cycles existing in the base matrix and eliminate them through setting the cyclically shifted values of the square permutation matrixes. The efficiency of the cycle elimination algorithm is verified through constructing a set of different rate LDPC irregular/regular codes. Simulation and hardware measurement results show that the error floor of cycle elimination constructed codes is suppressed to a much lower level without other performance penalty. For example, the irregular rate 1/2 code achieves a block error rate of 10-7 at SNR 1.9 dB without presence of error floor.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) code was invented by Gallager [1] in 1960s. After almost a 40-year disappearance, it gained renaissance recently due to its superior error correction capacity. Moreover, the LDPC decoding algorithm is inherently parallel and can be easily implemented in hardware, leading to a wide acceptance in optical networking, magnetic recoding, and communications fields.
The Tanner graph is often used to represent the LDPC codes. The Tanner graph is a bipartite graph with two sets of nodes, the variable nodes correspond to code symbols, and the check nodes correspond to parity check constraints. Each edge in the graph corresponds to a non-zero entry in the LDPC matrix. With consistency in the structure, iterative belief propagation (BP) algorithms are exploited to decode the LDPC codes. In the decoding process, messages are exchanged along the graph edges, and computed at the variable/check nodes. If the LDPC code is well designed, the messages will converge to the correct bits exponentially after a finite number of iterations. However, proper operations of the iterative BP algorithms hinges on the assumption that neighbors of a node in the Tanner graph are conditionally independent. If there are too many short cycles in the graph, the above assumption is violated and the BP algorithms will converge slowly and even result in wrong decoded results. Hence, how to improve the Tanner graph girth, which is defined the length of the shortest cycles, is critically important in the construction of LDPC codes.
Some algorithms, such as bit-filling [2] and progressive edge-growth (PEG) [3] are proposed to eliminate the small cycles existing in the Tanner graph. Through carefully choosing the locations of the non-zero elements in the LDPC matrix, bit-filling and PEG algorithms are helpful in constructing LDPC codes with good girth performance. But those algorithms are developed with no regard for the decoder VLSI implementation. Consequently, the resulting LDPC matrix with randomly located non-zeros elements is hard to be mapped

to the hardware structure. In order to design the VLSI implementation oriented LDPC codes, some other methods [4][5][6] are invented to jointly consider the code design and the hardware implementation. The main point of these methods is that before constructing an M×N parity check matrix, a small Mb×Nb base matrix is built first, in which each non-zero element at the position (x,y) is expanded to a square permutation L×L matrix (M=Mb·L, N=Nb·L). The square permutation matrix is an identity matrix whose rows have been cyclically shifted by a set of amount P, and P is a function of x and y. This kind of LDPC matrix structure can be conveniently converted to a parallel decoder consisting of a structured array of memory and process [4], in which every square permutation matrix is stored in a memory block, and the address controller for every memory block is a simple counter with the starting address P(x,y).
The above VLSI oriented LDPC codes can achieve gain performance as good as the random codes. As for the girth performance, [4][5][6] employ different cyclic shifted value functions P(x,y). Unfortunately, those functions cannot guarantee the girth value of the expanded LDPC matrix to be improved, and it can only make sure that this girth value is larger or equal to the girth of the small base matrix. For example, if the base matrix is a bad design with many length-4 cycles, the expanded matrix may be a bad design too with a lot of cycle-4. In our research, we found that through selecting the cyclic shifted value P of each permutation matrix, the small cycles existing in the base matrix could be eliminated and the expanded LDPC matrix will have high girth performance. Based on the idea, an algorithm is addressed in this paper. In the algorithm, the cyclic shifted values of all the permutation matrixes are first initialized to zeros, and the base matrix is then scanned to find all the short cycles. Through setting the P value of 1s in the cycle path, the found cycles are broken and eliminated. The above process carries on until the maximum cyclically shifted P value exceeds its upper limit L-1 (L is the size of square permutation matrix). We term the above cycle elimination method (CE method). Results show that for moderate length LDPC codes expanded from a small base matrix, the CE algorithm can generate LDPC codes with girth at least 10. This will eliminate the error floor in regular LDPC codes and effectively suppress the error floor level in the irregular LDPC codes to a very low level.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The detail of the cycle elimination algorithm is described in Section 2. Simulation and hardware measurement results of the implemented CE constructed LDPC codes are shown in section 3. Concluding remarks are given in Section 4.
II. CYCLE ELIMINATION ALGORITHM
A. Definitions and Notations
The Tanner graph is expressed as G(V, E). V is a set of nodes
(vertices) including VV ∪ VC, where VV is the set of variable nodes
and VC is the set of check nodes. E is the set of edges connecting VV and VC. Each edge has one variable terminal node vi and one check

0-7803-9152-7/05/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE

522

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:33:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

terminal node cj, which corresponds with the non-zero element hi,j in the LDPC matrix H. A Tanner graph is called (dV, dC) regular if every variable node is connected to dV check nodes and every check node is connected to dC variable nodes; otherwise it is called irregular graph. The variable node degree sequence is denoted by DV = {dV0, dV1, ……, dVn-1}, in which dVi is the degree of variable node vi; and the check node degree sequence is denoted by DC = {dC0, dC1, ……, dCn-1}, in which dCj is the degree of variable node Cj.
B. The Idea
Figure 1. A base matrix with cycles. Suppose we already constructed a base matrix shown in Figure 1, which is a 6×12 irregular matrix with variable node degree DV = {2,2,2,2,2,2,3,3,3,3,4,4} and check node degree DC = {5,4,5,6,6,6}. If we employ the base matrix expansion method in [4] to construct a large LDPC H matrix, every 1 at position (i, j) is expanded to a square permutation L×L (here L=453) matrix, each of which is an identity matrix with rows cyclically shifted by a set of amount Pi,j. The generated LDPC H matrix size is 2718×5436. However, it is seen that the base matrix in Figure 1 contains quite a few short cycles. Two issues arise here, 1) Will those short cycles result in a collection of same length cycles in the expanded H matrix as well? 2) If yes, how to eliminate those short cycles? The above two questions are answered in the following Lemma 1 and Lemma2, which constitute the basic idea behind the CE algorithm. Lemma 1: Suppose one length-n short cycle exists in the base matrix (it has n 1s in the cycle path). This short cycle will result in L length-n cycles in the expanded LDPC matrix if the cyclically shifted values Pi,j of the 1s are not properly set.
Figure 2. The number of cycles increase after expansion. The above lemma can be described using the example shown in Figure 2. In the figure, the four 5×5 square matrixes represent the square permutation matrixes expanded from a length-4 cycle, and their cyclically shifted values are: P1,1=1, P2,1=0, P1,2=4, P2,2=3, which results in five length-4 cycles after the expansion. Lemma 2: Starting from the leftmost upper element 1, going through all the 1s in the length-n cycle path and checking the increase of the cyclically shifted value ∆Pi,j->m,n, if “vertical direction loop increase”
∑V(∆P) ≠ k·L, here k=0,±1,±2…, this length-n cycle is eliminated in the expanded LDPC matrix.

Figure 3. Examples showing the P value setting.
Lemma 2 is illustrated using the example in Figure 3. The left picture and right picture represent a length-4 and a length-6 cycle respectively, in which Pi,j values is marked for every element 1 and the cyclically shifted value increases ∆Pi,j->m,n=Pm,n - Pi,j are also shown. Therefore, the cycle 4 vertical direction loop shifted value increase can be computed: ∑V(∆P)= 3+(-3)=0, and the cycle 6 vertical direction loop shifted value increase ∑V(∆P)=1+1+(-2)=0. The computation results show a violation of Lemma 2, indicating that if the cycle is expanded to L×L square matrixes, L cycle-4 or cycle-6 will be generated. Fortunately, those L cycles can be eliminated according to Lemma 2: choose any 1 from the cycle path and change its Pi,j values, we can make the vertical direction loop shifted value∑V(∆P) ≠ k·L.
Figure 4. Cycle-4, Cycle-6 and Cycle-8.
To be more specific, we study the cycle-4, cycle-6 and cycle-8 cases in Figure 4 and generate a set of cycle constraints based on Lemma 2. The steps of the cycle elimination algorithm are stated in the following:
1) First, the base matrix is initialized. All the Pi,j values are set to zero and a constraint-list is set up for every 1 in the matrix. Every 1 may be contained in several cycles, and every cycle will be translated into a cycle constraint (according to Lemma 2) and stored in the constraint-list.
2) In each operation loop of the algorithm, the program picks a column from the base matrix (from left to right), and this current column divides the base matrix into the left part and the right part.
3) Searching from the 1s in the current column, the algorithm tries to find all the short cycles in the right part of the matrix, and consequently all the found cycles are right-side-related with the current column. The detail of cycle searching process is seen from Figure 4. The 1s at (1,1) and (1,2) are located at the current column. Starting from 1 at position (1,1), we get to its offspring (2,1). Here the offspring is defined as the 1s on the same row or the same column with the ancestor 1. From (2,1), we reach its offspring (3,1), and (3,1) is called the third generation of (1,1). Exploiting the same idea, we find (1,2)’s second generation offspring is (2,2), and third generation offspring is (3,2). Then program checks the marked generation values, if the third generation pair (3,1) and (3,2) are on the same row, a cycle-6 is found and program backtracks to their ancestors until all the 1s in the cycle path are found.

523
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:33:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4) Finally, all those found right-side-related cycles with the current column are eliminated through setting the cyclically shifted values of the 1s in cycle path.

Assuming that (1,1) is always on the top of (1, 2), the cycle elimination constraints for cycle-4, cycle-6 and cycle-8 can be expressed in the following equation (1), (2) and (3):

(P1,1 – P1,2) + (P2,2 – P2,1) ≠ k·L

(1)

(P1,2 – P1,2) + (P2,2 – P3,2) + (P3,1 – P2,1) ≠ k·L

(2)

(P1,2 – P1,2) + (P2,2 – P3,2) + (P3,1 – P2,1) + (P4,2 – P4,1) ≠ k·L (3)

C. The CE Algorithm
When running the CE program, users can set the girth improvement target in the command line. For example, to construct an expanded LDPC matrix with girth ≥ 10, all the cycle-4, cycle-6 and cycle-8 in the base matrix should be eliminated. The detail of the CE algorithm is shown in the following Listing 1.

LISTING 1. CE Algorithm

(1) All the Pi,j of the 1s in the base matrix are initialized to 0

(2) Set up a constraint-list for every 1 in the base matrix

(3) for i = Column 1 : Column Nb

(4) clear all the 1s marking information

(5) // Find cycle-4, cycle-6 and cycle-8. (6) for j = First 1 in Column i : dvth 1 in Column i

(7)

Find (i,j)’s offspring (a,b), here a=i, b>j, the offspring consist of a set {O1,

O2, … OP} and are marked to be the second generation offspring.

(8)

for (s,t) = O1: OP

(9)

Find (s,t)’s offspring (p,g), here g=t, the offspring consist of a set {F1,

F2, … Fq} and are marked be the third generation offspring.

(10)

for (e,f)= F1 : Fq

(11)

Find (e,f)’s offspring (c,d), here c=e, d>j, the offspring consist of

a set {G1, G2, … Gt}and are marked the fourth generation

offspring.

(12)

end

(13) end

(14) end
(15) If two 2nd generation 1s are in the same column, two 3rd generation 1s are in the same row, or two 4th generation 1s are in the same column, backtrack to their ancestors to find the cycle-4, cycle-6 or cycle-8. Add the cycle constraint to the constraint-list of all the 1s in the cycle.

(16) // cycle elimination function ()

(17) for each 1 at position (x,y) in the found cycle

(18) record its original Px,y value

(19) while all the constraints in its constraint-list is not fulfilled

(20)

Px,y = Px,y + 1

(21) end while

(22) choose the 1 in the cycle with the smallest Px,y and keep this changed value, others’ Px,y are restored to their original values.

(23) end

(24) end

Listing 1 provides the pseudo codes of the CE algorithm. Line 1 and line 2 are the initialization process of the program. Line 3 is the outer loop of the whole algorithm. In each loop the current column is picked up from the base matrix and the following operations are conducted: first all the right-sided-related cycles with the current column are found, then every cycle is checked and its cyclically shifted values are set through careful calculations and comparison. The details are stated in the following.

The cycle searching process is shown from line 5 to line 15. This process starts from every 1 in the current column (line 6). All the right sided offspring are found and marked to be the second generation; then all the 1s within the same column of the second generation are found and marked as the third generation offspring. Similarly, all the right-sided 1s within the same row as the third generation offspring are marked as the fourth generation. After the above step, the marked 1s in the base matrix are checked to see if two second generation offspring 1s are in the same column, two third generation offspring 1s are in the same row, or two fourth generation offspring 1s are in the same column. If yes, a cycle is found and program backtracks to their ancestors until all the 1s in the cycle path are found.
Figure 5. A variable, check node tree start from a variable node
The cyclically shifted value setting algorithm is shown from line 17 to line 23 in Listing 1. Because the number of cycles in the base matrix increases exponentially when the cycle length increased (shown in Figure 5), and the cyclically shifted values P is limited within the ranges [0, L-1]. If P value exceeds its upper limit L-1, program will halt and give a warning. Therefore, the cyclically shifted value setting algorithm carries on in the following way to prevent the quick increase of P: 1) All the Px,y values are initialized to 0 (line 1); 2) Once a cycle is found, each 1 in the cycle is checked to see if all its cycle constraints have been met; If not, its cyclically shifted value P has value added until all the constraints are met; 3) Choose the 1 in the cycle with the minimum P value and accept its P value change, others’ P values are restored to their original values. Even though the above algorithm is very efficient to achieve a very slow increase of the Px,y values, it still increases quickly (not exponentially) and may exceed its upper limit L-1 if the target girth is too large. For example, in our experiment of an 18×36 base matrix, the average number of cycles for each element 1 is 1174 if the maximum cycle length is 8. Therefore, in the CE program, the maximum girth optimization target supported is 10. The program will automatically detect the cycle-4, cycle-6 and cycle-8 in the base matrix and eliminate them. If the set Px,y value exceeds the upper limit, the program will give a warning and the users may lower their girth target and re-run the program. The output of the program contains two files, one indicating the positions of all the 1s in the base matrix and the other giving the cyclically shifted value corresponding to the 1s. Those two files can be used to construct the expanded LDPC H matrix.
D. Overall Algorithm Complexity To analyze the overall complexity of the CE algorithm, it is
assumed that the base matrix is a (dv, dc) regular matrix with size Mb×Nb. The complexity of the CE algorithm is expressed as:
O(Nb*(dv2·dc2/4+k1·dv·dc/2+k2·(dv·dc/2)dv+ k3·(dv·dc/2)dv·dc/2)) (4)
where Nb represents the number of outer loop (line 3). The first part of the complexity stands for the operations of the matrix marking process shown from line 6 to line 15, which includes the complexity of marking the second generation offspring dv·dc/2 (divided by 2 means only the right-sided cycles are marked), and the complexity of marking the third and fourth generation offspring dv2·dc/2 and dv2·dc2/4. Therefore, the total marking process complexity is approximately

524
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:33:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

dv2·dc2/4. The second part of equation (4) shows the complexity of the cyclic elimination process. Approximately, the number of cycle-4, cycle-6 and cycle-8 are estimated to be C1·dv·dc/2, C2·(dv·dc/2)dv and C3·(dv·dc/2)dv·dc/2 respectively. Here, C1, C2 and C3 is a parameter depending on the base matrix structure. Since the cycle searching and
elimination complexity are linear to the number of the cycles and their
complexity (line 17 to line 23), it is expressed as k1·dv·dc/2+k2·(dv·dc/2)dv+ k3·(dv·dc/2)dv·dc/2. For irregular base matrix, complicated analysis need to be conducted because its node degree
distribution is not uniform.

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The CE program is written in C++. It reads the structure of the base matrix, optimizes the expanded H matrix girth performance according to the target specified by the user. To verify the efficiency of the program, several different rate LDPC codes are constructed employing two different methods: the CE program and the technique give by Zhang and Parhi [7] (ZP). In the ZP construction method, cyclically shifted value P for the 1 at position (x,y) is determined by formula Px,y=(x-1)·y. The codes constructed using the two methods are simulated and implemented in Xilinx FPGA, and the results are presented in this section.

A. LDPC Codes Design

Three different rate codes are designed: irregular rate 1/2, regular 5/8 and regular 7/8 [8]. For regular 5/8 and regular 7/8 codes, (3, k) H matrix structure is adopted [7] because this structure is believed to provide good BER performance for moderate lengths. The rate 1/2 code is constructed as irregular code to outperform the regular ones. The detailed parameters of the codes are listed in table 1.

TABLE I.

LDPC CODE DESIGN PARAMETERS

Rate variale node degree dv Check node degree dc
Code length

1/2

5/8

2,3 or 7 3

5 or 6

8

9036 9536

7/8 3 24 9782

Base matrix size

18×36 24×64 72×576

Expanded matrix size L×L

251

149

17

Average girth (ZP constructed codes) 8.0556 8.25 5.9132

Average girth (CE constructed codes) 10

10

8

CE program run CPU time (minutes) 22.5

18.7

1.13

The code rate of the (3, k) regular LDPC structure can be calculated:

Rate = k − 3

(5)

k

so each row contains 8 and 24 1s in the rate 5/8 and 7/8 code respectively. For the irregular 1/2 code, we use the PEG program [3] to design the node degree distribution of the base matrix. The generated degree distribution is (2,2,…2, 3,…3,7,..7), which outperforms the regular one by about 0.5 dB according to our simulation and measure results.

Meanwhile, seen from Table 1, the ZP method constructed codes have the average girth length 8.0556, 8.25 and 5.9132 for rate 1/2, 5/8 and 7/8 respectively. In contrast, the CE program constructed codes average girth can be improved to 10, 10 and 8. With a Sun Fire V480

server with 900MHz UltraSparc-III processors, the CPU time of the three rate codes are 22.5, 18.7 and 1.13 minutes. It should be noted that for the regular 7/8 case, due to the large base matrix size and the small L value, the constructed code girth can only be optimized to 8.
B. Simulation Results The simulation results of the ZP method constructed codes and
CE program constructed codes are compared in Figure 6. It can be seen that gain difference between the two kinds of codes is within 0.1 dB, and no performance penalty using CE method. In the simulation results, the error floor problems do not come out due to the long simulation time and heavy burden to the hardware. The error floor results are described and analyzed in the next section with hardware measurement results.
Figure 6. Simulatin results of the ZP and CE constructed codes
C. Hardware Measurement Results The constructed LDPC codes are described in VHDL,
synthesized by Synplicity, placed and routed using Xilinx development tool ISE6.0, and implemented on Xilinx Virtex-II XC2V4000 FPGA device. The decoder works at 100MHz clock frequency and has codeword about 10K bits. The architecture in our design enables multi-rate working modes: through configuring two pins of the FPGA device at “00,” “10” or “11,” the device operates at three different code modes: irregular 1/2 mode, regular 5/8 mode and regular 7/8 mode. At regular 5/8 and regular 7/8 modes, the decoder achieves a maximum throughput of 66Mbps when performing maximum 24 decoding iterations. For the irregular 1/2 LDPC code, more iterations are required for the code to converge, so the maximum decoding iteration is set to 60, and the maximum throughput that can be achieved is 30Mbps.
The measurement results of the ZP codes and CE codes are compared in Figure 7. In the figure, a set of block error rate vs. SNR curves are plotted. Note in the figure that the y axis is block error rate (block length ≈ 10K), and it is approximately 1~2 magnitude higher than bit error rate. Seen from Figure 7, the ZP algorithm constructed regular 5/8 design achieves good block error rate performance and does not have error floor problems. However, the ZP method constructed irregular 1/2 and regular 7/8 codes experience serious error floor problems at block error rate about 10-4. The above phenomena can be explained using the girth histogram in Figure 8. In the figure, the variable nodes inside one square permutation matrix have the same girth value, which corresponds to Lemma 1. For the ZP algorithm constructed regular 5/8 code, because it is cycle-4 and

525
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:33:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

cycle-6 free, the error floor can be efficiently removed. As to the ZP constructed irregular 1/2 code, although it is also cycle-4 free and has average girth 8.0556, the error floor problem still happens at a much high level because irregular codes normally have worse error problems than regular codes [9], moreover, there exists tradeoff between threshold SNR and the error floor BER [10]. In our design, the performance of the irregular 1/2 code is near Shannon limit, making error floor appear at a high level. For the ZP constructed regular 7/8 code, its base matrix size is 72×576, containing a lot of length-4 cycles, and those short cycles are difficult to be eliminated with a very small L value 17.
Figure 7. Measurement result comparison of the constructed codes
Figure 8. Simulatin results of the ZP and CE constructed codes To suppress the error floor in irregular 1/2 and regular 7/8 codes, CE program is used to generate the LDPC H matrix, and the average girth values of the three rate codes are improved to 10, 10, 8 respectively. This can suppress the error floor to a much lower level. Furthermore, the decrease of the error does not bring any penalty to the coding gain, and the ZP constructed codes and the CE constructed codes have gain difference within 0.1dB.

It should be noted that after the CE program optimization, the irregular 1/2 code outperforms the regular 1/2 code by approximately 0.5 dB, achieving a block error rate lower than 10-7 at SNR 1.9 dB. With this impressive error correcting ability, the irregular 1/2 mode decoder in our design can be utilized to handle deep fading channel and the worst transmission condition. While the regular 5/8 and 7/8 modes enjoy higher throughputs capability, they normally operate at better interference conditions and some particular services.
IV. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
This paper presents a cycle elimination (CE) algorithm to construct hardware oriented LDPC codes. Given a base matrix, the CE attempts to eliminate all the short cycles in the base matrix through setting the cyclically shifted value for all the square permutation matrixes, thus generating an LDPC code with high girth performance. The efficiency of the CE algorithm is verified through constructing three different rate LDPC codes: the irregular 1/2 code, the regular 5/8 code and the regular 7/8 code. The simulation and implementation measurement results show the error floor of the CE algorithm designed LDPC codes is significantly lowered without SNR threshold penalties.
The principle of the CE algorithm is to find and eliminate all the short cycles existing in the base matrix. Since in irregular codes, not all the short cycles are equally harmful [10], in future work we shall consider different weights for the different cycles. Those weights provide indications that the small stopping set cycle has more priority in the elimination process.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,” MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1963.
[2] J. Campello, D.S. Modha, and S. Rajagopalan, “Designing LDPC Codes Using Bit-Filling,” Proc. Int. Conf. Communications (ICC), pp. 55-59, Helsinki, Finland, 2001.
[3] X.Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D.M. Arnold, “Progressive Edge-Growth Tanner Graphs,” Global Telecommunications Conference, pp. 995-1001, Vol. 2, Nov. 2001.
[4] H. Zhang and T. Zhang, “Design of VLSI Implementation-Oriented LDPC Codes,” Vehicular Technology Conference, vol. 1, pp. 670-673, 2003.
[5] D.E. Hocevar, “LDPC Code Construction with Flexible Hardware Implementation,” IEEE International Conference on Communications, pp. 2708-2712, 2003.
[6] E. Boutillon, J.Castura, and F.R. Kschischang, “Decoder-first Code Design,” Proc. Int’l Symp. On Turbo Codes and Related Topics, pp. 459-462, Brest, France, Sep. 2001.
[7] T. Zhang and K.K. Parhi, “VLSI Implementation-Oriented (3,k)-Regular Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,” IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems, pp. 25-36, Sep. 2001.
[8] L. Yang, M. Shen, H. Liu and C.-J. Richard Shi, “An FPGA Implementation of Low-Density Parity-Check Decoder with Multi-Rate Capacity” IEEE Proceeding of Asia and South-Pacific Design Automation Conference, Jan. 2004.
[9] T. Tian, C. Jones, J. D. Villasenor and R. D. Wesel, “Construction of Irregular LDPC Codes with Low Error Floors,” IEEE International Conference on Communication , vol. 5 pp. 3125-3129, May 2003.
[10] D.J.C.Mackay, S.T.Wilson, and M.C.Davey, “Comparison of Constructions of Irregular Gallager Codes,” IEEE Proceeding 36th Allerton Conference on Commun., Control and Comput., Sep. 1998.

526
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:33:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

