IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2005

3247

An Analysis of the Orthogonality Structures of Convolutional Codes for Iterative Decoding
Yu-Cheng He, Member, IEEE, and David Haccoun, Life Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—The structures of convolutional self-orthogonal codes and convolutional self-doubly-orthogonal codes for both belief propagation and threshold iterative decoding algorithms are analyzed on the basis of difference sets and computation tree. It is shown that the double orthogonality property of convolutional self-doubly-orthogonal codes improves the code structure by maximizing the number of independent observations over two successive decoding iterations while minimizing the number of
cycles of lengths 6 and 8 on the code graphs. Thus, the double
orthogonality may improve the iterative decoding in both convergence speed and error performance. In addition, the double orthogonality makes the computation tree rigorously balanced. This allows the determination of the best weighing technique, so that the error performance of the iterative threshold decoding algorithm approaches that of the iterative belief propagation decoding algorithm, but at a substantial reduction of the implementation complexity.
Index Terms—Belief propagation, convolutional self-doubly-orthogonal codes, convolutional self-orthogonal codes, iterative decoding, threshold decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
I TERATIVE decoding algorithms based on a posteriori probability have found successful applications in decoding low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1]–[4], turbo codes, and many other codes defined on graphs [5]–[7]. Randomly constructed LDPC codes suffer from a severe disadvantage in the complexity of the encoding implemented by matrix multiplication. Cyclic and quasi-cyclic constructions have become an attractive way of constructing LDPC codes. The algebraic constructions are promising since they can greatly reduce the encoding complexity by using shift registers. Several quasi-cyclic constructions of block LDPC codes were presented in [8]–[10], whereas a quasi-cyclic construction of convolutional LDPC codes was discussed in [11]. An analysis of the algebraic LDPC codes based on finite geometries and graphs has been presented in [12]–[14].
Convolutional self-orthogonal codes (CSOC) were originally proposed for majority logic decoding [15]. Just like the belief propagation (BP) decoding algorithm for LDPC codes [6], [7], majority logic decoding of CSOC codes is a symbol-by-symbol decoding algorithm based on a set of orthogonal parity-check
Manuscript received February 18, 2004; revised April 27, 2005. This work was supported in part by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, École Polytechnique de Montréal, P. O. Box 6079, Station Centre-Ville, Montreal, QC, H3C 3A7, Canada (e-mail: yucheng.he@polymtl.ca; david.haccoun@ polymtl.ca).
Communicated by A. E. Ashikhmin, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2005.853318

equations. However, soft-decision majority logic decoding, or threshold decoding, is far less complex to implement than the BP decoding [16], [17].
As verified by [18]–[21], iterative threshold decoding improves the error performance of convolutional orthogonal codes, but may be slightly less efficient than the iterative BP decoding [22], [23]. These iterative threshold decoding algorithms are structurally different from each other. The iterative threshold decoding in [18] is another turbo decoding based on threshold decoding of convolutional codes, whereas the iterative threshold decoding in [21] is a heuristic iterative approach by repeating a number of threshold decoding for block codes. However, the iterative threshold decoding presented in [19] and [20] is a kind of non-trellis-based fixed-delay forward-only algorithm, consisting of a number of successive one-step feedback threshold decoding without interleaving, where the double orthogonality of convolutional self-doubly-orthogonal codes (CSO C) is used to assure the independence of inputs between successive iterations [24].
It is well known that very sparse random parity-check matrices of LDPC codes in combination with the elimination of small cycles of length on the corresponding code graphs can ensure a successful application of belief propagation in the decoding of the codes [4], [6], [7]. As for convolutional codes, they must be designed to have orthogonal constructions and thus are decodable by the iterative BP decoding algorithm without using interleavers as in [22] and [23]. However, due to the cyclic or quasi-cyclic constructions of CSOC codes, the correlations between the observations at each iteration step may not be negligible.
CSO C codes were originally proposed and investigated in [19]. The search for the codes was presented in [25]–[28]. The performance of the iterative threshold decoding of CSO C codes was systematically analyzed in [24], [29], and [30].
In this paper, we present an analysis of the structures of CSOC and CSO C codes employing the non-trellis-based fixed-delay forward-only iterative threshold and BP decoding algorithms. The analysis may explain theoretically the nature of the orthogonalities of CSOC and CSO C codes. The improvement provided by the double orthogonality over the simple orthogonality in the error performance may also be clearly seen, whereby the error performance of the iterative threshold decoding can approach that of the iterative BP decoding. Here, we consider only rate- binary nonrecursive systematic CSOC and CSO C codes over the binary-input additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel with binary phase-shift keying (BPSK) modulation. However, high-rate

0018-9448/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:39:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3248

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2005

punctured CSO C codes can be constructed and have been investigated in [31].
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, the definitions of CSOC and CSO C codes are given and a family of non-trellis-based fixed-delay forward-only iterative decoding algorithms based on threshold decoding and belief propagation are briefly described in terms of message passing. In Section III, we show that the self-doubly-orthogonal property of CSO C codes provides the largest number of independent observations over two successive iterations of the BP decoding by means of difference sets and partitioning the configuration space. In Section IV, we show that the double orthogonality yields the minimal number of cycles of lengths and on the code graphs by means of computation tree and the partition of the path set. In the same section, we also explore the rigorously balanced structure of the computation tree for the iterative BP decoding of CSO C codes, and extend the analysis of balance to the iterative threshold decoding. In Section V, simulation results show that for CSO C codes the error performance of the iterative threshold decoding approaches that of the iterative BP decoding. Finally, Section VI concludes the paper.

same value of

as will be discussed in

Section III-B. For simplicity, the self-orthogonality of a set

given by Definition 1 is called simple orthogonality, whereas

the self-double-orthogonality given by Definition 2 is called

double orthogonality. Actually, the condition for the simple

orthogonality is also implied by Definition 2 as can be shown

for the particular case

and

. Thus, a set that

satisfies the double orthogonality satisfies also the simple or-

thogonality. A rate- systematic convolutional code defined

by a self-doubly-orthogonal set is called a convolutional

self-doubly-orthogonal code in the wide sense [20], and is

simply noted as CSO C code.

Let and be, respectively, the input information bit and

the output parity-check bit of the encoder at time

where

we assume

for . A set of orthogonal parity-check

equations on is given by the following modulo- additions

and summations:

(1)

where

and where

II. CSOC CODES AND THE ITERATIVE DECODING

In this section, the definitions of the simple orthogonality for CSOC codes and the double orthogonality for CSO C codes are given. Following a review to the iterative threshold decoding algorithms in terms of message passing, the iterative BP decoding algorithms are summarized. Here, we consider only rateconvolutional orthogonal codes defined by a set of orthogonal parity-check equations.

A. Definitions of CSOC and CSO C Codes

Definition 1 [Self-Orthogonality]: A set of

integers

is said to be self-orthogonal if all the differences

distinct for all

[17].

nonnegative ,
are

In the sequel,

is also noted as

th parity-check constraint for .

The difference of two elements of

of the indices of the two elements

and referred to as the is defined as a function

(2)

where

.

Expression (1) indicates that every information bit is di-

rectly related to

information bits

with

and to parity-check bits , where

. With respect

to , the information bits

with

and

are

called the past information bits and the future information bits,

respectively.

A rate- and memory nonrecursive systematic CSOC

code, defined by generator

and imple-

mented by single-shift-register encoder, can be specified by a

self-orthogonal set , where the nonzero components of are

. Actually, the set indicates the connection

positions in the shift-register encoder, while the order of the

set

is the number of connections. We always assume

, and hence the memory length of the code is equal to

the coding span, i.e.,

. The asymptotic coding gain

of the code corresponds to the minimum Hamming distance

[15], [17].

Definition 2 [Self-Double-Orthogonality]: A set of non-

negative integers

, is said to be self-doubly-orthogonal if all the differ-

ences of differences

are distinct for all

, where

, and

, except for

the unavoidable repetitions [20], [28].

B. Iterative Threshold Decoding

We assume that the code sequence is transmitted over a zero-

mean AWGN channel with variance

, where the

mapping

is used between the code symbol

and the binary signal

. The received sequence

consists of a received information sequence and a received

parity sequence , corresponding to the sequences and

, respectively. The iterative decoding algorithms below are

described in terms of message passing using the log-likelihood

ratio (LLR) metric

, where and are the proba-

bilities of being equal to or , respectively, [7].

Let and be the initial messages for and , respec-

tively. For , they are initialized as

and

on the assumption that

, whereas for

, they are

calculated as

and

. For each

iteration

where is the total number of

iterations, let be the final message for and let be the

By unavoidable repetition, we mean that exchanging the check message from to . Referring to Tanner graphs, values between and or/and between and produces the may be seen as the message passed from the variable node to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:39:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HE AND HACCOUN: AN ANALYSIS OF THE ORTHOGONALITY STRUCTURES OF CONVOLUTIONAL CODES FOR ITERATIVE DECODING

3249

all the connected check nodes at iteration [6]. The definite and feedback iterative threshold decoding algorithms calculate the check messages, respectively, as
(3) and

since

. Thus,

is the message

from

to

, or simply , at iteration .

The definite and feedback iterative BP algorithms are readily

derived by replacing orderly (3), (4), and (7) by (9), (10), and

(11) as follows:

(9)

(4) (10)

where

and where

is a subset of with the element excluded. Following

(11)

[7], the function is defined as

(5)

where

and where ’s are the

input LLRs. The function is the well-known update rule for

the check messages in the sum–product algorithm, and is well

approximated by the add–min function in the min–sum algo-

rithm given by

(6)

where

is the sign function.

The final message in either definite or feedback decoding at

iteration is given by

(7)

where

is the weighing factor utilized for attenu-

ating the outputs of one-step threshold decoding [20]. The de-

coding terminates after iterations and the final decision for

is then made as follows:

where

, and where

is the weighing factor. At the first iteration, the variable

messages are initialized as

for

. At the last

iteration , the final message is calculated by (7) and the final decision is thus made according to (8).
Note that the iterative algorithms presented above are all non-trellis-based fixed-delay forward-only algorithms [23], [32]. The iterative process of either threshold or BP decoding is separated into steps. During every time interval, each one-step decoding is sequentially based on the information coming from the previous step and the channel output. Therefore, the iterative decoders may be implemented as a serial concatenation of one-step decoders. Hence, in our iterative decoders, every information bit is decoded once by each one-step decoder and times overall.
If the iterative decoding for convolutional codes is viewed as decoding frames or blocks such as for truncated codes, the
steps of BP decoding constitute exactly one iteration round of the ordinary iterative BP decoding for block codes [2], [11], [23]. More precisely, the iterative definite BP algorithm given by (9) and (11) is equivalent to the sum–product algorithm when the product function given by (5) is used in (9), whereas it corresponds exactly to the min–sum algorithm when the add–min function given by (6) is used instead.

(8) III. ANALYSIS OF INDEPENDENCE BASED ON DIFFERENCE SETS

If is used in place of in (3) and (4), then the factor

representing the channel information can be eliminated in

calculating the initial messages, which are then simply given by

and

, since the add–min function in (6) and

the ordinary addition in (7) are both homogeneous. This sim-

plification reduces the computational complexity, but generally

degrades slightly the decoding performance, in particular, at low

values when the code graph is not free of cycles [2], [6].

C. Iterative BP Decoding

In this section, the set of differences and the set of the differences of differences associated with a self-orthogonal set are analyzed structurally by partitioning the corresponding configuration spaces. In the iterative decoding, the order of the set of the differences of differences indicates the number of independent observations to the iterative decoder over two successive decoding iterations. By defining a function mapping from the configuration spaces to the differences sets, it is shown that only the double orthogonality allows an analytical evaluation of the number of the independent observations.

It can be shown that CSOC codes are decodable with the BP algorithm [14], [21]. An iterative BP algorithm that matches the algebraic construction of convolutional codes was presented in [23]. Let denote the variable message from node

to node at iteration , initialized as

for

A. Analysis of the Simple Orthogonality Let be a self-orthogonal set and let be the associated set
of differences defined as (12)

From Section II-A, is the th parity-check constraint for The set must contain a zero element and

nonzero

. It is also the th parity-check constraint for

elements, and the order of is then

. Since

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:39:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3250

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2005

and

, the smallest and largest elements of are

and , respectively. In general,

and thus

.

The set is said to be perfect if and only if the set

is isomorphic to the order- Abelian addition group

, where

. In this case,

contains exactly all of the integers over the range of

,

implying that

and

. That is,

a perfect self-orthogonal set provides the minimal memory

requirement for the corresponding CSOC code [17]. In other

words, all the received information symbols over two constraint

lengths around a specific information bit can contribute to the

one-step decoding for that bit in question.

The set of the differences of differences associated with is

defined as

(13)

where

. For the sake of consistency be-

tween the descriptions based on difference set and computa-

tion tree in the following, the elements of may be written

in the form of sum of the differences,

,

each corresponding to a -tuple

, where

and is the Cartesian product operation.

A more general differences function is defined as

(14)

where

is an integer, and

are a collection

of variables that take on values in . Therefore, the function

is defined with domain

where

, and the corresponding

codomain is a subset of the integer ring . For example, the

sets and are a pair of the domain and the codomain of

the function for

, whereas the sets and are the

pair for

. Each element of is a particular configuration

of the variables, i.e., a specific assignment of a value to each

variable. The domain of is called the configuration space

for the given collection of variables.

For simplicity, a set of differences may be directly represented

as a function of the corresponding configuration space in the

form of

based on (14). For example, and can be

denoted as

and

, respectively. We may

further have

since it is easy to verify

that

for any configuration

.

It may be understood that the collection of variables,

locates the code bits in the iterative decoding

while the function calculates the time positions of these

bits. For even, this function corresponds to the information

bits, whereas for odd, this function corresponds to the

parity-check bits.

The following partition of the configuration space is quite

useful in our analysis:

(17) (18)

The orders of these four disjoint subsets of are obtained as follows:

(19) (20) (21) (22)

Likewise, the set is divided into four subsets according to the partition of as follows:

(23)

where clearly,

. It is readily known

from (15)–(18) that

and

. Let

denote the difference set between and . Hence,

is

not empty, i.e.,

. For example,

, but

. Therefore, it generally holds that

.

When no particular efforts are made in the design for the self-

orthogonal set , the corresponding sets and may contain

some common elements, implying that

generally

holds, thus yielding

(24)

In either threshold or BP decoding, the check message stem-

ming from a parity-check equation is calculated as a marginal

function of the value of the associated information bit. This re-

quires that two conditions,

and , must be satisfied by

the configurations

for the iterative decoding based on

parity-check equations. Therefore, the set never specifies the

code bits. Precisely stated, the union

specifies the

information bits for the iterative threshold decoding, whereas

the union

specifies the information bits for the itera-

tive BP decoding. In both cases, the value of represents the

number of independent observations over two successive itera-

tions.

From the above analysis, it may be concluded that the simple

orthogonality of CSOC codes does not provide the maximal

number of independent observations to the iterative decoding

over two successive iterations. However, this problem can be

overcome by the double orthogonality of CSO C codes as de-

scribed in the next subsection.

B. Analysis of the Double Orthogonality
The double orthogonality can be redefined according to (23). It is more helpful to describe the conditions for the double orthogonality in terms of the subsets .
Definition 3 [Self-Double-Orthogonality]: A set of nonnegative integers

(15) is said to be self-doubly-orthogonal if all the following condi(16) tions are satisfied.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:39:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HE AND HACCOUN: AN ANALYSIS OF THE ORTHOGONALITY STRUCTURES OF CONVOLUTIONAL CODES FOR ITERATIVE DECODING

3251

TABLE I
E PROFILE OF THE SUBSET

1) The elements

, in are distinct, i.e.,

is self-orthogonal.

2) The elements in are distinct from the elements in ,

i.e.,

.

3) The elements in are distinct except for swapped

and .

(26)

From Definitions 2 and 3, Table I indicates that a self-doubly-

orthogonal set could be constructed for

.

The last two conditions are here arranged according to their

importance. Let us now consider a self-doubly-orthogonal set

. According to Condition 2) above, the corresponding sets

and are disjoint and partition exactly the set based on the

values of its elements. This leads to

,

and hence,

. Since Condition 3) above specifies

that does not contain repeated elements except for those un-

avoidable repetitions as will be discussed below, it follows that

the order of subset is maximized.

Therefore, it can be concluded that for a given , the double

orthogonality maximizes the order of and hence the order of

. In the iterative decoding, the maximal order represents

the maximal achievablenumber of independentobservations over

two successive decoding iterations. As a consequence, the itera-

tive decodingprocessmaybeexpedited,thusreducingthenumber

of iterations and hence the initial delay of the iterative decoding.

To determine , we need first to know the profile of .

Unavoidable repetitions result from particular permutations

of configurations

in . Consider a configuration

. According to the partition given by (15)–(18),

this given configuration has four permutations including it-

self in the natural order,

,

and

, which are all in . These four permutations

produce exactly an identical element

in due to the commutativity of the ordinary real addition.

Such repetitions are unavoidable. Four classes of permutations

discussed below are summarized in Table I.

In Class 1,

and

. The permutations correspond

to a unique configuration of the form

and yield an el-

ement of the form

exactly once in . In Class 2,

where

and , the two permutations are of the forms

and

, and thus produce an identical element

of the form

exactly twice. Likewise, in Class

3,

and

, and the permutations are of two different

forms,

and

, which yield an identical ele-

ment

exactly twice. Finally, in Class 4, where

and , the resulting four distinct permutations corre-

spond to an identical element

, implying that

this element is repeated exactly four times in subset . Conse-

quently, the orders of and are derived as follows:

(25)

IV. ANALYSIS OF CYCLES IN THE COMPUTATION TREE
In this section, the structures of small cycles in the code graphs are analyzed by means of path concatenation on the computation tree for the iterative BP decoding algorithm. After an introduction to computation tree and path concatenation, the cycles pertaining to CSOC codes with the simple orthogonality are analyzed by presenting several theorems. Following the analysis, the improvements of CSO C codes with the double orthogonality in the number of small cycles are clearly described. Furthermore, the balance of the computation tree corresponding to the double orthogonality is discussed. The computation tree for the iterative threshold decoding of CSO C codes is finally introduced.

A. Computation Tree for Iterative BP Decoding

Let us consider a computation tree representing two decoding

iterations for a specific information bit transmitted at time .

As an example, the corresponding computation tree for the itera-

tive feedback BP algorithm, obtained by iteratively applying the

parity-check equations (1) according to (10) and (11), is shown

in Fig. 1. The empty squares denote the check nodes of the same

degree

, representing parity-check constraints. The black

circles denote the variable nodes having the same degree of one

and representing parity-check bits. They are simply called parity

variable nodes. The grey circles denote the variable nodes for

the future information bits, and the empty circles denote the

variable nodes for the current and past information bits. All the

variable nodes representing the information bits have the same

degree and are simply called information variable nodes. De-

coding starts at the leaf nodes and terminates at the root node .

We use

to denote

, and we use to

denote that the information for

was obtained at iteration

. The parity variable nodes do not update messages and only

send the initial messages.

In Fig. 1, each branch is labeled by an integer in . The

paths from the root node to the information variable

nodes

at Level 1 are in one-to-one correspondence

with all the configurations

in except for

. Like-

wise, the paths from the root node to the nodes

at Level 2 are in one-to-one correspondence with the configu-

rations in the union

. That is, in the computation tree,

every path from the root node to any other information variable

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:39:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3252

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2005

Fig. 1. Computation tree for the iterative feedback BP decoding of convolutional codes.

node at Level

, is of length and can be In iterative decoding, the cycles of length or less are very

labeled by a unique configuration in the space .

important since the effects of cycles of lengths greater than

The computation tree for the iterative definite BP decoding may be negligible. The small cycles, say -cycles and -cycles,

algorithm is obtained by replacing the different superscripts are of particular interest. Due to the circular properties of the

in

with a constant

for the information variable parity-check matrices for convolutional codes, the distribution

nodes at Level .

of cycles can be analyzed on the computation tree representing

Consider two configurations

and the last two decoding iterations as shown in Fig. 1. For a number

, where

, and define their of iterations

the root node will be copied at Level

product by the concatenation

at iteration

due to the existence of -cycles, while the

nodes at Level will also be copied at Level at iteration (27) due to the existence of -cycles staring from these nodes. There-

Let

, and

respectively, by

be defined,
(28) (29)

fore, in addition to the -cycles and -cycles, -cycles should

also be considered.

To analyze the -cycles,

, a set of concatenated paths

defined by and is more useful than a single path

set , where

. In the sequel, a path from is re-

(30)

Obviously,

, but the configurations in

are in the form of a product.

In the computation tree, each configuration

labels a

path of concatenated branches

originating at the root

node, whereas each concatenated configuration

labels a path extended at the end of by . A configuration

labeling a path is said to be valid. For example, in Fig. 1, the

path comprising four branches,

, shown in bold, is

labeled by a valid configuration

. Here, a

valid configuration is simply called a path without confusion.

ferred to as a leading path and a path from as a trailing path.

Intuitively, -cycles, if any, must be included in , whereas

-cycles and -cycles must be included in the sets

and

, respectively, where

indicates the

Cartesian product of sets and . For CSOC codes, the simple

orthogonality is easily incorporated into the analysis of paths

using the product representation given by (30). In Fig. 1, the set

corresponds to the last two iterations and

, whereas

the set corresponds to the previous two iterations

and

,

. Taking into account the partition

and of the configuration space , we have

Thus, the configurations in and

are valid paths of

(31)

lengths and

, respectively.

A cycle is generally defined as a path that starts from a node and ends at the same node on the Tanner graph. In a cycle, no B. Analysis of the Simple Orthogonality

other nodes appear more than once. A cycle of length is simply The iterative BP decoding requires the incoming messages at

called an -cycle. In a computation tree, a cycle is considered a variable node and at a check node to be independent within

as a path of concatenated branches that starts at the root node at least two successive iterations. This is equivalent to avoiding

and ends at an intermediate node or a leaf node that is a replica -cycles on the graphs. It can be shown that the computation tree

of the root node. The cycles may reflect directly the correlations for the iterative BP decoding of CSOC codes is free of -cycles

in iterative decoding. In the sequel, unless otherwise specified, and the girth is exactly equal to [14].

paths and cycles originating at the root node in a computation Consider a configuration

, where

tree are considered.

, and . It is easy to show that

: suppose

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:39:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HE AND HACCOUN: AN ANALYSIS OF THE ORTHOGONALITY STRUCTURES OF CONVOLUTIONAL CODES FOR ITERATIVE DECODING

3253

, then we would have

or

and hence,

, either of which contradicts the condition

for the simple orthogonality given by Definition 1. Thus, in the

computation tree, there are no -cycles that start from the root

node and end at nodes

at Level .

We now prove that the computation tree is exempt from -cy-

cles. For any

, assign a reference time

, such that

. For any

distinct from and , we have

.

Due to the simple orthogonality,

since

and

. Identifying a subtree by its root node, it

follows that in every subtree , a node

at Level

will never be the replica of a node

at Level , where

. Therefore, the computation tree in Fig. 1 is free of -cy-

contradicting the condition for the construction of .

From the preceding theorems, we know that -cycles can only

begin by paths in and . The -cycles due to cannot be

removed and are thus unavoidable, whereas the -cycles due to

can be removed if the self-orthogonal set is constructed

such that the intersection of the corresponding sets and is

empty, i.e.,

and hence,

. The -cycles due to

and may be classified into -type and -type, respec-

tively. Let

denote the number of -cycles beginning by

path subset . Using Theorems 1 and 2, clearly

and

. The total number of -cycles is then

given by

cles.

To explore the structures of -cycles and -cycles, we need

(33)

to further partition the path subset according to the values of

the elements in . Note that may readily be partitioned into

and

. Based on this partition, the

set is partitioned into two disjoint subsets and by

the following mappings:

Before discussing -cycles, we introduce the property of sign

symmetry in . For any pair

, there must be a pair

. Using (2) and (12), for

, set must contain

two elements

and

, which have the same abso-

lute value but opposite signs, i.e.,

. In other

(32)

words, the element

is the opposite of element

in . Likewise, the same symmetric property holds for set

In the following theorems, the sets of leading paths and

trailing paths are both described using the three disjoint sub-

sets

and .

Theorem 1: Every path of leads to only one -cycle.

Proof: Consider a path

, then , so that

, implying

.

as well as its partitioning subsets and .

For example, consider the subset

. Assume

, then from (32),

. Using

(18),

. Suppose that

, then

is in and, hence, in . Following (14) and

using the symmetric property of , we have

Since

, hence, . Thus,

is a valid con-

figuration in , yielding a specific -cycle in the computation

tree.

which contradicts the assumption. Thus,

, fol-

For any other pair

, where

, it is lowed by

known from the simple orthogonality that

and hence,

. If

, then the configu-

ration

is a valid configuration in and does

not yield a -cycle. Therefore, the path

is the indicating the symmetric property of .

only -cycle beginning with the path

. For

, Theorem 4: The paths of must be the leading paths of the

the root node will be repeated as the node

the end of the path at iteration

.

at -cycles ending with trailing paths from and of is the beginning segment of a number

. Every path of -cycles

Theorem 2: Every path of leads to only one -cycle.

Proof: Consider a path

, then

and thus,

since

. There must exist a unique pair

,

from the product

.

Proof: For any path

concatenated by a

path

, an -cycle can be constructed if and

only if

where

, such that

and hence,

. Furthermore, it is easy to show that

: suppose , then

, which contradicts

the nonexistence of -cycles in the computation tree. Thus,

is the unique valid configuration in and

yields the -cycle beginning by the path

.

or, equivalently,

, resulting in the -cycle

. Here, we have used the conditions

and

that were imposed on the path subset in (17).

Taking into account the ordinary conditions

and

for valid paths, the number of such -cycles is exactly equal to

Theorem 3: All the paths of must generate cycles of

. These -cycles cannot be removed from the computa-

length at least .

tion tree and are thus unavoidable. Furthermore, according to

Proof: Suppose that a path

con- the simple orthogonality, it can be shown that any other path

catenating a trailing path

yields a -cycle

will extend the path

to yield

, where

and

. Thus, cycles of lengths greater than .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:39:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3254
For a trailing path by concatenation if and only if

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2005

, an -cycle is formed

TABLE II CYCLES OF CSOC CODES FOR ITERATIVE BP DECODING

From the definition of .

, these -cycles must exist since

Theorem 5: The -cycles beginning by paths of must be

the concatenated paths in the product

.

Proof: Consider an -cycle

and assume

. Clearly, the conditions

and

must be satisfied. Now we

show that the trailing path

must also be a config-

uration in .

Suppose that

, then

. By the above conditions for 8-cycles, we know

that

, which contradicts the as-

sumption

.

Suppose that

, implying that

and, hence,

due to

the sign symmetric property of , which contradicts again the

above assumption.

From Theorem 4 and the preceding discussion, it is clear that

if there is an -cycle beginning by a path in , the trailing

path must also be a path in , and the two paths correspond

to the opposite elements of each other in . There are two

cases to consider.

The first case considers the paths in

that result in

the unavoidable repetitions in . For any given path

, there exists a path has four permutations

which and

in . These four permutations correspond to the

same element in opposite to the element generated by the

given path

, that is,

sign symmetric property. Likewise, such avoidable -cycles may be classified into repeated type.

One can easily show that -cycles can be paths in the products

and

, and from Theorems 4 and 5, they

can also be paths in the products

,

, and

. However, no -cycles can be paths in

,

, and

. Table II provides the existence

of -cycles and -cycles in all the products

, identified

by . In the table, the leading path subsets and the trailing

path subsets are indicated by the first column and the first

row, respectively.

Let

denote the number of -cycles in the product

. The total number of all -cycles is given by

(34) Using (21) and Theorem 4, we obtain

(35)

As shown in Theorem 5, the product

yields two

kinds of -cycles, namely, the self-formed type and the repeated

type. We use

and

to denote

the numbers of -cycles of the self-formed type and of the re-

peated type, respectively. The total number of -cycles from the

product

is given by

However, in the computation tree, the originally given path

(36)

can only be concatenated by two of the above four

permutations, namely,

and

, with the

concatenation condition

, thus, forming the -cycles

and

. Obviously, only

the Class 2 and Class 4 paths in can satisfy the above con-

catenation condition. In Class 2, where

, the two forms of

For a set with the simple orthogonality, by definition the subsets and are not fixed. Therefore, the structures of and appear to require an exhaustive search. As a consequence, the numbers of -cycles and -cycles relevant to
, including

-cycles are identical. These -cycles cannot be removed and

may be classified into self-formed type because of the inherent structure of CSOC codes.

and

The second case concerns the avoidable repetitions in . also require an exhaustive search.

For any path

, if there is a distinct configura- Finally, it can be concluded that the -cycles and -cycles

tion

other than the above four permutations having leading paths in as well as the -cycles of the self-

of the path

and that configuration is mapped onto formed type having leading paths in are unavoidable in the

in , then an -cycle

iterative decoding due to the CSOC code structure. However,

is yielded by the concatenation of the two paths under the the -cycles and the -cycles in connection with can be re-

condition

. In this case, configurations

and moved if the path subset is made empty, which is clearly

result in an identical element in due to the seen in Table II. Furthermore, the -cycles of the repeated type

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:39:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HE AND HACCOUN: AN ANALYSIS OF THE ORTHOGONALITY STRUCTURES OF CONVOLUTIONAL CODES FOR ITERATIVE DECODING

3255

TABLE III CYCLES OF CSO C CODES FOR ITERATIVE BP DECODING

have leading paths of Classes 2 and 4 in as shown in Table I, and the number of such -cycles is determined by
(38)
Finally, substituting (35), (36), and (38) into (34) yields the total number of -cycles expressed by

due to may also be removed if the set is properly constructed so that is free of avoidable repetitions of elements.

(39) Consequently, an advantage of the double orthogonality of

C. Improvement Provided by the Double Orthogonality

CSO C codes over the simple orthogonality of CSOC codes comes from the removal of all the avoidable -cycles and -cy-

It has been widely recognized that short cycles on the code graphs can effectively degrade the error performance of the codes decoded with the BP algorithm [2], [6], [7]. From the above analysis, the computation tree for CSOC codes may thus contain the following three kinds of avoidable cycles:

1) the -cycles of -type having leading paths in the path

subset ;

2) the -cycles having either leading or trailing paths in the

path subset ;

3) the -cycles of the repeated type having leading paths in

the path subset .

Recalling Definition 3 of the double orthogonality, Condi-

tion 1) asserts that a self-doubly-orthogonal set is first self-or-

thogonal. Therefore, the analysis of the cycles in the computa-

tion tree based on the simple orthogonality can be extended to

the double orthogonality. However, the double orthogonality al-

lows the removal of all the avoidable -cycles and -cycles as

discussed above.

First, we deduce from Condition 2) in Definition 3 that

and hence

, which implies that

and

. Using this result, Table III can be obtained

from Table II, whereby the -cycles of -type are simply

removed. Hence, the number of -cycles in relation to is

zero, or

. Using (21) and (33), the total number of

-cycles is thus given by

cles that may originally exist in the computation tree for CSOC codes. In other words, an important result is that the double orthogonality yields the minimal number of -cycles and -cycles in the computation tree, thus improving the performance of the iterative BP decoding algorithms for CSO C codes.
Let us now compare the importance between Conditions 2) and 3) in Definition 3 for the double orthogonality. It is widely accepted that -cycles have more influence on the code performance than -cycles. Hence, Condition 2) in Definition 3 may be thought of as the most important characteristic of the double orthogonality since it removes the -cycles with leading paths in and the -cycles with leading and trailing paths in . However, Condition 3) in Definition 3 removes only the -cycles of the repeated type with leading paths in , which may only be a small portion of the entire set of -cycles with respect to the simple orthogonality. Therefore, the restriction imposed by Condition 3) in Definition 3 may be relaxed, leading to a reduction of the coding span. Note that for either CSOC or CSO C codes, the coding span relates to the initial delay of the iterative decoding and the memory requirements for implementing the coding schemes. We may recall that for CSO C codes, the coding span , or the memory length , grows as a polynomial in of order [19], [24], [28]. As a consequence, the relaxation of Condition 3) can lead to a substantial reduction of the implementation complexities.

D. Balanced Computation Tree for CSO C Codes (37)
The improvement in the code structure provided by the

Furthermore, Condition 2) in Definition 3 also removes all the

-cycles in relation to since

as shown above. In

other words, under this condition, the numbers of these -cycles,

including

and

, must

be zero.

Next, let us consider Condition 3) in Definition 3, which guar-

antees that there are no avoidable repetitions of elements in

. Taking into account that

derived from Condi-

tion 2), the -cycles of the repeated type from the path product

are all removed. Therefore, Conditions 2) and 3)

together yield

double orthogonality can also be explained from the point of

view of the distribution of cycles on the graph. Even though

the double orthogonality cannot remove all -cycles, it does

achieve the best distributions of -cycles and -cycles in the

computation tree. The best distribution of cycles may be de-

scribed in terms of balance, by which we mean the regular

distributions of -cycles and -cycles among the subtrees

as well as the subtrees

in the computation tree. Since

the balance results in certain patterns of the correlations which

exist between the messages propagated in the tree, it allows

a proper design of weighing technique and thus improves the

iterative decoding. The structural analysis of the distributions

of cycles may be useful for determining analytically the appro-

priate weighing factor values, i.e., the weight values.

In the following, we describe the balance of the tree in terms

However, the -cycles of the self-formed type still remain due of the reappearances of the information variable nodes. The

to the unavoidable repetitions of elements in subset . From variable nodes are regularly repeated and distributed at Level 2

Theorem 5, we know that the -cycles of the self-formed type among the subtrees and

. The description is now

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:39:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3256

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2005

given in the computation tree for two iterations as shown in

Fig. 1.

First, consider a variable node

specified by a

path

, where

. Note that in this case

which implies that the node

at Level 2 in subtree has already appeared as

at

Level 1, but in a different subtree . More generally, each

node

in a subtree repeats

times at Level 2

in other subtrees

, where

and

.

Consider now the variable nodes specified by elements in

and take into account the classification of elements given in

Table I. The configurations of Class 1 do not result in any repe-

titions. With regard to Class 2, where , each of

subtrees

contains

different variable nodes

, and each

appears in exactly two

different subtrees

and

as

and

, respectively, in the same subtree . More pre-

cisely, there exists an overlap between all the subtrees

within each . On the other hand, there are no overlaps caused

by the repetitions of Class 2 between subtrees . Similarly,

for Class 3, where

, each of

subtrees

contains

different variable nodes

, and each

appears in exactly two different subtrees and

as

and

, respectively. In other

words, there are

overlaps between any two subtrees

and due to the

repetitions

and

for any given pair , where

and

.

The analysis is somewhat more complicated with respect

to Class 4 where

, and are distinct. Each of

subtrees

contains

different variables

. Each node,

appears in exactly two

different subtrees

and

as nodes

and

, respectively, in the subtree . Furthermore,

the node

also appears exactly in two different

subtrees

and

as nodes

and

, respectively, in another subtree , thus re-

sulting in a total of four repetitions. In turn, there exist

overlaps between any two subtrees and due to the

repetitions

and

for any

given pair , where

. As

a consequence, there are a total of

overlaps between

the subtrees caused by all the repetitions with respect to

Class 4.

In the iterative decoding of CSO C codes, the unavoidable

repetitions of elements in are caused by the algebraic con-

struction and result in correlations between successive itera-

tions. Unlike the decoding of LDPC codes, however, the effects

of the correlations may be reduced by choosing a proper value

for the weighing factor in (7) due to the regularity in the dis-

tribution of the repetitions. As a consequence, the error perfor-

mance has been shown to improve [20], [23]. Next, we extend

the above analysis of CSO C codes for the iterative BP decoding

to that for the iterative threshold decoding.

E. Computation Tree for Iterative Threshold Decoding
The main distinction between the BP and threshold iterative decoding algorithms is due to the calculations for the variable

TABLE IV CYCLES OF CSO C CODES FOR ITERATIVE THRESHOLD DECODING
TABLE V CSOC AND CSO C CODES USED IN THE SIMULATIONS

messages. In the iterative threshold decoding algorithms, the

variable message calculated at an information variable node is

a function of all the incoming messages at the node. However,

in the iterative BP decoding algorithms, each variable message

calculated at an information variable node is a function of all

the incoming messages at the node except the incoming mes-

sage coming from the neighbored check node to which the out-

going variable message will be sent [7]. As analyzed above, the

computation tree for the iterative threshold algorithm can be

easily obtained from Fig. 1 by adding a subtree at each infor-

mation variable node. This is equivalent to expanding the path

sets and to include the subset , that is,

.

Consider a set with the double orthogonality. Every con-

figuration

corresponds to an element

in , thus yielding a -cycle if and only if

. Based on

the theorems and their proofs above, one can easily show that

no further -cycles are formed in the additional path products,

, and that no further -cycles

are paths in

, and

. Table IV shows

the existence of -cycles and -cycles in the computation tree

representing the iterative threshold decoding. Since -cycles are

paths from , the total number of the -cycles in two succes-

sive decoding iterations is calculated by

.

Likewise, it is easy to show that the balance of the computation

tree for BP decoding can be extended to the computation tree

for threshold decoding.

V. SIMULATION RESULTS

In this section, we present computer simulation results for

several CSOC and CSO C codes and compare the error per-

formances between the BP and threshold iterative decoding al-

gorithms for these codes. In our simulations, both CSOC and

CSO C codes were used, and the codes for

, and

are listed in Table V, where we use

and

to de-

note the self-orthogonal set and the self-doubly-orthogonal set

of order , respectively. In practice, the order and hence the

memory order determine the implementation complexity of

one-step decoders for the iterative decoding. As for the effi-

ciency of the iterative decoding, it is related to the number of

iterations needed for achieving the best performance. In our sim-

ulations, we observed that feedback decoding always performs

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:39:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HE AND HACCOUN: AN ANALYSIS OF THE ORTHOGONALITY STRUCTURES OF CONVOLUTIONAL CODES FOR ITERATIVE DECODING

3257

Fig. 2. Error performance comparison for iterative feedback BP and threshold decoding algorithms of CSOC codes with A = f0; 2; 7; 13; 16; 17g; J = 6; and m = 17. Iterations 1, 2, 3, 4, and 20 for BP decoding; iterations 1, 2, 3, 4, 8, and 20 for threshold decoding.

Fig. 3. Error performance comparison for iterative feedback BP and threshold decoding algorithms of CSO C codes with A = f0; 10; 12; 43; 165; 180g; J = 6; and m = 180. Iterations 1, 2, 3, 4, and 20 for BP decoding; iterations 1, 2, 3, 4, 8, and 20 for threshold decoding.

better than definite decoding in both error performance and effi- In Figs. 2–7, the bit-error rate (BER) performances of the

ciency when the decoding is optimized by using a proper weight codes used are compared. In our simulations, the iterative feed-

value [23]. Therefore, in the following, we consider only feed- back threshold and BP decoding algorithms use the add–min

back decoding.

function for calculating the check messages, and are optimized

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:39:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3258

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2005

Fig. 4. Error performance comparison for iterative feedback BP and threshold decoding algorithms of CSOC codes with A = f0; 7; 10; 16; 18; 30; 31; 35g; J = 8; and m = 35. Iterations 1, 2, 3, 4, and 20 for BP decoding; iterations 1, 2, 3, 4, 8, and 20 for threshold decoding.

TABLE VI OPTIMIZED WEIGHT VALUES FOR THE ITERATIVE DECODING ALGORITHMS

fine the effective iteration number as that number of iterations beyond which the additional coding gain becomes negligible.

Therefore, we may use this definition to compare the conver-

gence speeds of our algorithms. It is worthwhile noting that for

our fixed-delay coding schemes, the effective iteration number

corresponds to the initial delay.

For all of the CSO C codes considered, the effective iteration

by choosing the best weighing factors for calculating the

variable messages. The optimized weight values presented

in Table VI are obtained by simulations for a target BER of

at a proper signal-to-noise ratio. However, they are used

for all the iterations within the given simulation run. In the

error performance figures, these weight values are identified

as gains. The maximal iteration number is chosen to be 20,

which is the maximal number of one-step decoding required by

all the iterative decoding algorithms to approach the best error

performance. However, it can be observed that for practical

purposes, the asymptotic error performance is obtained after

five to eight iterations.

We observe that for CSOC codes, the iterative feedback BP

decoding provides a higher error performance than the iterative

feedback threshold decoding. For the CSOC codes with

and

, for example, the coding gain of BP decoding

over threshold decoding is approximately 0.5 dB at the BER

of . However, for CSO C code, both the iterative feedback

threshold decoding and the iterative feedback BP decoding es-

sentially provide the same error performance.

number of BP decoding is typically equal to four, whereas it is

approximately equal to eight for threshold decoding at the same

error probability. We also observe that in both BP decoding and

threshold decoding, CSO C codes have significantly smaller ef-

fective iteration numbers than CSOC codes for all the values of

considered, thus attesting to the superiority provided by the

double orthogonality over the simple orthogonality.

Even though the iterative BP decoding may be slightly more

effective than the iterative threshold decoding, the complexity

of implementing the one-step BP decoders is approximately

times that of the one-step threshold decoders [23]. That

is, the efficiency advantage of BP decoding is obtained at a

much higher implementation cost. It may be concluded that

for achieving a target BER performance by CSO C codes, the

iterative threshold decoding offers a good tradeoff between

the initial delay and the implementation complexity of the

decoders.

We recall that for either BP decoding or threshold decoding,

only a number

of newly received symbols at each fur-

ther iteration can take part directly in the decoding of a spe-

cific information bit. Therefore, one should maximize the value

The error performance figures clearly show that for both of

, which is actually achieved by the double orthogo-

CSOC and CSO C codes, the iterative threshold decoding nality of CSO C codes. In Definition 3 for the double orthog-

converges less quickly than the iterative BP decoding. We de- onality, Condition 2) removes the intersection between sets

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:39:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HE AND HACCOUN: AN ANALYSIS OF THE ORTHOGONALITY STRUCTURES OF CONVOLUTIONAL CODES FOR ITERATIVE DECODING

3259

Fig. 5. Error performance comparison for iterative feedback BP and threshold decoding algorithms of CSO C codes with A = f0; 43; 139; 322; 422; 430; 441; 459g; J = 8; and m = 459. Iterations 1, 2, 3, 4, and 20 for BP decoding; iterations 1, 2, 3, 4, 8, and 20 for threshold decoding.

Fig. 6. Error performance comparison for iterative feedback BP and threshold decoding algorithms of CSOC codes with A = f0; 2; 14; 21; 29; 32; 45; 49; 54; 55g; J = 10; and m = 55. Iterations 1, 2, 3, 4, and 20 for BP decoding; iterations 1, 2, 3, 4, 8, and 20 for threshold decoding.

and , and Condition 3) further guarantees no repetitions ex- eration number and the error performance of the iterative de-

cept the unavoidable repetitions of elements in . Therefore, coding. As expected, CSO C codes are proved to be superior to

maximizing

will tend to improve both the effective it- CSOC codes when they are iteratively decoded.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:39:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3260

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2005

Fig. 7. Error performance comparison for iterative feedback BP and threshold decoding algorithms of CSO C codes with A = f0; 27; 93; 503; 600; 1247; 1646; 1714; 1825; 1835g; J = 10; and m = 1835. Iterations 1, 2, 3, 4, and 20 for BP decoding; iterations 1, 2, 3, 4, 8, and
20 for threshold decoding.

VI. CONCLUSION

REFERENCES

The structures of CSOC and CSO C codes for iterative decoding have been investigated using difference set and computation tree approaches. We have shown that the double orthogonality of CSO C codes assures the maximal number of independent observations over two successive decoding iterations as well as the minimal number of -cycles and -cycles in the computation tree of the iterative BP decoding algorithm. Whether using iterative BP or threshold decoding algorithm, the double orthogonality produces a rigorously balanced computation tree, and hence allows a weighing technique to improve the error performance of the iterative decoding for CSO C codes.
As supported by simulation results, the double orthogonality does improve the convergence speed and error performance of the iterative decoding of CSO C codes. Using the best weighing factor values, iterative feedback decoding outperforms iterative definite decoding for both threshold and BP decoding algorithms. Simulation results show that the iterative threshold decoding of CSO C codes can approach the error performance of the iterative BP decoding, but at a substantial reduction of the implementation complexity. However, at a given error probability, the iterative threshold decoding requires a somewhat larger effective iteration number than the iterative BP decoding. These results may help in trading off complexity, latency, and error performance of our coding scheme.
Finally, extension of the analysis of the orthogonal structures of CSOC and CSO C codes to LDPC codes or other codes with similar constructions may be possible.

[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf.

Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.

[2] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE

Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.

[3] M. Sipser and D. A. Spielman, “Expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf.

Theory, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1710–1722, Nov. 1996.

[4] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse

matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar.

1999.

[5] R. J. McEliece, D. J. C. MaKay, and J.-F. Cheng, “Turbo decoding as

an instance of Pearl’s ‘belief propagation’ algorithm,” IEEE J. Select.

Areas Commun., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 140–152, Feb. 1998.

[6] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation,

Linköping Univ., Linköping, Sweden, 1996.

[7] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and

the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp.

498–519, Feb. 2001.

[8] B. Vasic´, “Structured iteratively decodable codes based on steiner sys-

tems and their application in magnetic recording,” in Proc. IEEE Global

Communications Conf. (GLOBECOM 2001), vol. 5, San Antonio, TX,

Nov. 2001, pp. 2954–2960.

[9] S. J. Johnson and S. R. Weller, “Resolvable 2-designs for regular low-

density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 51, no. 9, pp.

1413–1419, Sep. 2003.

[10]

, “A family of irregular LDPC codes with low encoding com-

plexity,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 79–81, Feb. 2003.

[11] A. Sridharan, D. J. Costello Jr., and R. M. Tanner, “A construction for

low density parity check convolutional codes based on quasi-cyclic

block codes,” in Proc. 2002 IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory,

Lausanne, Switzerland, Jun./Jul. 2002, p. 481.

[12] R. M. Tanner, “Minimum distance bounds by graph analysis,” IEEE

Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 808–821, Feb. 2001.

[13]

, “Spectral graphs for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” in Proc. 2001 Int.

Symp. Information Theory, Washington, DC, Jun. 2001, p. 226.

[14] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based

on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf.

Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.

[15] J. L. Massey, Threshold Decoding. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:39:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HE AND HACCOUN: AN ANALYSIS OF THE ORTHOGONALITY STRUCTURES OF CONVOLUTIONAL CODES FOR ITERATIVE DECODING

3261

[16] H. Tanaka, K. Furusawa, and S. Kaneku, “A novel approach to soft decision decoding of threshold decodable codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-26, no. 2, pp. 244–246, Mar. 1980.
[17] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications, 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2004.
[18] Y. V. Svirid and S. Riedel, “Threshold decoding of turbo-codes,” in Proc. 1995 IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Whistler, BC, Canada, Sep. 1995, p. 39.
[19] F. Gagnon, D. Haccoun, N. Batani, and C. Cardinal, “Apparatus for Convolutional Self-Doubly Orthogonal Encoding and Decoding,” U.S .Patent 6,167,225 Dec. 26, 2000 and European Patent EP0 907 256 A2, Apr. 7, 1999.
[20] C. Cardinal, D. Haccoun, and F. Gagnon, “Iterative threshold decoding without interleaving for convolutional self-doubly orthogonal codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 51, no. 8, pp. 1274–1282, Aug. 2003.
[21] R. Lucas, M. P. C. Fossorier, Y. Kou, and S. Lin, “Iterative decoding of one-step majority logic decodable codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 931–937, Jun. 2000.
[22] A. J. Felstrom and K. S. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181–2191, Sep. 1999.
[23] D. Haccoun, Y.-C. He, and C. Cardinal, “Forward-only iterative decoding of convolutional self-orthogonal codes,” in Proc. 2004 IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Chicago, IL, Jun./Jul. 2004, p. 492.
[24] C. Cardinal, “Decoding of convolutional self-doubly orthogonal codes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Ecole Polytechnique de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada, Jun. 2001.

[25] C. Cardinal, D. Haccoun, F. Gagnon, and N. Batani, “Convolutional selfdoubly orthogonal codes for iterative decoding without interleaving,” in Proc. 1998 IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Cambridge, MA, Aug. 1998, p. 280.
[26] F. Gagnon and D. Haccoun, “On the construction of codes for iterative decoding based on an extension of difference sets principles,” in Proc. 13th Applied Algebra, Algebraic Algorithms and Error Correcting Codes Symp.. Honolulu, HI, Nov. 1999, p. 17.
[27] B. Baechler, D. Haccoun, and F. Gagnon, “On the search for self-doubly orthogonal codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Sorrento, Italy, Jun. 2000, p. 292.
[28] D. Haccoun, C. Cardinal, and F. Gagnon, “Search and determination of convolutional self-doubly orthogonal codes for iterative threshold decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 802–808, May 2005.
[29] C. Cardinal, D. Haccoun, and F. Gagnon, “An error performance analysis of iterative threshold decoding,” in Proc. 2000 IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Sorrento, Italy, Jun. 2000, p. 187.
[30] C. Cardinal, D. Haccoun, F. Gagnon, and N. Batani, “Turbo decoding using convolutional self-doubly orthogonal codes,” in Proc. 1998 Int. Conf. Communications (ICC’99), Vancouver, BC, Canada, Jun. 1998, pp. 113–117.
[31] D. Haccoun and C. Cardinal, “High-rate punctured convolutional selfdoubly orthogonal codes for iterative threshold decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 55–63, Jan. 2005.
[32] X. Ma and A. Kavcˇic´, “Path partitions and forward-only trellis algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 38–52, Jan. 2003.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:39:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

