IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2005

3347

Iterative Decoding of Linear Block Codes: A Parity-Check Orthogonalization Approach
Sundararajan Sankaranarayanan, Student Member, IEEE, and Bane Vasic´, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—It is widely accepted that short cycles in Tanner graphs deteriorate the performance of message-passing algorithms. This discourages the use of these algorithms on Tanner graphs (TGs) of well-known algebraic codes such as Hamming codes, Bose–Chaudhuri–Hocquenghem codes, and Reed–Solomon codes. Yedidia et al. presented a method to generate code representations suitable for message-passing algorithms. This method does not guarantee a representation free of four-cycles. In this correspondence, we present an algorithm to convert an arbitrary linear block into a code with orthogonal parity-check equations. A combinatorial argument is used to prove that the algorithm guarantees a four-cycle free representation for any linear code. The effects of removing four-cycles on the performance of a belief propagation decoder for the binary erasure channel are studied in detail by analyzing the structures in different representations. Finally, we present bit-error rate (BER) and block-error rate (BLER) performance curves of linear block codes under belief propagation algorithms for the binary erasure channel and the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel in order to demonstrate the improvement in performance achieved with the help of the proposed algorithm.
Index Terms—Auxiliary checks, auxiliary variables, belief-propagation algorithm, four-cycles, Tanner graphs (TGs).
I. INTRODUCTION
Linear block codes have been a subject of great interest since the discovery of Hamming codes in the late 1940s. The design of early codes was based on algebraic structures, and these structures were exploited in developing bounded-distance decoders. The efficiency of such decoders is dependent on the minimum-distance of the code. In the early 1960s, Gallager [4] introduced a class of linear block codes called low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, and this was one of the first instances of codes defined on graphs. In his graphical representation of the code, vertices correspond to codeword bits and edges correspond to linear check constraints. Such a graphical representation grew out of the necessity to facilitate a class of decoding algorithms often referred to as message-passing algorithms. A decoder based on a message-passing algorithm is not a bounded-distance decoder, and it has been shown that long LDPC codes approach Shannon capacity under such a decoder. A great interest in the general study of codes defined on graphs emerged after Tanner’s paper in 1981.
In [9], Tanner founded the general study of codes on graphs, introduced generalized constraints, and proved the optimality of the sum–product algorithm on cycle-free graphs. The next development in the study of codes on graphs was achieved by introducing state variables into Tanner graphs (TGs) [12], [11], and this allowed to establish connections to trellises and to turbo codes. In [8], [1], and [5], the authors have presented important results on minimal trellis-like representations of linear block codes that minimize one or more
Manuscript received June 15, 2004; revised May 20, 2005. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCR–0208597 and by INSIC. The material in this correspondence was presented in part at the 42nd Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, September/October 2004.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721 USA (e-mail: ssundar@ece.arizona.edu; vasic@ece.arizona.edu).
Communicated by K. A. S. Abdel-Ghaffar, Associate Editor for Coding Theory.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2005.853321

complexity measures. In [6], Kschischang et al. further abstracted the idea of codes on graphs to encompass representation of general functions, and such graphs are referred to as factor graphs.
The state variables in TGs, introduced by Wiberg [12], are auxiliary variables that are introduced by the designer to improve code realization in some sense. These variables are not transmitted over the channel, and hence, they are not observed at the receiver end. In [7], MacKay discussed generalized parity-check matrix (GPCM) representations of linear block codes obtained by introducing additional columns and additional rows. These additional columns corresponding to auxiliary variables can be interpreted as state variables because they are not transmitted over the channel. In [13], Yedidia et al. presented an algorithm to generate GPCM representations of codes that have the following characteristics: small number of ones in each row, large number of ones in each column, and a small number of four-cycles. With empirical results, they demonstrated an improvement in bit-error rate (BER) performance of codes, transmitted over binary erasure channel (BEC) or additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, under message-passing algorithms applied on these new representations. This paper posed an interesting problem of finding a GPCM of a code that is suitable for message-passing algorithms.
In Section II, we present an algorithm that is specific to removing four-cycles in a TG of a linear block code. Such an effort is required to facilitate message-passing decoders (MPDs) of well-known algebraic codes. It is well known that the performance of a code under an MPD is affected by the cycle structure of the corresponding TG. In [6], Kschischang dealt with techniques of clustering (or merging) and stretching nodes in order to remove short cycles in a TG of the code. Unfortunately, these techniques require passing message-vectors along edges of the modified TG and, hence, increasing the complexity of MPDs. The algorithm presented in this correspondence preserves binary message-passing and so, the increase in decoding complexity is not significant. Although the idea of introducing auxiliary variables and auxiliary checks to the parity-check matrix of the code is similar to the one presented in [13], the approach taken in achieving a four-cycle-free representation is distinct. In Section III, we prove that this technique is guaranteed to remove all four-cycles in a TG of the code. Now, instead of the conventional TG of the code, the four-cycle-free graph (or the modified graph) can be used to iteratively decode on BEC and AWGN channel. In Section IV, we prove that the error rate performance of the iterative erasure decoder working on the modified graph is at least as good as that obtained by decoding on the conventional graph of the code. Also, we present simulation results of the BER and block-error rate (BLER) performances of an algebraic linear code over the BEC. Theoretical analysis of the effectiveness of GPCM representations in improving the performance of an MPD for AWGN channels is rather difficult. Hence, we resort to empirical results to demonstrate the effectiveness of four-cycle-free representations. The results presented in Section V demonstrate improvements in BER and BLER performances of algebraic codes obtained by decoding iteratively on the modified graphs. Finally, in Section VI, we conclude with a brief discussion on generalizing this technique in order to remove cycles of any specified length in a graph.

II. ALGORITHM TO REMOVE FOUR-CYCLES IN TGS

C n Consider a linear block code of length defined as the solution-

Hx = H space (over 2) of the system of linear equations

0, where

m 2 n G C is an

binary matrix. The bipartite graph representation of

is assumed to have at least one four-cycle. It is necessary to identify
G four-cycles in before they can be removed. The four-cycle structure

0018-9448/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:35:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3348

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2005

G < of is obtained from the square (over ) of the adjacency matrix A of
the graph. The adjacency matrix and its square can be written as

A=

0
HT

H
0

and A2 =

HHT
0

0
H TH

:

C the other hand, the auxiliary check guarantees that the dimension of 1 C is equal to that of .
By iteratively applying the procedure on the modified parity-check matrix, it is possible to remove all four-cycles involving actual and/or auxiliary variables. The iterative algorithm is summarized as follows.

The element in position (i; j) of A2 is the number of distinct paths of length 2 between the nodes ai and aj . In A2, the component H TH
calculates the number of paths of length 2 between variable nodes, and
the component HH T calculates the number of paths of length 2 be-
tween check nodes. These component matrices are symmetric. In the
G bipartite graph , there is no path of length 2 between a variable node
and a check node. Also, any two distinct paths of length 2 between two
G nodes contribute to a four-cycle. The total number of four-cycles in G is denoted by ( ).
G Theorem 1: In a simple bipartite graph , the total number of fourG cycles ( ) is given by

n

n

G( ) =

H H ( T )ij :

2

i=1 j=i+1

Proof: Assume that there are l, say l > 1, distinct paths of length

2 between distinct variable nodes xi and xj . This means that the element in position (i; j) of H TH is l. A pair of distinct paths between

G these nodes contribute to a four-cycle, and there are

l 2

different ways

to choose such a pair. Hence, the total number of four-cycles in can

be obtained by summing the quantities

(H

H) 2

over every (ordered)

pair of variable nodes.

K Corollary 2: In a complete bipartite graph , m;n the total number

K of four-cycles is

( m;n) =

n 2

m 2

.

It is easy to show that the element in position (i; i) of H TH is equal to the degree of the ith variable node. In [13], the first step of the al-

gorithm involves the process of taking intersections of all pairs of the

constraint sets to identify four-cycles in the code. In this correspon-
dence, we compute the product H TH to identify the four-cycles in the

code. Also, it will be evident from the following discussion that we do

not consider all the intersection sets. Now equipped with the tools to

identify the four-cycle structure of the graph, it is easy to remove all
G four-cycles in as shown below.
Assume that there is a four-cycle involving variables xu and xv . Taking a componentwise product of the uth and vth columns of H ,
0 0 0 0 we can determine the two check nodes, say Si and Sj , that are in-
volved in the four-cycle. Let xu Si xv Sj xu represent the four-cycle. In order to remove this four-cycle, replace the term xu +xv in Si and Sj with an auxiliary variable x . u;v This is equivalent to appending a new column to the original matrix H , and replacing elements in positions (i; u); (j; u); (i; v); and (j; v) of H with zeros. In addition, an auxiliary check equation of the form xu + xv x + u;v = 0
is added to the original set of constraints. This is equivalent to ap-
pending a new row to the original matrix H that corresponds to the

auxiliary check equation. If these variable nodes are involved in more

Initialize:

• Let l = 0.
2 • Let H l := H .
• H l is a ml nl matrix such that m0 = m and n0 = n.

Step 1:

•

Compute

H

H T
l

l.

• If there is at least one four-cycle in H l, then go to Step 2.

• If H l is four-cycle free, then go to Step 4.

Step 2:

1 • Let xu and xv be a pair of variables involved in a four-cycle.
• The column vector u v is the componentwise product of the
2 uth and vth columns of H l.
• Let B be an ml nl matrix defined as

0u 1

0 0 v u 1

B = 0; . . . ; 0; u 1 v; 0; . . . ; 0; u 1 v; . . . ; 0

n

where 0 is a zero column vector, and u and v are the uth and vth columns of H l.
• Let

0u 1

0 0 v u 1

h i S0 := 0; . . . ; 0; 1; 0; . . . ; 0; 1; 0; . . . ; 0; 1

n +1
where S0 corresponds to the auxiliary check equation.
Step 3: • The transformed matrix is written as

H l+1 :=

Hl + B ... u 1 v :
S

The addition operation is defined over the binary field.
2 • The dimension of H l+1 is m( l + 1) n( l + 1). 0 • l l + 1.

• Go to Step 1.

Step 4:

0 • 2 •

H0
The

Hl matrix H

0

is

free

of

four-cycles

with

dimension

M

N.

In the algorithm, Step 1, Step 2, and Step 3 constitute an iteration.
After the lth iteration, one auxiliary variable node and an auxiliary check node are inserted into the graph of H 0l 1. The weight of the aug-
mented row is 3, and the weight of the augmented column is one more
1 than the weight of the column-vector u v computed in Step 2. In Sec-

than one four-cycle, then every check equation containing the term
xu + xv is replaced with the auxiliary variable x . u;v This process removes all four-cycles involving variables xu and xv , and results in a
modified parity-check matrix with an additional (auxiliary) constraint
and variable in comparison to H . By introducing an auxiliary variable,

tion III, we show that in fact this algorithm guarantees to remove all

G four-cycles
The matrix
C G GPCM of

in
H
;

0t0,hiteshtaohtreiigsbiinfpraealergtiortaefpfghoruapr-hcayfctcoelrrersea,sfipisonnirtedefiennrguremtdobHteor0ao.sfSttiheteeprsaot2uiotapnnusdt.

3 of this algorithm are similar to Steps 2–4 of the algorithm presented

we have not changed the code rate because this variable is not trans- in [13]. Unlike in [13], we avoid creating a four-cycle by allowing only

mitted over the channel. The introduction of the auxiliary variable re-
C sults in the extension of the vector subspace to a vector subspace C h i C 1. For any vector x = x1; . . . ; xu; . . . ; xv; . . . ; xn in , there is a h i C unique vector x1 = x1; . . . ; xu; . . . ; xv; . . . ; xn; xu + xv in 1. On

one way to break down each constraint set. Also, this reduces the complexity of organizing sets into a partially ordered set of sets, and decreases the dimension of the output GPCM. The following example is designed to better illustrate the application of the algorithm.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:35:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2005

3349

(7 4) Example 1: Consider a ; Hamming code, defined by a parity= 7 = 3 check matrix H with n variables and m check equations. The

G ith column of H corresponds to a variable node xi of the graph , and

G the jth row
component

omf athtreixmHatrTixHc,owrreescpaonncdosmtopautcehethcaktnthoedreeSajreofexa.cFtlryomthtrheee

G four-cycles in . The parity-check matrix and the component matrix

are

1001101 H= 0 1 0 1 0 1 1
0010111

1001101 0101011 0010111 HTH = 1 1 0 2 1 1 2 : 1011212 0111122 1112223

G Proof: For some l; l is obtained from an iteration of the al-

G gorithm on l01. Without loss of generality, assume that there are

 2 G p2 ; p
means

that

, four-cycles in there are exactly

l01 involving variables p check equations (in H

xu l01

and xv . This
) with ones in

the uth and the vth columns. Rearrange the rows of H l01 such that the

first p rows have ones in the uth and the vth columns. The ith row of

the matrix corresponds to the check equation Si. The general form of

H l01 is

h1;1 h2;1

... ...

1 1

... ...

1 1

... ...

h1;n h2;n

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

hp;1 hp+1;1

... ...

1
h +1 p ;u

... ...

1
h +1 p ;v

... ...

hp;n h +1 p ;n

:

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

. . . . . . . . . hm ;1

hm ;u

hm ;v

hm ;n

The four-cycle x4 0 S1 0 x7 0 S2 0 x4 in H is removed by in+ + = 0 troducing an auxiliary variable x4;7 and an auxiliary check equation
written as x4 x7 x4;7 . The introduction of x4;7 is equivalent
(1 4) (1 7) (2 4) (2 7) to appending a new column to H, and replacing elements in positions
; ; ; ; ; ; and ; of H with zeros. The matrix H1 ob-

tained after the first iteration is written as

10001001

H1 =

0 0

1000101 0101110

:

00010011

(7 4) Since H 1 is free of four-cycles, it is the desired GPCM of the ;
Hamming code. Thus, in this case, just one auxiliary variable is re-

quired to remove three four-cycles.

The four-cycles involving xu and xv are removed by augmenting a new variable node xn , and a new check node Sm . The general form of the resultant matrix H l is given in

h1;1 h2;1

... ...

0 0

... ...

0 0

... ...

h1;n h2;n

1 1

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

hp;1 hp+1;1

... ...

0
h +1 p ;u

... ...

0
h +1 p ;v

... ...

hp;n h +1 p ;n

1 0:

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

. . . . . . . . . hm ;1

hm ;u

hm

;v

hm ;n

0

0 ... 1 ... 1 ... 0 1

G For a given graph , an upper bound on the number of auxiliary
variables (or auxiliary checks) required to remove all four-cycles in the graph can be computed from the following observations about the algorithm.

• At each iteration of the algorithm, exactly one auxiliary variable

is introduced.

• Just one auxiliary variable xu;v is required to remove any

number of four-cycles involving a pair of variables xu and xv .

G In Section III, we will show that the number of four-cycles in l (output

G of the lth iteration) 1( ) G number of auxiliary

is strictly variables

less than
N; n

that in

0inis

l01. Hence, the total
upper-bounded by the

G total number of four-cycles in

1(N; n) = N 0 n  (G):

(1)
G Now, let us examine the four-cycle structure of H l, and compare
it with that of H l01. If l is free of four-cycles, then the lemma is
trivially true. In order to prove the nontrivial case, we have assumed

in the following list of arguments that there is at least one four-cycle
G in l.

• The construction guarantees that there is no four-cycle involving

•

G ( ) xu and xv in l. On the other hand, there are p G 2 involving these variable nodes in l01. G If there is a four-cycle involving xu and xn in

four-cycles l, then this

pair of variables should participate in two distinct check equa-
H tions of l. But the algorithm guarantees that there is only one
check equation, namely Sm , that contains this pair of vari-

ables. Hence, by contradiction, we can conclude that there is

The summation quantity is an upper bound because there is always the possibility of an auxillary variable removing more four-cycles than intended.
III. WHY DOES THE ALGORITHM WORK? In this section, we present a combinatorial argument to substantiate the claim that the algorithm removes all four-cycles in the original
G G graph after a finite number of iterations. Assume that l is the bi2 partite graph corresponding to H l, obtained after l iterations of the al-
gorithm on the m n matrix H . The key idea of the proof is to show
G G that the number of four-cycles in l is strictly less than that in l01.

no four-cycle involving this pair of variables. Such an argument

can be used to prove the absence of four-cycles involving xv

•

and xn .
= 0 0 0 0 6 Let xn Sq xs Sr xn , where s u; v, be a four-cycle G in l. The general form of H l reveals that q and r have to take 1 2 . . . f g G values from ; ; ; p . For every such four-cycle in l, there 0 0 0 0 exist two four-cycles, namely, xu Sq xs Sr xu and 0 0 0 0 G xv Sq xs Sr xv, in l01.

 2 From the preceding arguments and the fact that p , we can conclude G G that the number of four-cycles in l is strictly less than that in l01.

Now we restate the claim of the algorithm as a theorem, and prove it using Lemma 3.

We prove this key idea in Lemma 3.
Lemma 3: (Gl) < (Gl01); l 2 .

G C parTthiteeogrreamph4:repArensyenlitnaetiaornbin0atrhyatbilsocfrkeecoodfefourh-acsycalnese.quivalent bi-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:35:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3350

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2005

C Proof: Let H be the parity-check matrix of . If the bipartite G graph corresponding to H is free of four-cycles, then the theorem G G is trivially true. Otherwise, let ( ) be the number of four-cycles in . G After l iterations of the algorithm with as the input, we know that the
following statement is true from Lemma 3:
(G) > (G1) > (G2) > 1 1 1 > G : ( l) G The number of four-cycles in with m check nodes and n variable GG G G wawnnoiidttdhhens,i,tsahtshueteprhepaeelegirxn-oibprsouittsuthrnamedfisegundulittabeirnyalnaitnn2feoeusm r2t-shcuay,ctcshelete0h-fCiarsteoalernoigtleerlqaaraurpytihivo2an.l0esT.noShtfuirnstech,peefroewarsleefignosnttriaatietrthitoemmdn of C.

IV. ITERATIVE DECODING OF LINEAR BLOCK CODES OVER BEC

In BEC, the input alphabet is binary, and the output alphabet, besides
symbols 0 and 1, includes an erasure symbol ". The probability of receiving an " is called the erasure probability. An optimal decoding of a
C linear block code over the channel is achieved by a direct application

O of
is

Ga(nus3s)i.anIneltihmisinsaetciotino.nT, hweecaorme pinletxeriteystoefd

such in a

an optimal suboptimal

decoder erasure

decoder, referred to as the MPD, that decodes iteratively by passing
G C messages over the edges of the graph of . The complexity of such

a decoder is linear in the length of the code. A decoding failure in an

MPD is caused exactly when every check equation has more than one
C S variable in erasure. For a fixed H of , a subset of variable nodes S S such that all neighbors of are connected to at least twice is called

a stopping set [2]. A decoding failure occurs precisely when the set

of variables in erasure contains a stopping set. The knowledge of all
stopping sets of H is sufficient to theoretically compute the error per-

formance of the MPD for a given BEC.

The simplicity of the iterative decoder provides a convenient frame-

G C G work
Let

t0obaenaalfyozuer-tchyecelfef-efcretseorfeprermesoevnitnatgiofonuorf-cy.cNleoswon

i0tscpaenrbfoermusaendcteo.

G G iteratively decode the
decoder working on

0liinsebaerttceordthe.anInthgaetnoefrathl,etdheecpoedrefrowrmoarknicnegoofnthe.

G G Th0.isFwiniallllby,e

shown by comparing the stopping set structures of and we compare simulated BER and BLER performances of

the MPD working on several representations of a (23; 12) Golay code

(GC).

A. Analysis
First, we present an example to illustrate that eliminating four-cycles helps to remove certain stopping sets and in turn improves the performance of the code under MPD. Also, this example illustrates the iterative decoding process on a GPCM representation of the code.
Example 2: Let S1; S2; and S3 be the constraints of a binary code
of length 7. Each codeword, represented as
x = hx1; x2; x3; x4; x5; x6; x7i
satisfies the following set of constraints:

We can remove the four-cycle x1 0 S1 0 x2 0 S2 0 x1

acnodnsStr40aibnetsthbey

introducing an auxiliary variable set of modified constraints
S10 : x1;2 + x3 + x4 = 0

x1;2.

Let

iSn10t;hSe 20s;eSt o3f;

S20 : x1;2 + x5 + x6 = 0

S3 : x1 + x3 + x7 = 0 S40 : x1;2 + x1 + x2 = 0:

Let us try to decode y with the modified set of constraints. Since y1 and
f g y2 are in erasure, the auxiliary variable takes on the value ". It is clear
that the subset of variables y1; y2; y3 does not contain a stopping set and, hence, we are able to decode y. Let x^ represent the decoded word.

Then
) x^1;2 + 1 + 1 = 0 x^1;2 = 0 (from S20 ) ) 0 + x^3 + 1 = 0 x^3 = 1 (from S10 ) ) x^1 + 1 + 1 = 0 x^1 = 0 (from S3) ) 0 + 0 + x^2 = 0 x^2 = 0 (from S40 ): h i The decoded word is x^ = 0; 0; 1; 1; 1; 1; 1 .

The examplealsoillustratesthatauxiliaryvariables are initialized with

values based on channel observations. It will be shown that each auxil-

iary variable can be expressed as a sum of standard variables by manip-

ulating the auxiliary check equations. Thus, an auxiliary variable takes
the value " if at least one of its component standard variables is in erasure.

Otherwise, it takes a value 0 or 1. Also. it is clear from the example that a

stopping set is a characteristic of the representation (matrix or graphical),

and not necessarily that of the code. In other words, a decoding failure

that occured using a particular graphical representation of a code could

S havLeetbee0nbaevearstetodpwpiinthgasedtififnertehnet

fgoruarp-hciyccaller-efrpereesGenPtCatMionHo0f,

the code. obtained

cboyrarepspploynindgintghetoitceoralutimvenasl(groorwitsh)mofoHf th0 earceocdlea.sTsihfieedvainritaobtlweso(cchlaescskess);

Ananmyevlya,risatbalnedxaridcvoarrreiaspbolensdi(nchgetcoksth) eanidthacuoxliulimarnyovfaHria0bilsesa

(checks). standard

 variable if i n. Otherwise, xi is
check equation Si corresponding

an to

athuexiilitahryrovwarioafbHle.0

Similarly, any is a standard

 check if i m. Otherwise, Si is an auxiliary check. The degree of any

auxiliary check node is exactly three.

Any auxiliary variable can be written as a sum (over 2) of two

or more standard variables. We prove this statement by describing a
process to achieve such a summation. For a given auxiliary variable xu, choose the corresponding auxiliary check equation Sm+u0n. Such a

check exists because for every auxiliary variable introduced to remove

four-cycles, a new check equation is also introduced. In general, this

check equation can be written as

S + 0 m u n: xi + xj = xu where i < u and j < u. It is important to notice that the ith and the jth columns are strictly to the left of the uth column. If the components of the equation, xi and xj , are standard variables, then we are done.

Otherwise, for every component that is an auxiliary variable, repeat

the above process. This recursive process is guaranteed to achieve the

goal in finite number of steps because

S1 : x1 + x2 + x3 + x4 = 0 S2 : x1 + x2 + x5 + x6 = 0 S3 : x1 + x3 + x7 = 0:
Let y = h"; "; "; 1; 1; 1; 1i be the channel observation of a codeword
x. From the received y, and the set of constraints, it is easy to check
that S = fy1; y2; y3g is a stopping set. In other words, each check has
at least two neighbors which take value ". Hence, from the preceding
discussion, we can say that the iterative decoder will fail.

• for any auxiliary variable, every component variable corre-

G •
Let

sponds to a column
the dimension of H

t0oisthfienlieteft.

of

that

of

us examine the stopping set structure of

the auxiliary variable;
0 and compare it to that

of G.

S Theorem Proof:

5: No subset Assume that

of0aiusxialinaroynevmarpiatyblesus bisseat

stopping set. of auxiliary

vari-

S ables which is a stopping
failure if every element in

se0t.taTkheiss

means that
the value ",

there will and every

be a decoding other variable

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:35:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2005

3351

Fig. 1. Performance of different representations of (23; 12) GC under belief propagation for BEC.

0 1 N (S ) S takes a value or . 2 S an auxiliary variable N (S ) that belongs to 1( ) ables, let us examine

x0Lthue.etSsitnruc0cett0uhwreeebreeianretehxtheiisentstsleeatarsenotsfateuadlxlN iilnni;eanirtghyheccbhoaoeulrucxsmkiolinSfasm ryo+0f.vuH aF0roin0-r.

The general form of these columns can be written as

. . . h1;n+1 h1;n+2 h1;n+3

1h ;N

...
+1 hm;n

...

...

...

...

. . . +2 +3 hm;n

hm;n

hm;N

1

0 0 ... 0 :

hm+2;n+1

1

0 ... 0

...

...

...

...

...

. . . 1 +1 +2 +3 hM;n

hM;n

hM;n

0 It is easy to see from the above submatrix that the last M m rows

are in a form equivalent to the echelon form. This observation implies

that any number of auxiliary variables in erasures can be decoded using

2 S S S tahbM elsee(xinauutxhialtiaorr0ydcecarhn).ebBcekutdeteqhcuiosadtcieoodnnstbr.yaIdnuicsotisnthgtehrtehwaesoscruhdmesc,pketiveoeqnruytahtaaiuotxnisl0iS iasrmya+svt1aorptio--

ping set. Hence, the theorem is proved.

S Hence, any stopping set
The following theorem

in H 0 contains at least one standard
shows that for any stopping set

v0ariinabH le0.

S there is a S the set of

caollrrsetsapnodnadrdinvgasritaobplpeisnginset0

.

in H . This stopping set in H is This result is important to show

that removing four-cycles cannot hurt the performance of the iterative

decoder.

S V Theorem 6: For any stopping set 0 in H 0, define a set such that

V := fxv 2 S0 and v  gn :

V Now, is a N (S ) S G Proof:

stopping Let

s0et

in be

H. the

set

of

all

neighbors

of

0 in

0. Sim-

N (V) V G ilarly,
clarity,

we

useisStjh0e

set of all neighbors of to represent the jth row

in of H

0

. ,

For and

the purpose of Si to represent

the ith row of H .
V S S darTdhveasreiatble,isseneonTehmeoprteymbe5c.aIuf se0

0 should contain at least one
does not contain any auxiliary

stanvari-

able, then the theorem is trivially true. To prove the nontrivial case,
V assume that is not a stopping set. This means that there exists at least

N (V) one check, say Si, in

that is connected to exactly one variable

V 2 V in . Let xu be the neighbor of Si. Then, let us consider the fol-

lowing two possible cases.

•

N (S ) S NV(S ) ( 2 V) 1 2 S ma(Iffbrexloaeumni0snitnh.tShS eSiaoid,t,etiShsfieinn00noictittiashoinniennnveoooltflevbmee)de.an0iAtnstniboandenpcpypxaoiufunsosigituesisrotx-ehnctuey. Bcoil;nueultywthnioitiemhfsiH gcapohnli0nbyeitossorratxahdoueifcrS .tvsTia0thrhiiines-0

•

S V N (S ) S H ax Iinfsus0x.uuim0Tn.hvpiBnoitsiulovStinemitshapiinsaslidneic,nsoahvnuteohtxnlraviacltedeiadS i,criyti0snviitsanhaterailaasebtsaolsseputp0mwoinpnhhgteoaiosssfneeoetut.cxhroa-acmctytlpcyol0enoi,enstnehatesnsnteioniSgpchipl0ubindoigner

V set.Hence, is a S Hence, for any stopping

ssteotppi0nginsH et.0

,

there

is

an

equivalent

stopping

V set in H .

V S SS S S msthtoeaSpatinptnhsicneetghnasutemhtaabdseerbecqeooeufdniisvntsaaghlneofdnwaatinrltudotroevthabdareuitaeaobftlsoetos0pin0piniwnH gililss0.ehetIaq,tvuwiesaetlihmwteopisltolahrrmateatfeneintirmttoop0nai.tcoTtathisocineas S BER and BLER as that of . On the other hand, it is easy to show that a

isntoH pp0i.nIgnsfeatcitn,

H
the

does not example

necessarily have an equivalent stopping set presented in this section demonstrates this

G G fact. Hence, it can be
decoder working on

c0oinsclautdleedastthaats

the performance of the good as that working

iterative on . In

G fact, for most cases, simulation results
performance is obtained by iteratively

indicate that decoding on

an0

improvement .

in

B. Results
(23 12) The ; GC is an algebraic code that is considered not suit-
able for iterative decoders. We obtained four-cycle free GPCM’s of the
(23 12) code by iteratively applying the algorithm on the conventional matrix
representations of the code. The performance curves of ; GC, shown in Fig. 1, indicate a decrease in BERs and BLERs when decoded using four-cycle-free GPCMs of the code. The GC can be represented by a parity-check matrix with 11 check equations, referred to as original GC, and by a parity-check matrix with 23 check equations, referred to as extended GC. The original GC has 88 ones that contribute to 190 four-cycles. The extended GC has 184 ones that contribute to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:35:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3352

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2005

Fig. 2. Comparison of performance of (31; 26) Hamming code on AWGN channel under MPD and Bahl–Cocke–Jelinek–Raviv (BCJR) decoder.

598 four-cycles. By applying the algorithm, we removed all four-cy- For such a simple case, the probability of S1 and S2 being satisfied

cles in the original GC and the extended GC and, hence, obtained two GPCMs, referred to as transformed original GC and transformed extended GC, respectively. The transformed original GC has 96 ones that is just eight more than that in the original GC. The transformed extended GC has 209 ones that is just 25 more than in the extended GC. The performance of the code obtained by decoding with each one of these representations is compared with that of the maximum-likelihood decoding. The maximum-likelihood decoding on BEC is performed by iteratively decoding on a bipartite graph obtained from a set of all possible constraints defining the GC. Note that the size of the transformed matrices are small compared to those presented in [13].

given x1 = 1 and y can be calculated by brute force, and it is given by
j f g Pr(S1; S2 x1 = 1; y) = q2(q5p6 + p5q6)(q3p4 + p3q4) f g + p2(p3p4 + q3q4)(p5p6 + q5q6)
j 0 where pi = Pr(xi = 1 y) and qi = 1 pi.
The conventional sum–product algorithm assumes that the con-
j j straints are mutually independent, and hence, the probability of S1 and
S2 being satisfied given x1 = 1 is Pr(S1 x1 = 1; y)Pr(S2 x1 = 1; y). The above assumption is not true because x1 and x2 are involved in both S1 and S2. This means that the a posteriori probability of x1 calculated by iteratively applying (a finite number of iterations) the
sum–product algorithm is not accurate.

V. ITERATIVE DECODING OF LINEAR BLOCK CODES OVER AWGN CHANNEL

In order to remove the four-cycle in the set of constraints, we replace x1 + x2 in S1 and S2 with an auxiliary variable x1;2. The modified set of constraints are

An MPD based on the sum–product algorithm is a suboptimal (in general) and low-complexity decoder that works by passing soft messages (log-likelihood ratio in particular) over the edges of a graph rep-
C resenting the code . This decoding technique is optimal in a maxC imum a posteriori sense if and only if the graph of is a tree (graph

S10 : x1;2 + x3 + x4 = 0 S20 : x1;2 + x5 + x6 = 0 S30 : x1;2 + x1 + x2 = 0:
Note that the corresponding bipartite graph is a tree. The probability of

with no cycles) [6]. In general, good codes have several cycles in their graph representations [3]. Although the MPD working on such graphs is a suboptimal decoding technique, its performance is very good when girths of these graphs are large.
The algorithm presented in Section II helps to increase the girth of a
G C graph from 4 to 6. Let 0 be a four-cycle-free representation of . The G following example illustrates that 0 can be a more suitable represenG tation for the iterative decoder than .

S1 and S2 being satisfied given x1 = 1 and y can be written as

j j Pr(S1; S2

x1

=

1; y)

=

(q2

Pr(S10

;

0
S2

x1;2

=

1; y))

j +(p2

Pr(S10

;

0
S2

x1;2

=

0; y))

(2)

where
j Pr(S10; S20 x1;2 = 1; y) = (q3p4 + p3q4)(q5p6 + p5q6) j Pr(S10; S20 x1;2 = 0; y) = (p3p4 + q3q4)(p5p6 + q5q6):

From (2), we see that the introduction of the auxiliary variable has fa-

h i Example 3: Let S1 and S2 be the constraints of a binary code of
length 6. Each codeword, represented as x = x1; x2; x3; x4; x5; x6 , satisfies the following constraints S1 and S2:

cilitated the calculation of the exact a posteriori probability of x1.
G The sum–product algorithm is applied on 0 after initializing the
log-likelihood ratios of the auxiliary variables to zero.

S1 : x1 + x2 + x3 + x4 = 0

Since it is difficult to theoretically analyze the effects of removing

S2 : x1 + x2 + x5 + x6 = 0:

four-cycles, we present Monte Carlo simulation results that demon-

Note that the graph of the code has six variable nodes and two check strate the improvement in BER and BLER performance achieved by

nodes. It is obvious that variable nodes x1 and x2 participate in a decoding iteratively (at most 100 iterations) on four-cycle-free repfour-cycle. Let y be the received vector when x is sent over an AWGN resentations of algebraic codes. The performance curves of (31; 26)

channel. Based on y, and the constraints, S1 and S2, the ith bit of the Hamming code, shown in Fig. 2, were obtained by running the mes-

decoded vector x^ is a 1 if it maximizes the a posteriori probability that

j j j is written as Pr(xi = 1 y; S1; S2) = Pr(S1; S2

xi = 1; y)Pr(xi = 1 Pr(y; S1; S2)

y )Pr(y )
:

sage-passing algorithm on two different representations of the code:
2 2 conventional 5 31 matrix representation, and transformed 25 51
GPCM representation. The conventional representation has 80 ones
that contribute to 280 four-cycles. The transformed representation is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:35:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2005

3353

Fig. 3. Performance of different representations of (930; 472) EG superposition code on AWGN channel.

a four-cycle free GPCM obtained at the cost of adding 18 more ones. graphs. Specifically, we have observed a fractional improvement in per-

The performance gain obtained from using the transformed-GPCM in- formance by iteratively decoding on the TG obtained by removing all

creases with the gain at a

aBnEiRncorfea1s0e0i3n

to approximately 0.5 dB at

signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). For instance,

aisBaEpRprooxfi1m0a0te5l.yT0h.e25BdEBR

and it increases performance of

six-cycles and four-cycles from a (7; 3) LDPC code, constructed from the point-line incidence matrix of the smallest projective plane.

these two representations under the MPD is compared with that of a

scyomdeb.oAl-tbya-sByEmRboolfm1a0x0im5,utmheaBpEosRteprieorrfiodrmecaondceer

on of

the the

trellis of the transformed

GPCM is 0.25 dB away from that of the optimal decoder.

The performance curves of a (930; 472) LDPC code (see Fig. 3),

obtained from superposition construction based on Euclidean geometry

(EG) [10], were obtained by running the message-passing algorithm on
2 two different representations of the code: a conventional 465 930 2 matrix representation, and a transformed 930 1395 matrix represen-

tation. Each variable in the conventional matrix is involved in exactly

ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors wish to thank Yifei Zhang and Bill Ryan for providing LDPC codes constructed using the superposition method. The authors would like to thank the anonymous referees and Khaled Abdel-Ghaffar, Associate Editor for Coding Theory, for their helpful comments.
REFERENCES

one four-cycle, and there are 465 four-cycles altogether. Note that the error floor in the performance of GPCM representation is an order of magnitude lower than that of the original representation.
The results thus far agree with the intuition that increasing the girth of a TG helps to improve the performance of the corresponding code. Contrary to this belief, Yedidia et al. had presented a special case of the (23; 12) GC whose performance deteriorates significantly when iteratively decoded with transformed GPCMs [13]. The performance results that we obtained for the GC by running the message-passing algorithm on a four-cycle-free graph of the code agree with their observations. However, we would like to note that the size of our transformed matrix is at least 25 times smaller than that of their GPCMs. Also, we have observed that decoding iteratively over four-cycle-free graphs of binary representations of Reed–Solomon codes is beneficial only if they are short and have low code rates.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this correspondence, we have presented an algorithm to remove four-cycles from TGs of a linear block code with a minimal increase in decoding complexity. The results presented in this correspondence indicate that this method of removing four-cycles improves the suitability of iterative decoders for conventional algebraic codes. A logical extension of this work is to develop a general algorithm to remove cycles of any specified length. In fact, we have been able to use a technique, similar to the one presented here, to remove all six-cycles from small

[1] A. R. Calderbank, G. D. Forney, and A. Vardy, “Minimal tail-biting trellises: The Golay code and more,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 1435–1455, Jul. 1999.
[2] C. Di, D. Proietti, T. Richardson, I˙. E. Telatar, and R. Urbanke, “Finite length analysis of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[3] T. Etzion, A. Trachtenberg, and A. Vardy, “Which codes have cycle-free Tanner graphs?,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2173–2181, Sep. 1999.
[4] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[5] G. D. Forney, Jr., “Codes on graphs: Normal realizations,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 520–548, Feb. 2001.
[6] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[7] D. J. C. MacKay, “Relationships between sparse graph codes,” in Proc. Information-Based Induction Sciences, Japan, 2000. Available: [Online] at http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/abstracts/ibis. html.
[8] R. J. McEliece, “On the BCJR trellis for linear block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 1072–1092, Jul. 1996.
[9] M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[10] J. Xu and S. Lin, “A combinatoric superposition method for constructing low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 2003 IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Yokohama, Japan, Jun./Jul. 2003, p. 30.
[11] N. Wiberg, H.-A. Loeliger, and R. Kötter, “Codes and iterative decoding on general graphs,” Europ. Trans. Telecomm., vol. 6, pp. 513–525, Sep./Oct. 1995.
[12] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. Linköping, Linköping, Sweden, 1996.
[13] J. S. Yedidia, J. Chen, and M. C. Fossorier, “Generating code representations suitable for belief propagation decoding,” in Proc. 40th Annu. Allerton Conf. Communications, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2002.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:35:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

