Low Computational Complexity Algorithms of LDPC Decoder for DVB-S2 Systems

Eun-A Choi, Dae-Ik Chang, Deock-Gil Oh
Digital Broadcasting Research Division Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute
Daejeon, Korea eachoi@etri.re.kr

Ji-Won Jung
Dept. of Radio and Science Engineering Korea Maritime University Pusan, Korea
jwjung@hanara.kmaritime.ac.kr

Abstract—This paper proposed the two kinds of simplified complexity reduced algorithm for LDPC decoder. First, sequential decoding with partial group is proposed. It has same H/W complexity, and fewer number of iteration’s are required without performance degradation. Secondly, early detection method for reducing the computational complexity is proposed. Using a confidence criterion, some bit nodes and check node edges are detected early on during decoding. In this way, early detected edges are not computed following iterations, the computational complexity of further processing is reduced.
Keywords-LDPC codes, Low complexity, Early Detect Algorithm
I. INTRODUCTION
The high definition television(HDTV) satellite standard , known as The Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB-S2) transmission system employs a LDPC(Low Density Parity Check) coding technique as a channel coding scheme. Unlike turbo codes, LDPC codes have easily parallelizable decoding algorithm which consist of simple operation such as addition, comparison and look-up table[1][2][3][6]. Moreover the degree of parallelism is “adjustable” which makes it easy to trade-off throughput and complexity. However DVB-S2 system requires large block size and large number of iterations to near Shannon’s limit. The standard recommends that LDPC coded block size has 64800, and number of iteration is about 70 in the case of half coding rate. A large number of iterations for a large block size give rise to a large number of computation operations, mass power consumption, and decoding delay. It is necessary to reduce the iteration numbers and computation operations without performance degradation in order to implement with low power consumption[4][5]. This paper proposed the two kinds of simplified complexity reduced algorithm. First, sequential decoding with partial group is proposed. It has same H/W complexity, and fewer number of iteration’s are required at same performance in comparison with conventional decoder algorithm. Secondly, early detection method for reducing the computational complexity is proposed. Using a confidence criterion, some bit nodes and check node edges are detected early on during decoding. In this way, because early detected edges are not computed from following iterations, the computational complexity of further processing is reduced.

II. LDPC DECODING ALGORITHM

The purpose of the decoder is to determine the transmitted values of the bits. Bit nodes and check nodes communicate with each other to accomplish that. The decoding starts by assigning the channel values to the outgoing edges from bit nodes to check nodes. Upon receiving that, the check nodes make use of the parity check equations to update the bit node information and sends it back. Each bit node then performs a soft majority vote among the information reaching him. At this point, if the hard decisions on the bits satisfy all of the parity check equations, it means a valid codeword has been found and the process stops. Otherwise bit nodes go on sending the result of their soft majority votes to the check nodes. In the following sections, we describe the decoding algorithm in detail. The number of edges adjacent to a node is called the degree of that node.

wk →n1

vn→k1

wk →n2 wk →n3

vn1 →k vn2 →k
vn3 →k

vndc →k

C heck node k

B it no d e n

wk1 → n
wk2 →n wk3 →n

wkdv →n

vn→k2 vn→k3

wk →ndc
(a)

vn → k dv
(b)

Figure 1. Message update at bit and check nodes (a) Message update at check nodes (b) Message update at bit nodes

A. Initialization

The decoding starts by assigning the channel transmit

values to the outgoing edges from bit nodes to check nodes.

un

= −Lc

⋅

rn(Lc

=

2 σ2

),

n=(0,1,…,N −1)

(1)

Where, N is codeword size and σ is Gaussian noise variance.

The initial channel value is shown in Eq. (1).

0-7803-9152-7/05/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE

536

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:41:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

B. Check node update

Let us denote the incoming messages to the check node k

from its dc adjacent bit nodes by vn1 →k , vn2 →k ,…. v, ndc →k
(see Fig. 1(a)). Our aim is to compute the outgoing messages
from the check node k back to dc adjacent bit nodes. Let us

denote these messages by wk→n1 , wk→n2 ,…., wk→ndc . Each

outgoing message from check node k to its adjacent bit nodes

is computed as

( ) wk→ni = g vn1→k , vn12→k ,...,vni−1→k , vni+1→k ,...,vndc →k

(2)

g(a,b) = sign(a) × sign(b) ×{min(a , b )}+ LUTg (a,b)

LUTg (a, b) = log(1+ e− a+b ) − log(1+ e− a−b )

In practice, LUTg (.) function is implemented using a
small look up table.

C. Bit Node Update Let us denote the incoming messages to the bit node
n from its dv adjacent check nodes by

wk1 →n , vk2 →n ,…., vkdv →n (see Fig. 1(b)). Our aim is to
compute the outgoing messages from the bit node back to
dv adjacent check nodes. Let us denote these messages by
v v n →k1 , n→k2 ,…, vn→kdv . They are computed as follows:

∑ vn→ki = un + wk j →n .

(3)

j≠i

Intuitively, this is a soft majority vote on the value of the bit

n , using all relevant information expect wk j →n .

III. LOW COMPLEXITY ALGORITHMS
A. Sequential Decoding Algorithm with Partial Group
In this paper, we propose a new decoding structure. First,
we divide check nodes by Sm (m = 1,2,..., p)group. The
groups are in general randomly chosen so that minimize the cycle-4 occurrence. Next we decode the group by group in a serial fashion. For example, Fig. 2 shows decoding procedure
in case of Sm equals 2. Check node and bit node probability
are calculated at the first group (see Fig. 2(a)). Decoding process of first group has been finished, second group initiated the decoding process with calculated bit node probability resultant from the first group(see Fig. 2(b)). Proposed algorithm change just decoding order without performance degradation.
If p equal one, it is same as conventional decoder. Its idea
is come from serial concatenate turbo decoder that two decoder is concatenated in a serial fashion. The resultant extrinsic information of first decoder is delivered to the second decoder.

Group 1

B itN ode

C heck node
(a)

B itN ode

Group 2
C heck node
(b)

Figure 2. The Bit and check node update procedure(p=2) (a) Bit and check node update at first group
(b) Bit and check node update at second group

The proposed algorithm is the same theory. With codeword
size N =64800, information size, K =32400, number of check node, M = N − K , Fig. 3 shows that its performance is fast converged with a fewer iterations. In Fig. 3, N r means number
of iterations. As shown in Fig. 3, performance of sequential
decoding scheme with p=2 ( N r =35) is almost the same
asconventional scheme with p=1( N r =70)

BER 0
10
-1
10

Conventional Decoder(Nr=70) Sequential Decoder (Nr=35)
uncoded QPSK

-2
10

-3
10

-4
10

-5
10

-6
10 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Eb/No[dB]
Figure 3. Bit error rate comparison between Conventional LDPC decoder and Sequential LDPC decoder(p=2)

B. Early Detection Algorithm
Another approach is early detection for reducing the computation complexity. Early detection method is based on the observation that bit nodes and check nodes with high loglikelihood value can be considered reliable. So detected bit nodes and check nodes are negligible for next iteration. It means that we don’t need to calculate the bit node and check node updates for detected node from following iterations. Therefore, computation complexity of the next iterations is

537
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:41:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

reduced. For early detection for LDPC decoder, the proceedings are as follows
step 1. Initialization EarlyDetectCheck[k → ni ] = 0 EarlyDetectBit[n → ki ] = 0
step 2. Check node updates if wk→ni ≥ Tc then EarlyDetectCheck[k → ni ] = 1 else calculates Equation (2)
step3. Bit node updates vn→ki ≥Tb then EarlyDetectBit[n → ki ] = 1 else calculates Equation (3)
If EarlyDetectCheck[•] or EarlyDetectBit[•] are equal to one, we don’t need to calculate bit node and check node updates, just deliver the previous values to bit nodes or check nodes. Therefore, it is very important to decide the early
detection threshold, Tb for bit nodes, Tc for check nodes. Fixed on the Tc = 10 , we evaluated the performance for various the value of Tb . As shown in Fig. 4., we know that the
performance of early detect method is the same as conventional
scheme at around Tb =18.

early detected bit nodes. Fixed on the values of Tb = 18 and
Tc = 10 ,

TABLE I.

DECODING COMPLEXITY FOR CONVENTIONAL AND EARLY
DETECTED METHOD

Conventional decoder

Early detection method

Check nodes (g(a,b)) Bit nodes (additions)

(M × (dc −1))× Nr (N × (dv − 1))× Nr

( ( )) M ×

dc

−

d

* c

−1

× Nr

((N − N * )× dv )× Nr

TABLE II shows the number

d

* c

and

N*

for iterations at

Eb N0 of 1[dB] in the environment of

N = 64800, K = 64800, M = 32400 , and dc = 7, dv = 13 .

TABLE II.

d

* c

/

M

10 0.387

THE NUMBER OF EARLY DETECTED EDGES

Nr

20

30

40

50

60

1.484 2.619 3.29

3.6

3.8

N*

491 19048 62372 64334 64335 64335

d

* c

/

M

denotes

average

number

of

early

detected

edges

per one check node. As shown in Table 2, we conclude that

amount of computation complexity is reduced by comparing to

standard LDPC decoder scheme at Eb No of 1[dB]. As shown

in TABLE II, computational complexity of early detected

method is about 50% offs in case of check node update, 99%

offs in case of check node update compared to conventional

scheme.

Figure 4. BER performance for different Tb (N = 64800, K=32400,
dc = 7, dv = 13)

The required number of operations associated with conventional algorithm and early detection algorithm are summarized in TABLE I. The decoding complexity of LDPC decoded is evaluated based on Eq. (2) and Eq. (3).

In TABLE I, we summarized the required number of

operations.

d

* c

denotes the average number

of early detected

edges for each check nodes and denotes average number of

IV. CONCLUSIONS
This paper proposed the two kinds of simplified complexity reduced algorithm for LDPC decoder. First, sequential decoding with partial group is proposed. We know that required number of iterations are almost halved than conventional algorithm maintaining same computational complexity and without performance degradation. Secondly, early detection method for reducing the computational complexity is proposed. Through the TABLE I to TABLE II, computational complexity of early-detected method is about 50% offs in case of check node update, 99% offs in case of check node update compared to conventional scheme. Based on these results, we conclude that proposed algorithm provide an attract solution to implementation iterative decoding of LDPC codes with large block size and many number of iterations.
REFERENCES

538
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:41:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,”IRE trans.information theory,vol.8, PP.21-28,1962.
[2] D. J. C. Mackay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon Limit Performance of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,” Electron. Letter, Vol.32, PP. 16451646,Aug.1996.
[3] M. Sipser and D. A. Spielman,”Expander Codes,”IEEE Trans. Information Theory, vol.42, pp.1720-1722, Aug. 1996

[4] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Effcient Encoding of Low-Density Parity Check Codes,” IEEE Trans. Information Theory, vol. 47, pp. 638656, Feb.2001
[5] J. W. Bond, S. Hui, and H. Schmidt,”Constructing low-density paritycheck codes,”EUROCOMM 2000, Information Systems for Enhanced Public Safety and security. IEEE/AFCEA,pp.260-262,2000.
[6] David J. C. Mavkay “Good Error-Correcting Codes Based on Very Sparse Matrics” IEEE Trans. Information Theory,vol. 45, NO. 2. March 1999.

539
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:41:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

