Turbo – Coding – 2006 · April 3–7, 2006, Munich
Sub Graph Approach In Iterative Sum-Product Algorithm
Muhammet Fatih Bayramog˜lu1, Ali O¨ zgu¨r Yılmaz2, Buyurman Baykal3 1 Dept. of Electrical and Electronics Eng. Middle East Technical University, fatih@eee.metu.edu.tr 2 Dept. of Electrical and Electronics Eng. Middle East Technical University, aoyilmaz@metu.edu.tr 3 Dept. of Electrical and Electronics Eng. Middle East Technical University, buyurman@metu.edu.tr

Abstract
A new scheduling algorithm to the iterative sum-product algorithm, which is called sub-graph scheduling, will be presented in this paper. The propesed algorithm provides a schedule which has a higher convergence rate than the iterative sum-product algorithm while keeping the complexity of one iteration withot degrading the performance. Our method also gives an explanation to the fact that turbo decoders have faster convergence rate than LDPC decoders.

1 Introduction
The sum-product algorithm is a very efficient tool for solving the marginalization problem of a global function that can be factored into local functions which have smaller number of arguments [1]. This algorithm is usually used for obtaining marginal probability density functions (pdf) from a given joint pdf. The sum-product algorithm is actually a generalization of some well known algorithms in many different areas of science such as communications and artificial intelligence [1]. The well known BCJR algorithm [3], Pearl’s belief propagation algorithm [4], Gallager’s probabilistic decoding algorithm of LDPC codes [5], the turbo decoding algorithm [6] are all instances of the sum-product algorithm[1].
The sum-product algorithm is a message passing algorithm which operates on factor graphs. Factor graphs figures out the factorization of the global functions into local functions which contain less number of arguments. The classical sum-product algorithm determines the schedule of the nodes of the factor graph for sending their messages. After two messages pass through an edge in both directions message passing terminates and the sum-product algorithm provides the exact marginal functions.
However, if the factor graph contain loops then obtaining a message calculation schedule according to the classical sum-product algorithm is impossible. In this case an iterative version of the sum-product algorithm is used. If the iterative sum-product algorithm requires large number of iterations to converge then its complexity may be prohibitive for power critical applications. If the standard message update schedule of the iterative sum-product algorithm is modified, different convergence characteristics can be obtained.
In [11] a shuffled version of the iterative sum-product algorithm is proposed for decoding LDPC and turbo codes. In this algorithm a parity check node calculates

its message more than once during an iteration. Although this algorithm improves the convergence rate, it also increases the complexity of one iteration.
The aim of the sub-graph scheduling is improving the iterative sum-product algorithm in convergence rate aspect. The main idea of the sub-graph scheduling is applying the divide-and-conquer strategy to the iterative sum-product algorithm. In sub-graph scheduling a loopy factor graph is divided into sub-graphs which are loop-free. Then the classical sum-product algorithm, which supplies the exact marginal functions very efficiently, runs on these loop-free sub-graphs. By this way each sub-graph generates a portion of the total result. Since these partial results are calculated by using only a portion of the total factor graph, they are not very accurate. In order to improve accuracy, each subgraph runs again iteratively by using the results of the other sub-graphs as a priori information. Hopefully the algorithm will converge to a point in less number of iterations than the iterative sum-product algorithm. An important property of the sub-graph sum-product algorithm is that, its complexity of one iteration is exactly equivalent to that of the standard iterative sumproduct algorithm.
In [12] an implementation oriented method for decoding LDPC codes is presented. The proposed method also resulted in higher convergence rate. The message update schedule used in [12] can be obtained automatically as an instance of the sub-graph sum-product algorithm. Sub-graph sum-product algorithm can also provide better converging schedules very easily.
This paper is organized as follows. Next section is a brief introduction to the factor graphs and the sumproduct algorithm. Sub-graph approach is explained in Section 3. In Section 4 some of the numerical results are presented and the paper is concluded in the final section.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:06:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Turbo – Coding – 2006 · April 3–7, 2006, Munich

2 Factor Graphs and the SumProduct Algorithm

In this section factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm is summarized. The main aim of this section is not explaining these concepts in detail but just an introduction. For further information [1] and [2] are authoritative references.

2.1 Factor Graphs
Factor graphs represent the factorization of a global function into local functions which have less number of arguments [1], [2]. They can be defined formally as follows:
Definition 2.1: Factor Graph: Let X be a set of random variables x1, x2, . . . , xn. Let a function of these variables, f (X) , can be factored into functions of Xi, gi(Xi), where Xis are subsets of X. In other words:

f (X) = gi(Xi).

(1)

Then a factor graph is defined as a bipartite graph consisting of factor nodes assigned to each factor function gi(Xi) and variable nodes assigned to each variable xi. There is an edge between the ith factor node and kth variable node if and only if xk ∈ Xi.
Note that in this definition, a priori information is also represented with a factor node.

2.2 The Sum-Product Algorithm
The sum-product algorithm provides the exact marginal functions of a global function if it is represented by a loop-free factor graph. Sum-product algorithm determines the message calculation schedule and the content of the messages formally. In this section we will summarize the important aspects of the sum-product algorithm. For a complete explanation refer to Section II.C of [1].
One of the most important properties of the messages of the sum-product algorithm is the fact that the message from a node p to node r, is independent from the message that p receives from r. This fact also determines the scheduling of the message calculation. Messages will be calculated when they are able to be calculated. This means that a node p will wait until all of the neighbors except one of them, q, send their messages. At this instant, node p can calculate and send its message for q. After p sends its message, it starts to wait a message from q which is required for calculating the messages for all of the other neighbors. This scheduling ends when two messages pass through an edge in both directions.

2.2.1 The Iterative Sum-Product Algorithm The schedule explained in Section 2.2 fails if there is a loop in the factor graph. This problem is solved by making the algorithm iterative. In the iterative sumproduct algorithm, initially all of the variable nodes

send empty messages. These initial messages enables all of the factor nodes to send their messages. Then again variable send their messages and this process goes on iteratively until a stop condition is satisfied.

3 Sub-Graph Approach

Sub-graph approach determines a schedule of execution

of factor nodes in loopy factor graphs by applying the

divide and conquer strategy. Sub-graph scheduling may

improve convergence rate and/or accuracy character-

istics of the iterative sum-product algorithm. In this

section we will explain the details sub-graph approach.

Basically divide and conquer strategy consists of

three steps. The first step is dividing the problem into

smaller pieces which are expected to be solved easily.

The second step is solving these smaller problems. The

final step is combining the results obtained from smaller

pieces to form the result of the whole problem.

The factorization equation should be reconsidered

for dividing the marginalization problem into smaller

pieces. Assume that the global function f (X) is fac-

tored into n functions, g1(X1), g2(X2), . . . , gn(Xn),

and R1, R2, . . . , Rk are mutually exclusive subsets of

the {1,

set 2, . .

of numbers . , n}. Then

from 1 to n such we can modify the

Ethqautatio∀ni

Ri (1)

= as

below:

n

f (X) =

gi(Xi)

i=1

=

gi(Xi) gi(Xi) . . . gi(Xi)

i∈R1

i∈R2

i∈Rk

k

=

ri(Xˆi)

(2)

i=1

where Xˆi = l∈Ri Xl and

ri(Xˆi) =

gl(Xl).

(3)

l∈Ri

Equation (3) shows that ri(Xˆi)’s are functions which can be factored into functions of smaller number of arguments. Thus, factorization of ri(Xˆi)’s can be represented with factor graphs. The original factor graph, which represents the marginalization problem of f (X) is the superposition of these newly formed small factor graphs, which will be called “sub-graphs” from now on. In other words the problem has been divided into pieces of the same kind.
The second step of the divide and conquer strategy is solving the problem for these smaller pieces. If the Ri’s are picked in such a way that the resulting ri(Xˆi)’s can be represented with loop-free sub-graphs, then solving the marginalization problem for the small subgraphs is easy. The classical sum-product algorithm, can calculate the marginal densities efficiently for these loop-free sub-graphs.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:06:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Turbo – Coding – 2006 · April 3–7, 2006, Munich

A Sub-Graph Other Sub-Graphs
Fig. 1. Pictorial demonstration of an iteration in the sub-graph sumproduct algorithm
We propose an iterative method for the final step of the divide and conquer strategy which is depicted in Figure 1. Initially a sub-graph operates and its result is supplied to the other sub-graphs. Other subgraphs will use this result as a priori information and generate a result. Then the first sub-graph uses the information generated by the other sub-graphs as a priori information in the next run and hopefully it will generate a more accurate result which will be used by other sub-graphs as a priori information. This more accurate a priori information will improve the accuracy of the output of other sub-graphs. This process goes on iteratively until a stop condition is satisfied. We call this iterative algorithm as the “sub-graph sum-product algorithm”.
In the light of these explanations a sub-graph can be defined formally as follows.
Definition 3.1: Sub-graph: A sub-graph, represented by S, is a region of a factor graph which does not contain any loop, and if a factor node p is included in a sub-graph S all of the variable nodes connected to p should be included in S.
A given factor graph can be partitioned into subgraphs in many different ways. Therefore, we should also define what kind of partitioning is proper.
Definition 3.2: Proper partitioning of a factor graph: A partitioning of a factor graph is proper if and only if all of the factor nodes in the factor graph is contained in a sub-graph, and only one sub-graph.
A question that may arise is whether a proper partitioning exists for every factor graph. The answer is positive. First of all, there exists a trivial partitioning, in which every sub-graph is composed of just a single factor node and all of the variable nodes connected to it. In other words every subset Ri = {i}. Depending on the factor graph, other partitioning schemes may exist. Different partitioning methods will result in different convergence and accuracy characteristics.
3.1 Block Diagram Representation of SubGraphs
Block diagrams usually provides simple representations for complex problems in different areas of science. Therefore, we employ block diagrams for explaining the sub-graph sum-product algorithm. The blocks are connected in cascade or in parallel or a mixture of these two to form a directed flow graph. Since our algorithm is an iterative one, we should represent the iterations. An iteration will be represented by feeding the output of

S3

S1

S2

S5

S4

D
Fig. 2. A simple flow graph of sub-graphs. In this figure Sis represent subgraphs and D represents a delay element.

the flow graph back to input of the flow graph through a delay element. Figure 2 shows a simple flow graph of sub-graphs.
In order to simplify the notation we enforce every variable node to be included in every sub-graph. Note that this enforcement does not conflict with definitions 3.1 and 3.2.
The signals flowing through the edges of the flow graph are vectors of density functions. Since every variable node in the factor graph is included in every sub-graph, the vectors contain density functions of the all variable nodes included in the whole factor graph. We represent these vectors with capital boldface letters with a ( ) sign on top of them. For instance, (I)j(xj) is a density function of variable xj which is the jth component of the vector I.
We define two operators on these vectors in order to simplify the representation while explaining the details of the sub-graph sum-product algorithm. The first one of these operators is the separation operator. Separation operator is represented with and defined as follows:

(A B)j(xj) = (A)j(xj)/(B)j(xj). (4) The second one of these operators is the combination operator and represented by ⊗. Definition of the combination operator is as follows:

(A ⊗ B)j(xj) = (A)j(xj)(B)j(xj).

(5)

3.2 Structure and Operation of a SubGraph Block

When a sub-graph block is executed its basic job is to distribute the received information to variable nodes as a priori information, then run the classical sum-product algorithm, and finally combine the results obtained from variable nodes to form the output vector. As it is shown in [14], the input received by a sub-graph from other sub-graphs also contains information generated by itself during the previous iteration. This part of the information should be separated from the input. Therefore, a sub-graph should have a state, and store its generated information to use it in the next iteration.
If we represent the input vector to a sub-graph with I and the state of that sub-graph with X then we can separate the information generated by the current subgraph during the previous iteration by Equation 6.

R = I D(X)

(6)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:06:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Turbo – Coding – 2006 · April 3–7, 2006, Munich
Fig. 4. Cascaded connection of two sub-graphs

Fig. 3. Structure of a sub-graph block

where D(.) is the delay operator. In turbo decoding

terminology the vector R is the extrinsic information

generated by all other sub-graphs.

Components of the R should be used as a priori in-

formation by the current sub-graph. As it is mentioned

in Section 2.1, a priori information about a variable

node can be represented by a factor node which is

connected to just that variable node. Therefore, we add

artificial factor nodes, one for each variable node, to

handle the a priori information received by the sub-

graph. Since these artificial factor nodes are connected

to just one variable node the sub-graph is still loop-free.

Next task of a sub-graph block is operating the

classical sum-product algorithm on its loop-free factor-

graph. After sum-product algorithm finalizes, the out-

puts generated at the variable nodes are combined to

form the output vector of the sub-graph block which is

represented with O.

The vector O is a combination of the information

generated by the current sub-graph and information

received by current sub-graphs. The information gen-

erated by the current sub-graph should be stored in the

state of the sub-graph block in order to use it in the next

iteration. This state can be obtained by the following

equation.

X=O R

(7)

The operation of a sub-graph block is demonstrated in Figure 3.

3.3 Connection Types
The sub-graph blocks, whose operation is explained in the previous section, is connected to each other basically in two different types. These connection types are cascade and parallel connection. Using these two connection types mixed forms can be obtained.
In cascade connection type output of a sub-graph block is applied as input of the next sub-graph block as shown in Figure 4. In this figure I2 = O1.
Parallel connection of sub-graph blocks is a little bit more complicated. Figure 5 depicts parallel connection of two sub-graphs. In this case both of the input vectors of sub-graphs is equal to the input of the parallel

Fig. 5. Parallel connection of two sub-graphs

branch. In other words,

I1 = I2 = I.

(8)

Then the output of the parallel branch is given by the

equation

O = O1 ⊗ O2 I.

(9)

In [14] it is showed parallel connection operation of sub-graphs is associative. This associativity property allows us to connect any number of sub-graphs in parallel.

3.4 Partitioning Types
A loopy factor graph may be partitioned into sub-graph properly in many different ways. One of the criteria in determining the partitioning of a factor graph into subgraph is the accessibility property of sub-graphs. What we mean by accessibility is how many different factor nodes can be accessed from a factor node in a subgraph.
The two extreme type of sub-graphs in the sense of accessibility are all-accessible and non-accessible subgraphs. In an all accessible sub-graph there exist a path between any two factor nodes. On the contrary, in an non-accessible sub-graph there are no paths between any two factor nodes. Figure 6 shows the all-accessible and the non-accessible partitionings together with the trivial partitioning on a small factor graph.

3.5 Complexity Issues
Complexity of the classical sum-product algorithm is determined by the number messages calculated since message calculation is the most processing power demanding process of the algorithm. We can equivalently say that complexity is proportional to the number of edges since two messages pass through an edge during the algorithm.
Similarly, complexity of the iterative sum-product algorithm is also proportional to the number of edges. However, since two messages are calculated per an edge during every iteration, the complexity of the single iteration of the iterative sum-product algorithm is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:06:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Turbo – Coding – 2006 · April 3–7, 2006, Munich

p1

p2

p3

p4

v1

v2

v3

v4

(a) The original factor graph

Sub-Graph 1 p1

Sub-Graph 2 p2

Sub-Graph 3 p3

Sub-Graph 4 p4

v1

v2

v1

v3

v1

v2

v3

v3

v4

(b) The trivial partitioning

Sub-Graph 1

p1

p3

Sub-Graph 2

p2

p4

v1

v2

v3

v4

v1

v3

v4

(c) All-accessible partitioning

Sub-Graph 1

Sub-Graph 2

p1

p4

p2

Sub-Graph 3 p3

v1

v2

v3

v4

v1

v3

v2

v3

v4

(d) Non-accessible partitioning Fig. 6. Different choices of partitioning a factor graph into subgraphs

equivalent to the total complexity classical sum-product algorithm.
The complexity of the sub-graph sum-product algorithm is proportional to the total number of edges in the sub-graphs. In Definition 3.2 it is ensured that all of the variable nodes connected to a factor node are also included in the same sub-graph. Hence, all of the edges connected to a factor node are guaranteed to be included in the same sub-graph with the factor node. Definition 3.2 also states that a factor node should be included in one and only one sub-graph. If these two facts are combined then it can be deduced that an edge in the original factor graph is included once and only once in a sub-graph. Therefore, the number of edges in the original factor graph is equal to the total number of edges in the all sub-graphs. Hence, the complexity of the one iteration of the sub-graph sum-product algorithm is equivalent to the one iteration of the iterative sum-product algorithm. This means that, if the number of iterations required for the sub-graph sum-product algorithm is less than the number of iterations required for the iterative sum-product algorithm then the subgraph sum-product algorithm has less complexity.

xk’ y1k’

Decoder 1 Λ1(xk)

Λ1rec(xk)

-+ Σ

-

Σ +

D Λ1ext’(xk)

+ Σ-

D

π y2k’

D

Λ2(xk)

Λ2ext’(xk)

+ Σ

-

Decoder 2 π−1

Λ2(xk)

Fig. 7. Modified turbo decoding schematic

Λ2(xk) Λ2rec(xk)

Decoding Output

3.6 Turbo and LDPC Decoding Algorithms as Instances of the Sub-Graph SumProduct Algorithm
The two capacity approaching codes, turbo and LDPC codes, use sum-product algorithm in their decoders [1], [7]. It can be shown that these two decoders apply subgraph scheduling in their decoders.
The classical structure of a turbo decoder which is first presented in [6] can be represented equivalently as in Figure 7. The component decoders shown in Figure 7 resembles the sub-graph block structure which is depicted in Figure 3. The component decoders employs BCJR algorithm [6], [3] which is a sum-product algorithm running on a loop-free factor graph. Therefore, we may deduce that the component decoders of the turbo decoding algorithm are sub-graphs. Together with their peripherals component decoders form a sub-graph block. Finally we may conclude that the turbo decoding algorithm employs sub-graph scheduling with two subgraphs connected in cascade.
Factor graph or Tanner graph representation of LDPC codes is very popular and the most widely used LDPC decoding algorithm is the iterative sum-product algorithm that runs on the factor graph that represents the LDPC code. This algorithm can also be derived as an instance of the sub-graph sum-product algorithm. The LDPC decoding algorithm is parallel connection of non-accessible sub-graphs.

4 Numerical Results
Although our algorithm can be applicable to any problem which can be represented with a loopy factor graph, We have simulated the sub-graph sum-product algorithm for LDPC decoding. We have used four different structured forms of sub-graph sum-product algorithm for simulations. The first one of these algorithms is the cascade connection of non-accessible (CAS-NON) sub-graphs which is equivalent to the method proposed in [12]. The second one is the parallel connection of the non-accessible (PAR-NON) sub-graphs. Note that this form is equivalent to the standard LDPC decoding algorithm. The third and fourth forms are the cascade and parallel connections of all-accessible (CAS-ALL,PAR-ALL) sub-graphs respectively.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:06:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Turbo – Coding – 2006 · April 3–7, 2006, Munich

1

Frame Error Rate (FER)

0.1

CAS-NON 0.01 PAR-NON

CAS-ALL

PAR-ALL

0.001

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

SNR:10

log(

Eb N0

)

Fig. 8. FER. vs. SNR characteristics of all of the four decoders.

Number of Iterations

45

40

CAS-NON

35

PAR-NON

30

CAS-ALL

25

PAR-ALL

20

15

10

5

0

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

SNR:10

log(

Eb N0

)

Fig. 9. Average number of iterations done by decoders at different SNR’s.

The code we have used is a randomly generated regular LDPC code of block length 2000 and rate R = 1/2. Our code has a column weight of 3. We have modulated the codewords with the binary phase shift keying modulation and passed the modulated signals through additive white Gaussian noise channel.
Figure 8 presents the frame error rate (FER) vs. signal to noise ratio characteristics of the four decoders. This result shows that all of the four decoder have almost equivalent accuracy as expected.
In Figure 9 we have plotted the average number of iterations required to converge to the correct solution. In this result we did not take into account the codewords which did not converge. The first observation that can be acquired from this result is that, cascade connected decoders require 50% less iterations to converge than their parallel connected counterparts. This observation also explains why turbo-decoding algorithm converges faster than LDPC decoding algorithm if it is recalled that turbo decoding algorithm is cascade connected algorithm whereas the LDPC decoding algorithm with standard scheduling is a parallel connected algorithm. This explanation closes the gap between LDPC and turbo codes one step further.
Another observation that can be made is that, the decoders which are formed by all-accessible sub-

graphs converge around 10% less iterations than the decoders formed by non-accessible sub-graphs. The decoder which is abbreviated by “CAS-ALL” converges 55% faster than the standard LDPC decoder while maintaining the accuracy. In other words complexity is decreased without sacrificing from FER vs. SNR performance.
5 Conclusion
In this paper we have presented a new scheduling algorithm for sum-product algorithm on loopy factor graphs. Experimental results demonstrated that our algorithm may increase the convergence rate of the sumproduct algorithm while keeping the complexity of one iteration constant. Our algorithm also gives an answer to the question why turbo codes converges faster than LDPC codes. With better partitioning algorithms and different connection forms performance of the subgraph sum-product algorithm can be increased even further.
References
[1] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H. A. Loeliger, “Factor Graphs and the Sum-Product Algorithm”, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol.47, No.2,pp.498-519 February 2001
[2] H. A. Loeliger, “An Introduction to Factor Graphs”, IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, Vol. 21, Issue 1,pp.28-41 Jan. 2004,
[3] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J.Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. IT-20, pp.284-287, Mar. 1974
[4] J. Pearl, “Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems : Networks of Plausible Inference”,Morgan Kauffman Publishers, San Mateo, CA, 1998
[5] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density Parity-check” Codes, M.I.T. Press, 1963.
[6] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon Limit error correcting coding and decoding: Turbo Codes” in Proc. 1993 IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, Geneva, Switzerland, May. 1993, pp. 1064-1070
[7] R. McEliece, D. MacKay, and J. Cheng, “Turbo decoding as an instance of pearl’s ‘belief propagation’ algorithm,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 140–152, Feb. 1998.
[8] D. J. C. MacKay, “Information Theory, Inference, and Learning Algorithms”, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, UK, 2003
[9] B. J. Frey and D. J. C. MacKay, “A Revolution: —Belief Propagation in Graphs With Cycles” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 10, MIT Press, Cambridge,MA, 1998
[10] F. R. Kschischang and B. J. Frey,“Iterative decoding of compound codes by probability propagation in graphical models” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Comm., vol. 16, pp. 219-230, Feb. 1998
[11] J. Zhang and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Shuffled Iterative Decoding”, IEEE Tran. on Comm., Vol. 53, No. 2, pp. 209-213, February 2005
[12] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “Turbo Decoder Architectures for Low-Density Parity-Check Codes”, in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, pp. 1383-1388, Nov. 2002
[13] N. Wiberg, “Codes and Decoding on General Graphs”, Ph. D. Thesis, Department of Electrical Eng. Linko¨ping University, Linko¨ping, Sweden, 1996
[14] M. F. Bayramog˜lu, “Sub-Graph Approach in Iterative SumProduct Algorithm”, M. Sc. Thesis, Department of Electrical and Electronics Eng. Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkey, September 2005

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:06:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

