IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 1, JANUARY 2006

71

Efficient Encoding of Quasi-Cyclic Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
Zongwang Li, Member, IEEE, Lei Chen, Lingqi Zeng, Shu Lin, Life Fellow, IEEE, and Wai H. Fong

Abstract—Quasi-cyclic (QC) low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes form an important subclass of LDPC codes. These codes have encoding advantage over other types of LDPC codes. This paper addresses the issue of efficient encoding of QC-LDPC codes. Two methods are presented to find the generator matrices of QC-LDPC codes in systematic-circulant (SC) form from their parity-check matrices, given in circulant form. Based on the SC form of the generator matrix of a QC-LDPC code, various types of encoding circuits using simple shift registers are devised. It is shown that the encoding complexity of a QC-LDPC code is linearly proportional to the number of parity bits of the code for serial encoding, and to the length of the code for high-speed parallel encoding.
Index Terms—Array of circulants, quasi-cyclic (QC) low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, systematic-circulant (SC) form.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes, discovered by Gallager in 1962 [1], were rediscovered and shown to form a class of Shannon-limit-approaching codes in the late 1990s [2], [3]. These codes, decoded with iterative decoding based on belief propagation [4], such as the sum-product algorithm (SPA) [3], [5]–[9], achieve amazingly good error performance. Ever since their rediscovery, design, construction, decoding, efficient encoding, performance analysis, and applications of these codes in digital communication and storage systems have become the focal points of research. Various methods for constructing LDPC codes have been proposed. Based on the methods of construction, LDPC codes can be classified into two general categories: 1) random (or random-like) codes generated by computer search based on certain design guidelines and required structural properties of their Tanner graphs [7], such as the girth and degree distributions [3], [6]; and 2) structured codes constructed based on algebraic and combinatorial methods, such as those given in [10]–[22], and many others.
Although iterative decoding of long LDPC codes can be practically implemented, encoding of these codes can be rather com-
Paper approved by T.-K. Truong, the Editor for Coding Theory and Techniques of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received May 1, 2004; revised January 19, 2005. This work was supported in part by NASA under Grant NNG05GD13G and in part by the NSF under Grant CCR-011789. This paper was presented in part at IEEE GLOBECOM, St. Louis, MO, Nov. 28–Dec. 2, 2005.
Z. Li is with the Data Storage Systems Center (DSSC), Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA (e-mail: zwli@andrew.cmu.edu).
L. Chen, L. Zeng, and S. Lin are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California at Davis, Davis, CA 95616 USA (e-mail: leichen@ece.ucdavis.edu; lqzeng@ece.ucdavis.edu; shulin@ece.ucdavis.edu).
W. H. Fong is with the Goddard Space Flight Center, NASA, Greenbelt, MD 20771 USA (e-mail: wai.fong@gsfc.nasa.gov).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2005.861667

plex, since most of these codes, especially computer-generated random codes, do not have sufficient structure to allow simple encoding. One class of structured LDPC codes that allows lowcomplexity encoding is the class of quasi-cyclic (QC)-LDPC codes. It is known in coding theory [22], [23] that QC codes can be encoded with simple shift registers, with linear complexity based on their generators (or generator matrices). Well-designed QC-LDPC codes have been shown to perform as well as computer-generated random LDPC codes, regular or irregular [14], [18], [19], [21], in terms of bit-error performance, block-error performance, and error floor, collectively. Therefore, in practical applications, they are strong competitors to the random codes, due to their simple encoding and low error floors. These codes also have advantages in integrated circuit (IC) decoder implementations due to their cyclic symmetry, which results in simple regular wiring and modular structure.
LDPC codes are universally specified by their parity-check matrices. The parity-check matrix of a QC-LDPC code is given as an array of sparse circulants of the same size [10], [14]. We say that the parity-check matrix is in circulant form. This paper is concerned with efficient encoding of QC-LDPC codes. Two methods are presented to find the generator matrix of a QC-LDPC code in a systematic-circulant (SC) form, based on its parity-check matrix in circulant form. Based on the generator matrix in SC form, encoding of a QC-LDPC code can be accomplished with an array of shift registers with complexity linearly proportional to the number of parity-check bits of the code for serial encoding, and to the length of the code for high-speed parallel encoding. Three types of encoding circuits (or architectures) are devised.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II gives a brief introduction of QC-LDPC codes, including the definitions of parity-check and generator matrices in circulant forms and basic structure. Sections III–V present two methods for finding the generator matrices of QC-LDPC codes in SC form and give three types of encoding circuits. Section VI gives the encoding circuits of two specific QC-LDPC codes and discusses their encoding complexities and error performances, and Section VII concludes the paper with some remarks.

II. INTRODUCTION TO QC-LDPC CODES

A circulant is a square matrix in which each row is the cyclic

shift (one place to the right) of the row above it, and the first

row is the cyclic shift of the last row. For such a circulant, each

column is the downward cyclic shift of the column on its left,

and the first column is the cyclic shift of the last column. The

row and column weights of a circulant are the same, say . For

simplicity, we say that the circulant has weight . If

,

0090-6778/04$20.00 © 2006 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:03:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

72

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 1, JANUARY 2006

then the circulant is a permutation matrix, called a circulant permutation matrix. For a circulant, the set of columns (reading top-down) is the same as the set of rows (reading from right to left). A circulant is completely characterized by its first row (or first column), which is called the generator of the circulant.

For a

circulant over GF(2), if its rank is , then all

its rows are linearly independent. If its rank is less than ,

then any consecutive rows (or columns) of may be regarded

as linearly independent, and the other

rows (or columns)

are linearly dependent. This is due to the cyclic structure of .

For simplicity, we always take the first (or the last) rows (or

columns) of as the independent rows (or columns).

A QC-LDPC code is given by the null space of an array of

sparse circulants of the same size [14], [16], [19]. For two pos-

itive integers and with

, consider the following

array of

circulants over GF(2):

III. GENERATOR MATRIX IN SYSTEMATIC-CIRCULANT FORM AND ENCODER IMPLEMENTATION: CASE I

In this and the next two sections, we present two methods for

constructing the generator matrices of QC-LDPC codes in SC

form from their parity-check matrices for two different cases.

The first case is that the rank of the parity-check matrix

given by (1) is equal to the number of rows of , and there

exists a

subarray in with rank . The second case

is that

, or

and there does not exist a

subarray in with rank . The first case is considered in this

and the next sections, and the second case will be considered

in Section V. Also included in these sections are three types of

encoding circuits using arrays of shift registers.

Consider the QC-LDPC code given by the null space of

the parity-check matrix given by (1). Suppose the rank of

is equal to . We assume that the columns of circulants of

are arranged in such a way that the rank of the following

subarray of :

...

... . . . ...

(1)

...

...

. . . ...

(2)

which has the following structural properties: 1) the weight of each circulant is small compared with its size ; and 2) no two rows (or two columns) of have more than one 1-component in common, called the row-column (RC) constraint. Property 1) simply implies that each circulant in is a sparse cir-

is , the same as the rank of . We also assume that the first

columns of correspond to the

information

bits. Then the desired generator matrix of has the following

form:

culant, and hence, is a sparse matrix. Property 2), the RC

constraint, ensures that there are no four 1-entries at the four corners of a rectangle in . Then the null space of gives

...

a QC-LDPC code of length

, whose Tanner graph

[7] is free of cycles of length four [11], and hence, has a girth

of at least six. If all the circulants in have the same weight , then has constant column weight and constant row
weight . In this case, is a regular QC-LDPC code. The

... ... . . . ...

...

...

...

...

RC constraint on ensures that there are check sums or-

thogonal on every code bit, and hence, the minimum distance of

(3)

is at least

[11], [22]. If the weight distribution of the

circulants in results in multiple column weights or multiple

row weights in , then is an irregular QC-LDPC code.

The structure of a QC-LDPC code can be viewed from its

parity-check matrix in circulant form, given by (1). Based on

this form, every codeword in can be divided into sec-

tions,

, and each section consists of

consecutive components of . For

, the compo-

nents of the th section correspond to the columns of the

th column of circulants of . For

, let denote

the vector obtained by cyclically shifting each of the compo-

nents of the th section to the right places. It is clear that

. We call the th (right) cyclic shift of . Then it follows from the circulant structure of that the

where is a

identity matrix, is a

zero matrix,

and with

and

is a

circulant. The generator matrix with the form given by (3)

is said to be in SC form. It consists of two parts, the left part

and the right part . The left part

of with

identity matrices on its main diagonal is actually

a

identity matrix, and the right part of

is a

array of circulants. In coding theory

[22], [23], is known as being in systematic form, and the

right part of is called the matrix that corresponds to

the parity-check section of a codeword in systematic form. We

say that is in SC form, because its matrix is an array of

circulants. The SC form allows us to encode a QC-LDPC code

with simple shift registers.

vector

is also a codeword in . This The necessary and sufficient condition for to be a gen-

says that has sectionized cyclic structure. If the parity-check erator matrix of is that

, where is a

matrix consists of a single circulant or a single column of

zero matrix [22], [23]. For

and

circulants, then is a cyclic code [22], [23]. Therefore, cyclic

, let be the generator of the circulant . Once

LDPC codes [11] form a subclass of QC-LDPC codes.

we know ’s, we can form all the circulants ’s of .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:03:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: EFFICIENT ENCODING OF QUASI-CYCLIC LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

73

Fig. 1. SRAA encoder circuit.

Therefore, is completely characterized by a set of

It follows from (7) and (8) that the th parity-check section

circulant generators, which are called the generators of . can be computed, step by step, as the information sequence is

Let

be the unit -tuple with a “1” at the shifted into the encoder. For

, at the th step, the

first position, and

be the all-zero -tuple. For accumulated sum

is

, the first row of the submatrix of is

formed and stored in a register. At the

th step, the partial

(4)

sum

is computed from (8) and added to

the next accumulated sum

. At the end of the

to form th step,

where the unit -tuple is at the th position of . Then for

the accumulated sum

gives the th parity section .

to be a generator matrix of , we must have

for Based on the above encoding process and the expression

. Let

(the last sections given by (8), the th parity check section can be formed with

of ) and

(the th column of circulants a shift-register-adder-accumulator (SRAA) circuit, as shown

of ). Then

gives the following equality:

in Fig. 1. At the beginning of the first step,

is stored

(5)
Since is a square matrix and has full rank, it is nonsingular and has an inverse . Then it follows from (5) that

in the feedback shift register B, and the content of register A

is set to zero. When the information bit is shifted into the

encoder and the channel, the product

is formed at the

outputs of the AND gates, and is added to the content stored in

(6)

Solving (6) for

, we obtain

.

From

, we obtain all the generators ’s of the

circulants in . Then can be constructed readily.

An encoding circuit for can be devised based on the

generators of the circulants in the matrix of . Let

be the information sequence of

bits to be encoded. Divide this sequence into

sections of equal length,

, where for

, the th section consists of consecutive in-

formation bits,

. Then the

codeword for the information sequence is

, which

has the following systematic form:

,

where for

,

is a section of

parity-check bits. It follows from

that

(7)

register A (zero at this time). The sum is then stored in register A. The feedback register B is shifted once to the right. The new content in B is . When the next information bit is shifted

into the encoder, the product

is formed at the outputs of

the AND gates. This product is then added to the sum

in

the accumulator register A. The sum

is then

stored in A. The above shift-add-store process continues. When

the information bit has been shifted into the encoder, register

A stores the partial sum

, which is the contribution to

the parity section from the information section . At this

time, the generator of the circulant

is loaded into

B. The shift-add-store process repeats. When the information

section has been completely shifted into the encoder, register

A contains the accumulated sum

, which is

the contribution to the parity section from the first two

information sections, and . The above process repeats

until the entire information sequence has been shifted into

for

. For

, let

shift of the generator , with

be the th (right) cyclic the encoder. At this time, register A contains the parity section

. Then for

. To form parity sections, we need SRAA circuits, one for computing each parity section.

A block diagram for the entire encoder is shown in Fig. 2.

(8) The information sequence is encoded serially. All the parity

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:03:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

74

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 1, JANUARY 2006

the

circulants in the matrix of are loaded into

the feedback shift registers in one clock cycle, and the first bits

of all the parity sections are formed. Then

by cyclically shifting all the feedback registers

times in

parallel, the other

parity bits can be generated. In this

way, the encoding is completed in clock cycles. This imple-

mentation requires a total of

flip-flops,

XOR gates, and

AND gates. Other encoding circuits with

encoding speeds between (or

) and cycles obviously

can be implemented. This offers a wide range of tradeoffs be-

tween encoding speed and encoding complexity.

Fig. 2. SRAA-based serial QC-LDPC encoder.

sections are formed at the same time in parallel, and they are

then shifted into the channel serially. The encoding circuit con-

sists of SRAA circuits with a total of flip-flops, AND

gates, and two-input XOR gates (or modulo-2 adders). The

encoding is accomplished in linear time with complexity lin-

early proportional to the number of parity-check bits of the

code. The encoding is accomplished with

clock cycles,

where

is the length of the information sequence.

An encoder that completes encoding in clock cycles can

be implemented with

feedback shift registers, each with

flip-flops, as shown in Fig. 3. All of the

information

bits are applied to the encoder in parallel. For

and

, let be the first column of circulant . For

, let denote the th downward cyclic shift of .

It is clear that

. Then for

, the th

parity-check bit of the th parity section is given by

IV. TWO-STAGE ENCODING: CASE I

A two-stage encoder can also be implemented. Assume that

the first

circulant

of array of (2) has rank .

This can be achieved by arranging the columns and rows of cir-

culants of , such that has rank . It follows from Schur’s

complement [24] that can be formed based on the circu-

lants in . It is known that the inverses, products, and sums of

circulants are also circulants [25]. Consequently, is also a

array of

circulants

... . . . ...

(10)

It follows from (4),(6), and (10) that for

, we have

...

... . . . ...

...

(11)

For

, let

. Multiplying out the

right side of (11), we obtain the circulants ’s in

(12)

for

and

that the generator matrix of

form:

. It follows from (3) and (12) can be put in the following SC

(9)

From this expression, we see that can be formed with

... ... . . . ...

...

two-input AND gates and

two-input XOR gates.

...

...

...

The parity-check bits are generated serially, bit by bit, and one

section at a time. For

, to form the parity bits of the

(13)

th parity section , the columns

are loaded Again, let

be the sequence to be en-

into the

feedback shift registers in parallel, and the first coded, and

be its codeword. From (13)

parity-check bit of is formed. Then cyclically shift these and

, we find that the th parity section is

feedback shift registers times to generate the other bits

of . With this implementation, encoding is completed in

clock cycles. The total number of flip-flops required is

.

(14)

The total number of XOR gates required is

and the

total number of AND gates required is

. The encoder

complexity is linearly proportional to the number

of

information bits.

From (14), we can compute the th parity section stages. First, we compute the bit vector

in two (15)

If all the parity sections are generated in parallel at the same and then compute the th bit parity section

. Divide

time, a circuit that completes encoding in clock cycles can vector into sections,

, where for

be implemented. In this case,

feedback shift registers

, the th section

. Recall that

are needed. To start the encoding, all the first columns ’s of for

, is the th column of circulants of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:03:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: EFFICIENT ENCODING OF QUASI-CYCLIC LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

75

Fig. 3. SRAA-based parallel QC-LDPC encoder.

Fig. 4. Two-stage QC-LDPC encoder.

given by (1). It follows from (15) that the th section is given is the sum of information bits. Based on (17), can be

by

formed with a circuit, as shown in the upper part of Fig. 4.

(16) All the

information sections are read into the

feedback shift registers

in one clock

For

, let denote the th (left) cyclic shift of (i.e., cycle. As soon as the information sections have been read

cyclically shifting each component of to the left places). into these feedback shift registers, the bits

From (16), we find that for

, the th bit of can be are formed based on (17), and appear at the outputs of the

expressed as follows:

banks of XOR gates. These bits are then shifted into buffer

where

(17) registers

, as shown in the lower half of

Fig. 4. Cyclically shifting

(shift to left) in

is the generator (first row) of the circulant

parallel

times, we generate all the other bits of . At the

and

is the transpose of

for

. end of the th clock cycle, all the sections of are stored in

In (17), we express the bit in terms of the cyclic shifts

. This completes the first stage of encoding. This

of the information sections,

. Assume that the encoding stage requires a total of flip-flops and

weight of each generator is . Then each term in (17) XOR gates.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:03:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

76

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 1, JANUARY 2006

TABLE I

H A H COMPARISON OF SRAA AND TWO-STAGE ENCODING SCHEME. (1) c AND t ARE THE NUMBERS OF ROWS AND COLUMNS OF

PARITY-CHECK ARRAY

GIVEN BY (1). (2) b IS THE SIZE OF A CIRCULANT

OF

The next stage is to form the parity sections based on

(or the rightmost) columns of circulants of form the array

. This can be done with another banks of XOR gates. If

. Let

the parity-check bits of each parity section are generated serially

one bit at a time, we simply cyclically shift the buffer registers times (left shift). The parity-check bits are
generated in the same manner as the bits of vector. In this way,

...

...

. . . ...

(18)

the number of XOR gates required in each bank is on the order of (we assume that the average row weight of each circulant in Then the desired generator matrix is a
is ). Consequently, the number of total XOR gates used to has the following form:

matrix, and

form the parity bits is on the order of , denoted

.

This two-stage encoding circuit completes the encoding of

(19)

information bits in clock cycles, and requires a total of

flip-flops and a total of

XOR gates. Note

that the above two-stage encoding implementation is based on

the circulants in the

subarray of the parity-check

which consists of two submatrices and . The

is a

array of the following form:

submatrix

matrix .

If we generate two bits of each section at a time and two parity bits of each parity section at a time, we can complete the encoding in clock cycles. In this case, the total number of

... ... . . . ...

...

...

...

(20)

XOR gates required to form the parity bits is

. The total number of flip-flops is still . Since each

circulant in the parity-check matrix is a sparse matrix and

is normally very small, say 1 or 2,

is much

smaller than , and hence the total number of XOR gates used

in the encoding circuit is

. In summary, for high-speed

encoding, the complexity of the two-stage encoding is linearly

proportional to the code length .

Table I gives the speeds and complexities of various encoding

circuits. Other encoding circuits can be implemented to provide

various tradeoffs between speed and complexity.

where is a identity matrix, is a zero matrix, and

is a

circulant for

and

.

is in SC form, and can be obtained by solving (5) by setting the

linearly dependent elements in

to zeros, with

(these elements correspond to the

linearly dependent columns of ) where is the generator

of circulant with

.

The submatrix of is an

matrix whose

rows are linearly independent, and also linearly independent of

the rows of the submatrix of . For to be a generator

matrix of the null space of , must satisfy the condi-

tion

, where is a

zero matrix. To

obtain the submatrix of , let

be the number

V. GENERATOR MATRIX AND ENCODER IMPLEMENTATION: CASE II

of linearly dependent columns in the st nd th columns

of circulants in , respectively, so that

.

Due to the cyclic structure of circulants as described in the

In Section III, we considered the simple case for which the

rank of the parity-check matrix of a QC-LDPC code given

by (1) is equal to the number of rows of , , and there exists

a

subarray in with rank .

Now we consider the case for which

, or

and

second paragraph of Section II, the last

columns of the

th column of circulants in can be regarded as linearly in-

dependent columns. Then the first

columns of the

st nd th columns of circulants of are linearly depen-

dent columns. Let

there does not exist a subarray in with rank . For

this case, we first find the least number of columns of circulants

in , say with

, such that these columns of

...

... . . .

...

...

... . . . ...

circulants form a subarray , whose rank is equal to the

(21)

rank of . We permute the columns of circulants of to where each is a

zero matrix for

and

form a new array of circulants, such that the the last

, and is a

matrix over GF(2) for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:03:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: EFFICIENT ENCODING OF QUASI-CYCLIC LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

77

. Each nonzero submatrix is a partial circu- is stored in the accumulator register A. If the first subencoder

lant obtained by cyclically shifting the first row of (one is also implemented with SRAA circuits, these same SRAA

place to the right)

times to form the other

rows. circuits can be used to encode the second part of the

Therefore, also has a circulant structure. For

, information sequence (after encoding ).

let

be the first row of the With the above encoding, the output codeword for the infor-

th row of submatrices

of , mation sequence is not completely systematic. Only the first

which has the following structure: the first

components

bits are identical to information bits.

are zeros; and the

bits of

that correspond to the linearly dependent columns of , called

dependent bits, have the form

,

VI. EXAMPLES

where for , is a zero -tuple and

is

a unit -tuple. Based on the structure of , the unknown com-

ponents of are , the same as the rank of . The condition

gives the following equation for

:

In this section, we use two QC-LDPC codes to illustrate the process of finding their generator matrices in SC form from their parity-check matrices in circulant form, using the methods presented in Sections III–V. These codes are con-

structed based on circulants derived from the 3-D Euclidean

geometry EG

over GF [22]. They are (8176, 7154)

...

...

. . . ...

...

and (8176, 7156) codes. The first code is new. The second code was constructed by Chen, et al. [14]. The second code has been

(22)

By solving (22), we find

for

. Divide the vector into sections, denoted

, each consisting of consecutive compo-

nents of . For

, is obtained by using as

the first row, and then cyclically shifting it

times to form

the other

rows. From ’s with

, we form

matrix .

Based on the generator matrix given by (19), an encoder

with two subencoders can be implemented. The first subencoder

is implemented based on the submatrix , and the second one

is implemented based on the submatrix . An information se-

quence of

bits is divided into two parts, and ,

where consists of the first

information bits, and

consists of the last

information bits. The first subencoder

encodes into a codeword in the subcode generated by

, and the second subencoder encodes into a codeword

in the subcode generated by . Adding the outputs of the

two subencoders, we obtain the codeword for the information

sequence .

The first subencoder based on the submatrix of can

be implemented in exactly the same way as described for Case

I in Section III. To encode the second part of the infor-

mation sequence into a codeword in the subcode gener-

ated by the submatrix of , we divide into sections,

, with

bits, respectively. Then

the codeword for is of the form

recommended by the NASA Goddard Space Flight Center for

NASA’s near-earth high-speed satellite communications and

other missions where a bit-error rate (BER) below

is

required. For such an error-rate requirement, the error floor of

the code must be below

.

To find the generator matrices in SC form of the above codes,

we need to describe the construction of their parity-check

matrices. Consider the 3-D Euclidean geometry EG

over

GF . This geometry consists of 512 points and 4672 lines

[22]. Each point is a 3-tuple over GF . The zero 3-tuple (0

0 0) is called the origin of the geometry. A line in EG

is simply a 1-D subspace of the vector space of all the

3-tuples over GF , or a coset of . A line in EG

consists of eight points. A line that contains the origin is said to

pass through the origin. There are 73 lines in EG

passing

through the origin, and 4599 lines not passing through the

origin. The Galois field GF as an extension field of GF

is a realization of the geometry EG

[22], and hence, its

elements represent the points of EG

.

The incidence vector of a line [22] in EG

not passing through the origin is defined as a 511-tuple,

, whose components corresponding to

the 511 nonorigin points of EG

, where the th component

if and only if the th nonorigin point of EG

is on

, and

, otherwise. Since there are eight points on ,

the weight of its incidence vector is eight. Any cyclic shift

of is the incidence vector of another line in EG

not

passing through the origin [16], [22]. Furthermore, and its

(23)

which consists of

zero sections and nonzero sections,

, each section consisting of bits. For

510 cyclic shifts are different incidence vectors of 511 different

lines in EG

not passing through the origin. It is clear

that the 511th cyclic shift of is again. It follows from

this property that the incidence vectors of the 4599 lines in

(24)

Since each in with

is a partial circulant

with rows, the second subencoder can be implemented

with SRAA circuits, as shown in Fig. 1. In encoding, the

th SRAA circuit with

as the inputs, and

stored in register B in turn cyclically shifts

EG

not passing through the origin can be partitioned into

nine cyclic classes,

, each class consisting of

511 incidence vectors. Each class can be generated by taking

any incidence vector in the class and cyclically shifting it 510

times. For each class with

, form a

circulant , with the incidence vectors in as the rows. This

results in nine

circulants,

, with both

times, respectively. At the end of the shifts,

column and row weight eight, since the set of columns in a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:03:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

78

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 1, JANUARY 2006

circulant is the same as the set of rows. The columns of each

circulant are also the incidence vectors in . Since two

lines in a geometry are either disjoint or intersect at one and

only one point, their incidence vectors can not have more than

one 1-component in common. Since the rows and columns in all

nine circulants

are incidence vectors of lines in

EG

, no two rows (or two columns) either from the same

circulant or from two different circulants, and , have

more than one 1-component in common. Consequently, the

circulants

, satisfy the pairwise RC constraint,

i.e., two different circulants, and , arranged either in a

row or in a column, satisfy the RC constraint.

Next, we decompose each circulant into a

array of

circulants with both row and column weights two.

For

, let be the first column of the th circulant

. Split into two new columns and of the same

length, with the weight of evenly distributed between these

two new columns. Cyclically shifting and downward

510 times, respectively, we obtain two new

circu-

lants, and , each with both row and column weights

four. This column splitting and cyclic shifting operation results

in a row of two

circulants,

, which is

called a column decomposition of [11], [14]. and

are called descendants of . For

, let be the first

row of . Split into two new rows and of the same length, with the weight of evenly distributed between

the two new rows, each with weight two. Cyclically shifting

and (to the right) 510 times, respectively, we obtain two

circulants and , each with row and column weights two. This row splitting and cyclic shifting operation re-

sults in a column of two circulants,

is called a row decomposition of

replacing each circulant in

we obtain a

array of four

, which

[11], [14]. For

,

by its row decomposition,

circulants

Fig. 5. Error performance of the (8176, 7154) irregular QC-LDPC code: IR, BER, and BLER stand for irregular, bit-error, and block-error rates, respectively.

is further decomposed. First we decompose into two de-

scendants and (by either column or row decomposi-

tion), each with both column and row weights equal to one. Each

of these two descendants is a

circulant permutation

matrix. Next we decompose into two circulant permuta-

tion matrices, denoted and . Then we replace and

with circulant permutation matrices and , respec-

tively. This replacement results in the following

array:

(27)

The column and row weights of are both three. Clearly,

still satisfies the RC constraint.

Form the following

array of

circulants:

(25)

is called an array decomposition of . Array decomposition

for constructing QC-LDPC codes was first proposed in [14]. All

the circulants in are descendants of . The array decom-

positions of the circulants,

, form a class of circu-

lant arrays

. Since

satisfies

the pairwise RC constraint, their descendants must also satisfy

the pairwise RC constraint. Consequently, the arrays in sat-

isfy the pairwise RC constraint. The two QC-LDPC codes, the

(8176, 7154) and (8176, 7156) codes, are constructed based on

the circulant arrays in .

(28)

which has the form given by (1). It is a

matrix

with constant row weight 31 and two column weights, 3 and

4. Let

be the matrix as defined by (2). We find that

and have the same rank 1022, which is equal to the

number of rows of . is nonsingular. The null space of

gives a (8176, 7154) irregular QC-LDPC code with

rate 7/8, whose Tanner graph has girth at least 6. This is the first

code described at the beginning of this section. The performance

of this code with iterative decoding using the SPA (assuming

A. Construction of the First Code

binary phase-shift keying (BPSK) transmission over an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel) is shown in Fig. 5. In

The (8176, 7154) code is constructed by using the first eight

circulant arrays

in . The array

simulation, we set the number of error blocks for computing each simulated point on the performance curve to 50. The total number of blocks needed to run for simulating a point is a vari-

able which is given by

, where is the block-error

(26) rate (BLER) corresponding to the simulated point. For example, to simulate the point that corresponds to the BLER of ,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:03:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: EFFICIENT ENCODING OF QUASI-CYCLIC LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

79

Fig. 6. Decoding convergence of the (8176, 7154) irregular QC-LDPC code. Fig. 7. Error performance of the (8176, 7156) regular QC-LDPC code.

the number of blocks needed to run is

.

From Fig. 5, we see that at the BER of , it performs only

1 dB from the Shannon limit. At the BER of , it performs

1.2 dB from the Shannon limit, and its bit-error performance

B. Construction of the Second Code

The second code, the (8176, 7156) code, is given by the null

space of the following

array of

circulants:

has no error floor down to the BER of . In fact, a field-pro-

grammable gate array (FPGA) decoder has been implemented,

and it shows no error floor down to the BER of

.

(29)

For comparison, the performance of a computer-generated

random MacKay (CGRM) code with the same parameters is

also included in Fig. 5. We see that the QC-LDPC code and the

CGRM code perform identically above the BER of ; how-

ever, the QC-LDPC code outperforms the CGRM code below

. Also included in Fig. 5 is a longer random irregular code,

designed based on degree distributions of its Tanner graph using

density evolution [6]. We see that the irregular code performs

within 0.2 dB better than the QC-LDPC code above the BER

of , but it has an error floor. Below the BER of , the

QC-LDPC code outperforms the longer random irregular code.

The decoding of this code also converges very fast. At the BER

of , the difference between 10 and 200 iterations is less

than 0.2 dB, as shown in Fig. 6.

The generator matrix of in systematic form is given

by (3), with

and

. Its matrix consists of two

columns of circulants, each column consisting of 14

circulants. From the circulants in , the inverse of and

(6), we can determine the generators of the 28 circulants in the

matrix of . A serial encoder for can be implemented

with two 511-stage SRAA circuits. This implementation requires

is a

matrix over GF(2) with constant column

and row weights 4 and 32, respectively. The null space of

gives a regular (8176, 7156) QC-LDPC code , which is the

second code described at the beginning of this section. This

code has two more information bits than the first code .

The performance of this code with iterative decoding using the

SPA is shown in Fig. 7. At the BER of , it performs 1 dB

from the Shannon limit. An FPGA decoder for this code using a

scaled min-sum iterative decoding algorithm has also been im-

plemented, and it also shows no error floor at a BER of

, as

shown in Fig. 8. The decoding of this code also converges very

fast. At a BER of , the difference between 10 and 200 iter-

ations is less than 0.18 dB. This code is the (8176, 7156) code

given in [14, Ex. 1].

The rank of is 1020, which is smaller than the number

of rows of , 1022, by 2. Hence, the generator matrix

of in SC form is given by (19). The submatrix of

consists of two columns of circulants, each column consisting

of 14

circulants. Let

2044 flip-flops, 1022 two-input XOR gates, and 1022 two-input

AND gates. The encoder complexity is linearly proportional to the

(30)

number 1024of parity-checkbitsof thecode.Atotal of7154clock

cycles is required to encode a block of 7154 information bits. To be the matrix defined by (18). The rank of this matrix is the

implement a faster encoding circuit that completes encoding in same as that of , namely 1020. The last columns of the cycles [use two-stage encoding based on (13)], first and second columns of circulants of are dependent

it requires a total of 7154 flip-flops, a total of 7153 XOR gates, columns. With this knowledge of dependent positions, we can

and a total of 7154 AND gates. For two-stage parallel encoding solve (5) to determine the generators of the 28 circulants of

with encoding time 511 clock cycles,the encoding circuit requires the submatrix . The last column of the first column of cir-

8176 flip-flops and about 2044 XOR gates.

culants and the last column of the second column of circulants

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:03:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

80

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 1, JANUARY 2006

of the parity-check matrix of this code and its rank is three. The generator matrix of this code can be put in the form given by (19).

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Dr. P.-S. Yeh of Goddard Space Flight Center, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, USA, for suggesting and supporting this research project. The authors would also like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable and constructive comments that improved the presentation of this paper.

REFERENCES

Fig. 8. Error performance of the (8176, 7156) QC-LDPC code, computed with an FPGA decoder using a scaled min-sum iterative decoding algorithm.

of are dependent columns. Knowing these dependent posi-

tions, we can determine the submatrix of

from (21)

and (22), which consists of two rows and . These two

rows are

and

, where each row consists

of 511 consecutive 1-components. For , the 511 consecutive

1-components are at positions corresponding to the 511 columns

of the first column of circulants of the submatrix , and for

, the 511 consecutive 1-components corresponding to the 511

columns of the second column of circulants of . The encoder

of can be implemented with two subencoders, one based on

and the other based on . For serial encoding with SRAA cir-

cuits, the first subencoder consists of two 511-stage SRAA cir-

cuits. The second subencoder based on and can be imple-

mented without extra logic gates. This is done by simply loading

the 511 ones of and 511 ones of into the B registers of the

two SRAA circuits, respectively, at the last encoding cycle.

VII. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we have presented two methods for finding

the generator matrix in SC form of a QC-LDPC code whose

parity-check matrix is given as an array of circulants. Several

efficient encoding implementations have been given. These im-

plementations require a complexity linearly proportional to the

number of parity-check bits of the code for serial encoding, and

to the code length for high-speed parallel encoding. For each

QC-LDPC code given in [14, Table 1] whose Tanner graph is

free of cycles of length four, its parity-check matrix either

has full rank or the difference between the number of the rows

in and its rank is small, two or three. Furthermore, each

parity-check matrix contains a

subarray whose

rank is the same as that of . For example, the parity-check

matrix of the (8176, 6132) code with rate 3/4 (the sixth code

given in the table) has full rank. Hence, its generator matrix can

be put in SC form, given by (3). For the (7154, 5113) code (the

fourth code in the table), its parity-check matrix has 2044 rows

and its rank is 2041. The difference between the number of rows

[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near-Shannon-limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 399–432, Mar. 1999.
[4] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[5] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[6] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[7] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 9, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[8] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. Linkoping, Dept. Elect. Eng., Linkoping, Sweden, 1996.
[9] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H. -A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[10] R. M. Tanner, “Spectral graphs for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Washington, DC, Jun. 2001, p. 226.
[11] K. Yu, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low density parity check codes based on finite geometries: A discovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 11, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[12] S. J. Johnson and S. R. Weller, “Codes for iterative decoding from partial geometries,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 236–247, Feb. 2003.
[13] I. Djurdjevic, J. Xu, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, and S. Lin, “Construction of low-density parity-check codes based on Reed–Solomon codes with two information symbols,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 317–319, Jul. 2003.
[14] L. Chen, J. Xu, I. Djurdjevic, and S. Lin, “Near-Shannon-limit quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 1038–1042, Jul. 2004.
[15] B. Vasic and O. Milenkovic, “Combinatorial construction of low density parity check codes for iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1156–1176, Jun. 2004.
[16] H. Tang, J. Xu, Y. Kou, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “On algebraic construction of Gallager and circulant low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1269–1279, Jun. 2004.
[17] B. Ammar, B. Honary, Y. Kou, J. Xu, and S. Lin, “Construction of low density parity check codes based on balanced incomplete block designs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1257–1268, Jun. 2004.
[18] L. Chen, I. Djurdjevic, J. Xu, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Construction of QC-LDPC codes based on the minimum-weight codewords of RS codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Chicago, IL, Jun.–Jul. 2004, p. 239.
[19] L. Chen, L. Lan, I. Djurdjevic, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “An algebraic methode for constructing quasicyclic LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory Appl., Parma, Italy, Oct. 10–13, 2004, pp. 535–539.
[20] H. Tang, J. Xu, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Codes on finite geometries,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 572–596, Feb. 2005.
[21] J. Xu, L. Chen, L.-Q. Zeng, L. Lan, and S. Lin, “Construction of lowdensity parity-check codes by superposition,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 243–251, Feb. 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:03:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: EFFICIENT ENCODING OF QUASI-CYCLIC LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

81

[22] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Jr., Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications, 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2004.
[23] W. W. Peterson and E. J. Weldon, Jr., Error Correcting Codes, 2nd ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1972.
[24] I. N. Iman and L. M. Lamont, “An algorithm using the Schur complement in inverting large matrices,” in Proc. IEEE Southeast Conf. Energy Inf. Technol. Southeast, vol. 2, Apr. 9–12, 1989, pp. 421–426.
[25] R. M. Gray, Toeplitz and Circulant Matrices: A Review. Stanford, CA: Stanford Univ., 2001.

Zongwang Li (M’04) received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China, in 2002.
From 2002 to 2004, he was with the University of California, Davis as a Postdoctoral Researcher. Since January 2004, he has been with the Data Storage Systems Center, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, as a Postdoctoral Researcher. His research interests include error-control coding for digital communications and data storage systems, and the implementation of error-control codes.

and signal processing.

Lei Chen was born in Beijing, China. She received the B.S.E.E. degree from Beijing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Beijing, China, in 1995, the M.S.E.E. degree from the Aerospace Institution of China, Beijing, China, in 1998, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of California, Davis, in 2005.
She is currently a Communication System Engineer with Legend Silicon Corp., Fremont, CA. Her research interests include error-control coding for digital communications, multimedia broadcasting,

Shu Lin (S’62-M’65-SM’78-F’80-LF’00) received the B.S.E.E. degree from the National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, in 1959, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Rice University, Houston, TX, in 1964 and 1965, respectively.
In 1965, he joined the Faculty of the University of Hawaii, Honolulu, as an Assistant Professor of Electrical Engineering. He became an Associate Professor in 1969 and a Professor in 1973. In 1986, he joined Texas A&M University, College Station, as the Irma Runyon Chair Professor of Electrical Engineering. In 1987, he returned to the University of Hawaii. From 1978 to 1979, he was a Visiting Scientist at the IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, where he worked on error-control protocols for data communication systems. He spent the academic year of 1996–1997 as a Visiting Professor at the Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany. He retired from the University of Hawaii in 1999, and he is currently a Visiting Professor at University of California, Davis. He has published numerous technical papers in IEEE TRANSACTIONS and other refereed journals. He is the author of the book, An Introduction to Error-Correcting Codes (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1970). He also co-authored (with D. J. Costello) the book, Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1st ed., 1982, 2nd ed., 2004), and (with T. Kasami, T. Fujiwara, and M. Fossorier) the book, Trellises and Trellis-Based Decoding Algorithms (Boston, MA: Kluwer, 1998). His current research areas include algebraic coding theory, coded modulation, error-control systems, and satellite communications. He has served as the Principal Investigator on 30 research grants. Dr. Lin is a Member of the IEEE Information Theory Society and the Communication Society. He served as the Associate Editor for Algebraic Coding Theory for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY from 1976 to 1978, and as the Program Co-Chairman of the IEEE International Symposium of Information Theory held in Kobe, Japan, in June 1988. He was the President of the IEEE Information Theory Society in 1991. In 1996, he was a recipient of the Alexander von Humboldt Research Prize for U.S. Senior Scientists and a recipient of the IEEE Third-Millennium Medal, 2000.

Lingqi Zeng was born in Shanghai, China, in 1979. He received the B.S. degree from Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China, in 2001 and the M.S. degree from the University of California, Davis, in 2004, both in electrical engineering. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in coding theory at the University of California, Davis.

Wai H. Fong received the BSEE and MSEE degrees from the George Washington University, Washington, DC, in 1984 and 1992, respectively. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree at George Mason University, Fairfax, VA.
He is employed by NASA at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD. His duties include advance technology development in the area of digital communications. He is also involved with the Consultative Committee for Space Data System standards committees in the areas of channel coding and RF modulation. His research interests include low-density parity-check and turbo codes for space-based applications.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:03:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

