298

INTERMAG 2006

DF-05
Pattern Dependent Noise Predictive Belief Propagation.
M. N. Kaynak1, T. M. Duman2 and E. M. Kurtas3 1. STMicroelectronics, San Diego, CA, USA; 2. Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA; 3. Seagate Technology, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Inter-symbol interference (ISI) channels are encountered in many applications, including magnetic recording and wireless communication systems. In general maximum a-posteriori (MAP) or maximum likelihood (ML) algorithms are used for channel detection. Recently, iterative belief propagation (BP) algorithm is proposed for channel detection as well [1]. When factor graph of the ISI channel is length 4 cycle free, BP gives a similar performance with the MAP detector, while it has the advantage of parallel structure leading to advantages in read channel architectures. Unlike ISI channels with white noise, for magnetic recording systems, noise is correlated and data (pattern) dependent. Correlation is a result of partial response (PR) equalization and data dependence is a result of the media noise (jitter) [2]. As an example, over normalized density 2.85 longitudinal recording channel equalized to PR4 target, variance of the noise for various data patterns is shown in Fig. 1. When media noise is less severe (0% or 3%), variance of noise is almost invariant of the specific data pattern. However, when jitter level is higher, patterns with more transitions suffer more from the transition jitter compared to patterns with less or no transitions. Taking correlation and data dependence into account for ML detection is shown to improve the detection performance significantly. The resulting pattern dependent noise predictive ML (PDNPML) detector modifies the branch metric computation of the ML detector by utilizing data dependent prediction filters and prediction error variances [2]. Similar principles are also applied to MAP detectors, resulting in PDNP-MAP channel detectors [3]. In a recent paper [4], we applied noise predictive techniques to belief propagation algorithm and proposed “noise predictive belief propagation” (NPBP) detectors, which iteratively whiten the noise samples using finite or infinite impulse response prediction filters. NPBP detectors improve the BER performance significantly, outperforming both BP and MAP detectors without noise prediction (NP). The main advantage of the NPBP detector is the parallel and iterative structure which leads to fast hardware implementations.
In this paper, we take a further step and propose pattern dependent NPBP (PD-NPBP) detectors over ISI channels with correlated/data dependent noise. The resulting iterative PD-NPBP detector also has a parallel structure and significantly shorter decoding delay which is very advantageous for timing recovery purposes and reduced memory requirements. We show that, the proposed PDNPBP detector outperforms both NPBP and BP detectors. Furthermore, PD-NPBP detector can generate and make use of soft information, which makes PD-NPBP detector applicable to iterative systems employing an outer error correction code. For instance in Fig. 2, we report the performance of the proposed detector for a coded system employing an N=1107 (block length), Rc=0.89 (code rate) low density parity check (LDPC) code over normalized density 2.85 longitudinal recording channel equalized to PR4 target with 9% media noise. We observe that the proposed PD-NPBP detector leads to the best performance for

both uncoded and coded systems. In fact, when the media noise is more severe, then the improvement introduced by the proposed detector will be even more. In the full paper, we will first summarize the factor graph representation of recording channels and analyze the pattern dependency of the noise. Then PD-NPBP detector will be discussed in detail. Finally, we will demonstrate the improved performance of the proposed detector using bit error rate (BER) and extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) chart analysis. [1] G. Colavolpe and G. Germi, “On the application of factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm to ISI channels”, IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 818-825, May 2005. [2] J. Moon and J. Park, “Pattern-dependent noise prediction in signal-dependent noise”, IEEE Transactions on Selected Areas on Communications, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 730-743, April 2001. [3] A. Kavcic and J. M. F. Moura, “The Viterbi algorithm and Markov noise memory”, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 291-301, Jan. 2000. [4] Mustafa N. Kaynak, Tolga M. Duman, Erozan M. Kurtas, “Noise Predictive Belief Propagation”, To appear in IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, Dec. 2005.
Fig 1: Correlation structure of total distor- Fig 2: BER performance of the PD-NPBP tion at the partial response equalizer output. detector.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:07:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

