Full-Information Rate Distance-4 Block Codes

Gokmen Altay
Faculty of Engineering Bahcesehir University
Istanbul, Turkey
galtaygbahcesehir.edu.tr

Osman Nuri Ucan
Faculty of Engineering Istanbul University Istanbul, Turkey
uosmangistanbul. edu.tr

Nejla Altay
Faculty of Arts & Sciences Bahcesehir University Istanbul, Turkey
nyenialgbahcesehir.edu.tr

Abstract- A new linear block code construction technique is proposed Ill. It generates all the even codes of length greater than 8 with full information rate for Hamming distance-4. The codes generated by the proposed method include the extended Hamming codes and the Reed Muller codes of distance-4. The generator matrix has useful properties such as lowest density, quasi-cyclic and regular.
Keywords-channel coding; block codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
Encoder and decoder implementation of long length linear block codes is difficult in practice and also requires large capacity of memory. Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes [2] receive enormous interest from the coding community as they hold higher Bit Error Rate (BER) performances [3]. Whereas, they have the disadvantage for encoding part as they have large, high-density and irregular generator matrices to encode information data, which cause difficulty in encoder implementations in practice. A generator matrix with low density of ones is considered as Low Density Generator Matrix (LDGM) and it was shown that it has practical advantage of decreased encoding complexity and increased decoder architecture flexibility [4] and also achieves a performance close to the Shannon theoretical limit [5]. Block Turbo Codes (BTC) or Turbo Product Codes (TPC) [6] and Product Accumulate (PA) codes [7] have been shown to provide nearcapacity performance and low encoding and decoding complexity. They use simpler components codes to produce very long block codes. Recently [8], extended Hamming codes are shown to achieve near Shannon limit performance for very high rate coding, which is useful for bandwidth efficient transmission.
Here, we present a new binary linear block code construction technique, which generates all the optimal Hamming distance-4 even codes greater than 8. Here, by optimal Hamming distance-4 code, we mean a code C = (n, k, d), where n, k and d are length, dimension and minimum Hamming distance, respectively, has the full information rate for Hamming distance-4 with respect to the table of best known codes in [9]. We call the codes constructed with our proposed scheme as Geometric Construction (GC) codes with respect to their geometric placement of component generator matrices in the construction. Extended Hamming codes and distance-4 Reed Muller (RM) codes are subsets of our GC construction

codes since they generate codes as the power of 2 in length, whereas our GC codes generates the codes as the multiple of 2 in length. Therefore, our GC codes can be good alternative for the component codes used in [7] and [8] as they give great flexibility and thus adoptability with respect to length of a code. Moreover, the constructed generator matrices of GC codes contain lowest density of ones and also have quasi-cyclic property in their component generator matrices. A code with cyclic or quasi-cyclic property can be encoded with less complexity [10] in a similar way of cyclic codes. Therefore, GC codes provide the advantages of LDGM codes and quasicyclic codes.

II. CODE CONSTRUCTION
The ultimate binary generator matrices G of our GC codes are constructed using (2) by geometrically placing the component generator matrices G1= [1 1] and G2= [1 0] of the codes C1 and C2, respectively. We formulate the size of GC codes as in (1).

C = (n,k, d) = (n,n- Flog2n + 1] ,4)

(1)

where the code length, n, is an even number greater than or equal to eight and Fb7 notation rounds b to the nearest integer
value towards infinite.

r GG
EGIG

El GIG,
cGIG

GGJ2G(J2;(JXGG7& 3
Ci G0 CG G, Gj,

E? G~2G2G Ci,

E3

G2I2 G7 IJ C CT;n C

Ci2 G2 G-i

~~G,l l61 @

G

@,~ Ci Gi

This paper contains a part of material of [1].

1-4244-0398-7/06/$20.00 §2006 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:06:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Here, E, (i=1,2,...t) represents group labels of component
generator matrices with respect to their geometrical placement, where t is the number of the groups. We set simple geometrical placement rules to construct the generator matrices of GC codes using (2):
We group the rows of G regarding to their placements as {E1, E2,.. .}. For E1, we place 2 of G1s with one after another in the first row of G. The columns of the first row is shifted to the right by a scale of one G1 and placed to the second row. This cyclic process is repeated for the following rows of the group E1 until the G1 matrices arrive to the last column of a row. For E2, we place 4 of G2s with one after another in the first row of the group E2. The columns of the first row is shifted to the right by a scale of 2 G2s and placed to the second row of E2. The process of shifting to right and placing the G2s matrices, which is also a cyclic process, is performed as long as there is room to place four G2s matrices in the row of G. If there are not enough columns to place four G2s, then we stop placing G2s. When the placement of the group E2 is complete, then we start placing G2s of group E3, if there is room to place them. In this case, there will be one interval among four G2s in a row. At the second row of E3, the shifting to the right will be by four times the scale G2. Similarly, this process is performed until there will be no room left for placing four G2s in a row. After the placement of E3 is ended, then, if there is still room for placing G2s of group E4, four G2s are placed with three intervals among them. In this group, shifting to right interval will be by eight times the scale of G2. This process continues for other groups {E4, E5,...} and the whole process is ended when there is no room left to place four G2s in a row. In general, the shifting is 1 for the group E1, 2 for the group E2, four for the group E3 and then becomes eight, sixteen and so on as the power of 2 for the following groups. The intervals among four G2s start with 0 for the group E2, and become 1 for the group E3, and then 3, 7, 15 and so on for the following groups, which is calculated as half of the number of the shifting and minus one.
We give Theorem 2 to prove that GC code construction generates the codes with minimum Hamming distance-4. Before that we give some definitions and also Theorem 1 to constitute a base for Theorem 2.
Theorem 1. If the rows of a generator matrix G for a binary (n, k) code C have weights divisible by 4 and are orthogonal to each other, then C is self-orthogonal and all weights in C are divisible by 4 [11].
Theorem 2. Suppose a generator matrix G of a GC code C is constructed as in (2) with component generator matrices
chosen as G1 = [1 1] and G, = [1 0]. Then the GC code C is
Hamming distance 4.
Proof Rows of the generator matrix G of (3) have weight 4 and, as stated earlier in this section, the geometric placement rule of G guaranties that the rows of G are orthogonal to each other. These provide the conditions of Theorem 1 and therefore the code C is self-orthogonal and divisible by 4. Hence, from Theorem 1, the Hamming distance of the GC code C is 4.

III. CONCLUSION
A new construction scheme, GC, for binary linear block codes that has the generator matrix with low density of ones and regular to construct is presented. It generates the full information rate even codes for distance-4 and thus optimal. As our generator matrices has some useful properties like low density, regular and quasi-cyclic structure and also grouping utility, it is practical for encoder and decoder design of very long length block codes. They can be employed for high rate applications such as magnetic recording systems and computer memory systems.
REFERENCES
[1] G.Altay, 0. N. Ucan, "HEURISTIC Construction of High-Rate Linear Block Codes," International Journal of Electronics and Communications (AEUE: Archiv fuer Elektronik und Uebertragungstechnik), in press.
[2] R. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[3] S.Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, "On the design of Low- Density Parity-Check Codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon Limit," IEEE Comm. Letter, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58-60, Feb. 2001.
[4] T.R. Oenning, J. Moon, " A low-density generator matrix interpretation of parallel concatenated single bit parity codes," IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 37, No.2, pp. 737-741, Mar. 2001.
[5] J.G.Frias, W. Zhong, " Approaching Shannon performance by iterative decoding of linear codes with low-density generator matrix.," IEEE Comm. Letter, vol. 7, no. 6pp. 266-268, June 2003.
[6] R. M. Pyndiah, " Near-optimum decoding of product codes: Block turbo codes," IEEE Trans. Commun., vol.46, no. 8, pp.1003-1010, Aug. 1998.
[7] J.Li, K.R. Narayanan, and C. N. Georghiades, " Product accumulate codes: a class of codes with near-capacity performance and low decoding complexity," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 50, pp.31-46, Jan. 2004.
[8] M. Isaka, M. Fossorier, " High-rate serially concatenated coding with extended Hamming codes," IEEE Comm. Letter, vol. 9, no. 2, pp.160162,, Feb. 2005.
[9] A. E. Brouwer, T. Verhoeff, "An updated table of minimum-distance bounds for binary linear codes. IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 664-677, March 1993.
[10] S. J. Jhonson, S.R. Weller, " A family of irregular LDPC codes with low encoding complexity," IEEE Comm. Letter, vol. 7, no. 2, pp.79-81, Feb. 2003.
[11] V. Pless, Introduction to the Theory of Error-Correcting Codes. 2nd edition, John Wiley and Sons,Inc., 1989.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:06:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

