IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 6, JUNE 2006

1143

Abstracts of Forthcoming Manuscripts

Design, Simulation, and Testing of a CMOS Analog Decoder for the Block Length-40 UMTS Turbo Code
Alexandre Graell i Amat, Sergio Benedetto, Guido Montorsi, Daniele Vogrig, Andrea Neviani, and Andrea Gerosa

Applications of Algebraic Soft-Decision Decoding of Reed–Solomon Codes
Warren J. Gross, Frank R. Kschischang, Ralf Koetter, and P. Glenn Gulak

Abstract—In this paper, we present an all-analog implementation of the rate-1/3, block length 40, UMTS turbo decoder. The prototype was designed and fabricated in a 0.35 m CMOS technology and operates at 3.3 V. We also introduce a discrete-time first-order model for analog decoders which allows fast BER simulations, while taking into account circuit transient behavior and component mismatch. The model is applied to the rate-1/3 analog turbo decoder for UMTS defined in the 3GPP standard, and the discrete-time model predictions are compared with the decoder experimental performance and the transistor-level simulations. These results demonstrated that this model can be successfully used as a tool to both predict analog decoder performance and give design guidelines for complex decoders, for which circuit-level simulations are impractical.
A. G. i Amat is with the Department of Electronics, Politecnico di Torino, 10129 Torino, Italy and with the Department of Technology, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 30100 Barcelona, Spain.
S. Benedetto and G. Montorsi are with the Department of Electronics, Politecnico di Torino, 10129 Torino, Italy.
D. Vogrig, A. Neviani and A. Gerosa are with the Department of Information Engineering, Universita di Padova, 35131 Padova, Italy.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2006.876881
Gear-Shift Decoding

Abstract—Efficient soft-decision decoding of Reed–Solomon codes is made possible by the Koetter–Vardy (KV) algorithm which consists of a front-end to the interpolation-based Guruswami–Sudan list decoding algorithm. This paper approaches the soft-decision KV algorithm from the point of view of a communications systems designer who wants to know what benefits the algorithm can give, and how the extra complexity introduced by soft decoding can be managed at the systems level. We show how to reduce the computational complexity and memory requirements of the soft-decision front-end. Applications to wireless communications over Rayleigh fading channels and magnetic recording channels are proposed. For a high-rate (RS 9225,239) Reed–Solomon code, 2–3 dB of soft-decision gain is possible over a Rayleigh fading channel using 16-quadrature amplitude modulation. For shorter codes and at lower rates, the gain can be as large as 9 dB. To lower the complexity of decoding on the systems level, the redecoding architecture is explored which uses only the appropriate amount of complexity to decode each packet. An error-detection criterion based on the properties of the KV decoder is proposed for the redecoding architecture. Queuing analysis verifies the practicality of the redecoding architecture by showing that only a modestly sized RAM buffer is required.
W. J. Gross is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 2A7, Canada.
F. R. Kschischang and P. G. Gulak are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3G4, Canada.
R. Koetter is with Coordinated Science Laboratory, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801 USA.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2006.876886

Masoud Ardakani and Frank R. Kschischang

Signal Activity Detection of Phase-Shift Keying Signals

Abstract—This paper considers a class of iterative message-passing decoders for low-density parity-check codes in which the decoder can choose its decoding rule from a set of decoding algorithms at each iteration. Each available decoding algorithm may have different per-iteration computation time and performance. With an appropriate choice of algorithm at each iteration, overall decoding latency can be reduced significantly, compared with standard decoding methods. Such a decoder is called a gear-shift decoder because it changes its decoding rule (shifts gears) in order to guarantee both convergence and maximum decoding speed (minimum decoding latency). Using extrinsic information transfer charts, the problem of finding the optimum (minimum decoding latency) gear-shift decoder is formulated as a computationally tractable dynamic program. The optimum gear-shift decoder is proved to have a decoding threshold equal to or better than the best decoding threshold among those of the available algorithms. In addition to speeding up software decoder implementations, gear-shift decoding can be applied to optimize a pipelined hardware decoder, minimizing hardware cost for a given decoder throughput.
M. Ardakani is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2V4, Canada.
F. R. Kschischang is with the Edward S. Rogers Sr. Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3G4, Canada.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2006.876885

A. A. Tadaion, M. Derakhtian, S. Gazor, M. M. Nayebi, and M. R. Aref
Abstract—We propose computationally inexpensive and efficient solutions for signal activity detection of phase-shift keying (PSK) signals in additive white Gaussian noise. We consider the complex amplitude of the signal as well as the information sequence as the unknown parameters. In addition, the noise variance is assumed unknown. We derive the generalized likelihood ratio test (GLRT) and suggest a computationally efficient implementation thereof. Furthermore, we develop a new inexpensive detector for binary PSK signals, which we will refer to as the generalized energy detector. To evaluate the performance of these detectors, we attempt to derive a uniformly most powerful invariant test (UMPI) as an optimal detector. It turns out that the UMPI test exists only if the signal-to-noise ratio is known. We use this UMPI test in order to obtain an upper-bound performance for the evaluation of invariant detectors, such as the above-mentioned GLRT. Simulation results illustrate and compare the performance and the efficiency of the proposed signal activity detectors.
A. A. Tadaion and S. Gazor are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Queen’s University, Kingston, ON K7L 3N6, Canada.
M. Derakhtian, M. M. Nayebi, and M. R. Aref are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Sharif University, Tehran, Iran.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2006.876884

0090-6778/$20.00 © 2006 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:08:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

