3746

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 8, AUGUST 2006

[14] ——, “Design and decoding of optimal high-rate convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 867–881, May 2004.
[15] R. J. McEliece, “On the BCJR trellis for linear block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 1072–1092, Jul. 1996.
[16] G. D. Forney, Jr., “Dimension/length profiles and trellis complexity of linear block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 40, no. 6, pp. 1741–1752, Nov. 1994.
[17] A. Viterbi, “Convolutional codes and their performance in communication systems,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. COM-19, no. 5, pp. 751–772, Oct. 1971.
[18] P. CharnKeitKong, H. Imai, and K. Yamaguchi, “On classes of rate k=(k + 1) convolutional codes and their decoding techniques,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 2181–2193, Nov. 1996.
[19] E. Rosnes and Ø. Ytrehus, “Maximum length convolutional codes under a trellis complexity constraint,” J. Complex., vol. 20, pp. 372–408, Mar.–Jun. 2004.
Iterative Soft-Input Soft-Output Decoding of Reed–Solomon Codes by Adapting the
Parity-Check Matrix
Jing Jiang, Student Member, IEEE, and Krishna R. Narayanan, Member, IEEE
Abstract—An iterative algorithm is presented for soft-input soft-output (SISO) decoding of Reed–Solomon (RS) codes. The proposed iterative algorithm uses the sum–product algorithm (SPA) in conjunction with a binary parity-check matrix of the RS code. The novelty is in reducing a submatrix of the binary parity-check matrix that corresponds to less reliable bits to a sparse nature before the SPA is applied at each iteration. The proposed algorithm can be geometrically interpreted as a two-stage gradient descent with an adaptive potential function. This adaptive procedure is crucial to the convergence behavior of the gradient descent algorithm and, therefore, significantly improves the performance. Simulation results show that the proposed decoding algorithm and its variations provide significant gain over hard-decision decoding (HDD) and compare favorably with other popular soft-decision decoding methods.
Index Terms—Adapting the parity-check matrix, gradient descent, iterative decoding, Reed–Solomon (RS) codes, soft-decision decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
Reed–Solomon (RS) codes are one of the most popular error-correction codes in many state-of-the-art communication and recording systems. In most of these existing systems, RS codes are decoded via an algebraic hard-decision decoding (HDD) algorithm. When soft information about the channel output is available, HDD can incur a significant performance loss compared to optimal soft decision decoding. For example, for the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, the loss is believed to be about 2–3 dB. Moreover, in some situations, it is desirable to obtain soft output from the decoder. A typical example is when turbo equalization is employed at the receiver and soft outputs
Manuscript received March 8, 2005; revised October 17, 2005. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCR0093020 and by Seagate Technology, Pittsburgh, PA 15222 USA.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843 USA (e-mail: jjiang@ece. tamu.edu; krn@ece.tamu.edu).
Communicated by M. P. C. Fossorier, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2006.878176

from the decoder have to be fed back to the equalizer. Consequently, soft-input soft-output (SISO) decoding algorithms for RS codes are of research interest both for theoretical and practical reasons.
In the literature, there are several classes of soft-decision decoding algorithms. Enhanced HDD algorithms such as generalized minimum distance (GMD) decoding [1], Chase decoding [2] and a hybrid of Chase and GMD algorithms (CGA) [3] use reliability information to assist HDD decoding. Enhanced HDD usually gives a moderate performance improvement over HDD with reasonable complexity. Recently, algebraic soft interpolation based decoding (the Koetter–Vardy (KV) algorithm [4]), which is a list decoding technique that uses the soft information from the channel to interpolate each symbol, has become popular [5]–[7]. The KV algorithm can significantly outperform HDD for low-rate RS codes. However, to achieve large coding gain, the complexity can be prohibitively large. For detailed discussions of the complexity performance tradeoff of the KV algorithm, we refer interested readers to [7]. Another approach is decoding RS codes using their binary image expansions. Vardy and Be’ery showed that RS codes can be decomposed into Bose–Chaudhuri–Hocquenghem (BCH) subfield subcodes which are glued together using glue vectors [8]. Even though this decomposition significantly reduces the trellis complexity of maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding of RS codes, the complexity still grows exponentially with the code length and dmin and it is thus infeasible for practical long codes. Recent work [9] has reduced the complexity and modified the algorithm in [8] to generate soft output efficiently. By using the binary image expansion of RS codes, we can also use decoding algorithms for general linear block codes such as reliability based ordered statistics decoding (OSD) [10] and its variations [11] for soft-decision decoding of RS codes. Previous such works include the hybrid algorithm by Hu and Lin [12] and the box and match algorithm (BMA) [13] by Fossorier and Valembois. OSD-based algorithms are quite efficient for practical RS codes even though they do not take the structure of the RS codes into account.
Iterative decoding [14] algorithms are of emerging interest for soft decision decoding of RS codes [15]–[17]. The main difficulty in directly applying iterative decoding techniques to RS codes is that the parity-check matrix of an RS code is in general not sparse. In order to deal with such dense parity-check matrices, Yedidia et al. [18] proposed a “generalized belief propagation” (GBP) algorithm that introduces hidden states in iterative decoding. However, their results show that this technique does not work well for high-density parity-check (HDPC) codes (such as RS codes) over the AWGN channel. We observe from the simulations that the iterative decoder fails mainly due to some of the unreliable bits “saturating” most of the checks which causes iterative decoding to be stuck at some pseudo-equilibrium points. In [16], the cyclic structure of RS codes is taken advantage of and a sum product algorithm (SPA) is applied to a random shift of the received vector at each iteration to avoid pseudo-equilibrium points (see [16] for details). While significant improvement in performance over HDD was obtained for short codes, the performance improvement diminishes for long RS codes.
In this correspondence, we present an iterative SISO decoding algorithm (which is based on the SPA) for RS codes. The main novelty in the proposed scheme is to adapt the parity-check matrix at each iteration according to the bit reliabilities such that the unreliable bits correspond to a sparse submatrix and the SPA is then applied to the adapted parity-check matrix. This adaptation prevents the iterative decoder from getting stuck at pseudo-equilibrium points and, hence, the convergence behavior of the iterative decoder is significantly improved. Simulation results show that the proposed iterative decoding scheme performs well for RS codes with reasonable decoding complexity, even though the parity-check matrices are not sparse. While the approach in [16] is also one of adapting the parity-check matrix, the adaptation there

0018-9448/$20.00 © 2006 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:08:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 8, AUGUST 2006

3747

is restricted to be within the class of cyclic shifts of the parity-check matrix, whereas we consider a more general adaptation procedure here which is based on the bit reliabilities. The proposed algorithm can be applied to any linear block code; however, we restrict our attention to RS codes in this correspondence because of the practical interest in soft-decision decoding of RS codes and the fact that the gain from this adaptive procedure is significant for codes with dense parity-check matrices such as RS codes.
The rest of the correspondence is organized as follows: The generic iterative decoding algorithm is presented in Section II. A geometric interpretation of the proposed algorithm is given in Section III. Several variations of the generic algorithm are investigated in Section IV. In Section V, simulation results of the proposed algorithm are presented and compared with popular RS soft-decoding algorithms. Discussions and the conclusions are presented in Section VI.

II. ITERATIVE DECODING ALGORITHM BY ADAPTING THE

PARITY-CHECK MATRIX

Consider a narrow sense (N; K) RS code over GF (2m) which has
0 a minimum distance dmin =  = N K + 1. The parity-check matrix

over GF (2m) can be represented as follows:

1
Hs = 1

 2

111 111 111

 (N 01)  0 2(N 1)

(1)

1 1 1  0 1

( 1)

 0 0 ( 1)(N 1)

2 where  is a primitive element in GF (2m). Let n = N m and 2 k = K m be the length of the codeword and the information at the bit 0 2 level, respectively. H s has an equivalent binary image expansion H b
(see [19] for details), where H b is an (n k) n binary parity-check
matrix.
We will use underlined letters to denote vectors and bold face letters
to denote matrices. Let c = [c1; c2; . . . ; cn] be the binary representa-
tion of an RS codeword. In the description of the generic algorithm,
we first assume that the bits are modulated using binary phase-shift
0 keying (BPSK) (with 0 mapped to +1 and 1 mapped to 1) and trans-
mitted over an AWGN channel (extension to other channels is straight-
forward). The received vector is given by

0 y = ( 2c + 1) + n;

(2)

Thus, the initial reliability of each bit in the received vector can be

expressed in terms of the log-likelihood ratios (LLR) as observed from

the channel

jj L c (0)( i)

=

log

P (ci P (ci

= =

0 1

yi) yi)

(3)

Fig. 1. Form of the parity-check matrix suitable for iterative decoding obtained through row operations.

0 column to the above form, and so on. Finally, we can reduce (n k) 0 2 columns among the n columns of H b to be the identity matrix, since
the matrix is (n k) n and is full rank. The matrix is thus reduced

to a form as shown in Fig. 1. We denote the set of unreliable bits cor-

responding to the sparse submatrix as The proposed algorithm is iterative

BL.
and during

the

lth

iteration,

we

have a vector of LLRs as

L(l) = L[ (l)(c1); L c (l)( 2); . . . ; L c (l)( n)]

(4)

where initially L(0) is determined from the channel output. Then, the parity-check matrix is reduced to a desired form based on L(l)

j j H(l) b

=

(H b ;

L(l)

):

(5)

In

the

bit-reliability

updating

stage,

the

extrinsic

LLR

vector

L(l) ext

is first generated according to L(l) using the SPA [14] based on the

adapted

parity-check

matrix

H

(l) b

L H ; L : (l) ext

=

(

(l) b

(l) )

(6)

That is for each bit, the extrinsic LLR is updated according to

0n k

L c 0 e(lx)t( i) =

2 tanh 1

j=1

H =1

n tanh
p=1
6p=i;H =1

L(l)(cp)
2

: (7)

The bit-reliability is then updated as

L L L (l+1) = (l) +

(l) ext

(8)

 where 0 <  1 is a damping coefficient. This is continued until
a predetermined number of times lmax = N1 or until all the parity-
checks are satisfied. A detailed description of the algorithm is given in Algorithm 1.

The proposed algorithm is composed of two stages: the matrix updating stage and the bit-reliability updating stage. In the matrix up-
j j dating stage, the magnitude of the received LLRs L(ci) are first sorted j j and let i1; i2; . . . ; iN0K; . . . ; in denote the position of the bits in terms
of ascending order of L(ci) , i.e., the bit ci is the least reliable and ci is the most reliable. We begin with the original parity-check matrix H b and first reduce the i1th column of H b to a form [1 0 . . . 0]T . Then, we reduce the i2th column of H b to a form [0 1 0 . . . 0]T , and so
0 on. We can be guaranteed to proceed until the i(N0K)th column, since
there are at least (N K) independent columns in H b. Then we try to reduce the iN0K+1th column to

Algorithm 1 Iterative Decoding Algorithm by Adapting the Parity Check Matrix

Step 1. Initialization: set , lmax = N1, l = 0, and the LLRs for the

coded

bits

from

the

channel

observation:

L(0)

=

2 

y

Step 2. Reliability-based parity-check matrix adaptation:

j j H (l) b

=

(H b ;

L(l)

).

a) Order the coded bits according to the absolute value of
j j the LLRs L(l) and record the ordering indices.

b) Implement Gaussian elimination to systematize the
0 (n k) unreliable positions which are independent in the

[0 . . . 0 1; 0; . . . ; 0]T : 0 (N K)

parity-check matrix. (The submatrix can also be made to be degree-2 connected, see Section IV-A). Step 3. Extrinsic information generation: Apply SPA to generate the

However, there is no guarantee we can do this. If we are unable to do
so, we will leave that particular column and try to reduce i(N0K+2)th

extrinsic LLR for each bit using the adapted parity-check

matrix

H (l) b

:

L(l) ext

=

(H

(l) b

;

L(l) )

(according

to

(7)).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:08:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3748

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 8, AUGUST 2006

 Step 4. Bit-level

reliabilities

update:

L(l+1)

=

L(l)

+

L , (l) ext

where

0 <  1.

Step 5. Hard decision: c^i =

; L c > 0

(l+1) ( i) 0

1; L c < : (l+1)( i) 0

Step 6. Termination criterion: If all the checks are satisfied, output the

estimated bits; else, if l = lmax, declare a decoding failure;

otherwise set l l + 1 and go to Step2 for another iteration.

The proposed adaptive algorithm is inspired by the OSD [10]. However, instead of reprocessing the most reliable basis (MRB), we adapt the parity-check matrix according to the least reliable basis (LRB). It can also be viewed as a generalization of the iterative a posteriori probability (APP) decoding algorithm based on a set of minimum-weight parity-check vectors by Lucas et al. [20]. In [20], the iterative algorithm is interpreted as a gradient descent. The adaptive algorithm generalizes the idea of gradient descent and extends it to be a two-stage gradient descent algorithm with an adaptive potential function. The damping
coefficient  serves as the step size in the gradient descent process to
control the dynamics of convergence. In the following section, we look into a geometric interpretation of this algorithm.

where J is a function of both the parity-check matrix H b and the received soft information T .

The operator  maps the original n-dimensional unbounded real space into an n-dimensional cube (since the output of the tanh function
0 is confined to [ 1; 1]). The potential function J is minimized iff a valid j j codeword is reached, that is all the checks are satisfied and Tj = 1 0 0 for j = 1; . . . ; n, where Jmin = (n k). Besides, points with all j jTj = 1 correspond to vertices of the n-dimensional cube. Therefore,
valid codewords correspond to the vertices of the n-dimensional cube at
0 0 which the potential function has the minimum value of (n k). The

decoding problem can be interpreted as searching for the most prob-

able minimum potential vertex given the initial point observed from

the channel.
Note that the potential function J is minimized iff a valid codeword

is reached. It is quite natural to apply the gradient descent algorithm
to search for the minimum potential vertex, with the initial value T observed from the channel. Consider the gradient of J with respect to the received vector T . From (13), it can be seen that

rJ(Hb; T ) =

@J

(H b ; @T1

T

)

;

@ J (H b ; @T2

T

)

;

.

.

.

;

@J

(H b; @Tn

T

)

(14)

III. GEOMETRIC INTERPRETATION OF THE PROPOSED ALGORITHM

where the component-wise partial derivative with respect to Ti is given

In this section, a geometric interpretation of the proposed algorithm by

as a two-stage optimization procedure is presented. The idea of using optimization methods, such as gradient descent, to solve decoding problems can be dated back to Farrell et al. [21]. The belief propagation (BP) based algorithms by Gallager [22] and Pearl [23] were also

@J H ; T 0 ( b
@T 0 6 T : i

) =

(n k)

n

p

j=1

p=1

H =1 p=i;H =1

(15)

shown to be special cases of the gradient descent algorithm. The bit reliability updating algorithm in this correspondence is more similar Thus, the gradient descent updating rule can be written as

to that proposed by Lucas et al. in [20].
01 1 ! 0 Define the operator  : [ ; + ] [ 1; 1] as a mapping from
the LLR domain to tanh domain

0 r T T  J H ; T (l+1)

(l)

(

(l) b

(l) )

(16)

where  is a damping coefficient as in standard gradient descent algo-

0 (L) = tanh

L
2

eL 1 e =
L +1

rithms to control the step width.

(9) Note that the reliabilities in tanh domain are confined to

2 0 Ti

[ 1; 1]. However, the updating rule (16) does not guar-

0 ! where the mapping is one-to-one and onto. It is immediate that the inverse operator

01

:

[

1; +1]

[01; +1] can be expressed as

0 01(t) = ln

1+t 1t

;

t 2 [01; +1]:

(10)

2 0 antee this.
guarantee

tThahtetrheefourep,dwateedusTei0

the
s

following
[ 1; 1]:

modified

updating

rule

to

T (l+1) i

0 0 

01

T (l) i



H

01
=1

6p=i;H

T (l) p =1

We apply the one-to-one tanh transform on the LLRs and get the reliability measure of the received signal in the tanh domain as

where

01(x)

=

2

tanh01(x).

It

can

be

seen

that

the

above

(17) nonlinear

updating rule is exactly the same as Step 3 and Step 4 in Algorithm 1.

T = [T1; T2; . . . ; Tn] = [(L(c1)); . . . ; (L(cn))]: (11)
As in [14], we can measure the reliability of the jth parity-check node
as

When iterative decoding is applied to an HDPC code, with very high probability, the iterative algorithm will reach some local minimum
r points where J(Hb; T ) is zero or is close to zero (since a few unrer liable symbols will render the components of J(H b; T ) to be small

n


j =

(L(cp)):

(12)

p=1 H =1

Following the concept of a “generalized weighted syndrome” pro-
posed by Lucas et al. [20, eq. (20)], we define a cost function J, which characterizes the reliability of the received vector T with a particular parity-check matrix H b.
Definition 1: Define the potential function J as

or close to zero). We refer to these as pseudo-equilibrium points since
gradient descent gets stuck at these points while these points do not
correspond to valid codewords.
From (13), we observe that since J is also a function of H b, different choices of the parity-check matrices H b, though span the same dual space, result in different potential functions J. More importantly, each
r H b results in a different gradient J(Hb; T ). The proposed algorithm
exploits this fact and when a pseudo-equilibrium point is reached, by
adapting the parity-check matrix based on the bit reliabilities, switches
to another H b such that it allows the update in (17) to proceed rather

than getting stuck at the pseudo-equilibrium point. However, note that

0 (n k)

0 (n k) n

J(Hb; T ) = 0

0 
j =

Tp

j=1

j=1 p=1 H =1

the potential function that we want to minimize does not involve the Eu-

(13)

clidean distance between the received codeword and current estimate at all. That is, the adaptive algorithm attempts merely to find a codeword

that satisfies all the parity checks, without really enforcing that it be the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:08:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 8, AUGUST 2006

3749

Fig. 2. Convergence behavior of iterative decoding with and without adaptation of RS(31; 25).

one at minimum distance from the received word. Since small steps are On the other hand, for the BEC, it is known that by adapting the

taken in the gradient descent, very often we converge to the codeword parity-check matrix corresponding to less reliable bits (i.e., the erased

at a small distance from the received vector as well. However, there is bits), ML decoding performance can be achieved [24] in one iteration.

no guarantee of convergence to the nearest codeword.

If the Gaussian elimination is successful, then all the erasures can be

We use the following examples to show the operation of the adaptive recovered. Gaussian elimination will not be successful iff some of the

algorithm and its difference from directly applying iterative decoding columns corresponding to the erased bits are dependent. In this case,

to an HDPC code.

there is ambiguity between two or more valid codewords. That is, the

Example 1: Consider decoding of a random linear block code where each entry of the parity-check matrix is i.i.d. and 0 or 1 with equal probability over an erasure channel. We first apply the gradient descent algorithm directly to HDPC codes without reliability-based adaptation. Assume that the erasure fraction is , therefore, the number of erased

ML decoder also fails. In conclusion, for the BEC, gradient descent without adaptation
tends to get stuck at a pseudo-equilibrium point, while the reliability-based adaptation will help gradient descent to converge to the ML solution in one iteration.

bits is n. Consider a particular parity check, any coded bit will partici- Example 2: The idea of reliability-based parity-check matrix adap-

pate in that check with probability 1=2 (according to the i.i.d. equiprob- tation can naturally be extended to AWGN channels and the insight

able assumption). A check is not erased iff all the participated bits are not erased. Therefore, the probability that the sth check is erased is

f g 0 Pr sth check is erased =: 1

1 n ;

n ! 1:

(18)

2

Assume that the ith bit is erased and it participates in r parity checks

in the parity-check matrix. The ith component of the gradient vector is

zero (i.e.,

@J (H @T

;T )

=

0) iff the extrinsic LLRs from all the checks it

participates in are erased. The probability that the ith component of the

gradient is zero is

remains the same. Though adapting the parity-check matrix based on the channel output does not guarantee convergence to the ML decision for AWGN channels, it does avoid iterative decoding getting stuck at pseudo-equilibrium points and thus improves the convergence behavior. We give a numerical example of the convergence behavior of iterative decoding of an RS(31; 25) code in Fig. 2. A typical realization of iterative decoding is simulated. The potential function J is plotted against the number of iterations. Since there are 30 parity checks for
0 RS(31; 25), the minimum value of the potential function is J = 30
(corresponding to valid codewords). We can see that due to the high

f g 0 0 0 Pr @J(H b; T ) = 0 =: [1 2 (n 1)]r

@Ti

0 0 0 0 0 =: 1 r2 (n 1) + o(2 (n 1))

density of the parity-check matrix of the RS code, iterative decoding without matrix adaptation (Algorithm 1 without Step 2) gets stuck at some pseudo-equilibrium. On the other hand, when the iterative algo-

0 ! 0 0 =: 1 r2 (n 1)

1;

! 1 rithm is applied in conjunction with reliability-based parity-check ma-

n

(19) trix adaptation (Algorithm 1), the value of J quickly goes to the global

which suggests that unless the number of parity checks grows exponentially with n, iterative decoding gets stuck at a pseudo-equilibrium point with high probability.

minimum as the number of iteration increases. Consequently, reliability-based parity-check matrix adaptation improves the convergence behavior of iterative decoding significantly. We will show in Section V

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:08:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3750

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 8, AUGUST 2006

that the adaptive algorithm also significantly improves the error performance.
IV. VARIATIONS TO THE GENERIC ALGORITHMS
In this section, several variations of the proposed algorithm are discussed either to improve the performance or to reduce the decoding complexity.
A. Degree-2 Random Connection
One problem with the proposed approach is that since each bit in the
unreliable part BL participates in only one check, it receives extrinsic
information from one check only. If there is a bit error in the dense
part participating in that check, the bit in BL tends to be flipped and
the decoder tends to converge to a wrong codeword. To overcome this
drawback, we can reduce the matrix H b to a form where the submatrix
corresponding to the less reliable bits is sparse (say column weight 2 rather than 1). This can improve the performance since each less reliable bit now receives more extrinsic information while the submatrix corresponding to the unreliable bits still does not form any loops (i.e., there is no loop involving only the unreliable bits). We can obtain this via a degree-2 random connection algorithm. The details are presented in Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2 Deg-2 random connection algorithm
Step 1.Apply Gaussian elimination to the parity-check matrix and obtain an identity matrix in the unreliable part.
0 Step 2.Generate a random permutation of numbers from 1 to n k.
n k Record all the indices, i.e., p1; p2; p3; . . . ; p 0 .
Step 3.Adapt the parity-check matrix according to the follow rule:
0 0 add ip +1th row to pith row, for i = 1 to n k 1.
0 0 After the Deg-2 random connection, all the (n k 1) columns in
the parity-check matrix are of degree-2 except the p1th column. The last column p1 can be left of degree-1, which will not significantly affect the performance. This appears to improve the performance of the proposed algorithm especially in the high SNRs.
B. Various Groupings of Unreliable Bits

C. Incorporated Hard Decision Decoding
A hard-decision decoder can be used during each iteration in the proposed algorithm to improve the performance and accelerate decoding as well. Since the HDD may return a codeword which is different from the ML codeword, we do not stop the decoder once a codeword is returned by the HDD. Rather, we still iterate up to a maximum number of iterations to obtain all the codewords returned by HDD during each iteration and finally pick up the most likely codeword. This guarantees to perform no worse than the proposed algorithm or HDD. In practice, error detection schemes such as a cyclic redundancy check (CRC) or other test techniques as discussed in [26] can serve as a practical stopping criterion to reduce the average decoding complexity. Combining the adaptive scheme with other SIHO algorithms such as the KV algorithm has recently been investigated in [27].

D. Partial Reliable Bits Updating

The complexity in the bit level reliabilities update part can be further

reduced via “partial reliable bits updating” scheme. The main floating-

point operation complexity comes from the computation of the ex-

trinsic information in the reliable part (where the submatrix is dense).

However, in the adaptation of the parity-check matrix, only some bits

in the boundary will be switched from the reliable part to the unreliable

j j part. Therefore, in the bit reliability updating stage, we
bits in the unreliable set BL and some reliable bits with

on(lly)
L

update the
j(c ) close

to those in the may update the

uit1nhre; l.i.a.b;leitnhs0ekt +BML

. For example, at LLRs rather than

each all of

iteration, we them (where

i1 through in are sorted in ascending reliability). The number of bits

in the reliable part M can be adjusted to control the complexity.

In the computation of the tanh of each check, we can also make

approximations to reduce the complexity. For instance, min-sum can be

used instead of SPA in Step 3 of Algorithm 1 [28]. Furthermore, since

the bit reliabilities are first ordered, the minimum of the absolute value

of the LLRs in the dense part of the parity-check matrix is known. Thus,

we can approximate the tanh of all the bits in the reliable part using

the tanh of the minimum value. This modification can significantly

reduce the floating-point operation complexity while retaining most of

the performance gain.

More sophisticated updating schemes can also reduce the complexity

of matrix adaptation. El-Khamy and McEliece have proposed a scheme

that adapts the parity-check matrix from previous ones, which reduces

the overall complexity by 75% (private communication).

Another variation that can help to further improve the performance is to run the proposed algorithm several times each time with the same E. Symbol-Level Adaptation

j j initial LLRs from the channel but
able bits. It is possible that some

baitdsifwfeitrhentLg(lr)o(ucpii)ngcloofsethteoltehsossreeliin-

the unreliable set BL are also of the wrong sign and vice versa. Hence,
we can run the proposed algorithm several times each time with a dif-

ferent grouping of the less reliable bits. That is, we can swap some bits

in the reliable part with those in the unreliable part near the boundary
and run the matrix adaptation all over again, which gives a new H b. We then run the proposed algorithm on that new matrix H b. Each time

the proposed algorithm is run, a different estimate of codeword may
be obtained due to the difference in the parity-check matrix H b. All

the returned codewords are kept in a list and finally the one that mini-

mizes Euclidean distance from the received vector is chosen. We will

see from simulation results that this method can significantly improve

Gaussian elimination requires serial update of the rows and is

difficult to parallelize. Here we propose an alternative algorithm that

is parallelizable. The idea is to take advantage of the structure of

RS codes and adapt the parity-check matrix at the symbol level. Let

f g 0 L N K0 S = i1; i2; . . . ; i(

) be a set of (N

K) least reliable symbols

(symbol-level reliability can be computed by taking the tanh product

of bit-level reliabilities or taking the minimum of the bit-level reliabil-

ities). In order to update the parity-check matrix at the symbol level,

we need to find a valid parity-check matrix for which the submatrix
corresponding to the symbols in SL is an identity matrix. The detailed

procedure is as follows: first, the submatrix corresponding to the sym-
0 2 0 bols in SL is filled with an (N K) (N K) identity matrix and the

rest of the matrix with unknowns (erasure). The key idea is that com-

the asymptotic performance, but also increases the worst case com- puting the unknown symbols in the parity-check matrix is equivalent
0 plexity. Similar techniques have been used in conjunction with OSD to finding (N K) valid codewords of the dual code which will be the

by Fossorier [25] and Wu [11]. The way of grouping reliable bits used here is similar to the grouping scheme by Wu [11]. We refer interested readers to [11] for a detailed description and asymptotic performance

rows of the parity-check matrix for the original code. For the jth row,

j j j N K 0 0 the i th entry is 1 and the i1th; i2th; . . . ; i 1th; i +1th; . . . ; i

th

entries are 0’s and all other entries are erasures E (i.e., all the positions

analysis.

corresponding to the reliable symbols are erased). Since the dual code

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:08:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 8, AUGUST 2006

3751

Fig. 3. Comparison of performance bounds of RS(255; 239).

0 is an (N; N K) RS code with dmin = K +1 and there are exactly K

erasures in each row, Forney’s algorithm [29] can be used to compute

the values in the erased positions. Each decoded codeword corre-

sponds to one row in the original parity-check matrix. By repeating

0 tchhiescpkromcaetdruixreofvoerraGll F(N(2m

K) rows, we can get a
), where the submatrix

systematic parity corresponding to

unreliable symbols is the identity matrix. Using the binary expansion,

we can then get the binary parity-check matrix and thereafter apply

the SPA using it. Unlike Gaussian elimination, each element in the

parity-check matrix can be computed independently and, hence, the

whole procedure can be parallelized. This provides a computationally

efficient way to obtain a parity-check matrix in the desired form for

hardware implementation. Related concepts such as re-encoding have

also been used to reduce the complexity of KV decoding (see [30]).

V. SIMULATION RESULTS

In this section, simulation results for iterative decoding of RS codes by adapting the parity-check matrix and its variations over various channel models are presented. The following notations will be used in
the legends. ADP(N1; N2) refers to the proposed adaptive decoding scheme. N1 refers to the maximum number of iterations of iterative decoding. N2 refers to the number of decoding rounds with different
groupings of the unreliable bits (see Section IV-B). ADP & HDD

Fig. 4. Comparison of performance bounds of RS(255; 127) in practical SNR region.
For comparison, the simulation-based ML lower bounds and analytical ML upper bounds are also plotted in some figures. The details for obtaining the ML lower bound is described in [20] and the ML upper

refers to the proposed algorithm with an HDD in each iteration (see Section IV-C). SYM ADP refers to the proposed algorithm with
symbol-level adaptation (see Section IV-E). RED(M ) ADP refers to the reduced complexity partial updating schedule with M bits in
the reliable part to be updated (see Section IV-D). MS ADP refers to the proposed algorithm using “min-sum” in updating the LLRs (using min-sum rather than sum-product in Step 3 in Algorithm 1

bound will be discussed in detail in the following subsection. To speed up simulation, a genie-aided stopping criterion scheme has
been used, i.e., the decoding procedure stops when ADP and HDD gives the correct codeword. This is mildly optimistic as can be seen from the following argument. Assume that there is no genie, then the
actual decoder will run a fixed number of N1 iterations and may re-
turn a list of codewords (since the HDD may generate different code-

[28]). Unless otherwise indicated, all the simulations adopt Deg-2 words at different iterations). The actual decoder will pick the most random connection (see Section IV-A) to improve the asymptotic likely codeword from the list. Thus, if the transmitted codeword is the
performance. The damping coefficient  is also specified on the plots. most likely one, the result of the actual decoder will be the same as

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:08:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3752

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 8, AUGUST 2006

Fig. 5. RS(31; 25) over AWGN channel.

that of the genie-aided decoder. Only when the transmitted codeword is not the most likely codeword, i.e., when the ML decoder would have made errors, the result of the actual decoder may be different from the genie-aided decoder and, hence, the genie-aided decoder may be optimistic.

 We further investigate a medium rate code RS(255; 127)

R=
under

0:498

0:5

ML decoding of

in the

Fig. 4. We can see RS ensemble reaches

that the an FER

=pe1rf0o0rm4 aatnacne

Eb=N0 = 1.2 dB and outperforms the hypothetical decoder and HDD

by 2.5 and 5 dB, respectively. The ML performance of RS ensemble

A. Performance of RS Codes Under ML Decoding

is only 0.6 dB away from the sphere-packing bound [34], making it comparable to the best known turbo and low-density parity-check

We first study the performance of RS codes under ML decoding. The intention is to show that RS codes are themselves good codes (even for medium rate long codes) and the performance loss is due to the suboptimal symbol-level bounded distance decoder. The weight enumerator

(LDPC) codes. Note that for this code, all known decoders up to now are still away from the performance under ML decoding, making it difficult to obtain good simulation-based lower bounds to estimate the ML performance of the RS code.

of an RS code under a specific binary image expansion is in general unknown. In this correspondence, we study the performance of the averaged ensemble of RS codes [31] under ML decoding using the Divsalar bound [32]. The averaged ensemble of the RS code is taken by averaging over all possible binary expansions. For details, we refer to [31] and more recent work [33].
We first investigate the performance of a widely used high rate code, i.e., RS(255; 239). In Fig. 3, we plot the upper bound on the performance of RS ensemble under ML decoding, HDD with error correc-
0 tion radius t = (dmin 1)=2 and a hypothetical decoder which can 0 correct up to t = (dmin 1) symbol errors (that is, we assume the
genie decoder can decode the received vector as long as it is within the
0 distance of t = (dmin 1) at symbol level from the transmitted code-
word). We can see that the HDD is asymptotically 3 dB worse than

The preceding examples show that the symbol-level bounded distance decoding does not fully exploit the error-correction capability of
0 the code. The hypothetical decoder, which decodes up to t = dmin 1,
still performs far away from ML decoding, which suggests that an alternative design principle should be adopted for RS soft-decision decoding. Besides, the analytical performance bounds of RS codes under ML decoding are of interest as benchmarks for suboptimal decoders as will be discussed in the following subsections.
B. AWGN Channels
We first present results for the RS (31; 25) code over the AWGN channel in Fig. 5. For this code, standard BP decoding (either with or without the damping coefficient, not plotted in the figure) has little

the performance which appears at

under ML around an

FdEeRcod=in1g0(0th20e).laTrgheesht ygpaopthiestiacbaoludte4coddBer,

is at

optimal for asymptotically large very low frame-error rate (FER)

S(sNayR,sa.tHaonwFeEvRer,=th1is0h0a2p0p0e),nws ohniclhy

is impractical for most of the applications. For practical SNRs, there is

gain (within 0.5 dB from algebraic HDD) due to the large number of short cycles. However, the proposed ADP(20; 1) & HDD provides a
c21a.03n0-da4pB. pUgrsoaiianncghovtthehereHgMrDoLuDploainnwgdearmnbeo1thu.0ondddB,wthoitevhepirnrCo0ph.2oa5sseedd-GBAMaDtDPa(n(32F)0Ea;tR3a)n=&F1EH0RD0=D4.

a loss of approximately 2 dB compared to the performance of the ML The reduced complexity version RED(20) ADP(20; 1) incurs 0.2-dB

decoder.

performance loss compared with the generic ADP and outperforms MS

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:08:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 8, AUGUST 2006

3753

Fig. 6. RS (63,55) over AWGN channel.

2 ADP by about 0.5 dB at an FER = 3 1005. The ML upper bound over

RS averaged ensemble is also plotted for comparison. It can be seen that

the ML FER =

1u0p0pe4rabnodutnhdesies

0.5 two

dB away from the ML bounds converge in the

lower bound at an high-SNR region.

Now we consider the RS(63; 55) RS code. The performance is

shown in Fig. 6. For this code, standard BP performs even worse than

HDD (not plotted in the figure). However, the proposed algorithm

HAfoDDrmDPs(5aa;nb1do)uCt&h0a.H7seDd-DGBMwprDiot(hv3iind)eMsatL1a.9nlo5w-FEearnRdbo1=u.0n5d-1da0tB0a4gn.aFiAnEDRoPv(e=2r 0a;1l3g0)e0b4pr.aeirIc-t

also provides another 0.3-dB gain over ADP(5; 1). Similar to other

gradient descent methods, the damping coefficient of the adaptive

algorithm must be carefully chosen to control the updating step width.

The performance curve of ADP(100; 1) without damping or Deg-2

connection has a flat slope and the asymptotic gain diminishes, which

is mainly due to the overshooting of the update scheduling such that

the decoder tends to converge to a wrong codeword quickly. SYM

ADP(20; 1) over HDD at

& an

HDD FER

=als1o00pr4o,vwidheicshaisncoonmtripvairaalbgleaitno

of about 0.7 dB Chase-GMD(3)

while the complexity is significantly smaller. The ML upper bound

also converges to the ML lower bound in the high-SNR region as in

the previous cases.

Simulation results for the RS(255; 239) code over the AWGN

channel are shown in Fig. 7. When large complexity is tolerable,

ADP(80; 50) & HDD outperforms the popular KV method proposed

in [30] (with HDD by 1.65

dmBa,xriemsupmectimveullyti,palticaintyF1E0R0)=by1010.04.

dB We

and algebraic also compare

this algorithm about 0.6 dB

with BMA better than

order-1 [13], BMA (1) at

aAnDFPE(R80;=501)0&04H. DCDomispaarlesdo

with the ML lower bound obtained by using a near-ML decoding

algorithm recently 0.6 dB away from

proposed in [35], the adaptive ML lower bound at an FER =

a1lg0o0r3it.hWmitihs

still rea-

sonable complexity, ADP(5; 1) & HDD outperforms the KV(100)

at an incur

FER
about

= 1004. Using
0.3-dB loss at an

FthEeR“m=in1-0su0m4.”

approximation, it will At the price of a slight

pinecrrfeoarmseainncecowmitphleBxMityA, A(1D)Pa(t2F0E;R3)=&1H0D04D. can provide comparable

C. Rayleigh-Fading Channels

Now we study the performance of the proposed iterative decoding

of RS codes over Rayleigh-fading channels. It is assumed that perfect

channel state information is available at the receiver (CSIR). We first

assume BPSK modulation where the coded bits are fully interleaved

at symbol level, so that fading remains constant over one symbol but

changes from symbol to symbol. The performance of an RS(31,15)

code is shown in Fig. 8, the proposed algorithm ADP(40; 1) & HDD

outperforms respectively,

algebraic HDD at an FER =

1an0d04G. MADDPd(e4c0o;d3in)g&byH6D.5D

and can

3.3 dB, further

improve the asymptotic performance. The performance of SYM

ADP(40; 1) & HDD is also plotted. We see that it also offers about

t5i-vdeBly,gaatinanoFveErRH=DD10a0n4d.

1.8-dB Similar

gain over GMD decoding, respecresults are observed for long codes

with rate R = 0:5. The performance of a shortened RS(128; 64) over

GF(256) is given in Fig. 9. The proposed decoding scheme provides

several decibel gain over HDD. This is a nontrivial gain considering

the powerful burst error correction capability of HDD.

We also study the performance of RS coded modulation system

over a symbol-level fully interleaved channel. We show in Fig. 10

the performance of a shortened RS(204; 188) code with 256-QAM

modulation and Gray mapping, which has similar settings as many

existing standards. We can see from the figure that the proposed

algorithm than 7 dB

ADP(20; 1) & at an FER =

1H0D0D3.

outperforms algebraic HDD by more Compared with KV decoder, there is

also a 3- to 4-dB gain. Though KV decoder takes the symbol-level

soft information directly, its performance is mainly limited by the

algebraic bounded distance decoding kernel.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:08:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3754

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 8, AUGUST 2006

Fig. 7. RS (255; 239) over AWGN channel.
Fig. 8. RS (31; 15) over fully interleaved slow fading channel. Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:08:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 8, AUGUST 2006

3755

Fig. 9. RS (128; 64) over fully interleaved slow fading channel.
Fig. 10. RS (204; 188) coded modulation over Rayleigh fading channel. Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:08:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3756

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 8, AUGUST 2006

VI. DISCUSSIONS AND CONCLUSION
There are several potential extensions of the adaptive algorithm. First, the gain of the proposed scheme may diminish at high SNRs for long codes. Further improvement of the generic decoder without significantly increasing the complexity remains a challenging problem. It is favorable that the structure of the RS codes can be taken into account in conjunction with the adaptive algorithm. Therefore, Vardy
H and Be’ery’s coset decomposition [8] seems to be a promising way
to represent the b using a relatively sparse form. It is also natural to apply some more sophisticated decoding techniques (e.g., constructing some subtrellis with reasonable complexity) and adopt the idea of the adaptive algorithm to improve the decoding performance. Second, from our simulation experience, when the channel has memory (say the intersymbol interference (ISI) channel or some frequency-shift keying (FSK) signaling), the performance gain of adaptive algorithm (without turbo equalization) diminishes. How to extend the adaptive scheme to detection and equalization such that they can generate good quality bit-level soft information is under investigation. Third, asymptotic performance analysis of the adaptive algorithm is also of interest. Ahmed et al. [28] showed that using a certain probabilistic model, the performance of the adaptive algorithm under min-sum approximation can be evaluated using the OSD bound. However, the performance bounds for the exact scheme is still of interest especially in the high SNRs.
In conclusion, we present a novel iterative SISO decoding algorithm of RS codes by adapting the parity-check matrix. The proposed algorithm can be geometrically interpreted as a two-stage gradient descent algorithm with an adaptive potential function. Simulation results show that the proposed algorithm compares favorably with known RS codes soft-decoding methods over various channels for a wide range of RS codes of practical interest. Besides, the proposed algorithm and its variations also provide flexible performance–complexity tradeoff for different applications.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank R. Koetter for pointing out the two-stage optimization essence of the proposed decoding algorithm. They are grateful to W. Jin and M. P. C. Fossorier for providing the simulation-based ML lower bound and many other precious suggestions. The authors appreciate the constructive comments from three anonymous reviewers that have greatly improved the presentation of this correspondence. J. Jiang also would like to thank M. El-Khamy for many inspiring discussions.
REFERENCES
[1] G. D. Forney Jr., “Generalized minimum distance decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-12, no. 2, pp. 125–131, Apr. 1996.
[2] D. Chase, “Class of algorithms for decoding block codes with channel measurement information,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-18, no. 1, pp. 170–182, Jan. 1972.
[3] H. Tang, Y. Liu, M. P. C. Fossorier, and S. Lin, “Combining Chase-2 and GMD decoding algorithms for nonbinary block codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 209–211, May 2000.
[4] R. Koetter and A. Vardy, “Algebraic soft-decision decoding of Reed–Solomon codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 11, pp. 2809–2825, Nov. 2003.
[5] M. El-Khamy, R. J. McEliece, and J. Harel, “Performance enhancements for algebraic soft-decision decoding of Reed-Solomon codes,” in Proc. DIMACS, AMS-DIMACS volume on Algebraic Coding Theory and Information Theory.
[6] N. Ratnakar and R. Koetter, “Exponential error bounds for algebraic soft-decision decoding of Reed–Solomon codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 11, pp. 3899–3917, Nov. 2005.
[7] W. J. Gross, F. R. Kschischang, R. Koetter, and P. G. Gulak, “Toward a VLSI architecture for interpolation-based soft-decision Reed-Solomon decoders,” J. VLSI Signal Processing, vol. 39, pp. 93–111, Jan./Feb. 2005.

[8] A. Vardy and Y. Be’ery, “Bit-level soft-decision decoding of ReedSolomon codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 440–444, Mar. 1991.
[9] V. Ponnampalam and B. Vucetic, “Soft decision decoding of Reed-Solomon codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 1758–1768, Nov. 2002.
[10] M. P. C. Fossorier and S. Lin, “Soft-decision decoding of linear block codes based on ordered statistics,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 41, no. 5, pp. 1379–1396, Sep. 1995.
[11] Y. Wu, R. Koetter, and C. Hadjicostis, “Soft-decision decoding of linear block codes using preprocessing,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Chicago, IL, Jun./Jul. 2004, p. 259.
[12] T. Hu and S. Lin, “An efficient hybrid decoding algorithm for ReedSolomon codes based on bit reliability,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 1073–1081, Jul. 2003.
[13] M. P. C. Fossorier and A. Valembois, “Reliability-based decoding of Reed-Solomon codes using their binary image,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 452–454, Jul. 2004.
[14] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of binary block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 429–445, Mar. 1996.
[15] G. Ungerboeck, “Iterative soft decoding of Reed-Solomon codes,” in Proc. Int Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 2003.
[16] J. Jiang and K. R. Narayanan, “Iterative soft decoding of Reed Solomon codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 244–246, Apr. 2004.
[17] J. S. Yedidia, “Sparse factor graph representations of Reed-Solomon and related codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Chicago, IL, Jun./Jul. 2004, p. 260.
[18] J. S. Yedidia, J. Chen, and M. Fossorier, “Generating code representations suitable for belief propagation decoding,” in Proc. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2002.
[19] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications, 1st ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1983.
[20] R. Lucas, M. Bossert, and M. Breitbach, “On iterative soft-decision decoding of linear binary block codes and product codes,” IEEE J, Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 276–296, Feb. 1998.
[21] K. Farrell, L. Rudolph, C. Hartmann, and L. Nielsen, “Decoding by local optimization,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-29, no. 5, pp. 740–743, Sep. 1983.
[22] R. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[23] R. J. McEliece, D. J. C. MacKay, and J. F. Cheng, “Turbo decoding as an instance of pearl’s “belief propagation” algorithm,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 140–152, Feb. 1998.
[24] P. Elias, “Coding for two noisy channels,” in 3rd London Symp. Information Theory, London, U.K., Sep. 1955.
[25] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Reliability-based soft-decision decoding with iterative information set reduction,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 12, pp. 3101–3106, Dec. 2002.
[26] ——, “Iterative reliability-based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas in Commun., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 908–917, May 2001.
[27] M. E. Khamy and R. J. McEliece, “Iterative algebraic soft decision decoding of Reed-Solomon codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Information Theory and Its Applications, Parma, Italy, Mar. 2004, pp. 1456–1461.
[28] A. Ahmed, R. Koetter, and N. R. Shanbhag, “Performance analysis of the adaptive parity check matrix based soft-decision decoding algorithm,” in Proc. Asilomar Conf. Signals, Systems, and Computers, Pacific Grove, CA, Nov. 2004, pp. 1995–1999.
[29] S. B. Wicker, Error Control Systems for Digital Communication and Storage, 1st ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1995.
[30] W. J. Gross, F. R. Kschischang, R. Koetter, and P. G. Gulak, “Applications of algebraic soft-decision decoding of Reed-Solomon codes,” IEEE Trans. Communi., vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 1224–1234, Jul. 2006.
[31] C. Retter, “The average weight-distance enumerator for binary expansions of Reed-Solomon codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 3, pp. 1195–1200, Mar. 2002.
[32] D. Divsalar, A Simple Tight Bound on Error Probability of Block Codes with Application to Turbo Codes. TMO Progr. Rep., 1999, TR 42–139.
[33] M. E. Khamy and R. J. McEliece, “Bounds on the average binary minimum distance and the maximum likelihood performance of Reed-Solomon codes,” in Proc. Allerton, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2004.
[34] S. Dolinar, D. Divsalar, and F. Pollara, Code Performance as a Function of Block Size TMO Progress Report, 1998, TR 42–133.
[35] W. Jin and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Iterative biased reliability-based decoding of binary linear codes,” in Proc. IEICE and SITA Joint Conf. Information Theory, Honolulu, HI, May 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:08:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

