IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 1, JANUARY 2006

13

An Innovative Low-Density Parity-Check Code Design With Near-Shannon-Limit Performance and Simple Implementation
Mustafa Eroz, Feng-Wen Sun, and Lin-Nan Lee

Abstract—A novel parity-check matrix design for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes is described. By eliminating the routing problem associated with LDPC codes, the design results in a small implementation area, and the codes have outstanding error-rate performance close to the Shannon limit for a wide range of code rates, from 1/4 to 9/10, and for various modulation schemes such as binary phase-shift keying (PSK), quaternary PSK, 8-PSK, 16-amplitude PSK (APSK), and 32-APSK. As a result, LDPC codes designed with this method have been standardized for next-generation digital video broadcasting.
Index Terms—Digital video broadcasting (DVB), high-order modulation, iterative decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, very-large-scale integration (VLSI) implementation.
I. INTRODUCTION
D ESPITE the simplicity of decoding operations of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1], [2], the challenge in the design is how to establish the communication between “randomly” distributed bit nodes and check nodes. Various research papers have addressed this issue [4]–[7]. A fully parallel architecture, where there are as many physical nodes in the circuit as the logical nodes of the code, becomes rapidly infeasible with increasing block size, due to complexity of interconnections between the nodes. On the other hand, for partially parallel architecture, where a small number of physical nodes are reused to serve all the logical nodes, the main problem is to access relevant information for the logical nodes in the process fast enough from memory in high-speed applications. All of the previous papers on this topic attack this problem by dividing the memory block into small pieces, and by designing LDPC codes that allow simultaneous access to these small blocks without any collisions. On the other hand, this leads to an increase in the chip area, due to area-inefficient, small blocks of memory. Furthermore, Tarable et al. [13] showed recently that as long as small, multiple memory blocks are available, it is possible to obtain collision-free memory access for any code. So they showed that specially designed LDPC or turbo codes are, in fact, not needed. In this letter, we describe a novel way of designing LDPC codes by imposing certain restrictions on the parity-check matrix, so that a single memory block can be accessed in parallel without any collision, leading to area-efficient designs. Hence, the multiple memory block assumption of [13] does not apply to our design.

The scheme works by accessing memory in a structured way to realize a seemingly random code.

II. PARITY-CHECK MATRIX DESIGN FOR EFFICIENT MEMORY ACCESS

LDPC codes are linear block codes with sparse parity-check

matrices

. For long LDPC codes, we can only have

a limited number of parallel computation engines (physical

nodes) to implement all of the logical nodes [4]. In this archi-

tecture, computation engines (i.e., bit/check node processors)

would have to first access the contents of edges adjacent to

a group of logical nodes. But, in general, this information is

scattered randomly in memory. In such a scenario, accessing

the contents of edges would take clock cycles. Considering

that numerous iterations are required to achieve good perfor-

mance and several read/writes of edge contents are needed

per iteration, it becomes clear that high-speed applications

cannot be supported due to memory-access speed limitations.

In this section, we describe a new code-design technique which

ensures that relevant edges for a group of logical bit/check

nodes are always placed “together” in RAM so that multiple

edges can be fetched in a single clock cycle.

The key to structured access while achieving good perfor-

mance lies in the specification of the parity-check matrix. In

general, a parity-check matrix can be described by specifying

which check nodes are connected to the bit nodes. In the fol-

lowing method, we specify the adjacent check codes for a group

of bit nodes at a time. The number has certain physical

meanings. First, it denotes the number of parallel computation

engines for bit and check node processing. Second, it denotes

the number of columns in the RAM matrix that hold the con-

tents of bipartite graph edges. The relation of these two mean-

ings will become clearer in an example in Section II-B.

A. Specification of the Parity-Check Matrix

We place the following main restriction on a certain subma-

trix of :

For a group of bit nodes of degree , suppose that the

check nodes connected to the first bit node are indexed as

. Then the check nodes connected to th bit node

(

) are

Paper approved by C. Schlegel, the Editor for Coding Theory and Techniques of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received September 2, 2004; revised April 8, 2005 and May 24, 2005. This paper was presented in part at the IEEE MILCOM, Atlantic City, NJ, October 2005.
The authors are with Hughes Network Systems, Germantown, MD 20876 USA (e-mail: meroz@hns.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2005.861681

where

denotes the total number of check nodes and

. For the following group of bit nodes,

the check nodes connected to the first bit node of the group are,

in general, randomly chosen, so that at the end, all check nodes

0090-6778/$20.00 © 2006 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:02:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

14

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 1, JANUARY 2006

Fig. 1. Edge placement and access. (a) Top RAM. (b) Bottom RAM.

have the same degree (except for one check node with one less B. Arrangement of the Edge RAM Matrix

degree, as will be clear in the next paragraph). Furthermore,

we search over the free constants

(check nodes

connected to the first bit node in every group of ), so that the

final LDPC code is cycle-4 free and the occurrence of cycle-6

is minimized.

In addition to the previous restriction, we furthermore re-

strict the parity-check matrix to be of the form

, where is staircase lower tri-

angular as in (1), i.e., only the

submatrix is chosen

according to the previous paragraph. (From the structure of the

submatrix, note that the first check node has one less degree

than the others)

Before processing a group of check nodes or bit nodes, the contents of all the adjacent edges have to be read from RAM, and after processing, the updated values have to be written back. But in order to efficiently perform this task, the required edge contents have to be placed “together” in RAM for all the groups of nodes, so that multiple edges can always be fetched in one clock cycle. Of course, while achieving this structure, some level of randomness must be maintained in order not to sacrifice performance. Actually, even with a truly random LDPC code, for a group of check nodes (respectively, bit nodes), the relevant edges can always be placed next to one another in RAM, but then the relevant edges adjacent to a group of bit nodes (respectively,

check nodes) will be randomly scattered in RAM. Our design

ensures that the relevant edges for every group of bit nodes

and check nodes are simultaneously placed together.

(1) The RAM is conceptually divided into two: top-edge RAM

...

and bottom-edge RAM, as shown in Fig. 1. (Note that in actual

implementation, top-edge RAM and bottom-edge RAM form a

single memory block.) The number of columns in RAM ma-

trices is , i.e., the size of the parallel computation engines.

Our motivation for choosing the parity-check matrix in this form Each edge of the bipartite graph is assigned an index starting

has three parts. First, it leads to a very practical method of en- from 0, and each box in Fig. 1 contains an edge. Bottom-edge

coding. In particular, the parity-check matrix is sufficient to RAM contains the edges between check nodes and bit nodes of

achieve encoding without having to generate a large, nonsparse degree two or one. Top-edge RAM contains the edges between

generator matrix with a quadratic encoding complexity. Any in- check nodes and bit nodes of degree greater than two. In other

formation block

is encoded to a codeword words, each top RAM edge corresponds to a one in the sub-

using

, matrix, and each bottom RAM edge corresponds to a one in the

and recursively solving for parity bits.

submatrix. Therefore, for every check node of degree , two

Second, a certain number of bit nodes of degree 2 improves adjacent edges are stored in the bottom RAM, and the remaining

the code’s performance [3]. Grouping those bit nodes in a struc-

eges are stored in the top-edge RAM.

tured way under the submatrix makes an easy implementa- During check-node processing, we access

con-

tion, as described in Section II-B. Third, the staircase format secutive rows from top RAM and two consecutive rows from

of the submatrix guarantees that no short cycle composed of bottom RAM, as shown in Fig. 1. These rows contain all and

only degree-2 bit nodes exists, which improves the performance. only the edges associated with a group of check nodes. In

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:02:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 1, JANUARY 2006

15

the bipartite graph, edges of the top RAM which are adjacent

to a certain check node are indexed consecutively. For example,

top RAM edges adjacent to the check node labeled 0 are in-

dexed 0 through

, top RAM edges adjacent to the check

node labeled 1 are indexed through

, etc. Then from

Fig. 1(a), it becomes clear that the first rows of the top RAM

contains only of the adjacent edges for check nodes labeled

. Moreover, the th element of each row

carries an edge for the th check node in the group of check

nodes.

Bottom RAM edges are indexed following the indexes of top

RAM edges in the order shown in (2), starting from

and

ending at

. The placement of bottom RAM

edges is shown in Fig. 1(b). Note that the top left-hand corner

entry does not carry any edge information. Based on the in-

dexing scheme in (2) and edge placement in Fig. 1(b), the re-

maining two adjacent edges per check node for the first group

of check nodes are found in the top two rows of the bottom

RAM. Moreover, similar to the top RAM case, the th element

of each row carries an edge for the th check node. For the next

group of check nodes, adjacent edges are found in the fol-

lowing consecutive rows of top RAM and two consecutive

rows of bottom RAM, etc.:

(2) ...

edge adjacent to the first bit node can be anywhere in that row.

Therefore, the column number for that edge must also be stored

in ROM. The column indexes of the edges adjacent to the other

bit nodes follow the first column index in a “wrapped around”

fashion. For example, if the th edge in the row belongs to the

first bit node, then the

st edge belongs to the second bit

node, the

nd edge belongs to the third bit node, and the

st edge belongs to the th bit node. In this example,

only the number would be stored in ROM.

The silicon size of the ROM table is negligible. For the digital

video broadcasting (DVB)-S2 standard, the total required area

for 11 different code rates, each having a codeword size of

, is below 0.1 mm .

For all the bit nodes with degree two and one bit node with

degree one (i.e., bit nodes associated with submatrix ), adja-

cent edges are stored in bottom RAM. As shown in Fig. 1(b),

all of the adjacent edges for a group of bit nodes are found

in two consecutive rows of bottom RAM. Those two consecu-

tive rows are shifted by one, with respect to the two consecutive

rows accessed for check-node processing. In the following we

give a simple example to clarify the whole design.

Example: The parity-check matrix for a code designed ac-

cording to the rules given in Section II-A is shown in (3), at

the bottom of the page. For this code, the rate is

and

the length is

. Clearly,

,

, and

. The corresponding bipartite graph is in

Fig. 2.

Note that all but one check node has degree

. The

indexes next to a node denotes labeled edges adjacent to that

node. Top- and bottom-edge RAM with

columns is

given in

One would rightfully argue that the above favorable placement

of edges adjacent to groups of check nodes can be achieved

for any random LDPC code by suitably labeling the edges.

The innovation of the design lies in the fact that adjacent edges

for groups of bit nodes are simultaneously placed together

in some rows of edge RAMs, which follows directly from

the parity-check matrix restriction described in Section II-A.

On the other hand, unlike check nodes, adjacent edges of the

bit nodes are not stored in consecutive top RAM rows. For a

group of bit nodes, all with degree

, the indexes for

the rows that carry all the adjacent edges are random, and

must be stored in ROM. Furthermore, within a specific row, the

(4)

Check nodes are partitioned into groups of

: {0,2,4}

and {1,3,5}. Note that we do not need to store the groups, since

the computation engines do not differentiate which nodes are

(3)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:02:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

16

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 1, JANUARY 2006

H Fig. 2. Bipartite graph of the matrix in (3).

processed. For the first group, are

adjacent edges

All of the above edges are stored in the first six rows of top-edge

RAM. So we just need to fetch those six rows. Moreover, in each

row, the th element belongs to the th check node in the group.

The remaining adjacent edges are

.

They are stored in the first two rows of bottom-edge RAM. A

similar structure exists for the other group of check nodes.

Bit nodes of degree

are partitioned into groups of

: {0,1,2}, {3,4,5}, {6,7,8}, {9,10,11}. Bit nodes in the

first group have degree three. Their adjacent edges are

bit node (hence,

); for the row indexed 2, belongs to

the first bit node (hence, ), and for the row indexed 7,

belongs to the first bit node (hence,

). Therefore, the first

part of our ROM table reads 0/0 2/1 7/1. Going through the other

groups in a similar manner, we obtain

All these edges appear in top-edge RAM, namely, rows indexed

0, 2, and 7. These row indexes are stored in ROM. Row 0 car-

ries

; row 2 carries

; row 7 carries

. Similar to the check-node case, each row carries

one adjacent edge per bit node. On the other hand, they are not

Bit nodes of degree

are divided into the following

groups: {12, 14, 16}, {13,15,17}. It can be verified that adjacent

edges of each group occur in two consecutive rows of bottom

RAM.

in perfect order, as in the case of check nodes. In other words, the th element in each row does not necessarily belong to the C. How to Choose

th node. But as described in Section II-B, if the th element From the previous discussion, it is evident that the most im-

belongs to the first bit node, then the

st element belongs portant design parameter is , the number of parallel compu-

to the second bit, the

nd element belongs to the third bit tation engines for bit-node and check-node processing. Obvi-

node, etc., and finally, the

st element belongs to the th ously, choosing a large would enable high-speed decoders

bit node. So all we need to store in ROM is the index of each at the expense of increased area, and vice versa. More quanti-

row that belongs to the first bit node in the group. In the above tatively,

, where is the coded bit rate

example, we note that for row indexed 0, belongs to the first (Mb/s), is the maximum number of iterations, is the available

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:02:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 1, JANUARY 2006

17

N Fig. 3. Performance of LDPC codes over AWGN channel ( = 64800).

clock rate (MHz), is the average degree of bit nodes, and is

the total number of read or writes per iteration (

, since

each iteration consists of bit-node and check-node processing,

each requiring one read and one write). For example,

Mb/s,

iterations,

, and

MHz

leads to

.

III. PERFORMANCE RESULTS

Even though the previous design restricts the parity-check

matrix to be structured, the performance is still very good due to

the pseudorandom choice of certain check-node/bit-node con-

nections that ensures the cycle-free characteristic. We designed

codes with 11 different rates, namely, 1/4, 1/3, 2/5, 1/2, 3/5, 2/3,

3/4, 4/5, 5/6, 8/9, and 9/10 to cover a wide range of bandwidth

efficiency. For each code rate, a parity-check matrix is specified

by listing adjacent check nodes for the first bit node in a group

of

. To improve the performance, irregular LDPC

codes are used, where degrees of bit nodes are varying [3]. Exact

degree distributions and parity-check matrices are specified in

[12]. Performance of various code rates with QPSK, 8-PSK,

16-APSK, and 32-APSK constellations on an AWGN channel

is depicted in Fig. 3. The code length for all cases is

. Gray labeling is used for QPSK and 8-PSK. Labeling

for 16-APSK and 32-APSK are described in [12]. These LDPC

codes have been standardized for second-generation DVB appli-

cations. As opposed to the first-generation DVB standard which

uses convolutional and Reed–Solomon codes, they offer more

than 35% capacity improvement, as shown in Fig. 4. Further-

more, they are, on average, about only 0.7–0.8 dB away from

Shannon limits.

The DVB-S2 standard also includes a shorter code (

). On the other hand, the structure restriction described

in this letter, with

parallel engines, prevents finding

codes with

for some of the code rates. In these

cases, we designed codes slightly longer than

and

shortened them back to

. As a result, the exact code

rates are 1/3, 2/5, 4/9, 3/5, 2/3, 11/15, 7/9, 37/45, and 8/9. The

relative degree distribution of mother codes are the same as be-

Fig. 4. Comparison of DVB-S2 (LDPC+BCH) codes to DVB-S1 and channel capacity.
fore. Performance of the shorter codes is about 0.2–0.3 dB worse than longer codes [12].
IV. CONCLUSION
An innovative parity-check matrix design for LDPC codes is described, which eliminates the routing problem and has outstanding error-rate performance. The method leads to very simple and effective codes with less than 10 mm silicon area, up to 150 Mb/s data rate, and only 0.7–0.8 dB away from Shannon capacity.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Aug. 1962.
[2] D. J. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near-Shannon-limit performance of lowdensity parity-check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 457–458, Mar. 1997.
[3] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[4] G. Al-Rawi and J. Cioffi, “A highly efficient domain-programmable parallel architecture for LDPCC decoding,” in Proc. ITCC, 2001, pp. 569–577.
[5] M. Mansour and S. Shanbhag, “Low power VLSI decoder architectures for LDPC codes,” in Proc. ISLPED, Monterey, CA, 2002, pp. 284–289.
[6] W. Lee and A. Wu, “VLSI implementation for LDPC decoder,” in Proc. ICECS, 2001, pp. 1223–1226.
[7] E. Boutillon, J. Castura, and F. Kschischang, “Decoder first code design,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, Related Topics, Sep. 2000, pp. 459–462.
[8] H. Jin, A. Khandekar, and R. McEliece, “Irregular repeat-accumulate codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, Related Topics, Sep. 2000, pp. 1–8.
[9] R. Narayanaswami, “Coded modulation with low-density parity-check codes,” M.S. thesis, Texas A&M Univ., College Station, TX, 2001.
[10] L. Ping, W. K. Leung, and N. Phamdo, “Low-density parity-check codes with semirandom parity-check matrix,” Electron. Lett., vol. 35, no. 7, pp. 38–39, Jan. 1999.
[11] D. MacKay, Information Theory, Inference and Learning Algorithms. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2003.
[12] European Telecommun. Standards Inst. (ETSI) EN 302 307 v1.1.1 Digital Video Broadcasting 2nd Generation Framing Structure, Channel Coding and Modulation Systems for Broadcasting, Interactive Services, News Gathering and Other Broadband Satellite Applications [Online]. Available: www.dvb.org
[13] A. Tarable, S. Benedetto, and G. Montorsi, “Mapping interleaver laws to parallel turbo and LDPC decoder architectures,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 9, pp. 2002–2009, Sep. 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:02:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

