GQ-06
A Reliability-Based Reed-Solomon Decoding Algorithm for Magnetic Recording Channels.
H. Xia1,2 and J. R. Cruz2 1. Link A Media Devices Corp., Santa Clara, CA, USA; 2. School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK, USA
I. Introduction Reed-Solomon (RS) codes and algebraic hard-decision decoders are the current state-of-the-art for error-correction coding in magnetic recording systems. Iterative soft-decision decoding algorithms utilizing channel reliability information such as the belief propagation (BP) algorithm have been recently introduced for decoding RS codes with great success at the expense of an increase in decoding complexity [1]. An earlier type of algorithms generally referred to as Chase algorithms have also been used for decoding RS codes with the help of reliability information. In this paper, we present a simplification of the adaptive BP (ABP) algorithm which leads to a Chase-type algorithm and evaluate its performance on magnetic recording channels. II. Reliability-Based Algorithm In [1], the BP algorithm has been used to decode a partly low-density parity-check matrix of an RS code which is generated adaptively according to the reliability information of each bit of the received vector. First, the received reliability information is sorted, and the received bits are grouped into reliable (Gr) and unreliable (Gu) groups. For those columns in the parity-check matrix corresponding to bits in (Gu), a reduction of the column weight is performed. Then the BP algorithm is executed using the modified parity-check matrix. If the correct codeword cannot be found, the channel reliability is updated with the extrinsic information provided by the BP algorithm and it is executed once again. We have observed in our simulations of the ABP algorithm that the performance is strongly dependent on the accuracy of the grouping, i.e., whether all the erroneous bits are included in (Gu). A hard version of reliability-based belief propagation can be used for a reduced-complexity implementation, which turns out to be a Chase-type algorithm. The detailed Chase-type algorithm can be described as follows: Step 1. Execute hard-decision RS decoding of the received vector. If successful, go to End. Step 2. Sort the received vector in descending order of the magnitude of the reliability information and use Gauss-Jordan elimination on the binary image of the RS parity-check matrix using complete pivoting around the least reliable bits (Gu). Step 3. Using the modified parity-check matrix, flip the least reliable bits that do not satisfy a parity-check equation involving only reliable bits (Gr). Execute hard-decision RS decoding and perform a CRC check to see if the user data was correctly decoded. If it checks, go to End. Step 4. (Optional) Identify the bits in the reliable group (Gr) which have many unsatisfied check equations, flip them with a particular flip pattern and repeat Step 3. If it fails to decode after all flip patterns have been tried, declare a decoding failure.
End. III. Performance Evaluation Some recent work on the analytical performance of reliability-based algorithms in [2] and references therein can be used for evaluating the performance of the algorithm proposed in this paper.

Using the same notation as in [2], consider the RS (n,k) code over GF(2m). Assume that among the N=nm received bits, there are i hard-decision errors. For 1≤j≤i, let βj(i) be the jth descending ordered reliability value among the i hard-decision errors and let γl(N-i) be the lth- ordered reliability value among the N-i correct hard-decisions for 1≤l≤N-i. The probability of βj(i) being larger tPhar(nβγj(li()N≥-γil)(Nis-ig)i)v=e∫n∞0afsγl(N-i)(x)∫∞xfβj(i)(y)dydx where fγl(N-i)(x), fβj(i)(y) are the probability density function of βj(i) and γl(N-i) respectively [2, Equations (5) and (6)]. If we consider a decoding system with a hard-decision algebraic RS decoder
and the proposed Chase-type algorithm for the retry mode, the overall frame error rate is given as Pe=Palgebraic×PChase, and the first-order approximation of PChase is
PChase= 1-Σnm-kmi=t+1(N!/(i!(N-i)!)×Q(1)i×(1-Q(1))N-i×Pr(β1(i)<γN-km-i+1(N-i))) with t≥(n-k)/2. IV. Results and Discussion
In our simulations, we use the BCJR algorithm as the soft-decision channel detector on an equal-
ized perpendicular magnetic recording channel with DC-attenuated target (1.0, 1.11, -0.07, -0.37) [3], channel density K=1.4 and 90% jitter noise. A shortened RS (186, 172) code over GF(28) has
been used, and the performance of the proposed Chase-type algorithm has been compared with the
Chase II algorithm for different values of p (number of bits needs to be flipped). We can see that
the proposed Chase-type algorithm is almost as good as the Chase II algorithm with p=6 at a frame error rate FER=10-5, and about 0.5-dB better than conventional hard-decision RS decoding. For
longer RS codes, simulations also show a performance improvement over conventional hard deci-
sion decoding.
[1] J. Jiang and K. R. Narayanan, “Iterative soft decision decoding of Reed Solomon codes based
on adaptive parity check matrices,” in Proc. IEEE Intl. Symp. Inform. Theory, 2004.
[2] M. Fossorier and S. Lin, “Error performance analysis for reliability-based decoding algo-
rithms,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 48, pp. 287-293, Jan. 2002.
[3] H. Sawaguchi, Y. Nishida, H. Takano and H. Aoi, “Performance analysis of modified PRML
channels for perpendicular recording systems,” J. Magnetism.Magnetic Materials, vol. 235, pp.
265-272, 2001.

INTERMAG 2006

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:07:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

791

