IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 41, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2006

2531

A 0.18-m CMOS Analog Min-Sum Iterative
Decoder for a (32,8) Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) Code
Saied Hemati, Member, IEEE, Amir H. Banihashemi, Senior Member, IEEE, and Calvin Plett, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Current-mode circuits are presented for implementing analog min-sum (MS) iterative decoders. These decoders are used to efficiently decode the best known error correcting codes such as low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes and turbo codes. The proposed circuits are devised based on current mirrors, and thus, in any fabrication technology that accurate current mirrors can be designed, analog MS decoders can be implemented. The functionality of the proposed circuits is verified by implementing an analog MS decoder for a (32,8) LDPC code in a 0.18- m CMOS technology. This decoder is the first reported analog MS decoder. For low signal to noise ratios where the circuit imperfections are dominated by the noise of the channel, the measured error correcting performance of this chip in steady-state condition surpasses that of the conventional floating-point discrete-time synchronous MS decoder. When data throughput is 6 Mb/s, loss in the coding gain compared to the conventional MS decoder at BER of 10 3 is about 0.3 dB and power consumption is about 5 mW. This is the first time that an analog decoder has been successfully tested for an LDPC code, though a short one.
Index Terms—Analog iterative decoder, belief propagation, current-mode circuits, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, min-sum decoding, turbo codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
GALLAGER invented low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes as part of his doctoral thesis in the early sixties [1]. However, the importance of inventing these capacity achieving codes was not fully realized at that time due to limited computational resources. Three decades later, turbo codes [2], which are another class of capacity achieving codes, were introduced and it took a few more years before LDPC codes were reinvented [3]. LDPC codes can get extremely close to the Shannon
Manuscript received January 4, 2006; revised May 31, 2006. This work was supported in part by Communications and Information Technology Ontario (CITO), in part by Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), and in part by Canadian Microelectronic Corporation (CMC). This paper was presented in part at the 2005 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), Adelaide, Australia, September 2005, and in part at the 2005 IEEE Custom Integrated Circuits Conference (CICC), San Jose, CA, September 2005.
S. Hemati was with the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, K1S 5B6 Canada. He is now with the School of Information Technology and Engineering (SITE), University of Ottawa, ON, K1N 6N5 Canada (e-mail: hemati@sce.carleton.ca).
A. H. Banihashemi is with the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering and Broadband Communications and Wireless Systems (BCWS) Centre, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, K1S 5B6 Canada (e-mail: ahashemi@sce.carleton.ca).
C. Plett is with the Electronics Department, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, K1S 5B6 Canada (e-mail: cp@doe.carleton.ca).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JSSC.2006.883329

limit [4] and are now included in or are under consideration for many communication standards (e.g., IEEE 802.3an, IEEE 802.11n, IEEE 802.20, and DVB-S2) [5], [6]. Iterative decoding algorithms are powerful and yet computationally affordable decoding algorithms that are used for decoding LDPC codes and turbo codes. Therefore, it is of great interest to implement low-cost iterative decoders with high throughput and low power consumption. While iterative decoding algorithms can be implemented by a floating-point discrete-time synchronous digital approach (see, e.g., [7]–[9]), consumed power and silicon area can be large and thus unacceptable for some applications. Analog continuous-time iterative decoding was proposed a few years ago to improve the power/speed ratio of iterative decoder chips [10]–[21]. Analog decoders can also be more compact and generate lower switching noise compared to their digital counterparts.
Belief propagation (also called sum-product), which is the best known iterative decoding algorithm, can be implemented by analog BiCMOS or subthreshold CMOS circuits [10]–[17]. A Gilbert differential multiplier is the basic processing module in analog belief propagation decoders and is implemented by using either bipolar or weakly inverted MOS transistors [11]. However, BiCMOS circuits are costly and subthreshold circuits are rather slow and can only be used for low-speed applications. Furthermore, a Gilbert multiplier has only two inputs and is thus only suitable for implementing 2-input modules. A module with a larger number of inputs can only be implemented by cascading 2-input modules which causes more latency [11]. Also, in the belief propagation algorithm it is necessary to have an accurate estimation of the noise power in the communication channel [22]. This requirement increases the complexity and power consumption of the receiver.
In [18] and [19], the authors use analog CMOS circuits in strong inversion biasing mode for implementing analog min-sum (MS) decoders. MS decoding performance is inferior to belief propagation by only a few tenths of a decibel. However, biasing MOS transistors in strong inversion mode paves the way for designing high-speed CMOS iterative decoders. Analog MS decoders are also attractive because designing high-input modules is simple and there is no need for cascading 2-input modules when a high-input module is implemented. Also, in MS decoders there is no need for estimating the noise power in the communication channel, and therefore receivers will be less complicated and therefore less expensive compared to receivers that use belief propagation [23]. Furthermore, decoding performance of analog MS decoders can be even better than that

0018-9200/$20.00 © 2006 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:06:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2532

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 41, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2006

of the conventional (floating-point discrete-time synchronous)

belief propagation decoders. This observation was made while

studying the dynamics of the analog continuous-time iterative

decoding in [20].

In this paper, we generalize the circuits that were presented

earlier in [19] and show that all the major blocks in an analog MS

decoder can be implemented by using current-mirrors. This im-

plies that our proposed circuits can be implemented in state-of-

the-art BiCMOS or CMOS fabrication technologies.

The functionality of the proposed modules is verified by im-

plementing an analog MS decoder for a

32,8 LDPC

code in a 0.18- m CMOS technology. While this LDPC code is

probably too small to have any practical application, it is among

the largest fully functional reported analog decoders. Mean-

while, the same processing modules used in this analog decoder

can be used for implementing decoders for much longer LDPC

codes. The steady-state error-correcting performance of this de-

coder in the low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) region is close to

the simulation results based on a model for analog decoding

[20]. However, in the high SNR region the error-correcting per-

formance of the chip deteriorates due to mismatch and other

implementation imperfections. We also study the tradeoff be-

tween the throughput and the decoding time on one hand and

the error correcting performance of the chip on the other hand.

When data throughput is 62.5 kb/s (corresponding to the coded

throughput of 250 kb/s), the decoder has enough time to con-

verge to its steady-state behavior, and as the speed increases the

performance degrades such that at data throughput of 6 Mb/s,

the performance degradation is about 0.3 dB at a bit error rate

(BER) of 10 compared to the performance of the conventional

(floating-point discrete-time synchronous) MS decoder.

In the following, we show how major processing blocks in

analog MS decoders can be implemented by current mirrors. By

substituting current mirrors with full transistor level circuits, the

proposed modules can be implemented. However, it is necessary

to make sure that current mirrors are biased properly and there

is enough room for voltage swing. Precision, speed, area, and

power consumption of the proposed modules depend mainly on

the utilized current mirrors.

This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, LDPC codes

and the conventional MS decoding algorithm are introduced.

Sections III and IV deal with the basic processing modules and

corresponding circuits. Measurement results and some discus-

sions are presented in Section V. Finally, Section VI concludes

the paper.

Fig. 1. Tanner graph representation of a (32,8) LDPC code. Variable nodes and check nodes are shown by circles and squares, respectively.

matrix corresponds to a parity equation and each column cor-

responds to a bit in the codeword. If the th bit of a codeword

is in the th parity equation, the th element of will be

1, otherwise it will be 0. An LDPC code is a linear block code

with a sparse parity-check matrix [1]. A linear block code can

be graphically represented by means of a Tanner graph [24] that

consists of two sets of nodes: the variable nodes and the check

nodes. These nodes represent bits and parity equations, respec-

tively, and are connected through edges to each other based on

the parity-check matrix of the code. For example, Fig. 1 shows

the Tanner graph representation of a (32,8) LDPC code.

In iterative decoding, the Tanner graph of the code depicts

the structure of the decoder. The decoder is initialized based on

the received information at the channel output and some sta-

tistical information about the channel and information source

at the transmitter. Decoding is performed by passing messages

through edges of the Tanner graph between the variable nodes

and the check nodes, iteratively. At each time instant, a mes-

sage passed across an edge represents the belief of some part

of the graph about the probability of the adjacent bit to to be

0 or 1. The iterative nature of these decoding algorithms allows

bits that are related through parity equations to exchange their

beliefs iteratively in the hope that they finally converge to the

most probable transmitted codeword or bits. In the th round of

the conventional MS iterative decoding algorithm

, the

messages that are passed between a variable node and a

check node are given by

(1)

(2)

II. LDPC CODES AND BASIC OPERATIONS IN CONVENTIONAL MS DECODING ALGORITHM

where and are the sets of variable nodes and check nodes incident to the check node and the variable node , respectively. In (1) and (2) messages are in the log-likelihood

Channel coding is used to improve error rate performance in ratio (LLR) domain and

is the message sent from node

communication systems. This is accomplished by introducing to node in the th round of the algorithm. The algorithm is

redundancy in the transmitted information. For example, for initialized by

. Moreover, is the initial weight

block codes, instead of transmitting a -bit data block, an -bit of the variable node in the LLR domain that is computed

block

, called a codeword, is transmitted. Bits in the based on the received value from the channel. For the binary

transmitted block are correlated through parity equations. In a phase-shift keying (BPSK) modulation and an additive white

linear block code, these parity equations are linear and thus a so Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, can be simply replaced

called parity-check matrix can represent bits that are corre- by the output of the matched filter corresponding to each bit

lated through each parity equation. Each row in a parity-check at the receiver [23]. For negative numbers,

function is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:06:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HEMATI et al.: A 0.18- m CMOS ANALOG MIN-SUM ITERATIVE DECODER FOR A (32,8) LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK (LDPC) CODE

2533

Fig. 2. Symbolic representation of current mirrors. (a) n-type. (b) p-type. For n-type, I will be positive and I actually flows into the block, so will be negative. For p-type, I is negative and I is positive.

equal to 1 and for non-negative numbers it is equal to 1. The output of each variable node in the th iteration is calculated by the following equation:
(3)

represents the soft estimation of the transmitted bit cor-

responding to the variable node . The decoding process is

stopped as soon as the estimated bit corresponding to each vari-

able node, which is defined as

, satisfies all

the parity equations, otherwise the decoding process continues

until a given maximum number of iterations ( ) is reached.

In analog continuous-time MS decoding, unlike the conven-

tional MS decoding, variable nodes and check nodes are continuous-time asynchronous analog circuits. However, these analog modules process their inputs similar to their discrete-time counterparts. Therefore, iterations disappear and are replaced by a

Fig. 3. A current buffer, regardless of the direction of the input current, duplicates it at the output with flipped sign. (a) n-type current mirror is active. (b) p-type current mirror is active. (c) Low-swing cascode current buffer. (d) High-swing cascode current buffer.

continuous-time variation of the messages. In fact, analog con-

tinuous-time decoders are highly interconnected complex nonlinear systems and it has been observed that their error correcting performance for short codes can be better than that of the conventional iterative decoders [20].

be used for a positive input current [Fig. 2(a)] and a p-type current mirror can be used for a negative input current [Fig. 2(b)]. Since messages can be positive or negative, we use both types of current mirrors simultaneously and call the combination a cur-

III. BASIC MODULES OF VARIABLE NODES
To see how a variable node is implemented, as an example we consider the variable node #1 in Fig. 1, which is connected to three edges, and thus is called a degree three node, and computes its outputs based on the following equations that are derived based on (1) and (3):

rent buffer.

Fig. 3 shows a current buffer and demonstrates how it can

duplicate positive and negative currents. This figure also shows

that a leakage current

flows through the loop. While in

the absence of mismatch, this leakage current does not degrade

the accuracy of the current buffer, it increases the power con-

sumption. Therefore, it is desirable to minimize this current by

choosing proper p-type and n-type current mirrors that can not

be on at the same time for a given supply voltage. On the other

hand, this leakage current keeps transistors out of the cutoff re-

gion when the input current is zero and thus increases the speed

of the circuit.

Therefore, the main operation in variable nodes is addition.

To improve the accuracy of the current buffers, it is pos-

Messages in the proposed circuits are represented in the form sible to use cascode current mirrors for making a current buffer.

of currents and can be either positive or negative. We define po- In the fabricated decoder chip in 0.18- m CMOS technology,

larity of a current based on its direction. If a current is drawn current buffers shown in Fig. 3(c) and (d) are used, and the

from the power supply or from p-type MOS transistors, we con- width–length ratios for p-type transistors and n-type transistors

sider it negative and if a current is going into ground or into are 2 m/0.4 m and 1 m/1 m, respectively. Biasing voltage

n-type MOS transistors, we consider it positive. Based on the

in Fig. 3(c) is equal to 0.9 V and circuit simulation shows

above definition for polarity of currents, a current mirror dupli-

can be as high as 10 A.

cates the magnitude of the input current but flips its sign, where Fig. 4(a) shows the computation of

by using current

positive output current is defined as current flowing out of the buffers. This circuit exploits Kirchoff’s current law for adding

block. Fig. 2 shows the symbols that are used for representing the currents. Similarly, the three outgoing messages of this vari-

current mirrors [25]. It also illustrates how sign of the input cur- able node to the neighboring check nodes can be computed by

rent is flipped. It is worth noting that an n-type current mirror can adding suitable incoming currents. However, in order to reduce

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:06:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2534

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 41, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2006

M m Fig. 4. Basic building blocks for implementing variable node #1 in Fig. 1.

(a) Computing . (b) Computing

.

silicon area and power consumption in variable nodes, it is pos-

sible to reuse

for computing other outputs as shown in

Fig. 4(b). In this figure,

is subtracted from

to

generate

. Current buffers with the same input can be

replaced by a current buffer with multiple output sections. The

dynamic range of the current buffers that convey should be

wider than other current buffers because has a wider vari-

ation range. For these current buffers, we used transistors with

three times larger width–length ratios.

Fig. 5. Modules of the check node #1 in Fig. 1.
outgoing messages. In the following, we show how each module is implemented.

IV. BASIC MODULES OF CHECK NODES
In this section, the basic modules for implementing the check nodes are presented. As an example, we focus on implementation of check node #1 in Fig. 1. The operations in a check node are given by the following equations based on (2):

A. Implementation of RTAS Modules

Fig. 6 illustrates the RTAS module. Fig. 6(a) shows a current

rectifier, the output of which is always a positive current, regard-

less of the polarity of its incoming current. This circuit exploits

the fact that n-type current mirrors can only be used for posi-

tive input currents and p-type current mirrors can only be used

for negative input currents. Fig. 6(b) shows a sign extractor. In

this circuit, if is positive, the n-type current mirror will be

active and it will discharge the input capacitance

of the

NOT gate and the output will be 0. Similarly, if is negative,

the output will be 1. Fig. 6(c) shows the circuit that is used for

implementing RTAS in the fabricated analog MS decoder.

B. Implementation of WTA Modules

WTA circuits consist of a few cells that compete with each

other in duplicating their input at the output. This implies that

there should be some kind of mirroring in these circuits. By ex-

ploiting this idea and by using current mirrors, WTA circuits can

Fig. 5 shows the modules for implementing this node. First, be devised. As Fig. 7(a) shows, a simple current mirror consists

sign and magnitude of all incoming messages are extracted in of an input stage, an output stage, a feedback circuit, and an

RTAS (real to absolute value and sign converter) modules. Then amplifier. In a real circuit, it can be difficult to distinguish these

the magnitude of each outgoing message to each variable node blocks as they may overlap. This figure also shows that in a cur-

is computed by finding the minimum value among the magni- rent mirror, a suitable biasing voltage

corresponding to

tudes of all the received messages from other variable nodes that the input current is generated that is used for regenerating the

are connected to the check node. This operation is performed input current at the output.

in the minimum winner-take-all (WTA) modules. The sign of Fig. 7(b) shows how by changing the feedback in the cur-

the outgoing message to each variable node is obtained in the rent mirror of Fig. 7(a), a multi-input minimum WTA can be

sign-multiplier (SM) modules by multiplying the signs of the designed. Diodes in this figure guarantee that the feedback path

messages that have been received from other variable nodes. Fi- is closed only for the minimum input that generates maximum

nally, four ASTR (absolute value and sign to real converter) mod-

. In real circuits, there are better ways than using diodes to

ules combine the sign bits and absolute values and generate the implement a WTA circuit. As an example, in [26] a low-voltage

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:06:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HEMATI et al.: A 0.18- m CMOS ANALOG MIN-SUM ITERATIVE DECODER FOR A (32,8) LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK (LDPC) CODE

2535

Fig. 6. RTAS module. (a) Current rectifier. (b) Sign bit extractor. (c) Circuit for implementing an RTAS module in the fabricated chip.

max WTA circuit was designed by using a low-voltage current mirror [27]. In Fig. 7(b), input and output currents are subtracted from a sufficiently large reference current . At the core of this circuit, there is a current-mode maximum WTA, and by subtracting input and output currents from , it is converted to a minimum WTA. Fig. 7(c) shows the minimum WTA circuit that was used in the analog MS decoder. At the core of this minimum WTA is a high-swing cascode version of the maximum WTA in [28]. in this figure is about 3.5 A.
C. Implementation of SM Modules

low-noise logic family. In this chip, we use three-input DCVSL (differential cascode voltage switch logic) XOR gates [29].
D. Implementation of ASTR Modules
The structure of the ASTR module is illustrated in Fig. 8. The input current is received from the WTA module and the sign is generated in XOR gates. These two are combined together to generate the outgoing message of the check node. In Fig. 8, when the sign bit is 0, analog switch #1 is closed, and when the sign bit is 1, analog switch #2 is closed.

In hardware implementation, it is simpler to work with a sign bit that represents the polarity of the message. For negative num-

V. MEASUREMENT RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS

bers, the sign bit is set to be 1, and for non-negative numbers, The proposed modules are used for implementing an analog

it is set to be 0. This way, instead of multiplying the signs, we MS decoder for the (32,8) LDPC code of Fig. 1 in a 0.18- m

can XOR the sign bits. It is quite important to limit the switching CMOS technology. This code is called a (3,4) regular LDPC

noise in the check nodes by choosing a suitable XOR gate from a code since degrees of all variable nodes and check nodes are

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:06:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2536

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 41, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2006

0 0 Fig. 7. Basic blocks of: (a) a simple current mirror; (b) a simple current-mode minimum WTA; (c) the cascode minimum WTA used in the analog decoder chip
(V = 0:9 V, V = 1:35 V, width–length ratio for p-type transistors (n-type transistors) is 2 m/0.4 m (1 m/1 m)).

conducted to a set of ASTR modules to generate bipolar cur-

rents for applying to the corresponding variable nodes, corre-

sponding to values. In this chip, input currents can change

from 2.7 A to 2.7 A. The processing core of this analog

decoder is 630 m 910 m and the variable nodes and the

check nodes consume roughly 60% of the core area. This rel-

atively low utilization factor is due to the brute-force manual

connection of the processing nodes. An automatic router could

Fig. 8. The ASTR module.

significantly increase the utilization factor. The average length of the interconnections is about 690 m.

Before starting the decoding, it is necessary to reset the de-

three and four, respectively. While the functionality of the pro- coder and clear up any unwanted state in the analog decoder.

posed modules are verified for decoding a short LDPC code, Otherwise, the decoder might stick to its initial state regard-

the same variable nodes and check nodes can be used for im- less of the input information. This could degrade the overall de-

plementing analog MS decoders for much longer (3,4) regular coding performance. This phenomenon was observed in both

LDPC codes. The general architecture and the microphotograph [19] and [30]. To avoid an unwanted initial state, the outgoing

of the implemented chip are shown in Fig. 9(a) and (b), re- interconnections of the check nodes are connected to the vari-

spectively. Table I shows the area of the major blocks in the able nodes through 96 high-speed analog switches that are con-

analog MS decoder. This chip has digital inputs, which simpli- trolled by an off-chip control signal. As there is no feedback

fies the statistical testing. Each input signal can be represented when the switches are open, by writing the input messages into

by up to six bits, five bits for the magnitude and one bit for the the chip, any memory will be cleared automatically. By closing

sign bit. Quantization error in this case is negligible [23]. Dig- these analog switches, decoding will start. At the output section

ital inputs are fetched into an on-chip 32 6-bit memory. We of the chip, by using a 32:1 multiplexer, the output of each vari-

have used 32 5-bit current-steering digital-to-analog converters able node is read and recorded in an off-chip testing module to

(DACs) to translate the input digital signals into 32 different cur- analyze the error correcting performance of the chip. Decoding

rent levels. The gain of the DAC modules can be controlled by continues until the analog switches are opened. To fetch a new

an off-chip biasing voltage and was tuned for the best perfor- block of data, the chip is set in the writing mode, the on-chip

mance. The DACs’ output currents and the stored sign bits are memory is updated, and all steps are repeated.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:06:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HEMATI et al.: A 0.18- m CMOS ANALOG MIN-SUM ITERATIVE DECODER FOR A (32,8) LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK (LDPC) CODE

2537

Fig. 10. Comparison among error correcting performances of ideal digital MS decoder (N = 50 000), modeled analog MS decoder (N = 50 000 and relaxation factor = 0:8), and measurement results for the chip.

quantization and clipping similar to those of the chip [20]. To

obtain reliable measurement results, in the presence of possible

asymmetry in the decoding process, the error correcting per-

formance of the chip was tested by using randomly generated

codewords (not always all-zero codeword). In the low SNR

region, while the measured curves surpass the error correcting

performance of the conventional MS decoder, they are close

to that of the model for analog MS decoder. This is the region

where the noise of the channel dominates the imperfections in

the analog decoder chip. It should, however, be noted that for

higher SNR values, implementation imperfections deteriorate

the decoding performance.

To explain high SNR degradation, we include mismatch in

Fig. 9. (a) Architecture of the implemented chip. (b) Die microphotograph of the simple model of analog MS decoding in [20] by scaling the

the chip.

nodes’ outgoing messages by a random number with a Gaussian

distribution

[31]. All signal processing tasks are per-

TABLE I AREA OF MODULES AND SIGNIFICANT BLOCKS OF
THE ANALOG MS DECODER

formed locally in this chip and the proposed analog decoder

will not suffer from global mismatch, if transistors are locally

matched [31]. Simulation results show that if

,

the observed degradation in high SNR values can be justified

by transistor mismatch. It should be noted that when a message

is processed in a node, it is mirrored a few times, and thus, for

each current mirror, the estimated will be less than 0.1. This

amount of mismatch seems reasonable, since transistors in this

chip are only a few times larger than minimum transistor size

and currents can not exceed (3.5 A) [32]. In low SNR

values, it seems that the mismatch effect decreases. This can

be justified by noting that for high SNR values, on average, cur-

rents are larger. Thus, the difference between and incoming

currents in WTA modules become small and this significantly

increases mismatch in WTA circuits. Since leakage current in

Fig. 10 shows BER curves for the decoder chip at data current buffers is about 10 A, we can assume mismatch in the

throughputs of 62.5 kb/s and 6 Mb/s together with simula- variable nodes will not change significantly when SNR varies.

tion results for the conventional (floating-point discrete-time By increasing the gain of the DAC circuits and by increasing

synchronous) MS decoder. Also in the figure, we have the sim-

, ideally the throughput should increase. However, in the

ulation results based on a model for an analog MS decoder with fabricated analog MS decoder, the limitation on swing limits

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:06:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2538

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 41, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2006

TABLE II CMOS DIGITAL (TOP 2) AND ANALOG (BOTTOM 5) ITERATIVE DECODERS

the maximum current and any attempt for increasing the currents degrades the decoding performance.
Fig. 11 shows the variation of the word error rate (WER) performance of the analog MS decoder chip versus the decoding time for each word. It is observed that by increasing the decoding time, error-correcting performance improves, however, after about 1.3 s (corresponding to an information bit rate of 6 Mb/s and a coded throughput of 24 Mb/s), the rate of improvement decreases substantially. At this throughput, the performance degradation is about 0.3 dB at BER of 10 compared to the performance of the conventional MS decoder. In the absence of a universal and widely accepted definition for the nominal throughput, the settling point seems to be a suitable candidate for defining the nominal throughput of analog decoders [21]. With this definition, the nominal data throughput for this analog MS decoder is 6 Mb/s. However, if this chip is used at much lower throughputs, it will beat the error-correcting performance of the conventional MS decoder (62.5 kb/s). This chip Fig. 11. Measured WER performance of the analog MS decoder versus decan also work at higher data throughputs (up to 20 Mb/s) if fur- coding time for different SNR values. ther loss in the coding gain is acceptable.
In Table II, the main features of the fabricated analog MS decoder along with those of the previously reported CMOS analog metric, which is defined as consumed energy per uncoded bit and digital iterative decoders are presented. A fair comparison [17] (or consumed energy per coded bit [8]), can be easily misbetween these decoders is difficult as different codes with dif- leading. This is because throughputs have been reported for different rates, and different CMOS technologies are reported. For ferent amount of loss in the coding gain compared to the corfairness, the comparison metrics should also be properly in- responding conventional iterative decoders. Also, total power terpreted. For example, the commonly used energy efficiency consumption in the decoder should be considered that includes
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:06:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HEMATI et al.: A 0.18- m CMOS ANALOG MIN-SUM ITERATIVE DECODER FOR A (32,8) LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK (LDPC) CODE

2539

required energy for estimating the noise power in the channel BiCMOS, in which accurate current mirrors can be designed,

in belief propagation decoders and analog-to-digital converter analog min-sum decoders can be implemented. A proof-of-con-

(ADC) power for chips with quantized inputs. Moreover, the re- cept analog min-sum decoder chip was designed and fabricated

sults of [21] show that the throughput and therefore the energy for a (32,8) LDPC code in a 0.18- m CMOS technology. Error-

efficiency can change by changing the code or the block length. correcting performance of this chip in the steady-state and in

The energy efficiency is thus not just a function of the circuits. the low SNR region was close to the simulation results based

Having said this, Table II shows that the fabricated analog on a model for an analog min-sum iterative decoder [20] and

decoder, which is the first analog min-sum decoder and the first surpasses that of the conventional discrete-time synchronous

functional analog decoder for an LDPC code, has the second min-sum decoder.

highest throughput among the reported CMOS analog decoders

and is the second energy-efficient design. As the proposed mod-

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

ules in our design can work in strong inversion, we expect to be able to design faster modules in future designs by increasing currents.
So far, the lack of automation tools for designing large analog circuits has limited analog decoders to short codes and fabri-

The authors would like to thank Mr. N. Ogbebor for his contributions in preparing the layout of the analog decoder chip. They would also like to thank Dr. P. Zarrinkhat for designing the (32,8) LDPC code.

cated chips have been only used for verifying the functionality of the modules in analog decoders. In [16], small manually-designed analog decoders have been used as components of a larger decoder to circumvent this problem. For large analog decoders, the effects of mismatch and PVT (process, voltage, temperature) variations can be significant and need to be addressed properly during circuit design. In our proposed circuits, modules remain accurate if transistors are locally matched. Therefore, we expect that large analog decoders can remain functional if the local mismatch is properly controlled. By increasing the code length, the average decoding time for each block will increase as it will take longer for messages to propagate through the decoding graph. Also, as the interconnections become longer, the capacitive and resistive loads will be higher and the settling time will increase. As a result, the overall throughput may not increase when larger codes are used. To increase the throughput, one possibility would be to design faster processing modules. In our proposed method, this can be done by increasing currents and dynamic range. It should be noted that this task becomes increasingly difficult as the technology scales down and supply voltage decreases. In this context, the design of low-voltage modules becomes important [17], [26].
To improve error-rate performance, more accurate modules should be designed. As it is not feasible to do transistor-level simulation to verify how changing a parameter can affect the final error-rate curve, methods similar to [20] should be employed. For the same reason, it is difficult to design an analog decoder for a particular throughput. For the analog MS decoder, we observed that transistor-level simulations for a small number of scenarios can be misleading as for certain choices of input vector, the decoding can be performed much faster than the average decoding time required for steady-state performance. Testability of analog decoders is another issue that needs to be addressed before these decoders can be commercially available. In this context, again, the statistical error-rate performance of the chip is of main concern and needs to be tested efficiently.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, processing modules for implementing analog min-sum iterative decoders were presented. In the proposed approach, the main modules can be designed based on current mirrors. Therefore, in any fabrication technology, CMOS or

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.
[4] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, Jr., T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[5] The IEEE 802 LAN/MAN Standards, [Online]. Available: http://www. ieee802.org
[6] The Digital Video Broadcasting Project (DVB) Consortium Standards, [Online]. Available: http://www.dvb.org
[7] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “A 690-mW 1 Gb/s 1024-b rate-1/2 low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.
[8] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “A 640-Mb/s 2048-bit programmable LDPC decoder chip,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 684–698, Mar. 2006.
[9] F. Kienle, T. Brack, and N. Wehn, “A synthesizable IP core for DVB-S2 LDPC code decoding,” in Proc. Design, Automation and Test in Europe Conf. (DATE ’05), 2005, pp. 100–105.
[10] M. Moerz, T. Gabara, R. Yan, and J. Hagenauer, “An analog 0.25 m
BiCMOS tailbiting MAP decoder,” in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers, Feb. 2000, pp. 356–357. [11] F. Lustenberger, “On the design of analog VLSI iterative decoders,” Ph.D. dissertation, ETH, Zurich, Switzerland, Nov. 2000. [12] H.-A. Loeliger, F. Lustenberger, M. Helfenstein, and F. Tarköy, “Probability propagation and decoding in analog VLSI,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 837–843, Feb. 2001.
[13] V. C. Gaudet and P. G. Gulak, “A 13.3-Mb/s 0.35 m CMOS analog
turbo decoder IC with a configurable interleaver,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 38, no. 11, pp. 2010–2015, Nov. 2003. [14] C. Winstead, J. Dai, S. Yu, C. Myers, R. R. Harrison, and C. Schlegel, “CMOS analog MAP decoder for (8,4) Hamming code,” IEEE J. SolidState Circuits, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 122–131, Jan. 2004. [15] D. Vogrig, A. Gerosa, A. Neviani, A. Graell i Amat, G. Montorsi, and
S. Benedetto, “A 0.35- m CMOS analog turbo decoder for the 40-bit
rate 1/3 UMTS channel code,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 753–762, Mar. 2005. [16] C. Winstead, “Analog iterative error control decoders,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada, 2005. [17] C. Winstead, N. Nguyen, V. C. Gaudet, and C. Schlegel, “Low-voltage CMOS circuits for analog iterative decoders,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 829–841, Apr. 2006. [18] S. Hemati and A. H. Banihashemi, “Full CMOS min-sum analog iterative decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, 2003, p. 347. [19] ——, “Iterative decoding in analog CMOS,” in Proc. 13th ACM Great Lakes Symp. VLSI, Washington D.C., 2003, pp. 15–20.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:06:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2540

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 41, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2006

[20] ——, “Dynamics and performance analysis of analog iterative decoding for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 61–70, Jan. 2006.
[21] ——, “Convergence speed and throughput of analog decoders,” IEEE Trans. Commun., accepted for publication.
[22] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Linköping Univ., Linköping, Sweden, 1996.
[23] J. Zhao, F. Zarkeshvari, and A. H. Banihashemi, “On implementation of min-sum algorithm and its modifications for decoding LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 549–554, Apr. 2005.
[24] R. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[25] D. A. Johns and K. Martin, Analog Integrated Circuit Design. New York: Wiley, 1997.
[26] S. Hemati and A. H. Banihashemi, “A current-mode maximum winnertake-all circuit with low voltage requirement for min-sum analog iterative decoders,” in Proc. 10th IEEE Int. Conf. Electronics, Circuits and Systems, Sharjah, UAE, 2003, pp. 5–8.
[27] V. I. Prodanov and M. M. Green, “CMOS current mirrors with reduced input and output voltage requirements,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 104–105, Jan. 1996.
[28] J. Lazzaro, S. Ryckebusch, M. A. Mahowald, and C. A. Mead, “Winner-take-all networks of O(n) complexity,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1989, vol. 2, pp. 703–711.
[29] J. M. Rabaey, A. Chandrakasan, and B. Nikolic, Digital Integrated Circuits, A Design Perspective, 2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2003.
[30] J. Dai, “Design methodology for analog VLSI implementations of error control decoders,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, Dec. 2002.
[31] S. Hemati, “Iterative decoding in analog VLSI,” Ph.D. dissertation, Carleton Univ., Ottawa, Canada, Aug. 2005.
[32] P. G. Drennan and C. C. McAndrew, “Understanding MOSFET mismatch for analog design,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 450–456, Mar. 2003.

Amir H. Banihashemi (S’90–A’98–M’03–SM’04) received the B.A.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from the Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan, Iran, in 1988, and the M.A.Sc. degree in Communications Engineering from the University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran, in 1991, with the highest academic rank in both classes.
From 1991 to 1994, he was with the Electrical Engineering Research Center and the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Isfahan University of Technology. During 1994–1997, he was with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada, working towards the Ph.D. degree. He held two Ontario Graduate Scholarships for international students during this period. In 1997, he joined the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, where he worked as a Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) Postdoctoral Fellow. He joined the Faculty of Engineering at Carleton University in 1998, where at present he is an Associate Professor in the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering. His research interests include Coding and Information Theory, Digital and Wireless Communications and Theory and Implementation of Communications Algorithms. He has published more than 90 papers in refereed journals and conferences. Dr. Banihashemi has served as an Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS since May 2003. He has been involved in many international conferences as chair, member of technical program committee, and member of organizing committee. These include co-chair for Communication Theory Symposium of Globecom’07, TPC co-chair of Information Theory Workshop (ITW) 2007, member of organizing committee for International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT) 2008, and co-chair of the Canadian Workshop on Information Theory (CWIT) 2009. He is also a member of the Board of Directors for the Canadian Society of Information Theory and the Director of the Broadband Communications and Wireless Systems (BCWS) Centre at Carleton University. He is a registered Professional Engineer in the province of Ontario, Canada. He is also a recipient of Carleton’s Research Achievement Award in 2006.

Saied Hemati (S’01–M’06) was born in Isfahan, Iran, in 1970. He received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in electronics engineering from the Isfahan University of Technology (IUT), Isfahan, Iran, in 1993 and 1997, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, in 2005.
From 1997 to 1999, he was with the Isfahan Optics Centre, Integrated Electronics Industry (IEI), and from 1999 to 2001, he was with the Isfahan Telecommunication Company, both located in Isfahan, Iran. Currently, he is a Postdoctoral Fellow at the University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. His research interests include the theory of operation and the design and implementation of continuous-time analog iterative error-correcting decoders. Dr. Hemati is the recipient of several awards and scholarships, including the Senate medal for outstanding academic achievement at Carleton University, a Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) postdoctoral fellowship, a Canadian Space Agency NSERC postdoctoral supplement award, a Communications and Information Technology Ontario (CITO) research excellence award, an Ontario Graduate Scholarship, an Ontario Graduate Scholarship in Science and Technology, and the best paper award in the CITO Knowledge Network Conference in 2002.

Calvin Plett (M’91–SM’05) received the B.A.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada, in 1982, and the M.Eng. and Ph.D. degrees from Carleton University, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, in 1986 and 1991, respectively.
From 1982 to 1984, he worked with Bell-Northern Research doing analog circuit design. In 1989, he joined the Department of Electronics, Carleton University, Ottawa, where he is now an Professor. For some years he did consulting work for Nortel Networks in RFIC design. In recent years, he has been involved in collaborative research with numerous students and various companies including Nortel Networks, SiGe Semiconductor, Philsar, Conexant, Skyworks, IBM, and Gennum. He has authored or coauthored more than 70 technical papers. He is a coauthor of Radio Frequency Integrated Circuit Design (Artech House, 2003) and a coauthor of Integrated Circuit Design for High-Speed Frequency Synthesis (Artech House, 2006). His research interests include the design of analog and radio-frequency integrated circuits, including filter design, and communications applications. Dr. Plett is a member of AES and PEO. He was a coauthor of papers that won the Best Student Paper Awards at BCTM 1999 and RFIC 2002.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:06:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

