A simple algorithm to design irregular LDPC codes for finite length

Mehrdad Taki, Mahdi Orooji Iran University of Science and Technology mehrdadtaki (gmail.com, morooji(yahoo.com

Abstract- A simple and practical algorithm to design an irregular Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes for finite length applications is introduced. The simulation result will be proved the advantages of designed codes in compare with conventional regular and irregular finite length LDPC codes. Due to the semi-random structure of proposed codes, it will be encoded simpler than the other LDPC codes. Finally, a modified Extended Bit Filling (EBF) is proposed to control rows weight.
Keywords- Finite length Irregular LDPC Codes, SemiRandom Parity Check matrix, Extended Bit Filling
I. INTRODUCTION
LDPC codes were first suggested in 1962 by Gallager [1], along with an elegant decoding scheme. They were greatly forgotten for several decades, because the computers at that time were not powerful enough to exploit them. In 1995 they were rediscovered by Mackay and Neal [2].
A complete procedure for designing these codes for different symmetric channels with asymptotic analysis was presented in landmark paper [3]. Unfortunately asymptotic (very large length) optimization can not be applied for finite length codes. There are two types of LDPC codes: Regular and irregular that will be discussed in detail in section II. It has been shown that irregular codes will have better performance than regular ones for large block length. But, as it has been shown in [4] an irregular LDPC code optimized for infinite length, has not acceptable performance for finite length applications and a regular code is preferred. The finite length analysis of LDPC codes is a current challenge in LDPC research area.
In [5] an efficient algorithm to design Irregular LDPC codes for finite length application is proposed, in this paper we continue that method to evolve a simple and practical method to design irregular LDPC codes for finite length applications. Our designing method has three steps. In the first step, a primary structure for finite length is selected for the purpose that the behavior of the code becomes much closer to which is anticipated by an asymptotic analysis. In the second step, some of the best degree distributions which have better asymptotic threshold are chosen.
In view of the fact that asymptotic analysis is not precise enough to choose the best candidate in finite length codes, the simulation will determine the best

code. Toward this, degree distributions must be realized in the form of parity check matrixes considering that short length cycles must be avoided in related Tanner graph.
In this paper Extended Bit Filling (EBF) algorithm is applied to generate the parity check matrix from degree distribution; however, this algorithm is unable to control rows weight of the matrix. Consequently, a modified EBF (MEBF) which can also control the rows weight is proposed. MEBF algorithm is applied to five different rates. The designed code of each rate is compared with conventional codes with the same length.
The rest of the paper is organized as a follows: in section II principles of LDPC codes is reviewed. Section III explains the innovated code design method. Section IV is dedicated to simulation results; finally, concluding remarks are given in section V.

II. LDPC CODES
LDPC codes, as the name suggests, are block codes defined by a parity check matrix which is sparse. The parity check matrix of a code with rate r=KlN and length N is (N-K)xN matrix, whose (M=N -K)
rows specify M constraints on codewords. The parity-
check code is the set of all binary vectors satisfying the
following constraint:

Hx VT =0

(1)

Where H is a parity check matrix and V is a codeword.

LDPC codes can also be represented by a bipartite graph which consists of two types of nodes, variable and check nodes. Each code bit is a variable node
while each parity check equation or row of parity check matrix represents a check node. An edge in the graph is located between variable node j and check node i, providing the (i, j)-th element of parity check matrix is "1". The above bipartite graph is called the "Tanner Graph". One of the most important specifications of LDPC code is the length of shortest cycle in the Tanner graph which is called "Girth".

In the case that the degree of the variable nodes
and the check nodes are constant (lets call them dv and
dc respectively), the corresponding graph is regular
and the resulting code is called regular LDPC code. Else if the degrees of variable and/or check nodes in a

1-4244-0411-8/06/$20.00 C 2006 IEEE.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:09:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

graph are not constant, the resulting code is called irregular LDPC code.

LDPC codes are specified by two following polynomials:

dvm_

dcma.

(x) = Z Ajxj, p(x) = pixi-1

(2)

j=1

i=l

Aj and pi would be calculated by Equ.3.

imi
|Pi = t E (3)
E I
j =E
In the above equation, nj is the number of variable
nodes with degree j and mi is the number of check
nodes with degree i. moreover, E is the total number of edges in the graph. As a result, a LDPC code could be described by triple (A,p,N). Couple equations
(2(x), p(x)) describe a LDPC code of rate R if and
only if Equ.4, Equ.5 and Equ.6 are satisfied.

JZ j= 1 , Vj Aj > 0

(4)

i

Pi =1 Vi :pi >°

(5)

fp(x)dx

Ri=1 °1

(6)

JP(x)dx

0

That the iterative decoding algorithm works well in LDPC codes is the main stimulus to use these codes. So functionality of iterative decoder will be evaluating the performance of the code. Error correction capability of LDPC codes could be effectively improved by choosing proper distribution for nodes degrees. Regardless of the fact that analysis of the iterative decoder convergence properties will be complex when block length (N) is finite, it will be considerably simple ifN tends to infinity.

The sparse property of check matrix of the LDPC codes causes the dense property for generator matrixes. The dense generator matrix makes the encoding process of these codes complex. To reduce the complexity of the encoding process, the idea of using semi-random parity check matrix is introduced in [6].

The semi-random parity check matrix consists of two parts. The first part is deterministic whose main diagonal and the first diagonal below the main diagonal elements are all "one". As it is shown it Equ.7, The second part has a random structure.

In case that the codeword vector is denoted by
V (P1, P2 ... PM,U1,U2,...,UK), the Equ.1 results in
the fast-encoding mentioned by Equ.8.
Equ.8 shows that the parity elements of the codeword are determined from the original sparse parity-check matrix with no need to manipulate the dense generator matrix.

1 0 0.0

11 0 ...0

(7)

H = 01 1... 0 A mxk

mXn

0 ... O

k

|PI = yj4l,m+j

J j=l

(8)

k

tPi =ZPi-, +Ujh} im+j i>I j=l

III. NEW DESIGN METHOD
The aim of this session is to introduce a 3-step method to design finite length Irregular LDPC codes. In the first step a proper structure is chosen, the second step is dedicated to asymptotic optimization; finally, selection of the best code is the purpose of the third step.

Step 1. Choosing a proper structure
Being close to what is predicted by asymptotic analysis defines the appropriateness of the finite length codes structure. To aim this goal, four significant points must be considered.
1. On the grounds that a large different degrees in A(x) or p(x) causes small values coefficients; consequently, their corresponding nodes will be too little to affect the code performance, a maximum degree variation of variable or check nodes must be restricted. By the time that the numbers of variable or check nodes having the same degree is less than the specific number, they do not behave as an asymptotic optimization predicts. Furthermore asymptotic optimization results in a dense degree distribution for check nodes (two or three successive degrees). As a result, the degree of variable and check nodes is restricted to two or three degrees; consequently, the number of variable or check nodes which have the same degree will be adequate.
2. Columns having high weight in finite length will challenge sparseness of parity check matrix. This issue reduces functionality of iterative decoder. Moreover, it increases correlation between columns; consequently, short cycles in the code graph appear. So we try to restrict linear density (ratio of weight to length) of columns. Our simulation results demonstrate that linear density of columns or rows should not exceed 5%.
The restriction introduced in two above points will reduce the optimization searching area.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:09:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3. The most important factor which reduces functionality of iterative decoder and makes a difference between an asymptotic analysis and a real performance is short cycles in the code graph. Consequently, occurrence of short cycles must be avoided as much as possible. In the proposed method, an improved EBF algorithm will be employed to control cycles in parity check matrix.
4. The most critical cycle happens between degreetwo nodes. Existence of a cycle between L nodes of degree-two means a binary summation of L columns of parity check matrix is a zero vector. Thus, a minimum hamming distance between codewords is limited to L, albeit this is not generally true for high order degrees. Using semi-random codes not only make encoding easy but also prevent from cycling between degree-two nodes.

1

2

3

m-l m

n

1

2

3

m-1

m

Figure 1. Graph structure of semi-random codes

Due to mentioned points semi-random structure is employed in proposed plan. Accordingly, two primary structures shown in Equ.9 are considered.

{2(X) = 22x+ 2xi-'

(9)

(2 X) = PC++XPc+lxc

2A(x) = A,2x + Aixi-, + A,`
(2 p(x) = xc-

(10)

Step 2. Asymptotic optimization
LDPC codes exhibit a threshold phenomenon in different channels as though error probability approaches to zero in case that the variance of the noise is less than threshold and block length tends to infinity [3]. This threshold value could evaluate a performance of LDPC codes. Accordingly, asymptotic optimization is based on threshold value maximization for a considered rate. We consider Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) channel having a noise standard deviation a. The coherent antipodal signaling is employed and Signal-to-Noise Ratio
(SNR) is defined as a Eb No= 1/(2RU2). Gaussian approximation method [8] is used to compute the threshold value. (A,p) should be determined such that
threshold would be maximized.
In both considered forms mentioned in Equ.9 and Equ.10, optimized values of six parameters must be calculated. However, due to Equ.4, Equ.5 and Equ.6 some parameters could be determined in terms of other parameters. Accordingly, the number of independent

parameters is reduced. The result of represented simplification of form one parameters (mentioned in Equ.9) is shown in Equ. I I to Equ. 13.

k2

R

AAi 1]-2

(1 1)

iR

2+i*( )

PC+] 1 -PL (12)

C= 2+i*(i_-RR ) 2

(13)

Owing to above equations "i" is the only independent parameter which must be optimized.
Besides, the simplification is also considered for parameters of the second form (mentioned in Equ. 10). In this form A2 is determined as Equ. 14.

2M 2xM E cxM

(14)

Next, following simultaneous equations would be achieved by using Equ.4 and Equ.6.

llc

R=

i

Il/c+Ai Ii+4l v

(15)

]l=A, +4+2 c

Consequently, all parameters are determined in the
terms of (c, v, i); moreover, (c, v, i) are calculated to
maximize the threshold. According to discussed approaches, asymptotic optimization of form one is simpler than form two.

In the continuation of this step for each rate and for each form, some couples (A, p) having maximum threshold will be chosen.

Step 3. Selecting ofthe best code based on simulation result
In this step parity check matrix for all previously optimized polynomials would be constructed. Prevention of occurrence of short length cycles in code graph is the main problem of parity check matrix production. Specifically cycle with length four must be eliminated confidently.
In [7] an algorithm called EBF is presented to generate a parity check matrix with cycle control. Using this algorithm we control a girth of a graph during production of a matrix. But, this method is unable to control rows weights and just controls a maximum of rows weighs. In this paper we make a modification to EBF algorithm as follows in order to enable it to control rows weights.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:09:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

First, target weights for rows must be sorted in ascending order as Equ. 17.

[brjl7br22 I.. brm ], bri < br2 < < brm

(17)

Where bri is the weight of rt/h row. Next, a
maximum allowable weight for a row in EBF algorithm is set to bri and bit filling is started. By the
time that a weight of a row become maximum, "1" insertion in that row is blocked and the maximum row weight is changed to next bri

A modified EBF method to generate semi-random codes is summarized in Fig.8. We use the same abbreviations as a main paper [7] and modifications is highlighted by bold font so interested readers are referred to the main paper for more details.
After parity check matrixes is generated and whose bit error rate is simulated, the best code of each rate is selected.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
Based on points mentioned in the previous section, MEBF algorithm has no superiority to original EBF in right-regular codes generation. In contrast, when the variety of check degrees is high, EBF algorithm has no proper performance. Fig.2 makes comparison between generated codes using MEBF, EBF and PEG (Progressive Edge-Growth) [9]. Notwithstanding that all of the algorithms have the same characteristic polynomials; MEBF has better performance in compare with the others.
Based on proposed algorithm, irregular LDPC codes in both forms are generated for five different rates. Table 1 shows values of free parameters for the best selected codes and corresponding threshold values. Designed codes are compared with optimum regular LDPC codes described in [10]. Each of the codes has length 1024 and whose BER is simulated in AWGN channel. The comparison is illustrated in Fig.3 to Fig.7. As following figures have clarified, the best designed codes in rate 1/8,1/4,1/2,3/4 and 7/8 has
5dB,ldB,0.25dB,0.5dB and 0.75dB more gains
respectively in compare with the regular codes while
an error probability is set to 10-7 A considerable performance improvement of irregular codes in compare with regular ones in rate 1/8 could be
explained based on significant difference between threshold values. Besides; those figure shows form two insignificantly perform better than form one. However, it has much more complex designing procedure.

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper a simple and practical method to design irregular LDPC codes is presented. The simple irregular semi-random LDPC codes have some advantages over other finite length codes such as: a simpler optimization technique; better performance

due to their irregular structures; a faster encoding capability owing to the semi-random parity-check structure. In addition, in this paper a modification to EBF algorithm is presented to enable it to control rows weights.
Table 1 Asymptotic threshold ofthe designed codes versus regulars
VI. REFERENCES
[1] R.G. Gallager, "Low density parity check codes," No. 21 in Research Monograph series, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1963.
[2] D.J.C. MacKay and R.M. Neal, "Near Shannon limit performance low density parity check codes, " Electronics Letters, vol.32 Issue: 18, ppl645, 29 Aug.1996.
[3] T.J. Richardson, M.A. Shokrollahi and R.L. Urbanke, "Design of capacity-approaching irregular Low Density Parity Check Codes" IEEE Transaction on Information Theory, vol. 47 Issues: 2, pp. 619-637, February 2001.
[4] Y. Xue, H. Xiang, "Performance analysis of finite-length LDPC codes" 4th IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications, SPAWC 2003.
[5] Rashidpour, M.; Jamali, S.H.; "Simple irregular low-density parity- check codes and their application in CDMA systems," 2003 IEEE Toronto Centennial Workshop on Wireless Communications (CWWC)
[6] L. Ping, W.K. Leung, and N. Phamdo, "Low-density paritycheck codes with semi-random parity-check matrix." Elecrronic Letters, vol. 35, pp. 38 -39, 7 Jan., 1999.
[7] Campello, J.; Modha, D.S.; "Extended bit-filling and LDPC code design" IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, 25-29 Nov. 2001 Volume 2, Page(s):985 - 989
[8] Sae-Young Chung; Richardson, T.J.; Urbanke, R.L.; "Analysis of sum-product decoding of low-density paritycheck codes using a Gaussian approximation" IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, Volume 47, Issue 2, Page(s):657 - 670, Feb 2001.
[9] Xiao-Yu Hu; Eleftheriou, E.; Arnold, D.-M.; "Progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs" IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, 2001. Vol 2, Page(s):995 1001 ,Nov. 2001
[10] Rashidpour, M.; Shokrollahi, A.; Jamali, S.H.; "Optimal regular LDPC codes for the binary erasure channel" IEEE Communications Letters, vol 9, Issue 6, Jun2005,Page(s):546-548

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:09:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

klo-2

Eb/NO
Figure 2. BER performance of codes constracted based on MEBF, EBF and PEG

Eb/NO
Figure 5. BER performance of optimum regular code and designed codes in rate 1/2 and length 1024
=0 75

Figure 3. BER performance of optimum regular code and designed codes in rate 1/8 and length 1024

Eb/NO
Figure 6. BER performance of optimum regular code and designed codes in rate 3/4 and length 1024
=0875

Eb/NO
Figure 4. BER performance of optimum regular code and designed codes in rate 1/4 and length 1024

L 10
Eb/NO
Figure 7. BER performance of optimum regular code and designed codes in rate 7/8 and length 1024

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:09:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 8. Modified Extended Bit Filling algorithm
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:09:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

