A IMPROVED DECODING ALGORITHM FOR LOWDENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

Wei Zhou, Ai-dong Men, Li-Ye Zhao, Zi-yi Quan
School of Telecommunication Engineering Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
Beijing, CHINA E-mail: zhouwei2OO7(.gmail.com

Abstract Based on decoding performance, complexity and latency of finite-geometry low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, an efficient decoding algorithm is proposed. The algorithm is a hybrid bit-flipping (BF)/majority-logic (MLG) algorithm. In the algorithm, there are two stages. At the first stage, a code is decoded with bit-flipping (BF) with a small fixed number of iterations. Then the output from bit-flipping (BF) decoder is decoded by majority-logic (MLG) decoding. And in bit-flipping (BF) decoding, a new method is used to find the least reliable position. In the hybrid algorithm, there aren't real operations. Simulation results show that the algorithm provides 0.3dB coding gain over Weight bit-flipping (WBF) decoding, and within 1dB away from sum-product algorithm (SPA) decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes can be constructed by both pseudorandom manners [1] and
algebraic manners [2], [3]. Yu Kou presents a geometric
approach to the construction of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [2]. Using the approach, four classes of LDPC codes are constructed based on the lines and points of Euclidean and projective geometries over finite fields. These codes are called four classes' finite-geometry LDPC codes. They have good minimum distances and their Tanner graphs have girth 6. Finite-geometry LDPC codes can be put in either cyclic or quasi-cyclic form. Consequently, their encoding can be achieved in linear time and implemented with simple feedback shift registers. Furthermore, harddecision decoding, such as one-step majority-logic (MLG) decoding and bit-flipping (BF) decoding can decode them. These hard-decision decodings are implemented easily, but their performances are not satisfied. Now we apply the efficient decoding algorithm that is a hybrid BF/MLG in decoding of Finite-geometry LDPC codes, which can offers the good tradeoffs among decoding complexity, decoding speed, and error performance.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In section II, a brief overview of finite-geometry low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes is explored. Section III introduces a

new parameter which is used by the new decoding algorithm. Section IV discusses the hybrid decoding algorithm. Section V provides simulation results before concluding remarks in Section VI.
II. FINITE-GEOMETRY LDPC CODES
Well-known finite geometries are Euclidean and projective geometries over finite fields. Based on these two families of finite geometries, four classes of LDPC codes are constructed. They are: 1) type-I Euclidean geometry (EG)LDPC codes; 2) type-Il EG-LDPC codes; 3) type-I projective geometry (PG)-LDPC codes; and 4) type-Il PGLDPC codes. Codes of these four classes are either cyclic or quasi-cyclic, and, therefore, their encoding can be implemented with linear feedback shift registers based on their generator (or characterization) polynomials [4], [5]. This linear time encoding is very important in practice and is not shared by other LDPC codes in general. Finite-geometry LDPC codes have relatively good minimum distances and their Tanner graphs do not contain cycles of length 4. They can be decoded with various decoding methods, ranging from low to high complexity and from reasonably good to very good performance. These decoding methods include: one-step MLG decoding [5], Gallager's bit-flipping (BF) decoding [8], weighted MLG decoding [5], weighted BF decoding, a posteriori probability (APP) decoding [8], and iterative decoding based on belief propagation (commonly known as sum-product algorithm (SPA)) [6], [7]. Finitegeometry LDPC codes, especially high-rate codes, perform very well with the iterative SPA decoding.
MLG is hard-decision decoding, and it can be easily implemented. MLG decoding has the least decoding delay and very high decoding speed can be achieved. Since finitegeometry LDPC codes have relatively good minimum distances, it provides relatively large coding gains over the uncoded system. A thorough discussion of various types and implementation of MLG decoding can be found in [5].
Weighted MLG decoding was first proposed by Kolesnik in 1971 [5]. In Weighted MLG, some kind of reliability

supported by the Teaching and Research Award Program for Outstanding Young Professor in High Education Institute, MOE, P.R.C

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:07:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

information (or measure) of the received symbols is used to help making decoding decisions. Usually for the AWGN channel, considering the soft-decision received sequence,
Y (y0,yl,,ry -) , a simple measure of the reliability of a
received symbol y, is its magnitude yI I . And let
Z = (ZO, z1... , zn-1) be the binary hard-decision received
sequence obtained from Y as follows:

I1Z for y1 > 0,

Z/ =l

for y1 < 0.

The larger the magnitude yI , the larger the reliability of
the hard-decision digit zl is [5].

The magnitude yIyI can be also used in BF decoding.
This decoding was called Weighted BF (WBF) [2].

But in many cases, the magnitude yIyI can't indicate the
reliability of the bit accurately. And in Weighted BF and Weighted MLG, many real addition operations are required. Reference [9] proposes a new parameter to calculate the reliability of each bit. And we use the method in our algorithm.

III. THE DEFINITION OF THE NEW PARAMETER
While a code word is transmitted over a noisy binary channel, some variables are received in error. And we need therefore identify the unreliable variables. Usually, a simple approach to identify the variables is to count the number of unsatisfied constraints for each variable in LDPC codes. But in many cases, this method is unreliable. Reference [9] proposes new parameters to find the reliable bit.
For the type-I 2-D (1023, 781) EG-LDPC code, supposing v is the variable being analyzed, while there are
32 constraints that contain v, and in each constraint, there are 32 variables. For variable v, we denote by U(v) the number
of unsatisfied constraints in which v appears. And we also denote the set of neighboring constraints for variable v as M(v), and the set of neighboring variables for constraint
c as N(c) For regular LDPC codes, we then have
IM(v)l = dv and N(c)l = d .
In Fig.1 we show a part of the bipartite graph rooted at the variable node v for a (1023, 781) regular LDPC code.
Here cl, C2,..., and c32 are the constraints that contain v, and vij stands for the j th variable neighboring c1 other than
V.

V1.1 V1.31 V1 V22 V2.3 V2.31
Neighboring
Variables

V32.1 V32.2 V32.31

Neighboring

..... ...

L

Constraints

0 \ 018

032

The analyzed variable

V

Figure 1. A part of the bipartite graph for the type-I 2-D (1023, 781) EGLDPC code

The following definitions are given:

1, when c is unsatisfied R(c) =1_, when c is satisfied

(1)

E U(v) = Z [(R(c') + 1) / 2], {C M(v)} (2) c'
Umax (c I v) = ma,x(U(v')), {v' E N(c) \ v} (3)

T(v) = ZR(c')-Umax(c' v), {c cM(v)} (4) C'I
For the type-I 2-D (1023,781) EG-LDPC code, there are
32 variables that are connected with constraint cl. By the
definition of LDPC codes, it is clear that the number of
erroneous variables in N(cj) should be an odd number
when R(cl) =1. In case that the SNR is 2 to 3 dB higher than
the theoretically required value for having arbitrarily small BER for code rate 0.763, the probability that there are three
erroneous variables appearing in N(cl) is rather small.
Therefore, usually we consider that there is only one
erroneous variable in N(cl) when R(cl) = 1. As mentioned
in [10], a bigger Umax(c /v) means that the only erroneous
variable is more likely to exist in N(cl)lv , i.e. the
probability that v is an erroneous variable decreases as
Umax(c /v) increases. Similarly, when R(cl ) =-1, this
probability increases with the increasing ofUmax(c, /v) In order
to further analyze this probability quantitatively, we use a parameter T(v) , which is defined in (4) to describe this value.
When variable v1 and v2 satisfy U(vl) = U(v2) and
T(v) < T(v2) , we can draw a conclusion that v1 is more
unreliable than v2.

The parameter U(v) describes the number of s
unsatisfied constraints which contain variable v, and T(v) distinguishes the variables belonging to the same number of unsatisfied constraints. So by the two parameters U(v) and T(v), we can efficiently identify which variable is the least reliable one. Especially, for FG-LDPC, whose parity-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:07:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

check matrix has large column and row weights, the parameters U(v) and T(v) can provide more messages.
Moreover, it is possible that the decoding process is trapped in an infinite loop, and decoding failure will be reported when the maximum allowable iteration number is reached. To detect and break such infinite loops when they appear, a new method was proposed in reference [11]. In loop detection, if in the kth iteration, the newly decoded word is identical to a previously decoded word, the flipped bit is reversed and then we flip the bit with the second least reliable variable. The flipping process is repeated until a new word that was not generated before is generated. Unfortunately, this requires storing all the k-I indexes of the bits which have been flipped and sorting the related reliable information. For a long code, hardware implementation of this sorting is very complicated and the computation
complexity is almost 0(n2) . Because the loop-infinite in bit
flipping decoding is often caused by the bits whose error are concealed deep and hard to find. So for FG-LDPC, we can decode the received sequence by Bit flipping with a small number of iterations firstly. During this process, we can correct some errors which are easy to find, and then the output is decoded by MLG. This algorithm can avoid loopinfinite.

IV. AN EFFICIENT DECODING ALGORITHM FOR FINITE-GEOMETRY LDPC CODES
Let H be the parity-check matrix of finite-geometry LDPC codes with J rows and n columns. Then,

S = (S,S2,...,sJ) = ZHT

(5)

gives the syndrome of the received sequence Z .

The efficient decoding algorithm for finite-geometry LDPC codes performs the following steps in decoding:

1. Compute the parity-check sums (syndrome bits) based on (5). If all the parity-check sums are zero, stop the decoding.
2. Maintaining a collection of d, + 1
queues Qo ... Qd , where Q1 contains variables v
for which U(v) i. Find the highest nonempty set
Q1 ( i > 1). And from Q1 find the variable which
T(v) is the minimum, so this variable is thought as the least reliable variable.
3. Flipping the least reliable variable. 4. Repeat steps 1 to 4 until all the parity-check sums
are zero (for this case, we stop the iteration in steps 1. And output this codeword. ) or a preset maximum number of iterations is reached.
5. When a preset maximum number of iterations is reached, all the parity-check sums aren't zero. Then the output code is decoded by MLG. Finally output the code from MLG.

Because the decoding of finite-geometry LDPC has good convergence, the preset maximum number of iterations is small, for example 5 or 10.
V. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this Section, we evaluate the error performances of FG-LDPC codes decoded with the following BF and WBF algorithms: (i) the SPA algorithm; (ii)the WBF algorithm; (iii) the hybrid bit-flipping (BF)/majority-logic (MLG) algorithm; (iv) MLG algorithm. In computing error performances of this code, we assume BPSK transmission over an AWGN channel. Simulations are performed on the type-I 2-D (1023, 781) Euclidean geometry (EG)-LDPC code constructed in [2].
Figure 2 is the performance of the type-I 2-D (1023, 781) EG-LDPC code with various decoding algorithms. The maximum number of iterations is set to 50. And for the hybrid bit-flipping (BF)/majority-logic (MLG) algorithm, the maximum number of iterations is 10. Figure 2 shows at the BER of 10-4 the hybrid algorithm can achieve 0.3dB improvement than WBF, and is within 1dB away from the SPA decoding.

SPA

0

MLG0 ,,,; 8

-Xe - WBF

102

- a hybrid BF/MLG

&3

--

-\

2

2.5

3.5

4

4.5

5

5.5

Eb/NO(dB)

Figure 2. Bit-error probabilities of the type-I 2-D (1023, 781) EG-LDPC code based on different decoding algorithms
Figure 3 shows the effects of the different preset maximum number of iterations in the hybrid decoding algorithm on the bit-error performance of the type-I 2-D
(1023, 781) Euclidean geometry (EG)-LDPC. At low SNR (2-3dB), the bit-error performance when the preset
maximum number of iterations is 10 is best. At medium SNR (3.5dB) the bit-error performance when the preset maximum number of iterations is 100 is best. At high SNR (4dB), the bit-error performances for the preset different maximum number of iterations are very close. This is because at low SNR the BF algorithm couldn't find the real error bits and at higher SNR the new method can find the real error bits. And for the type-I 2-D (1023, 781) EG-LDPC code, the minimum Hamming distance is 33. With one-step MLG decoding, the code is capable of correcting 16 or fewer errors. Figure3

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:07:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

shows that because the FG-LDPC has good convergence the hybrid algorithm when the preset maximum number of iterations is 10 has good bit-error performance.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to appreciate to the help of their colleague.

iio- ~ = ~S@;;;; ;;;;;;; ,\ Iteration10times
_- -_- _XXXXXX X Iteration3Otimes -\ -. --Iteration5Otimes Iteration80times Iteration lOOtimes
w

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

Eb/NO(dB)

Figure 3. Bit-error probabilities of the type-I 2-D (1023, 781) EG-LDPC code based on different iteration times using the hybrid algorithms

VI. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we propose an efficient decoding algorithm for finite-geometry low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. The algorithm makes full use of the characteristic of finitegeometry LDPC, and the decoding of the algorithm converge fast. Furthermore, because of no floating computing in this algorithm, this algorithm can be implemented with relatively low decoding costs. The efficient decoding algorithm provides a very good tradeoff between the error performance and the complexity.

REFERENCES
[1] D.J.C.Mackay, "Good Error-Correcting Codes Based on Very Sparse Matrices," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theroy, 45(2):399-432, March 1999.
[2] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, "Low-density parity-check codes: A rediscovery and new results," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 2711-2736, Nov. 2001.
[3] S.J.Johnson and S.R.Weller, "Codes for iterative decoding from partial geometries", IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol: 52 (2), pp: 236-243, Feb. 2004.
[4] [W. W. Peterson and E. J. Weldon, Error-Correcting Codes, 2nd ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1972.
[5] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Error Control Coding. Fundamentals and Applications. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1983.
[6] D. J. C. MacKay,, "Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399-432, Mar. 1999.
[7] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, "Design of capacity approaching irregular codes," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619-637, Feb. 2001.
[8] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[9] Y. Cao, X.M.Shan and Y.Ren, "An Efficient Decoding Algorithm for Low-Density Parity-Check Codes," IEICE Transaction on Fundamental. vol. E88-A, No.5 pp. 1384-1389 May,2005.
[10] A.M. Chan and F.R. Kschischang, "A simple taboo-based soft decision decoding algorithm for expander codes," IEEE Commun. Lett., vol.2, no.7, pp.183-185, July 1998.
[11] Z. Liu and D. A. Pados, "Low complexity decoding of finite geometry ldpc codes," in Proc. ICC, vol. 4, May 2003, pp. 2713-2717

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:07:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

