4376

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 54, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2006

A Turbo-Decoding Message-Passing Algorithm for Sparse Parity-Check Matrix Codes
Mohammad M. Mansour, Member, IEEE

Abstract—A turbo-decoding message-passing (TDMP) algorithm for sparse parity-check matrix (SPCM) codes such as low-density parity-check, repeat-accumulate, and turbo-like codes is presented. The main advantages of the proposed algorithm over the standard decoding algorithm are 1) its faster convergence speed by a factor of two in terms of decoding iterations, 2) improvement in coding gain by an order of magnitude at high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), 3) reduced memory requirements, and 4) reduced decoder complexity. In addition, an efficient algorithm for message computation using simple “max” operations is also presented. Analysis using EXIT charts shows that the TDMP algorithm offers a better performance–complexity tradeoff when the number of decoding iterations is small, which is attractive for high-speed applications. A parallel version of the TDMP algorithm in conjunction with architecture-aware (AA) SPCM codes, which have embedded structure that enables efficient high-throughput decoder implementation, are presented. Design examples of AA-SPCM codes based on graphs with large girth demonstrate that AA-SPCM codes have very good error-correcting capability using the TDMP algorithm.
Index Terms—Iterative decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, repeat-accumulate (RA) codes, Ramanujan graphs, turbo decoding algorithm, very large scale integration (VLSI) decoder architectures.
I. INTRODUCTION
I TERATIVE decoding techniques have gained widespread attention in advanced communications systems after the seminal work of Berrou et al. on turbo codes in 1993 [2]. These techniques have proven very effective in extending the limits and services of wireless communications, improving the throughput of broadband systems over long ranges, and expanding the areal density of magnetic recording systems. The underlying principle of operation of turbo codes dates back to Gallager in his work on low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes in 1963 [3]. It is based on iterative suboptimal decoding by message-passing as an alternative to one-shot maximum-likelihood decoding. Codeword symbols are processed iteratively in an attempt to improve their reliability based on
Manuscript received June 2, 2005; revised December 15, 2005. The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it for publication was Prof. Brian L. Evans. Part of this work has been published in Proceedings of the IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, Taipei, Taiwan, R.O.C., November 2002, pp. 1383–1388.
M. M. Mansour is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, American University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon, 1107 2020 (e-mail: mmansour@aub.edu.lb).
Color versions of Figs. 1, 5, 6, and 8–14 are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TSP.2006.880240

the code constraints. Output reliability measures of the decoded symbols at the end of each decoding iteration are used as input prior information for the next iteration. Interiteration correlation between input and output messages is minimized by using extrinsic outputs which do not depend on the inputs used to generate them. Extrinsic output messages are typically produced by subtracting or excluding the corresponding input prior messages from the computations. Decoding iterations proceed until a stopping criterion is satisfied.
LDPC codes and the more recent turbo-like or repeat-accumulate (RA) codes [4], [5] have emerged as competitive alternatives to turbo codes in many communication scenarios. Compared with turbo codes, LDPC codes 1) have simpler processing requirements since their decoding is not trellis based, 2) their decoding algorithm is inherently parallel which is attractive for high-speed applications, 3) they achieve better frame error performance, 4) their error floor occurs at lower bit-error rates, and 5) they do not necessarily require a long interleaver to attain good error performance [6]. LDPC codes have been adopted in next-generation digital video broadcasting (DVB-S2) via satellite [7] and considered for adoption in many wireless standards (802.11, [8], 802.12 [9], and 802.20 [10]); advanced magnetic and magnetooptic storage/recording systems [11]; and long-haul optical communication systems [12]. RA codes have been successfully applied in scalable image and video transmission systems (JPEG-2000, H.26L) [13].
LDPC and RA codes belong to a class of linear block codes with a sparse parity-check matrix and are typically referred to as sparse parity-check matrix (SPCM) codes. One major challenge in the decoder design for long SPCM codes is the random structure of the parity-check matrix or equivalently the edge permuter of the associated Tanner graph [14]. To achieve full throughput for a large number of iterations using the inherently parallel standard message-passing algorithm, these permuters are typically implemented using a physical interconnect of wires that matches exactly the topology of the code’s (random) Tanner graph. This network quickly becomes an implementation bottleneck and prohibits a parallel decoder realization for long codes. The alternative would be to implement the permuter using memory blocks, which degrades decoding throughput and increases memory requirements.
This paper addresses the drawbacks of the standard message-passing algorithm and the associated random edge permuter required to communicate messages according to the two-phase schedule. The main contributions of this work are a new message-passing algorithm and a class of structured or architecture-aware SPCM (AA-SPCM) codes that offer a better performance/complexity tradeoff when the number of

1053-587X/$20.00 © 2006 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:07:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MANSOUR: TDMP ALGORITHM FOR SPCM CODES

4377

decoding iterations is small, which is attractive for high speed A. LDPC Codes

applications. The algorithm is called the turbo-decoding message-passing (TDMP) algorithm, and can be applied in general to decode any code defined by a sparse parity-check matrix such as (irregular) LDPC, (irregular) repeat-accumulate [15], and more general turbo-like codes [4], [5]. It accelerates the convergence behavior of the standard iterative decoding algorithm by roughly a factor of two in terms of decoding iterations, and attains an order of magnitude improvement in bit error rate (BER) at high signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs). AA-SPCM codes have embedded structure that enables 1) an efficient implementation of the permuter using programmable networks and 2) a parallel implementation of the TDMP algorithm.
Related work on different scheduling approaches of the twophase message-passing algorithm appeared in [16]. The vertical and horizontal updating procedure is partially analogous to our work in [1] which merges both updates efficiently in a single step. The main difference is that [16] still uses two types of messages (checks and bits) in its decoding operation, while the proposed algorithm uses a single type of messages resulting in significant memory savings. Moreover, maintaining both old and new messages requires extra overhead in the way in which mes-

An LDPC code is a linear block code defined by a sparse

parity-check matrix

with parity-check equations on

codeword bits. An LDPC code is typically described graphi-

cally by a bipartite Tanner graph [14] whose reduced adjacency

matrix is having variable nodes and check nodes corre-

sponding to the columns and rows of , respectively [see

Fig. 1(a)]. A variable node is connected to check nodes

and a check node is connected to variable nodes, where

and are called the node degrees. Equivalently, the th column

of has ones, and the th row has ones. The set of neigh-

bors to a node is denoted by

. If all variable-node de-

grees are uniform and all check-node degrees are uniform, the

code is said to be a regular LDPC code, otherwise it is called

an irregular LDPC code. In general, the locations of ones in

or the connections to neighboring nodes are done according to

an

“edge” permuter, where

. Two graph

parameters relevant to performance are the girth, or length of a

shortest cycle in the graph, and diameter, or maximum length of

a shortest path in the graph. The encoding complexity of LDPC

codes is quadratic in the code length .

sages are to be read and written. LDPC decoder architectures based on [1] and [16] were presented in [17]. In [18], an approximation of the message-passing algorithm was proposed using a staggered schedule that relaxes the extrinsic principle. Previously generated check messages are not subtracted from prior inputs to compute new check messages, which increases correlation between messages across decoding iterations.
Structured LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices were studied in [19]. Efficiently encodable structured irregular LDPC and repeat-accumulate codes were proposed in [20]. The standard message-passing algorithm does

B. RA Codes

A repeat-accumulate code is a linear block code composed

of a repetition code concatenated through a permuter with a

rate-1 memory-1 convolutional code. An input message block

of information bits is encoded

by repeating each bit times to produce a block of bits,

where , are repetition degrees, and their sum

is

called the permuter length. The repeated bits are permuted into

and passed in groups of bits to an

accumulator to produce the codeword

not take full advantage of these structured codes since the per-

muter must route old messages while newly generated messages

(1)

are saved but not used immediately in the same decoding itera-

tion. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
reviews SPCM codes and their iterative decoding algorithm. Section III introduces the TDMP algorithm and proposes a reduced-complexity algorithm for message computation. The performance of the algorithm is analyzed using EXIT charts [21]. Section IV introduces a parallel version of the TDMP algorithm (P-TDMP) and proposes AA-SPCM codes. Design examples of AA-SPCM codes from graphs with large girth are presented in Section V, and their performance on an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel using the TDMP algorithm is examined. Section VI concludes the paper.

with

, and

[see Fig. 1(b)]. In a systematic RA

code, the message bits are transmitted, and hence the block

length is

. (Systematic RA codes will be considered

in this paper.) For

and uniform repetition degrees

, the code is called regular, otherwise it is called

an irregular RA (IRA) code.

A Tanner graph can also be associated with an RA code as

shown in Fig. 1(c). The graph has variable nodes, called in-

formation nodes, corresponding to the information bits

variable nodes, called parity nodes, corresponding to the parity

bits ; and check nodes corresponding to the parity-check

equations the codewords must satisfy. An information node

is connected to check nodes, and a check node is connected

to information nodes. In addition, the check nodes are also

II. SPARSE PARITY-CHECK MATRIX CODES

connected to the parity nodes according to the zig-zag pattern shown in the figure. Note that if the parity nodes are dropped,

This section presents an overview of sparse parity-check ma- the graph reduces to that of an LDPC code [3].

trix codes and their associated iterative decoding algorithm. The An RA code can also be represented algebraically as

most popular SPCM codes are LDPC codes and the more recent the null-space of a sparse parity-check matrix

repeat-accumulate or turbo-like codes. For an in-depth analysis

, where

and

, as shown

and design of LDPC and RA codes, the reader is referred to in Fig. 1(d). The rows of correspond to check nodes, the

[3]–[5], [15], and [22].

columns of to information nodes, and the columns of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:07:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4378

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 54, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2006

on the other hand is that their decoding can be fully parallelized, while RA decoders must serially process the accumulator trellis for faster convergence.

C. Decoding SPCM Codes

Fig. 1. (a) LDPC Tanner graph, (b) RA encoder, (c) RA Tanner graph, and (d) RA parity-check matrix.

SPCM codes are decoded iteratively using the sum-product

algorithm[23]–[25] which closely approximates maximum like-

lihood decoding. The algorithm operates on an SPCM Tanner

graph by computing messages for every graph node and commu-

nicating these messages along the edges of neighboring nodes.

These messages represent estimates of the transmitted bits to-

gether with a measure of the reliability of these estimates.

Assume a systematic SPCM code is defined by

where

and

. Let

denote a transmitted codeword, and

the corresponding received

word. We denote the variable nodes in the Tanner graph by

(information) and (parity) and use the index as a subscript,

and the check nodes by and use the index as a subscript.

The message associated with a transmitted bit is given by the

log-likelihood ratio

and is called the channel observation or intrinsic message

(similarly for ) [see Fig. 1(c)]. In addition, let

denote

the variable message passed from node to some neighboring

check node

is proportional to the likelihood

of bit in favor of zero given the information obtained from

check nodes other than . Similarly, let

denote the

check message passed from node to a neighboring variable

node

;

is proportional to the likelihood with

which bit satisfies check given the likelihood in favor of

zero of the remaining bits checked by . Due to the presence

of cycles in a typical Tanner graph, different scheduling of

node computations yield nonequivalent message-passing

algorithms. There are two main scheduling techniques for

the message-passing algorithm [22]: two-phase LDPC-like

schedule and turbo-like schedule.

1) Message-Passing Using the Two-Phase LDPC-Like

Schedule: In this schedule, a decoding iteration is divided into

two rounds of computations, one pertaining to variable nodes

and one pertaining to check nodes. The scheduling of operations

is done irrespective of the structure of the Tanner graph (e.g.,

if it contains trellises). In each round, all nodes are activated in

parallel, sending new outgoing messages to all their neighbors

using messages received in the previous round. Check messages

are defined using the auxiliary function

[15] and its inverse

:

to parity nodes. A “1” is present at a specific entry in if

the corresponding nodes in the graph are connected. The

(2)

ones in are distributed according to the permuter structure.

Finally, the zig-zag pattern of the accumulator trellis in the

(3)

graph translates to ones on the main diagonal and ones on one

of the first off-diagonals.

where

if

, and otherwise, and

The main advantage of RA codes compared to LDPC codes is

. The sum

is defined as

their linear encoding complexity as is evident from the structure

. The pseudocode of the

of and the encoder in Fig. 1(b). The advantage of LDPC codes LDPC-like message-passing algorithm is listed below.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:07:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MANSOUR: TDMP ALGORITHM FOR SPCM CODES

LDPC-like Schedule: LDPC LIKE

//Input: channel values

//Output: Hard decision estimates

//Initialization

forall variable nodes (and )

, all

//Iterative decoding

for

to do

forall check nodes

4379
messages in a round of computations do not participate in further message computations until the decoding iteration is over (except partially in the turbo-like schedule). If updated messages are used directly within an iteration to compute new messages, then refined estimates will spread faster among neighboring nodes in the graph, speeding up the convergence behavior of the algorithm. Further, new check messages become directly variable messages during an iteration, hence both variable and check messages collapse into a single type of messages leading to significant memory savings. This section presents a decoding algorithm, the TDMP algorithm, which has the latter two properties. In Section IV, a parallel version of the algorithm that processes multiple nonoverlapping rows corresponding to structured SPCM codes in parallel is presented.

A. Algorithm Description

all

(4)

The TDMP algorithm will be described with the help of the

parity-check matrix shown in Fig. 2, which has six parity-

forall variable nodes (and )

check equations corresponding to a code of length 12. The algorithm is based on decoding the rows (parity-check equations)

all

(5) of the parity-check matrix sequentially. Extrinsic messages gen-

erated from decoding earlier rows are used as input prior mes-

sages to decode subsequent rows. To each row in , we as-

sociate the vector

of extrinsic messages cor-

end for //Hard decisions

responding to the nonzero entries in that row. The number of nonzeros in a row is called the weight. Let denote the set of indexes of the nonzero entries of row in . For example,

in Fig. 2, the weight of row 3 is

and its index set is

. Hence, corresponds to bit 1, cor-

responds to bit

corresponds to bit 12. The messages

in vector are related to the likelihood with which the infor-

mation and parity bits corresponding to the nonzero entries in

row satisfy the th parity-check equation, given extrinsic es-

timates about the bits from all other parity-check equations in

2) Message-Passing Using the Turbo-Like Schedule: This schedule takes advantage of embedded regular structures in a Tanner graph to improve convergence speed. For example, in an RA Tanner graph, the accumulator trellis can be isolated and the Bahl–Cocke–Jelinek–Raviv (BCJR) algorithm [26] can be applied locally to compute check messages. The BCJR algorithm implements the message-passing algorithm efficiently on cycle-free Tanner graphs (e.g., trellises). A decoding iteration consists of activating all information nodes in parallel, and running the BCJR algorithm over the entire accumulator trellis. Messages from check nodes are not sent to information variable nodes until the BCJR iteration is over. Note that the parity nodes participate internally in the forward and backward trellis

which these bits participate. In addition, we maintain the vector

of posterior messages that stores the sum

of all messages generated by the rows in which each bit partic-

ipates (i.e., the th entry of , corresponds to the sum of all

messages for the th bit generated by decoding the rows in

where the th entry is nonzero). For example,

in Fig. 2,

and the sixth entry of is

. The posterior

messages of row are indexed as . Hard decisions are made

by slicing the vector .

Decoding the th parity-check row involves the following four

steps. The steps are illustrated in Fig. 2.

1) Read: The extrinsic messages and the posterior mes-

sages

for row are read.

computations.

2) Subtract: are subtracted from

to generate prior

messages

. This step ensures

III. TURBO-DECODING MESSAGE-PASSING ALGORITHM

the extrinsic principle in that messages generated earlier from decoding a particular row are not used as inputs in

The previous decoding schedules operate using two types

decoding the same row in a later iteration.

of messages and require saving all intermediate messages be- 3) Decode: Decode row using (4) or a soft-input soft-output

tween both rounds at every iteration. Moreover, newly computed

algorithm (e.g., BCJR algorithm) with as input. Let

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:07:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4380

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 54, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2006

4) Write back: The vector replaces the old extrinsic messages , and the posterior messages for the bits located at positions indicated by are updated by adding to .
Steps 1)–4) constitute a decoding subiteration. A decoding iteration comprises multiple subiterations corresponding to the rows of . A round of subiterations over all rows of constitutes a decoding iteration. Compared to the LDPC-like and turbo-like schedules, the TDMP algorithm uses the most recent messages in decoding the bits of a row in . Moreover, the check and variable message rounds of computations are merged into a single step of computation where simultaneously new check messages are computed using the most recent variable messages, and variable messages are updated with the newly computed check messages.
The LDPC-like schedule requires memory storage for

messages, assuming has row weights

and column

weights . The TDMP algorithm on the other hand requires

storage for only

messages, resulting in a memory savings of 100%

(Note that the posterior messages include the channel values.) For uniform column degrees , this amounts to
100%. For example, the savings in memory is about 43.75% for the rate- 64 800-bit irregular LDPC (RA) code specified in the DVB-S2 standard [7].

Fig. 2. Message-passing under the TDMP algorithm. The figure illustrates the four steps of the algorithm in decoding the third row of the parity-check matrix: (a) Read extrinsic and posterior messages, (b) subtract extrinsic messages from posterior messages to generate prior messages, (c) decode the parity-check equation using these messages as inputs, and (d) write back the output messages as new extrinsic messages and update the posterior messages.
denote the output messages. For example, the th message in row is computed using (4) as

B. Reduced-Complexity Message Computation

The nonlinear function

and its inverse

have a

wide dynamic range for small values of

, and flatten

out for large values of

. They are typically imple-

mented using lookup tables with fine bit resolution for enhanced

accuracy and wider range. In addition, the two quantized func-

tions must be inverses of one another. These requirements lead

to large function units and wide data-paths, which limit the code

length for which practical decoders can be implemented.

We propose to use an alternate function to compute messages

which is easier to approximate and implement using simple

logic gates. Consider the bivariate function

defined as

(6)

It is easy to show that

has the following properties:

i)

;

ii)

;

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:07:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MANSOUR: TDMP ALGORITHM FOR SPCM CODES

4381

iii)

;

iv)

;

v)

;

vi)

.

if

then

(10)

These properties considerably simplify the implementation of

end if

. The relationship between given by the following properties:

and

in (2) is end for

vii) viii)
ix) .

; ;

For convenience, we define the following notation:

Instead of implementing

using a lookup table, it can

be approximated using the following simple function [27]:

(7)

It is straightforward to verify that properties i)–vi) hold for

as well. Property ix) can be applied using to compute

messages recursively (cf. (4)). Consider computing messages

pertaining to a parity-check equation of weight with input

messages

:

Message Computation Algorithm:
//Input: //Output: Initialization

SISO

The message

is determined by first computing

, then

,

then

, up

to

at position

, as well

as reversely computing

, then

, then

,

down to

at position , and finally

combining the results

.

The pseudocode of the message computation algorithm using

the -function in (10) is listed as above assuming is even. The

forward and backward recursions are initialized with and ,

respectively. The loop computes forward and backward updates

until half way through the recursions, at which point output mes-

sages are produced in pairs. The leftmost and rightmost mes-

sages and are computed directly from the and ,

respectively. The case when is odd is handled with a slight

modification.

Theorem 1 (Message Computation Algorithm): The message

computation algorithm is equivalent to maximum a posteriori

(MAP) decoding using the BCJR algorithm [26].

Proof: The proof is based on showing that (8)–(10) are

equivalent to the forward recursion, backward recursion, and

output equations of the BCJR algorithm, respectively. First, the

trellis of a parity-check code is constructed, and its branches

are labeled using the input messages . The forward recur-

sion of the BCJR algorithm is applied in the log domain using

state metric differences instead of absolute state metrics. The re-

sulting recursion equation is equivalent to (8). The same holds

for the backward recursion equation. Extrinsic outputs are

generated by combining the forward and backward recursions

excluding the current input . The resulting output equation

is equivalent to (10).

TDMP Algorithm: TDMP

Forward-backward recursion

for

to

do

//Storage: extrinsic message vectors

of length

.

//Storage: Vector of posterior messages

.

//Initialization

(8) (9)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:07:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4382

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 54, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2006

C. TDMP Algorithm: Formal Description

In this section, we give a formal description of the TDMP

algorithm using the reduced-complexity message computation

algorithm presented in the previous section. The inputs to

the algorithm are a sparse parity-check matrix

rep-

resenting a RA code, LDPC code, or any other SPCM linear

block code (where

); input channel observations

; maximum number of de-

coding iterations . The outputs are hard decision estimates of

the information bits

.

The pseudocode of the algorithm is listed above. Storage for

the extrinsic messages and the posterior messages is allocated

using the vectors

, and the vector . All ex-

trinsic messages are first initialized to zero, while the posterior

messages are initialized to the channel observations . The main

body of the algorithm has two nested loops. The outer loop runs

Q Fig. 3. Comparison of BER performance using the -function with the ideal
case, and the constant correction term method of [28].

until the desired number of iterations is reached, while the inner loop runs over the rows of sequentially from 1 to . As described in the four steps in Section III-A, for every row , the

posterior messages of its nonzero entries

as well as the

extrinsic messages are read (Step 1 in Section III-A). Next,

//Iterative decoding

are subtracted from

and stored in a temporary vector

(Step 2). The messages are then passed to a SISO decoder

for for

to do to do

which generates updated messages as described in the pseudocode in the algorithm in Section III-B (Step 3). Finally, the extrinsic messages are updated with the new , and the pos-

//Read and subtract SISO //Decode

terior messages are updated with the new sum (Step 4).
Fig. 4(a) shows a parallel data-flow graph of the message

//Write back //Write back

computation algorithm for the case

. Intermediate mes-

sages and are computed starting from the left and the right

until half the inputs have been processed, after which output

end for end for

messages are generated in pairs. The number of -function

blocks is

. Fig. 4(b) shows a serial data-flow graph with

four -function blocks that uses a stack for storing the interme-

//Hard decisions

diate messages. Messages are pushed onto the stack until half the inputs have been processed, and popped afterwards to gen-

erate output messages using a pair of -function blocks. For

comparison, Fig. 4(c)–(d) show data-flow graphs for message The accuracy of the -function approximation is evaluated computation using (4) and (5) for the LDPC-like algorithm. in Fig. 3, which compares the BER performance achieved

using the -function approximation with the ideal case when D. Convergence Analysis and BER Performance

decoding a rate- 1024-bit regular LDPC code. Also shown in the figure is the BER plot using the constant correction term approximation of [28]. The -function approximation incurs negligible loss in coding gain compared to the ideal BER, and is more accurate than the approximation of [28].
The BCJR algorithm was applied in [29] to partial response signalling channels where intersymbol interference is modeled using a two-state trellis. Difference metrics were employed and simplified recursions were derived in the usual form of a “max” term and a correction factor. However, the correction factors were ignored when in difference equations to simplify implementation. On the other hand, the recursions presented above using the -function approximate the linear and nonlinear portions of the recursions using “max” terms without any correction factors which are more accurate and very easy to implement

Extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) charts are a simple tool

for analyzing and predicting the convergence behavior of iter-

ative decoders [21]. The idea is to consider the exchange of

input/output mutual information between constituent decoders

in an iterative decoder as decoding proceeds iteratively. A con-

stituent decoder typically receives two inputs, noisy channel ob-

servation values of the transmitted bits and a priori log-like-

lihood values generated by other constituent decoders and

generates extrinsic values in addition to posterior values for

hard decisions.

By adopting the Gaussian assumption, an a priori input to a

constituent decoder can be modeled by applying an independent

Gaussian random variable with variance and zero mean

in conjunction with the transmitted bit

as

using simple logic gates.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:07:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MANSOUR: TDMP ALGORITHM FOR SPCM CODES

4383
Mutual information between the transmitted bits and the extrinsic values can be approximated using time averages as [30]

An EXIT chart is simply a characteristic plot of mutual infor-

mation versus mutual information of a code for a partic-

ular channel

. An EXIT chart snapshot trajectory is used

to illustrate the convergence speed of the decoding algorithm.

Such a trajectory is generated by applying the extrinsic values

generated from iteration as a priori input values to itera-

tion , and plotting the corresponding

values.

Fig. 5 shows characteristic EXIT chart plots with snapshot

trajectories superimposed for a rate- length 3456 RA code

simulated at 0.4 dB, 0.5 dB, and 1.0 dB using the two-phase al-

gorithm (left column) and the TDMP algorithm (right column).

The number of decoding iterations performed by the two-phase

algorithm, determined from the number of steps in the figures,

is 58, 40, and 20, for the three

values respectively, while

the TDMP algorithm requires only 31, 20, and 10 decoding it-

erations. The wider steps in the TDMP plots demonstrate the

faster rate of information exchange as a function of the number

of iterations of the TDMP algorithm compared to the two-phase

LDPC-like algorithm. Fig. 6 plots the mutual information trans-

ferred at

1 dB by both algorithms as a function of the

number of iterations for the same RA code simulated in Fig. 5.

For the same number of decoding iterations, more mutual infor-

mation gets transferred using the TDMP algorithm compared to

the two-phase algorithm. Consequently, the TDMP algorithm

has a faster convergence speed, requiring half the number of it-

erations to converge at higher

values, which is attractive

for high-speed applications.

Fig. 7 compares the BER performance of the TDMP and

two-phase algorithms when decoding a rate- length 3456 ir-

regular systematic RA code and a rate- length 9720 irregular

systematic RA code constructed from Ramanujan graphs [31].

A maximum of 32 decoding iterations was performed or until

the codeword has zero syndrome. The plot is annotated with the

average number of decoding iterations performed at every sim-

ulation point. The TDMP algorithm attains roughly an order of

magnitude improvement in bit error rate (or a coding gain of

0.1–0.2 dB) in less than half the number of iterations at high

SNR values.

Q Fig. 4. (a) Parallel and (b) serial data-flow graphs of the message computation
algorithm for computing messages 3 = ( ; . . . ;  ; . . . ;  ); j = 1; . . . ; 6. (c)–(d) Serial data-flow graphs for check and variable message com-
putations using (4) and (5).

IV. PARALLEL TDMP ALGORITHM AND STRUCTURED SPCM CODES
In this section, a parallel version of the TDMP algorithm using architecture-aware SPCM codes is presented. The aim is

to achieve scalable decoding throughput at low implementation

complexity. The TDMP algorithm processes the rows of se-

The mean and variance

are related as

quentially which results in a lower processing throughput com-

[21]. Mutual information between the transmitted bits and pared to the LDPC-like schedule. The TDMP algorithm can be

the a priori values for a particular is given by

parallelized by embedding some structure into that allows

parallel processing of multiple rows without communicating

messages between the nodes corresponding to these rows. The

resulting is composed of several bands of nonoverlapping

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:07:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4384

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 54, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2006

Fig. 5. EXIT charts for a rate-1=3 length 3456 RA code: (a) Two-phase schedule at 0.4 dB, (b) TDMP at 0.4 dB, (c) two-phase schedule at 0.5 dB, (d) TDMP at 0.5 dB, (e) two-phase schedule at 1.0 dB, and (f) TDMP at 1.0 dB.
rows. We refer to SPCM codes with such structure as AA-SPCM error performance of AA-SPCM codes using the P-TDMP alcodes, and the parallelized TDMP as P-TDMP algorithm. The gorithm is examined in Section V.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:07:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MANSOUR: TDMP ALGORITHM FOR SPCM CODES

4385

Fig. 6. Mutual information transferred at 1 dB as a function of number of iterations for both TDMP and two-phase algorithms.

Fig. 8. General structure of an architecture-aware (a) sparse Tanner graph, and (b) sparse parity-check matrix.

permuter. For example the rate- , 1024-bit parallel LDPC de-

coder chip of [32] contains 26 624 message wires with average

length of 3 mm using 0.16 m CMOS technology, and has a

chip area of 7.5 7 mm of which only 50% is utilized due to

routing congestion. It is desirable to explicitly construct permu-

tations so that 1) source and destination node addresses can be

compactly represented or generated on the fly and 2) the corre-

sponding Tanner graph has desirable graph-theoretic properties

that yield a code that performs well under iterative suboptimal

decoding and has a large enough minimum distance. We gen-

eralize our work on LDPC codes in [27] and [33] to explicitly

construct AA-SPCM codes. Independently, Tanner in [34] pro-

posed related ideas to explicitly construct structured regular RA

codes from quasi-cyclic groups. Other structured constructions

in the context of LDPC codes were presented in [35].

One desirable architecture-aware structure of a Tanner graph,

or equivalently a parity-check matrix, would be to divide the

variable nodes and check nodes into clusters of size such

that if one node from a cluster connects to a node from an-

other cluster, then there exist distinct connections between all

nodes from both clusters. The connections between the nodes of

Fig. 7. BER performance of the TDMP and two-phase algorithms for a rate-1=3 length 3456 and a rate-1=3 length 9720 irregular systematic RA codes assuming a maximum of 32 decoding iterations. The average number of
iterations performed is shown next to each simulation point.

two clusters are done according to some permutation , where varies between cluster pairs. Fig. 8(a) shows an architecture-
aware sparse Tanner graph, where the variable nodes are separated into information nodes (top) and parity nodes (bottom).

The random permuters connect clusters of nodes as opposed

to individual nodes, and hence are factored into permutations

A. AA-SPCM Codes

of size . Fig. 8(b) shows the general structure of an architec-

ture-aware sparse parity-check matrix composed of subma-

Random edge permuters constitute an impediment towards trices , where is the

identity matrix and is with

achieving high-throughput decoders for long codes due to the its columns permuted according to the permutation . These

large memory in serial architectures and the prohibitive number submatrices are distributed according to the structure of the edge

of wires in parallel architectures required to realize a random permuter. Each block row contains at most submatrices and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:07:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4386

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 54, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2006

Fig. 9. (a) AA-RA Tanner graph, (b) base Tanner graph, (c) AA parity-check matrix, and (d) base parity-check matrix.

each column contains at most submatrices so that the dimen-

sions of are

and

.

Fig. 9(a) shows an architecture-aware RA Tanner graph with

12 information nodes of uniform degree

and 18 check

nodes of degree

, where the bottom permuter is a

simple accumulator loop. Nodes are clustered into groups of

so that the graph contains four information-node clus-

ters and six check-node clusters. The upper permuter has

bundles of edges, where each bundle contains edges. The

bottom permuter is an accumulator where accumulation takes

place between check-node clusters. The parameters of this code

are

. A base Tanner graph

is shown in Fig. 9(b) where each cluster of nodes is represented

by a single node and each bundle of edges is represented by

a single edge. Instead of accumulating parities using adjacent

check nodes, parities are accumulated using checks from ad-

jacent clusters in parallel by connecting the rightmost check Fig. 10. Transformed accumulator Tanner graph by parallelizing recursion (1).

node cluster to the leftmost parity node cluster as shown in

Fig. 10. A nonzero submatrix is placed in the upper right- bit will contribute to the estimate for any other bit rapidly, after

most corner in the parity-check matrix in Fig. 9(c). To perform a number of iterations proportional to the diameter [36].

encoding in linear time, the total parity of the accumulated infor- The most effective techniques for constructing graphs that

mation bits must be even (i.e.,

must be even). In possess large girth and small diameter are explicit construction

case the parity is odd, simply deleting an edge from the upper techniques that are essentially of algebraic nature—they are

edge permuter results in even parity. The corresponding base either Cayley graphs of certain groups, or graphs whose vertices

parity-check matrix shown on the bottom left in Fig. 9(d) has are identified with some algebraic structure on which there is

dimensions

.

a natural action group preserving adjacency. The most notable

The simplest form of AA-RA codes is obtained when all per- algebraically constructed graphs with large girth are Ramanujan

mutations in the systematic part of are circulants. The chal- graphs [37]. These graphs were applied in the construction of

lenge of constructing AA-RA codes is in choosing the various LDPC codes in [38]–[40], and good performance was obtained.

matrices in so that the resulting code is good in the sense In [41], it was shown in addition that Ramanujan-based LDPC

that it performs well under iterative decoding and possesses a codes do possess the architecture-aware structure [i.e., their

large minimum distance. There are two heuristics that are valu- parity-check matrix can be represented similar to Fig. 8(b)].

able for iterative decoding by message-passing: 1) making the Other construction techniques that yield the AA-structure

girth of the Tanner graph as large as possible and 2) making the include quasi-cyclic groups introduced by Tanner in [36] to

diameter of the Tanner graph as small as possible. A large girth construct regular RA codes, and cyclotomic cosets to construct

guarantees that the initial iterations of the message-passing de- AA-LDPC codes [42], among others. These techniques can

coding algorithm generate statistically independent estimates. A be extended to construct AA-SPCM codes as well. Design

small diameter guarantees that information from every received examples of AA-SPCM codes are presented in Section V.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:07:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MANSOUR: TDMP ALGORITHM FOR SPCM CODES

4387

P-TDMP Algorithm: PTDMP

//Storage:

extrinsic message vectors of length

//Storage: Vector of posterior messages //Initialization

//Iterative decoding

for

to do

for

to do for all s

//Read and subtract

SISO //Decode

//Write back

//Write back

end for

end for

//Hard decisions

For example, a Benes network with

can be imple-

mented using 14 080 transistors and requires 3168 control and

data wires, assuming 4-bit messages.

Fig. 11 illustrates the dataflow of a P-TDMP decoder oper-

ating on an AA-SPCM code with parameters

, and . The decoder contains six constituent SISO

decoders that implement the message computation algorithm

each having its own local -memory. Each -memory stores

4 6 extrinsic messages pertaining to a single row in each of

the four block rows in . The posterior messages are stored

in an 8 6 -Memory pertaining to the eight block columns

of submatrices in . Each decoder reads a pair of extrinsic

messages from its local -Memory. In addition, the network

reads two rows from -Memory (2 6 messages) and routes

the corresponding pair of posterior messages to the each of the

six decoders. After a latency of three time units , the de-

coders start to generate new extrinsic messages in pairs which

are stored in the local extrinsic memories. In addition, the de-

coders generate updated pairs of posterior messages as well

which are routed back using the network to update -Memory.

The same operations are repeated for the remaining three block

rows.

The decoder processes

messages in time units.

Assuming the decoder operates at a frequency , performs

decoding iterations, and messages are represented using bits,

the throughput attained by the decoder is

bits/sec

V. DESIGN EXAMPLES OF AA-SPCM CODES

B. Parallel TDMP (P-TDMP) Algorithm

In this section, we present some design examples of AA-SPCM codes based on cage graphs [44] and Ramanujan

The rows of ones in each row of submatrices in an graphs [37]–[41] and evaluate their performance using the

AA-SPCM are nonoverlapping, and hence can be processed P-TDMP algorithm. We first explicitly construct a base Tanner

in parallel using SISO decoders. Decoder processes row graph with desirable girth and diameter properties and then

in each row of submatrices, for a total of rows, and maintains expand it to define an ensemble of AA-SPCM codes param-

extrinsic messages denoted by

, in a local eterized by a VLSI design parameter and a set of random

memory. Posterior messages are stored in a global memory of permutations. A code in this ensemble is constructed by re-

size and passed in parallel ( messages at a time) to the placing each node in the base Tanner graph by a set of new

decoders using a network that implements the factored edge nodes, and the corresponding edges by bundles of edges of

permuter. The pseudocode of the P-TDMP algorithm is listed size that connect the new nodes according to the chosen

below. The innermost parallel loop runs over the rows of in permutations. The girth of the expanded graph is at least as

iterations processing rows at every iteration. This results good as the base graph, and hence, it is expected that the codes

in an improvement by a factor of in decoding throughput in this ensemble have good error-correction capability under

over the (serial) TDMP algorithm.

iterative decoding.

Another advantage of the architecture-aware structure is that Consider the construction of a systematic RA code of di-

it enables an efficient implementation of the permuter using a mension and length . Choose a parameter according to

programmable multistage interconnection network (e.g., Benes a desired decoder implementation complexity and deliverable

network [43]). The network is programmed to route the various throughput, such that

and

. The fol-

permutations when processing the rows of submatrices in . lowing procedure outlines the steps to design the desired RA

A Benes network that routes any permutation of size is com- code [see Fig. 9]:

posed of

stages where each stage contains

1) Construct a

matrix corresponding to the accu-

switches. For a regular code with uniform check node degree ,

mulator portion of the Tanner graph. has ones on the

the total number of control bits is

.

main diagonal and the first off-diagonal. Tail-biting can be

The actual VLSI implementation of a Benes network is rela-

employed to reset the accumulator to a known state.

tively easy because of its regular structure and simple switch 2) Construct a

matrix corresponding to the sub-

elements that can be implemented using only ten transistors.

graph formed by the information nodes, check nodes, and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:07:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4388

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 54, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2006

Fig. 11. Data-flow graph of the P-TDMP algorithm operating on an AA-SPCM code with parameters S = 6; D = 4; B = 8, and c = 6.

the permuter. can be either constructed randomly or ex-

plicitly through algebraic techniques, or from the incidence

matrix of a combinatorial design, or the adjacency matrix

of a graph with large girth and small diameter such as cage

graphs [44] or Ramanujan graphs [37] (among others).

3) Modify so that the ones in its columns are not clustered

together in small regions to avoid low-weight codewords.

Due to the presence of the accumulator, if the ones of a

small set of information nodes lie in a small number of

narrow regions of the accumulator, a low-weight codeword

can result [36].

4) Form a base parity-check matrix

of size

by augmenting and .

5) Expand all nonzero entries of by

from a set of

random permutation matrices and all zeros by

all-

zero matrices to form a parity-check matrix of size

corresponding to the desired RA code.

To construct unsystematic SPCM (LDPC) codes, the steps

related to the parity bits and are omitted.

TABLE I RATE-1=2 RA CODES FROM CAGE GRAPHS

A. Rate- RA Codes From -Cages

the adjacency matrix of the graph. Since is symmetric,

this leads to a base parity-check matrix of size

,

In this section, RA codes whose base Tanner graph is a cage and hence a code rate of .

graph are constructed. A -cage graph is a -regular graph of girth having the minimum possible number of nodes. Each B. Rate- RA and Ratenode in a -regular graph has neighbors, where is valency Ramanujan Graphs

LDPC Codes From

of the graph. Reference [44] lists the best known cages so far Ramanujan graphs were first introduced by Lubotzky-

for several valencies . For example, Tutte’s (3,8)-cage has 30 Philips-Saranak in [37] as a family of explicitly-constructed

nodes, node-degree three, and girth 8. Table I lists 18 RA codes regular graphs with large girth. A regular Ramanujan graph

that were constructed from cages with valencies 3, 4, 5 and var-

is the Cayley graph of a special group of 2 2

ious girths. For each graph, the base parity-check matrix was invertible matrices with respect to some generator set. The

expanded for several values of to generate codes of various elements of the group correspond to the nodes of , and the

lengths. An RA code can be constructed from a cage graph ac- edges of

correspond to the elements of the generator set.

cording to the previous procedure by simply setting to be The parameter determines the number of nodes (proportional

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:07:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MANSOUR: TDMP ALGORITHM FOR SPCM CODES

4389

Fig. 12. BER performance of codes designed from cage graphs: (a) RA-CAGE-3,4, (b) RA-CAGE-5,6,7, (c) RA-CAGE-14,15, and (d) RA-CAGE-16,17,18.
TABLE II RATE-1=3 RA AND RATE-1=3; 1=2 LDPC CODES FROM RAMANUJAN GRAPHS

to ), and determines the valency of the graph

. The with flexible parameters. In this section, we construct RA codes

term Ramanujan refers to a spectral condition on the second using Ramanujan graphs according to the following procedure:

largest eigenvalue of the adjacency matrix of a -regular 1) Construct a Ramanujan graph

as described in

graph related to the ratio

. This ratio determines the

[40], and obtain its adjacency matrix

.

randomness and expansion properties of the graph: the smaller 2) Generate a bipartite factor (Tanner) graph

from

the ratio, the more random, and the better expander the graph

using the Ramanujan-to-Factor-graph transforma-

is. Ramanujan graphs attain the minimum possible ratio and

tions in [41], and obtain its adjacency matrix

.

are optimal in this respect.

3) Either set directly to be

or , or for more

LDPC codes derived from Ramanujan graphs were consid-

flexibility, go to step 4.

ered in [39] following the exposition of Margulis in [38] and 4) Following Theorem 3 in [41],

(and hence ) can

the LPS-method of [37]. In [40], the LPS-method was general-

be partitioned into square submatrices that are either all-

ized to allow the construction of a wider range of LDPC codes

zero or the sum of one or more permutation matrices. Re-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:07:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4390

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 54, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2006

Fig. 13. Performance of codes designed from cage graphs versus E =N [dB]: (a) BER of codes RA-CAGE-8,9,10, (b) decoding iterations for codes RA-CAGE-
8,9,10, (c) BER of codes RA-CAGE-11,12,13, (d) decoding iterations for codes RA-CAGE-11,12,13.

place the all-zero submatrices with a ‘0’ and the permu-

LDPC-RAMAN-5 is a rate- code designed using

tation submatrices with a ‘1’ to obtain the base adjacency

with adjacency matrix

of size

matrices

and .

2016 2016 by applying the edge-merging transformation,

5) Set to be

or , and continue the procedure and has parameters

; Fi-

outlined at the beginning of Section V.

nally, LDPC-RAMAN-6 is a rate- code designed using

Three rate- RA codes were constructed from the

with adjacency matrix

of size

Ramanujan graph

whose adjacency matrix 7920 7920 by applying the node-splitting transforma-

has size 4896 4896 [39]. The node-splitting tion, and has parameters

.

transformation [41] was applied to generate

of The parameters of the six Ramanujan-based SPCM codes are

size 4896 9792, which was partitioned into an 18 36 array summarized in Table II.

of 272 272 all-zero or permutation submatrices. A base

adjacency matrix

of size 18 36 was obtained, and

C. Simulation Results

was defined accordingly. The three rate- codes have the The performance of the SPCM codes constructed from

following parameters: RA-RAMAN-1

cage graphs and Ramanujan graphs was evaluated through

RA-RAMAN-2

simulations over an AWGN channel assuming BPSK signaling.

RA-RAMAN-3

and

. 20 000 frames were simulated using the P-TDMP algorithm for

Three LDPC codes were also constructed from Ramanujan a maximum of 256 decoding iterations. The BER performance

graphs: LDPC-RAMAN-4 is a rate- code designed of RA-CAGE-3,4,5,6,7,14,15,16,17,18 are plotted in Fig. 12.

using

with adjacency matrix

of Fig. 13 plots the performance of RA-CAGE-8,9,10,11,12,13

size 1440 1440 by applying the edge-merging transfor- together with the average number of iterations performed until

mation, and has parameters

convergence. For comparison, Fig. 13(a) plots the BER of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:07:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MANSOUR: TDMP ALGORITHM FOR SPCM CODES

4391

Fig. 15. BER versus E =N [dB] of codes LDPC-RAMAN-4,5,6 designed
from Ramanujan graphs. Also shown is performance of randomly constructed
codes with similar complexity.

converge, and attains an order of magnitude improvement in

coding gain at moderate to high SNR values. The algorithm of-

fers a better performance/complexity tradeoff when the number

of decoding iterations is small. In addition, the algorithm has

significantly less memory requirements, achieving a savings of

about 43% when applied to the commonly employed (3,6)-reg-

ular codes. Further advantages are achieved using the simple

and accurate reduced-complexity mechanism for computing

messages.

A class of structured SPCM codes has also been presented.

These codes have embedded structure that enables efficient

high-throughput decoder implementation. When applied to

structured SPCM codes, the TDMP algorithm can be par-

Fig. 14. BER and decoding iterations versus E =N [dB] of codes
RA-RAMAN-1,2,3 designed from Ramanujan graphs.

allelized, leading to significant improvement in decoding throughput. Design examples based on graphs with large girth demonstrate that structured SPCM codes perform well under

iterative decoding using the TDMP algorithm.

a rate- length 4896 regular LDPC code from [39] and a rate- length 2000 irregular RA code from [5].
Fig. 14 plots the BER performance of the Ramanujan-based RA codes RA-RAMAN-1,2,3 together with the average number of iterations performed until convergence. For comparison, the BER performance of two RA codes from [4], [36], and [45] is

As has been demonstrated by this work, the TDMP algorithm is an attractive solution for the emerging communications standards in terms of decoding throughput and storage requirements, especially those that employ long codes such as DVB-S2. Future work will concentrate on efficient encoder design for AA-SPCM codes.

also plotted. Fig. 15 plots the BER performance of LDPC codes
LDPC-RAMAN-4,5,6, as well as the performance of randomly constructed LDPC codes of similar complexity.
The simulations suggest that the proposed AA-SPCM codes are promising and compare favorably with existing codes of equivalent complexity.
VI. CONCLUSION
A turbo-decoding message-passing algorithm for sparse parity-check matrix codes has been proposed. The algorithm has a faster convergence speed compared with the standard decoding algorithm requiring on average 50% less iterations to

REFERENCES
[1] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “Turbo decoder architectures for low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommunications Conf. (IEEE GLOBECOM), Taipei, Taiwan, Nov. 2002, pp. 1383–1388.
[2] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo codes,” in IEEE Int. Conf. Communications (ICC), 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[3] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[4] D. Divsalar, H. Jin, and R. J. McEliece, “Coding theorems for turbolike codes,” in Proc. 36th Allerton Conf. Communications, Control, Computing, Sep. 1998, pp. 201–210.
[5] H. Jin, A. Khandekar, and R. J. McEliece, “Irregular repeat-accumulate codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Turbo Codes Related topics, Brest, France, Sep. 2000, pp. 1–8.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:07:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4392

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 54, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2006

[6] S. Lin and D. Costello, Error Control Coding, 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice-Hall, 2004.
[7] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB-S2) via Satellite [Online]. Available: [Online]. Available: http://www.dvb.org.
[8] B. Bangerter, “High-throughput wireless LAN air interface,” Intel Technol. J., vol. 7, no. 3, Aug. 2003 [Online]. Available: [Online]. Available: http://www.intel.com/technology/itj.
[9] Y. Rashi, “LDPC: Efficient alternative FEC for the TFI-OFDM PHY proposal,” IEEE 802.15 Working Group for WPAN [Online]. Available: [Online]. Available: http://grouper.ieee.org/groups/802/15/pub.
[10] J. Fan, “LDPC: Efficient alternative FEC for the TFI-OFDM PHY proposal,” EEE 802.20 Mobile Broadband Wireless Access (MBWA) [Online]. Available: [Online]. Available: http://grouper.ieee.org/ groups/802/20/Contribs.
[11] H. Song, “Low density parity check (LDPC) code concatenated with generalized partial response (GPR) target for high-capacity magnetooptic(mo) recording channels,” Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., pp. 1749–1752, Mar. 2002.
[12] B. Vasic, “Low-density parity-check codes and iterative decoding for long-haul optical communication systems,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 438–446, Feb. 2003.
[13] C. Lan, “Scalable image and video transmission using irregular repeat-accumulate codes with fast algorithm for optimal unequal error protection,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 1092–1101, Jul. 2004.
[14] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[15] T. Richardson, M. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[16] J. Zhang and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Shuffled iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 209–213, Feb. 2005.
[17] F. Guilloud, “Generic architecture for LDPC decoding,” Ph.D. dissertation, Ecole Nationale Supérieure des Télécommunications (ENST), Paris, France, Jul. 2004.
[18] E. Yeo, “High throughput low-density parity-check decoder architectures,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommunications Conf. (IEEE GLOBECOM), San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001, pp. 3019–3024.
[19] R. M. Tanner, “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984, Dec. 2004.
[20] M. Yang, “Design of efficiently encodable moderate-length high-rate irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 564–571, Apr. 2004.
[21] S. t. Brink, “Convergence behavior of iteratively decoded parallel concatenated codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 49, no. 10, pp. 1727–1737, Oct. 2001.
[22] A. Roumy, S. Guemghar, G. Caire, and S. Verdu, “Design methods for irregular repeat-accumulate codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1711–1727, Aug. 2004.
[23] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[24] R. J. Mcliece, D. J. C. Mackay, and J.-F. Cheng, “Turbo decoding as an instance of Pearl’s “belief propagation” algorithm,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 140–152, Feb. 1998.
[25] F. R. Kschischang and B. J. Frey, “Iterative decoding of compound codes by probability propagation in graphical models,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 219–230, Feb. 1998.
[26] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 20, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[27] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “High-throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. VLSI Syst., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 976–996, Dec. 2003.
[28] X. Y. Hu, “Efficient implementations of the sum-product algorithm for decoding LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommunications Conf. (IEEE GLOBECOM), San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001, pp. 1036–1036E.
[29] W. J. Gross, V. C. Gaudet, and P. G. Gulak, “Difference metric softoutput detection: Architecture and implementation,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Part II, Analog Digit. Signal Process., vol. 48, no. 10, pp. 904–911, Oct. 2001.

[30] M. Tüchler and J. Hagenauer, “EXIT charts of irregular codes,” presented at the Conf. Info. Sciences Systems, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, Mar. 2002.
[31] M. M. Mansour, “Design of repeat-accumulate codes from graphs with large girth,” presented at the 39th Annual Conf. Information Sciences Systems (CISS), The Johns Hopkins Univ., Baltimore, MD, Mar. 2005.
[32] A. Blanksby and C. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1=2 low-density parity-check decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.
[33] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “Architecture-aware low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Systems (ISCAS), Bangkok, Thailand, May 2003, vol. 2, pp. 57–60.
[34] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, and T. Fuja, “A class of group-structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Communication Theory Applications, Ambleside, U.K., 2001, pp. 1–5.
[35] D. Hocevar, “LDPC code construction with flexible hardware,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications (ICC), Anchorage, AK, May 2003, pp. 2708–2712.
[36] R. M. Tanner, “On quasi-cyclic repeat-accumulate codes,” presented at the Proc. 37th Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, Computing, Monticello, IL, Sep. 1999.
[37] A. Lubotzky, R. Phillips, and P. Sarnak, “Ramanujan graphs,” Combinatorica, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 261–277, 1988.
[38] G. A. Margulis, “Explicit constructions of graphs without short cycles and low density codes,” Combinatorica, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 71–78, 1982.
[39] J. Rosenthal and P. O. Vontobel, “Constructions of LDPC codes using Ramanujan graphs and ideas from Margulis,” in Proc. 38th Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, Computing, 2000, pp. 248–257.
[40] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “Construction of LDPC codes from Ramanujan graphs,” presented at the Ann. Conf. Information Sciences Systems (CISS), Princeton Univ., Princeton, NJ, Mar. 2002.
[41] ——, “On the architecture-aware structure of LDPC codes from generalized Ramanujan graphs and their decoder architectures,” Proc. 37th Ann. Conf. Information Sciences Systems (CISS) The Johns Hopkins Univ.. Baltimore, MD, Mar. 2003, pp. 215–220.
[42] ——, “Low-power VLSI decoder architectures for LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Low Power Electronics Design (ISLPED). Monterey, CA: , Aug. 2002, pp. 284–289.
[43] V. E. Benes, “Optimal rearrangeable multistage connecting networks,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 43, pp. 1641–1656, 1964.
[44] G. Royle, Cubic Cages [Online]. Available: [Online]. Available: http:// www.cs.uwa.edu.au/gordon/cages/index.html.
[45] H. Jin, “Analysis and design of turbo-like codes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Elect. Eng. Dept., California Inst. Technology, Pasadena, CA, 2001.
Mohammad M. Mansour (S’98–M’03) received the B.E. degree with distinction and the M.E. degree, both in computer and communications engineering, from the American University of Beirut (AUB), Beirut, Lebanon, in 1996 and 1998, respectively, and the M.S. degree in mathematics and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) in 2002 and 2003, respectively.
From 1998 to 2003, he was a Research Assistant at the Coordinated Science Laboratory (CSL) at UIUC. In 1997, he was a Research Assistant at the Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE) Department at AUB, and in 1996, he was a Teaching Assistant at the same department. He is the recipient of the Hewlett Foundation Fellowship Award in March 2006. During summer 2000, he worked at National Semiconductor Corporation, San Francisco, CA, with the wireless research group. His research interests are VLSI architectures and integrated circuit (IC) design for communications and coding theory applications, digital signal processing systems, and general-purpose computing systems. Dr. Mansour was on the Dean’s honor list at AUB from 1992 to 1996. He received the Harriri Foundation Award twice in 1996 and 1998, the Charli S. Korban award twice in 1996 and 1998, the Makhzoumi Foundation Award in 1998, and the PHI Kappa PHI Honor Society award twice in 2000 and 2001. His Ph.D. dissertation was nominated for the ACM Best Dissertation Award by UIUC in 2003.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:07:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

