ICWMMN2006 Proceedings
An Improved PEG Construction of Irregular LDPC Codes by Conditioning Low-Degree Nodes

Hua Chen, Zhigang Cao
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, P. R. China Emails: chh00@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, czg-dee@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Progressive Edge-Growth (PEG) algorithm is an important approach to construct good LDPC codes at short block lengths. PEG construction with optimized symbol-node degree distributions yield irregular codes with very good performance, especially in the water-fall region. In this paper, we present a modification to the PEG algorithm by conditioning lowdegree symbol nodes in the Tanner graph. Our modified algorithm yields irregular codes with improved girth histogram at low-degree symbol nodes. Simulation results show that the modified algorithm can lower the error floor of irregular PEG codes considerably, while having slightly better performance in the water-fall region.
Keywords: Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, irregular LDPC codes, girth conditioning, progressive edge growth (PEG), girth, girth histogram, low-degree symbol nodes, error floor, trapping sets.

the girth histogram is used as a heuristic tool to choose good codes from randomly generated code ensembles. Furthermore, in [5], [6], Tian et al. pointed out that girth-conditioning might not be the best approach to construct codes with low error floor, because while not all short cycles were equally harmful, girth-conditioning might constrain code structure severely by removing as many short cycles as possible, even though some of them could do little harm.
In this paper, we propose a modification to the PEG algorithm by conditioning low-degree symbol nodes in the Tanner graph, which lowers the error floor of irregular PEG codes considerably while having slightly better performance in the water-fall region. This paper is organized as follows: Section II explains our main ideas, and Section III describes our proposed modification to the PEG algorithm. We show the performance of the improved PEG codes in Section IV, and finally we conclude our paper in Section V.

1 Introduction
Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes [1] have attracted considerable attention because of their capacity-achieving performance and low decoding complexity. Recently, constructing good LDPC codes at short block lengths has been the subject of intense research. As short cycles in the Tanner graph, especially those with length 4 or 6, can cause the sub-optimality of iterative message-passing decoding, one approach to construct good LDPC codes at short block lengths is girth-conditioning [2]–[4], [11], [12], where one tries to remove as many short cycles as possible. PEG algorithm [2]–[4] is one of the most successful girth-conditioning approaches for the construction of short LDPC codes. PEG construction builds up a Tanner graph on an edge-by-edge basis and maximizes the local girth at symbol nodes in a greedy fashion. PEG construction is flexible in code parameters (i.e. block length and code rate) and can be used for both regular and irregular codes. In particular, in [4] it is shown that irregular codes constructed by PEG algorithm with optimized symbol-node degree distribution [7] have especially good performance in the water-fall region.

2 Main Ideas
Girth-conditioning on high-degree symbol nodes is more difficult than on low-degree nodes, as high-degree symbol nodes spawn lots of nodes in the Tanner graph, which lower the girth histogram greatly. However, as explained in [6], cycles involving higher-degree nodes are actually less problematic due to a higher extrinsic message degree (EMD), while lowerdegree symbol nodes are more susceptible to channel noise, as they contribute little to EMD. Moreover, optimized irregular LDPC codes by density evolution usually have a large amount of low-degree symbol nodes, especially degree-2 nodes [7]. Although elimination of low-degree symbol nodes is advocated in [13], according to density evolution, removing low-degree nodes can impact either rate or threshold, since a small fraction of low-degree nodes can significantly raise code rate, while only marginally degrading threshold. As a result, there are inevitably lots of low-degree symbol nodes involved in short cycles in density evolution-optimized irregular LDPC codes. Cycles consisting of low-degree symbol nodes are main contributors to performance loss in AWGN channel, especially shortest cycles consisting of degree-2 symbol nodes.

However, while PEG algorithm tries to construct codes with as large a girth as possible, in reality the girth histogram is of greater importance than the girth for the performance of iterative decoding [4]. For instance, in [11] the average of

In the modified algorithm, our main idea is trying to avoid short cycles consisting of low-degree symbol nodes during the PEG edge-selection procedure. In the PEG algorithm it often happens that one has a few candidate check nodes to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:05:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

choose (i.e. multiple choices), which result in the same local girth. Standard PEG algorithm chooses either the one with the smallest index or just one at random [2], and a modification by incorporating an extra search procedure to make the girth of the left-hand subgraph decrease as slowly as possible is discussed in [4], but only minor improvement can be obtained. In our modified algorithm, for the placement of a new edge, we make the number of lowest-degree symbol nodes involved in the newly formed shortest cycles as small as possible. This heuristic reduces the number of short cycles consisting of lowest-degree symbol nodes in a greedy fashion, hence making cycles involving lowest-degree symbol have as large a length as possible. In most cases, our modified algorithm can reduce the number of short cycles involving degree-2 symbol nodes, as degree-2 symbol nodes usually have high multiplicities in density evolution-optimized irregular LDPC codes. This modification can improve girth histogram at degree-2 symbol nodes, i.e. the local girth at many degree-2 symbol nodes is increased by 2, hence lowering the error floor of irregular PEG codes considerably. In [14], enforcing two different values of local girths at degree-2 symbol nodes and larger-degree symbol nodes respectively is used to construct irregular codes with low error floors.

3 Modified PEG Algorithm

Following [2], [4], we describe the standard PEG algorithm for constructing a Tanner graph with n symbol nodes and m check nodes as follows:

Progressive Edge-Growth Algorithm:

for j = 0 to n − 1 do

begin

for k = 0 to dsj − 1 do begin

if k = 0 Es0j ← edge(ci, sj), where Es0j is the first edge incident to sj, and ci is a check node such that it has the low-

est check-node degree under the current graph setting

Es0 Es1 · · · Esj−1. else
expand a subgraph from symbol node sj up to depth l

under the current graph setting such that the cardinality

obuf tNNs¯ljsl+js1top=s

increasing but is φ, then Eskj ←

less than m, edge(ci, sj),

or N¯slj where

=φ Eskj

is the k-th edge incident to sj and ci is a check node

picked from the set N¯slj having the lowest check-node

degree.

end

end

,InanthdeNasbljovaendalNg¯oslrjitdhemn,odtesjthies

the set

degree of symbol of all check nodes

node sj reached

by a tree spreading from symbol node sj within depth l, and

its complement respectively [2], [4].

It should be noted that, for irregular codes, symbol nodes are ordered according to their degrees in non-decreasing order, i.e.

constructing the edges of lower-degree symbol nodes earlier to improve the minimum distance induced by the subgraph
of lower-degree symbol nodes, particularly degree-2 symbol nodes [4]. However, the placement of a new edge (ci, sj) might involve some lower-degree symbol nodes sj, which are intended to have a larger local girth. Our modified algorithm
only conditions the lowest-degree symbol nodes involved in those newly formed shortest cycles passing through (ci, sj), since they contribute most to the performance loss in AWGN channel. However, such conditioning requires us to keep
track of all the lowest-degree symbol nodes involved in the newly formed shortest cycles passing through (ci, sj), which is difficult to be obtained in standard PEG algorithm due to
duplicate vertices or edges in the spreading subgraph [4]. In this paper, we modify the spreading subgraph of sj in the PEG algorithm to obtain such knowledge.

A. Modified Spreading Subgraph of sj

We notice all cycles are formed in the case when k ≥ 1 and N¯slj = φ but N¯sl+j 1 = φ (no cycles are formed in the case when Nslj stops increasing but is less than m), and their lengths might be g = 2(l + 2), g + 2, g + 4, . . . , and so on. For all the shortest cycles with length g = 2l + 4, we only need to pay attention to all the shortest paths from sj to ci, whose lengths are g − 1 = 2l + 3.

In our modified algorithm, when spreading the subgraph from

symbol node sj, every edge in the current Tanner graph setting

is allowed to appear once and only once to avoid duplicate

vertices or edges. Furthermore, when the subgraph grows from

depth l to l + 1, only the nodes (symbol nodes or check nodes)

currently in depth l are expanded, while in standard PEG

algorithm, all nodes within depth l are expanded. Under the

modified subgraph setting, for any candidate ci, the lowest-

degree symbol nodes in all the length-(2l + 3) shortest paths,

as well depth l

as to

Nslj and l + 1 in

N¯slj , can the same

be recursively computed from way as how Nslj and N¯slj are

obtained in standard PEG algorithm.

B. Conditioning Lowest-Degree Symbol Nodes

As soon as we gather the information of the lowest-degree symbol nodes in all the length-(2l + 3) shortest paths from sj to ci, we can choose a candidate ci for better performance based on the following two conditioning criteria:

1) Maximum multiplicity of lowest-degree symbol nodes in a

single shortest cycle: Borrowing ideas from [5], [6], multiple

lowest-degree symbol nodes in a short cycle contribute little

to EMD and are more susceptible to channel noise. In the

modified algorithm, we make the maximum multiplicity of

lowest-degree symbol nodes in a single shortest cycle as small

as possible, i.e.

min
ci

nj,i

(1)

where nj,i is the maximum multiplicity of lowest-degree

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:05:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE I

GIRTH HISTOGRAM AT LOWEST-DEGREE SYMBOL NODES OF CODES

10−1

CONSTRUCTED BY PEG AND OUR MODIFIED ALGORITHM

(a) Symbol-node degree sequence of irregular (1008, 504)

10−2

code with maximum symbol-node degree 15.

degree 2 3 4 5 7 14 15

number 481 283 35 98 9 1 101

10−3

Error Probablity

(b) Girth histogram at degree-2 symbol nodes.

girth histogram

10−4

Algorithm

6

8

Aver. local girth

PEG

477

4

6.02

Proposed 197 284

7.18

10−5

80 iterations

PEG, bit error Proposed, bit error PEG, block error Proposed, block error

symbol nodes in a single length-(2l + 3) shortest path among
all such paths. It should be noticed that for the computation
of nj,i, we don’t need to record all the shortest paths from sj to ci, as nj,i can be obtained recursively from depth l to l + 1 just like Nslj . As a result, we can obtain nj,i easily for any candidate check node ci with only little overhead.

2) Overall multiplicity of lowest-degree symbol nodes in all
shortest cycles: For any candidate check node ci, we minimize the number of lowest-symbol nodes in all length-(2l + 4) shortest cycles passing through edge (ci, sj), i.e.

min
ci

Nj,i

(2)

where Nj,i is the overall multiplicity of lowest-degree symbol nodes in all length-(2l + 3) shortest paths from sj to ci, which can be obtained recursively in the modified spreading
subgraph.
Finally, one subtle point needs further comment. Because different choices of the first edge Es0j in PEG graph will lead to different topology of the spreading neighbors of sj and result in different situation for conditioning lowest-degree
symbol nodes, it is necessary to try several different choices of Es0j (i.e. Ntry different candidate Es0j ) and choose the one resulting in the best result, i.e. minimum nj,i and Nj,i.

4 Simulation Results
In our simulations, we construct irregular LDPC codes with the same parameters as in [4] using PEG and our modified algorithm respectively. These two codes have block length n = 1008, rate 1/2, and are based on optimized symbol-node degree distribution given in Table II of [7] with maximum symbol-node degree 15. It should be noted that we only use the PEG algorithm given in [8] with maximized girth of lefthand subgraph, as it performs slightly better than standard PEG algorithm [4].

A. Improved Girth Histogram at Degree-2 Symbol Nodes
In Table I, we list the girth histogram at lowest-degree symbol nodes for both irregular codes. Table I(a) shows the symbolnode degree sequences. We observe 481 out of overall 1008

10−6

10−7

1.5

2

2.5

3

E /N (dB)
b0

Fig. 1. Bit- and block- error rates of rate-1/2 irregular (1008, 504) code constructed by PEG and our modified algorithm.

symbol nodes (i.e. about 47.7%) have a degree of 2 , which are responsible for relatively high error floor. In Table I(b), we list the girth histogram at lowest-degree symbol nodes, i.e. degree-2 symbol nodes for both two codes in this case. We can observe in PEG graph, each degree-2 symbol node has a local girth of 6 except for 4 degree-2 symbol nodes with a local girth of 8. In code constructed by our modified algorithm, 284 out of overall 481 degree-2 symbol nodes (i.e. 59.0%) have a local girth of 8. The average local girth at degree-2 symbol nodes of these two irregular codes is 6.02 and 7.18 respectively, which means a great improvement in the local girth at degree-2 symbol nodes. As mentioned earlier, short cycles consisting of degree-2 nodes contribute most to the performance loss in AWGN channel.
B. Lower Error Floor
In this subsection, we show the performance of irregular codes shown in Table I with lowest-degree symbol nodes conditioned using our modified PEG algorithm. Following [4], we use BPSK modulation over additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel with belief propagation (BP) iterative decoding, where the maximum number of iterations for the BP decoder is set to 80.
Fig. 1 gives the bit- and block- error rate curves for the two codes. We observe that in the water-fall region (i.e. at low SNR values), the two codes have more or less the same performance, with the code constructed by our modified algorithm slightly better. In the error floor region (i.e. at high SNR values), the code constructed by our modified algorithm outperforms the corresponding PEG code considerably.
We examine the errors for both codes in the error floor region to see how the performance improvement in this region

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:05:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

happens. It is known that under iterative decoding, for the AWGN channel errors in the error floor region are mainly caused by low-weight codewords and near-codewords [9] (which are further referred to as trapping sets in [10]). Lowweight codewords cause undetected errors while trapping sets are main contributors to detected errors. In [10], the notation (a, b) is used to denote a trapping set with a symbol nodes and b unsatisfied check nodes. (a, b) trapping sets with both small value of a and b dominantly give rise to undetected errors, as such trapping sets tend to be error states from which the iterative decoder cannot escape [9], [10].
In our simulations, at the highest simulated Eb/N0, i.e. 2.7 dB, for PEG code, all errors found are detected errors, and for our code, the percentage of undetected errors is 1.3%. As a result, errors in the error floor region are mainly due to small trapping sets in this case. Moreover, the trapping sets for the code constructed by our modified algorithm are on average larger than PEG code, i.e. larger values of a and b. For example, for PEG code, the smallest trapping sets with b = 1 are (9, 1) and (15, 1), while for the modified algorithm, small trapping set with b = 1 are (13, 1) and (17, 1). Furthermore, other small trapping sets for the PEG code are (13, 2), (1, 3), (7, 3) and (15, 3), while for our modified algorithm are (16, 2), (8, 3) and (13, 3). We can observe that larger values of a and b for the trapping sets are the main reasons for better performance of our modified algorithm than PEG algorithm. So by means of conditioning low-degree symbol nodes in the Tanner graph, our modified algorithm can increase the size of smallest trapping sets, hence lowering the error floor of irregular PEG codes.

[3] X. Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Irregular progressive edgegrowth (PEG) Tanner graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Intl. Symp. Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, pp. 480, June30-July 5, 2002.
[4] X. Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 51, pp. 386-398, Jan. 2005.
[5] T. Tian, C. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Construction of irregular LDPC codes with low error floors,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commu., Anchorage, Alaska, USA, pp. 3125-3129, May 2003.
[6] T. Tian, C. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPC code construction,” IEEE Trans. Comm., vol. 52, pp. 1242-1247, Aug. 2004.
[7] T. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619-637, Feb. 2001.
[8] D. J. C. MacKay, http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/ mackay/CodesFiles.html.
[9] D. J. C. Mackay and M. S. Postol, “Weakness of Margulis and Ramanujan-Margulis low-density parity-check codes,” Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science 74, http://www.elsevier.nl/ locate/entcs/volume74.html, 2003.
[10] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing, UrbanaChampaign, pp. 1426-1435, Oct. 2003.
[11] Y. Mao and A. Banihashemi, “A heuristic search for good low-density parity-check codes at short block lengths,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comm., Helsinki, Finland, pp. 41-44, Jun. 2001.
[12] J. Campello, D. S. Modha, and S. Rajagopalan, “Designing LDPC codes using bit-filling,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commu., Helsinki, Finland, pp. 55-59, Jun. 2001.
[13] M. Yang, W. E. Ryan, and Y. Li, “Design of efficient encodable moderate-length high-rate irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, pp. 564-571, Apr. 2004.
[14] L. Dinoi, F. Sottile, S. Benedetto, “Design of variable-rate irregular LDPC codes with low error floor,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commu., Seoul, Korea, pp. 647-651, May 2005.

5 Conclusions
Progressive Edge-Growth (PEG) is one of the most successful girth-conditioning algorithms for the construction of good LDPC codes at short block lengths. In particular, irregular codes constructed by PEG algorithm with optimized symbolnode degree distribution have especially good performance in the water-fall region. In this paper, we propose a modification to PEG algorithm by conditioning low-degree symbol nodes in the Tanner graph, which tries to avoid low-degree symbol nodes involving in shortest cycles whenever an edge is placed into the Tanner graph. Our modified algorithm can improve the girth histogram at low-degree symbol nodes. Simulation results show that our modified algorithm can increase the size of smallest trapping sets of irregular PEG codes, thus lowering the error floors, while having slightly better performance in the water-fall region.

References
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1963.
[2] X. Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., San Antonio, Texas, USA, pp. 995-1001, Nov. 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:05:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

